A SPEEDY REMEDY AGAINST SPIRITVALL INCONTINENCIE. SHOWING IT TO BE SINFUL IN
ANY, TO HEAR A FALSE MINISTRY. With a brief description of a True Church of
Christ.

CANT. 1.6. Show me, ^ thou, wh^ my soul loves, where thou feedest thy
Flock, and make them to rest (...): for why should I (...) as one that
turns aside, after the Flocks of thy Companions?

2 COR. 6.14. Be not unequally ^^ked with Infidels: for what fellowship has
righteousness with unrighteousness: and what communion has light with
darkness.

Printed in the time of Parliament, Anno Dom. 1640.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, (for, far such only have I intended this present Treatise)
I being importuned by a Friend to write my judgment what I conceived of
Heareing in the Public Assemblies of our Land: (...) occasioned by his Answer
thereunto to make this reply, (with some addition since) which I then little
thought, that this or any thing of mine, should ever be borne to so public a
a view: I being so far unfit, both for humane learning, and in the constant
employment of a laborious Calling: and being privy to my own unworthiness for
so weighty a work, especially being so rawly and rudely composed, made me more
unwilling to publish the same: but by reason of Friends importunity, both for
vindication of the Separation from some lately bro^ched errors, and for
further discovery of the abominable Idolatry of that Mystery of Iniquity, that
Man of Sin and Son of Perdition, which has too long reigned: By tyranny and
tre^
and ruled: and that wicked vile one, may be further revealed, whom the Lord
has Promised to consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and now does abundantly
abolish by the brightness of his coming: has caused me to condescend
hereunto, hoping hereby to provoke some other, more fit and able (as all ought
to endeavor) to reward her double, as she has rewarded the Saints, Rev. 18 6.
And likewise considering the great need thereof, in these our days, and Land
where we live, in that the regions are even white unto harvest; and all are
ready to ask with Pilat, what is truth? which that they may better know what
it is, it will be First fit to know what it is not: that so being both
forewarned of those manifold errors which are abroad in the world, and
thoroughly convinced and ashamed of their own wicked ways, and all that they
have done: Then to show such the Form of the House of the Lord, and the
Pattern thereof; and the goings out thereof, and the coming in thereof, and
the whole Fashion thereof, and the Ordinances thereof, etc. We have a warrant
Ezekiel. 43.10,11. But before, to show persons what the ways of God, and the
Truth is, will be to little Mat. 7.6. and 11.16,17. and 15.24.26.
purpose, as we have found by long and woeful experience: But now having such
reasons, and good encouragements to the help of the Lord, to help the Lord
against the mighty: I have (with the Woman in the Gospel) cast this my Mite
into the Treasury of your Meditations; and though it be but small, take it in
good part, good will is all.

And First I would have thee (Christian Reader) know, that I have endeavored
to reduce my thoughts of this subject, into this brief bundle both by reason of
my own distracted time, and for thy benefit: because a long Tract (not so
needful for the godly wise) might burden the memory, and not be retained so
easily Wherefore I having studied brevity, thou must read more diligently, and
not herein so much expect the proof of the positive practice, but rather
reproof of the contrary: and there is not the like necessity, if it be but
considered to whom this is intended, and whereupon it is occasioned. And if
this Tratise may be profitable to thee, I would entreat thy Not as News for a
day, but daily.
serious consideration, and charitable construction hereof, according to Truth:
for I know the too usual practice of prejudicat persons, that for want of
wisdom, or love to us, and the Ioh. 3.19,20.
truth, will neither confer with us, nor read our Books, they are so far
disaffected, and dislike of whatsoever comes from us: saying, we censure, and
by our practice reproove and condemn them all; and with Ahab, that we never
Prophecy good, but evil to them: and so with Ahaz they refuse the Isa. 7.12.
means offered them of God: and good Josiah because he 2 Chro. 35.22. Ier,
7.13.26.28.
refused to hearken to the word of the Lord, at the mouth of Phare-Neco, it
cost him his life: And do not these in effect bid God depart from them, for
they Ioh. 21.14.
desire not the knowledge of his ways. But further to answer for our selves,
we do not censure or judge the persons or final conditions, but let every one
stand or fall to his own Master; as we are taught Romans 14.4. and only judge of
thing and persons present condition, and practice, as the Scriptures teaches
us to esteem of them, being visible or discernable to us, and as they are in
relation to us in Gods worship only: and if this be evil in us, we desire to
see it, else you must not blame us, but God and his word for it, which
flattereth no man's person, that walks contrary thereunto: neither do we
think, speak, or write any thing of your condition, but for your good, giving
God thanks for your good example, and his Graces in you or any endeavoring
(according to our duty, and best ability) the further Information, Reformation,
and everlasting Salvation: and not flatter you nor our selves in an evil
condition. And if we be before you in any degree of Grace, take heed that you
hate us not for it, because it is the Lords doing, who has made us to differ;
for by his Free Grace, we are what we are: and being he has so been pleased to
choose and separate us to his service, what are we, or ye, that we should let
God, for as the Apostle says, Act. 4 20. We cannot but speak the things, that
we have seen and heard, and testify, with the same Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.13.15.17.
1 Ioh. 3.1.3.
that the love of Christ constrains us thereunto. And if for this our
obedient and sincere service of God, according to his revealed will, and for
telling you the truth, we be such an eye sore and enemies unto you (as to be
called proud, c^nsorious, riggid Seperatists) we are like to be more vile yet,
if the Lord be pleased to reveal any more of his Mysteries unto us.

Likewise thou must observe with me, that there is two Churches to be
understood, and spoken of in the Scriptures; the one Mystical, and Catholic
or Universal, comprehending all the Elect, which is the Covenant of Faith: The
Church a visible State.
the other Ministerial, or Visi^le and particular, the Covenant of Order: the
last is that Cultive Church State, which is here minded in this ensuing
Treatise, whereof only all are to take notice for the performance of their
public duties in Gods worship and service: of which visible estate there is
also amongst (...) Christians two sorts: the one Christian and true, the other
Antichristian, or otherwise false: the latter is that estate whereunto many are
called by a general profession of Christ, yet equal or one with the world:
the other is the true Church Estate, and Distinct Corporations or Churches of
Christ, spoken of in the Scriptures, consisting of Discernable or reputed
Saints the matter.
Saints, chosen or elect of God. For as the Church Estate was Stative from Adam
to Moses in a Family, at having, and enjoying the rightful Power, and
Privileges of all Gods Ordinances. From Moses to Christ, in a Nation:
wherefore all Sacrifices were prohibited but in the Temple, as Deuteronomy. 16. So
after Christ it was Corporationall, of a Company of Christians, Covenanted to
be a Church Body, which is the subjective matter, as Romans 12.4.5. 1 Timothy 3.15.
1 Cor. 5. v. last, especially 2 Cor 6.16. Act. 2.41.47. unto which all the 9.
Church Estates, and their 9 Functions and Exerciseings, are adjuncts and
appurtenances; which appears Romans 12 6,7,8. these 9 Functions, and their
exerciseings, are also adjuncts to the 9 Church Estates: these 9 exercisings
are also adjuncts to these 9 Functions. These are all Institutive Universal
and general notions of Gods mind revealed to us for his worship, and communion
with him therein: this Church, and that Church are Constitutive and particular
actions of Christians, in obedience unto those Institutions: and none can be
such, or any true Body or Church, but by Not by Baptism.
Covenant, for a body cannot be Corporated but by Covenant the form.
Covenant, or Agreement: And every such particular State or Church, ought to
consist of such a number, as may ordinarily every Sabbath Congregate together
in one place for edification: who have all equal and alike power and
privilege, to exercise and enjoy all Gods holy Ordinances.

It is likewise to be understood and minded what I mean by Order, it being the
maine matter of this ensuing Treatise. First, Order (...) twofold, either
Civil, or Ecclesiastical: the first is for our well ordering in Natural
things: the latter which is Ecclesiastical, and being that here treated of, is
for our well ordering in matters of Faith, its virtues and works, and for our
communion with God in the me^nes of his worship and our salvation. Which Order
is in the Scriptures translation Truth: for the true Order in worship, as John
4.23,24. Col. 3 4 Which Ecclesiastical It Is contrary to confusion or Babylon.
Order, Ordinances, and Governmet, is plainly parallelled in the Scriptures by
the Civil Body, Romans 12.4,5. 1 Cor. 12.12. For as every King appoints
Corporations and Officers, and Freemen of them; and their proper works, and a
continual seasonable exercise of them, for his own honor, and benefit of his
Subjects: so Christ our spiritual King, has prescribed a spiritual
Corporation of Saints, Free men, and Officers thereof, and their set works, and
their continual seasonable exercise of them, for his worship, and their
edification: all which are by God bounded to this his observable Order in their
several states. For there is 4 Estates of God, which are Nature, Policy,
Faith, and Order: and that Religion which destroys any, or Which Popery does.
all of these, must be destroyed it self: and every error in Religion
destroys one of these, or leads thereunto So this Heareing.
error here treated of is a destroying of this maine principle, even the Order
of God in Religion, which is (in this ensuing Treatise) plainly pro^ed, both by
the Scriptures, and Reason agreeable thereunto. For as we must a^knowledie God
the Author of all, so lik wise is he the right and alone Orderer of all, as well
of Religion or adoration, as of Creation, procreation, and preservation: which
the Creature in these special and peculiar Prerogatives, is, and will be ever
bound to acknowledge God the Author and Orderer, as Genesis 1.28,29. and 2.8. to
17. and 9.1,2,3,4. Act. 15.29.

In the last place it is likewise to be understood in this ensuing Treatise,
what I mean by Institutions. There is in Scriptures 8 several Titles, or
manner of expressions of Gods mind to us therein.

First, Laws, whi^ the general of the rest, that binds us to God.

Secondly, Commandments, which are properly such as (...) writ in Moses his
time (the 10. Commandments) be most using that term.

Thirdly, Judgments; these at the first were mentioned for the Laws for
Government in the Commonwealth: but after the prescripts for the government of
the Church were made, then was it sometimes used for them.

Fourthly, Testimonies: for the Testimony of Christ, and though used by David,
are Evangelical, testifying the love of Christ.

Fifthly, Precepts are the same things with the former, as prescribed by Gods
Prerogative will.

Sixthly, Word, are all the same things, as recorded by the Statute-Booke of
Scripture.

Seventhly, Way: the manner of Christ's Instituted worship, or the execution of
all these things in the Church Congregation, and Christian conversation.

Eighthly, Statutes, from statuo, and is as significant as instituo, or
Institutions by us daily used: this (though no term in Scripture) is most used
for distinction; and from our Statute Laws for Civil government, which are
above the Common Law, as Institutions Spiritual are above Moral Laws.

Institutions, are Prerogative Precepts of God, above and after the Creation:
which are competent Fultive or Cultive.

Fultive, or for man's sustenance in his kind: First, in general Marriage, Genesis
1.28. Particulars, immediately by Meats, Genesis 1.29. and mediately by his
commanding use of all other Creatures, viz. his government of them, Genesis 1.29.

Cultive, or for Gods worship, is Moral and Supermorall.

Moral solely, 1, Paradise, and its Pradisall worship: and mixed, with the
worships ensuing.

Supermorall, is Legal and Evangelical. Legal, is Paradisall, and Mosaicall
Evangelical, is Familick from Adam to Moses: and National thence to Christ.

Again, they are Complete, or Celestial, viz. the Gospel and its
Institutions, are called the Kingdom of heaven often, which are Corporationall:
1. anincorporate Church, with its Ministry, and Members, and their Functions:
and all their Sabbath-meetings, exerciseings and observations. Of the
particulars of all these at large elsewhere.

Institutions Spiritual, are only of the 2 d Commandment, and tend only to
worship, and have their being from God: and as the Almighty gives being to
all good things, so we must understand that for the manner thereof, it (...) 4
fould. 1. Forms, gives being to all natural things. 2. the end to moral
things. 3. possession to worldly things. 4. the efficient to all instituted
things: which God has manifested by his immediate commission to Moses, the
Prophets, Christ and his Apostles: and as all these are good, they come from
God; and as they are evil, from the Devil, the efficient cause thereof: for
the Devil has also usurped his Institutions, or Prerogative Precepts,
proclaimed by the Pope, and Prelates his substitutes, and therefore (...) be
called the God of the world: because be as God thereby rules in, and
dominereth over the Children of disobedience, i.e. by his Institutions, or
Consecrations of holy States, holy Offices, holy Times, holy Places for
worship: all which here follows in this ensuing Treatise; which I entreat
thee observe with diligence; and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things.

Many shall be purified, made white, and tried: but the wicked shall do
wickedly, and none of the wicked shall have understanding: but the wise shall
understand. Dan. 12.10,


I am thy Friend though unknown,
so far as I am be my own.


A SPEEDY REMEDY AGAINST SPIRITUAL INCONTINENCIE.
KIND Christian Friend, according unto your request, and importunate desire,
and my weak ability, I have again indevoured, a plain and brief reply to
your Objections, for the lawfullnesse of Heareing in the public Assemblies of
our Land. I mean for you, and such whose eyes the Lord has opened, so far
as to discern the False Ecclesiastical State thereof, as you confess in your
writing, and that you are already Separated therefrom; which it may be you are,
in your judgment and affection, though not in practice: because you suppose it
to be a duty, or at least a liberty to partake with them in the Preaching of
the Word there. Which practice I conceive (and shall endeavor further to
prove) to be sinful, and unwarrantable by the Rule of the Word, and by good
reason, or consequence therefrom; and that in diverse respects.

First, it being granted that the Church Estate is False, it therefore cannot
have a True Ministry, nor an ordinary right Administration, neither for
themselves, nor others; and therefore no warrantable Hearing, praying, receiving
the Sacrements, or other partaking of their Ministry: and this you must
likewise needs grant, for a False Church cannot ordain a True Ministry, (...)
Company (...) Rebels in the Commonwealth can make true Officers: But it is
sinful for them so to continue in, or partake with that Church State, which is
generally agreed upon to be National, or Priestly, and not a particular Body,
and therefore False: none of them being but a Congregation only, and not a
Corporation, (as were the Apostolic and Primitive Churches of Christ.)
Wherefore their Church State being such, and so far unlike the Primitive
pattern: it must needs therefore be sinful partaking, for all those likewise
whomsoever, that are there Congregated, and present with them in that worship,
who (by the nature of their Church intention and constitution) are real
partakers with that False State of Church and Ministry: For that Universal
Church State and Ministry requires not any more uniting, or mighting of
membership, but being there, and then assembled or present with them. For as in
a worldly Assembly, where any act is done, good, or bad: all there, and then
present are alike liable to the Law, to be justified, or condemned together: so
in such an Ecclesiastical Assembly, all that come there, are as really then
partakers with that State, and Body, one as well as another: for all their
private personal contrary intentions, have no warrant in institutions, as is
plain, 1 Cor. 10.14. to 22. Rev. 2.14.20. 2 Cor. 6.14.17. for those knew their
Idolatry, yet thought themselves free from the same, though present thereat,
which dissembling the Apostle there reprooveth as Idolatry, and communion with
evil.

And being (as aforesaid) Congregated in their worship, you do thereby partake
of their Altar, their counterfeit False institutions and constitutions, as is
plainly proved, 1 Cor 10.17,18. and 12.20. and 2 Cor. 6.14.17. For every
devised constitution, or Church State invented by Man's brain, and used as a
means to serve God in, and by, is an A false Church (...) an Idol.
Idol, 1 Kings 12.28,29. Amos 4.4,5. and 5.5. and all such as come there, and
then to worship God (else what do they there) come under their institutions,
and constitutions: and are therefore then Idolaters, as much as the rest then,
and there present, because they worship God by an Idol, a false Church State
and Ministry, being constituted of the whole Nation, even all within the
Kingdom, good, and bad, even as they were but the day before the Proclamation
thereof, for the most part Papists, with profane impuritants of all sotts: which
has now no warrant from the Word, but directly contrary; as is plain, Cant.
4.12. 2 Cor. 6.17, 1 Cor. 5. chapter, Rev. 22.14,15. Besides their Time, Place,
Persons, Maintenance, and Means of Worship, are Institutions of their own
devissing, and therefore Idols, of all which hereafter.

And this their humane Antichristian Church State, as it is said to be
Priestly, Parishionall or Congregationall: so it is institutive likewise,
because under a National Church Institution Authorized by the Civil State:
wherefore all those that do partake of their Public Administrations, must
needs partake of their Institutions, by virtue whereof they do administer: and
so have communion in that Church State, as well at in the Ordinances thereof,
Mat. 23.17.20. Whereas in the Covenanted, and united Corporations, or
particular independent polliticke bodies, and Churches of Christ, union, and
communion, is No communion in a true Church state, but by un. on.
restrained to the Members; if but 2 or 3, as Mat. 18.20. or so many as may
ordinarily meet together in one place for edification, as 1 Cor. 14.23.
Ecclesiastically in Christ's Name, and by his Power acting for him: and of such
an encorporated Body, none can Ecclesiactically partake, or be Members thereof,
but only such as by due Order are added, or admitted into some such true
society of Saints: all others do but stand by, and are without, as 1 Cor.
5.12. having no rightful power in, or privilege to, Christ's Instituted
Ordinances, in that divine Instituted corporated state, as Psalm. 122. all, 2
King. 8.2.5.14.25.33. Psalm. 147.19,20. which is a manifest difference, from
their Church State, where all that are present are partakers and Members.

But it is objected by you, and in a Book called Mr. Robinsons, that thu
Hearing aforesaid, is but a Moral act, and not Communion: and that Preaching
the Word is not enclosed with any ditch, or hedge, human or divine, but lies in
common for all, and for the good of all, etc.

To which I Answer. First, it is the Scripture only that is of Divine and
Conscience-binding Authority, and no humane Authority, which only is the
Argument from that Book.

Secondly, All that he aymeth at and endeavors to prove, is that one fully
Separated from the Church State of England, may bear the Ministers thereof
without communion with them, which Argument is not for those that are not
Separated therefrom.

Thirdly, his Argument to prove it no communion, because it is not rightful
communion, is not good; for unmarryed persons can have adulerous marriage
communion, though not rightful: they may not, nor ought not; yet they can, and
too often have communion appropriat to Marriage.

Fourthly, the whole and fool professed scope of that Book, is to prove it
lawful for those of his Church, or the like Seperates, to Hear the Ministers
of the Church of England, which is expressed in his Title thereof: but that point
he never touches in his whole Book after, either in general, or by any
particular affirmation, or positive proof: but only answers one only
Argument, framed by himself: as if it were the only Argument, that had been,
or could be brought to disprove his Title and opinion; whereas there are many
other, some of which I intend to show you.

Fifthly, since his writing that Book, he publicly professed and taught in the
Church of Layden, whereof he was Minister, that this Hearing now in difference
between us, was partaking, and sinful partaking with a false Ministry, but not
proper communion therewith: and he was also then confuted therein, in the
presence of near 300. persons of that Church, and diverse others, and promised
to desist from prosecuting that opinion, which he had made known.

Sixthly, that Book was never Printed, nor intended for to be, by himself
(though he lived at least a year after the writing thereof) nor by the Church
whereof he was; nor any of the like true State; nor with their consent: but an
enemy of them and him, long after his death, and much longer after his writing
it, having found it amongst his wast papers; and I think not knowing of Mr.
Robinsons own abovesaid revocation of the Title and scope of that Book: and
being urged by his and their most inveterate enemies, got it Printed to Mr.
Robinsons Friends shame, and many men's hurt, who were willing to be hurt
thereby in their souls, and matter of divine worship, rather then they would be
hurt in their worldly repute and wealth.

Seventhly, it is evident to the many that heard Mr. Robinsons said assertion,
that this Hearing was sinful partaking with that Ministry: and the Arguments
that prevailed with him so to speak in the full Congregation of that great
Church, that he wrote not that Book after it, because there is no mention of
any of those Arguments which then diswaded him from that secret opinion, which
shows that he honestly kept his promise of his desisting its prosecution;
though it escaped the fire, which I think it should not have done, if he, or
his Friends had supposed it would have been Printed: for ever a^terward be
continued in his former and better judgment, according to his Justification of
Separation in Print.

But to Answer those Objections (but briefly.) First, I deny not that it is
merely morrall, to speak, hear, write, confer, to wash, eat, drink, etc.
yea even to preach, or pray among morrallists: as when one preaches the God of
Nature to the Heathen, which have no other State upon them but Nature, as Ioh.
4.39.42. Act. 11.19,20. and 17 23,24. but when a Pastor preaches Christ, in
the Church of Christ, it is Christian, Preaching Stative.
stative; and Ministerial, and so an Evangelical Institution. And when a a
Priest preaches of Christ, in the Church of Antichrist, it is likewise
Antichristian, stative, and Ministerial, and so a Diabolical Institution: and
therefore in both more then morrall except that you will say (as some
Famillistically profess* that though they be Ministers, yet they preach to
Assemblies of unconverted and morrall men: not as to a Church: and that the
Preachers are no Officers therein; which the Preachers themselves dare not say:
for then they must hold as we by the Scripture last quoted. But when we go to
perform any one spiritual, and public instituted duty (for all institutions
are duties, and not liberties) as to offer the sacrifice of prayer, praise,
preaching or Heareing more then Morrall.
Hearing the Word, or receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, or Babtisme,
in an instituted Ecclesiastical state, by an instituted officer: it is then a
spiritual duty, performed in obedience to God, and not a morrall act but
divine, spiritual, and acceptable: unless we can worship God morrally, and
acceptably; which is no less a falsity then an absurdity, Pet. 2.5. Wherefore
so to speak, hear, wash, eat, drink, as is aforesaid, is more then
morrall: because then there is a prerogative precept, or an institution upon
them in the administration, and much more the Sacraments, being of an
instituted nature must therefore have an instituted person to administer them
(and not for imaginary real presence thereat, as some fondly affirm; and
therefore to avoid that error, run upon a worse, which is, that any may
as well administer those instituted ordinances, as Baptism and the Lords
Supper, which are only of an instituted nature, aswe^ as pray, or preach the
Word, which are morrall, and grounded in nature) Consider this difference; for
though others can do the same things, yet they may not: sor no personal
private intentions have warrant in institutions; as all may see by the example
of Corah, Vzza, and Vzzia. All which show, that only the immediate warrant of
God must be our guide therein. As in the Commonwealth, though it be lawful
for any to carve, cut, or work upon Silver, and to set the impression thereof
on letters and evidence; yet so to do, in making and sealing with the figure of
the Kings stamp and Seal, without the Kings commission, is Treason. I likewise
grant that preaching, or Hearing the Word, is not enclosed with any hedge,
ditch, l^ane of divine, but that it lies in common for all, and for the good of
all, as you say; provided always that it be preached (if Officially and
Authoritatively) first, in a true Church state: secondly, by those that have a
lawful Ecclesiastical function, and calling thereunto: or else personally, as
Prophetically by a gift, as Romans 12.6. 1 Cor 14.3 24.29 to 35. Act. 11.20.21.
Ioh. 4.28.34. otherwise God has cursed those that dare assume this authority,
and the partakers therein, as is plain Numb. 16.1.3.11.33. 2 Chro. 26.16. 1
King. 12.31. yea although both Corah, and Vzza burnt true incense, and
Ieroboams Priests true sacrifices, Amos 4 4,5. and 5.5. And that it is alike
dangerous, and more sinful in diverse respects to partake in the worship of the
Beast, now under the Gospel, see 2 Thessalonians. 2.7.10.12. Rev. 14.9,10,11, etc.

And whereas it is likewise objected, both by you, and many others, that it is
not communion, to bear them in the administration of the Word only, except in
the Seals also. I Answer, this is a difference without distinction and
shifting Sophistry; and do desire all were truly sencible thereof, that seek
the Lord in sincerity. Because I must be brief, I only do demand of you, or
any, where God did ever in a Church state, separate these two, the word, and
the seals (having Officers for their due administration) for if it be lawful
for one to Hear them, why not to receive further benefit by them? seeing they
do one as well as the other, as they be an instituted, and constituted Church
and Ministry. All which are alike appropriate it herunto.
and Preaching of the word Ecclesiastically, is as real a part of worship, as
is the sealer; and therefore as incommunicable there, as was eating meat
sacrificed to Idols, 1 Cor. 10. For there is four parts of Apostolical Church
communion, Act. 2,42. that is, the Church, the Church States, Functions of
those States, and the Sabbatticall Congregationall exerciseings of them all
three: and from these Four are answerable, the Mother, the Breast, the Nipple,
and the Child sucking Milk from all three; in all which you plainly partake,
and communicate, and so have your spiritual nourishment communicated from a
false Church, which either poisons, or starves them according to that quantity
ye receive thereof. And as the milk of the Word will nourish, being had in,
and by, the true Mother or Church; so the Milk of the Whorish Church will
poison, by her unwholesome Doctrines, and in time steal away the natural
affection from the true Mother, or Church: howbeit the word may be prosperous
there, through the nature thereof to the elect, as Heb. 4.2.12 Isa. 55.11. and
by the superabundant goodness of God, though it cannot be challenged,
expected, or prayed for upon any Promise, they not being in the visible
Antichrist's out of the state of Grace.
state of grace, the true Church: but wallowing in, and wandering after a false
Church, Rev. 13.3. Wherefore (in the fear of God) let all those who do intend,
or have already joined themselves unto the Lord, in so near a bond, as to be
married to Christ; as Isa. 62.5. and so by that mystical union, are made one
body with him; as Ephesians 5.30. having taken him to be their Husband, Lord, and
Lawgiver, to be ruled and taught by him, who is their spiritual King, Priest,
and Prophet: let them I say consider how dangerous a thing it is, to break
this their instituted state of worship, and to embrace the bosom of a
stranger, as Pro. 5.20. which the Lord cannot abide, Isa. 42.8. Psalm. 73.27.
and 106.39,40. And as there is but two estates properly wherein all creatures
are comprehended, that is to say, in this life the world, and the Church; in
the life to come, heaven and hell: so that every one is either a member of
Christ, and ought to be in his Church, or of the Devil belonging to the world,
or false Church; and shall either reign with Christ in eternal bliss, or
ruin with the Devil and his Angels in eternal torments: which may be a
reason sufficient to deter persons, who be persuaded of their own personal
faith, and assurance of Gods love in Christ: yet do content themselves to
continue in a disorderly, and disobedient state of Idolatry. Which spiritual
instituted Church state, true and false, is in Scripture set forth by the
natural instituted state of marriage: For as the true Church is a company of
discernable Christians, entered into a Covenant of God to be his Sabbath
assembling Corporation, for his worship, and their own salvation: and the false
Church in controversy, is a Regiment of Popish Priests, usurping Gods
Ordinances, and adding their own, for the same ends; I mean in their own
pretense; though in truth and Gods account, it is Idolatry, and worship, and
communion with Devils, 1 Cor. 10.14. to 21. 2 Chro. 11.15. Rev. 9.20. So is
true marriage a Man's and Woman's covenanting with God and each other to be
Husband and Wife, in obedience and love of Gods marriage order; and for the
continuance of mankind; and false or usurped marriage, or its abusive communion
is an agreement of a Man and a Woman to do the work, and take the pleasure of
marriage, without and before the act and performance of the divine order of
marriage, 25 Hos. 1.2,3. with cap. 3.3. which false Church, is the counterfeit
of that blessed instituted order, and ordinance of God, for procreation, and
preservation spiritual, which is called fornication, and whordome, v. 2. which
false and counterfeit Ecclesiastical state, is called a great whore, v. 1 as
having relation only to the City of Rome: with a cup of gold in her hand, v. 4.
which Cup is (as I conceive) the Mass of false worship of the same false, and
Antichristian Church state, the Kingdom of darkness, or that habitation of
Devils, and cage of every unclean, and hateful bird, as Rev. 18.2. but
derived and received from Rome, and so dispersed into diverse particulars of
National or otherwise false Church states; which Cup, is there said to be full
of abomin^tions, and filthiness of her fornications, v 4. and all the
inhabitants of the Christian earth, are drunk with the wine of that old whores
cup, as v. 2. chap. 13.8.16. and 18.3.23. And this Idolatrous, glorious,
Catholic quaffing cup, has Seven several supporting Pillars, or degrees of
drunk^nnesse (the counterfeit of Wisdoms house Pro. 9.1.) whereby that old
Babylonish Baude, does intoxicate the heads and hearts of her silly passengers,
as the Wiseman has it, Pro. 9.15,16. And all those that are either her real
members, and constant customers, or any way entangled with her institutions (if
it be but delightful dalliance with her, as some think this Hearing is) do in
the sense, and by the proof of Scripture then alike become her guests, by
receiving her mark or lovetoken, either in their right hand, or in their
forehead, as Rev. 13.16,17. which shall be plainly proved in the sequel of this
my Letter, which Cup I have divided into Seven several Drafts.

The First Draft of this Whorish Divellish delusion, is this deceivable,
National, E^clesiasticall state, with the renowned antiquity, and universality
thereof: which as it had its beginning, and growth, as 2 Thessalonians. 2.7,8. so must
it have an ending, as Rev. 18.7,8. Dan. 11.45. Maugre the malice of all her
Merchants, Rev. 18.11.15. whereas the true Church state of Christ, the gates of
hell cannot prevail against it, as Mat. 16.18. Heb. 12.28. because it is in
heaven, Gal. ^ 26. Rev. 21.10. which divine pollitticall state, has been, and
shall ever continue to the end of the world, in use and power: wherefore, as
Babells fall is certain, as Rev. 18.2. and will be sudden, as v. 10.19. why
should not all Gods people (being by the Holy Ghost invited, be willing to come
out of Babylon, as verse. 4. as by duty we are bound: and serve the Lord in due
order, in his own way, in his own House, by his own means, and amongst his
fellow-sonnes in the fellowship of the Gospel, the true Church state, where
only he has promised to accept us, as Eze. 20 40. Heb. 8.2.10.12. with 2.5.
and 12.28. Ioh. 9.31. Mat. 18.20. 1 Pet. 2.5. for God never gave his Laws and
Ordinances Ecclesiastical to any but to a true Church or State, as Mic. 4.2.
Psalm. 147.19,20. Isa. 8.16. nor any tolleration to exercise or enjoy them
elsewhere, Ier. 2.17,18,19,36.

The second reason or ground against hearing aforesaid, is taken from their
Office, which is also Antichristian and universal, as is their Church state,
they being all ordained, breathedon by the Bishops; and so those Frogs
coming out of the mouth of the Beast and false Prophet, Rev. 16.13. are
thereby fitted to officiate in any place they can get within that state,
whether or no they have, or yet there be any Benefice or flock to feed, or
rather to feed them. But as for the Churches of Christ, they choose out from
amongst themselves, as Act. 6.6. Officers in every Church, Act. 14.23. and
1.21,23. such as the rule of the Word waranteth both for gifts and
qualifications, where, being elected and ordained, they are only bound to
officiate and partake in as before: so likewise must there be a functionall
rite as well as a gift, to officiate and serve God by, such offices which are
only five as our King Christ Jesus has left his Church for the sufficient
feeding and preserving both of the souls and bodies of his brethren, the
Saints, which the false, apish and Antichristian church, has likewise
imitated, but does after their own order of infinite offices, officiate, not
by Christ's. Wherefore all that hear them so officiate, or preach in their
public, instituted, and consecrated places, must needs partake of that their
universal Office, which extends (not only to a peculiar people, as in the
Church of Christ) but to all that hear them, he will be their Priest
wheresoever they come: neither do they preach (as you suppose and many
profess) by virtue of gifts, (wherefore as you say, you do hear them) but
officially, and sent by the Prelates (whose mouths they are to the people
(witness their holy Orders, so called:) and so must all hear them (their
instituted teachers) and at their own instituted time, in their own
instituted place, by their own instituted means, in their own constituted
state, and no otherways: however men (they consider not wether they obey God
or man therein,) flatter themselves, making it as small a matter as going to
Market, through commonnesse thereof being borne and brought up therein; yet is
every such act both in their officers, an act of rebellion and treason against
Gods prerogative Royal, so to continue, and officiate for Antichrist, and
against Christ; and likewise for any to bear them so officially preach there
as aforesaid, for they must needs partake of their Altar, Antichrist with his
false instituted office and State, as 2 Chronicles. 11.15. 1 King. 12.31.33. and so
be partakers of their sin therein, even as of their sacrifice, which is
plainly forbidden, Amos 4.4.5. and 5.5. 1 Timothy 5.22. 2 Cor. 6.14.16.18. and a
fearful sin of rebellion against God, as Ierr. 7.22,24. Rev. 18.4 and
14.9,10,11. And it is the property of Christ's Sheep to hear his voice, his
own officers, and not strangers, such as come not in at the door, by a true
outward calling thereunto, which whatever they be, are not therefore true, but
false Prophets, let them pretend what they can, they run before they be sent,
as Ier. 23.21,22,32. for though they may have never so great gifts or
abilities, to preach as Corah, Dathan, and Ab^ram had, Numb. 16.2. yet it makes
them not true officers without a true and visible or outward calling, which
gives right thereunto; no more then a man unmarried may procreate, or then any
officer in the Commonwealth which does officiate As a Cunstable, or headsman.
for the King, for, or by his gifts or abilities thereunto, for diverse of his
Neighbors may excel him therein) but by virtue of his election and commission
thereunto: only whereby he is enlighted more then any other, though never so
able for gifts. and if any other shall presume or assume officially to deal
with, or for others in the execution of the Kings Laws, both he that so
executes, (although never so secretly, and those that do submit thereunto
(though never so simply) are both in a praemunire, and transgressors of the
Kings Laws and Ordinances. And much more equal is it, that Christ our King,
Lord and Lawgiver, should be submitted unto herein: and that none should dare
to take this official honor unto himself, except he be called of God, as
Aaron was, Heb. 5.4. especially under such a notorious rebel as Antichrist is,
2 Thessalonians. 2.8. even the Devils vicegerent or Lieutenant, Revel. 13.2.4. and
9.1.2.11. and for this sin, we shall find the Scripture plentifully
vindicating the honor and glory of God herein, on such who have presumed to
approach so near the Lord without this his Order, as Numb. 16.32,33. 2 Chronicles.
26.16.18.21. and 13.9,10. 1 King. 13.1.4.34. with any appearance of an office,
as Act. 16.18. Rev. 2.2. And shall he now permit any (under what pretense
soever) to officiate us for him, but without his call or sending, visibly
manifested (...) especially manifesting the contrary sending, and that by his
implacable enemy Antichrist; who has for a long time rebelled against Christ:
and by his prevailing power and usurped authority, making both Laws and
Officers, of his own invention, as is prophesied of him, Dan. 7.25. Ioh. 5.43.
which only well wayed, were enough to deter tenderhearted Christians from
submitting to him, or partaking with him, as Rev. 9.11. And as they have from
this head, their false calling, so have they thence their false functions or
Both which you justify by Hearing them Preach.
offices, none of those mentioned, Romans 12. nor Ephesians. 4. but confounding the
Offices of Christ, both for order and number, to fit their own humor

But as we have a rule to know the Laws, Offices and Officers of Christ, so
have we a Warrant likewise to hear them, because sent and set up by him; and
in hearing them, we hear Christ that sent them, as Luke 10.16. And so may
expect a blessing of information, edification, and consolation by them, as the
means sanctified of God for that end.

But on the contrary, if we bear any of Antichrists officers, as aforesaid,
ecclesiastically, we then hear the Bishop that sent and authorized them, the
Pope, their elder Brother, that authorized the Bishops, and likewise we heard
their King and head the This is truth.
Devil, as Rev. 9.11. that sent his Vicar the Pope, as the Apostle teaches, 1
Cor. 10.20. 2 Cor. 6.15,16. 2 Chronicles. 11.15. wherefore consider this one
particular, I beseech you, if this be not in a high manner to provoke the Lord,
even as much as in you lies, to deny God, his Church, his Ministry and
Administrations, and to give the glory thereof unto another, even his
implacable enemy Antichrist, and so make their selves liable to the judgments
of God, in upholding the cursed kingdom of darkness, which the Lord will
destroy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8. which is the maine cause of our total separation from
them, knowing no good ground for Popish pardons Jesuitical reservations and
equivocations, nor for Familisticall intentions and evasions, herein we dare
not presume to partake in their transgressions, Rev. 18.4. but as we are
bought both souls and bodies by so dear a price, 1 Pet. 1.18,19. we believe
we ought to glorify God to the uttermost, both in our souls and in our
bodies, as 1 Cor. 6.20. Giving up our bodies a living sacrifice, in his holy
service, acceptable to God according to his Word, Romans 12.1,2. 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but reprove
them rather, as we are commanded, Ephesians. 5. to 21. Then let Baals Prophets
plead their own cause, and let them preach to their pictured walls, for the
Lord has not raised us up Prophets to keep us in Babel, as Ier. 29.15. as some
still plead, and as Judah then said, whom the Lord threatens, verse. 17. for
their flattery and villainy, verse. 23. but that we should come clear out of her
speedily, as chap. 51.6.45. Revel. 18.4. And not dare to have any dalliance
with those spiritual Harlots in Gods spiritual worship, as Prove. 6.25. For as
the same Wi^e man says, verse. 27.28. Can a man go upon coals, and his feet
not be burnt; no surely, such are over-swayed with the sinful conceits of
their former contents, not considering the breach of their spiritual
instituted state, which only God has blessed them in, and bounded them to, as
in the natural instituted state of marriage. And though we have right unto
all (both natural and spiritual) benefits and privileges, as you say both by
the Word; and all other ordinances of Christ, as 1 Cor. 3.22. Yet are we also
tied unto the stative instituted order of Christ therein, as were our first
Parents Adam and Eve, Genesis 3.6. Romans 5.19. Notwithstanding the otherwise
manifold use, both for delight therein, and benefit thereby; and because of the
institutivenesse thereof, which they brake, they procured a curse both on
themselves and their posterity, as verse. 15, 17, 19. Wherefore I pray you, and
all Gods people, for this reason, to consider the danger, at how great a price
you purchase the whores ware, and buy it no more, as Revel. 18.11. For it is
forbidden Fruit.

For, as for the outward man, we must observe Gods order, both for back and
belly, though we (as all others) have a created right unto the creaturs, yet we
may not take them of any, or where we find them; but must come unto them by the
course and order God has appointed us thereunto: so also may we not in
spiritual things (as some suppose) seek to benefit our selves, but by
obedience, as is plain, 1 Samuel 15.22,23. Ecles. 4.17. or 5.1. Wherefore let
all Gods people be warned of their Spiritual Incontinencie and Idolatry, which
so much provokes the Lords jealousy, as Deuteronomy. 29.20. Exodus 34.14. Psalm.
78.56. 2 Cor. 11.2. and not dote on these false, fabulous, and usurped
Authoritive teachers, how excellently soever personally qualified, as Israel of
old did after the Egyptians and Assiri^s, as Ezekiel. 23. chap. Exodus 16.3. Hos
12.1. which giddiheadednesse the Apostle likewise charge, both on the Pastors
and people under the Gospel, to be carefully prevented as an ensuing scabbie
sin, 2 Timothy 4.3,4. For the practice of those persons that ruinate either
Faith or Order, is abomination, bringing confusion, contrary to that course
Christ has set in his Church, 1 Cor. 14.33.40. And they must be avoided as
unfit matter for the Churches of Christ, Rev. 21.27. whether to be received
into them, or being thereof to be retained; they ought therefore to be better
informed, as Pro. 19.2. and by the same Wise man advised, Eccles 4.17. to take
heed how they enter into the house of God, lest being unfit matter of a Church
of God, and not partakers of the true order of Gods worship, all their services
be but the sacrifice of Fools, though themselves be never so devout.

And as I conceive, such are all those, who by this incontinent confused course
of Hearing aforesaid, without Gods order (as though our God were not still the
God of Order, as well of Religion or adoration, as of Creation, Procreation, and
preservation) and by this their Babylonian oberration, they may be followers of
any Religion; which, as I suppose, is rather ignorance in you and them to whom
I write (though they so do rather through an inordinate desire of inward
spiritual benefit) then ambition or any outward worldly respect, as it was at
the first building of Babel, Genesis 11. who, having sinned and broken the order
of God, thought by the height thereof, to preserve themselves, and prevent Gods
Judgments from the like late general Deluge. And as it was in them a sinful
ambition, so is it now likewise in these and them both an arrogant presumption;
and a chief means to reduce and retain others still in Babylon, or
disorderly confusion.

This is the second drunken draft of the intoxicating wicked Wine of that
Whores cup, Rev. 17.1,2,4. whereby her guests are so attended and supplied with
their red liquor, Prove. 23.30,31. that all are ready still to run thither.

A third reason and ground against Hearing aforesaid, is in regard of the
Maintenance of those Ministers, which is either Jewish or Popish Tithes and
Offerings, which is appointed and expected for their labors, from their
followers, as a due reward thereof, and is indeed by them in reason not to be
retained or denied. Wherefore, if this disorderly practice of Hearing be well
weighed by those who so lust after that forbidden fruit, such as you I mean
who are already (or suppose themselves) separated from the false, and united to
the true Churches of Christ, and should depend on their own officers, and
appointed means f^r the Food of their souls, as Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. ^.2. And
on whom their officers should depend for their maintenance, as 1 Cor. 9.11.14.
1 Timothy 5.17,18. and who suppose it a liberty to be partakers of their
spiritual things, may see how injurious and unequal dealing it is, not only
to thrust out, and take up the rightful rooms of others their flock, but
also to receive their officers spiritual things, if they do not afford them
their wages for maintenance, whereby indeed their craft is upholden, as are
their Pursevants, and the rest of their Commissary courts, that rude rabble of
cruel hunters, Ezekiel. 13.18.20. which wages, if all Gods people would retain,
as they might, Revel. 18.11. and rather lose their worldly repute, and likewise
refrain their fellowship in those Antichristian assemblies, as they ought,
Ephesians. 5.11. we should not have so many proud priests, and misled poor
people, as Revel. 18.22,23. which now all, some for fear, others for favor,
follow the Whore as is professed, Rev. 13.15,16,17. and are thereby branded
with her mark, and know not the danger, until a dart strike through their
liver, as Prove. 7.23.

Neither would there be so many empty (...) at the assemblies of the Saints;
for take away this hot Maintenance.
coal from their live Altar, and their sacrifices and set service will quickly
cool, as the Lord testified of the false Prophets of old, Mic. 3.5,11. so is
it now with these Antichristian Priests, of whom the Prophet, Dan. 11.39. and
the Apostle Jude has long ago told us these things, how that they should
divide the Look to this you landed men.
land for gaine^; and does not every Parish Priest expect, nay compel it,
every one from his quarter, as Isa. 16.11. both of their lands and houses they
will have Tithes, though we come not to partake with them, else comes out
their commischiefe courts wodden dagger, which has by our Savior himself bin
told us before, John. 16.2. which spirit begun in Diotrophes that domineering
Doctor, their old predecessor, as 3 Ioh. 9.10. and of these false Prophets, and
their profitable disposition, the Apostle, 2 Pet. 2.3. Jude. 11. has at large
forewarned us: And that this their maintenance is a contrary course to Christ's
Church; is plain, which is either a free benevolence, as Act. 5.4. Luke 8.3.
or by their own labors, as Act 20.33,35. or both, as occasion requires:
Wherefore I beseech you to consider this their incontinencie, and their injury,
and if you do expect to meet the Lord in his ordinances, look not so much to
please your own fantasies, but if you will run a whoring still after those
spiritual Harlots, you must then likewise in reason pay them their wages, as
before, which is not only an absurdity thereon, but also a fearful sin, as
Hos. 2 5,7,9. and 12.1. Isa. 55.2. Ezekiel 16.17,18. Prove. 3.9. Rev. 14 9,11. and
18.15,23.

Now one word more by the way to their Ministerial men, who like Michahs
wandering Priest, Judge. 17.7.9.11.) are never satisfied with their benefices, as
Chap. 18.19.20. when will the Prophecy be fulfilled Zach. 13.4.5. And when
will the day come that they will be ashamed of their vision, and leave off
their sinful standing, and wait on the Lord in the way and means he has
sanctified for his worship and service, (and being found fit) bring their
gifts for the repairing of the Saints, whom they have hitherto hindered, and
in as much as they could ruinated: it may be they will now at the last help the
Lord against the mighty, for we know the times have not yet so well fitted
their turning, yet the expected time of the wind turning to the truth, being
now near at hand, bid them hasten, for if with its turning hereafter, they
expect to be carried into our companies, how can they free themselves from our
jealousies, but rather be rejected, according to that prophecy, Ier. 51.26.
Ezekiel. 44.10. to 14. Wherefore for their credits let them in time return, and
with us trust the Lord, who has said he will satisfy the souls of his Saints
that serve him, Psalm. 36.8.9. and 65.4.132.13.15. Isa. 66.11,12. 1 Pet. 2.1.2.
For what is it better for the best of them, and their doting disciples, the
Professors so much complain of the times They will be as the times be.
if they do still only wish them better, and never help to make them so by
their particular practice, nay let hem look to it lest (the world by wondering
and wandering after, and resting upon them) they be not found the chief
hinderers of the Lords Harvest, as Mat. 9.36,38. not only by standing idle all
the day-themselves, Mat. 20.6. but also dissuade others from the Work of the
Lord, saving with the idle Israelites, Hag. 1.2. that the time is not come that
the Lords house should be built; What need we trouble our selves therewith,
we must leave Reformation to them in authority^ and so never reform
themselves) as though the Laws of God were not in force, nor use, but by the
appointment and permission of Princes or Prelates, it is true that Princes may
make the truth more free, but not more lawful, in any time or place, Psalm.
111: 8. But these carnal Gospellers with their great possessions, are like
with Christ's Camel, Mat. 19.20,22,24. to keep out of the Kingdom of Heaven
(the Church, Mat. 6.33. and 13.19,24,31,33,38,41.) for the way of the Gospel is
too narrow and strait generally for them, Mat. 7.13,14. and fit for the poor
who have nothing to lose, for it is such that the Lord does choose, Iam. 2.1,5.
1 Cor. 2.27,28. As for those whose godliness is gain, who will be rich, they
fall into snares and manifold temptations, 1 Timothy 6.5,9. which worldly wealth
the Apostle then said, that some (but we may now say that all) do covet
after, and so pierce themselves through with many errors; verse. 10.

But if you be not affrighted nor terrified enough for your own sinful
standing, and rebellious walking, neither have any hearts to so great a price
of Christ's wisdom, the true worship of the But dote on the world.
Word, Romans 12.1,2. which is that wisdom the wise man S^loman, so, much
priseth in his Proverbs and divine Sentences, and elsewhere in the Scriptures,
and if you be not yet persuaded hereof, leave off to oppose and And so add
affliction to our bands Phil. 1.16.
rail against those that be, as did your proud predecessors the Scribes and
Pharisees, Mat. 23:13. else let some of your divine Doctors (which yet never
any did) demonstrate to us, their warrant to dispense the Mysteries of life and
salvation, by those, and to such, as it does in that state, nothing belong or
appertain, as O impudency and impiety!
they all do, like the false Prophet of old, Ier. 6.14.15.16. For by their
flattery the poor people are kept still in blindness and profanation of Gods
Ordinances, as were the ancient Jews, who cried aloud, The Temple of the Lord,
the Temple of the Lord, as they do with less right, Ier. 7.4. Ioh.
8.33.37.39.44. And by this their gainefull great Net and flattering bait, they
catch all comers, in hope that none will pass by their angles, as Hab.
1.13.15. Thus sell they Gods Ordinances for Jewish, and Popish Tithes and
Offerings.

This is the Third drunken Draught, and contentious quarrelling cup, betwixt
the Whore and her guests: whereupon the Glass of her gain is broken, and they
refuse to make her satisfaction.

A fourth reason and ground against hearing aforesaid, is in respect of their
consecrated houses, Cathedralls, Chappells, or Churches so called: because all
those High Places have upon them an Antichristian institution, even from the
first foundation of them, being then intended, consecrated or made holy, only
for their worship of God, and no other place by them permitted thereunto. And
herewith they delude the people, who for the most part dote upon a material
Temple still, under the Gospel: which is no other then to deny Christ to be
come in the flesh, who is the substance of all things shaddowed under the Law,
either in his Person or Church. And likewise the better to keep the People in
hand: there remains a power of blessing or consecrating in them, as it is in
God 1 Timothy 4.5. therefore has Antichrist assumed this power also, as John.
5.43. 2 These. 2.4. Rev. 13.2,4,13,14. And as it is an ordinance of Antichrist
to institute or consecrate a state, and persons to preach by and to, as before:
so likewise has he consecrated a time and places to preach in: which places
being dedicated to and set apart for Gods public worship, and without the
warrant of the Word, are Idols or Idolatrous monuments. as Judge 17.5. Ier.
7.31. 1 King. 12.29.31. Hos. 4.4,5. and 5.5. And therefore of all other places
unfit for Gods true worship who will not be worshipped with, or by an Idol. And
none can come to Hear the Word there; but must needs come under that their
Institution and consecration, or execration rather, and so be partaker of their
sin therein. But as it was ever, so is there now an appointed place by God,
for his worship and service: as first under the Law Deuteronomy. 12. So likewise under
the Gospel, but not so bondaging Mal. 1.11. For now the particular appointed
place for public worship under the Gospel, is the Christ's Court.
encorporated cultive congregations of the Saints, wheresoever assembled, he
has there promised his presence, and acceptance. * Mat. 18.20. and 28.20. 1
Cor. 11.18.20. and 14.23. 1 Timothy 2.8. Rev. 1.13. And this is one put of the
Churches liberty under the Gospel Gal. 5.1. for as the The Temple typed out
the congregation.
Temple, or Place of Gods worship under the Law, was the Tipe of the
Congregation of Christ's worshipers under the Gospel Gal. 4.24.26. Heb.
12.18.22.23. 1 Cor. 3.17. So when Christ came that was Tiped and is now the way
the truth and the life Ioh. 14.6. the Temple, with the rest of the Ceremonial,
Iudi^all, and Leviticall worshipers, were abrogated and abollished, as is
manifested Ioh. 4.19. to 24. Act. 7.47.49. Heb. 3. to 7.1 Cor. 3.16.17. Ephe.
2.20.22. 1 Pet 2.5.9. Wherefore seeing God has now by Christ consecrated the
whole earth, as before, and all other places are free for the Saints assembling
(in the sight of God) however by men forbidden, then are all in this case to
obey God rather then men, Act. 4.19.5.29. For this was Ephraims sin Hos. 5.11.
and 8.114. for otherways by your pertaking with them there in their worship
(as Hearing is) you do not only sin against God therein your selves Gal.
2.18. but likewise justify and uphold those Persons practice in those Idol
places, by going to the Most know no other Church.
Church (as they say) and so by your example (who seem to be Separated and have
more knowledge) you destroy the weak souls amongst them, for whom Christ
died: which even in things indifferently lawful is a fearful sin, 1. Cor.
8.10.11. Romans 14.16. Eze. 51.54. whereby they are not only encouraged to
continue in their Church state, but also discouraged for the sufficient feeding
of the soul in the Churches of Christ, but need to behoulding to Antichrist
his implacble enemy, for some of his dainty Idolatry.

And as this Hearing, is an offense and cause of stumbling to the weak, who
are yet without, toward whom we are to walk wisely Col. 4 5. 1 These 4:12.
Phil. 2:15. that by our conversation they may be brought to acknowledge the
truth, Deuteronomy. 4 6,8. which yet they are ignorant of, Ephe. 4.17,18. so is it
likewise an offense to the breethren who have a charg to watch over one
another, Lev. 19.17 Mat. 18.15. both in their covenanted duty of faith toward
God, and of orderly walking one toward another, in the fellowship and order of
the Gospel, but by such an extravagant wandering beyond the bonds of that
body, or state, whereof we are encorporate members, to their Idol Temples or
Antichristian harlot houses aforesaid, is not only a breach of the true Church
Covenant, but of the second Commandment, whereby God is greatly dishonored,
his own breethren, and other Churches burdened and greeved Rev. 2.24,25. 2
Cor. 2.1,5. Romans 16.17. whom we ought not to offend, 1 Cor. 10.32.

Consider likewise that by this your practice of Hearing in those their
canonical Churches, you worship the Beast Rev. 14 9. etc. And do apparently
receave his mark in your forehead, you then, as the rest there, are publicly
discerned to be his guests, servants or slaves rather, by your so running with
the confused rabble to the same excess of ^ot forbidden 1 Pet. 4.3,4. For if
you do profess Separation from every false way, then are you under the
Aposteles reproof, Gal. 2.18. Because as in other their Antichristian
institutions) so in this particlar of their place, you build again that
profession of theirs, which by your Separation you seem to destroy, and so make
your self therein a trespasser, which you cannot avoid: else let any show some
warrantable ground (which yet none could do) that you may come into those
consecrated Cages, to Hear, and not come under (and so sm^dly partake in) that
their Antichristian institution thereof, and if you do not profess Separation
as indeed you are not wholly; then are you likewise under the reproof of that
Apostle Tit. 1.16. and of our Savior Mat. 23.28. and were better never seem to
be separated to Gods service: for by your double dealing betwixt Christ and
Antichrist, you both justify the wicked and condemn the just which is
Wherefore walk by some rule.
Abomination to the Lord Prove. 17.15. and 28.4. and argues that such persons
understand not what their grounds lead them to perform: for if you be true
scolars and Churches of Christ, they ought not to come within Antichrists
scoole, but avoid the door of the harlots house Prove. 5.8,21. and to let them
return to thee, but return not thou to them Ier. 15.19.

And if the case stand thus concerning the place of Gods worship under the
Gospel, that as Christ has appointed one place, so has Antichrist appointed
another, the one mount Eball which is cursed, the other mount Gerasim, which is
blessed Deuteronomy. 11.29 how comes it then to pass that any of the reputed people
of God, and Churches of Christ are so widely mistaken? as thus to wander from
their own place, as the ^illy Bird from her nest Pro. 27 8. would not the woman
of Samaria wonder now, if she were amongst us, to see the Jews, the reputed
Christians of our times, meddle with the Samaritans, the Antichristians, from
whom they profess Separation, not in things natural as our Savior then with
her: for we must live and grow together in the field of the world Mat. 13.30. 1
Cor. 5.10.11. Phil. 2.15. But in things and actions merely spiritual and that
with approbatition, not by way of reproof, as our Savior there, being
demanded of her where the rightful place of Gods worship was John 4.20. he
answered it was not now tied to any material place, so it were in spirit and
truth v 21.24. The Temple of Christ's Church is built of living stones and a
spiritual house, and now no more material, 1 Pet. 2.5, 1 Cor. 3.16.17. He.
3.6. And what though our Fathers worshipped in Mount Aives, and adored these
Idolatrous monuments, let not us be led by their errors: Ier. 9.14. But let us
be informed with the woman of Samaria that they worshipped they knew not what:
and that it is the gates of Spiritual Sion that he loves, above all their
decked adorned dens. Psalm. 132.13. It is a holy habitation, or mountain of
holiness, the congregation of Saints where he has Christ keeps a good House
for all comers.
placed all his spiritual springs. Psalm. 87.2.7. Mic. 4.2. where he feeds his
flock and sufficiently refreshes his Saints. Psalm. 132.15. Wherefore then
should any be so wavering, and still wandering from the waters of their own
well Prove. 5.15. what have we to do in the way of Egypt, to drink the waters
of Nilus? or what have we to do the way of Ashur, to drink of the water of
the river? If you cannot answer man, nor your own conscience herein; then o
how will you be able to answer the Lord at the great day of account? o then in
time let your own wickedness correct you, and your turnings back reprove you,
for it is an evil and a bitter thing thus to forsake the Lord, Ier.
2.17,19,36. for which sin the Lord first threatened, and at last brought great
Judgment upon Israel of old, Isa. 8.6,7. Amos 4.4,5. and 5.5. Hos. 4.13,14.
and warned Judah to beware by them, verse. 15, 16, 17. And now inviteth all Gods
people out of these their Idolatrous dens, Rev. 18.4. And if that these
reasons and rules of Scripture the Commandments of God cannot prevail with
you, then look and tremble at the late judgments of God upon these Idol No
other houses were hurt.
Temples at diverse times, in diverse places of this Kingdom, which by the
immediate hand of God, have been ruinated or defaced by fire and thunder, where
many in them, in a miraculous manner have felt the heavy hand of God from
Heaven, some to death, others their skin scorched and nothing seen on their
clothes: this (as I suppose) is to teach them, and all others, not to
blaspheme the power of God, his worship, and Church of Christ, by attributing
them to pen and material Temples; which wonders and great works of a great
God, methinkes should not be thus ^lighted, but that men mind not Gods Word,
will neither mind his works, else would they mind and remember these things,
and repent that with Ephraim they had been joined to Idols, Hosea 4.17,19. And
so I conclude this point with the words of Moses, saying to you, and all the
people of God which hear hereof, Depart I pray you from the Idolatrous tents
of th^se wicked m^n, Numb. 16.26.

This is the Fourth drunken draft, the Ale-bench of Antichrist, which is so
deked and adorned with all natural delights, to call in and please passengers,
Prove. 6 13,16. that if any either horse or foot pass by her consecrated
chambers, she is ready to discharge her Canons.

A fifth reason and ground against Hearing aforsaid, is in respect of the Time
of Gods worship, which in part they also make Idolatrous, although it be Gods
own time; for as before it is proved to be Idolatrous to Hear the word
amongst them, in respect of their false and counterfeit Church State, Office,
Maintenance, and Place of worship, so likewise it is Idolatrous in respect of
the time of their worship, which Time is likewise consecrated and made holy by
themselves, without the warrant of the Word, and therefore an Idol, 1 Kin. 7.12.
and 32.33. And those that worship God by, in, or with an Idol are Idolaters,
as is confessed by all, and proved, Exodus 20.4,5. Isa. 42.8. And that this is so
with them in this particular is plain and that by the testimonies of
themselves, the preistly Hierarchy and powerful reputed Church, the Clergy or
spirituality of England: Deuteronomy. 4.20. and 9.19. and 21.3. Psalm. 28.9. and 33.12.
the rest, from the Observe thi^ you Nobles.
head to the foot (as they do hold, and profess) be but the laity,
temporality, or carnallity as, Psalm. 2 1. and 3.6,8. and 33,10, which
ecclesiastical hierarchy, and preistly Canterburian Clergy, or Church of
England, have by their own usurped authority, published to the world, both by
themselves the Bishops, and their impudent instruments the priests, diverse
Books to that purpose: that the Sabbath Gods Court day, our Lords redemption
day, is no otherwise so observeable, morally and perpetually holy, then by them
(the Church) enjoined: and so a Church holy day as the rest of the days in the
Rubricke. And as on these their Holy days, so for the Lords day it self, have
they likewise commanded, and strictly enjoined, that that part of the day only
whereon their Divine Sevice for sooth is said (for that is their proper
worship) to be strictly observed as excomunicable: the rest of the day not so,
but common and free: as is manifest by their Book of Tusteration for
profanation on one part thereof, and by the strict search of their forsworn
Officers, on the other part thereof, in the time of their Divine Service, as
they say: Besides all this, it is manifest by their usual pleading and
preaching thereof without reproof: whereby they do plentifully declare to the
world, if they will believe them (and by their subtle sophistry have also
stumbled some of the sincere weak ones therein that the Gospel Sabbath is no
more Morrall or otherways a holy day, by divine authority, but by their making
as aforesaid: which being held alterable: and so being made holy by them or
any other (though a true Church) is an Idol, Exodus 20.8. 1 King. 12.32.33.
there being noe warrant of the word, neither prescept nor president, that can
be produced for such a desolating abominating practice, as to nullify the
Lords own day, or to deifie any other day, whereon men ought to work Exodus 20.9.
it being the only prerogative of God, and beyond all man's power, who are
plainly and powerfully forbidden to make any thing, or time holy: but take
what God by his word has made holy, sanctified and set a part for his service,
by his revealed will in his Word, as aforesaid. And that this our Gospel and
ancient observed Sabbath day (not the ceremonial Sabbaths Col. 2.16.) is still,
as ever morally a blessed and sanctified, holy joy-rest-day of God, for his
Sons and our Saviors triumph in the great work of our Redemption, or new
Creation: and that it is simpathetically and endutiedly observable to the
Saints still, I dare not doubt, nor cannot, for what I ever yet, either saw, or
heard, by any antisabbatanian Prelate o^ person.

And though it be objected, that in the New Testament there is but little
proof, by litterall Texts by this our Gospel Sabbath day, neither any proof
for the breach thereof. I answer, first for reproof their needed none, it was
so zealously, and conscionably observed: but for proof it being sufficiently
grounded, first in the Old Testament, by God in the Creation, in Moses and the
Prophets, and also by Christ and his Apostles, and the examplary observance
thereof in both those states and times, which were then by their instituting
officers informed by word more fully therein: Which Sabbath, with diverse other
ordinances of Christ, as Baptism, with the order of all administrations (now
so much questioned) were powerfully and substantially instituted, in the
Apostolical primitive Churches, and they established therein, whose examplary
practice might therefore be sufficient for the sincere establishment, which
ordinances of God being before the beginning and Apostacy of Antichrist, ever
without question, that we read of in Scriptures, or others that I know of,
generally and traditionally received, and conscionably observed by the
Apostolical Primitive Churches; therefore needed not so large a record of
proof, or reproof: for as the Apostle says, John 21.25. Act. 1.23. If all
things were written that were done and spoken, the world could not contain the
Books: wherefore these, as other things of practice have been received
traditionally: as 2 Thessalonians. 2.15. 2 Timothy 2.2. For though the Scriptures set
forth all things and matters of faith to salvation, substantially, yet not
circumstantially, of all things which do appertain to the Kingdom of God,
but briefly for the reasons abovesaid, else the Gospel could not be a mystery,
as 1 Timothy 3.16. Col. 1.26. And for the Sabbath, both our Savior himself, Mat.
24.20. and the Apostle John, Rev. 1.10. testify of the practice thereof, the
Apostle being then in the spiritual devotion and gracious ecstasy, requisite
for the sanctitication of the Lords holy day; Christ then and therefore showed
him that admirable prophecy of the Revelation: which holy day and John's so
using it, is therefore there so distinctly expressed: And our Saviors teaching
and telling his Disciples things to come, and to be done, shows there, that
the Gospel Our Sabbath Gods Ordinance in the Gospel.
Sabbath day, was by them, (after the fulfilling of those several things there
prophesied, and long after the abolishment of the Legal Sabbath) carefully and
conscionably to be observed and kept, Mat. 24.20. which amongst them both in
Christ's and the Apostles times, was so sympathetically observed, that we read
of no reproof thereof, (which sympathy and sincerity by the smoaky smother of
the bottomless Pit, is in this particular and many other, too much lost and
obscured amongst us) for in those primitive and purer Times, we find their
conscionable walking, and careful keeping of this our Gospel Sabbath, which if
it were the subject (and not too tedious and long for this place and occasion)
might be more fully amplified and proved, which for the present I shall omit,
and only point you to the consideration of these Texts of Scripture following,
Luke 24.1. to 49. with its like in the other Evangelist, Act. 20.7. to 12. with
verse. 6. saying that he was at Troas seven days before he administered the
Sacrament, because the Lords day was not in them, 1 Cor. 16.2. also Ioh. 20.19.
to 25. and 26. to 31. Act. 2.1. to 22. with Levit. 23.10. to 16. which prove
that the gifts of Tongues, and Prophecy, and Peter's preaching to the
conversion of 3^00. souls, was on the Lords day; which places prove the now
observed Sabbath day; and also the Congregationall ecclesiastical exercisings,
and enjoying of Gods instituted Ordinances, and Church worship thereon only;
which as it is, so also was tied to an instituted time, and that of God, as is
likewise plain, Numb. 28.2. etc. 2 Chronicles. 31.3. Lev. 23.37,39. and never
alterable, but by the special and immediate commission of God by his Prophets,
as 2 Chronicles. 29.25. And for any other liberty which the opposers can prove for
the contrary practice thereof under the Gospel (either to alter the Lords day,
or exercise any part of worship on any other day) to me is very vain and
empty: And do likewise believe that their putting down, and off, Gods
holiness of his day, is Sacrilegious desolation, Rev. 2.22. And their putting
up themselves, and on, their own holiness, on that day, or any other, makes
it an Idol, and themselves Idolators, which is abomination, Dan. 9.26,27. Yea,
although it be the very same day of Gods appointing, yet now not so, by, and to
them, and consequently by all that then and there join Which all bearers do.
with them; because Gods holiness of the day is by them abrogated, by holding
and making it alterable by them, to any other day; though for the present (as
some subtly say and write) it is by them (the Church) thought to be the best
and fittest time, and therefore to be so esteemed and observed: therefore have
also tolerated Gods instituted Ordinances, to be exercised out of his
instituted time, on the week days.

Thus have they for their will, by the might of their power, and for the honor
of their Hyerarchy, as is prophesied of them, Dan. 4.27. spoke great things
against the most High, ^hinking that they may change times and Laws, Dan 7.25.
2 Thessalonians. 2.4 wherefore they having (more presumptuously then any of their
predecessors the Popes before them) thus dischurched and unconsecrated Gods
day; and on the contrary, churched and consecrated that day for their own
divine worship, as did Jeroboam of old, 1 King. 12.32,33. wherefore chose
whomsoever that join with them therein and thereon, are alike transgressors,
and alike (...) able to the the same punishment, one as another, as verse. 30.
Wherefore then as you would avoid the wrath of God, and the judgments that
have been formerly manifested on Sabbath (...) afters; remember for hereafter
that you presume not on Gods Prerogative, whose only peculiar it is to appoint
the Time, Place, Persons, Maintenance, and means of his own worship and
service; all other whatever man shall devise for, and besides the same, is in
Gods account, done to and for our selves, as Pros: 10.11. Zech. 7.5,7. and so
abominable, Lev. 19.3. to 37. because of man's invention, which herein is
treason, and in the highest degree derogatory to Gods glory, as Ier.
16.11,20,21. some of which sorts was, and is all Idolatry: and this
Antichristian mystery of iniquity especially, Rev. 17.4,5. 2 These. 2.4. where
he is termed that usurper over all Gods Deputies, and their proper deputations
of Gods honoring by his blessing and fanctifying, and therefore over this his
first sanctified The Sabbath,
Ordinance; ever since exceedingly dignified by his precepts and his Saints
practice.

This is the Fifth Antichristian drunken draft, whereby the Whore^ guests have
so intoxicated their heads, that they now regard (...) Time for the performance
of duty in Gods appointed public Service, but their own drunken humors.

My sixth reason and ground against Hearing in the public Assemblies of our
Land, is in regard of the Means of their worship and service, which is
properly their English Mass, or Service Book, wherein is contained all their
divine inventions, or ecclesiastical administrations, both for matter and
manner of their public worship* but by the best, and most, now known to be an
Idol, as their own former Parliament Petitions both against it, and the whose
state of the^ If then false, now worse.
Church) do at large declare, which comes not so properly within the compass
of this my present occasion, because it is by you (and such ^emi-seperatists
and reformists, to whom this is chiefly intended) protested against, and that
you partake not ^hore with; yet thus much I conceive necessary to show that you
do also by your hearing there, uphold and acknowledge that old Idol
consequently, as do all of them still; yea even their best Ministers (as they
call them) who pray, and petition to Parliaments to be reformed, but do not
reform themselves; whose hypocrisy herein is most hurtful, but least
mistrustfull: who in the first place I shall apparently prove to prop and
uphold the English Mass, or Serv^ Book, so much by them disclaimed sometimes.
First, by their oath at their admission into office, they do all of them, (the
best as the worst) solemnly swear on their knees, that they will be
conformable to the Church of England, both in government and worship, that is
already or shall be hereafter established; so by this oath, their service Book
containing their worship, is chiefly intended; which, with all their devised
Discipline, false Doctrine, innovations and inventions, more then a good many,
are thereby approved* (as it is by the ignorant believed) to be good, and
according to Gods Word, when as they know they are nothing less. For as by
that oath, they are made officers in that state, so thereby they are bound to
uphold all therein, by their best endeavors, even this false means of worship
their Mass Book, which they justify both by their own practice, and the
peoples; who in this particular they labor to keep blindfold all they can,
that they behold not their halting, but may all help to their maintaining;
until by a Parliament (the arm of flesh) they be by Laws enforced to be
reformed. And as they are all manifest Masse-mongers, and Service-saying
Priests by profession, when as they according to their office and oath, do
swear to be conformable to the said Service of the Church of England, though
they should never do it: so are they also by their obedient and dutiful doing
of it, and that devoutly reading over and over again, that their devised
divine Service, and stinted number of prayers, which lame sacrifice they are
not ashamed to offer to God in his See your reward, Mal. 1.7.8.14.
public worship, though they be in their private devotion. And this all of
them (by virtue of that oath, and before the Bishop breath the Holy, Ghost upon
them) must do themselves, or by their Substitutes and Servants, their journey
men Priests, before they may preach the Word, else they are forsworn.

And now who is so blind and will not see, whether this be not truth, and
whose servants those best Priests be^ for though a necessity be laid upon the
Ministers of Christ, to preach the Gospel freely, 1 Cer. 9.10. yet those
Service-sayers, and swore servants to the Beast, may not, no longer then their
Priestmakers the Prelates will permit; for the powerfullest preaching of the
Gospel of Jesus Christ, is by them made but a circumstantial thing, to their
divine Service (as they call it) which is enjoined all of necessity, and their
preaching but a liberty, (yea not a Witness all the silenced Ministers.
liberty if it be not liked) and so of less consequence by those Chemerims;
for that to which the preaching of the Gospel must give place, is of most
consequence; but the saying or singing of service in some part, and observance
of certain Ceremonies, is first urged, and to be observed, therefore that is
most necessary, and who (that will) sees not that it is by them so made: for
besides this their devised service (a bigger Idol then that of Nebuchadnezar
Dan. 3.1.1) they admit of preaching, only the better to please the People, as
did Nebuchadnezars music ver. 5.7. that so simple People may come and
continue there, and be the better bewitched therewith to fall down before the
Idols of Antichrist: which poor People (according to their Ecclesiastical
education) like they of Samaria, Act. 8.9. who were bewitched with the
sorceries of Simon, and so doated thereon, that they thought it the great power
of God, as verse. 10. even so these, because they have preaching, and some
truths there taught: and as did those subtle sophillers, the false Apostles, 2
Cor. 11.13,15. (more rightfully then your best Preachers) who to please the
people the Jews, Gal. 4.9.21. taught (as well as your best Preachers) but
mingled with the Gospel, Circumcision and the Ceremonial Law, as ob. 5.1. to
4. Phil. 3.2,3. and so bewitched the people therewith, only to avoid the Cross
of Christ, Gal. 3.1. and 5.11.6.12. and that they might glory in their flesh,
v. 13. And is it not so with these (even the best) Preachers of our times: (and
worse too) for Circumcision, and the Ceremonial Law, were once the Ordinance
of God, and so was the false Apostles Office, who preached in a true Church,
though they were not sent by Christ, and not so discernable to the people, as
these false Officers, and false Doctrines are, and all in a false Church: And
the greatest plea these greatest Preachers have, for their dissembling, and so
slavishly submitting to the man of sin, is, because that thereby they may
have Or else g^ a Benefice.
liberty to preach, else say they, our mouths must be stope^ and then how
shall the people be converted? shall the poor people perish? A poor shift,
and has God such glory by^ and need of your preaching, or your selves of
maintaining? let all look on your voluptuous living, your dainty diet, your
rich habit, your curious dwellings, large Benefices, and beloved liberties, and
they shall seldom see them sold at so dear a rate as the Apostle sets upon
the privileges of preaching and enjoying the Suffering for it.
purity of Gods Ordinances in his own order of the Gospel, Act. 20.23,24.
Phil. 1.29. 2 Timothy 3.12. whereby you might bring more glory to God, and light
to the people, then by your preaching by your false office, in a false state,
to unfit people, in that condition you build and uphold them in; And as for
their conversion of souls (whereby they so brag) all may see how true it is,
if they do but consider their Church state, how false it is, both wherein, and
whereunto they are converted; and likewise the preaching how little it
profits. And as for Conversion, which they Their private interpretation.
call the seal of their Ministry, from the 1 Cor. 9.1,2. it is not there
meant, neither will it serve their turn, but to prove them Apostles (which
they dare not affirm) and to constitute Churches, Church-states, the offices,
and orderly use of all Ecclesiastical Ordinances: these four were the seal
of Paul's Apostleship which he there claims of the Corinthians. And since the
Apostles time neither ordination of Officers, nor conversion of souls, was
tied to a Ministry (especially in a false Church) And for Conversion whereby.
Conversion of souls, it is ^yed properly to the spirit, by the word in the
mouth of any, Act. 11.19.21. and as our Savior reaches, Ioh. 3.8. Isa.
55.10,11. Psalm. 19.7,8. 1 Ioh. 3.^. ^ (...). 1.23,25. Iam. 5.19,20. and
1.28,21. whereunto conversion ought to be attributed as the proper effect
thereof in a true Church, Psalm. 87.4. (as the Lord counts Converts) and of
the Ministry to feed the Flock, who are or ought to be before converted, Act.
20.18. I^m. 5.^. But we s^ the clean contrary confused course amongst this
their Ministry; for instead of separating them converted and saving them from
the froward generation, Act. 2.40. they flatter them and build up all there, in
which condition they all continue and content themselves Ier. 5.31. whereas the
Apostle 1 I^. 3.3, says, he that has this hope in him (or is ^ed) Pure
worship.
purifieth himself as he is pure, and cleanses himself from all filthiness
of flesh and spirit, 2 Cor. 7.1. Psalm. 119.32. And if the best of them, even as
the worst, be in so bad a condition, even blind guides of the blind, why should
not you, and we, whom the Lord has showed them so to be, be likewise
persuaded to be wholly separated, and let them alone, as our Savior says,
Mat. 15.4 Yet do I desire from my soul, that some of them whom I know, and
hope well of (who seem to be sincere) would examine themselves seriously
herein, and know^; and now in time like Isreal's 2 Chronicles. 11 14.
Levites, leave their Benefices, and possessions, and bring their best
abilities to the work of the Lord, in his own way of truth, and so deal
faithfully for their own souls, and thousands that do dotingly depend upon
them. I know that this is a hard saying, but o beloved take heed of
dissembling; and that with the Lord, who is the searcher of the heart, Ier.
17.9,10. Psalm. 44.20,21. look to your hearts in this particular especially,
and consider of that saying of the Apostle, Romans 3.8. Why do we not evil that
good may come thereof? For if this your preaching be so, (as at the best it is)
he says that your damnation is just, and is worthy of a sharp reproof in
the best, Gal. 2.11. to 14. wherefore as I consider your condition, so have I
in love told you the truth as I conceive, earnestly desiring you to discharge a
good conscience herein, both toward God and man, as the Apostle commands, 1 Timothy 1.5,19. 1 Ioh. 3.19,21. But to be brief, and to return to you my friend
in the faith, though not in the fellowship of the Gospel, let us see, how you
also help to uphold, and make up this their Mass of Idolatry, their English
Mass, or Service Books, for as we have found their best Ministers to be
upholders of, and partakers in this their read-said-Service, the Mass Books,
the proper means of Gods worship, so you the best and greatest Luke 12.7.8.
professors, will also one day, I doubt, be found deep transgressors therein,
as they, and those who simply and directly do adore that written rotten old
Idol; For to them which know not your judgment, and do see you at their
worship in their Idol Temples, at their Idol time, though you come but to
Hear the word (as you say) yet they not knowing so much; are by your example
encouraged to eat up all they having as good a stomach to one part of that
unsavory sacrifice, as another; though you pick a bit thereof as your
incontinent, q^asie stomach will serve you. And likewise to the better ^ort of
professors which know your persons, and judgment, and see your practice
therein: to them you teach first to make schism in the Church, by partaking in
one part of Church worship, and not in another; and likewise thereby you
justify their standing there, both for Church state, Ministry, and
administrations, whereof you then partake as much as any of them, as it has
been before proved, and showed to be a fearful sin, 2 Cor. 8. chapter and Romans
14. chapter especially in you; Romans 1.24. whereupon the weak being more confident
(though too indifferent in Religion) do depend; for whose sakes, and that it
so much concerns this our Country, who generally and traditionally walk in a
course of Christianity, yet is mere Idolatry: I shall add one Caveat more for
its discovery, and remedy; for alas, is it not pity, as the Lord said to Iona.
4.10,11. to see that there is even in such a City and Kingdom as this, more
then six score thousand persons, that know not their right hand from their
left in Religion; for our Land is too Laodicea like, and our age so
indifferent, that if they have any profession, or form of Religion, it How few
do separate.
troubles them not, whether they worship God truly by his Word, or falsely
with the world. And though they cannot give a reason or grounded answer by the
warrant of the Word, for what they do; yet they can presently say slightingly,
o such a thing is of indifferency, or a liberty: And this sophistry has been
the common bane of tha Scriptures authority, whereby the Prelates have brought
in every Ceremony; whereas in deed and in truth, it is altogether contrary:
For in the worship and service of God, nothing is simply indifferent in the
use, but is either good or evil; according to the hindrance or furtherance it
affords to the maine, else it is vain; and vanity, even as in natural and
civil things and actions, it is evil: so is it in matters of Religion
chiefly, even the taking of Gods Name in vain; for all things therein must be
done decently and orderly, as 1 Cor. 14.26,40. therefore not of liberty or
indifferency, but of absolute necessity, for the advancement of Gods glory, if
in Gods Worship and service, else it is vanity. Wherefore then let none dote of
indifferency of things therein; for if they cannot approve their practice by
the Word to be good, let them in the fear of God condemn it for evil, for
what is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. For although those things and
actions be right and true, which persons perform in Gods Worship (yea a Church
it self) yet if they perceive and understand them not so to be, by the rule of
Gods Word, as Ioh. 5.39. Pro. 19.2. it is to them as vain, if (I say) they
believe upon others affirmations, persuasions, as 1 King. 13.18,19. or
threatenings, or any means whatsoever, by any person or persons whomsoever, as
I^. 2. to 10. Pro. 28 21. Ier. 9.13,14. Wherefore then let all to the Law, and
to the Testimony, that perfect pattern and ride of righteousness, Psalm.
19.7,10. 2 Timothy 3.15,16. Iam. 1.25. whereby at the last and great day of
account, we must all be tried; not only for these great and weighty matters of
Gods worship and service, but also for every of our thoughts words, and actions
that we have done in the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.10. Romans 14.12 and will it serve your
turn, or stand you in any stead then to say, o such a Pope, or Prelate, such a
Counsel, Church, v. people did so, said so, and commanded so: o no, God never
gave them (as some presumptuously assume) that absoluteness The two horns of
the Beast.
of authority, nor undoubted infallibility, Rev. 13.2,4,11. but must
themselves, at that general assize, make answer for themselves, and shall not
prevail with that uncorrupted righteous Judge, neither for themselves, nor
their favorites, by flattery, nor fear, Psa. 49.6,8. then what will avail
the peoples Popish plea Ignoramus? since the Apostle says, 2 These. 1.8. that
the Lord Jesus will come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance to those that know
not God, and obey not the Gospel of his truth, as chapter 2.10. Wherefore then let
none d^re to break any order, or Ordinance of Christ, Mat. 5.19. and
slightingly say of his worship, it is indifferent, as the manner of too many
is, but learn to sear before the Highest, as Isa. 57.15. H^b. 1.13. whose
eyes are pure, and cannot abide any iniquity, especially that of Idolatry, Isa.
42.8.
And now to you again who are more judicious, and seem to love the Lord Jesus
Christ, and look for life and salvation by him, I say, and earnestly desire
you, that you be ruled by him, and in these weighty matters of his worship you
be obedient to him, 1 Ioh. 5.2,3. Romans 6.16. Act. 3.22,23.
And seeing you profess the fear of the Lord, and desire (as you say) truly
to serve him according to his word, and to forsake every false way, which that
you may do, I shall endeavor to direct you, to discern of things that differ,
lest that any of those who profess order in Religion, should by extremes run
into confusion; wherefore take notice, and remember this one particular
therein, that the worship and service of God in his instituted ordinances, are
of great consequence: especially those which are of an instituted nature, and
merely immediate as the Sacraments are, and must therefore have an institituted
order, ( i.e. an instituted Officer) for their administration, as page 5. For
Samuel being priest, might do all that Saul did when he was king 1 Samuel
7.6,15,17.
but Saul might not do one actio^ belonging to the Priesthood Sam. 18.8, to
15.1 Cron. 15.2. Number. 16.
. The rest of Gods Ordinantes which are parts of instituted worship (as
teaching, praying, ruling) are all of a moral nature, and are or may therefore
both personally out, and by a membral right be exercised in the Church, by
prophecy; as also elect, and ordain their own officers, Act 6.3. and 14.23.
and 1.15. to the end; yet as these are personal (as in private) and membrall
(as stative in the Church: so they are Worship of an Instituted nature.
all institutive, (as official) and immediate* and may not therefore admit of
man's invention, or natural reason, what this worship should be, Romans 1.22.
but must take what God has made, what ever it be, Exodus 20.4. For the
instituted worship and service of God is not grounded nor taught in Nature, as
it is instituted in the Churches; neither can a natural man discern the same
with all humane helps, what, and how it should be: And in this sense only,
all humane arts (though otherwise never so Consider this all you who are
accuracy minded
excellent, for the exposition of Scripture, and in all matters of Religion)
all Philosophy, (that is natural understanding and reason) are vain,
pernicious, and prohibited, Col. 2.18,18. for erecting of instituted worship
only, and no otherwise; wherefore to avoid another extreme, confusion, late
presumption and false affirmation, lately published (but not by the approbation
or consent of any true Church, or person who knew what spirit they were of,)
which is, that the Spirits teaching i^ sufficient, without the help of humane
learning: wherefore I would have you, and all Gods people beware, and spy out
this false spirit, whereby is confounded all the degrees both of the spirit of
gifts, the Spirit of grace, and that immediate divine infallible Spirit,
whereby the Apostles of Christ (being of his Privy Council) were guided, who
thereby knew the whole counsel of God, Act. 20.27. and that without the need
of the Word, or any humane help besides being conversant with Christ 40.
days, they were taught and instructed in all things, for the true
understanding, and teaching of Gods mind, concerning the Gospel, Act. 1.2,3. 1
Cor. 2.16. and 14.37. which way of teaching and learning none ever since had,
or can expect, as 1 Cor. 4.9. but are tied to Gods will, already, and
sufficiently revealed in his Word: by which immortal seed of the Word all are
now begotten and taught, (either by reading or hearing it read) and thereby
must walk, and take heed as unto a light shining in dark places, 2 Pet. 1.19.
And if any speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light
in them, Isa. 8.20. Psalm. 119.105. etc. For this Word and will of God is left a
perfect and sufficient rule for salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.15,17. without any further immediate revelation or inspiration; which
then (for diverse reasons) the Apostles and privy Counselors of Christ had*
being only peculiar and useful to them, (and the Churches, for a time) to
instituting, planting, foundation laying, and for confirming of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 3.10,11, Ephesians. 2.^9. 2 Pet. 1.19,21. Heb. 2.3,4 G^. 3.5. yet for the
divulging and teaching the same Word unto (...) and all natural helps, was,
and is requisite, which Christ had and the Apostles that wanted, were supplied
by the Holy Ghost, Act (...) 1 Cor. 14.18. and therefore of God, and not from
the Devil, as the author of that Book affirms: and that other^ Treatise of
N. ^. And that the (...) appointed for Information of the Churches now is the
(...), we may see a Tim. 2.^. which word, (and not Spirit they were to deliver
to faithful men, who were also by (...) to teach others distinctively, and not
instinctiuely by that supposed Spirit* which the Author affirms, for in that
(...) be quote^ H^b. 8.9,10 1^. 1 (...). 2.27. Ioh. 14.26. 1 Cor. 2.15. which
was po^lier to the Apostles Ephesians. 3.4.5. for in (...) 1 Cor. 2.1^. Now we have
received, not the Spirit which is of the World, but the Spirit which is of God,
he speaks of himself, and the other Apostles* in a transcendent manner as
(...). 15. and not of the Church. But (as he) so if any shall for he has the
Spirit of grace and guiftes, how shall ^e or any, know it to be (...) or false,
which he says (...), which is the knowledge (...) understanding of the
literal words* and so the ^ning of the Scriptures or word whereby the spirits
must be tried, (...) 1 Ioh. 4.1. 2 Timothy ^.16. Ioh ^.39. Isa. ^.20. and not
(...) spirit by another* He then could not be confuted.
which (...) all words* (...) can (...) institutively (...) being (...) they
must (...) but (...): And (...) lawful (...) all (...) to (...), others (...),
which is (...), and m^st useful in (...) any understanding and truly, ^r
(...) ^illy say, (...) and according to (...) (which cannot be corrupted) (...)
know the (...) falsehood thereof by his spirit (...) not (...) silent, or else
(...) to some other (...) thereof* (...) then is the (...) except they must
(...) for it, ^r (...) other Doctrine; which were it the only means of
knowledge to salvation, now how various and uncertain (...) it be* how many
millions of men^ spirits should we ^ve? that tenent of the Church of Rome were
better. (...) the Church believes, for there were some foundation to (...) and
build our faith open, but the other a fancy: Wherefore all Gods people are to
take heed of this Heretical b^asted Spirit, and to examine those liars, that
say they are Apostles (that is instinctive teachers) and are not, as (...).
2.2,3. For i^ this false Apostolical Spirit, had been as carefully kept out
of all Churches* (...) that of Ephesus, (...) so high, as to (...), and (...)
information in all truth, and Doctrine of Faith, and worship, which only the
Apostles of Christ (for the reasons aforesaid) had; ye^, they had a further
gift, of giving this gift unto others, as Act. 8.17,18. and 19.6. 2 Timothy 1.6.
which he, or others may so well If he had that Spirit, he was very
uncharitable if he gave it (...).
claim, as the other: and as well as the Apostolical, Prelaticall, proud
Papal spirits of our (...), who yet could never do it, though they and their
Antichristian Ancestors have, and still do attempt the same, in making of
every one of their Priests, by their br^hing, and laying their (...) them;
saying, (...) the Holy Ghost; who are ever after reputed Spiritual men, and
not before. And therefore ((...) for what else) do they so scorn the like and
better gifts and abilities in others, to preach the (...) the (...) of that
Book whom some of them subtilty and suddenly (...) thereon, seeking (as they
do daily our reproach) like the false Apostles, of Paul, which was to him a
great prick (...) flesh, (...) 1 Cor. 1^ 1^ and 11.21. and 12.7,8. but we hope
(as (...)) (...) support to us, and the great glory (...) God, as word (And a^
the (...) put (...), and (...) pressed (...) this point (...) him: I (...)
leave (...) lay this dangerous Spirit that themselves (...) all true
worshippers to beware of (...) false (...) Spirit* (...) as it (...) as the
(...) of the mystery of (...) (the stative Antichrist* which the Apostle (...)
so much discovers and condemns (...) working in, and since ^ning through
all Religions, true and false (...) it has been as the (...) only, but now
begins, by the pulse of this Spirit (so (...)) to work (...) a Baby
likewise, which (as our Savior has long since said should) we may shortly
look, to come to pass, (...). 24.24. But (...) Savior the^, so I now lay,
(...), verse. 26.

And as this Spirit has been the life of all false and erroneous Religions;
so it is like to be still a disturber of the true* wherefore I have enlarged
any self a little the more herein* because (as I conceive) it is like to be a
worse and more dangerous disease amongst Gods people, then the Antichristian,
false order of Worship, which is easier discerned, being an object of the eye,
then the other being seated (...) the (...), and so well pleasing and
befitting* the qualification of the m^st, and those many times well gifted, as
the Author of than Book, the scope whereof (in a word) makes Religion
(Familistically whereof it is full) to consist of a Soul without a Body,
making it all instinctive or spiritual: whereby, (instead of reproa^ of the
Antichristian Authoritive abuse of Humane L^wing and all use of Heathen
Schollership, and Authors, as helps to prove and erect any point of Faith or
part of Instituted Worship) (...) makes the Cure a worse Malady then the
Disease. And because this Instituted Worship of God, is not grounded not taught
in nature, as it is instituted: neither can a Natural man (...) nor discern
the same, with all humane helps, but as he is spiritually informed from the
Word, as aforesaid: And because by Nature, all men will be worshippers of God,
Romans 1.21.22. though in a Adam (...) ^eated condition and fall.
natural estate (as Adam in his created condition, 1 Cor. 15.45,47. where
only he was perfect, but knew not the (...) of an instituted or heavenly
Estate (which was proposed unto him upon condition, which he accepted) and
therefore fall therein. For he could not fall in his perfect Creation:
therefore is at the reason and ground (as of Adam Fall) so of all Idolatry and
iniquity, Romans 1.26. to the end; For as among the diverse sorts and kinds of
Idolatry, and Idolators, they all acknowledge God, the same Deity* (...) and
1^.^3. (...) 1.19, (...) manners, as (...) 23. yet the best the ever they could
imagine or devise: So is it likewise under the Gospel, with all who miss that
pattern of wholesome words, ^ Tim. 1.13. H^. 8.5.6. either for matter, or
manner* and without the warrant thereof, build thereon their own devices, 1
Cor. 3.12,13. Mat. 15.8.9. especially that d^vellish device, and Antichristan
great delusion, which has so long deceived the Nations, and with holden the
truth in unrighteousness, Romans 1.1^. and still works in the children of
disobedience: I mean the Roman Papacy with its Antichristian Hirarchy, their
spiritual Priesthood; that rebellious and opposite state to Christ, 2 Thessalonians
2.4. that falser of Christ, Rev. 13.11. Dan. 11.21. to 36. and 8.8. to 14. his
Church, 2 Thessalonians. 2.4. Rev. 2.9. his Ministry, 2 Cor. 11.14,1^. 1 Ioh. 4.1. 2
Ioh. 7. else could it not be so strong a delusion as it is, and wa^ prophesied
of, Isa. 62.2. 2 Thessalonians 2.11. Dan. 12.1^. R^m. 13.8,16,17. for as this old
imposter Antichrist at the first did rise in the Church of Christ, as it was
foretold, Act. 20.29. 1 Ioh. 2.19. and thrust himself into the wedding Feast
of his Churches, according to the parable, Mat. 22.11. so does this subtle
sophister still in his instruments, by the thread bare garment of devotion, and
show of godliness, colourably cover themselves with Christianity, though
indeed they do deny the power thereof, as 2 Timothy 3.1,5. 1 Timothy 4.1,2. and
Christ to be come in the flesh, ^ Ioh. 4.3. that is to be the only Lord and
Lawgiver to his Churches and people, Col. 2.18,19. and this is the greatest
Idolatry that ever was, Rev. 17.1,2. but I hope this prosperous Parliament will
pull the Prelates the unbidden Bishops out of the Wedding Feast of our wealthy
Kingdom; They are not Parliament proof^.
are they not already speechless, so would they be livelesse, if the House
were not heartlesse* But fearing to be tedious, and too long from the matter,
which is the M^s^e, and so ^ad, that it may be you desire of ^eare no (...) it;
wherefore I shall conclude with a general caution, to all the Churches of the
Separation, and to all that (...) the Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, desiring
to fly from Idolatry: That they come not under any humane or Antichristian
spiritual institution; because that they as Gods, knowing good and evil, Genesis
3.5. have presumed upon Gods peculiar Prerogative, as verse. 22. to appoint him
a worship, which is forbidden (...), and that upon the (...) of death, as verse.
3. whatsoever it be therein, if of (...) invention, it is abomination. Exodus
20.4. (...) 7.25,26. O (...) you true worshippers, and Churches of Christ,
loo^e to it, le^ you as Israel of old, ^s. 7.1. through neglect of
watchfulness, permit any Ac^ to partifie of their institutions, the execrable
and (...) thing; and so become all alike transgressors therein, as verse. 11,
12. 1 Cor. 5.6. Heb. 12.15. And who knows but for neglect hereof, is the maine
cause why the Israel of God have so long turned their backs upon their
enemies, verse. 8. wherefore ^ow at the last look to it: up therefore and put
the execrable thing (of H^aring or Preaching, or any other partaking of
Antichrists institutions) from among you, whomsoever it be; for the charge and
care is committed to you (as to Israel of old) for the cure, or cutting off of
sin, and sinners, Mat. 18.15,17. 1 Cor. 5. lest therefore by neglecting
Christ's Laws, you be not only haters of your Brothers souls, as Lev. 19.17.
but also forfeit your state and Charter to your King Christ Jesus, as Rev.
2.22,23. Look to it I say then, and labor for the preservation of the peace,
and purity of your communion, Heb 12.15,16,28,29. Likewise besides these
Hearers extravagant wanderers, and followers of the formal flocks of Christ's
Companions, Cant. 1.6. or other partakers of Antichrists institutions: There is
another sort of new fangled opinionists, who are the domesticke disturbers and
troublers of Israel and Sions peace, Cant. 2.15. these are unsound and unstable
in the truth, who are only constant in unconstancie, and carried away with
every wind of Doctrine, by such as lie in wait to deceive: These innovators if
they cannot leven and draw all others after them, then upon the least
opposition or no just occasion, being brought by light affection they are lost
by the like passion; and never stay, or like long any communion nor quietly
keep their habitation: These are they that do dis-separate themselves from
Churches, Iud. 19, wherefore mark such who cause divisions and dissentions,
and let them be timely cut off that trouble you, Gal. 5.12. for their false
doctrines will fret like a Canker: Wherefore be careful of your communion, and
courageous for the Faith; and in these dangerous times, drink no longer water,
but take a little wine, for I fear you will find enough to do; now every one
looks to advance their own conceits: wherefore wisely watch over those within,
and warily prevent them without, that none creep in without the wedding
Garment, for of such you will have no comfort; neither of those who have not
the judgment and affection, clean come out of Babylon: for these giddy-headed
Hearers, which halt between two opinions, the Church of Christ and Antichrist,
to one in the forenoone and another in the afternoon; 2 Timothy 4.4.
as if there were not meat enough in our Fathers house: such shameless sons
and servants are not as yet ^it matter for a Church of Christ, which is a pure
2 Cor. 11.2.
Virgin, and they having wanton whorish hearts cannot content themselves with
one Husband: wherefore such Christians as would give up their names to Christ
and his service, should consider, that Christ as a Master, does exact all, and
our best service: and as a Husband will admit of no corrivall. Let them see
what Elijah the Prophet says unto them, 1 King. 18.21. if the Lord be God
follow him, and if Baal be God follow him: Mat. 6.24. 2 King. 5.18. 17.7, to
4.1^
For as also our Savior says, Yet cannot serve two Masters; wherefore let all
Christians be warned, and armed to answer Antichrists offers, of all pleasures
and profits of the world, with the glory of them, as our Savior did his elder
Brother, Mat. 4.9,10. Avoid Satan, for is (...) thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve: but those that Hear in the Antichristian
Assemblies, serve Antichrist, as has been proved: even that odious old
over-turn'd Idol the Mass Book.

This is the sixth drunken draft, which it drunkenness it self, the vomited
morsels of the Whores Mass: wherewith by her ((...) loathed) allurements, Sh^e
has p^ys^ed all Nations, Revel. 14.8. and without Gods Mercy, if they repented
not, must with her for ever, drink of the Wine of Gods wrath in Hell torments,
Revel. 2.22. and 14.10. But blessed h^ our good God, that old withered
weather-beaten B^d and queen, who has sit a^ a Queen, Rev. 18.7. yet now
begins to bide her head, for her general hatred, being now desolate and naked,
and ready to be rewarded with double torment: of dishonorable ru^es, and the
fiery flames of her (...) indignation, Revel. 16.9.11.

And as we have s^ne a brief Description of the Idolatrous Antichristian
Church state, with their Officers, Administrations, Maintenance of them (...)
their Place, The, and Mean* of their false worship. Now in the seventh and
last place, I shall offer to your consideration, their Spiritual King, or
Head, under whom they all stand, serve, and obey his command, under whose
power, and upon which Altar, they all do officiate, and offer all their
Religious Sacrifices and services; throughout Rev. 17.15.
all the Nations of the Christian Earth, whereunto they (...) after the nature
of a tyrannical Head compelled, Rev. 3.15,17. and are thereby become his
vassals, slaves and subjects, verse 14. worse then Israel under the Egyptian
Taskmasters: Would you know who this their King and Head is; it is the
Official state of the Papacy or Popeship, termed, Rev. 9.11. the Angel of the
bottomless pit Abaddon and Apollyon, because he domineereth over his Vassals
in marshalling them to the mischiefeing Christ's worshippers; as the Devil does
over his Regiments of vassal Devils, for the like end; especially because he
as the Devils Lieutenant, so domineereth over his rabble of Cloistered Monks,
Friars, Nuns, and his Cathedral Prelates, (...), P^ends, Commi^ss^, Arch
deacons, Ye all flow from the Fountain and maine Sea of Rome.
Priests and Deacons: So does the God of this World, ruling visiblely, by his
Vicegerent, and eldest Son, the Pope, with the rest of that Crowned Clergy
of Locusts, or Hirarchie of Priests, of diverse degrees; who are a distinct body
from the Laity, as before, page Which together with the Head and Tail thereof,
make up that Monstrous (...) of (...), and beastly body of Antichrist, 1 Ioh.
2.18,22. 4.3. 2 Ioh. 7. 2 Thessalonians. 2.3,8. Rev. 13.1,2. Dan. 11.36. and 12.11.
Ephesians. 6.12. For no civil or temporal Lord or King, can be, nor is their
Ecclesiastical Head, but ^vnd or servant, what ever they say: For as Rome
ever, so does England; Bishops, literally deny, and with disdain, disclaim
it, proclaiming the contrary to ^o all the world, both in their Courts, and
Book of consecration of Bishops, especially, page 1^. 11, 140. their place and
Office to be (...), descended and derived from Rome, and so is every Minister
they make.

And this their Hirarchicall Head, has for his own being and better
subsistence, made L^res, Offices; and Courts, whereunto his silly slaves and
subjects; are enthralled, and ensnared in spiritual bondage; to receive his
subjective Mark of Obedience, either in their right hand (by Their Lord and
Lawgiver.
powerful commanding for him) or in their forehead (by public profession
and submission unto him;) And this does all their Ecclesiastical Officers
properly, and civil abusively. What their Laws are, all are made to know; and
for affection, or (...), submit thereto; or for opposition thereof, suffer
thereby; (...) they have and shall, until the limited and appointed time of
those their spiritual taskmasters prevailing power be expir^, Rev. 17.16,17.
Which Laws of theirs you may find (not in the Book of God) but in their own
Law Books, the B: of Canons, Councels, Books of Articles, Books of Record
and Registers, Books of Consecration, and Ordination, besides their Books of
Homilies, and Common Prayer for worship. Rev. 20.12.


What their Courts are, all may (and many to their cost) know; as their Court
of Delegates, their Inquisition, and High commission Court, Prerogative Court,
Court of Arches, Court of Audience, Commissaries Court, and their Officials,
Archdeacons Coun^, and their Surrogate, with the rest of their Antichristian
Visitation, or Circuit Co^ischiefe Courts: which as yet were never ^eard of in
the Apostolical Primitive Churches: ^o^e they not to be seen in the
Scriptures, nor warranted thereby. Unto which Courts, all are likewise
compelled, their own ^jects and ^ves being summoned, they run: others their
opposites being const^ned, or carried by the Civil Power, and found
unconformable, are by the u^esistable argument of their Club Law, carried to
prison, the Bishops black Court, where, instead of information, and
supportation, either spiritual or natural, they are without any relief by
them but of bare walls there buried alive, if they will not submit to them, and
so break the neck of faith and a good conscience.

What their Offices and Officers are, besides their Preachers formerly treated
of, are likewise known to be more then a good many, from the Pope to the
Pariter; whom you may find according to their places and degrees in those
Courts, pleading and fighting for this their Lord and Master with all, who are
either for opposition, or otherwise offen^ts in his Laws, Pursev^ted, or
ferreted before them. Which spiritual Proctors or Doctors of their Laws, like
faithful and courageous Captains, always get the best (the Mor^its) of their
captives, whatsoever the cause is, or which way soever it goes; for by these
tyrannical Laws and Officers, like ravening Wolves, they can at their
pleasures, pillage, and pick the pockets of their poor (...) servants; who
must like silly Sh^epe (...) in the pound of their Popish Courts) l^e (...) to
be (...) and (...) lightly beholding to these (...) last they may escape with a
whole skin without (...). And this Hydros or ^evenheaded (...) Beast, Rev.
13.1. who (...) the Kin^ of the earth, 17.18. compelling them to be of his
Church, and depend upon his power and will, as verse. 13. is a spiritual
politic state, or Ecclesiastical Hirarchy of Priests properly; yet in
respect of their power, their authority is A spotted Beast. Rev. 13.2.
civil as well as Ecclesiastical, they having usurped, and Frances permitted
them the exercise of both seats and swords till the appointed time, Rev.
17.17. this Antichristian spiritual Priesthood is that black and bloody See or
Church of Rome, with their derivers therefrom, which in respect of her false
Church State, Discipline and doctrine, is said to be a bloody See; wherein
every thing dyed, Rev. 16.3. this spotted Beast being a com^ound of both s^es,
civil and Ecclesiastical, are lively set out in their colors, to be of a
tyran^all nature: by those Beasts, (...) 1^.2. by which wicked usurped power,
they have ever man^fested their malice; first in killing Christ. Rev. 11.8. and
is still as ever an opposite adversary to his Members, and a bloody B^ch^er of
the Saints, as was prophesied of them, Rev. 6.4.9.11. and 11.7. and 13.10.15.
and is manifest to the world, by the woeful experience of the Saints
sufferings; and their own Histories, which testify of their manifold (...),
and persecutions of our predecessors, who witnessed and suffered for the truth
of Gods worship; which Christi^s were called in their several ages, by
several Titles (as now by (...)) and ever Heretics, as not fit to live in a
(...) wealth, only because we cannot conform to (...).

(...) Christ in his Humanity (...) of his (...), they could not prevail and
(...) his Testimony, the (...); ye^ have they (...) it by their (...) policy,
that (...) with the (...) the public ad(...) on (...) of our (...) for the
(...) of (...) that so (...) of the (otherw^ (...) be neither perverted nor
depraved: which course, though the ecclesiastical Courts have (because of the
benefit thereof) assumed the power and (...) of, yet because of the good order
thereof (...) them (which for their ^y they seldom brea^e it is very
profitable for the peace and (...) public; that (...) permitted to pervert,
in the least sense, any (...) ^ename^: And therefore it is appointed that
Executors, Administrators and overseers be made for every Will and Testament,
and if any be found to alter, add or deminish any thing from the written will
of the deceased, whether in name, word, or work, to alter the fence, scope or
plain intent ^ay the very letter thereof in what sense soever, by any person
whatsoever there is due penalties provided for every such offense, the Pillary
at the least, for every one that is found but to conceal, much more consent to
such a fact. And the breach of this laudable Law, good nature abhors, as
Gal. 3.15. Heb. 9.17. Wherefore (as the Apostle there argues, good reason
requires, that likewise the last will and Testament of our Lord Jesus, being
sealed, signed and delivered in the presence of the Apostles and many
Disciples, should neither be ^gared; nor added unto, upon those penalties the
Apostle ^otesteth unto them of Rev. 22.18,19. Prove. 30. And as this alteration
is odious in nature, reason and custom of all men, as the Apostle in the
former quoted place, Gal. 3.15. (...), that no man does abrogate it; so indeed
no man, but that (...), 2 Thessalonians 2.3. the brazed The Prelates imposters.
faced Bishops and they ^herents, would thus deal with Christ, and those poor
Orphants his Church, who have not only altered his will? not only in some
letter, point scope, or sense thereof:) but have utterly abrogated and cancel^d
it, either b^ denying it altogether (...) the people, as in Rome; or the true
interpretation, sense, or understanding thereof; (which is equivalent (...)
elsewhere; and by putting out the power and Name of (...) from his (...) unfit
for all people, times and (...) 2.4. (...) and of conscience (...) the
Scriptures (...) these ^ning (...) Executors and (...) if at all, as for the
(...) (...) these are all their Ecclesiastical (...), especially their
Churchwardens, who (...) 2 (...) 22.) must, by virtue of their Oath O wicked
(...).
, for the least Ceremony, Betray their Minister, Father, Wise, or Brother,
into the hands of those cruel hungry hunters. And thus have this Antichristian
crew, cheated Christ, and cousened his Church and children all they can, for a
long time, by their forgery and perjury, wereof I do accuse the Prelates
especially, and hope that the Parliament will put them on the Pillery: and so I
leave them to their mercy; and your Hearing, (...) consenting, and partaking
with them, to your own further discovery hereby and by Psalm. 50.

Now we have taken a view of this ecclesiastical hideous ^ead, his power and
practice, whom I am persuaded that you to whom I write, are already ashamed of,
and are ready to affirm, that you suppose you have, or do desire to have
nothing at all to do with in Gods worship: Wherefore it you will give me leave
a little to play the Prelate, I will not put you to the Oath, but only upon a
few interrogatories, whereby you may see if you desire more then the most, who
seek information as cowards do their enemies, not to meet with them) whether
you do belong to that body, submit to that power, or partake with that their
l. ^; that is, whether you be an Antichristian (...); First, have you seen by
the Scriptures, that the Church of Rome, with all their successors, derivers,
and afferents, are all Antichristian, false and uncommunicable (...)? and that
you may not, nor do not partake therein as all? Secondly, do you not partake
with that head, in none of his ecclesiastical institutions? (...) in his
public worship, as in Sacraments, Hearing the Word, in his institute of Time,
Place, or persons he has appointed thereto, and for (...) or Burying, etc. nor
in receiving or executing any Oath or once ecclesiastical there. Which are
civil.
Thirdly, do you not submit to that power? as to obey their citations,
summons, or other their ecclesiastical commands? as for observed on of their
Idol dryes, (...) appear at their Courts, or (...) in base to any of them, or
their Officers? nor pay them no (...) to any of their (...)? If you can really
answer no* then are you not (...) prope^y to (...) Church and Ministry: though
you live or dwell in some Parish in the ^ Kingdom, you are not properly
thereby members of the Ecclesiastical state, until you actively and passively
partake the^ or submit thereto, but if in any of those things (or the like)
before mentioned, you do ecclesiastically act, willingly, and contentedly
consent to (I mean not passively for therein all do) submit to that power, by
obeying their Laws and Officers, by which they do administer, as in the point
of Hearing there, though you should hear nothing but the truth there taught,
which you cannot be sure of, but the contrary rather (yea usually railing and
preaching against what truth you practice further then they preach) yet do you
thereby uphold that cursed kingdom of darkness, and partake with their
Hearing is rebelling.
rebellious power, by which they there stand and preach, though in appearance
and by consequence of Christ, yet indeed for Antichrist, as has been
plentifully proved: for it is not the truth, or falsehood of the Doctrines
there taught, neither their persons, nor gifts of any which we envy or
separate from properly; but their false ecclesiastical state, and Romish
spiritual Priesthood, and Antichristian usurped power: (which is that Other
our Savior said, Ioh. 5.43. should come in his own name) which we cannot
have any spiritual communion with, 2 Cor. 6.14. etc. and is the proper cause
and reason of our Separation, wherefore we and all Christ's faithful, loving,
^l^t and loyal subjects, believing and obeying Christ Jesus, our spiritual
King, Priest, and Prophet, will he one day) say, (...) good and faithful
subjects and servants enter into your Masters (...) Mat. 25.14.21,24. Luk 19.12
to 20 but as for those others my enemies that would not that I should reign or
rule over them, bring them hither and ^ay them before me, as verse. 27.

Wherefore Christ Jesus, our spiritual King, of our spiritual Israel, having
by himself, and his Apostles, proclaimed, L^. 8.1.9.2. Mat. 28.18.20. Act.
1.8.2.5. and make known the Gospel of peace, the means of life and salvation,
to all his Elect, believing and obeying him, a These. 1.7,10. Heb.5.9. Why then
should we (or any) dare to neglect so great salvation, especially Christ our
Captain having commanded the contrary, of all his loving, loyal and elected,
(...), (...) of that cursed (...), Rev. 18.4. (...) by partaking in their
singes, we partake of their plagues, (...). 14.9.10,11. And all those make
themselves Beh^ld and tr^.
(...) to their (...) not, N^ 19.22. Ier. (...) Act. 2.40. H^g. 2.14,17. 2 Cor.
6.14,17. Ephesians. 5. (...) 6,7. And so shall suffer for their own sins; for by
their false power and state, being an unclean thing, every spiritual action
of public worship therein, is defiled, Ioh 14.4. and Christ's fellowship
rejected, Psalm. 94.20. which is only in his Churches, and own ways of truth,
1 Ioh. 1.6,7. 3 Ioh. 4. (...) 21.24. whereunto all the servants of Christ are
bound to bring their best abilities for the honor of their King Christ,
against this Romish rebel Antichrist; for our King Christ les^ has made his
subjects freemen, and not to be entangled with any volke of bondage, though in
a true Gal. 5.1.
Church, much less to be enslaved to a false: For as the subjects of this our
King and Prince of Peace, Isa. 9.6,7. are a free and willing people, Psalm.
110.3. so likewise have they his Laws a permanent firm foundation, and his
offices certain, by a free Election, as before. But this their terrible tyrant
other Lords and Archbishops besides the Lord Jesus, Isa 26.13. 1 Pet. 5.3,4.
and ^.25. rule, not over the bodies, but the consciences o^ their ^aves; who
are either, permitted to choose or refuse their obtruded officers, nor shall
ever know all their Ecclesiastical Canonical Laws, but must be at the
disposing and deposing of their Prelates; both for their officers and Laws, to
add ^ diminish according to the times, (...) shall be best and most for the
(...) of their Cr^ great glory, (...) pleasures; their promise d^po^tion, on
their Man (...) 4.8, (...) And i^ this their conscience-commanding Castle,
their (...) making such a terrible sound, and ^nl^ing sn^hering ^oake, Rev.
9.2. this terrible Tyrant so do minee^eth, and d^nn^eth their hear^s, and d^eth
their eyes, that they (...) now (...), Isa 59.9.
wondering and (...) know not whither, Rev. 13.3^4. And though God has
plainly declared his mind. P^ 8.9. in the wonderful things of the Law, and
the glorious glad tidings of the Gospel the two Rev. 11.3.
witnesses of the truth; yet are they by them (...) ^ndes foot, verse. ^. and
c^u^ed as a strange thing, and these that walk thereby, as Isa. 8.1^. But
blessed be^ow good God for hi^ happy instruments, and means amongst us, who by
the Word, the Spirit of Christ's mouth and brightness of his coming, has so
abolished this ^east, dismissed this mist and cloud of ignorance, and that with
a cloud of witnesses, who ^ike in the truth, which begins again to revive,
which (...) the (...) do even gnaw their tongues, (...) God ^ven, by (...)
wicked opposition, and divellish divination, Rev. 13^6 and 16.10,11,14. where I
leave them (...) all spiritual communion with them, Ier. 7.23.31. 1 Samuel 15.23.
as we a^ taught, 2 Cor. 6 (...) 17. Rev. 18.4. and has hereby been plained ^
proved to (...) rebellion against God; which if you, or any other with me, do
so apprehend, and hereafter amend. I shall think this my poor pains well
bestowed, which for Gods glory (and now the common good) I have earnestly
endeavored; hoping that some Lot will escape for his life, Genesis 19.12,17. and
by this little brief and weak warning get out of this spiritual Rev. 11.8.
Sodom and Babylon: if that the Scriptures, (...). 5.39. the Commandments of
God, Moser. and the Prophets, ^ay Christ himself, verse. 46, 47. Act. 31.22,23.
(whose authority herein we are only to obey) can persuade persons; else these
my rude reasons, and all exhortations cannot prevail: neither will they
believe, no not if one come from the dead, as our Savior says, Luke 16.31.
wherefore I shall cease to detain you any longer herein; leaving these my rude
lines which, (in the distracted or rather extracted time from my calling I have
endeavored for your satisfaction, to your serious (...), and Gods blessing:
unto whom I commend (...) Word of his Grace, which is a ble^ in^o^ you (...) up
further, and give you an inheritance amongst them that are sanctified: by which
Word if you Walk you shall do (...), and witha^ Noble (...) seare^ing ^e
Scriptures (...), Act. 17.11. 2 Timothy 3.15.
whether those things be so or no, For they only are (...) you wise (...) to
salvation, but as for those what either negligent by (...) obstinately stop
(...) Psa. ^.4 (...) 14.15. and (...) aside by their own (...) shall the Lord
lead and reward (...) the workers Psalm. 125.5.
of iniquity but (...) I hear and hope (...) things of you, even such as do
accompany salvation; so I desire likewise that you, and all those (...) on the
(...) of the Lord Christ, should signify the (...) of (...) from (...) 3, 7.
especially (...) of (...) and follow not after that which is evil, but that
which is good^ For (...) that does well, is thereby manifest on (...) of God,
but he tha^ does (...) God (...) ought, (...).

This is the seventh and last (but not the least) drunken draft, their Captain
and Kings health: wherewith their The Clergis and Church wardens.
substitutes, and sworn servants, have so long, and much urged their Subjects:
that their addle The Prelates. Hab. 2.16.17.
beads are sick, and the whole body faint: they are filled with shame for
glory, and shameful spewing, staggering, and final falling without remedy.
Rev. 1^. chap. Wherefore ^ all ye dear rede^ed ones of the Lord, hearken to
the voice of the Lord: Go out of her my Phople, that you be not pertakers of
her sins, least you be pertakers of her plagues. Rev. 18.4.

Little Children keep your selves from Idols, Amen, 1 John 5.21.


If you, or any please to reply, let it be plainly; briefly, and for proof, by
divine Testimony: so shall I weigh it willingly, and remain your friend in the
Faith, though not in the fellowship of the Gospel.

L. F.
AN INDEX TO THE CHVRCHES CODEX WITH ITS VINDEX AND IVDEX. OR, A SPEEDY REMEDY
AND SPECIAL SPIRITUAL RECEIPT FOR A SOUL-SICK Saint and Son, who would be a
worshipper and servant of Christ his Redeemer.

1 Cor. 7.23. Ye are bought with a price, be not the servants of men.

Jer. 6.16. Thus says the Lord, stand ye in the ways, and behold, and ask
for the old way, which is the good way, and walk therein, and you shall find
rest for your souls.

Jer. 51.10. The Lord has brough forth our righteousness, come and let us
declare in Sion, the work of the Lord our God.

Rev. 14.1,4. Then I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with him
an hundred forty and four thousand, his Fathers name written in their
foreheads. These are they which were not defiled with women, for they are
virgins: these are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes. Those
were redeemed from among men, being the first fruits unto God, and to the Lamb

By me L. F.

Printed in the first year of the Parliament, and of the Beasts downfall in
England. An. Dom. 164^.

THE CHVRCH A CORPORATION.
IF Paul that glorious and great Apostle, and privy Counselor to Christ
Jesus, that most glorious King of Saints; was so zealously affected, not only
for the honor of his Head and King Christ; but also for his dear brethren and
Countrymen the Jews, that he wished he were accursed himsel e, that they
might be saved, and come to the acknowledgement of the Gospel of Christ, who is
God over all blessed for ever, Amen. Then how ought every Christian also, who
is a a true subject of Christ, be enflamed for Gods glory, and with affection
to his Country herein; yea, even to take his Est 4.16.
life in his hand so far as ^e may have any ability, warrant or calling
thereunto) for the advancement thereof: especially in such a time (as blessed
be God) this is. Wherefore dearly beloved Countrymen, I though the meanest
subject amongst the Saints being occasioned to write this former negative part
of worship, have also added this positive part, for your sakes, whose welfare I
wish as my own, beseeching you to give me leave in love, even for the good of
your souls, to tell you of your dangerous condition, in respect of your Phil.
2.10.
acknowledgement of, and obedience to Christ Jesus, in his true worsh p and
service, which is a matter of no small consequence as you may see, 2 These
1.8,9. and 2.10,11.

Besides, the Pagans, Jews, and Mahometist^, who do all literally deny Christ
Jesus to become in the flesh, and all salvation by him; and are therefore by
Christians generally reputed no Churches: So also amongst Christians
themselves, who do profess Christ to be come in the flesh, and that they
expect salvation by him, and are therefore baptized into his Name: yet
notwithstanding there verbal profession, the multitude and most, are not true
but false Churches; because of their manifest denial of Christ to be King,
Priest, and Prophet, in his own Church state or Kingdom there to teach, and
rule by his own Laws, Offices, and Ordinances; who do thereby in effect most
disloyally deny him also, by their own inventions, overthrowing his true
Church, and true Religion therein, whereby in his Word he is exhibited to us,
for our obedient acknowledgement of him. And amongst these Christians ever
since the general apostacy of Antichrist, there has been and is, a
continual controversy what this worship and Church is; whereof there are
seven several sorts, who do profess themselves true worshippers and
Churches; yet are all disallowed of God, and Antichristian, or opposite to
Christ: who by their own inventions have fitted Christ's Churches and worship
to their Commonwealth, and not their Commonwealth to his Churches.

First, the Papists, who hold the sacred acceptable Churchstate, to be the
Papacy, with its body and Priesthood.

Secondly, the Prelatists, that it is the Arch-Prelacie, with its Sub-Prelates
and Priests.

Thirdly, the Monarchists, that it is a Monarchicke Monarchy, with its
authority.

Fourthly, the Statists, that it is a Commonwealth, with its Presbyteriall
power.

Fifthly, the Presbyterians, that it is the Synod of a republic, with its
Presbyteriall power.

Sixthly, the Anabaptists, that it is the whole number of sincere professors of
the Gospel, because by their approbation being baptized.

Seventhly, the Arminians, (Camelian-like) that it is any of these six, if
they hold their Arminian Tenants, of justification, For believing or working.
ab interno hominis, originally and properly, which all these seven several
sorts do; except some of the sounder Presbyterian Protestants; who yet cannot
sufficiently confute the other, because of their ignorance of Adams created
condition; and also because being in the same false confused Church*state with
them.

Some saying that they are true visible Christians, and therefore a true
visible Church. Others say they are Parishioners, of a Parish of our Country,
and therefore members of a visible Church. The third, that they are Protestant
Subjects of a Protestant Kingdom; therefore members of a Protestant Church,
and therefore true. A fourth sort, that the Parliament has expressed and
imported the Nation of England to be a Church of Christ: but I am a denison of
England, therefore of that Church, as it was with the No more naetionall
Churches, Act. 2 5.21.15.9. and 10.34,35.
Jews, Priests, and Levites after Moses, and in Abraham's Family: All which
several reasonings are ignorant and unsound affirmations, missing the true
form of Gospel Churches: which several Church estates, are (as I conceive)
counterfeit and false Churches: and only (as Cant. 6.7,8.) the Separated,
Cant. 4.12. independent, spiritual particular politic bodies or Corporation
Churches, are true, according to the rule of the Word, and Apostolical
Primitive Pattern: as in all those places where the Church is called, a Body,
a City, a Fellowship, a Brotherhood, and the like: which do inclusively
declare every such true Church to be a free and perfect State.

This true Church state, house, or Church of God, which is the Pillar, ground,
Spring, Soul, and center of divine worship, truth, or true word-set Scripture
service of God, and communion between Christ and his Christians, in their
complete terrestrial state; is the Body or The Church state a Corporation.
Corporation of the cultive instituted Church of Christ; called also his
Spouse, his Syon, his City, his Kingdom, his rest; which therefore must be our
aimed and ended scope, till we find a better and more complete celestial
state of rest and glory. I call it a Corporation, because that is the subject,
root, and fountain of policy or civili^ie, and all things political and
civil; and the best notive term or expresser of the divine Mystery of Christ's
Church: especially because it is the Mount pattern, or instituted form of the
cultive Church of Christ (vulgarly termed his visible Church (it is also the
most commonly known thing and term to every freeman of any body politic, or
re public, regal, Majorall or dominall: A Corporation civil which is the
divine Church pattern) may thus briefly be described and both better discerned.

Our King by his Regality, edicts a City form, of body members (integrall and
isntrumental) and their functions and fruits to all his subjects within the
compass, bars, and limits of a City (as London;) with charge and privilege
to all the said Inhabitants thereof, to encorporate themselves by mu uall
covenant, into that edicted form of a City, and transform themselves from
their mere instinctive personality, into an institutive Citinesse, or public
republicke state; the which they accordingly constitute. This Corporation now
bears the resemblance of his whole Kingdom; and so is and may be
Synecdochically called, as also a particular Church, may be called Christ's
Kingdom, which properly consists of the whole body of his Elect.

A Civil Corporation then is the divine pattern and platform of Christ's
Church, or spiritual Corporation, and that by the divine instinctive and
distinctive description of the Apostle, Romans 12.4, ^, etc. with its parallel
place, 1 Cor. 12. throughout especially, verse. 27. Now ye (the Church of
Corinth) are the body of Christ: (not natural, Sacramental, nor mystical;
therefore cultive, ecclesiastical, and ministerial institutive body
politic.) And its particular members: but not natural, Sacramental, nor (in
this place mystical only: for though as fit matter of the cultive instituted
Church, they were discernable members of the mystical, and universal body:
yet here, and in this whole chapter, and the two next of the same scope and
subject, they are noticeable only and properly, as the encorporate members,
Freemen, or Citizens of the instituted, and then constituted Church corporate
of Corinth; for else the whole mystical Church could not then congregate in
one place, to worship God as he required in his Word, in the exercise and
enjoyment of all his Ordinances: Wherefore that Body and those Members there
spoken of, must needs be meant of the fourth fort of Christ's Body; that is of
his instituted cultive, and by themselves constituted body politic: which
political republicke, or corporation ecclesiastical, is of a stative nature;
and not properly real, actionall, nor personal: partly because it is
instituted by a prerogating supreamacy, and partly because it consists of
instituted offices; and especially because its subject, and centure is a City
or corporation, which must needs be authoritive, and divinely preceptive in its
institution; and religiously receptive and federall in its constitution: both
which are mental, and not real, stative, and not actionall: public, and not
personal. This divine, politic, public, authoritive, institutive The
Church.
Corporation ecclesiastical; as it is patterned by the vulgar civil one in
the world: so is it by the same way and means, constituted, encorporated, or
begun, by a public mutual covenant with their King Christ Jesus, and one
with another.

For as a worldly Monarchs regal charter proposing a City priveledg, and
imposing a City duty, being accepted, and submitted to by his subjects, is an
infallable testimony of his royalty, and their loyalty of his Monarchship,
Lordship, or Worship: and of their subjectship homage and worshipping him, or
testifying to his Lordship, Kingship, Firstship, and Supremacy.

So Christ's Monarchike Word setting his spiritual City, both as his prime
munificent permanent donation, at his entrance or Corroation: and also as his
proper perpetuation of his Gospel Kingdom, over and for his Elect, redeemed,
called Saints, and holy worshippers, is his proper entrance on his Regal
State, and his taking possession of his rich glorious and joyous Kingdom, by
their willingly accepting, and engagedly submitting thereto; whereby they are
transformed from their worldly personal estate, to Christ's public instituted
estate.

Thus having drawn an Index, or brief compendium of the Churches Codex, or
larger description thereof, which being so great a Gospel Mystery, I leave to
others better ability and opportunity. Because a Corporation, and not only a
Congregation.


And forasmuch as it is the general imagination, not only of the blind and
ignorant Atheisis and Papists, but also of the Professors of our times; who
(according to their own natural principles) think that there is no more
requisite nor acquisite truth, then what is to them, and their admired Rulers
revealed, Ioh. 7.48. And likewise because of the general accusation of the
proud Prelates and their adherents, Act. 28.22. that we are only for
opposition of others, and what we would not have, but know not what to have,
^st. 3.8. And also because of the now expected ruination and final fall of
Babylon, Rev. 16.19. And for confirmation of weak brethren Luk 22.32. and
information of such amongst, that do belong to the Lords Election, 2 Timothy
2.10. I have thought fit (having before endeavored the discovery of the And
spiritual incontinencie.
Mystery of iniquity) not only to lay down what we hold negatively, but also
what is the Truth as we hold possitively, which here follows briefly.

I believed therefore I spoke, for I was sore troubled, Psalm. 116.10.

As there is but one God (a) and Father of all, one Lord over all; and one
Spirit (b) So there is but one Truth (c) one Faith, and one Salvation; one
Church (d) called in one hope (e) covenanted or joined in one profession (f)
guided by one rule (g) even the Word of the most High. a Genesis 1.1. Exodus 20.3.
Isa. 46.9. Ephesians. 4.6. b Phil. 1.27. Ephesians. 2.18. and 4.3.4,6. c Ioh. 14.6. 1 Timothy 2.4. Ephesians. 4.5. Isa: 46.13. Luke 2.11. Act 4.12. d Mat. 16.18. Rev 2.9. e
Romans 1.6,7 and 8.28,30. 1 Cor. 1.24,30. Ephesians. 4.4 and 1.18. f Psalm. 50.5. Isa
62.5. Act. 2.41,42,47. Ephesians. 4.16. 1 Cor. 1.9. Phil. 1.5. and 2.1,2. 1 Ioh.
1.3,7. g Deuteronomy. 6.25. Phil. 3.16. Gal. 6.16. Ioh. 8 51. Romans 10.8. 1 Ioh.
2.3,4,5.

And that the true (a) way of the public worship and service of God under the
Gospel (b) must be according to the Primitive pattern (c) of the * Apostles,
who only taught the Commandments (d) of Christ therein, and instituted but one
Church State, for * all persons, in all places, at all times, thence to the end
of the world, Act. 10.34.15.9. 1 Cor. 15.24. Whose plat-forme and constitution
of Churches, was (not Nacionall, Dyocesan, nor Parishionall, and so
Congregationall only, but) corporationall, and particular (e) or distinct; as
does appear by the practice of the Apostles, who planted particular or
several Churches, in one country, city, house, or place, wheresoever they
found believers; and by their Epistles written unto them (f) and likewise by
the seven (g) several Churches in Asia the less. a Ioh. 4.24 and 14.6. b 2
(...). 1.9,11. c. Exodus 25.40. 1 Chro. 28.11, to 19. Ezekiel. 43.10.11. Heb. 3.1.
to 6. and 8, 5.6. Ephe: 2.20. 2. Tim: 1.13. d M^t. 28.19.20. Act. 1.1.23. 1
Ioh: 1.1. to 5. Gal: 1.10.12. Rom: 1 2 3. and 16.25.26. 1 Cor: 4.1. and 7.17.
and 11 23. and 14.37 2 Timothy: 1.13. 2 Pet: 1.16. and 3.2. e Act: 2.42. and 6.1.7.
and 8.12.25. and 10.34. to 48. and 11.22. to 26. and 14.21. to 28. and 15.36.
and 18.8.11. and 19.10. to 20. and 20.17. to 28. f Rom: 1.7. and 16.4.5. 1 Cor:
1.2. and 16.19. Gal: 1.2. Ephe. 1.1. Phil: 2. g Rev: 1.4. and 2.1.8.12.18. and
3.1,7,14.

A BRIEF AND PLAIN DESCRIPTION of a true Church of Christ, Proved by Scripture
and Reason, as follows.

Most excellent, great and glorious things are every where in Scripture, spoken
of thee, o City of God. Psalm. 87.3.

Every true Particular, Visible (a) Constitu^ed (b) Church of Christ: is free
(c) and independent (d) Spiritual house (e) Polliticke body (f) or corporation
of discernable Saints (g) faithful or holy People: with their Seed (h) not
exceeding such a number as may ordinarily every Sabbath, meet together in one
place (i) being all of one heart (k) called of God by the Gospel (l) Separated
from the world, or all false worship, (m) into the communion or fellowship of
his son Christ lesus (n) and one with an other (o) in the faith (p) and Ooder
(q) left the (r) Perfect and perpetual (s) rule of righteousness: under their
only Spiritual head (t) Christ Jesus, by whose power and authority (v) they
Elect and ordain (w) their own Officers: Receive in Believers (x) Refute
errors (y) Reform evils (z) Cast out obstinae offendrs (a) and execute all
Gods instituted ordinances.

The Churches JUDEX. Or Authoritative proof. Heb. 4.12.

Prove all things, hold f^st that which is good, 1 These. 5.21.

a Mat: 5.14,16. and 18.20. R^: 12.1. b. Deu: 26.17. Isa: 62,5. Ephe: 5,29,30.
e Ioh: 8,^2. Gal: 4,26. and 5,1,13. 2 Cor; 3,17. 1 Pet: 2,9,16. Mat: 15,9. d 2
Cor: 12,13. Rom: 16,4. 1 Cor: 7,17. and 14,33. e Ioh: 4.23,24. and 14,17,26. 1
Cor. 2,10,12. Rom: 8,9. Ephe: 2,21,22. 1 Pet: 2,5. Heb: 3,6, f Rom: 12,4,5. 2
Cor: 6,16. 1 T^m: 3,15. Act: 2.42:45. 1 Cor: 12.7. to 27. Heb: 12.22. Ephesians.
2.,19. and 4,16. g Lev: 20,26. Song: 1,16. Rom: 1,7. 1 Cor: 1,2. Ephe: 1,1,4. 1
Pet. 2,5.9.10. 2 Pet: 1,1^ ^. Col: 1,2. and 3,8,2. Rev: 11,14. h Gen: 17.7,8.
Mal: 2,15. Act: 2,39. 1 Cor: 7,14. Rom: 4,11. and 9,8. i Mat. 18,20. 1 Cor:
5,4. and 11,18,20. and 14,23. k Rom: 15,6. 2 Cor: 13,11. Zeph: 3,9. Act: 1,14.
2,46. Ephesians: 2,18. and 4,3,6. Phil: 1,27. 2,2. 1 Pet 3,8. l Ioh: 6,44,45. Math:
11,12,25,27: Song: 1,1, to 3: Act, 3,23. Rom: 1,6. and 12,1. 1 Cor: 1,2,9,24.
and 4,15. Col: 1,21,23. 2 These: 2,14. 2 Timothy: 1, and, 10. Tit: 3,3,5. m Gen:
3,15. Exodus 34,12 to 15. Ezekiel: 44,7, to 10. Song: 1,6. Mat: 13,38, Act:
2,40,41. 1 Cor: 5,9,13. and 10.18. to 21. 2 Cor: 6,14,17. Ephe: 2,2,6. and
4,17. to 25. Rev: 18 4. and 14,9,10. n Ioh: 14,20,23. 1, Cor: 1,9. 2 Cor: 6,18.
Ephe: 2,18,19. 1 Ioh: 1,3,6: H^b: 21,13. o Ioh: 17,11,21,23. Ephesians: 3.9.2,9,22.
and 4,25,5,7 to 11. Phil: 1 5. Heb: 10,25. p Act: 6,7. and 14,22.16,5. Rom:
1,5. and 14,1,23. and 16,26. 1 Cor: 2,5. and 16,13. P^l: 1,27: Col: 1,23. and
2,5,7. 1 Timothy 1,19. 4,1,6. 6.12. Heb: 10,23. Jude 20, ver. q Ioh: 14.6. 1 Cor:
14,40. Col: 2,5.6. 1 Chronicles: 15,13. r Number: 15,15,16. Deuteronomy: 4,2. to 6. Isa: 8,20.
Luk: 16,29,31. Math: 15,9. Ioh: 5,39. Act: 20,32. Gal: 1,8,9. and 6,16. 3,15.
Col: 2,8,18, to 23. Heb. 3,2,3. Iam: 1,25. 2 Cor. 3.9.11. Romans 1.16. 1 Pet,
1.3.4.16. 2 Timothy 3.16.17. Rev. 22.18.19. Pro. 30.6. Psalm. 19.7.8. and
119.144.172. 1 Chronicles 16.15.17. Psalm. 111.8. 119,142.144. and 145.13. Luke 1.33.
1 P^t. 1.25. Rev. 14.6. t Isa. 8.9.7. Hos. 1.11. Mat. 23.8.9.10. Mar. 10.42.44.
2 Cor. 1.24. and 4.5. Ephesians. 1.22. and 2.20. and 4.15. and 5.23.24. Col. 1.18.
and 2.10. to 20. Heb. 3.1. and 10.21. 1 Pet. 8.4.7. and 2.2.4. v Mat. 18.18.20.
28.18. Ioh. 3.35. 1 Cor. 5.4.5. w Numb 8.9.10. Act. 1.21. to 26. 6,2. to 6. and
14.23. 2 Cor. 8.19. 1 Timothy 3.10. Tit. 1.5. x Isa. 14.1.2. 60.4.8. Psalm. 110 3
Luke 17.37. Act. 2.41.47. and 9.26. and 11 24. and 16.5. and 18.27. and
19.18.19. Romans 14.1. 2 Cor. 9,13. Col. 2.6. y Act. 15 6.7.22. and 20.30.31. 1
Cor. 14.29. Gol. 1.8. and 2.11. to 14. 2 Pet. 3.17. 2 Timothy 2.18. Heb. 13.9. 2
These. 2.8. 2 Ioh. 8.9. Jude 3, to 23. Rev. 2 15.15.20. z Lev. 19.17. Mat.
18.15.17. 1 Cor. 11.17. to 34. and 5.1. to 8. 2 Cor. 2.5. to 9. Rev. 3.1.3. a
Genesis 3 23.24. and 4.11,12.14. Math. 18.17.20. 1 Cor. 5 4. to 11. Romans 16.17.
Gal. 1.8. Col. 4.17. 1 Timothy 5,1.2.19. to 25. Tit. 2.5. and 3.10. Rev 2.2.20.
Psalm. 94.20 and 149.6. to 9. b Deuteronomy 4.5.6. chapter Mat. 28.20. 1 Cor. 2.21.24.

Search the Scripture, for in them ye think to have eternal life, and they
are they that testify of me. Ioh 5.39. Act. 17.11.

The Churches VINDEX, or Reason Proof

Be ready always to give an answer to every one that asks you a Reason,
etc. 1 Pet. 3.15.

1. It must be a True Church: because that is the first of the five preceptive
parts of Gods pure worship, even the pillar and ground of true worship: for God
is a Spirit, and those that worship him, must worship him in spirit and truth:
and unto this True Church only belong the promises and blessings.

2. It must be a Particular Church; because the bounds or number thereof must
be known, and be no further; or larger, then the membrall duties thereof do
extend, and may be d^ily executed; which cannot be in a National Diocesan, or
Provincial Church.

3. It must be a Visible and discernable Church, discernable and mental in
respect of its institutive corporationalnesse; visible and real, in respect of
its constitutive congregationalnesse, and actions thereof: As a City set on a
hill, because it must be seen, and known to be the place where their public
duties of Gods worship and service must be performed; there being no rule left
to know an invisible Church by, but the Ordinances, Ministers and
administrations are all visible, therefore must of necessity be performed in a
visible state; as those distinct several Churches were, which the Apostles
planted and writ unto.

4. It must be Constituted, builded, covenanted, or coupled together, not loose
or scattered stones; because Christ cannot be a corner stone, nor the Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists no Foundations, where Christ's Habitation is not
built, and so incapable of such a guest.

5. It is a Free Church or State, both in respect of the Ceremonial Law, or
from all other humane inventions and compulsions, and also to embrace, receive,
and set up any Truth.

6. It is an Independent Church, as all Cities are under one King or Head, one
Law, one Order, one Government therein, every one having as large and as free a
Charter as another, and power equally and alike to execute the same.

7. It must be a Spiritual house or Church, not material, of Lime, Stone, and
Timber; because that cannot be Christ's Body, which his Church is; neither did
he dye for such matrrials, but for his Church, who are his Members and
Mystical Body.

8. It must be a Corporation, a Spiritual politic Body, or City; being
thereby enfranchised, and a powerful public state, really distinct from the
rest of the World, thereby enrighted to, and enstated in all the Ordinance^,
and also tied to the discharge of the diverse duties thereof; no Forrainers or
others having any voice therein nor privilege thereto, but only as
spectators, by a moral right, in the natural and moral parts thereof; as
prayer and preaching the Word, which is permitted all, being appointed of God
there as one special means of conversion.

9. It must consist of discernable Saints, because only such are true
subjects, and that Kingdom, house or habitation of Christ where he dwells,
must be holy as he is holy: that is, regenerated, prepared, hewed, swared, and
purged from the rubbidge of their earthly and carnal condition, by repentance
faith and obedience, before they be fit for the Court of Christ, that glorious
state of grace.

10. It consists of their Children or Seed likewise, because that thereby
only is set out the free grace of God, they being also received into that As
an Apprentise in a City.
covenant of grace so well as their parents, and thereby enrighted to Baptism
the seal thereof; and thereby engaged at the years of discretion, actual to
estate themselves into further privileges; whereof they are capable by
education, Genesis 18.19. being the seed of believers; and whereby outwardly they
are differenced from Infidels.

11 It must not Exceed such a number as may ordinarily every Sabbath meet
together in one place; because else some might lose their privileges of Gods
Ordinances, as in the great Antichristian Assemblies, whose flocks are more in
number then can be daily fed, or known in State, or by Face:

12 They must be all of one Heart, in the band of love, else they cannot, like
David's Armies, 1 Chronicles. 12.38. set up Christ their King, to rule in his own
house by his own Laws, Ministry, and Administrations, and because a Kingdom
divided against it self cannot stand.

13 They must be called of God by the Gospel, because it is not nor cannot be
by any humane power, who can only speak to the ear, or compel bodily
performance, but is proper and only peculiar to the divine power, to draw or
convince the heart: this Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence indeed, but the
violent are not compelled thereto by others, but themselves affectionately take
it by force.

14 They must be Separated, etc. for their own more comfortable society, and
Gods glory; both by manifestation of the virtues of their vocation, and for
others imitation.

15 Into the Communion of Christ, because they are spiritually espoused or
married to Christ.

16 And One with another, in all matters and means, both ecclesiastiall and
personal, for their mutual edification and consolation, and for natural
supportation.

17 In the Faith and Order, because thereby they manifest themselves, and the
Church, to be of Christ; by the one also they be Sons, and by the other the
Servants of Christ.

18, Left in the Perfect and perpetual rule of righteousness^ First, it is a
perfect rule, else Christ knew not how, or had not time, to make his last will
and Testament; and so must be beholding to men therein, and less faithful
then Moses over his house: but being perfect and plain, there needs no Canons,
nor Laws more then Moral. Secondly, it is a perpetual rule, else some time
would have been set for its continuance; but none is mentioned but the end of
the world.

19. Under their only spiritual head Christ Jesus; because from him alone, as
Redeemer they have received their Charter* Laws, and Ordinances, and power to
execute the same in the Church; yet do we acknowledge that God as Creator has
also deputed a supreme civil power to Princes, over the Church, to order them
by Laws civil, in their keeping all the ten Commandments.

20. By whose power and authority, they elect and ordain their own Officers.

First, because every Ordinance of Christ is given to, and in his Church; else
had not the Church as much power, and privilege for the soul, as the
Commonwealth has for the body; wherein every City or Town corporate, and
fellowship therein, has this power.

Secondly, because that those amongst whom they are conversant, can best judge
of their fitness, and abilities, both for gifts and qualifications: likewise
it furthereth the diligence and faithfulness of the Officer, that they to whom
he is to administer, have freely chosen him: it also binds the people to
greater love and obedience of, and maintenance to his person, and Ministry,
whom themselves have made choice of.

21. Receive in believers, for manifestation of the Saints faith, love, and
loyalty, for the benefit of society, and for the perfecting and increase of
Christ's Body.

22. Refute errors; else all manner of abominations and Antichristian
superstitian, might by the power and policy o^ men, be brought in, and set up
in the Church, which is the ground and pillar of true worship.

23. Reform evils; from defiling, and for retaining the purity of their
communion, that their King Christ Jesus may be delighted to dwell amongst them,
it being a pure and peaceable habitation of Justice.

24. Cast out any obstinate offenders; because their Charter is given only to
true and loyal subjects; and their Officers and Laws likewise for suppressing
of Rebels and Tra^tors which may arise, and through subtilty creep in amongst
them: likewise hereby is every particular Church discerned to be a living body
as by receiving in nourishment, so by casting o^ excrement.

25. And Execute all Gods instituted Ordinances; because they were therefore
given them, and are bound thereunto, both in acknowledgement of their King
Christ, from whom they received them all, and for their own benefit; all
powerfully and virtually, by their state; some as moral, enrighted and
deputedly, by their members; others as institutive, officially and engagedly,
by their officers.

The Lord (...) in his holy Temple, let all the earth keep silence before him,
Hab. 2.20.

You may see the practice of these particulars prescribed more at large, in our
general profession of Faith called the Apology. And in the Guide to Syon.

And now if hereby you do discern what a Church of Christ is; it remains
for you, first, not to mind my wea^e managing and penning hereof, nor our
walking herein, so much as the truth; and your own duty, wherein every one
particularly, is to yield universal obedience, as to every ordinance of
Christ, so to his true Church State especially; out of which no public worship
is performed Ezekiel. 20.40. 2 Cor. 7.1.
acceptably. Wherefore we are wished by the Apostle, to cleanse our selves from
all filthiness of flesh and spirit, and finish our sanctification and
salvation in the fear of the Lord: and by the same Apostle beseeched, Romans
12.1,^
by the mercies of God* to give up our bodies (as well as our souls) a living
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to the living God, which is the worship of his
Word, and not to fashion or conform our selves therein to the World, but be
changed by the renewing of the mind, that we may prove what that good,
acceptable, and perfect will of God is.

And now if by this brief bit, the stomach of your souls be whetted,
enlightened, and affected to the truth, you may be further satisfied by diverse
ancient Barrowes Discovery. Ainsw. Counterpoise and Communion of Saints, etc.
Books of our Ancestors, but especially by our general information and
confession of Faith, called the Apology; wherein is more at large laid down
our humble desires, and lawful demands (concerning the truth of Religion) both
unto the Parliament, and of the Universities of England, or any other, who
would undertake, either by way of writing, or free conferencee and public set
dispute, religiously and orderly, to debate our differences; that so the truth
might come to light, which we have ever endeavored, and by the silence of
reformed Churches has been approved, and by our own Nation, both these
ways, and means (and all other) has been hitherto denied us: the one not
offording us liberty of conscience [by suppressing our oppressors the Prelates]
the other, in stead of answering our grounds by Gods Word, have by their
irregular and unchristian carriages, in their privileged places, and other
personal private ways, not only smothered the truth, but also have cast many
undeserved calumnies upon us; and not contented herewith they (having all power
in their hands) have in what they can persecuted our persons, that so we might
no more speak in Christ's Name; prohibiting all passage of printing, reading,
or keeping our Books; because (as we think) that they dare not come to the
light, lest they should be reproved, like their predecessors, Ioh. 3.20. And
those cruel creatures and bloody Bitesheepes, with their viperous Pursevants.
vermin and Churchwardens.
vassals, who have received authority from their persecuting High Priests, have
in all hostile, and merciless manner, a long time afflicted us; compelling
some to blaspheme, and deny Christ, in his truth; and being more mad against
us, they have persecuted us into strange Countries; and others that remain,
are either thrown into their prisons, if they cannot procure their death, or
during their life, if they have any worldly wealth, fined them; or otherwise
their poor souls are hunted like Partridges on the Mountains: and after they
are dead, deny them burial, unless the cruel and covetous mind of these
grievous Prelates and Priests.
Wolves may be satisfied.

And though we have been, and are still thus used (which were lamentable, and
too tedious to tell, even the particular kinds thereof) yet have we ever
patiently, We were never Rebels nor Traitors.
conscionably, and unoffensively carried ourselves, both toward civil
Authority, and in the Religious practice of Gods public worship, so far as
he has been pleased to reve^se unto u^r and do purpose still (except we
can be ^tter Informed) to continue therein, as God affords us opportunity,
though to the loss of all outward preferments, what ever it might be, yea
even life it self, if it shall so please our God again to exercise and honor
us.

And as our Predecessors have ever, so do we still maintain the truth of
Gods worship, in his true Church; and a just See Mr. Rob: justification of
Separation.
Separation from all false ways, as of Papists, Ar^ini^ Anabaptists, Fam^ists,
Semiseparatists, and all Antichristian, or otherwise false Churches; whether
Conformists, Reformists so far as they differ in practice from the Word, and
(their harmony of Confession) or any other maintainers of error, heresy or
faction: Ezra 4.3.
who have nothing to do with us, to build the house unto our God, but we our
selves together will build it unto the Lord God of Israel: which spiritual
Gospel house and holy habitation, the True Church state, and fellowship
therein, we may not leave, Heb. 10.25. Rev. 2.13,24,25. but following the truth
in love, must maintain, edify and repair the same, Ephesians. 4.12. to 16. Iud.
v^ 20. For we are not they that do disseperate our selves to perdition, but
follow Faith unto salvation. Heb. 10.39.


And that Separation which we maintain, is not from the Word, or true
Churches (as we are slanderously accused) but from sin, and communion
therewith; especially, in all false worshipping of God.

And such a Separation would not be so unsavory and strange (in these our
days especially) if men were not strangers from the Commonwealth of Israel: 1
Pet. 4.4.
For what age ever was there, wherein Gods people were not Separated from the
World, in all false worshipping of God? Separation the old and true way of
Religion.
God himself did first teach it, when he made a Separation between the seed
o^ the woman, and of the Serpent, Gen 3.15. the fir^ than Adam saw, in the
Separation of Seths posterity from Cains, Genesis 4.16. and 6.2 Noah did the like,
in Separating Sems posterity from Cains, Gen 9.25,26. and 11.31. Abraham was
called out of Cald^e, Genesis 12.1. and Lot out of Sodom, Genesis 19 15,22. Israel
out of Egypt and Babylon, Exodus 4.29,31. and 20.4,5. Numb. 23.9. and 16 40. 2 Chronicles 11.13,16. Ezra. 6.21,22. and 9.1,2. Nehem. 9.1,3. and 10.28,30. and 13.3.
Isa. 48.20. and 56.3. Ier. 15.19. Ezekiel. 22.26. and 44.7. to 23. C^. 1.^, 7.
Faithful Judah from rebellious Israel, Hos. 2.1,4. and 4.15,17. and 5.11. I^.
2.8. Christ's Disciples from faithless Jews and Gentiles, Mat. 7.13.16. I^.
10.4,5.26,27. and 17.6. to 20. Act. 2.40,41. and 19.9. Romans 12.1,2. and
16.17,19, 1 Cor. 10.7. to the end. 2 Cor. 6.14. to the end. Ephesians. 5.6. to 11.
And all Gods people from the confused Babel of Antichrist, Rev. 18.4.7.13,14.
S^d^e and Egypt, Rev. 11.8. and that upon pain of the Lords wrathful
displeasure, Rev. 14.9,11. and 16.19. 2 Thessalonians. 1.8,9. and 2.10,12. And the
Church of England consists of a mixed multitude, even sinners of all sorts,
who were never Separated from the World, Mat: 13,38. Phil. 2 15 truly
constituted. nor yet acknowledged the order of the Gospel, but preach it down
all they can* neither have Christ to teach, or rule over them, as King, Priest
and Prophet, by his own Laws, Offices, Officers, and Ordinances; but by the
inventions of Antichrist, or oppos^e to Christ, who would compel al by his
^used Canons, to carry his mark in their hand, or in their forehead, and
either by fear or flattery has for 1300 years, deceived all the Nations of
the * Christian earth, Rev. 14.16. because they regarded not to acknowledge God,
nor the Gospel of his dear Son, in the love thereof, 2 These. 2: 9,11. nor
on the conditiones theireof, Man. 16.24. Phil. 1.29. 2 Timothy 3.12. but being
blinded, either by the baiting prosperity, or biting persecution of the world,
2 Cor. 4.4. the people clymate, seat, or center of their souls, Mat. 6.21.
their earthly worldly minds can no more wag out of the wide way of the worlds
Kingdom toward Gods Kingdom, Mat. 6.33. then the earth can be carried into
the Clouds, or a stone ascend upward, Mat. 19.24. wherefore our Savior says,
Straight is the gate, and narrow is the way that leads to life, and f^there
^e that find it, Mat. 7.14.

But we know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in wickedness: and
we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an understanding that
we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his
Son Jesus Christ, 1 Ioh: 5:19,20: And he is the Author of eternal salvation
to those that obey him, Heb: 5:9.

And herein I do exercise my self to have always a conscience void of
offense, toward God, and toward men, Act: 24:16.

Per me L. F.

FINIS.
Printed in the first year of the Parliament, And of the Beasts downfall in
England, Ann. Dom. 1641.


