A PREPARATION TO THE MOST Holy Ministry: Wherein is set down the true
means to be well prepared to the same, by an exact description, and
consideration, of the necessity, excellency, difficulty, and great profit
thereof; with the marvelous effects of the same: Also a lively exhortation to
all youth, to give themselves to the study thereof: and a confutation of the
objections which may be brought in any sort to touch the same: Very profitable
and necessary in these our times, as well for those that addict themselves to
the Ministry, as for all other for whose instruction it was ordained. Divided
into two Books. Written in French by Peter Gerard, and translated into English
by N. B.

Esaias 52. Romans 10. Nahum. I. How bewtifull are the feet of them which bring
glad tidings of peace, and brings glad tidings of good things, and preach
salvation.

Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster
row, at the sign of the Talbot. 1598.

TO THE RIGHT HONOrable Sir William Periam Knight, Lord chief Baron of her
Majesty's Exchequer, all happiness.
RIght honorable. Not many years since, your loving acceptance of the
translation of a French treatise, has imboldened me to do the like again, and
to Dedicate this small work unto your L. For my purpose is, never to change
for any other Patron of my labors, seeing that unto you of right they do
belong. I had thought to have published some other thing, of mine own
breeding, but that this French man pulled me back, and urged me to teach him
to speak the English tongue: Being somewhat capable, he was not long in
learning the same. If he speaks not so eloquently, as many of our Orators
use to do, the fault is to be imputed to his bad schoolemaister. But in my
opinion, he speaks, although plainly, yet profitable things, and necessary
for our estate. Let the work commend the author, and at your leisure I hope
your L. Will vouchsafe him the reading. Thus committing your L. my good Lady
your wife, your kind Brother, your virtuous and godly chidren (my worshipful
friends) unto God, his most merciful protection, I humbly take my leave.

Your L. in all duty to be commanded. Nicholas Becket.

To his loving Brethren, the Pastors and Ministers of Deuon. and Cornwall, and
all other Christian readers, grace and peace.
MY loving brethren, if this small treatise shall happen to come into your hands,
I pray you give it entertainment, make it familiar unto you, by often reading
the same. Although you have in your studies many excellent works of this
argument, Hyperius, Erasmus, Hemmingius, Daneus, and our good countreyman
Master Perkins, etc. Yet you shall find here many things that are more
suitable to us country Divines, which have pastoral charges. For I know not
how it comes to pass, that many have long labored in their Ministry, and
yet have little or nothing profited their auditorie. Many causes there are of
this nonproficiencie, in some ignorance, in others negligence, and the just
judgment of God upon the people (who because they do not hunger and thirst
after righteousness, Math. 5. Acts, 16. Act. 17.
nor attend unto the preaching of the word, as Lydia the purple-seller did unto
Paul, nor search the scriptures with the noblemen of Berea) therefore their
hearts are blinded with the Israelites, and they contemn and despise Christ
with the proud Pharisees. Ioh. ^.
But in my conceit, this is not the least hinderaunce to the prosperity of the
Church, when as the Pastors and Ministers of the same have no respect, neither
how they live, neither how they teach. Here therefore is plotformed unto us,
what the life, and what the doctrine of Ministers ought to be, and here is set
down a plain and easy method of divining the word of God aright. Dan. 12.
If we then be desirous to shine as the brightness of the firmament, and to be
as the stars for ever and ever, let us teach others by our life and doctrine,
and endeavor to turn many unto righteousness. Let us not preach our selves, but
Christ crucified, not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, seeking only the
glory of God, and the conversion of the souls of our brethren, that we may
unfeignedly protest with S. Paul. 1. Cor. 2.
My word and my preaching, stood not in ye intising speech of man's wisdom, but
in plain evidence of the spirit, and of power, that your faith should not be
in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. Thus beseeching the Lord for
his mercy sake to bless us, and comfort us, in this our troublesome and
painful calling, and to give us grace to take heed to our selves, Act. 20.
and to all the flock whereof the holy ghost has made us overseers, to feed
the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood: In all dutiful
love I take my leave.

Your loving Brother, and fellow laborer in the Lord. N. B.

A PREPAration to the holy Ministry, very profitable and necessary as well
for those that desire the same, as for all the faithful, for whose instruction
it is ordained.
CHAP. I. Because the office of the Pastors is to be employed in the correction
of vice, it is expedient to show, that vice was never so rife as it is now: how
to correct the same in some sort, there is nothing so necessary as the
ministry.
WHen God is justly provoked to encounter with the vices and sins of men, he
throws for his darts into the earth, war, famine, and plague, (which are
three of the most principal executions of his wrath) then every one naturally
does endeavor to defend and preserve his life, from the violence and fury of
them. But they which have their hearts and bowels more lively touched with
strange and fearful punishments of war, great and lamentable miseries of
famine, with other sorrowful and extreme calamities of the plague, or of any
other thing: they I say, are not only content to escape from the imminent
dangers which does inuiron all those which dwell in those places or countries,
upon which God has discharged most furiously such afflictions, but being moved
with hearty and merciful affections toward others, do desire to draw them
likewise out of the same, in such sort that good politicians and and most
faithful lovers of the commonwealth, have forced themselves by their wit and
counselles to stay the stream of cruel and bloody war: others being
touched with the same humanity, have bin urged to comfort the poor and needy,
in the time of famine, have devised all means possible by which they might in
any sort be nourished and maintained. The Physicians and others which took
upon them to cure diseases, and to preserve their neighbors in heal^h, when
they see the air so infectious and corrupted, that there is engendered thereby
so strong a contagion, so apt and swift to infect that in a short time, many
thousands of persons of all sects and ages are extinct and killed: that the
streets, houses, and dunghilles, are oftentimes so spread with the bodies of
the dead, that order cannot be taken for their burial. They do not only
prepare ordinary receipts and remedies, counterpoysons, playsters, and common
antidots, but they do devise all other cordial Medicines that they can, For
extreme diseases, extreme medicines must be invented.
to help those poor souls, and deliver them from the force of this mortal
venom. This is that which at this day all true and faithful Christians should
do and diligently observe in this our age, which is so depraved and co^pounded
of all sorts of vices, that it is not possible to add more unto it: to wit,
that every one according to his calling, should devise all the strongest and
most sovereign remedies, which he may, to correct the disorders and
troublesome confusions in which the whole earth is buried, and to apply them to
the diseases, with which all, as well great as small, are infected, to cure
the^ altogether, or at least to mittigate them in any sort. And this is so much
the more necessary, because now sins and wickedness of the people are more
great and horrible, then the ages heretofore. When Esaias, Jeremy, Ezechiel, and
the other prophets would reprehend the malice and impenitencie of men in their
time, they were wont to reckon up particularly those transgressions and
sins, which at that time bore the sway, to the end that they might make them
ashamed which too freely did commit the same, and afteward having as it were
touched them to the quick, and even pierced their inward soul, they caused
them to understand, that with all their heart they desired their conversion and
reformation, unto the which they so seriously did exhort them. Amongst all the
notable places in which this may be most clearly perceived, that of the
prophet Micheas is one, in the seventh Chapter of his Prophecy, Mich. 7
where most lamentably complaining of the corruptions which then reigned, he
brings in God, speaking after this manner. VVoe is me, for I am as the summer
gatherings, and as the grapes of the vintage, there is no cluster to eat, my
soul desired the first ripe fruits. The which words signifies as much, as if
he should say (I thirst after righteousness, and am desirous to see some good
man amongst the Israelites) even as one passing by being thirsty, does desire
to find some clusters of grapes, or some fruit, but all is consumed as it
comes to pass, in a dry and bad season. Afterward he adds, The good man
is perished out of the earth, and there is none righteous among men, they all
lie in wait for blood: every man hunteth his brother with a net. The best of
them is as a bryer, and the most righteous of them, sharper then a thorn
hedge, etc. And continuing that speech, it may very well be gathered, as well
by those words which we have recited, as by those that follow, that every one
should turn from his crooked way, and return to the performance of his duty.
If we will spend but a little time to consider this description of vices, and
compare them with the sins of our age, we shall find, that our age does far
exceed, for so much, as not only the fulfilling of all the filthiness of
sin (of which the Prophet does so much complain) may be seen amongst us,
but it does so superabound, that in ancient times, fear and shame (which are
two strong bridles to retain men in some sort in their duty, or at the least
to make them ashamed of their faults) at this day are broken, and take no more
place, but that which is worse, they are by an incredible wickedness of men,
turned into a kind of disordered licentiousness, that every one is so past
shame, that he commits sin with a certain pleasure and delight of the
heart, in such manner, that he thinks it not to be evil. Darkness is
counted light, black white, and at this day there is no vice nor virtue, but
that which men hardened and inuetrate in all kind of iniquity, do esteem to be
vice or virtue. For virtue, godliness the fear of god, charity, and such like,
are so disguised and varnished by the sottish opinions and foolish speech of
worldly men, that they are reckoned to be vice, hypocrisy, dissimulation, and
algether contrary unto that, which they are indeed in themselves: and the
same vices, covetousness, ambition, envy, stealth, robbery, blasphemy,
rapes, whoredoms, murder, sedition, mutiny, and many others, are so gallantly
set forth with outward masks and paintings, that they pass at this day for
virtues, worthy of perpetual commendation, in such sort, that even as when
we see in the woods or forest, Bears, Lions, Wolfes, they put us in a great
fear, but when we see them embossed, or portraied out upon a wall, or upon a
gate, we take a certain pleasure to behold them: Frogs, serpents, snailes,
etc. are loathsome and displeasant unto us when we see them creep upon the
ground, to leap upon, and to cry after us, but when we see them lively
drawn upon a fair table, or wrought with the needle upon some carpet,
distinguished in one place with white silk, in another place with green, red,
violet, or crimson: Or when we see there these venomous creatures set forth
with such variety of colors, we take maruailous delight to behold them, and
we do admire at the same. Such is the behavior of the most part of the
inhabitants of the earth, who, although there be nothing more deformed and
monstrous then vice of his own nature, nothing which may make men more to
tremble for fear, if her filthiness might be seen as it is, nothing is to
be found more filthy, more noisome or inferior, nothing more pestilent and
contagious then her poison, of which the Kings, Princes, and Potentates of the
earth, Kingdoms, Countries, and all Provinces, are empoysoned, and all persons
of what tongue, people, nation, so ever they be, are so bewitehed, that we
may very well say, that it is as it were an outrageous stream that has
drowned the whole world. How many may be found at this day so filthy in
their corruption, Ruffians, Whoremongers, Bawdes, and a number other of the
same stamp, who by their sugared words by their honyed discourses, and by a
deceitful tongue, full of sophistical glosings, do make men think and
believe, that wicked vices, which draw upon men the curse of God, until it
casts them down headlong into the gulf of hell, are not sins, but
pleasant pastimes and recreations. And that they which follow not other men's
steps, who makes conscience of their ways, and will not prostitute
themselves, and wallow as swine in the dirtie puddle of the corruptions of this
world, are counted foolish and ridiculous: in such sort, that we may in our
word fitly call our age a cleansing sink of all filthiness, and uncleanness
of the times passed: what then is to be done? Verily every one must endeavor,
that as the world was never more ingenious to find out a thousand kind of
devices and subtilties to cover their sins, to be so desirous of an holy
reformation, that he be as quick witted in inuenting and diligently searching
out all the most sovereign and excellent remedies, As the world was never so
corrupted: so all possible means must be deiuised to remedy the same.
by which in some sort so many evils may be met withal: the fervent zeal
which we ought to bear to the glory of God, should stir us up, that love
which is due to our neighbor, ought to prick us forward, and many other
reasons which were too long to recite. When we feel our selves ouerladen, and
surcharged with infectious humors (as the Physicians term them) and they
cause the pain of the head, of the stomach, or of any other part of our
body, and oftentimes a distemperature of the whole, we go to the Physician,
we ask his advice what Medicine we shall use, we take it very willingly,
that which he appoynteth agreeable to purge us, sometime sweet, sometime
sower. If one helps not, we take another, if the second have no operation,
we make other compositions, potions, confections, pills, until we have
found out that which purgetth the putrified and corrupt humors of our body.
When any is taken with an extreme and dangerous disease, he has recourse
to the Physician for the same, he asks counsel of him, how he may know
the means to heal his malady, or to mittigate the sharpness thereof, he
prays him to apply all the force of his Art, all his best receipts, if one
Doctor cannot help, he sends for others, earnest entreaty is made for the
patient: To be short, one runs in post hither, and thither, to find out
those that be most expert and perfect in that science of which they make
profession, to the end they may steed them in this urgent necessity the like
are we to do in a strange and fearful sickness, with which miserable men are
diseased: we must not only apply medicines, and old plasters, for they will do
no good, the disease is stronger then they, but we must devise new medicines
which are of more force the^ those that have bin used heretofore, other wise
there can no hope be conceived of amendment or recovery. Diverse opinions of
some, to correct the corruptions of our age.
Many think that the most sovereign and effectual remedy is, if kings and
princes should reform the bad behauior of the court, and for that as much as
the scripture teaches, that God pours forth his indignation upon people and
nations, and does justly punish the^ because of the sins of the kings of the
earth. This is a most forcible reason, for in truth, even as Emperors,
Monarchs, and Kings of this world, do excel others in power, riches, credit
and authority, so also ought they to surpass others in all kind of virtues:
as we see in the heavens, that as the Sun is greater then all the other
stars, so it does far surmount them in brightness. If it comes to pass,
that kings do exceed others in vice and disorder, what may be expected of the
most part of the subjects, who commonly follow the example of their princes,
but that they delight in corruption, and estrange themselves from God? As in
the contrary, if Princes give themselves to the study of virtue, and that it
shine in them as it ought, we may conceive hope, that there light will kindle
others to follow them. Nevertheless, this reason is not of so great weight,
because God many times do give good Kings, yet their Subjects are not
bettered thereby: and as sometimes there may be a good people, but a wicked
King, who is nothing amended by the honest life of his Subjects. Wherefore we
must conclude, that this does depend upon the providence of GOD, who as he
holds the hearts of Kings in his hand: so likewise, the heart of the
people, to learn and incline them whither soever he pleases, and
consequently, that is not the true means, or nearest way to purge the world
of sin. There be others that are of opinion, that all men in general, and
every one in particular, must begin to be displeased with their sins. For
God having created all creatures to be known of them to be served and
worshipped as the Creator, if it shall come to pass, that man which being ye
chief of the works of god, in steed of keeping the first rank, in singing
and celebrating his praises, should not acknowledge him, but dishonor and
blaspheme him, seeing that other inferior creatures do praise and magnify
God, performing that unto him, unto which they were principally created: it is
not to be doubted, but that this intolerable and detestable unthankfulness in
man, will provoke the curse of God upon mankind, and such desolations, that as
a flood shall cover all the earth. But if every one could amend himself, and
unfeignedly detest his wicked life, and addict himself to the knowledge of God,
to set forth his praises, as they are bound by the law of nature, and of
their creation some hope might be conceived, that the earth in some sort should
be reformed. But because the common people is a filthy beast, blockish,
ignorant, following their own fancy in the manner of their life, who will
never approve that which is not answerable to their own affections, there is
no likelihood of reformation and amendment of life in this respect. Moreover,
earthly Princes enjoying their pleasures at the full, attended by flatteters,
who oftentimes, do commend all their actions, and having none about them which
dare open their mouth to tell them their duty: what hope of reformation may be
conceived or looked for in this regard? we must then seek out some other
means, by which in some sort we may attain unto the same.

Many have written very excellent treatises of those means, which are
maruailous notable, worthy diligently to be read, and to be practiced, by
reason of the great force and efficacy that they have, to move every one to
the performance of his duty. But in our opinion, all things being considered
and examined with sound judgment, the most exquisite, most sovereign, and
forcible remedy, to renew as much as may be the face of kingdoms, full of all
abomination, filthiness, and horrible vices, and in one word, so entangled
one with another in an infinite sort of sins, that they are as huge mountains
that reaches from the center of the earth, even unto heaven, crying for
vengeance, (as the sins of Sodom and Gomorrha) the most sovereign remedy I
say, is to procure a good number of pastors, endued with virtuous and honest
manner, of sound knowledge, and of a singular dexterity in preaching the word
of God, and of a true and sincere zeal to the glory of God, accompanied with
diligence and watchfulness in the administration and execution of their charge.

CHAP. II. By what reasons it may be proved, that to reform the disorders of
men in many countries, there is nothing of such force as the preaching of the
word of God.
IN the first place this may be verified, because the word of God in the
scripture is very fitly compared to a burning fire, as in Jeremy, where God
says to his Prophet, that He will put his words into his mouth like a fire.
Iere. 5.74.29.29. Isay. 49.2.
And in the 29. of the same Prophecy, it is compared to a fire, and to an
hammer. Is not my word even like a fire (says the lord) and like an hammer
that breaks the stone? And in Isay, to a sword, and to a shaft, where it is
said, that God has made his mouth like unto a sharp sword, and a chosen shaft,
etc. Ephesians. 6 17. Apoc. 15, 15. Math. 1, 12.
Also to a fan, where John says, that He holds his fan in his hand, and
will make clean his floor, and gather his wheat into his Garner, but will
burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire. And unto salt and such like things.
By all those similitudes and other very well known, we are plainly
instructed, and it is lively represented unto us, the virtue and efficacy of
this word of God: that seeing that God has given such power to it, to be able
to encounter with the transgressions and sins of men, The word of God being
compared to a sword, to a fan, to salt, they that preach the same purely, may
correct many vices.
it may very well be concluded, that those which do preach his word, so it be
purely and from a zealous affection, and hearkened unto attentively in all
humanity and reverence, they may by the grace of God root up out of the world
an infinite number of sins.

For seeing that it is so, that the fire of his own nature does purify gold,
silver, and cleanses other metals, brings them to powder, and fineth them,
seperateth the dross, consumes straw, chafe, and other dry things when they
are cast into it: and as a sharp swoorde does cut and pearce, or like a fan
when the corn is threshed to make clean the floor, to cast and drive away
the chafe, filme, dust, and tail of the corn, and to make it clean and
pure: also the salt of his natural property, does consume the superfluous
humors which is in meat, and do preserve the same from corruption. Verily it
cannot otherwise be, but that the true Pastors which are messengers of the
holy word of God, which truly is the word of fire, by the preaching thereof,
but they must needs burn and disperse an infinite number of disorders, and
corruptions, unto the which the most part are addicted: and also by that, to
cut off many sins, profane manners, and abominable behauior of a company of
naughtipacks, which take no delight but in doing evil, and by the same (which
is a sword that wounds even to the marrow, and to the division of the soul)
they pearce through and search ye very inward thoughts of their souls, to awake
them earnestly from their sound sleep of vices, and afterward by lively and
often exhortations, reprehensions, denou^cings of the judgments of God, with
fearful threatenings, which are as heavy strokes of an hammer, upon their
obstinacy and hardness, they may make the^ have a feeling of their sins, to
detest all their pleasure therein: Also by the same of this word, they discover
much filthiness of ye ravening cormora^ts, that is to say, a great number of
Infidels, Atheists, Apostates, hipocrits, which are oftentimes hidden in the
church of God, as cockle amongst the corn, which they cast out of the same,
and purge it: to conclude, seeing that the same word is salt, keeping meats in
their accustomed goodness, that they do not corrupt: It must needs be, yt
they which carry this salt hither and thither, do give a savor unto them which
have it not, and to them which have it in a small measure, to conserve them,
and to them which have it sufficiently, to cause them to hold the same, and to
advise the^, that this savor does not diminish, nor perish: that is, to cause
by this word, that those which are secure in their sins, may feel them and
acknowledge the^, and those which have a feeling of the grace of God, that they
increase more and more in the one, and in the other, and they that are grown
to greatest perfection, may have care to keep ye knowledge which they have, in
detesting all their life long their wicked conversation, and studying with all
their heart and affection for integrity, The second reason.
and innocence. Secondly, we affirm that, somewhat to correct the disorders of
our age, as it were ouerflowing the whole world, the most fit and sovereign
receipt is, to procure a sufficient number of good preachers, because God in his
word does give them in charge to preach freely, not only to Artizans and
laborers, but also to kings and great Lords, so that they keep themselves
within the compass of their duty. We read in Deutronomy, Deuteronomy, 17, 19.
that The King should receive the law from the Priests, and read it, that he
may fear God, and that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren. And to
this effect, Iehoash the King of Judah, was taught by Iehoiada ye priest, not
only when he was little, but also when he was a great king, 2. King. 12.
he reprehended him when he saw it needful: as also the Prophets exhorted
and reproved kings very freely, without fear of their Majesty or
authority, as it is manifest by many very notable examples, which we will
recite in their places. This point also is worthy the consideration, which
makes much for our purpose, that Prophets and Priests were had in great
reverence amongst kings, that they governed the people for the most part, by
their counsel, as we read plainly in the book of Numbers, of Joshua the Great,
how he ruled his people by the advice of Eleazar ye priest: if this were
practiced at this day, Number. 1^, 22
it is very probable that such disorder and confusion in Kingdoms, should not
be seen, The third reason.
as now ordinarily may be perceived.

Thirdly, when in ancient time God would have any reformation to be made of
errors, abuses, and abominations of all kind of sin. He has devised no better
means to root up from the midst of the people, those sins and inormities
which then reigned and bare sway, but by using the ministry of this word. We
have notable examples, especially in the reign of Josias, in whose time the
pure service of God was established in Judah, and Israel, by means of the
reading of the law, and by the preaching of this word of God. For we read,
that Shaphan the Kings Chancellor, 2. King. 22.
having found the Book of the law which was almost lost in the times of the
wicked Kings, Manasses and others (who did degenerate to all idolatries, and
impiety) and that the good King Josias, beeng desirous to purge the Temple of
the Lord of the abominations of his predecessors, he caused the people to
be assembled: those that had charge to teach others (that is the Priests) read
the words of ye book of the law. The king and the people, perceiving that they
had not lived according to the precepts and instructions of the same, they rent
their garments, feeling the prick of their sins, they fasted and wept
unfeignedly: Afterward every one reformed himself, and made a protestation, that
thence forward they would serve the eternal god: some brake down the high
places, others profaned those things yt were dedicated to Camar, and to Baal,
their falls gods, some pulled down ye houses of harlots, others burnt the idols
and sprinkled their ashes upon the river. To be brief, the king and the people
sanctified themselves, and made a vow unto god, to follow afterward his
ordinances, and to turn away from the superstitious worship devised by the
brain of man. Let us come to another example, of which mention is made in
Nehemias. It is recorded, Nehe. 8.
that Nehemias did the like, beng sent from Artaxerxes the great, to build up
Jerusalem, (for it was a long time before destroyed, and brought to a most
miserable estate, the^ when ye people were carried away captive into Babylon) yt
all being in the greatest desolation that ever it was, as well for the
establishing of the service of God, as for the public government (seeing that
the people did abound with beastly ignorance, who cleaued to the gods of the
Gentiles, and polluted themselves with all their wicked behauior) Nehemias, I
say, assembled all the people, eue^ as one man. Esdras the priest read the book
of the law, before the congregation of men and women, and all them that were
capaple to understand. The priests that were with Esdras, gave intelligence
unto the people of the law, by ye same scripture. The people wept bitterly,
feeling themselves wounded with their inquity, they returned from their wicked
ways, and made a vow to serve the eternal God, with a pure and sincere heart.
And we may join unto this history ye which is written in the 2. book of the
Kings, 2. King. 17
where it is said, that the king of Ashur having dispeopled the country of the
inhabitants of the ten tribes, and brought strange nations thither, it came to
pass, that this barbarous people, living in that country wherein god was
accustomed to be served (but not knowing the manner of his service) God sent
Lions against them, who slew them, and tore them in pieces, whereat this poor
brutish people being maruellously astonished, and the king in like manner, after
he was advertised that God so distroyed this people, because they served him
not according to his laws and commandments, he gave commission that they
should send one of the Priests of the Jews, to the end that he might teach
the people to reverence the eternal God, according to his law: the which was
the most singular remedy, which was possible to cure the strange diseases with
which this poor people was so grievously tormented. What more? When Jesus
Christ came into the world for poor sinners, and not for the^ which thought
themselves just, as he says himself in the gospel, was there ever such gross
darkness, and barbarousnesse as was then upon all the face of all the earth?
The kingdom of Israel, was it not the^, as sometime the Prophet Azarias said
unto K. Asa, 2. Chro. 15.
without ye true god, without a priest to teach, and without law? Where was
the visible Church, but in Joseph and Marie, in Zacharias, the father of John
Baptist, and Elizabeth, and in a few other? What did Jesus Christ to disperse
these mists of ignorance, and to spread forth his heavenly light? He sent John
Baptist, to preach and teach the word of god, who was a Trumpet, to awaken the
world from the sleep of vices, who was his first forerunner and Herald in
his entrance into this world, who says, that He is the voice of him that
cries in the wilderness, prepare the way of the Lord, make his paths straight;
Afterward he came himself like a burning and consuming fire, by the sword of
his word, cutting in two, he dispelled the great clouds of filthy
ignorance, he brought to the knowledge of him, an innumerable multitude of
poor people overwhelmed in sins: And for this cause, speaking unto the
troops that followed him, he compared his doctrine to leaven, which he
understood by the Kingdom of heaven: showing by that, Math. 23
that as a little leaven being put into Meal, do by and by cause the same to
swell: so the doctrine of Jesus Christ, being sowed through the world, has
so increased in a short time, that the best part of the earth have had a
savor thereof: afterward he sent his Disciples, as his Posts, and
Messengers, throughout all Kingdoms, Countries, territories and provinces,
preaching this doctrine of salvation: that by a most wonderful providence of
God, within a few years, there was no nation so barbarous and savage, which
heard not of him, and a great part of all the nations which are in the world,
did so profit by this word, that they were drawn out of their perverse and
damnable lives, and guided in that right way which leads to everlasting life.

But some will object against that which I have spoken, after this manner: that
at this day there is to be found a sufficient number of learned Preachers,
endued with all graces requisite for their charge: An answer to an objection,
that may be made that there are sufficie^^ Preachers, but not true Preachers,
for they are diversely corrupted.
and therefore what needs that reformation, whereof here question is made?
Indeed we must confess, that (thanks be given to God) there be many, whom we
must acknowledge to be chose^ instruments, whose service god uses for the
advancement of his glory, and the salvation of his elect: but yet we must add
therewithal, that amongst all the^ that carry this fair name of a Bishop,
Pastor, or minister, many have only ye bare title, but they are not so indeed.
For (alas) how many are to be found that seek only their own particular
profit, and not the honor of our Savior Jesus Christ: Philip. 2.2.
and which are like unto them, of which S. Paul complains. And others, which
are covetous of dishonest gain, of which S. Paul gives warning so expressly
to Timothy and Titus to take heed. 1. Tim. 3 Tit. 1.
Which is the same against the which the Prophet Esaias cries out. On the other
side, how many be there which are already placed in this charge who gapeth
after nothing but the honors of this world, Esaias. 3
who are the followers of James and John the sons of Zebedeus, who being led
with ambition, demanded of Christ, that he would grant unto them, the one to
sit at his right hand, the other at his left, when he came into his Kingdom?
how many also be there which are ignorant, unlearned, and who came into this
calling by the window, that is, by favor, or by money, as many of ye priests,
which were not the sons of Leui, came to the priesthood by money, in the time of
ye wicked King Jeroboam, and those which were as fit to discharge that calling,
as a pezant (which has been always brought up amongst Oxen and kye) is to be
king. How many are to be found which are hypocrites, and counterfeits? who are
manifest conte^ners of God. Such be those of which the Prophet Jeremy
speaks, when he says: The Priests said not, where is the Lord? and they
that should minister the law knew me not, that is they disdained and despised
me. Moreover, there be some amongst them, who in stead of Preaching the word
of God sincerlie, do give themselves to contention, and profane questions,
whereof insueth great enuies, and mischeefes, of which Saint Paul complains.

1 Timothy 6.4.21
There be others which take singular pleasure, in speaking things pleasant to
men, as fables, and such like, of which Saint Paul makes mention. There be
others, which under the pretense of the Gospel, creep into houses, and lead
captive, simple women laden with sins, 2 Timothy 4.3 2 Tit. 3.6
and led with diverse lusts, which women are ever learning, and are never able
to come to the knowledge of the truth. There be others, which are seducers,
false teachers, and false prophets, like unto them, unto whom the Prophet
Jeremy does threaten utter destruction, because they do disperse the flock
of the Lord. To conclude, there be some which are filled withal impiety, and
by their sin, cause the people to fall as did the Priests Ophni, Iere. 14
and Phinees. There be some which have knowledge and understand the truth, yet
they dare not often bark, they be dumme dogs, as those were which the
Prophet Esaias do reprehend. There be others which have no conscience at al. 1 Samuel 2
Others there be which have good parts, who would serve greatly for the
advancement of Esaias. 56
the glory of god, if they were employed as they ought: yet nevertheless they
remain unfruitful, through their own idleness, and negligence. All this
border of vices, so twisted one within ye other, as priuet in a quick hedge,
are without doubt ye only lets which hinders the fruit of the preaching of
the word of God, delivered by such Pastors: For as the Pastors are the eyes by
which the people sees and perceives, their mouth by which they speak, the
ear by which they hear, and the judgment and counsel of which they do
depend, for the most part, if they be given to vice, and corrupted, their
infection does spread it self amongst them which are guided by the^. And as
sin does draw the wrath of god, his wrath, his curse, finding sin in all,
so ye curse of God is powered forth upon all. It may be gathered hereby, yt not
only we must have pastors, but also we must principally know what they are,
with what manners they are qualified, with what learning they are furnished. The
pore heathen being only enlightened with the relics of that light, which was
best in our nature, after sin has wisely said and put in practice, that when
one goes about to instruct a young child in human sciences, liberal arts,
and good manners, diligent advise must be taken, what masters and teachers he
provides for him, being as necessary for him that is to be instructed to have
a good master, as for the children to have a good father, and a good mother,
for even as children being borne and brought up by their parents, infected with
any vice, the same sin ordinarily does remain as it were imptinted and hid
in their children, when they are come to age: and the disorder and imperfection
of any schoolmaster, does remain rooted in him whom he teaches: we may say
then by a more strong reason, that it is very convenient and necessary, wisely
to consider, and to have a watchful eye to the behavior of them, of whom we
must be instructed. For if they be impure in their manners, burning with
covetousness, ambition, envy, hatred, rancor, given to drunkenness,
looseness, to an unchaste life, or such like, and in their doctrine be
heretics, scismatikes, and not of the true faith: their manner of life and
doctrine do shine also easily in us, who do naturally drink in more pleasantly
those potions which be venomous and empoisoned, then those which be good and
wholesome. Wherefore in the name of God, and by the guiding of his spirit, we
will set down in this treatise with arguments and reasons, as forcible as
possible may be drawn out of the holy scriptures, as well the manners and holy
life, which should shine in them, as the suffiencie of that learning, with
which they ought to be furnished, and especially the means whereby every one
ought to be prepared to this weighty charge: but it shall be declared in in
such manner, that all they which can practice that which we affirm, shall not
only see how they must be prepared, but also how they must enter into this
charge, and how in fear and trembling they ought to walk until they come to
the end of their race. And seeing that this is the only remedy to turn away
the fire of Gods wrath, which is kindled in the most part of the kingdoms of
the earth, the which as it is singular, so it may hardly be believed, that it
may be found, we will take it in hand more willingly and diligently, to show
how this composition may be made, and after, how it may have his due force and
operation, being applied to those diseases, which at this day bears sway.

CAAP. III. The true means by which preparation must be made to the holy
Ministry.
Behold then where we must begin to have all them well prepared unto this
charge, unto whom God has given any affection to desire the same. First on
the one side, a lively representation, must be set before the eyes of the
excellency of this calling: and on the other side, their own baseness and
vileness, that weighing the one with the other, and considering how unworthy and
incapable they are of such incomparable honor, unto which God has exalted
them, they may endeavor so much the more earnestly to make themselves fit,
and principally, to pray unto God with all the power of their soul, to give
unto them all those things which he knows to be necessary for them in the
administration of such a function. For if it be so, that Saint Paul, which was
a chosen vessel, when he thought upon his charge, he cried out, Who is
sufficient for these things? as though he would conclude, 2 Cor. 2.16
that none is worthy or sufficient, how much more all they which desire this
charge, which have not the tyth of those gifts which Saint Paul had, should
blush for shame, and being astonished in themselves, to be so honored of God,
to be employed in this calling, should walk in a greater carefulnes and fear
of God. Secondly, this may put them in mind of ye great difficulty of this
calling, which consists in these two principal points, first, yt they be
irreprehensible in their manners, and in all their life, that is, not touched
with any gross sins, as theft, murder, whoredom, or such like: secondly, that
they be endued with a measurable knowledge in the scriptures, as well to be
able to expound ye holy scripture to the people, as to defend the same against
the gainsaiers: and to this end those that desire this charge, must not think
that it is such a dignity, wherein they must receive nothing but honor, but
rather a burdensome charge, in which they must not be idle, but vigilant and
laborious, to have their hand always upon the plough, as it is said in a
common proverb, that by a continual travail, that thing may be attained
which is requisite and necessary for the discharge thereof. These two points
may very fitly be gathered out of S. Paul, 1. Tit. 3 Under the word
excellency or dignity, are comprehended all those notable titles with which
the scripture does set forth the ministry, under the word hard, all
difficulties.
seeing yt it is said, that He that desires the office of a bishop, desires a
good work: which is as much to say, as he desires also a work yt is painful
and full of trouble. And this is that which we commonly say, that those things
which are rare and excellent, are for the most part hard to attain unto.
Cicero in his first book of offices, would signify no other thing, when he
says, the more that any thing is hard, the more it is excellent. And in
another place, where he says, that Nature her self has inwrapped great
things within great difficulties. But to understand these two points more
easily, under each of the^ we comprehend all that which the scripture sets
down, touching dignity and labor: that is, under the name of dignity we
understand all those excellent titles, with which Pastors are adorned in the
word of God, the which titles appertained in ancient time, to the Prophets,
Priests, and Apostles: not that it is our meaning to say, that in all things
pastors be like unto prophets, priests, and Apostles, without any exception: we
reserve unto them that which was proper and peculiar unto themselves, and which
cannot be given unto them which now preach the word, as to the prophets to
tell of things to come, the which God by an especial privilege, has revealed
unto them by a wonderful manner: unto priests to offer sacrifice, and to
perform other ceremonies, which were commanded in the law: and to the
Apostles to be sent hither and thither, into many places, to make plain the
will of their master, and to do miracles, as they did, both for the
confirmation of the doctrine of the truth: but we do only attribute to the
Pastors that are now, all those excellent titles which do commend their
ministry, because they are their successors, in the publishing of the same
word, which also appertains unto them by right, because that the holy
scripture does honor them with the same titles in many places, as we shall
see in their place, that under dignity and excellency we put that they are
called, Mimisters of God, servants of god, and of Jesus Christ, Prophets, Me^
of God, Seers, Apostles, Evangelists, Doctors, Planters, Waterers, Dispensers
of the mysteries of God, Messengers, Fathers, Bishops, Salt of the earth, Light
of the world, a good Savor, finally: Angels, and Gods: all which titles we put
one after ye other, as they are more or less significant, and we will moreover
in the form of an exhortation, expound every title as well as we can, the
better to stir up all those to the performance of their duty, which bears
affection to the holy Ministry. Also under difficulty, we comprehend the great
travail and diligence which must be employed in that study, to do best good
in their charge, with most edifying: also all those troubles and afflictions,
which they usually suffer, that is, injuries, raylings, reproaches, dangers,
unto which they are often subject, during the whole course of their calling.
Let us speak then now of these two points, according to order, that is, as
Saint Paul teaches, 1 Timothy 3
that it is a worthy work: when he speaks thereof, he makes a little
preface, to make them more attentive, to whom he writes this Epistle, that
they might the rather consider, that he entreats there not of an ordinary or
common matter, but of a grave and serious thing, as greater cannot be imagined.
This is that which he touched in many of his Epistles, that always when he
enters into a matter of great consequence, to make the faithful to know, that
they should deeply consider that thing which he shows the^, as in the same
Epistle, teaching that Jesus Christ is the Savior and redeemer of the world:
before he says it, he uses this introductio^. This is a true saying, and by
all means worthy to be received, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of which I am chief. Also in the fourth Chapter of the same
Epistle, having said, That Godliness was profitable for all things, and that
it had the promises of this life present, and of that which is to come. He
adds the better to persuade, that this was a true saying, and by all means
worthy to be received: that is, that godliness had the promises both of this,
and of that other life. 2. Tim. 2
Also in the 2. Timoth. 2. speaking of suffering afflictions for the love of
Christ Jesus, and that he himself suffered all things for the elect sake,
that they might also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with
eternal glory. He adds, This is a true saying, for if we be dead with
him, we shall also live with him. And in many other places he uses the same
manner of teaching, the which is very profitable, principally for this reason,
rhat when we would maruailously move any body, then when we teach them some
point of doctrine, worthy the marking, and necessary to be used for diverse
uses, if we use after this manner a certain gentle insinuation, we profit much
more, then when we enter presently to the unfolding of the doctrine, without
any form of preparation, as if we handle any common matter. Therefore let us
conclude, that seeing that Saint Paul entering into the discourse of this
calling, so worthy and excellent, does make a notable Preface, to note as it
were by the way, the dignity and beauty of the same, that all they in whom
God has grafted this holy desire to dedicate themselves into it, should
think, and think again in themselves, what they take in hand: I mean, what
singular honor God does offer unto them, that they may take the more pain in
preparing themselves, and to be pricked forward thereunto, that they daily
set before their eyes those excellent titles, with which they are adorned in
the holy scripture: by the testimonies whereof, it is very convenient, first to
prove the same, and afterward to dilate upon them in the manner of an
exhortation.

CHAP. IIII. The proof by places of scripture of twenty two titles, which are
given to the Ministers of the word of God.
IN the first place they are called the Ministers of God, 1 Tit. 1
and of Jesus Christ. Paul a Minister of God, and an Apostle of Jesus Christ, 1
Cor. 1 Ephesians, 1. Ehp. 4.
according to the faith of Gods elect. Secondly, they are called the Servants
of God, and of Jesus Christ. They are called, Genesis 20
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, and Doctors, but because first we
make mention of those titles which be less significant, 1 Samuel, 9
we set down, that thirdly they are called Prophets. Abraham was a Prophet.
The fourth title is, that they are called Seers, as we may read. When Israel
went to enquire an answer of God, they went to the house of the Seer. And there
Samuel is called a Seer. In the same book of Samuel it is said: That the Acts
of King David both first and last, are written in the books of Samuel the
Seer, and in the volum of Gad the Seer. In the 1. Chr. 21. and the 2. Chr. 9 1
Chro. 21 2 Chro. 9
In the visions of Iddo the Seer. And in the same book the 12. Chapter. Iddo
the Seer. In the 29. mention is made of John the son of Hanani the Seer, who
reproved Iehoshaphat in that he went with Achab. The fifth title, that they are
called Apostles. The 6. Evangelists. The 7. Doctors. The 8. Pastors. The 9.
they are called Planters. The 10. VVaterers, of the word of God. As S. Paul
says: Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, but God gives the increase. The
11. they are called fellow workers, or Gods laborers. The 12. the Disposer of
the Mysteries of God: Let a man so think of us as of the Ministers of
Christ, and disposers of the secrets of God. The 13. Messengers, or
Ambassadors.

Now then are we Ambassadors for Christ, as though god did beseech you through
us, we pray you in Christ's stead, that you be reconciled to god. The 14. they
be called Laborers in the Harvest, as in Math. Whereas Christ seeing a great
company following him, he said unto his disciples: Surely the Harvest is
great, but the laborers are but few, pray ye therefore, the Lord of the
harvest, to send forth laborers into his harvest.

The 15. Fathers. When the King of Israel had in his power the army of the King
of Syria, he asked of Elisha the Prophet as touching them, saying: My Father,
shall I smite them? shall I smite them? Again, I write not these things to
shame you, but as my beloved children I admonish you. For though you have ten
thousand instructors in Christ, yet have you not many Fathers, for in Christ
Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. The 16. Elders, as in the 20. of
the Acts, where we may read, that when S. Paul sent for the Elders whom he
exhorted in their duty. 1 Timothy 6
And also: The Elders that rule well, are worthy of double honor. 1 Pet. 5
In Peter. The Elders which are among you, I beseech, which also am an Elder,
and a witness of the sufferings of Christ. 1 Timothy 3 T^. 1
The 17. Bishop. If any desire the office of Bishop, he desires a worthy
work. The 18. Math. 5 Math. 6
The salt of the earth, so Christ calls his Disciples. The 19. The Light of
the world. The 20. A sweet Savor. We are unto God, the sweet savor of
Christ in the^ that are saved, and in them that perish, to the one we are the
savor of death, unto death and to the other, the savor of life, unto life.
The 21. They are called, Angels. The Pastors of the 7. Churches, are called
Angels in the Revelation of S. John. The 22. and the last, they are called
Gods. Exodus
For it is said, when Moses refused to go into Egypt, for the deliverance of
the people, God joined Aaron unto him, and said unto him, That he should be his
spokesman, and he shall be as thy mouth, and thou shall be to him as God.
Again: Behold I have made thee Pharaoh his God. That is, I have given thee
power against Pharaoh, and thou shall be as a God to a weak man. Speaking in
this manner unto him, to have all fear of the Tyrant to be quite taken away.

CHAP. V. How every one that affects the ministry, should make profit of
each title, which the scripture gives to Pastors.
NOw seeing that we have made proof of the titles, let every one
diligently consider, what they ought to learn which desire this calling.
First of all, in that they are called the Ministers of God, they must learn
two things. First, that they be of honest conversation: Secondly, that they be
endued with a competent measure of knowledge. As concerning their manners, what
they must be, and what God requires at their hands, let them set before
them, that most excellent place of scripture, written in Leuitieus, where the
behavior of the Leuits are described: Leuit. 21. What the title of a minister
teaches them, desires the same.
Whosoever of thy seed in their generations has any blemishes, shall not
prease to offer the bread of his God. For whosoever has any blemish shall not
come near: as a man blind, or lame, or that has a flat nose, or that has any
misshapen member, or a man that has a broken foot, or a broken hand, or is
crook backed, or bleare eyed, or has a blemish in his eye, or be scuruie, or
scabbed, or has his stones broken. For this place is a true table to behold
what Ministers ought to be: but we allege not this place to this end, that
the imperfections of the body, whereof there mention is made, may keep back
at this time those from coming to the ministry, which desire the same, as it
hindered the Leuits from being priests: for the reason for which God would
have his Priest without blemish, was because he rep^esented the person of
Christ, who should be the immaculate lamb in that reconciliation, which should
be made by him, betwixt God and us: but now seeing that Christ Jesus has made
an end of the ceremonies of the laws here mentioned, we which are under the
Gospel are no more bound to the outward observation, yet notwithstanding the
substance of the same, is to be applied to all those that are placed in the
calling of the ministry, that as in those times, the lame, broken and
disfigured, were kept back from the Priesthood: so at this day, understanding
by the faults of the body, the spiritual blemishes of the soul. Those that
be fools, ignorant, wicked, ungodly, should not be admitted to this charge:
for ignorance, wickedness, and ungodliness, and many other vices copartners
unto these, does make men more filthy and deformed, then the imperfection of
the body. And if these corporal imperfectio^s did keep them from the
Priesthood which greedily desired ye same, how much more those which are,
blind, lame, maimed, and monstrously deformed in their soul, may not, nor
ought not, in any sort be admitted to the ministry. They therefore that aspire
unto this worthy work, must employ all their endeavor to furnish themselves
with the fear of God, piety, knowledge of the truth, and an holy zeal to the
setting forth of Gods glory, and other such like Christian virtues, to the
end, that being thus adorned with the graces of the spirit, they may desire
this calling with a good conscience, and embrace the same, when it shall be
offered them, and discharge it as becomes the true Ministers of Christ.
Concerning the second point, which is of the graces of God, which are
requisite to be in them, the better to divide the word of God aright: they
ought to be put in mind, that seeing that Pastors be instruments ordained
by God, to beget children in his Church by the seed of the word, as Saint
Paul shows, 1. Cor. 4 Gal. ^. Phil. 10
they must take pains to procure a sound and true understanding of the word
of God, and furnish themselves with a kind of dexterity in applying the same
to his proper use, that being thus enabled, they beget children unto Christ.
But they that are destitute of these helps, ought to abstain altogether,
least they being blinded in error themselves, should draw others into the same
danger of whom they take charge. They likewise which are false teachers, ought
not to intrude themselves into this calling, for fear least the people being
seduced by them, should together with their leader, most lamentably endanger
the salvation both of body and soul. Moreover, Pastors being compared to a
householder, Mat. 23
they that desire to be Ministers, ought to know, even as the duty of a good
householder is to govern his house in good order, to provide things necessary
for the maintenance thereof, so they which desire this charge of the
ministry, they ought to cast before hand, that for the faithful execution
of this function, they must have in a readiness through long Meditation, a
treasure of learning, from which they may fetch diverse and large instruction,
to use them as they shall see occasion. But being unprovided of this treasure,
when as they should be before hand, they go backward, and so it comes to
pass, that the flock which is under their leading, is in danger to perish by
famine, of which they being guilty, they must expect no less then the just
judgment of God upon them: to avoid the which, it is high time for them to
be diligent in doing their duty, that discharging the same in some
commendable manner, they may be as acceptable to God, as those are displeasaunt
unto him which are ignorant, and slothful in their vocation. Second title.
Servant of God.
When they are called servant of God, and of Christ, by that they may know,
that even as it is the duty of a good and wise servant, not to serve his
Master negligently, but to love him, to seek his credit as much as possibly
he may, to provide wisely and faythfullye things necessary for his
Masters house, and take heed principally to dispose in such sort all his
business, as is requisite and behoouefull. They also that study for those
things that be expedient and necessary to teach the people of God, must
apply themselves to every ones capacity, and in one word promote the
work of God; that is, the salvation of souls, and the good of the Church.

And because that the holy work is inco^parably of more value, and precious,
then the work of servants that are under masters in this world, a far
greater knowledge, labor, and experience is required of them which has the
government of this sacred business. And by this reason they should be more
stirred up to perform their duty, by considering themselves to be fellows
to the Prophets, Apostles, and greatest servants of God (which had particular
graces to themselves) namely Moses, who for honor sake, Apoc. 15
is called the servant of God, and Jesus Christ himself the son of God, who
being desirous to fulfill the will of his Father, came down into the world
for the salvation of his elect, Esaias. 41 Matthew. 12
was called the servant of God, although he was the chief of the Prophets,
Apostles, and servant of God. In that they are called Prophets, Third title
of Prophets.
they ought diligently to consider, that as they which had this name given unto
them in old time, were men endued with singular graces of the Spirit of God,
that God honored them so much, that he familiarly revealed unto the^ those
things which he would have the people to observe in his service, and to declare
his thre^tnings to the wicked and rebellious, and also to teach the^ that obeyed
his will, what was most fit and convenient to be done, and to walk worthy of
that honor, unto which God has exalted them: not that we vnder^tand them to
be like the Prophets in all things: we refer a particular and extraordinary
vocation unto two sorts of Prophets, which the scripture sets down, whereof
the first did ask of the mouth of God, when the people was brought to some
extremity, or those which did declare that which God had revealed unto them, at
that time, when it pleased God to have it made manifest unto them, not that
they spoke unto God upon all occasions what they thought good, but they
received the words of God always, when it pleased him to have openly declared,
and those are the Seers of whom we have spoken heretofore. Three sorts of
prophets
The second sort was of them which had charge to interpret the law unto the
people dispersed here and there, after that the sacrifices of the law were
ceased, unto whom a several province was assigned, of this sort mention is
made. But our meaning is, Es. 1. Io. 4 Ezech 1 Aba. Agg. 1. Zach. 1.
that forasmuch as they are the servants of God, to declare his word, where
they were placed, that they should also study with all diligence to frame
themselves to this so honorable a calling: above al, to understand the deep and
hidden secrets of ye tword, to be able to declare the^ to others, to profitable
edification, that they may bring forth some effect. The third sort of prophets
which the scripture proposes, be thos^ which have received the gift of
expounding the word of God, and of applying the same unto every man's
capacity and quality, having respect to time and place. Of this sort be
those of whom mention is made in the thirteenth of the Acts, That there were
in Antiochia some Prophets and some Doctors. Act. 13
And we read, that there were appointed in the Church, some Prophets, that
is, those that had received the gift of expounding of the Scripture. In which
sense, 1. Cor. 11 Ephesians. 4 1. Cor. 14
Saint Paul uses this word, to prophecy, to apply, and make use of doctrine,
to exhortation, edification, consolation. Follow after love, and covet
spiritual gifts, and rather that ye may prophecy: that is to say, to
declare the word of God to the edification of the Church. And this word
Prophecy, Romans 12.
is taken for this holy exercise. Seeing then we have gifts that are diverse,
according to the grace that is given unto us, whether we have Prophecy, let us
Prophecy, according to the proportion of faith: that is, let us interpret the
scripture according to that gift which God has given us. 1. These.
And in that sense Saint Paul speaks, Despise not Prophesying. Fourthly, they
are called Seers, which name is given unto the^ in the scripture, to give the^
to understand that they should see the will of god, who has bestowed upon the^m
eyes and light, to behold his secrets, and high mysteries, and afterward to
make them known to others, as the duty of their charge requires. They also
that desire to be such, must call to mind, how God honors them: the
better to make themselves fit for this calling, to serve God sincerely, not
rashly to intrude themselves, but with Christian humility, accompanied with an
holy zeal of his glory: when Kings, Princes, and great Lords do call us to
their houses, to show vnte us that which is most dear and precious unto them,
or to impart unto us their secrets, we think our selves to be in an happy
case: yet many times their favor is but a wind, and breeds an affliction
of the mind, because we stand in such fear of loosing their good will. How
much more ought they to be careful, who have consecrated themselves to the
holy ministry, to keep that favor, which the King of all Kings has
vouchsafed them, in revealing unto them his marvelous secrets, which are
pleasant to be known, and nothing dangerous to be opened to others: but
contrariwise, God does communicate them, to be imparted to others, which are
desirous of the knowledge thereof. When our secrets are discovered, and made
known to others, we are grieved thereat, and many times it causes us great
hurt: but it is otherwise with God when we reveal his secrets, wherewith he
makes us acquainted: we do advance his glory, and procure his favor the
more. In man's body there is nothing more dear then the apple of the eyes, and
of purpose God has given unto us nothing so precious as that: for although all
the parts of our body be most excellent, that the great Philosophers being
astonished at the maruailous workmanship of them, have confessed that this
work could not be from man, but that it was divine: but of all the rest, the
eyes are the principal parts, because they are the guides of the other
members, and without which men are as miserable as Polyphemus was, when his one
eye was put out. Even so, seeing that in the body of the Church, the Pastors
be the eyes, and the light of the same, they that desire to be such eyes, they
ought not only with great care and diligence, to get this light, but having
gotten it, charitably to prefer, and daily increase the same, to enlighten
them that are in darkness, and breefely to take heed, that it be not
diminished and blemished in them, because that if it be quenched or darkened
in them which desire to be, or be already Seers, it is to be feared, that it
will be the cause of as much mischief, as it would have been of goodness,
when others are directed by that light. But how comes it to pass, that they
come not only to be bleare eyed, but darkness, and blindness it self?
This happens when they are puffed up with pride, with carnal opinions, and
vain fantasies, with which they suffer themselves to be led, and lead with
them all those that hearken unto them, unto their own destruction. Hitherto
may also be added, that if those that be ignorant, be not kept back from
this charge, it will fall out by them, as it does by those that has badde
eyes, and having a desire to draw near unto the Sun, are offended by the
light thereof, and in danger of loosing their sight altogether: and that which
is more to be feared, through their negligence, (which being unfit,
intrudeth themselves into this charge) they do commit a double fault: that is
to say, in that they overthrow themselves, and others guided by them: that
they deserve a double punishment: because of their want of experience, they
know not how to govern the flock of GOD, the which they lead by Brambles,
and Briers, and through desert places, in stead of fair ways. Finally, let
us conclude, that these two points may stir up to the performaunce of
their duties, that will be Sheepheards, first the brightness of that clear
light, which they ought to carry: secondly, the indignation and wrath of God,
which they heap upon their own head, if they approach unprepared, and
unfurnished, of those graces which are altogether necessary for that calling.
Fifth title, Men of god
Let us come then unto the fifth, which is, Men of God. Wherein we may note,
that this title does seem more expressly to commend unto us their dignity,
and excellency, and also by this, they may the more lively be pricked
forward to frame themselves to the practice of their duty in this calling.
For the holy Scripture when it would signify something that is excellent, or
when it goes about to attribute a certain praise to some especial man, it
uses the same manner of speech. As for example: When it sets down a man
valiant in the war, it calls him, A man of war, as, The Lord is a man
of war. Again, Exodus 25
All her men of war shall be cut off in that day. Also a notable man is
called a man of renown, Iere. 49 Exodus 27 Iocl. 3 Dan. 2 Numb. 16 1. Chron. 5.
as it is said, There were Giants, which were men of renown. Also, Men of
strength, Men of valor. And when wicked men are meant, they are termed Men of
Beliall, whereby is noted the greatest wickedness. Also it calls, Men of
death, those which are worthy of death. Men of blood, Psalm. 26
those which are bloody minded. In like manner, Ministers being honored with
this title, Men of God, That is, to show, that this charge does represent a
person more divine then humane. They might as aptly be called, Sons of men,
to note, that they were the most rare and worthy amongst men: but when God
will have his holy and reverent name of man, to make known the love and
familiarity, that those which bear such names, have with God, and that that
estimation which they have with him, should be of force as nothing more to
incite them which desire this calling, having such a title of glory, and
honor. For this as much in effect, as his domestical favorites: unto whom
he discloseth even the very secrets of his heart. What man is so simple, or
abject, who will not think himself greatly honored, to be in the service of
any Prince, or great Lord, although it be but an inferior place? How does he
look aloft, who has authority and credit under his Lord, and is favored of
him? And being proud of this vain honor, with what cheerfulness, and
willingness does he serve his Lord? What does he omit whereby he may gratify
him? What then ought they to do, which have this honor, to be employed in
the service of God, to be so preferred in his house, that they have not the
name of a base servant, but such a name, as imports the chief rowme of
account? What ingratitude is in them, who abuse any ways this singular favor?
and what punishment is he worthy of, that forgets his duty? We conclude
then, the fear which they ought to have of being justly punished, if they
fail in the duties of their calling, and that degree of honor unto which God
has exalted them, ought to stir them up greatly with all industry and
diligence, to apply themselves unto all those things which may please GOD,
who is their true Master, and sovereign Lord. We set for the sixth, that they
are called Apostles: 6. Apostles 7. Evangelists. 8. Pastors. 9. Doctors.
for the seventh, Evangelists: for the eight, Pastors: for the ninth,
Doctors. And that they are called Prophets, by Saint Paul in the fourth to
the Ephesians, we will say nothing: for it is plainly enough laid open
before.

And as concerning these four titles which are here joined together, we will
expound them all in one, and show what they ought to learn, who will exceed
them in their places. Generally, they are to observe, that God has given
diversity of graces unto them, to some more, to some less, as he knew it to
be expedient for the good of the Church: that is, that those which were
Apostles (which he put first) received greater abundance of spiritual gifts,
then the Evangelists (which were after them) who had a calling a little
inferior to that of the Apostles. But the better to understand what the one
and the other were, we must speak of each of them severally. The Apostles
were men tried, and chosen, whom God endued with most heavenly graces, and
elected them in a sovereign decree of honor: such were the twelve Apostles,
unto which number Saint Paul was after received. Next were the Evangelists,
because their charge did draw nearest to the Apostles, but they were unlike
unto them in degree of dignine. As concerning Pastors, and Doctors, many
think that it was but one office: but according to the judgment of Calvin,
they be two: who says in his Commentary upon this place of Scripture, that
Pastors be those, unto whom is committed the care of a certain flock, unto
whom also the name of a Doctor may not be given in some sort, because that the
Doctors are those which are ordained as well to make fit Pastors, as to teach
the whole Church. Let this the^ be diligently marked, of all them yt intend the
profeshon of the Ministry, to take heed of these two extremities: the first
is, that neither being Doctors, nor Pastors, that is, having no gifts in any
measure, to exercise this holy calling, that they ought not to go about to
intrude themselves. The other is, that although they have some gifts for the
execution of this charge, yet they must daily learn to know their
weakness, to the end, that by the knowledge thereof, they may be humbled
more and more: that when they shall perceive their fellow brethren and
companions, to excel them in the knowledge and understanding of the Scripture,
and of other sciences, that they reverence them, and give honor unto them, as
unto Vessels which God has preferred before them: and above all, that they be
free from envying them. And having some opinion of themselves, they must not
think that they do surpass them, but that they acknowledge with humility to
be inferior unto them: and let them consider, that if they be not Apostles,
yet they are Evangelists, and that although others go before them in gifts, yet
nevertheless, that they are those whom it has pleased God to appoint to set
forth his glory: and that although others have received more, yet they may be
as profitable, according to that measure of riches which GOD has bestowed upon
them. But if it comes to pass, that those which are not equal in gifts,
shall suffer themselves to be carried away with envy, which is very familiar
unto them, who are drunken with a vain and imaginary sufficiency, they will
cause more harm and mischief in the Church of GOD, then those will do good,
who being furnished with all things necessary, are promoted to this charge.
Breefely, seeing that God knows it to be profitable for his Church, it has
been and now is, his will and pleasure, that there should be men endued
with diversity of graces, they that have less then others, should content
themselves with that they have received, and endeavor to increase them: that
is, to follow them who have more then themselves, being touched with an holy
jealousy. And those which have received more, they must take heed to employe
them as they ought, knowing that if they abuse the same, they must render an
accounte unto him that has distributed the same liberally unto them, for the
edification of his Church. Let us come to the tenth, 10. Planters 11.
VVaterer. 12. Laborers.
the eleventh, and the twelfth, that is, Planters, VVaterers, and Laborers,
the which in like manner we join together, because that they signify as it
were one thing. Behold then the fruit which we must gather of them of whom we
speak: that is, that even as when laborers do manure their land, and order
it according to the season, and as those that keep vineyards do dress their
vines, to the end that they may have plenty of fruit, so those that desire
to have the guiding of the Church of God, ought advisedly to consider, that
they be sufficiently provided for the government of the same: above all, to be
able to instruct and teach, in plucking up by the roots the brambles and
thorns which are very thick, weeding out as much as may be, the cockle,
which grows in great plenty with the good corn, and to cause it to bring
forth good and wholesome fruits, according to the expectation of his Lord:
and that they take heed, that through their negligence, it brings not forth
bastard and wild Grapes, in steed of good and pleasant fruit. A simple
husbandman, or some other ignorant labourer, will take all pains that he can
to reap the profit of his ground: what ought then the laborers of the
Church of GOD to do in the field of God? Is it a thing to be suffered, that
either by their negligence it be marred, or by their insufficiency the
profit thereof be kept back? Therefore after the manner of laborers, they
that desire this calling, they ought principally to endeavor night and day to
make themselves fit for the same. Secondly, to set the good plant of the
word of God, to water it in good time, that it may bring forth fruit in
abundance, and when the time of the harvest and gathering is come, the
laborers may rejoice, and cheefely the expectation of the Master of the
Vinyarde and of the field, may be satisfied, and have occasion to praise
them, to whom he has committed the ordering of his ground, that they have
dealt faithfully: even as Saint Paul, who calls himself and his fellow
laborers, Planters and VVaterers, but it was GOD that gave increase to his
holy work.

Let us go forward to the thirteenth, in that they are called laborers with
GOD, Ministers are called laborers with God.
this is, to give them to understand, that honor which GOD gives unto them
more particularly. For seeing that God can do his own work himself, who is
so simple, that does not greatly wonder at so infinite bounty? Verily, it is
so much the more to be maruailed at, that we being full of sin, are
altogether unworthy to come near unto him, not only to be the chief
stones which should be employed in the building of his Church, but not
worthy to be the least, be it never so ragged and vnhewed, until he
squareth us, to make us fit for his holy building. And not only he
contententh himself with that, but he exalts us even so far, that we are
called his fellow laborers. Alas, who is it amongst all them that addict
themselves to the study of the Ministry, that by the conceit of this
merciful kindness, is not ravished with admiration? And being thus
astonished, do not strive with all his power, to acknowledge this so singular
goodness, and plainly confess, that all that he works with GOD, proceeds
not from his own free will, as some does imagine, but that all comes from
GOD, and that he is nothing else but an instrument whom GOD stirs up by
his Spirit, to do his will. When the Scriuener holds the hand of the
Child whom he teaches to write, the Scholar cannot well attribute the
thing written, to himself, but to his Master which guided his hand: but the
Master, for the better encouragement of his Scholar, may say, that he did
write the same. Even so Pastors, they are nothing in the work of the Lord
but instruments, which are guided according to his will: but when they shall
perceive themselves so honored of GOD, what ingratitude is it, if they do
forgette and abuse this incomparable honor? Who is it amongst men, that being
of an inferior degree, shall not perceive himself greatly to be esteemed, if
he be called into the company of some Noble Lord, and that this great
Prince will not attempt any thing, before he has made him acquainted
therewith? and also will attribute unto him part of the glory of his noble
acts and famous exploytes which he has done, although he has done
nothing, or less then nothing, what unthankfulness should there be in such
an one, if he would not make a vow of perpetual duty unto such a Lord,
and strive as much as possibly he can, to please and gratify him?

The unthankfulness of them whom GOD has called to the holy Ministry,
should be very great, if they should be so far gone, as to forgette that
goodness and title of singular honor, with which he has adorned them.
Therefore, such ought to pray unto God, to give unto them that grace, so to
think of this honor, that the remembrance thereof may be a prick unto
them, to stir them to be diligent in the discharge of duty. The fourteenth
is, that they are called Dispencers Ministers be called dispensers of the goods
of God.
of the mysteries of GOD: this title may teach them two things: the first, that
they be faithful in distributing the goods and riches which they have
received of God, they must take heed that they be not despised of them whom
they teach: for this comes to pass, the word of God also which they
deliver, shall be despised, and God himself: their Ministry shall be as it
were unprofitable, which is one of the greatest miseries that may befall them:
because, that even as by the execution of their charge, Gods glory is
advanced, so by this means it shall be diminished, for which they shall be
countable before God.

To the end then that they fall not into this inconvenience, they must watch
night and day, to prepare themselves to do their duty. The other is, that
they fall not as it were, into the contrary extremity, that they regard not
too much to be praised of the simple people, who sometimes for want of
judgment, when they perceive some one to make a great show in preaching, and
to have gotten the favor of many, they by and by imagine, that they be men
come down from Heaven, and seeing that this cannot be corrected in the common
sort, they must beware that they give not place to these flying opinions, to
cause them thereby to wax proud, and to be puffed up. But they ought to
remember, that they are only stewards, and dispensers of the wealth of God,
and not giuers, and distributers of that which is their own, and when the time
shall come, they must give an account of their stewardship, unto him which has
placed them in that charge, of whom they shall be rewarded as they shall be
found faithful, or unfaithful. Finally, considering that if a Monarch, or King
in this world, have abased and pulled down some one of his Servants, who
having charge of the dispensing of the goods of his house, have so much
forgotten himself, that he thought them to be his own: how will God when he
pleases, handle them, if they do not contain themselves in all modesty
within the compass of their charge? Let us come to the 15. that they are
called Ambassadors, Ministers are called Ambassadors.
and Messengers: what learn they by this? that even as when Princes sends
their servants into foreign and strange countries about their affairs, they
send not ordinarily those which they think to be unfit, and insufficient to
dispatch their business, but those which are of undoubted ability: those
likewise that are sent, do endeuonr by all means they can, to make their
Embassage to have happy success. The Kings their masters wills, and makes
it known, that they will have them to be regarded as their own persons, that
if they be dishonored, they take the dishonor to themselves, they are
incensed, and they take just occasion of revenge, even as David revenged
himself upon King Hamon, for that shameful injury he had done unto his
Servant, in causing their beardes to be shaued, and their Garments to be
cut: so in like manner, all they that be messengers of the sovereign King
of all Kings, to deliver his word unto all sorts of people, they ought not to
spare any labor, to accomplish woorthilie the contents of their commission,
that by the happy execution thereof, they may promote in great measure, the
work of their Master: And seeing that it is his pleasure, that they should
be honored as himself, as he says in the Gospel (he that receives you,
receives me) they then, being moved with this incomparable honor, to take
more courage and alacrity to please him.

Ministers of reconciliation.
Let us join the other title of excellency very like unto this, which is
the 16. rhat they are called, Ministers of reconciliation: the meaning whereof
is, that as it is meet, that they which are appointed to make peace, and cease
contention betwixt two or three, or a multitude of men, should be well spoken,
and to bring forcible reasons to persuade, and apply them to the purpose, that
they may thereby cure the bitterness of the heart on both sides, and join them
together in a firm band of love: even so it is much more expedient, that
those which are intercessors, and mediators betwixt God and men, should be
prompt and ready to work this effect: and it is necessary that they be wise,
prudent, discreet, advised, endewed with good precepts and instructions,
drawn out of the word of God, and other godly Authors, that by their great
wisdom and exquisit learning, they may by the grace of God, restore poor
sinners (who have broken in all points the league of allyaunce which God has
made with them) to the favor of God again. And that they do study with all
dexterity agreeable to their calling, that when they pray unto God, they may
make an atonement betwixt God and the people, in the administration of their
charge, according to those means which he harh ordained in his holy word:
And because this is very profitable, they must labor to enrich themselves,
with all things necessary for the exercise of this office, of so great
importance. Let us go to the other titles which are full of weight and
authority. The 17. they are called Fathers, Ministers called Fathers.
that as a good and wise Father, to whom God has given children, he takes
pain to bring them up, and to instruct them, whiles they are in their young
and tender age, in those virtues, which should altogether shine in them: when
they are come to riper years, to frame them to other higher sciences, to join
with their knowledge, honesty of manners, and so to breed them according to
their natural inclination. Those also which are desirous of the calling of the
Ministry, ought to beware, not only to have the bare name, and want the
effect, that is, to be unfit to teach the people: insufficient to beat back
heresies, which are oftentimes engendered in the midst of the Church of God:
but that they be plentifully instructed in each faculty, that making
themselves known indeed, they may be feared of them who appose themselves
against that doctrine of which they are defenders, and may be esteemed of the
people, so much, or rather more, then a wise Father is of his family. If they
be young in age, they must endeavor to be old in knowledge, in holiness of
life, in moderation of their manners, in gravity in counsel, and ripeness of
all their actions, that being compassed about with this fair border of
virtues, they may supply not only their defect of years, but that they go
beyond, as much as may be, the old men themselves, with hoarie hairs, and
white beards.

The 18. they are called Bishops, to watch without ceasing, over their flock:
to teach diligently by the word of God, to be always in the watch Tower, to
see how every thing stands, not to be corrupted that if errors, abuses, and
perverse, and heretical doctrines will enter into the Church, they must show
their diligence in chasing them away. To conclude, that they be always in the
fore, and rerewarde, for the entire conservation of the people, whom God has
committed unto their charge. For this word Bishop, in the Greek tongue,
signifies in English, so much in effect. But because we shall speak more
largelye thereof in the discourse of the difficulties of the Ministry, we will
content our selves with this, for this time.

The ninteenth title. They are called by Christ, The salt of the earth, Salt of
the earth.
to teach them, that as there is nothing in this life of greater use then salt,
amongst the effects whereof which are infinite, there be two principal: the
first is, that it gives a taste to all meats, with which our poor body is
nourished: the second is, that it preserves them by the natural force thereof
from corruption and putrefaction: so they in like manner, by their wholesome
doctrine, which they ought to teach, do keep in their duty those which are
enlightened by that heavenly b^^ghtnesse, and who have knowledge of salvation in
Jesus Christ alone, to the end they do not degenerate, or slide away, neither
from that truth which they pr^f^sse, neither from their godly life, but
persist, and go forward more and more in their good course. Moreover, by the
salt of this doctrine, they must cause a wicked life to be made known, and
all sin and profaneness to be discovered, and make ungodly men to feel
the sharpness and eagerness of the same, to procure in them an hatred of
their sins, to detest them ever afterward, and to dedicate themselves to an
holy, and Christian conversation. But let us observe, as they are the cause of
reformation for the most part, or at least wise may be so called, by reason of
the salt of doctrine, (by which they must season as well them which oftentimes
are awaked out of their vices, to the end that they sleep not in security,
as those that many times do snort so strongly, that they feel nothing more,
then they which are sick of the Leprosy) which they must carefully be
advised above all things, whether they have or no: afterward, that they keep
it safe, whether it be clean and pure: I mean, that it be not defiled with
any filthiness of false doctrine: and moreou^r, to look whether they have
sufficient. And finally, being assured so have all this, that they keep it
in the natural pu^^tie, taking care that it be not marred or spilt, that is,
that they ought diligently to countergarde the integrity and purity of their
salt: for if that come to pass, even as there is nothing of such force, for
the good and salvation of man, then those which have the government of this
salt: So there is nothing more hurtful then they, if they once suffer
them^elues to be soyled and polluted, with false and Pharisaicall doctrines,
and defile themselves with the uncleanly conversation of the wicked. For the
matter hangs upon them in al^, and through all: that is, as salt is of such
use, that there is nothing more, for the necessity of this life, so long as it
remains in his natural purity: but if it be corrupted, there is nothing
be it never so badde, but that is better then that: Many things being
spoiled, either serve for the fire, or for the dungue-heape, whereof comes
some profit: but salt being corrupted, it does not only serve for nothing,
but it hurts that which would be profitable, that it shall not prosper, if it
be cast upon it: Experience shows the same, if it be cast upon the dungue,
it makes the same barren. But those that has the charge of the Ministry,
do carry this salt of Doctrine, if through their own fault, they suffer it to
corrupt they do not only become unprofitable, but also do great hurt. Salt
being corrupted, hurts that which it touches any manner of way, but the
damage which is procured by such men is incredible. Wherefore without any
other form of exhortation, let every man stay his soul in the deep
consideration of this thing, that he may sensibly perceive the greatness of
this charge of the Ministry, and that they also which are desirous to aspire
unto the same, ought to think, and to think again, what they take in hand,
and having enterprised the same, to exercise it in all purity of conscience,
and in fear and trembling. Let us come to the twenty, and see what
instruction we may draw out thereof, in that they are called, The light of the
world. Hereby we may gather, that as nothing in the world is to be compared to
the beauty, and unspeakable profit of the light, so there is nothing that can
match the excellency of the Ministry: for even as the Sun does inlighten with
his most clear b^ightnesse the face of the earth, and as the lamp, or candle
in the house, do give light to all that are therein, so Pastors ought by the
shining brightness of the doctrine which they carry, first in their own
person to give light unto others, to be an example unto them in all virtue,
that they may strive to be like unto them. Secondly, they are to know, that it
is their duty, to cause this their brightness to shine in obscure and dark
places, that they instruct the ignorant who are plunged in their thick
darkness, and show unto them the way of life, and salvation, exhorting them
without ceasing to repentance, those which have gone astray, and whch love
better to follow the course of the blind world, then to walk in the paths of
the children of light. To conclude, that they hold forth as much as may be in
all places, this burning light, as it is imparted unto them for this purpose.
But let us add, that as God has bestowed it upon them, to disperse it in all
places, as it appertains, if they do it not, they make it unprofitable, in
which they sin greatly, and provoke God against them. If they suffer the same
to be darkened, or put out, let them think that they are worthy to be cast
themselves into utter darkness, because of the swarm of sins that they
procu^e by their default. If any take upon him, to guide by night a troop of
men through the woods, or mirie places, with a Lantern or any other light, if
the candell goes out, and they which altogether trusted to the same, be
ignorant of the way, it comes to pass, that one hitteth his head against a
tree, another falls, another stumbleth upon a block, and hurts himself,
and they that are in the dirtie way, are in great misery, and affliction. What
calamity then shall be, if he unto whom the light of salvation is given to
guide others, let the same die away by negligence? how can it otherwise be,
but sometimes one, and sometimes another, must wander out of the right way, in
a strange manner? And that many of them which ought to be guided by him, are in
continual peril, and danger. Wherefore all they that feel in themselves, a
certain desire to carry this light, they must remember that it is their part
to walk in the same themselves, and consider, that if they go astray, be it
never so litttle, a great offense is given to the Church, in stead of edifying
ye same without ceasing, beause that their faults, be they never so small,
they are presently known unto them which have a sharper sight then the common
people: to this end Christ said to his Apostles, that They were as a City
set upon an hill. But if it be hard, nay, impossible to hinder the sight of
a City or Castle which is situated upon the top of an Hill, it is as
difficult a matter that Ministers can hide their faults, but that they will be
perceived when they have committed them.

The conclusion is then, if all this be well pondered of them, they must needs
make them wise and advised in their duty.

Let us come to the one and twentieth title, that they are called A good
Savor, A good savor.
speaking as the Scripture does attribute unto them this Savor, it is not in
regard of their person, but of that doctrine which they preach.

The persons be only vessels, wherein the same is contained, as Saint Paul
shows, who speaking of himself and of other Apostles, says: But we have
this treasure in earthen Vessels. 2. Co^. 4.
Or even as when we have sweet Water which we will keep in store, we use
not to put it into stinking glasses, because that they will corrupt the same,
but we take new glasses, whereinto nothing has been powered, or if there
have been any thing in them before, we rince them clean in pure water, that
our rose water or other such like, may be kept from putrefaction. In like
manner, so ought they to take heed, that the doctrine of salvation, which they
ought to preach which will exercise the ministry, be a good and sweet savor,
put into clean and pure vessels, or to speak more plainly, to purge them of
much filthiness and many sins, whereunto they are subject as well as others, that
being well purified and sanctified, they may be vessels more fit to receive the
sweet balm of the doctrine of Jesus Christ, and being therewithal
plentifully endued, they may carry it to every place, whereunto it pleases
God to send them, to embalme them with this pleasant savor, which are
infected with the corruption of sin, and that they may be as those who being
perfumde with musk, do cause others to feel a sweet smell when they are
near unto them. But let us add hereunto as before, that it is not sufficient
to have received and kept this savor for a time, but it must be preserved in
the same goodness, until the end of our life: for they that have received
it, and kept it for a certain space, and after suffer it to corrupt, do as
much harm as they that are altogether infected. But (as one says) how may
this be? very easily. Any liquor which is left in a bottle does it not wax
naught often times before a man think? Good wine may be kept in an hogs-head
for a little time, but many times I know not by what accident, it waxes sour.
This savor of the sacred word of god, may much more be marred in men, who are
subject to such change and inconstancy, that we cannot comprehend the least
part thereof. Besides, there is Satan, who hates deadly the savor of this
doctrine, who endeavors by his skill, subtlety, and devise, to cause it to
be lost in them who carry the same, or at the least (being not able to bury
it altogether) spitte out his venom to poison the same, that being mingled
therewith, he may cause it to be as unsavory and hurtful, as it is sweet
and profitable in his own purity. In one word then, this title of so great
praise, ought marvelously to prick forward them, who love the study of the
Ministry, to be more diligent, and being entered, to exercise the same with
faithfulness and constancy, notwithstanding all those hindrances and
obstacles that Satan raises up, to let their proceedings in their calling.
Let us now take in hand to show the dignity of this pastoral charge, and
let us come to the two last titles and cheifest Epithites that are given unto
them, as it were to put our last hand to the painting forth of their beauty
and excellency that they are called Angels and Gods. Let us see in what
sense they are called Angels: in one word, it is in regard they are the
Messengers of GOD, as Angels are, but in a diverse manner: for Angels are
celestall lights, and of such a swiftness, that as soon as God has spoken the
word, they presently execute his commandment, whether it be in heaven or
earth, as it is said in the Psalm. Psalm. 103.
And seeing that it was convenient that they should be made of another
substance, then of that which is earthly, that they might be ready to execute
Gods commandment, as speedily as God would have them, he has created them in
a divine substance: but Pastors are called Angels, Pastors called Angels.
not in regard of their person, but of their charge, in the administration
whereof, serving God as becomes them, their service is so valued before God,
as that of his Angels, in that they do not less advance the glory of God in
the preaching of the word, then the Angels in performing Gods will and
commandment. And let us ad hereunto, that he had in such estimation this
charge, yt he would have Jesus Christ so called, Jesus Christ called an Angel.
Exodus 4. 1. Cor. 1.
by reason of his embassage into this world, as many places of Scripture bear
witness. So that we may yet consider one very notable point: for seeing
that the Pastors are companions of Jesus Christ, who is greater then Angels,
Pastors also in their Ministry, may be esteemed greater then Angels: and if
they be of this account, what can be added more to the dignity of this
charge? Nothing, but that they are called Gods. Why Ministers are called gods.
This Epithet then of sovereign honor is given unto them, as we have
proved, being limited within a kind of signification: that is, not yt they are
as God in his essence, that is to say, without any evil passion or weakness,
or that they are strong, puissant, merciful, and in sum, the spring and
fountain of all goodness, as he is. Neither is it so to be understood, that
God transferreth unto them his honor, which is proper to him alone, or that he
diminishes the same, although but a little, but they are so called, to note
the gratnes, excellency, and depth of this so high a calling, that the Hebrews
ordinarily understands by this word, especially when it is given to men: the
greatest perfection of most rare and excellent virtues, which may possibly be
found, that he that is honored with this title by reason of his excellency,
do draw near unto the divine nature: also they are so called, to signify
that the virtue and efficacy of the Spirit of GOD, is joined to their
labors, that they may be assured, that if they be zealous, and painful in
their Ministry, that they shall not labor in vain, but that God whom they
serve, will make them see and feel the fruit and profit of their charge, unto
his honor and their own comfort. See my brethren, see all you readers in
general, unto what GOD has exalted us: you readers, know the dignity of the
Ministry, honor it as it is your duty. You my Brethren, contemplate within
your selves the high degree of honor, unto which he has preferred us, but be
wise, take heed of pride, that he do not as much abase, as he has advanced
us. Let then every title admonish us of two things: first, that every one
may strive to be more and more worthy of so great a title of honor: the
second, to beware that we be not contrary to that which the title
signifies. Let us also withal, consider that there is no calling in the
world so high as ours is, and let us know, that if we suffer our selves to
fall, there is no fall so dangerous or so great. Wherefore seeing that we are
preferred to so high a place, as above others, we must also understand, that
it is our duty to walk in greater carfulness and fear then other men, if
that will answer to the dignity of our charge. And as we are the most happy
in the world, if we walk in sincerity and integrity of life, so likewise
we are the most miserable creatures of the world, if we behave our selves
looselye, and show a bad conscience. This is that which S. Austen speaks in
his book: Of a Pastor. There is nothing more pleasant and acceptable unto
many, then the office of a Pastor, but if they do execute this function
neglige^tlie, flattering the people in their sins, this is nothing more
miserable toward god: that is to say, as there are many that account
themselves happy amongst men, to be in this office, so he would have them
know, that if they do not exercise the same as they are bound, that they are
most unhappy before God. But let them take this withal for their comfort,
that if the excellency of their calling do stir them up to perform their
duty, although they be not reckoned happy amongst men, yet they are in chief
estimation with God, as S. Austin says in ye same book before alleged, in
these words. There is nothing so troublesome, so laborious, so painful, as
the calling of a Minister, but there is nothing more blessed before God,
because he fights, and warreth against the enemies of God, as his General
commands him. And in truth, as God is author of this calling, also they which
exercise the same, ought always to look unto God, as unto whom alone they
must give account, but how is that? that is, that in manifesting that they are
indeed the servant of God, by living as they speak, that their behavior
be not contrary to their doctrine: that temperancie, modesty simplicity,
and all Christian virtues, do shine in them so clearly, that their life
Preaches, as it is said in the common proverb. The Philosophers which were
counted wise men, amongst the Paynims, have very well observed, that a
philosopher was not to be esteemed a true Philosopher, if he lived otherwise
then he taught: as many, and especially Cicero, notes in his oration, Pro
Planco: where he says: That virtue, integrity, honesty, is requisite in man,
and not only the volubilitie of the tongue, art, and science. Also against
Salust, he says, It is of chiefest commendation to lead a life answerable to
our words, and that our discourses be conformable to our manners. Also in his 2.
of Tusculans questions, That the Philosophers are not known by their words,
but by the constancy and firmenes of their actions. We which carry the name
infinitely, more excellent then the name of Philosophers, that is, the name of
Christians, yea we which are the leaders and guiders of others, we ought to
regard to join good actions with that fearful name of Ministers, wherewith
we are honored. For if it be a thing filthy and worthy of reprehension in
any vocation, when men shall take v^o^ the^ some honorable preferment, and shall
have no care by their behavior, to approve themselves to be worthy thereof:
then our charge, as it is without comparison more excellent then others, so
also there be no faults so great, and so scandalous, as those which are
committed in the same. Heereunto tends the words of S. Ambrose, in his book
of a Pastor, saying.

There is nothing more excellent, The life of a true Pastor must be answerable
to his words.
then the calling of Ministers: nothing more high then the name of a Bishop:
but this is, when they show their dignity unto the sight of the eye: when
they make it known truly what they are, showing their profession more by
their actions, then by their name: to the end that their name may answer to
their action, and the action may answer to their name: for fear least that
they appear to be in an high honor, and their life to be in a low degree:
for fear least their profession be divine, and their works unlawful: for
fear least they have a religious habit, and that their deeds be profane:
for fear that they seem not to have the words of a Dove, that is sweet as a
Pigeon, and carry the heart of a dog, full of gal and bitterness: for fear
that they boast not of the profession of a sheep, and carry in their hearts,
the fierceness of a Wolf: for fear least answer be made unto them, This
people honor me with their lips, but their heart is far from me.

The same Father in the book before alleged, says further also. As the long
gown of the Senators fitteth the Senators, as husbandry becomes laboring
men, armor is fit for soldiers, navigations for the mariner, and in sum, as
every workman is known by the quality of his work, so the works of a
Minister, do show what a Minister is, that he may better be known by his
work, then by his profession: that he may be more called a Bishop by his
merits, then by his name: that is, that he deserves more by his good and his
Christian conversation the name of a Bishop, then only carrying the name. To
these two, we may add, that notable sentence of S. Bernard, in one of his
Epistles, saying. Hearken now unto my song, which is sweet, and pleasant, and
profitable: It is a thing monstrous to be in the sovereign degree of honor,
and to have a base and faint heart, to have the first place, and to lead the
life of an abject: to have a tongue which pronounces great matters, and to
have idle hands: to use many words, and to show no fruit: to have a grave
countenance, and light actions: a head white and hoarie, and a heart full of
vanity: a face full of wrinckles, and a tongue full of scoffs: to show
outwardly a great authority, and yet to be altogether mutable and inconstant.
We may add also this, taken out of the same Author in that Canticle, when
he says: Can a foolish and ignorant Pastor lead the Sheep of the Lord
into the Meades of the divine words? But he adds a little after: If any
be learned, and be not honest, it is to be feared, that so much as such a
one edifieth by his words, he hurts as much by the barrenness of his life.

I desire nothing more, then that it may please God, that these excellent
sayings here mentioned, may be well understood, and practiced of all them,
which either at this day do, or of them which hereafter minds to make
profession to teach others, in what Churches so ever. It is very likely, that
as the ignorance of them, and the negligent regarding thereof, do cause great
offenses and miseries, to the right understanding and practice of them, will be
an occasion of great edification, and happiness. But because these things do
appertain to the difficulty of the ministry, because it is very hard to be
perfect, let us begin to enter into the discourse of the foresaid difficulties.

CHAP. VI. The beginning of the difficulties which are found in the Ministry.
WE are to observe, that to understand these difficulties more plainly, S.
Paul his order must be followed: in the 1. Tim. 5. and in Tit. 1. 1. Tim. 5
Tit. 1
where he speaks, first of the quality of the manners of them, which do
betake themselves to a pastoral charge. Secondly, the difficulties which are
proposed in teaching the word of God This order is very good, for seeing that
Preachers must not only preach with the tongue and the mouth, but also with
the hands, feet, arms, head, and in sum, withal their body: that is, so
govern themselves in all their actions, that the practice of the doctrine
which they set forth, may be seen, and read, in the administration of their
charge. It is expedient to handle first of all, the difficulties which are
found in the manners of Ministers. The first difficulties consists in this,
that the minister must be unreprovable.
Before all things when Saint Paul says, That a Bishop must be unblameable,
who is it that will not altogether loath that function? For this word if it
be literally taken, as many have understood it: as amongst others, they
which in old time were called Donatists, who affirmed that the ministry was
unprofitable, by reason of the vices of the persons: they were straungely
deceived, in that they understood when S. Paul said, That a Bishop must be
unblameable, that it was required that there should not be in him the least
blemish, and imperfection: seeing that Saint Paul by this word understands
not, that they should be pure, innocent as Saints, or Angels, for seeing that
they be men as others be, so it is impossible, but that there should appear in
the^ some relics of sin, and natural uncleanness. It is very true, that
it is to be desired, that in those which be such men, that nothing be seen
to shine in them but examples of godliness, and of all Christian virtues, in
which no earthly thing may be perceived: but seeing that it is impossible that
they should be altogether vncladde of the old rags of our first Parent Adam,
in vain this is to be looked for. Neither is this the meaning of Saint Paul:
but only that they be unreprovable What it is to be unreprovable.
in regard of notorious offenses, of all criminal cases, that they be not
convinced of infamous and shameful sins, for which they which commit them
are called to judgment, as to commit adultery, fornication, murder, theft,
briberie, or to have borne false witness against any man, and such like. For
in truth, if any one being apprehended in these gross and palpable crimes,
have been admitted to this charge, and that it be known, it must needs
cause great offenses in the Church of God, seeing that the Pastor should not
only have a good testimony of those that be of the same Church, but also of
strangers. But if it comes to pass, that the Pastor be sometimes a little
intemperate in his actions, as if it chances that he drink more then
ordinary, or be made angry, or envious, or ambitious, or tickled with some
such like passion, which is not so well ordered as he himself desires, as to
be a little too much given to his profit, to be unthankful, troublesome,
hard to please, sour, too careful, nevertheless, he takes no pleasure in
these vices, and goes about to extenuate them, and to correct them every day,
such things hinders not, but that he may be unreprovable. For if none should
be admitted into the Ministry, but those which are altogether void of such
infirmities, into which they often fall as well as others, it must of
necessity be concluded, that we should have no Ministers at all. Wherefore the
Donatists have badly reasoned, when to maintain that the Ministry of the
word of God served to no use, they have concluded, that no filthy and unclean
thing could be cle^sed by that which is unclean. For (say they) Ministers
which ought to preach the word of God, and administer the sacraments, are
defiled with vices as other men, whereby the Ministry loses his force and
efficacy: they are greatly (I say) deceived: for besides that, the reason
before alleged, is very sufficient: it may further be added, that neither the
preaching of the word of God, nor the administration of the sacraments, have
no force at all from the person of the minister, but from the ordinance and
commandment of God, seeing that he has instituted the^ to this end. And we
may observe hereby, that this reason is of such force, that although a minister
be wicked, and spotted with those vices of which S. Paul would have him
cleansed, and who was lawfully called, his impiety being unknown, his
ministry shall not cease to be of power: the reason is, because he
exercises his Ministry, not in his own name, but in the name of God, of
whom depends all the force of the Ministry, whereof he is author alone.
Moreover, we affirm, that although Saint Cyprian has said, that Baptism
does confirm remission of sins, and that the force of the said Baptism,
does depend of the quality of the Pastor, that this great Doctor has erred
in this point, as well as many others: which we do of purpose set down, to
the end that the authority of such a person sh^ulde not diminish the reason
alleged by us, the which we may confirm by many testimonies of the Scripture,
but this shall suffice, that when John Baptist the forerunner of Christ Jesus,
showed the coming of Jesus Christ, and baptized, In baptizing, he said: I
baptize you with water, but he that comes after me, shall baptize you with
the holy Ghost: for in so saying, it is all one, as if he had said, that it
is not the Minister of the outward sign, but that Jesus Christ is he which
gives force, and virtue to his baptism, by the secret and inward operation
of his spirit. In like sort we may speak of the word of God, because it has
the same reason, that the Minister can do nothing else but propound unto the
people by a lively voice, but god must give understanding, and imprint that
which is spoken in their hearts, to make the^ to feel the power thereof. He then
yt desires to be a minister, he must take heed not only to be pure and
without reproof of these gross and notorious vices, but also of other lighter
faults. For although it has bin said, that if a Minister be given to commit
some small offense, yet nevertheless he is without reproof: our meaning is not
in any sort to flatter, or to make faults less the^ they are, whatsoever they
be: for if he lets loose the bridle too much to those vices of which we have
made mention before, and thinks that he ought not to be put by, in desiring
this charge, we say, that it is as detestable to God, as being polluted with
some horrible and infamous crime, yet nevertheless is promoted to the
Ministry, seeing that god unto who^ he must give account of his charge, has in
as great horror those vices which seem saml, as those which are more apparent
we call these small faults, as covetousness, ambition, envy, and many such
like (because they are so ordinarily esteemed of men) but if we suffer our
selves to be carried too far herein, they become so great, yt they be as violent
streams, that carry us before the^ into many downfals. Now let us see those
mischiefs which they procure to themselves, which run too far into those sins,
yt we may the better beware, and also the beauty of those virtues, which are
desired of a Pastor to be followed, keeping the order afterward ensuing. When
S. Paul says, that a bishop must be the husband of one wife How it is to be
understood, that a bishop must be the husband of one wife.
(although that does not properly appertain to the matter in hand) yet
nevertheless seeing that S. Paul sets down a description of the manner of a
Pastor, we will breefely speak something thereof. Although there have been
many that have drawn out diverse expositions upon this place, yet the best, and
that which is to be preferred before other, is that of saint Chrysostom, who
says, that here plainly poligamy is forbidden in a Bishop, the which the
Jews held as a law in their time, of which they were not ashamed, because they
were easily drawn to give way to the marriage of many wives, being provoked on
both sides: first when they read in the old Testament, that Abraham, Jacob,
David, and many other, had at one time many wives, they might persuade
themselves, that it was lawful for them also, as commonly it is seen, that
there is nothing of more force to induce men to corrupt themselves, as the
ancient custom of our fathers and Predecessors. Secondly, looking upon the
Nations who were their near borderers, how they were addicted to this natural
deprauity, (as corruptions do stretch and spread themselves easily upon others)
it is not to be doubted, but that this sin likewise was rife amongst the
Jews: for it is certain, that the people in the East parts of the world, did
not observe marriage with such religion, as did become men of honest
conversation. See then where S. Paul goes about to teach us, that if it be a
villainous and dishonest part in a civil person to be so intemperate, as he
will not content himseife with one wife, according to the commandment of God,
how much more is that not only inconvenient but abominable in him, which
should instruct others in the doctrine of salvation. In that it is required of
a Pastor, that he should be watchful, What watchfulness is required of a
Pastor.
we may learn, that even as they unto whom any charge is committed in this
life, if they mind to bring it to good perfection, they must ordinarily watch
over the same both day and night. Pastors have without all comparison the
greatest and most troublesome calling: they ought then to be more diligent and
watchful, if they purpose sincerely and in the purity of the conscience, to
discharge their duty. Emperors, Potentates, governors of countries and
provinces, which are without ceasing, to manage, grave, and serious affairs,
for the keeping in order of their subjects, and preservation of their estate,
both in peace and war, and at all times, they must not be a sleep, but have
their eyes always open, on the one side, and on the other, and more at one
time then at another, according to the occurrancies of their weighty
business. In war soldiers do carefully keep their watch and ward,
although there be no likelihood of danger: and this is a usual custom which
they keep amongst them, but when the enemy falls upon them, they are more
awaked then before: in steed of laying watch, and passing over the matter
slightly, the^ they bend all their force against him, being constrained
thereunto by an urgent necessity. Let us apply this to our purpose, Ministers
have to deal with matters of greater importance then those which the great
Lords of the world do enterprise, for their affairs be of the earth, those
of Pastors are of heaven: it behooves them therefore to be more watchful and
diligent. Soldiers do watch for their life, which they hold at greater price
then any other thing, and they endeavor by all diligence to preserve the same.
But Pastors having the charge of souls, which are by many degrees more
precious then the life of the body, so they ought more to watch, but about
what? over the souls which are given to them in charge, over the flock of
Jesus Christ, that they may be nourished and fed with the true and heavenly
food, that they may be kept in the right way, and that they watch (I say)
that they may more and more be confirmed in the word of God, which is the true
food of the soul, and the true guide, to direct us to eternal life. And also
that they be careful that the lean diseased sheep be made fat, and
healed, and that the Woolues, Dogs, and Foxes, do not bite them, pinch them,
nor catch rhem, within their claws. And seeing that the Devil, which is the
true Woolfe and Lion, who always without ceasing, pusheth at the faithful,
and that Heretics, Scismatikes, and especially worldly and corrupt men, be
like Serpents, who do spy out continually (running more swiftly at one time
then another, that they may do hurt, turning and winding themselves, the more
easily to seduce them) the Pastor then must consider, that it behooves him to
be more diligent to watch, then in a calm and peaceable time. When the
courageous man of war, which governs a besieged Town, sees a great breach
to be made, and that the enemy will make an assault, he does more carefully
look about him, to give the enemy the repulse. In like manner, when Satan
and his deputies does besiege the flock of Christ with furious assaults, they
ought to show then, themselves more valiant and prepared.

To this end Saint Paul calls Timothy a Soldier. Thou (says he)
Timotheus, endurest travail, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Wherefore if
a minister in steed of being diligent, becomes sloathfull and cold in his
duty, and through his negligence and loosenes, the sheep committed unto him go
astray, or are lost, let him propose to himself what he shall answer before
God, etc. For the definite sentence is given of God himself, and is written in
the prophecy of Ezechiel, in those words which the spirit of God pronounces
by the mouth of his Prophet: When the watchman sees (that is, the Pastor) the
sword come upon a land (that is, Eze. 3. and 13
the wrath of God) and that the watchman blows not the Trumpet, and the
people be not warned: if the sword come, and take any person from among them,
he is taken away for his iniquity, but his blood will I require at the
watchmans hand. Behold a sentence which is like a thunderbolt upon the head of
the Governors of the Church, if they fail in their duty, by which they ought
the more to be stirred up, by how much the punishment threatened against them
is great, that if they discharge their duty as they ought, they shall procure
the greater blessing upon themselves, and upon all their flock, otherwise
they shall be brought into danger, if they shall neglect and despise their
charge. Let it be then concluded, that if it be commanded to every
faithful man, to watch diligently, that he be not taken and intrapped by the
nets and snares of Satan, and by the crafty wiles of the world, etc. By a
far greater reason, the Minister who is set over others, ought diligently to
watch. Math. 24 25.14 Rom, 13. 1 Cor. 15 1 Thessalonians. 5 2 Pet. 4 What the
sobriety of a Minister ought to be.


Moreover, sobriety is required by S. Paul, of a Pastor: let us see what is
understood by this word, Sober. Some do interpret the same, prudent, and of
sound understanding. The more simple and true interpretation is, that the
Pastor should be sober in eating, and drinking: And it is to be noted by the
way, that this sobriety is not a meritorious work, to obtain remission of
sins, and the grace of God, as the Idolaters do esteem of their sobriety,
not such a kind a sobriety of which mention is made in the Judges, Judge. 13
Numb 4
and in Numbers, where we read, that those that vowed to observe the law of
the Nazarites, did abstain from wine, and all strong drink, etc. Neither that
sobriety of the Recabites, of which mention is made in Jeremy, who also
drank no wine by reason of a vow which Ionadab the son of Recab their
Father, Iere. 15.
caused them to make: but of a common, and ordinary sobriety, not to
ouergorge themselves with meat and drink, as gluttons, and drunkards use to
do, who think upon nothing else in the world, but almost to make their bellies
burst, and think that they should live to eat, and not eat to live. The
reason is, that this excess, is wished by S. Paul to be far from a Pastor,
is so evident, that it is folly to demand the same. Common experience does
teach us, that a man that forgets himself so much, as that he oppresses
nature by his gourmandizing, and ryotousnesse, becomes not only sick of the
palsy in his body, but also in his soul. The excess of eating and drinking,
the destruction both of Soul and body.
As concerning the body it is worse then brute beasts, whom we may see, not
to run into such excess, as foolish men do, who if they sometime take too
much, it is not in such sort, that they forgette their Caves, and dens, that
they cannot go to them again: but what happens to man? they do so much
sometime ouercharge themselves, that they cannot help their own body, they
can neither go with their feet, nor touch with their hands. And not unfitly
has one of the ancient Fathers compared them to Idols, which have noses, but
smell not: a mouth, but they cannot speak: a throat, but they cannot cry:
eyes, but they cannot see: feet, but they cannot go. It is a benumming of the
members, with which, if they be taken, they are altogether unprofitable, even
as they were dead, and when they have powered in their wine (I mean when they
have spent their time in this course of life) what do they feel in their poor
bodies, but the interest, and cruel usury of their riotous life? that is,
cruditie in the stomach, great pain of the head, whereby some become sick of ye
gout, some troubled with the rhewme, some has ye falling sickness, some the
ptisick, some ye Apoplexy: others have red eyes, rotten teeth: a stinking
breath: a wrinckled face, monstrous and fearful to behold, and a great number
of such accidents. In so much that S. Basil says: It is a great marvel that
their poor body being so softened, do not melt as wax against the fire, and
that falling away by peecemeale, it be not converted into dust and powder. To
conclude, it is not only the destruction of ye body, but the soul is likewise
as much hurt, as ye stomach, for drunkards do loose in like manner the use of
their reason and understanding, ye they can do nothing well, that when they are
so disguised, they cannot know their friends and neighbors, no not their own
wives, and children. And to speak more of this sin, gluttony, and
drunkenness, does only hinder, and overcome the understanding of him that is
drunk, but it also depriueth him of the counsel of his friends: For if they
shall give unto them any advice when they are so brutish, they speak as it
were to a stone. In some this gourmandizing and excess, is such a kind of
intemperance, of which Cicero speaks, which is the fountain of all
perturbations, that it is a reuolting, and an apostasy of the reason, and
understanding: for it is so estranged from true reason, that it is impossible
to govern, and contain by the same, the appetites, and concupisences of the
mind. Seeing then drunkenness is the cause of so many mischeefes which cannot
be numbered, with good reason, S. Paul would have this voice far from a
Pastor, and on the contrary side, that he be given to sobriety, which is the
mother and Nurce of an infinite company of virtues, which are too long to
recite. And for this cause, S. Jerome writing to Nepotian, admonished him to
avoid the banquettos of temporal men, and that it were better for him to dine
in his own house, then in a Palace. And to make an end of this point,
Sobriety beeng so much commended to all the faithful in many places of the
scripture, Ministers ought so much the more to embrace the same, by how much
they have the government over others.

Let us come then to the third virtue set down by Saint Paul, that is,
Modesty. Luke 21 Romans 13 1 Thessalonians. 5 1 Timothy 3 1 Pet. 5 What modesty is
required in the^ which desire the Ministry.
And let us observe, that he requires no counterfeit, and feined modesty,
which is seen in many hypocrites, who are mingled in the Church of God, and
who deceives the simple, under the mask of hypocricie, and by this means are
more ambitious. Good Gregory, who for his godliness and learning, was called
the Theologian, made lamentable complaints of some that lived in his time, in a
funeral oration, which he made at the obsequies of his father, and he showed
certain marks, whereby we should know the^, because then there was a great
number of Philos^phers, besides the ministers of the word of God, who under
the color of this hypocrisy, deceived many people. But concerning true
Philosophers, perceived such kind of men to be amongst themselves, as this
little history bears witness. At a certain time when Socrates saw
Anthistines the Cynicke, to seek credit by wearing an old Cloak, showing in
a brag, the rags which he had, being desirous to have the same to be
attributed to his humility, counting it arrogancy in others that did wear
better apparel: Socrates said with a loud voice, I see thy pride
Anthistenes, through the patches of thy Cloak. To produce examples of them,
who make profession of Christianity, who please themselves in this
hypocritical humility, it were labor lost: more of that stamp are to be
found, then of any other as every one that does but a little consider the
estate, may manifestly perceive. But the Apostle does earnestly desire true
modesty, and humility, which consists not in the color of the garment,
neither in the countenance of the face, and of the body, but in the mortifying
of our disordered and rebellious affections. This humility is the robe of the
Minister, with which he ought to be covered, because (to speak in one word)
that is the soul, the blood, and the heart of Christian religion, and without
which, religion is but a painted vizard. To be brief, seeing that this virtue
is commanded to all Christians, Romans 12 Gal. 5 Phil. 4 Col. 3 Tit 3 1. Pet. 3
as we may see in Scripture, it is most of all convenient, that Ministers
should put the same in practice. We will not then enlarge our discourse of
these virtues, because they are so well known to all, but we will dilate more
of those things that follow, because they are worthy diligently to be
considered.

The fourth virtue is hospitality, or charity: where we are to note, that
the Greek word which the Apostle uses, signifies to love strangers, which
is more then kindly to entertain them, for they may be received into our
houses, and we may do good unto them, being provoked by common courtesy, yet
nevertheless, not love them, or if we love them, yet it is very coldly. This
shows that charity and hospitality, which is here recommended to Pastors,
toward the poor, and strangers, it is not a dissembled and superficial
charity, as was that of the hypocritical Pharisees, who gave their alms,
more to be seen and praised of the vulgar sort, then moved by the misery and
poverty of the needy: unto this, tends that saying of saint Paul, Let love
be without dissimulation, Romans 12
distributing to the necessities of the Saints, giving your selves to
hospitality. Iam 1
And saint James likewise says, Pure religion, and undefiled before God, even
the father, is this, to visit the fatherless, and widows in their adversity.

An ancient Doctor speaking of this kind of Charity, do not unfitly name
it Ambition, then Charity. Charity must not be affected with ambition.
But in what sense can Ambition be taken for Charity? Very easily: For many
may be provoked to do well unto the needy, more to get a fame, and renown
amongst men, then moved thereunto by the misery of the poor, because that
Ambition as the same Father says, is the Ape of Charity, that is, as an Ape
which is a pleasant creature, and well known to every one, uses to
counterfeit what men does, so an ambitious man to get honor, do force
himself to does the same thing, that charitable men practizeth, as concerning
the outward show, but there affection differs so much the one from the
other, as there is a disagreement betwixt ambition and true charity: for a
true host does exercise charity, in regard of the honor of God, who is the
God of the poor, as well as the rich. The ambitious man respects his own
glory only: the true host is kind to the distressed: the ambitious more
favors the rich, then the poor: but that hospitality of the which Saint
Paul speaks in this place, is a true and natural hospitality, proceeding
from the bowels of mercy, which is as pleasing to God, as the other misliketh
him. This is that which is commended unto us by many reasons, which are too
long to set down, but we will touch the chiefest of them, that we may
earnestlye endeavor to practice the same.

And first we are to call to mind the commandment of God in Deuteronomie,
Deuteronomy. 10
where God commends strangers unto his people, The fruits of hospitality.
because they were strangers. Love (as it is there said) strangers for ye
have been strangers in the land of Egypt. Secondly, we may see the blessings
which God has bestowed upon them, The first fruit.
who have exercised the same with a willing mind: for the first, we perceive
that it so much prevails with God, that he does incline the hearts and
affections of great personages, to seek the love and familiarity of them
which are given thereunto, although they be their inferiors, and of low place
in respect of the world: and by this occasion, those which descend from great
houses, do oftentimes match with those which are obscure Behold an history
which bears witness hereof. Genesis 24
It is recorded of Rebecca and Laban her brother, who having received
courteously the servant of Abraham, who sought a wife for his Masters son
Isaac, it came to pass, by the singular providence of God, that Rebecca was
given to wife to Isaac, which was the chiefest good, that could happen to that
house. For what cause likewise had Raguel the Priest of Madian, for his son
in law, the great and incomparable Prophet Moses? Was it not his
hospitality? For the Scripture speaks, Exodus 2
that Moses having fled out of Egypt into Madian, and being there a stranger,
he was received by Raguel into his house: in which having dwelt sometime, he
gave Zippora his daughter to him to wife. The second fruit.
In the second place we may observe also a greater blessing, which God gives
unto them which are the lovers thereof, that God makes their wives fruitful,
which were before barren, and without children: and by this means have
delivered them from that reproach, which was counted great in old time. Examples
hereof is to be seen in the Sunamite, 2. King. 4
for whom the Prophet of God obtained a son, because she ordinarily received
him him with joy into her house. Thirdly, it has such virtue, that it may, if
it pleases God, prolong the life of them which be in great danger: Iosu. 2.
as we read of a woman named Rahab, who having received in the Town of Jericho
the Spies which Joshua had sent out, preserved her own life, her brethren, and
sisters, and all that appertained to her, then when the town of Jericho was
sacked by Joshua. Fourthly, The fourth fruit.
it is of such force, that by means of it, corporal diseases have been cured
in the houses of them, who has kindly entertained the servant of God, Act.
18.
even by the servants of God themselves.

The History in the Acts of the Apostles, do bear sufficient witness, for
there we read, that a certain man called Publius, in the Isle of Malta, having
received Saint Paul into his lodging, and retained him by the space of three
days, this hospitality was the occasion that Publius father which was
diseased, was not only healed, but all other maladies which reigned
there-about: when the sick persons were brought to Saint Paul, they were
likewise cured. Fifthly, The fifth fruit.
it does not only prolong life, by the will of God, using those extraordinary
means before specified, but that also it may be the cause to multiply in a
wonderful and maruailous manner, things ordinary created of God, for the
nourishment and preservation of man's life: as we may read in the Book of
Kings, that Elias having demanded water to drink, and a morsel of bread, 1.
King. 17.
in the time of a most cruel famine, of a poor woman, a widow, the woman
saying unto him, that she had but an handful of Meal in a barrel, and a
little Oil in a cruse, and that she had gathered two or three sticks of wood
to dress the same for her self and her Son to eat, and afterward die, what
came to pass? The Prophet said unto her, Fear not, come and do as thou have
said, but make me thereof a little Cake first of all, and bring it unto me, and
afterward make for thee and thy son, for thus says the Lord God of Israel:
The meal in thy barrel shall not be wasted, neither shall the Oil in thy
cruse be diminished: the widow believed him, and having overcome all
temptations, wherewith she might have been possessed, she showed her love to
Elias, and she^ perceived forthwith by experience, the effect of the word of
GOD to be most true, which was spoken by the Prophet, that her Oil and Meal
failed not, so that she plentifully reaped for that little which she had sowed.
Sixthly, The sixth fruit.
we may observe, yt it is of such virtue, that it is oftentimes an occasion to
many that be ignorant, to come to the knowledge of God, Luc. 16.
and of their salvation, as Zacheus did, who having received beyond his
expectation Jesus Christ into his house, and entertaining him most kindly as
possibly he might. Jesus Christ said unto him, that This day salvation was
come into his house: and it was not in vain that Martha received with such
great love and affection, Jesus Christ, Luc. 10.
as we see in Luke, and what good came unto her by the same. Let us come to
other favors with which God has honored them who have embraced this virtue,
which indeed are very great. Seventhly, The seventh fruit.
by that means Angels have been brought into the houses of them, who ran to
entertain the passengers, constraining them to eat and drink in their house:
nay more the^ that, it has brought god himself in the form of an Angel, as
we have an example diligently to be marked in Genesis: where it is written,
that Abraham having seen three persons, Genesis 18.
that is, three Angels, taking upon them the shape of man, whereof one was God
(that is, Jesus Christ, who afterward appeared to the world) Abraham ran
before them, prayed and invited them to come into his tent, and he entreated
them in as good sort as he could with incredible joy: we may see also another
examble in the same book, but not so expressly as the first, Genesis 19.
because there mention is made but of two Angels, whom Lot received into his
house, and toward whom he exercised the same hospitality. To this end, the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, does admonish the faithful, Heb. 13.
To continue brotherly love, and not to be forgetful to lodge strangers: for
thereby some have received Angels into their houses unawares. What greater
profit can it bring unto us more then these? It seems that it is impossible,
yet we may observe one besides, which is worthy the marking, that it does not
only join the Angels and God with the faithful, but also it does prepare a
lodging for him, expelling all uncleanness, which might hinder God to come unto
us: that is, it puts away from us our sins: wherefore S. Peter admonishes
the faithful, 1 Pet. 4
Above all things to have fervent love among them, for love covers the
multitude of sins. The eight fruit.
What man is he, that when he duly considers this, will not be maruailously
stirred up to the practice of hospitality, which so delights God, the
Angels, and all faithful men. Wherefore would Job not have the stranger lodge
in the streets, Job 31.
but opened his doors to him that went by the way? beeause by this means he
received the glory of God. Wherefore did Lydia that Merchant of purple, Act. 16.
constrain the Apostles to stay in her house, but for the joy and singular
comfort she received in her conscience? Let us conclude then, as the
narration of these incredible fruits of this hospitality, should be as
baytes to allure all Christians to put them in practice, and much more
Pastors, who are more particularly exhorted to the same by Saint Paul. They
ought to follow the example of that good old man of the Tribe of Ephraim,
Judge. 19.
who returning out of the fields from his work in Gibeah, took a poor
Leuite into his house, who wandering here and there in the Town of Gibeah,
could find no lodging. In such manner all the faithful, and especially
Pastors, should be most ready to entertain strangers. Hereunto also we may
add those excellent blessings which are promised, and which are performed to
all those which practice charity, that they ought to be of great weight to stir
them thereunto. As they which exercise charity, procure to themselves the love
of God, so those who do not practice it, bring upon themselves his curse.
Also those curses which are threatened to those me^ which are cruel toward
such, which falls upon their heads many times when it pleases God, such
curses (I say) and punishments, should be unto them as bridles to correct their
covetousness and unkindness. And what be those punishments? many have been
cast headlong into great dangers, 1. Sam. 28.
eue^ of loss of life it self, because they have not exercised this
hospitality, as we may read of Nabal, who having refused to send provision
unto David for his army, was not only in danger to loose all his goods, but
his own life, and the lives of all that were with him, as he had well
deserved. Judge. 8.
But it fell out worse unto those of Su^coth and Pennell, for they were
destroyed by Gedeon, and many of the^, namely the Elders of the city, endured
a violent death, because they refused to give a refreshing to his army, when
they were weary in the pursuit of the Kings of Midian. It follows
afterward, that a Minister should not be given to wine. And with great reason
S. Paul desires this vice to be free from a Pastor. It is impossible to speak
of all the mischiefs which happens hereby S. Austen says, Drunkenness is a
familiar devil, a sweet poison, a delightful sin, and be that suffers
himself to be possessed herewithall, he does not enjoy himself, as he that
forsakes it: he does not only commit sin, but is all sin. Drunkenness
forbidden to Pastors.
He says also in another place, Where drunkenness reigns, reason is
banished, the understanding is blockish, counsel is out of order, judgment is
perverted. But let us mark out of the scripture, what harm it brings.
First. Prou. 20.
First it makes a man seditious. Wine is a mocker, and strong drink is
raging: and whosoever is deceived thereby, is not wise. Secondly, Second.
it makes a man dissolute in his life and in his words, Ephesians. 5.
and therefore Saint Paul admonishes the Ephesians, Not to be drunken with
Wine wherein is excess. Thirdly, Third.
it makes a man voluptuous and given to fleshly pleasures, as Oseas shows,
Osea. 4.
who showing the sins of the people, unto which at that time they were given,
he faith: Wine and new wine, it takes away the heart, they have committed
whoredom. Fourthly, Fourth.
it brings a man to poverty, as Solomon says in his Proverbs, A labourer
that gives himself to drunkenness, shall never be rich. Fifth.
By these a man is so overtaken, that he comes even to commit sacrilege.
Dan. 5.
For we read of Baltazar that when he had made a great feast to his Princes,
his wives, and his concubines, then when he was drunk, he forgot himself so
much, that he caused to be brought unto him, the vessels of gold and of silver
which his father Nabucadnezzar had brought from the temple of Jerusalem, to the
end that his guests might drink therein: never thinking that they were
dedicated to God, and that it was not lawful to profane them, Sixth.
without the incurring the high displeasure of God. Again, it casts a man
headlong into such a brutish senselessness, that he breaks the very laws of
nature. This came to pass in Lot, Genesis 19
who bee^g overcome with wine, deflowred his two Daughters one after another.
These be ^en part of those mischeefes which drun^ennesse brings, which
being so grievous, it ^ught to be detested of all. But the punishments of God
which he has sent upon the ^ody and the soul of drunkardes, ought to move
us more, to the detestation and loa^hing thereof. Was not Ammon the son of
David murdered at a banquet which his bro^her Absolo^ had made being filled
with wine? 2 Samuel 13
Elah, in like manner, was not he slain by Zimri his Servant, when he was
drunk ^n the house of Arza the steward of his house? The good Father Noah, the
restorer of mankind, 1 King. 16
was he not by the just vengeance of Go, made a reproach unto Cham his son?
who afterward was accursed of god with all his posterity. That is a most
memorable history in the 16. of Judges, where we may see, Judge. 16
not only the excess of drinking to be ye cause of death to some few, Gen 22.
but almost to an inumerable multitude. For there it is said, yt the princes of
the Philistines being assembled to offer a great sacrifice unto their God Dagon,
to rejoice, and being merry with wine, they caused Sampson their enemy to
come forth from the Prisonhouse to make them sport. But Sampson being led unto
the pillars whereupon the house stood, in which they feasted, leaning upon
them, and embracing the two pillars with bot^ his arms, he caused the house to
fall down^ upon all them that were therein: in suc^ manner, that not only all
the Princes of the Philistines, and others which were there, were crushed
together, but also three thousand me^ and women which were upon the roof^ were
likewise slain.

Let us come now to those punishment which are threatened to the soul, that it
shall not inherit eternal life. S. Paul threatens the profane Corinthians, 1
Cor. 6
Be not deceived: neither fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
wantons, nor Buggerers, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor railers,
nor extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God.

This is denounced to all persons, and much more to Pastors, for if they suffer
themselves to be overtaken by this sin, their fault is the greater, because
they are leaders of the rest: for as a good ancient Doctor says, Drunkenness
is a fault in any particular man, but in a minister it is sacrilege, by which
the one kills the soul with wine, the other extinguisheth the spirit of
holiness.

Let us go forward, and see what S. Paul means, when he says, that such a
man should be no Striker. By this word, Saint Paul understands, that a Pastor
should not be so easily moved, What means it, that a Pastor must be no
Striker.
when he has occasion offered unto him (either by word or deed) as to be
incensed so far to choler, to strike either with hands or feet, or with his
tongue or mouth: that is, any way do injury. Chrysostom understands by this
word principally, he yt does hurt, or strikes with the tongue, using bitter
and proud words. The which interpretation is very tolerable: yet
nevertheless we may better understand by this word, (as it signifies properly
in the greek) a certain military fierceness, or wildness, which is commonly
perceived in Soldiers, who feeling themselves any manner of way pricked, are
suddenly provoked, and ready to strike: and by this rashness, procure much
hurt to themselves: as all others do, who suffer themselves to be too much
carried away with outrageous affections. And many times through their mad
mood, they become a laughing stock, and a reproach to good men, and those
which be of the best place, and therefore by good right the Apostle does forbid
this vice to a Pastor. For if it be indecent, and shameful in an other man, of
what calling soever he be, it does less beseem those which are appointed to
instruct others. He adds a little after, that a Pastor should be gentle, and
no fighter: What it signifies, a Bishop must be gentle and no fighter.
by these two words, he understands, two counterpoisons, and medicines, to
heal the two maladies which he had named before: that is, drunkenness, and
desire to strike, and he apposeth them as good and sovereign remedies, against
the two maladies going before. For even as many ryots and hurts do come of
drunkenness, ye which is very fitly termed, the mother of partiality and
strife, so gentleness and courtesy is that, which presently does appease and
cease the same.

Anger and Choler (as the ancient Fathers say) is far better assuaged by
gentleness and courtesy, then by resisting. Salamon shows the same in his
Proverbs, where he says. A soft answer appeaseth strife, but angry words
stirs up contention. Amongst all virtues, with which Princes and great Lords
ought principally to be adorned, it is gentleness, and facility in speaking
to all, and to receive them kindly, if they come unto him. There is nothing
that make them more commended. The good Princes among the heath^n had so much
light. For it is reported of the Emperor Titus, who at a time being
reprehended by some of his familiars, because he promised lightly to all that
demanded any thing of him, without considering the quality, or the cause of
the request, he answered them wisely, that ye face of a Prince should resemble
the countenance of God, from which as never any depart, but very well
contented, so the gentleness of a Prince should be such, that never any one
should fear to come unto him, and that they should go from him, If gentleness
becomes kings and princes, much more others, and especially Ministers.
without grief. If Pagan Princes, who had but the shadows of Christian
virtue, have declared by effect, yt nothing beseemed the^ more then true
humanity, we may less marvel at ye great courtesy which the chief servants of
god, and governors of his people, have caused to appear and to be made known
in their actions. Joshua the great Captain of Israel, has manifestly declared
by many of his noble acts, that nothing did so much stead him in his
government, as affability, and courtesy. But principally then, when he
would learn of Achan, whether he had the excommunicate thing of Jericho.
Joshua. 7
For instead of using the ordinary manner of Princes, and captains, to speak
fearcely and sharply unto a malefactor, Joshua behaved himself toward him,
with a fatherly clemensie, saying: My son, I beseech thee, give glory to the
Lord God of Israel. Moses was one of the greatest Prophets that ever was, that
even by the testimony of God himself, there was never Prophet like unto him.
Besides, he was the meekest, and humblest person that ever was, as may be
perceived by the practice of his life: but above all, Number. 12
in suffering the rep^oches and injuries of his brother Aaron, and sister
Myriam. Pastors which of necessity must practice this gentleness in their
ministry, ought diligently to study for the same, seeing that without it, he
cannot well discharge his calling. And therefore Saint Paul does not only
desire this virtue in this place, but elsewhere, as in the 2. Tim. 2. 2. Tim. 2
when he says: The servant of the Lord must not strive, but must be
gentle toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men patiently, Tit. 1
instructing them with meekness, that are contrary minded. This is the
reason for which Saint Paul is set before us, an ensample of humanity unto
others, as we may see. 1. Cor. 14.
Shall I come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the spirit of
meekness? And again, he speaks after this manner. Now I Paul my self
beseech you, 2. cor. 10
by the meekness and gentleness of Christ, which when I am present among
you, Gal. 5 Math. 11 Ministers must propose unto themselves the meekness of
the Apostles, namely S. Paul, and of our Savior Jesus Christ
am base. etc. To be brief, when the same Apostle says to the Galathians, that
Meekenes, gentleness, and temperancie, are the fruits of the Spirit. And that
our Savior Jesus Christ himself is set down for an ensample to all
Christians, as we may see. Learn of me, that I am meek and lowly in heart,
and ye shall find rest unto your Souls: those that desire this calling of the
ministry, must consider that it is their duty above others to give themselves
to this gentleness and meek spirit. Let us come now to covetousness, and desire
of gain which is not honest, which is numbered by Saint Paul amongst those vices
which a minister should avoid. Covetousness ought to be avoided of Ministers,
because of the infinite evils it brings to all those who are led by it.
We comprehend these two words under one. The reason is, seeing that
covetousness being an ardent, and insatiable desire to get goods, and to heap
them up one upon an other, those that are poisoned with this desire, they care
not how they get them by right or wrong, and so making a dishonest gain, it is
not amiss to comprehend these two vices under one. But to avoid earnestly
this vice of covetousness, let us set down in order, the filthiness and
strange evils which it brings to the world, proving the same, not only by
that which the Philosophers have thought, and written, but principally by the
Scripture. And let us observe, that if there were nothing left, but that the
wise Philosophers have written, it were sufficient to cause us to detest the
same. For who is not moved with that saying of Cicero. Good manners are
corrupted, 2. Offi^.
and depraved by the too much love of riches. Likewise he says in his Oration
against Verres, That there is nothing so sacred, but that it may b^e violated,
nothing so strong and defenced, but that it may be overcome by money. In his
Oration for Quintius, he says: There is no duty never so holy, or divine,
which may not be broken through covetousness. And in his first Book of his
Paradoxes, Covetousness is a kind of thirst, and destemperature in men, which
can never be satisfied, it tormenteth, and racketh them, not only with a
beastly desire to increase that which they have, but also with a miserable
fear of loosing that which they have gotten. Also against Vatinius,
Covetousness is insatiable, it holds in such sort the understanding of men,
so locked and tied fast, that it suffers them not by any means to take
breath. To be brief, in the fourth Book of his Tusculan Questions, It is a
sickness that pearceth the veins, and runs through the intrales, and that
which is worse, when once it has seized our heart, it cannot be rooted out. I
think none so void of reason, that would either buy or eat that meat which
should not slake our hunger, but rather increase the same: or drink that Wine,
or any other liquour which should not quench our thirst, but that which should
make us more dry. Covetousness the^ being the same meat and drink, it ought
so much the more to be abhorred. But ye better to find out the deformity
thereof, and that incredible mischief unto which it brings the^ that suffer
themselves to be led by the same, The first mischief unto which covetousness
brings them that serve her. 1. Sam. 2
let us come to the scripture, and hearken diligently what is there spoken. We
learn first of all, that it so blinds men, that it casts them headlong,
not only to the loss of their goods, but of their life also, as we see in
Nabal. Who being a very rich man, refused to give provision to David's young men,
which were greatly distressed by war, notwithstanding that David's soldiers had
been as a wall to all the sheep and goods of Nabal, his covetousness, and
unthankfulness carried so far, that he would give nothing unto him, who had
power utterly to subvert him, and in truth he had been in extreme danger, had
it not been that his wife Abigail by her wisdom prevented it. Again, The
second
it so dazeleth the eyes of many, and makes them so sense^esse, that they
care not to seek the destruction, not only of a few, but of an whole nation,
who^ they had rather behold to perish, then to be deprived of their expected
gain: of which sort the Scripture proposes unto us two notable examples. Number.
23
The first of Balaam, who being called by Balaacke the king of Moab, to curse
the people of Israel, having received a reward of his divination, (that is,
rich presents) he thought it better to curse that people, and that by his
curse they might perish, then that he would lose the reward which he
expected from Balaack. The other is of Demetrius a certain Siluersmith, who
seeing that Saint Paul preached, Acts 19
that the gods which were made with hands, were not true gods, and fearing
least that the gain which he and many other of his craft, got by making
shrines of silver for Diana, should either be dimished, or altogether be lost,
he stirred up so great a tumult, and sedition in the town of Ephesus, that
saint Paul, and his companions, were not only in danger of their life, by
means of Demetrius, and his confederates, but also all they that were in
Ephesus, and even the town it self: In such sort was Demetrius enraged by his
covetousness, that he thought it better to hazard the town, then to loose
any part of his commodity. It stirs men up to sell themselves, and others,
and to make more account of a piece of silver, then of men created to the
glory of God: as we may read of Dalila the amourous lover of Samson, who
suffered her self to be so undermined by her covetousness, that she sold him
unto some of ye Philistines, who gave unto her a thousand, and one hundred
pieces of silver, to deliver unto them the forenamed Samson. It goes further
then that which is amongst private men, those which are linked together by
consanguinitie: yea, even those which are brother germans, issuing out of the
same bowels, may be so inchaunted with this venom of covetousness, that they
make sale one of another, as we read to have come to pass to the sons of
Jacob, who sold to the Madianites, their brother Joseph, Genesis 37 The third.
for twenty pieces of silver. Nay, it stretches it self so far, that it so
besotteth the covetous man, that forgetting God to be the revenger of sin,
they oppose themselves against the Spirit of God, to satisfy their greedy
desire. Annanias and Saphira, may bear witness hereof, who suffered themselves
so to be abused by this cursed passion, that they were not any thing abashed
to lie unto the holy ghost, who spoke by the mouth of Saint Peter, being
desirous to keep back by deceit, half of that price for which they had sold
their field, who for their shameless lying died presently, as we may read.
Gehazi likewise was on less charmed with this poiso^, Act. 5. The fourth
running after Naaman, who returned from his master, being cured by him of his
leprosy, and seeing his master had taken no reward of Naaman, he took (his
master not knowing of it) two talants, and two change of raiments of Naama^,
saying yt his master Elizeus had sent him (lying first to Naaman, afterward to
his master, who by ye power of the spirit of God, knew well enough all that he
had done) for which cause by ye justice of God, the leprosy of Naaman claue
fast unto him, and to his posterity for ever. The like did Achan, 2. King. 5.
being possessed by the same passion, forgot himself in such sort, that he
committed an horrible sin, taking away the excommunicat thing of Jericho,
contrary to the express commandment of God: nothing of which was lawful to
take, because all things were appointed to destruction, without keeping any
thing which was execrable and accursed, which is called in the scripture
Excommunicat. Iosu. 7. The fifth.
Besides, covetousness does so disorder men, that it constrains the servants
thereof to serve unclean spirits, even the devil himself, as we may read
of certain men, who having a maid which had a spirit of divination, got much
by her divining, out of whom (because she said that he and his fellows
were the servants of God) he caused the spirit to depart: wherefore the
Masters of this maid seeing their gain to be lost, they drew Paul and Silas
to the magistrates, accusing them to be the disturbers of the City. What could
a covetous man do more, unless he would sell GOD himself, Math. 26. The
sixth.
to gain something thereby? We read in Matthew, that Judas bargained to sell
Christ Jesus, who was GOD, and in fine, sold him indeed for thirty pieces of
silver. See then the uttermost and last degree of mischiefs, unto which it
casts men. Let us conclude then, if Philosophers had this reason to say as
Cicero shows, 2 Offic.
that There is nothing more vile then covetousness, especially in princes,
None must take upon the^ the government of the Church for their private gain.
and in those that govern the commonwealth: what then is more wicked and
abominable, in those which have the guiding of the church, if they give
themselves altogether to their private commodity and profit?

In that it is said that a Pastor must be wise, just, prudent, and temporate,
these words are so common and known unto every one that I need not to stand
upon them to set down the beauty and excellency of them: wherefore speaking
of the three vices contrary to these virtues, that is, Ambition, Choler and
Envy, that we may comprehend under these words that which S. Paul says, That
a bishop must not give place to his own sense, Tit. 1.
the which (because they yt do procure this holy calling, may be infected as
well as other men) we will handle after the same manner, as we have set down
the vices and virtues before going. In general then, and the first mischief of
ambition is, that where she enters, she overthrows all. If she insinuate
her self into the Courts of Kings and Princes of this world, she never
contents her self with that degree of honor, unto which she aduaunceth her
servants: she always pricketh them forward, Mischiefs coming of ambition.
until she causes them to fall into some strange miseries, of which we will
only repeat two Histories. The (...) how ambition is displeasant in his
sight. Moreover we may observe, that ambition is of such a nature, that she
never gives rest to the^ that serve her, in such sort, that if ambitious men
were preferred to the highest degree of honor in this world, they would even as
Giants, lift up themselves even unto heaven, I mean, they would never be
content, that although their name were spread over the face of the earth, but
they would go about to exalt themselves eue^ unto the heavens, if possibly they
could, as we may read of the proud builders of the tower of Babell, who were
so ambitious, that the cheifest occasion for which they would lay the
foundation of that tower, was nothing else but to be renowned: for see how
they spoke: Genesis 11
Let us build us a City and a tower, whose top may reach unto the heaven,
that we may get a name. The ambitious man would climb up to heaven, to make
himself equal with God.
What would they otherwise signify by these words, but that they would fly
even up to heaven, to make there names immortal? To conclude, the ambitious
man would climb higher then heaven, even to God himself. And this is that
unto which our first parents aspired, who being without sin, commanded all
the living Creatures of the earth as a great King and sovereign Emperor, this
Empire did not suffice them, for as soon as the devil had said unto them,
that if they did eat of that tree, which God forbad the^, that they should be
like God (thinking the Devil to have spoken truth) they presently eat of the
same. Behold how far Satan carries the Ambitious, by reason of their
ambition: the which is as great as ye calling is high wherein we are placed) the
more then we are advanced to some high place, the more ought we to avoid the
same. And heereunto may be added, that the more excellent gifts we receive from
god, which are proper, for the discharge of our calling, the more ought we to
take heed, that she enters not into our heart, to take possession of the
whole, and seeing that these gifts be the gifts of the spirit, which are the
more to be regarded, as the spirit is more excellent then the body, The higher
that a calling is, the greater the ambition, if it creepes into them that
exercises that calling.
and as they pass them in dignity, so there is greater danger, that this
worm of ambition should breed in them. We see commonly by experiences, that
worms do not breed in new and hard trees, but in Cedars, and other more
tender wood, and moathes in the finest wolles, and not in the course: so
likewise ambition is the proper vice of those that are most perfect. And this
ought especially to be considered, that amongst all the gifts of the spirit,
there are none of more reckoning, then the graces of God in preaching the word,
and as they are of more value, so ambition does more attempt them which are
endued with these graces, who are in perpetual danger, to be overcome of her,
either by reason of their eloquence, or because of the conceit of their
sufficiency: or because of the general applause of the people: so that they
ought diligently to beware yt she does not seize upon the heart: for if she
once enters, it is certain, that such does bring forth more bad fruit
secretly, under the pretense of reason, to maintain their ambition, yt they
do no good, which is perceived in ye government of their calling: even as a
little wormwood cast into a vessel of wine, spoileth the whole, and a little
ink being powered dinto clean water makes it black, so a little ambition may
spoil all those excellent virtues which a Pastor has attained. But how shall
a Pastor (says some) avoid this ambition? How a Pastor may avoid ambition.
It does consist only in not seeking for honor, but also to reject the same
when it it offered, as far as possibly they can: especially then, when
occasions are given of commendations, as when he goes to preach. For it may
so fall out, that then when one is prepared to speak well, he may be tickled
with a certain humor of glory, as upon the Sabbath day, or some solemn
feast day, then say I, he must remember his duty, which is to behave himself
humbly, and to give all the glory to God. To this end Philo, Iudaeus
applies the forbidding of the people of Israel, to eat leauened bread at the
feast of the passover, as though he would say, that even as the leaven has
this property to puff up the dowe, so the praise which that day may be
given, may make the heart to swell: and as leaven was forbidden them the day
of the Passover, so likewise upon other days when they went about any good
work, especially in Preaching the word, then we ought to fly this vain
glory (which is so indeed for the most part) more diligently then at another
time: because then she does present her self, and may insinuate her self
into the soul more then at some other time. Let us come to anger, of which we
may say, that this devilish passion is so cruel to those, who yields
thereunto, The mischief of Anger.
that it depriueth them of sense and understanding.

As Soon as it enters into any it takes away from them all the light of
reason, and consequently, all counsel and advice in bringing our purposes to
pass. Afterward it tyrannizeth, as commonly Tyrants use to do over the^ which
are subject unto the^. For eue^ as those yt have once taken possession of any
country, they take away from ye same al those yt may hurt the^, as they see in
wisdom, so this having once seized upon ye heart, does choke al wisdom which
there may be hid: it causes us to be of a turbulent spirit, it co^foundeth al
our thoughts, and causes all our countenance, to be altogether disordered.
Hippocrates the Prince of the Physicians says, that the sickness is to be
feared, which causes an alteration of the countenance of him which is
diseased. Choler then is so much the more dangerous, that it transformeth in
such sort, the estate of the body and mind, that if one could paint such as
are thus metamorphized, no such monsters would appear. For chollericke men
sometime frown, sometime laugh, sometime blush, sometime wax pale, sometime
they knock their feet against the ground, sometime they clap their hands,
sometime they mock, nod their head, make a mouth, as children use to do, and
to be brief, they make so many faces (as one says) as they that use to foot
out the moriske dance. If this demeaner of an angry man be not sufficient
reasons to persuade any to leave these follies, yet this vice ought to be
abhorred, because it makes the manners of those that be chollerick, to be rude
and savage, and all their nature so wild and barbarous, that if it be
considered as it ought to be, we shall find, that it is more like the nature
of lions, Choler does extinguish in me^ all Christian virtues.
bears, and tigers, then of men, because this passion does so abolish mercy,
courtesy, temperance, honest, and modest gravity, that nothing can be seen in
them, more then is in cruel and wild beasts. Some blame pleasure, because it
transformeth men into swine, as Circes did the companions of Ulysses. But
choler ought more to be discommended, because it does not only transform men
into Tygres, and Lions, which are beasts more dangerous, but also even into the
person of the Devil, as we well observe in a learned treatise of a famous man
of our age, which he made of choler, drawing these reasons here alleged to
prove, that it depriueth us of the spirit of God, by which we are regenerated:
for if that spirit were in them, it should make them of wolves, lambs, but
choler brings us to our savage nature, it causes that of lambs we become
wolves: and in one word, choler is the Prince of disorder, which is in the
world, and the true co^trarietie, which opposes it self directly, against all
that which God has made. Briefly, seeing that this passion is not only
deformed, but also pernicious, those which are preferred unto, or desire the
calling of a minister, ought so much ye rather to banish the same from them,
not only for the horrible mischiefs which it brings with it, but also because
of yt, springs another passion which is called Envy, no less dangerous and
pestilent unto men then Anger, nay rather more, if all things be duly
considered. We say that it springs of choler, because it does communicate
with it, as all vices depend one upon another. But according to Saint Austen,
we may say that it proceeds from Ambition, because it is called the daughter
of ambition: but so it is, that the parents being so near, it was very
necessary, that I should touch some thing hereof by the way, because they
that are too much given to choler, and especially to ambition, commonly are
infected with envy. And this is that which S. Austen would signify, Aug. de
ver. b. dom. super Mat.
saying: That Envy is the daughter of pride, and that the mother thereof, which
is ambition, cannot be barren, but that every place where she is, she brings
forth. Wherefore we may conclude of a certainty, that he that is ambitious,
is also envious. The^ seeing that this passion, is as it were engraffed in the
heart of every one, even as Plutarch says, As there is no Lark without his
crest: so there is no spirit to be found, in which there is not some seed of
envy: fo far ought it be from us, to flatter our selves, as though it were
some little fault. For they which suffer themselves to be overcome of the
same, may commit an infinite number of strange sins, the which are so much
the less tolerable, as this vice is more infamous and wicked then others.
Wherefore envy is more infamous then other vices.


For when one is overcome with choler, with covetousness, with ambition, with
pleasure, for fear to offend, he finds out an evasion, or some light
excuse, as when one is accused to be negligent or slothful in his business,
he will answer, that he is to take advice in his affairs: if an other be
reprehended of impatience, he will answer that he ought not to dissemble an
injury that is offered unto him, for if he do so, he may be alwaeis subject
to wrong. Again, if an other be reproved, that he is given to pleasure, he
will say, that he must pass the time merrily, that he must be gallant,
otherwise he should be thought to be a Melancholicke Stoic: if he he
ambicious, he will answer, otherwise none will reckon of him, unless he be
advanced to honor and credit.

To conclude, if he be covetous, he will say, that he has many children to
maintain, and if he were poor, none would care for him, and if he should grow
to be sick, he must depend upon Physicians and Apothecaries, etc. But if one
ask the envious man wherefore he is envious, what can he answer? But that
God is more good, more liberal, more merciful, to give unto one more beauty,
to an other more riches, to an other more knowledge. For when is an envious man
sorrowful? Even then when he sees another man more furnished with some
graces then himself, he rejoices when another is grieved, and when he has
occasion to be grieved. Contrarily, he is afflicted, when others are joyful:
he laugheth when others weep, and weepeth when others laugh. To be brief, he
is healed by an other man's sickness, and is revived by an other man's death.
But let us see by examples, the occasions that the envious take to torment, and
crucify themselves. We read, Genesis 26 What be the occasions of envy.
that Isaac in the time of a grievous famine, went unto Abimelech King of the
Philistines in Gerar, and that GOD having blessed his store, in making his
flocks of Sheep and Cattle to increase, and all that he possessed: It is
said afterward in the History, that the Philistines envied him: where we
may see an apparaunt matter of their envy, which was that they enjoyed not
such blessings as Isaac did: Whereupon they made a great tumult, for the
Philistines troubled Isaac, they stopped up all his Wells, with which he
watered his flocks, and their rage was so great, that for to appease and allay
the same, Isaac was constrained to depart from them. And the reason is added by
Abimelech himself, where he spoke on this sort unto Isaac: Get thee from us
for thou art mightier then we a great deal. This fair reason might make
Abimelech ashamed, and all his Subjects, because it did proceed from the
disease of the mind.

What was the cause, that Rachel conceived such an hatred against her sister
Lea? Genesis 30.
And murmured so much against her husband, that she her self said, that
She should die, if he gave her not children. The reason is set down,
because Rachel saw she bare Jacob no children, as her sister Lea did (for
which cause she was a reproach unto those that lived at that time) she
pursued with envy her sister Lea, who was in great reputation amongst all at
that time, because that barrenness was reproachful to Women, and that was the
cause that Rachel was so enraged against her sister Lea, in that she was not
so fruitful as she.

Let us go forward, if this vice creep into men of war, or into Courts, or
into Kingdoms, or into the Church of God, it stirs up incredible
mischiefs. In war among them that make profession to carry arms. Who can
speak of half of those troubles that it kindles? whereof ca^e that strife
and contention betwixt the men of Ephraim and Gideon, then when Gideon pursued
the rest of the Madianites, that he had in chase? It proceeded from no other
cause, but that Gideon had done an exployt of war most memorable, which had
never been ended but lamentably, had not Gideon, (perceiving well the
occasion) pacified them, attributing unto them the better part of the victory,
Judge. 8 Eunie destroys all where it enters.
as we may read.

If it creep into Courtiers, it is never satisfied, but with the death of
those that it does envy. There is a notable example hereof among the
governors that Darius had appointed over his Realm. Dan. 6
And over those three Rulers that had the oversight of the hundredth and twenty
governors: for we read, that Darius having appointed Daniel one of the three
over the hundredth and twenty governors, he loved him so well, that he
thought to have set him over the whole Realm, that he should be the second
after him, insomuch, that the other Governors began to envy, and to bear
such a vehement jealousy toward him, partly because he was so beloved of
the King, and partly because of the Jewish Religion, that they found out a
means to accuse him of unfaithfulness toward the King, because he would
not call upon the King Darius, according to the decree that the enemies of
Daniel had caused to be made. What came to pass? he was cast into the Lions
Den to be devoured of them, and it had so come to pass, if GOD had not
showed a maruailous token of his providence in defending, in restrayning the
nature of those furious Beasts, who in steed of tearing him in pieces, did
him no harm at all: but the other his accusers, being by the commandment of
the King cast into this Den, with their Wives and Children, were devoured
even unto their bones, before they were come unto the bottom of the Den. If
it infecteth Kings, or enters into them unto whom their Kingdoms may come by
any means, this furious Beast does show her self more cruel: for she does
not only procure the death of them upon whom she fastneth her self, but
she is so outrageous, that she prosecuteth unto death, all those whom she so
mortally hates: yea, even to banish out of the places, the brute beasts, where
those whom they envy do remain, yea, and overthrow the place it self, such
is their insatiable envy. Amongst other examples we may read, that when Saul
had a long time sought David to put him to death, 2. Sam, 21.
fearing least he should get away his Kingdom from him, it is there said,
that one of the servant of Saul named Doeg, desiring to gratify his Master,
came and told Saul that David was in the Town of Nob, and that the priest
Ahimelech had given unto him the Sword of Goliath. Saul sent to seek
Ahimelech, he spoke reproachfully unto him, and called him traitor, and said
that he had conspired against him with David: unto whom when Ahimelech had
answered, that neither he nor David did conspire, but that he was his Son
in law, and a faithful servant, and that he had only asked counsel of the
Lord for him. Then the gall and venom of envy which was in the heart of
Saul, abundantly powered forth it self, for he caused not only Ahimelech to
be slain, but also fourscore and four Priests with him, Also Nob the
City of the Priests, smote he with the edge of the Sword, both man and
woman, both child and suckling, both Ox, Ass and Sheep, which were in the
City. To go forward, if it once enters into Brothers and Sisters, which have
issued out of one belly, it cannot be kept back by this fraternity, which
is the greatest bond of love as possibly may be, it breaks out oftentimes by
a most cruel murder of them which are joined together in consanguinitie: we
may propose two examples hereof, one of the Brethren of Joseph, Genesis 37.
of whom we read, when he was deadly hated of his Brethren (because Jacob
their Father loved him, and also for his Dreams, by the interpretation
whereof, his Father, his Mother, and his brethren, might understand, that one
day he should be preferred before them) his Brethren conspired his death, and
at length to satisfy their envy, they sold him, in such sort, that their
envy was so violent, that although they knew for certainty, that he should
prove a great Prince, who might afterward stand them in steed, yet they had
rather have put him to death, then to have seen him in such an estate. The
other may be taken from Caine, who passed further: for the History makes
mention, that seeing the sacrifice which he offered, was not so accepted of
GOD as his Brother Abels was, he most cruelly massacred him. Moreover, the
envious man does not only put to death those whom he does envy, but
sometime he lays violent hands even upon himself, as some have noted: and
for proof whereof, they have set down the example of Achitophell, 2. Sam 17
of whom we may read, who very much grieved, that the counsel of Hushhai
was preferred before his, he went home and hanged himself. To be brief, if
an envious man could set himself against God, he would do it: and we may
very well say, that envy has reached so far in the person of the Scribes
and Pharisees, and many others, of whom we read in the Gospel, who although
they were more then convinced in their consciences, that Jesus Christ was God,
being so inchaunted with this poison of envy, they devised all means that
they could to put him to death, accusing him, that he said he was God, and
in the end by this false accusation they crucified him. Besides, envy is the
sole cause of the ^estruction of those which are poisoned therewith, the only
overthrow of kingdoms, if it once does infinuate it self into the hearts of
them which have the government of the same: and it is no less merciful unto
the Church of God, if the leaders thereof give way unto it. And because that
Satan, who is the true Father of envy, and the mortal enemy of the
salvation of men, Envy in the church hurts as much as in any other state.
endeavors with all his foce to increase his Kingdom, and to destroy Gods
people, knowing that if there be any in whose heart this accursed passion is
planted and ingraued, it is in the heart of Pastors whereby he may gain most,
and the more advance his kingdom, and diminish Gods inheritance. Then it may
so fall out, that he that is thus possessed with envy, in steed of seeking
the glory of God, and the discharge of his duty, he will seek his own,
neither will he be content to live peaceably amongst his fellow brethren, if
he shall perceive that they excel him in any grace, whereby he may profit
himself, and learn of them, and that the Church may be greatly edified, but
he rather takes delight, that both he and the Church should be deprived of
such men, then patiently to bear, that the opinion which is conceived of him,
or which he perswadech himself men conceive of his gifts, should any way be
impaired by others. And to conclude, seeing there is no such way to promote the
glory of God, as by the ministry of his word, provided always that those
that have the charge thereof, to preach the same, be void of all sinister and
corrupt affections, and espcially of this envy: so there is no instrument
which does more diminish the Kingdom of God, and establish that of Satan, as
when the Pastors suffer themselves to be carried away with these passions.
Therefore we must detest as much as possibly we can, this horrible monster
Envy, and to the end we may the more abhor the same: let us consider, that
he that yields thereunto, does but procure his own torment. Furthermore, in
respect of him which is followed with envy, How envy may be corrected.
he is so far many times from being hurt, that that virtue is increased in
him, which others go about to diminish. And this is that which Propertius
would signify when he says, that an envious man has so many tormentors, that
do justly punish him, as he whom he does envy has commenders. And
verily, as envious men do procure praise and commendation unto them, whom
they gnawe upon with their envy, they do but heap up the torment of their
mind, and cause their own shame. as Chrysostom shows upon Matthew. O
Envy, which art always an enemy to thy self, for he that enuieth, makes
himself as infamous, as he causes him to he glorious whom he prosecuteth
with envy. And let us add this, to comfort them which are troubled with the
envy borne against them, that most notable saying of Propertius, that the
prick of envy ought to stir up men more to the exercise of virtue. Jacob
having passed over Iordane with his staff, had never returned with great
bands, if the envy of Esaw had not stirred him up, and exercised him.

Joseph had not been a commander in Egypt, if the envy of his brethren had
not sold him. For it is written, he cannot be Abell, that is not exercised
with the malice of Caine. With these things also we may join that which
Cicero says against Catiline, that envy gotten by virtue, ought not to be
counted envy, but virtue. And this ought as well to be applied to those which
do pursue others with envy, somewhat to restrain them, as to those which are
envied, the more to encourage them cheerfully to go forward and persevere in
well doing.

FINIS.
The second Book.
CHAP. I. The second part of the difficulties which are found in the Ministry,
concerning the Preaching of the word of God, and conuincing the adversaries of
the same.
SEeing that now we have sufficiently declared the dignity of the Ministry,
and the great difficulties which are to be found in the same, as well in regard
of those virtues with which they are to be endued, who do aspire unto it, as
in respect of those vices which they are to avoid: Let us come now to those
difficulties, which do offer themselves as well in teaching the word of God
unto the people, as in defending the same, by encountering with heriticques, of
whom some do falsify the same: some do mingle it with their railing, and
others defiles it with their Glosses. These then be the two points, which S.
Paul does principally require in Ministers, when he says: That they must be
apt to teach, and have knowledge to confute the gainsayers. Of which point we
are now to speak in order, but before we enter into the discourse of them, let
us observe that, seeing that the question is, how to make a perfect Pastor in
his charge, that we must keep that order which have been observed a long time,
as we see in a Cannon which was taken from the fourth council of Carthage,
where S. Austin sat, which says thus. He that is to be made Minister, first of
all must be examined whether he be wise by nature, docible, temperate in his
manners, Chaste in an holy life, sober, watchful, provident in his affairs,
humble, affable, merciful, so much for his behavior. Afterward it follows
for his learning: that he must be wel^ learned, instructed in the law of the
Lord, understanding aright the sense of the Scriptures, exercised in the
doctrine of the Church, He that will embrace the charge of the ministry must
be of good life, learned, and alwairs diligent.
and above all, that he does simply hold all the Articles and documents of
faith. Where we may perceive by this Canon, that in Ministers, the suffiicencie
of learning must be joined with honesty of manners, and that by good reason:
for it is not sufficient that a Minister should be a good man, fearing God,
and unfurnished of those parts which are necessary for the execution of this
charge: neither on the other side, it suffices that one should be learned and
profounde in knowledge, and skillful, and nevertheless be of a wicked life.
For as wicked manners with knowledge, ought to cause men to be kept back from
this charge, so a good life, and an honest conversation, joined with
insufficiency, and unfitness, ought to make others to be put by, and
excluded. To these two points let us join a third, that it is not sufficient
to be capable to preach the word of God, and to be of a good life, but
besides these two, that they put that in prac-which they teach, and that they
use diligence and industry, in employing the gifts which they have received of
the Lord, for the edificatio^ of his church. Wherefore let them continually set
before their eyes, this excellent sentence of S. Gregory, which ought to be
as a Glass, daily to behold all the parts of their duty. He must (says he)
seriously consider, what it is, that he that desires this charge, comes unto,
and after having attained the same, how he lives: also he must see, how living
well, he teaches, how teaching well, he learneth every day his own weakness,
for fear least that this great humility should cause him to avoid this
charge: wherein being placed, his life must not be contrary to the dignity
of the same: and being in this charge, although he be of a good life, he must
not fail in doctrine. And if he be learned, he must not be proud: and in
sum, being filled with all virtue, he must not rashly attempt this charge,
unless he be constrained thereunto: and if he be void of virtue, he must
take heed that he approaches not unto the same, although he be
constrained. Let us enter then into the discourse of this property of teaching
requisite in the Pastor. Let us observe, that it consists principally in
three points: whereof the first is to teach the word of God unto the people,
and to administer the Sacraments. The second is, to confute the doctrines of
false prophets, and teachers. The third, to exhort the people to repentance.
The property of preaching do consist in 3. points. 1. To preach the word of
God. 2. To convince the gainsayers 3. To exhort and reprove. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 1


These three points may be very clearly gathered of that which Saint Paul
speaks in Tim. and Tit. where he says, That a Bishop must be apt to teach:
it is not meant that this quality must be a thing forged in the air, it must
be employed in the instruction of the people: and although saint Paul speaks
not at all in that place, of the administration of the Sacraments,
nevertheless, seeing that the administration of the Sacraments, does depend
upon the preaching of the word, he that preaches the word, may also
administer the Sacraments: so that we see the first point easily proved.

The second likewise is set down in express words: that is, that he be able
to improve those that say against it. And the third, that he be of ability to
exhort with wholesome doctrine. But let us prove all three points more at
large by other places, for the comfort and contentation of the readers. The
first point may be proved by two most excellent places of the old Testament.
The first points proved by other places.


The first is, that Iehosaphat willing to purge the high places of Judah, of
Idolatry, he did appoint Levites and Priests, who should teach Judah, having
with them the Book of the Law of the Lord, and they went about through all
ye Cities of Judah, and taught the people. Ezech. 44
The second is in Ezechiel, where we read, that the Lord reproving the Jews,
because they had established in the service of God, those that ought not to be
received, he says in the 15. verse of the same Chapter, that the Priests of
the Leuits, the sons of Zadok, that kept the change of his Sanctuary, when
the children of Israel went astray from him, that they should come near to him
to serve him, and they should stand before him to offer the fat, and the blood,
and yt they should administer ye which he had appointed. And in the 23. ve. it
is added, yt they should teach the people, the difference between the holy and
profane, and cause the^ to d^scern between the unclean and the clean. Let us
come to those proofs of the new Testament, which are more evident. It is said
in the Acts, Acts 2
that Peter and Paul, preached repentance, and remission of sins, and they that
heard it, were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter, and the other
apostles, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Then Peter said unto them, Amend
your lives, and be baptized every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for
the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost. And
in the 41. verse, it is said, That they that gladly received his word, were
baptized. And in the 46. verse. They continued daily with one accord in the
Temple, and breaking bread. Again, when Saint Paul in the 20. of the Acts,
Acts 20
does reckon up the sum of his Apostleship, he says unto the Elders of
the Church of Ephesus, That he kept back nothing from them that was
profitable, but had showed them, and taught them openly, and throughout every
house, witnessing to the Jews, and also to the Grecians, the repentance
toward God, and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Acts 26
And in the 26. Paul being before king Agrippa, did recount al his office, he
says, That as soon as ever he was called to be an Apostle, by an heavenly
vision which appeared unto him as he was going to Damascus, he showed the
same first unto them which were at Damascus, and Jerusalem, and throughout all
the coasts of Judah, and to the Gentiles, that they should repent, and turn to
God, and do works worthy amendment of life. The proof of the second point. 1.
King. 18.
Let us prove the second point by other places of Scripture, that is, that a
Pastor must be able to confute the erroneous doctrine of false teachers: of
which we have examples of the Prophets, and Apostles. First, we see in the
first Book of the Kings, that the Prophet Elias did show unto Achab, and to
the people of Israel, that the prophets of Baal, (which the ignorant people
held for true Prophets) were false Prophets, and he himself did convince them
of falshoode, by that sacrifice which they had chosen to make known, which of
them two (he or they) were false Prophets. It came to pass, that by the
prayer of Elias, fire was cast down from heaven, to consume his Sacrifice, and
on the contrary side, that of the false Prophets was not consumed, although
they prayed to their god Baal to hear them, they were convinced to be false
prophets.

In the second place, we read in Jeremy, Iere. 14
that the Prophet Jeremy by the commandment of God, did confute the
prophesies of the false Prophets, who affirmed that God would not punish
Jerusalem, nether by the sword, nor by famine. And he affirmed the contrary,
that God would plague them by these two scourges, and that the false prophets
themselves (who durst abuse the name of God, saying, that it was in his name
that they showed them, that war and famine should not come near them)
should also be consumed by the sword, and by famine, with the people unto whom
they had prophesied. And in the 28. of the same Prophet, Chap. 25
a certain false prophet named Hananiah, showing the people, that God had
broken the yoke of Nabuchadnezzar ye king of Babel, and that the vessels which
he had taken out of the house of the Lord, should be brought back again: and
for the confirmation of his saying, having taken the yoke from the Prophet
Ieremiahs neck, and broken it before the Priests and people, he said, even so
shall the yoke of Nabuchadnezzar king of Babel, be broken from the neck of all
nations, within the space of two years. When it it is there set down, that
Jeremiah had the word of the Lord to the contrary, who by Gods
commandment, put him back, saying unto him in the 15. verse of the same
chapter: Hear now Hananiah, the Lord has not sent thee, but thou make this
people to trust in a lie: Behold this year thou shall die. We read
likewise, how that Ezechiel did beat down the false Prophets and
prophitesses, who seduced the people declaring unto them peace in the name of
the Lord, then when he was purposed to take vengeance upon them for their
sins, saying: VVo unto the foolish Prophets, that follow their own spirit,
and have seen nothing. And in the 18. ver. VVo unto the women, that sow
pillowes under all armeholes: that is, who maintain by their false prophesies,
men in vain hope, promising unto them peace and quietness, when they do
abound with all wickedness. And make vayles upon the head of every one that
stands up to hurt souls: that is, who fit their vain predictions to all
ages, and to all kind of people, or else they that do deck them which go
toward them with cetrain vailes or such like: promising them to obtain by
these means, any vision. The Prophet speaks in such manner, because the
sorcerers and diuiners, covered with a veil, the face of them unto whom they
spoke, and sowed pillowes under their armeholes, giving them to understand,
that the event of their answer should be more certain. It is said also in the
Acts, that There arose certain of the sinagogue, which are called Libertines,
and Cirenians, and of Alexandria, and of the^ of Cilicia, and of Asia, and
disputed with Steven. But they were not able to resist the wisdom and the
Spirit by the which he spoke. Act. 9.
And in the same book we see, that Saint Paul confounded the Jews and the
Grecians, showing that Jesus Christ was the son of God. We read also in the
fifteenth of the Acts, that certain false Prophets, (who taught, that Except
they were circumcised, they could not be saved) were confuted by Saint Paul
and Barnabas, and other Apostles in Antiochia. In the eighteenth of the same
book, mention is made of a certain Jew named Apollos, an eloquent man, and
mighty in the Scriptures, who mightily confuted publicly, the Jews with
great vehemence, showing by the Scriptures, that Jesus was the Christ. We may
see many Epistles of S. Paul, which are lively applied to this effect. In Saint
Peter we read, 2. Pet. 2.
There were false Prophets among the people, which privily brought in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that has bought them. Also in the second
Epistle, Saint John refuteth the doctrine of Antichrist, 2. John 7 The proof
of the third.
saying: Many deceivers are entered into the world, which confess not that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh. He that is such a one, is a deceiuer, and an
Antichrist. Let us come to the third and the last point, which is, to exhort
the people to repentance and conversion, reproving ye faults as necessity shall
require. We see in the prophecy of Jeremy, that God spoke in this manner by
the mouth of the Prophet Jeremy. Ier. 44.
I have sent unto you all my servants the Prophets, rising up early, and
sending the^, saying, Return now every man from his evil way, and amend your
works, and go not after other Gods to serve them, and ye shall dwell in the
land which I have given unto you, and to your fathers, but you would not
incline your ear, nor obey me. Also in Osea, Osea. 5.
God says by his Prophet. O ye Priests, hear this, and hearken ye O house of
Israel, and give ye ear O house of the King: for judgment is toward you:
that is, the judgment of GOD is prepared against you. And in the sixth Chapter
it is said, that God seeing the people of the Jews not to amend by his
punishment which he had powered forth upon them, he says, That his people in
their affliction should seek him diligently, saying, Come and let us return to
the Lord, for he has spoiled, and he will heal us, he has wounded us, and he
will bind us up. And in the fourteenth Chapter, O Israel, return unto the Lord
thy God, for thou have fallen by thine iniquity. Take unto you words, and
turn unto the Lord, and say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously. And in Ioell. Turn you unto me with all your heart, and with
fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning, and rent your hearts and not your
clothes, and turn unto the Lord your God, for he is gracious and merciful,
slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repents him of the evil. And in
the third of Matthew it is said, that John Baptist ^he forerunner of Jesus
Christ, preached in the wilderness of Judea, saying: Repent, for the kingdom
of God is at hand. And in the sixth and seventh verse. And they were baptized of
him in Iordane, confessing their sins. And when he saw many of the Pharisees
and Sadduces come to his baptism, he said unto the^, O generation of Vipers,
who has forewarned you to fly from the anger to come? bring forth therefore
fruits worthy of amendment of life, and think not to say with your selves, we
have Abraham to our father, etc. We might add many other places of scripture
unto these, but because these are sufficient, we will go on forward.

CHAP. II. Of things that he must observe, that will frame himself to be apt
to teach.
LEt us now discourse of every point, and let us show what on the one side
we must keep, and on the other side, what we must avoid. Let us mark
concerning the first point (which is, To be apt to teach, one must be filled
with good knowledge.
that a Pastor must be apt to teach) that is, Pastors are not taken for popish
Priests, who cannot be Pastors, being ignorant and insufficient, as many of
them may be made Priests, although they know nothing, according to their
Cannons, who say, that a man may be made a priest, if he can sing Mass, and
read well their breuiarie. It is added moreover, that if they cannot read,
that the Pope may dispense with this vice of ignorance, provided always that
they can sing Mass: so that by this Cannon, the most doltish idiot that may be
found (who is more fit to be an horsekeeper, or to drive asses to the mill) may
be received into the office of ye ministry. But S. Paul, requiring that a
minister should be apt to teach: he means that he must labor to enrich
himself with all humane and liberal sciences: above all, with the knowledge
of the holy scriptures, which may make him capable and very apt: for if he be
not in some measure fit for this charge, as he is unworthy, so he ought not
to desire the same: and if he desire it, he is not to be admitted. He that
desires the ministry and is ignorant, ought not to be admitted, for many
inconveniences that may grow thereby.
And this we do affirm for two reasons. The first is, that if he that is
ignorant, and a young nouice in learning, be preferred to this function, he may
become proud and headstrong, full of fantasies, making himself believe that
he is more the^ sufficient, and being possessed of this imagination, he will
more labor for the charge, then desire it with all humility: he will not
forget any persuasions to come unto the same, thinking yt if he be preferred
unto it before others, it is sufficient, Innocent. de v^^. ^um. conditi.
never regarding the principal. To this purpose says Innocentius, that
As Soon as an ambitious man is preferred to any honor, he becomes fierce and
outrageous: he has no care to do good, but to bear rule: he presumes that
so much the more he is a good man, as he seeh himself the higher to be
advanced: but virtue, and not the degree, makes a good man: not the dignity,
but the honesty. A little after speaking of these bad actions, he adds, that
such kind of men, being exalted, do disdain their former friends, they make
themselves ignorant of those whom they know: they do despise their ancient
companions, they turn their back toward them: ^hey stretch forth their neck,
and make ostentation of their pride: they speak of nothing but of their
greatness: they meditate upon high matters: they cannot bear, to be subject
to any man: they go about always commanding: to conclude, they become more
and more bold, proud, stout, troublesome, and importunate. And in regard of
the principal part of their duty, which is to Preach the word of God, being
persuaded of themselves that they have sufficient knowledge, they commonly
speak that which comes in their mind, without premeditation: or if they make
any, it shall be very cold stuff: they speak in such an immodest sort,
impudently and without zeal, and consequently without fruit: in such manner,
that a man may see in them that which Quintilian says. That unlearned men
speak more high, then those that have knowledge and wisdom, and they which
know nothing, make themselves ignorant of no kind of learning.

The second reason is, that seeing they are drunken with their own opinions
and sonde conceits, in the exercise of their charge, as well by their life, as
by their doctrine, they will cause an infinite number of offenses contrary to
the honor of God, and the edification of the Church: and especially to the
detriment of the souls of the poor faithful Christians: For which such
Pastors shall answer before God, seeing that they are appointed the Stewardes
and Guides over the^.

But if he that desires the charge of the ministry, be sufficiently furnished
with those gifts which are requisite to this charge, behold the good that
comes thereby, that his knowledge has made him wise, advised, and modest,
according to the common proverb, That ignorance makes a man bold, but
knowledge stayed, and p^udent: after having gotten a sound judgment, by the
knowledge and experience of those things which he has learned, he takes upon
him with good deliberation, the dignity, and greatness of this charge: so
that ordinarily it comes to pass, that the more experience one has, the
more judgment he has, and conceit by the same: and being such an one, he
does not intrude himself, but rather his learning will make him ^ore fearful,
even to avoid this charge being ^ffered unto him, and in the end will cause him
^ot to accep^ of ye same, unless he be urged, and constrained thereunto. And by
this we may ^iscerne insufficiency from sufficiency: Insuf^^ciencie, if a man
will thrust in himself viole^t^^^: Sufficiency, more in flying from it, being
^ffered, then in seeking the same by vnlaw^ull means. These be those then,
unto whom ^his office must be given, and to others that ^emand the same, it
must be denied. What good is to be hoped for of the^ which are preferred to the
Ministry, being very sufficient.
For those that fly from it, having taken the some by co^^^raynt, it is
incredible with what fruit they ^ischarge it, because yt in the accepting
there^f, they showed a manifest sign of their wor^hinesse. This is that which
the good Father Gregory did write to a certain man, who ha^ing accepted of
this charge after many in^^eaties, and much urging, he sent him word that he
was lawfully come unto it. Behold his ^wne words. In your writings you say,
that ^ou have greatly desired rest, and by this you show, that you are lawfully
come to a Pastors charge: ^r as this function ought to be denied to them,
which earnestly seek for the same, so it ought to be ^^ue^ unto them which
auoideth it. Unto this, ac^ordeth the civil law of Leon and Anthemius
Christian Emperors, which they made in the ^eare 469. which speaks after this
manner. That a Bishop in our time may be chosen chaste, and humble, to the
end, that in al^ places where he come, he may purify al things by his
integrity, that no minister be made for reward, but by prayers, that he be so
far from Ambition, that being found, he may be constrained, and being prayed,
he go back* being again invited, and reintreated, he^ still auoideth the
charge: and let this only necessity in excusing himself, be a sufficient
choice: for he is unworthy of this order, which is not instituted and ordained
by constraint.

This is that which may be observed in the greatest Servants of God, who having
no^ only the knowledge of good letters, an^ sciences, after the custom of
other men, bu^ also, the understanding of the holy scriptures by the special
revelations of the holy Ghost they have so unwillingly taken upon the^ this
charge, The more sufficient one is, the more surely he is drawn to this study,
but being called, he even sees the same with edification.
that when God would send^ them, some have excused themselves b^ their
infirmity: others being ravished wit^ a kind of admiration, they have cried
ou^ that they were in fants, that is, incapable in every respect of this
charge: others hau^ gone further, that they have altogether, avoided it: when
God would send Moses toward Pharaoh, to deliver his people out of Egypt, Exodus 3
he excused himself by his infirmity, saying, Who am I, that I should go
unto Pharaoh? And how did God solicit him by promises, and by threatenings, so
long that he was weary, that he said, that he could not speak well, and
that he had an impediment in his speech? Iere. 1
What did Jeremy when God commanded him to go to the king of Judah, to declare
his word? he cried out in this manner. Ah, ah, Lord, behold I cannot speak,
for I am a child, etc. And what did the Prophet Jonas, when God gave him
commandment, to go and preach repentance to that great City of Niniuie?
Jonas 1
In stead of obeying God, he did fly as a rebel.

Let us add unto this, that which Saint Chrysostom did, of whom it is
written, that when he was to be chosen Bishop, he fled into the
Wilderness, and in his flight, he said, that he that was furnished with all
gifts necessary for such a function, should be set over the flock of
Christ: but as for him, the weakness of his spirit did bear him witness,
that he was almost unprofitable. Showing by that, that they that defice this
charge, should consider that which they do, and what their force and ability
is, and not to enterprise any thing before the trial thereof. Afterward he
says two notable things: the first is, that if any come to accept of this
calling, who is it (says he) but that will say, that great and wonderful
things are committed to children to govern, and to such as have spoiled and
corrupted the flock of the Lord that sacred and holy things are made jests and
matters of sport, and so become ridiculous: signifying by the same, that they
that take upon them this charge, having not sufficient gifts of the body and
of the mind, The word of God being handled by insufficient men, is oftentimes
laughed at.
for the execution thereof, it is as absurd a thing, as if the managing of a
kingdom were committed to a child, and that which is worse, it will fall out,
that people being taught and guided by ignorant Pastors, instead of being
continually edified by them, especially by their Sermons, oftentimes by them
they shall be offended. But behold a great mischief, ye word of God (of which
none ought to speak, but with gravity and reverence, is exposed to laughter:
for when the people hear an unlearned Pastor, and him that is unfit to divide
the word; many times they mock him, and laugh him to scorn, and in ieasting
at him, the word of God also which is showed by him, is sported at, and
baselye esteemed, by which they do provoke the wrath of the Lord upon
themselves. The other is, that he is scarcely able to give a reason of his
salvation, or to retain the same, giving to understand by that, that it is a
fearful misery, that he which should teach others, is so ignorant, that he
can not give an account of his faith, if he be demanded. Wherefore to avoid
such mischiefs, let him which desires the ministry, endeavor to frame
himself for the discharge of his duty.

He must here also diligently take heed, To be apt to teach, and to divide the
word of God, he must take heed that he heapeth not up many things without
judgment, which can not be understood, and so he become obscure in speaking.
that he falls not into an extremity, as it were altogether contrary,
which is not to be too learned (for a man can never learn sufficiently) but
my meaning is not to heap up many things, and gather them one upon another
indiscreetly, and without judgment, in such sort, that he cannot express
them, when necessity shall require: so that such which give themselves so to
study, are commonly so confuse and intricate in their discourses, that the
best learned can hardly understand what they say. Therefore Saint Paul
says,, That a Minister must be apt to teach: that is, besides his knowledge,
he must have a dexterity to express his mind, and to cause his hearers to
understand him. He that is deprived thereof, he must not once stir to seek
this charge, although he be well furnished with knowledge, but because it is a
kind of hidden and obscure learning, that it cannot well serve for the use of
others, the Apostle would correct this vice by a fitness of teaching of him
that desires to preach the word. The Romans have observed this fault amongst
their Orators, 1. Tusc.
as Cicero shows, saying, that it may so come to pass, that some may have a
good conceit in matters, but they cannot speak aptly, and with a grace, that
which they have conceived. This may be said also of the^, of whom mention is
made, 1. de Orat. 1. de Orat.
where he says, that there be some such stammerers and stutters with their
tongue, and which have so bad a pronu^ciation, and have such an ill favored kind
of iesture, with their cou^tena^ce and body, that although they have art and
understanding, yet they are not worthy to be nu^bred amongst learned me^: but
there be others which are so well adorned with ye gifts of nature, that one would
think they were not borne after the manner of other men, but they seem to come
from some divine race, because they are endued with such rare and heavenly
graces, and do perform with such a singular dexterity of spirit, whatsoever
they take in hand. It is true, these be not ye sort of who^ we chiefly speak.
For they that are hindered by their tongue, or by their voice, or by some indecent
iesture of ye body, to which they are so accustomed yt they cannot leave it,
they themselves may be judges, whether it be a good or a bad thing to take upon
the^ this charge. But those of who^ we entreat be such, namely who have
furnished themselves with knowledge, who have their tongue at commandment, a
voice strong enough, and intelligible, and pleasant to ye hearers, and the
behauior of the body proportionable, but they are entangled in their matter,
that as one fallen into a laborinth, they know not which way they came in, nor
how to get out: they are also so obscure in making their learning known, yt
when one has hard the^ with diligent attentio^ of the mind a long time, yet he
can remember nothing, or very little, of ye which they said. If such me^ write,
their writings oftentimes are eue^ darkness it self, of which nothing can be
seen: they be ridles, which to dissolve we had need of an Oedipus, to guess at
ye which they would say: for they be even as torters to torment, not only ye
minds of the simple, but of those which have good wits, although not
sufficiently confirmed with knowledge, to be able to judge exactly of their
writings. For it comes to pass oftentimes, that many giving themselves to a
diligent reading of them (thinking to find great matters) they do so impoly
themselves to ye finding out thereof, yt they loose ye greatest part of their
time, which they ought to spend about things more profitable for edification,
others loose their labor altogether: I mean such as have miserably consumed
their good hours, which should have bin spent about other things, and by that
means do nothing profit the commonwealth, or less then nothing. They learn
as those of who^ Cicero speaks, who are so addicted to their studies, that
they never bring any thing to light for the benefit of their country. Wherefore
let the preacher avoid as much as possibly he ca^ this obscurity, The preacher
must uoid obscurity, as much as he can.
which is so far from profiting many, yt it hinders him much in his study, and
so consequently, greatly hurt the church of God, when such are appointed to be
governors of the same: and he shall consider, yt flying this obscurity more
diligently (which others do so much affect) yt he shall apply himself with all
his force to a kind of facility, in expressing yt which he teaches, as well
by writing, as by lively voice: and this facility shall bring as much profit
and fruit, as difficulty of delivery does bring hurt, as we see plainly in
those Pastors which use the same, and who have easily gotten such an habit
therein, To have a dexterity in preaching, heed must be taken, that many words
be not used without soliditie.
yt they do service in fit time and place. We may also observe here an other
fault, unto which many that speak publicly are subject, who having naturally
an aptnes and swiftness in speaking, which they have attained by study and
labor, yt when they speak or discourse, it seems like a flood that runs
swiftly, but they are matters of light importance, and for the most part
altogether unprofitable. It is true, yt there be some that speak very aptly,
according to the diverse natures of men, who are as greatly to be commended,
seeing that they preach with fruit and profit, as others which do no good, are
to be blamed. And as those which have a celerity in preaching with profit, are
more to be admired (because they are peculiar graces in them) that they cannot
be propounded as examples to imitate: so also we ought to avoid the vice of
them, who having a volubility of tongue, do more feed the people with words and
voice, the^ with matter. The volubilitie of the tongue, is a great fault when
it is abused.
This is (says an ancient doctor) a great fault: the volubility of the tongue,
when by the same great admiration is procured amongst the simple: but why is it
a great fault? principally for two reasons: the first is, that the people, who
for ye most part are sottish and ignorant, conceive so great an opinion of such
preachers, that they make account of others which are endued with far greater
graces. And those kind of preachers do more often delight their hearers then
instruct them: and even as those men that are accustomed to gross meats, love
them better then those that are more delicate, so they that are used to such
preachers, because they want learning and judgment to judge of the
sufficie^cie of others, they do rashly prefer the worse before the better. It
is said in a common proverb, and it is a very true thing. Cic. 1. de Not. Deo^.
The people approve that which they love. This is that which Cicero observes,
that the most part of men account that well done only, that does come from him
whom they like of, and as touching him, they are wont to approve yt which one
says of the Pithagorians, who when they affirmed any thing in disputation,
being demanded wherefore it was so, they were accustomed to say that Their master
Pythagoras said so, whose authority was not to begain said. The other reason
why we say yt the volibilitie of the tongue is a great fault, is in regard of
ye Pastor, who being accustomed a long time to this swiftnes of speech, it
falls out many times, that he becomes slothful in his study, for trusting
too much to his gift in speaking; he cannot otherwise choose but he must needs
fall into, and harden himself in this vice. Moreover, this second mischief
arises hereof, that as every man is more subject to the love of himself, then
to any other vice, it may come to pass yt such preachers thinking well of
themselves by the opinion of the multitude, may admire themselves too much, and
may be idolaters of themselves. Which shall be an occasion, that such men
suffering themselves to be carried away with these vanities, they may despise
others whom they think inferior to the^, and may pursue with a kind of
jealousy, those that excel them in gifts: and finally, they may commit many
other faults, not beseeming their calling, and all to maintain that credit,
that they are persuaded is conceived of them, loving better to be accounted
learned me^ by opinion, then to loose their vain reputation. Let a preacher
who has this gift, labor as much as he can to be free from this kind of
volubilitie in speaking (not but that it is the gift of God being used well,
but when it is diverse ways abused) that is, that he endeavor to avoid the
abuse, and follow the true use thereof in this sort, that is, in tempering the
same with daily study, in grave and serious things, to the end, that being
endued with this facility in speaking, and with the knowledge of great and
profitable things, he may in uttering the same with a kind of dexterity,
bring more profit and instruction to the church of God.

CHAP. III. Unto what things he must apply himself, that desires the
ministry, for to get an aptness in teaching, which is required in a minister
by S. Paul.
Now let us come unto those things unto which the Preacher ought most of al
to apply himself, to become fit for his charge, which is, that he get a firm
and sound knowledge of grave and serious matters, especailly of ye holy
scriptures, and that he lays so strong a foundation in the same, that he
never expound them, but with profitable edification. To attain unto this
profou^dnes, we think yt before al things, it is expedient to have a competent
understanding in the principal languages: yt is, Hebrew, Greek, and Latin: for
seeing yt these three tongues be as it were the bark and the shell, in which
the juice and marrow of true dignity (as of the most part of other good
sciences) be inwrapped and enclosed, they that desire to have any dexterity and
experience in the word of God, ought not of them to be ignorant. And although
we have almost all those things which are written in those tongues, translated
into a language which is very familiar unto us, yet it is necessary yt we our
selves have the understanding of those tongues, wherein they were written: ye
reason is, that finding an infinite number of diversities and contradictio^s not
to be reconciled (as an ancient doctor calls the^) in the expositions of
interpreters, it is to be feared, yt if we stay upon them, without well weighing
them, yt many times we may be deceived. So that it is the surest way, that we
our selves have ye knowledge of the^ (at least in some measure) that we may
advisedly consider the diverse expositions, as well of the one as of the other,
and confer them with judgment and discretion, with the pure text of every
language, that we may the better judge of the good or bad translation, and more
easily find out the truth. To speak particularly and summarily of every one of
them, we will speak first touching the Latin tongue, that nothing is more
profitable then the same, and that for an infinite company of reasons:
especially for this, that it has bin in use in all ages (and is yet at this
day) as ye domestical and mother tongue of al nations, so that they that are
ignorant of the same, must needs be deprived of ye knowledge of the most part
of those things which are written in it. As concerning the Greek and Hebrew
to^g, although many do not give themselves to the study of the^, as they do to
the latin, and some other that make no reckoning thereof (not knowing it may
be, what value they are of) yet nevertheless they be of maruailous use. The
Hebrew tongue is above all, necessary for the understanding of the old
testament, principally, because it was first written in that language: and the
Greek is no less necessary, specially for the New, because it was written in
that. But we may here note diligently two points touching these two tongues,
that as each of these tongues have their diverse properties, so we must
diligently observe the^, if that we will have the true and right use of them.
The Greek tongue has this property, that it is so fruitful and plentiful, this
it signifies one and the self same thing by many words, the which (besides
many other significations which the same words may have, according to the
diversity of places and matters, which do occur here and there) signify
also one thing, and in this respect great heed must be taken hereof, that we
do not misconceiue in searching the understanding of every place. As touching
ye Hebrew tongue, seeing that it has a property quite contrary to the Greek
(because it has very few words, but under the most part of them, it
comprehends many and diverse things) we must consider, that if we take in hand
to expound some places of scripture, we must not content our selves with one or
two significations of every word, but that we do diligently mark the
plurality of the significations of each word, according to the occurrences of
matters: to the end that we may carry away the most proper signification of
the place, as near as may be: so that he that can observe this, and practice
it, he may be maruailously eased in the exposition of the scripture: but
contrariwise, he that satisfies himself with a simple and bad signification of
the greatest part of words, without considering the variety of every subject,
it is certain, that although some one may attain unto a great knowledge in
these tongues, yet he may be deceived (as many are deceived, and do deceive
themselves commonly in going no further) that those that have only a mean
knowledge in them, do observe with judgment this diversity, as often as they
search out the understanding of any place. The second point is, that it is not
sufficient for a Preacher to attain unto the understanding of those tongues and
to observe this diversity: but also after that he has found out a proper
signification, he must study with dexterity to expound the same, with profit
and edification to the people. For if he want this dexterity, it is certain,
that the knowledge which he has gotten in the languages, is much less
profitable, (as it may be seen in many, which are destitute thereof, although
otherwise they have experience in the tongues) and for this cause, not only
the simple people, but also those that have more profited, are much more moved
and edified with such kind of teaching, then with the barren and ruder manner,
as common experience shows. And in truth, even as it is not sufficient to
say, and to show, that such a meat is good, or some other thing is very
profitable, if order be not taken for the enjoying of the same: so it is not
enough for the Preacher (who is to instruct a congregation compounded of duers
sorts of men) to tell simply ye meaning of some place: but besides, he must
know how to set forth the same, and as it were to apparel it with necessary
ornaments, that the people may the better find it out, and be better edified,
which alone with the glory of God, he must propose before him. Wherefore to
conclude this first point, the Preacher must study with all diligence for
this, to attain unto his soundness of doctrine, above all, in reading the
holy scripture without ceasing, meditating in the same upon all occasions,
pondering the same day and night, if possibly he can, propounding before his
eyes that notable saying o^ the Fathers, That cursed is the negligence o^ them
who do not employ themselves night and day to gather the oracles of the
spirits of God. For that is the true and only means with earnes^ calling upon
the name of God, to come by the same.

Secondly, to get his soundness of knowledge, every one must understand, yt
the more he learneth, the more he shall perceive hi^ own ignorance, and so
his ignorance shall make him humble, and consequently bette^ disposed to
learn, to the end that by his humility, and knowledge of his own weakness,
he may banish pride, and concei^ of himself, which do hinder many from
coming to a perfect understanding. This i^ that just complaint of Seneca,
saying: Th^^ many had even come unto true knowledge, if b^ pride they had not
imagined, they had attayne^ the same already. For verily, as pride is a great,
obstacle and impediment to the getting of the treasure of knowledge, so
humility is the ready way which leads many unto the same. Aug. lib. 3
didasc.
Learn (says an ancient Doctor) of all, diligently, that which thou know
not, for humility will make that common unto them, which is proper unto every
one: Thou shall be wiser then all, if thou will learn of all: They that
receive of all, are more rich then all. Aug. christ. ad Hiero.
Unto which we may very well add this sentence of Saint Austin unto Hierome,
That to learn things necessary, no age ought to seem too late, and although
it be more homely for old men to teach, then to learn, yet nevertheless, it
is more convenient to learn then to be ignorant.

Thirdly, let us observe, that to get this sou^dnesse of knowledge, The
preacher to get sound knowledge must exercise his memory.
here is nothing of such force and virtue, then diligently to exercise the
memory in learning, and faithfully retaining many grave sayings and sentences,
drawn out of the best authors that may be found, and especially out of the
word of God. But my meaning is, that every one should have a good and true
understanding of ye things the which he will commit to memory, for if one
learneth ye which he does not understand, behold three inco^ueniences ye
arises thereby, The first is, ye he spe^deth a long time in learning them: the
second, that after he has learned them as it were by force, and constraint,
he forget them easily again. The third, being in the memory, they do more
harm then good, because that the places in the same memory, which are
possessed with such things, cannot be filled with other more profitable
knowledge.

But the greatest hinderance that it causes, is, that it hurts the judgment
in performing her duties, which is to approve, or disalow of those things
which be in the memory, or of those things which we read. For to judge well of
any thing, it must be first well understood: if our memory be stuffed with
those things which we understand not, our judgment shall remain idle and
unprofitable. But on the contrary side, if the vessels of our memory be
filled with those things, it is incredible to be spoken, what fruit and
commodity grows thereby. We say commonly, that we only know that which we
keep in memory, We know only that which we keep in memory.
which indeed is very true, because that to judge well of knowledge, we must
not account that to be knowledge, but that which we have learned in the reading
of grave and serious matters, in most approved authors. For although men
according to their wit, do devise an infinite number of good and excellent
things, yet they must be praised for knowledge, by others, and indeed they be
not many times of any account, but to be suspected, both of our selves, and
others. Moreover, there are some that allege other reasons of themselves,
which they may oppose to ours, which is the cause that ours are nor current
with the^, whether we dispute with them, or whether we labor to instruct them
in any thing. Furthermore, if we speak any thing of our selves, which is sound
and forcecible, yt is commonly reckoned feeble, unless it be fortified and
maintained by the reasons of other men, which peradventure we have read, or
understood, by our selves. But when we can aledge ye which others have left in
writing, without doubt, that is of much more weight and force, and which will
make us take more stomach in defending that which we do affirm, and that is
properly called knowledge. How much the memory avails in this point, it is
almost impossible to be spoken. Amongst many other profits which it brings,
this is one, that it is a good help to frame the judgment. Memory is a help
to frame the judgment.
For seeing that it is so, that ye judgment is framed more by reading and
keeping many good things, it follows, that so much the more as one keeps
them in his memory, by so much the more he may have a riper judgment. In such
sort, that in any matte of great importance whatsoever, if that he will advise,
deliberate, discern, consult, resolve he may the better and more surely do it
by the remembrance of things past, which have bin seen heard, or read, and
kept by him some other time, the^ to stay himself upon reasons devised in his
own brain. But let us well understand that which we call memory, not a
remembrance for a few hours, or for a few days, which may be pe^ceiued in
many, who having heard, or read something, do remember it a day, or two days,
or a year more or less, but after it vanishes away. What properly Memory
is.
But memory is a remembrance of things which we have heard, or read, or
meditated upon a long time, and which are so fixed and imprinted in the same
that they have taken up their lodging where they mind to dwell a long time, as
it were in a chest, out of which we may take, as need shall require, many
lessons, and instructions, as often, and as much as we will. This memory is so
necessary for a Preacher, that if he be destitute thereof, he cannot execute
his charge, but with very great difficulties, because that as soon as he has
learned any thing to recite unto ye people or to serve him for some other use,
if he forget it a little after, he must always begin again, and so hardly
come to any great knowledge. Cicero in his I. It is a hard thing to be a
preacher without memory.
book de Orat. speaking of an Orator, says one notable thing, that is to say:
Memory is the treasure-house of all things, the which if she keep not as a
good garden, all that which we have read, learned, devised, imagined, invented,
(understanding al things which should be in orators, which should be most
excellent should by and by perish. We may very well say the same of a preacher,
who after that he has long sweat at his study, and exercised in his charge
many years, if he has a slipperie memory, it is certain that he ca^ do no
more good: for if it shall happen for him to speak publicly, or privately, or
oftentimes to answer unto questions, when his advise or counsel is asked, or
to be made acquainted with matters of weight of great men, or to be demanded
the text of scripture, if he cannot allege the same to serve his turn, many
inconveniences may follow thereof. And if at any time one be constrained upon a
necessity to recite something in have, he shall speak so obscurely, that the
hearers shall not understand him to what end he speaks: and it may so fall
out, yt he shall not understand himself, because he has learned those things,
as it were perforce, having no leisure to meditate upon the^, and to digest
the^, and although at home peradventure he has meditated upon the^,
nevertheless, because ye oftentimes he is constrained to travel hither and
thither, and that he has not his books at command, ye surest way is, to have
them fast locked in the memory, because when they are carried there, as it were
in a deske, as well in the high way, as in the house, as well by night as by
day, they may be beaten, chewed and considered upon, and by continual
meditations, those things may be ripened, or seasoned, which shall be found too
raw. By this then, an incredible profit grows to the preacher, that amongst
many other things, he may expound the word of God soundly, He that has a good
memory, may soundly, and easily preach the word of God.
and plainly, according to ye capacity of every one: for having in the
treasure of his memory, many grave things, it is an easy matter for him to
choose those which he shall perceive by the balance of his judgment, to be
profitable and fit for the instruction of every one. This then, is to be
reckoned one of the greatest and most sovereign gifts of God that may be: for
seeing yt in the church of God, there be of all sorts of men, both subtle and
gross, and simple, others of some mean conceit: others of very little reach:
the greatest dexterity of spirit that can be in a preacher, is so to apply
himself to every ones capacity, as that they may be instructed. And moreover,
the more that a preacher can frame himself to be familiar and plain to every
one, the more fit he is to discharge that function: and which is more, he
shall be esteemed the more learned. Although many be of a contrary judgment,
who do not esteem knowledge according to facility, but rather by I know not
what reports of some, who esteem many to be learned men, which have only the
knowledge of some numbers, who nevertheless, are reckoned men of
understanding, by opinion, rather then by truth, and by those which are not fit
and allowed judges in these things. One of the greatest Philosophers, who
speaking of such kind of men, has used a most notable similitude, A very apt
similitude.
that as the common people in Magical arts, do marvel at those things whereof
they vnde^stand not the reason, by which the sorcerers do many absurd things,
so many, says he, wonders at that style, or phrase of speaking, of which they
have no understanding. And in truth, what man of judgment will account him a
learned man, who is so obscure in his discourse, that he may be justly carped
at? And those also, which do think to cauil, shall not know well themselves
with what they should find fault: who I say, will account the^ for learned men,
seeing yt they are learned only for themselves? These be they of whom it is
said in a common proverb, that their sciences are hidden Muses, but such as
are of no account, because that such men having some good gifts of God,
nevertheless, if others cannot be the better for them, they cannot be properly
esteemed for the greatest learned men because that knowledge is not to be
counted knowledge, when a man keeps it to himself alone, and cannot impart it
to others. But when a man has knowledge, which does many good, and that he can
easily communicate ye same, he is fitly to be termed a learned man. And it is
very well said by an heathen Poet, ye it is nothing to know any thing for it
self, unless another knows that which thou know, as though he would say,
that otherwise it is not to be esteemed for knowledge. But seeing that the
mark and principal end of all knowledge, is to instruct and to edify, it
follows that the more a man in uttering his knowledge, does teach and benefit
others, the more learned he is, and ought so to be accounted. Wherefore let us
conclude this point, that a Preacher should not only endeavor, to stir up
his mind, and polish his tongue, with fair words, gentle, The more plainly a
man writes or speaks, the more learned is he to be accounted.
and delectable, but also, and principally, to fill his breast with the
knowledge of many good and profitable things. For if there be nothing but a
filed, and polished tongue, to vtte^ many words, although they be well
placed, they do not much profit. For even as the spirit of a man, either he
that reads, or he^ that hearkeneth to another that speaks, i^ not much
moved by words filed one within another, if no matter of substance be mingled
therewith, so the spirit of a man cannot much be moved by a flood of
unprofitable words in which no matter of importance is contained. In such
sort, that Cicero has very wel^ said, that it is a mere folly to speak with
propriety and ornaments without sententious words, and to speak sententiously
without order and disposition of words, it is childish. Finally, let us add,
that a preacher being sufficiently furnished both wi h words and knowledge, of
many good things, he shall attain unto an easy kind of teaching, and having
attained ye same, he shall discharge his calling with great profit, as every
one may easily perceive by his praying, in which he shall see this facility so
much wished for* and so commended, as nothing more, in regard of those
infinite commodities that it brings, as well to the preacher, as to the
hearers. S. Austen says in a certain place, The more plain a preacher is, the
more he edifieth.
that a preacher ought to labor to be heard with understanding, willingly, and
obediently. By which a man may observe three principal commodities which do
proceed from this facility: the first is, that the preacher which is endued
therewith, is easy to be understood: the second, that being understood, men
takes pleasure to come to hear, to learn, and profit: the third, that
obedience is willingly given unto his word, when the people do correct their
evil life, growing up from faith to faith, and in all christian virtues, which
is in sum, the greatest good and contentation which a preacher can attain
unto, in the administration of his charge.

CHAP. IIII. What is to be observed in making of sermons.
II is time to come to the method and order to be observed in preaching, The
manner of preaching is hard, by reason of the diversity of opinions therein.
which is one of the greatest difficulties in the discharge of the ministry: we
do affirm plainly, that it is one of the greatest difficulties, because that
it is not yet agreed upon: one sets down one way, others another way, in
such sort, that so many me^ as there be, so many opinions: as every one has
his opinion by himself, so according to the same, every one, at least, if his
mind be stirred up, does devise a new fashion. Others feeling their own
weakness, do love better to go about to accustom themselves to follow others
which they fancy best. Nevertheless, we must confess, that they are al
profitable, for seeing ye God uses diverse instruments for the edification of
the church, we must acknowledge, that all that which ye preachers have, they be
the gifts of God: and consequetly, that skill with which they help themselves
to preach the word, being a part of the graces of God, and with this skill,
their purpose and intention is, to advance his glory: we ought I say, to
acknowledge that the method of every one is profitable, and charity teaches
us so to judge. But we our selves do confess, Every one must esteem his
own preacher.
that although that which we mind to propose, seems better the^ many others,
yet for modesty sake and humility, we are content to set it after al others.
But seeing that God does distribute his graces more abundantly to some then
unto other some, and that it is lawful for every man according to the measure
of the graces of God bestowed upon him, to speak freely ye which he thinks
to be most expedient, and the best way to edify: so we may also set down our
judgment in this point. Nevertheless, we may boldly say, that the method
which we propose, is not to be discommended, because we know by experience,
that the practice thereof, has done very much good. For having preached some
small time in 11. or 12. churches, in many of which, some learned men were
present, which were greatly edified, and principally in those churches which
were in three or four universities, in which were many doctors, and a great
number of students in divinity, very well learned, who with many others,
perceiving how profitable it was, desired to have it, and to be made
acquainted with the practice: some have craved it at our hands, and others have
very importunately entreated us to set it forth in Print. And seeing that
our purpose is to prepare to the Ministry, those which are desirous of this
treatise, (and that it is necessary above all things, to be well furnished to
preach, which is the principal part of this charge) by this occasion, we
have obeyed unto their lawful requests, more by constraint then willingly,
protesting before God, and in our own conscience, that in this, we have no
other regard, then of the glory of God, and the edification of the Church: as
we do assure our selves by the issue of this our enterprise, that the one and
the other, The preacher must not have a vain conceit of himself.
shall be greatly furthered. And this we do cheefely set down, that every
one may see that we are not singular in our own opinion, which we have placed
afterward, for a long time, knowing well, yt there is nothing that so
torme^teth the mind of the ambitious man, nothing which is more hard to keep,
nothing which more hinders the way to virtue, and in sum, nothing is more
pestifferous and contagious in any man, then this is, and especially in him
that desires our charge. And I will add this also to the reasons before
alleged, for what cause we have written this method: that is, having laid
the foundation thereof, upon the Sermons of many great preachers, whom we have
heard in many places, being very diligent in hearing them, and after meditating
upon their Sermons, have brought the^ into writing (by which we greatly
exercised our memory) yt I say, many students were pricked forward by this our
recital, to hearke^ more attentively unto the preaching and lessons, the^ they
did ordinarily before, and took great pains to remember them, promising
themselves, that they profited more by this means in one year: especially
hearing always learned men, the^ they had done before in six years by their
private studies. And considering yt it is a shameful thing, and full of
reproach, that those that have so long frequented the universities and places of
study, should so negligently suffer such opportunities to pass over, which
afterward they could by no means recover, and that they would hereafter be
more diligent, if it should please God to offer unto the^ the means to enjoy ye
like blessings: and as for those that have not as yet bin at those schools,
when they should be preferred thither, they do advise them diligently to regard
this way of profiting, which is thought most convenient. Before we come to
set down our method, we give counsel, that to follow and observe the same
profitably, it is necessary that we should be furnished with those parts
which are requisite and expedient for the same: that is, with knowledge and
learning, in great quantity and abundance. For otherwise we shall loose our
labor, and shall not attain unto it, no more then a man can build without
matter: and in truth, he does fowly deceive himself, that indeuoureth to
imitate one that is singular, if he be not endued with those gifts, by which
the other excels. Wherefore every one must follow the counsel of Horace.
Every one must look what his shoulders can bear, and what they cannot bear:
that is, what ability and force is in us, and according to the same, to
dispose of our selves the best way that possibly we may. Nevertheless, we
may assure our selves, that whosoever shall but in some measure, exercise
himself in the scripture, In preaching the word of God, every one must do as
he is able.
he may procure sufficient knowledge to serve his turn, if will he take
pain, because that is not inwrapped with many difficulties nor subtilties,
neither does consist of many hard precepts to observe, but it has many easy
points, as all they that use to read them, may find out by experience. A
profitable and easy method of preaching, which consists in six points.
How profitable it is, we will say nothing: but we will leave it to the
judgment of others.

First of al, we must well consider and meditate upon ye text which we purpose
to expound, to the end, that by a dilligent and deep meditation, we may have a
perfect understanding thereof, and by the eye of our judgment we may perceive
all the doctrine which may fitly be gathered out of the same, from the
beginning to the end.

For the second point, we must draw out the beginning, from the matter of the
text it self.

Thirdly, it must be divided into parts, that is, such notes must be taken
out of the text, which does naturally arise out thereof: sometime two, sometime
three, or four, according to the matter which we handle.

Fourthly, we must expound in order every doctrine, the which the Preacher must
enrich with diverse amplifications, neither too long, nor too short, but as
profitably and fitly as he can, with similitudes.

Fifthly, he must use examples, sometime more, sometime less, as the Preacher
shall judge most expedient: sometimes also, it shall not be from the matter to
use inductions, the better to move the hearers.

Sixthly, to make the conclusion, it is best to make a short abridgement and
summarie, of that which he has handled. It is impossible to use a method of
preaching to satisfy all the hearers


But because as Gregory Nazianzine says, that in a multitude compounded and
mingled of all sorts of men of all ages, of diverse humors and complexions, it
is hard to invent a method of Preaching, which should be so acceptable to all,
that every one should be satisfied, and content: and besides he adds, that as
it is hard to tune all the strings of a Lute, or Sitterne, when one is but
touched, so every man may think, that this method cannot please all, as in
truth we have not set it down to that effect, but to leave it to every man's
judgment. Wherefore we will expound more at large, all that which we have
briefly said. First of all, whereas we say, that we ought o have a good
understanding of the text, we might allege infinite reasons wherefore yt is
necessary: but because every one may conceive many which we cannot recite,
therefore we leave them to every man's consideration: saying only in one word,
that if any one shall be so unwise and rash, to take upon him to expound a text
which he does not well understand, he must needs fall into an infinite company
of absurdities, and inconveniences.

Secondly, where as we say, that the beginning must be drawn from the text it
self, which we well understand, that must be done as well for the ease of the
preacher, as for him that hears. Concerning the case of the Preacher, it is
great in many respects, if he knows and can do it aptly: but if he cannot
conveniently do it, it shall not be less hard unto him, the^ unto them which
are accustomed to draw it where they can: where some begin sometimes with a
place of scripture, as it seems most fit for their matter, others by a
rep^tition, sometimes tedious and unprofitable, of those things which they have
spoken before. Others which read Commentaries, begin with that which they
find there: whereby it may come to pass, and oftentimes it does, that many
trusting altogether to them, many times they teach those things, which they do
not understand themselves: whereof arises many inco^ueniences, especially these
two: that is, they are hardly to be understood of their hearers: and the other
is, that in regard they have committed those things to memory, which they
understand not, they do quickly forget them again. There is also a third
evil: that those that are accustomed to learn without book, not only the
beginning of their sermon, but also the most part of the rest, they shall very
hardly afterward make them themselves, and with great difficulty become good
peachers. Briefly, the beginning is so hard a thing, that it is said in a
common Proverb, that he that has well begun any work, has half brought
it to pass. This is spoken of any work whatsoever, but by a better reason we
may say so of our Preaching: For in truth, every one knows by experience,
that those that have the dexterity of beginning well, afterward without much
difficulty, they may proceed: As it is easy to build a house when the
foundation is well laid. He then that can keep our method, may avoid all
these inconveniences. For first drawing his beginning from his text, which he
well understands, he shall hardly speak any thing, which shall not be
understood.

Secondly, if he has meditated, or devised any thing, as he must continually
do, the better to understand that which he would expound, by this means I
say, he shall remember all, as naturally we keep better those things which we
devise, then those which we read, or learn of others.

Thirdly, he shall more plainly be understood of the hearers, and
consequently, he shall Preach with much more edification.

Furthermore, for the ease of the preacher, it shall be great in two respects.
First, in that he makes the beginning himself, the which he draws from the
matter, which he does very well understand: he cannot be so obscure to his
hearers, as if he drew it out of the book of other men, or rehearsing their
sermons altogether (as many do) for although every one may have a private
skill of himself, o^ some natural inclination, so every one according to the
conceit, may lay the foundation of their sermons, and by the same reason,
others which will recite other men's works, not having the same spirit, they
cannot rehearse them with such understanding and edification, as the authors
thereof. Secondly, there is no doubt, but that the hearer does understand much
better, that which the preacher understands himself when he enters into his
matter. And verily this is a thing which the preacher must diligently observe,
that in the beginning, he speaks nothing but firm and sound things, because
that the hearer hearing those things in his enteraunce to his discourse, may
be the more attentive to hear the other parts, that follow. The beginning
of the sermon, must be sound matter.
Contrariwise, if the Preacher begins with a repetition of things going
before, or else do spend more time in those things which are not material, the
hearers which have good ears, hearing that in the beginning, and finding
nothing worthy the marking, they become cold and weary to hear the rest of
the sermon. It is true, that necessity urging a man, he may well use sometime
a repetition in the beginning of his sermon, and sometime in the midst: but
that which may be done of necessity, must not be done of custom.

Thirdly, concerning the division of the text, gathering those doctrines which
are comprised therein, we must note, that if any will describe the beauty of
some virtue, or the filthiness of a vice, or in sum, the great profit of
some lessons: it is very good to produce many reasons, and to let the
feeblest first, and then those that are more forcible: and consequently,
others. And the reason is, in placing the weakest first, and then the
strongest, because that the hearer, if he be not moved with one reason, two or
three of more force being added, he may be moved to put that in practice,
whereunto he is stirred up. But herein he must take heed of two extremities,
that setting down many reasons, that they be not strange from the text, Two
extremities to be avoided in the exposition of the text.
otherwise it were better for him to content himself with one or two, which
may be fitly gathered out of the text, then to allege many which are far
feched: the other extremity is, that being desirous to enclose himself
altogether within the compass of his text, that he will not go out: it
comes to pass, that he does rather paraphrase then expound. This kind of
interpretation is seemly, and convenient, for him that teaches in the
school, for the benefitte of them that do study the grounds of divinity,
who afterward being well grounded, may interpret the scripture in a more
ample and popular manner: it shall suffice unto them to show the true sense of
the arguments of the Scripture, and the force and virtue of the words which do
occur in the languages, the which that scripture contains, but the preacher
must avoid this extremity for two reasons. The first is, that having a large
text, we cannot expound the depth of the sense thereof, nor enter into the
bowelles of the same, and by that means deprive our selves of many notable and
excellent doctrines and comforts, which are buried therein. The other is, that
it may make the preacher idle, for only to run over a large text, which he
has read, he shall not need to labor in drawing out all the doctrines and
instructions, which he might easily gather, because that before he shall have
showed the meaning of his text, the greatest part of the time will be spent,
and more then is limited for an ordinary Sermon.

The greatness or the smalnesse of the profit of the one or the other,
plainly does appear in this, that many hearers which are very well read in
the scriptures, and who understand the sense thereof, can say as much as they
that thus paraphrastically run over a text, but when the hearers which are
something grounded and conuersaunt in the Scripture, do hear the preacher
speak many profitable things, expounding a place excellently, and plentifully,
and that they themselves cannot attain unto this kind of expounding the word
of God, The preacher must expound his text copiously.
this may incredibly move them, and make them very diligent in coming to
hear, and attentive at Sermons, and in sum, do bring great joy and good, both
to the Preachers, and hearers. Wherefore let us conclude, that the Preacher
ought most to give himself to this manner of expounding the Scripture
copiously: for he that will be too succinct, he shall not so much edify. And
further, it is much better to allege many things which are of great use,
although they may seem to some somewhat strange from the text, then to be too
scrupulous in tying our selves too much to our text, and not to edify.
Nevertheless, we say, that if our Method be well observed, that one can hardly
go out of his text, because that taking his beginning from the midst of the
text, which he well understands, it must needs be, that this beginning must
be as a Paraphrase, and a summarie of the whole text: afterward, the
amplification is a more plentiful declaration set down in order, of all that
which was spoken in the beginning in a few words.

This beginning may be compared unto the roundnesse of a circle, and the
exposition by his parts: that is, a staying within the circle, and so to be
enclosed, that he cannot go out: or if one would speak more plainly, the
beginning is like ye selling of a merchants ware by wholesale, and the
exposition by parts, is like the retailing thereof. In the fourth place, having
set down, that we must use similitudes, we say, that it is necessary for
infinite reasons which would be long to recite: but we mean, that seeing that
similitudes be of maruailous use, provided always that they be of weight, and
apt, as occasion shall require. For we will not have all similitudes to be
used, The use of similitudes.
which ^re sometime unapt, foolish and light, because they do rather breed
offense, then ^difie: but when they are taken from things ^ateriall, and
substantial, it is certain, that ^here is nothing which is of greater
pro^^te. There are two things (says Cicero in his ^hird book of Orat. Cicer.
de Orat.
) which are wont to move ^^eatly, that is a similitude, and an example. ^icero
says this in speaking of his Ora^ons, which are nothing to be com^^red to
those things which a Divine ^oth handle: yea, a fit similitude does ^one
move in sacred things, then in those ^atters that concerns the world. But
^e better to understand what good ^d profit does come by similitudes, let us
see what Erasmus says in a most eloquent epistle, unto him whom he dedicated
that little book which he entitled Adages. There is nothing (says he) among
all the ornaments which are to be given to an oration, more excellent then a
Metaphor. Will you delight? there is nothing that has so great delectation:
will you teach? there is nothing which proves a thing more effectually and
plainly: will you persuade? there is nothing of more force and vehemency:
will you study to be copious? thou shall find no other where more rich and
plentiful matter: do you desire breuirie? there is nothing which is more
fit: do you affect high points? this does extol whatsoever thou will: will
you extenuate any thing? there is nothing that will more abase it: do thou
desire to be understood, and to give light to a thing? there is nothing which
does represent any thing better before our eyes. By the same, Adages are made
acceptable: fables have their grace, and these do commend Apothegmes. By the
same, sentences are better set forth, and have more brightness. To be
brief, for the praise of a similitude, there is nothing of more force then the
example of Solomon, who being so great a man, that besides Jesus Christ, there
was none like unto him: he would not adorn his Oracles, but with the title of
Proverbs. Afterward he adds a point to be marked: Take away (says he) a
Metaphor and a similitude from Orators, all things be little and of no value.
Take away the Proverbs and Parables from the writings of the Prophets and
Evangelists, and thou shall take away the most part of the grace of the
scriptures. To all these commodities, we may join also this, which is of
great consequence, that is, when one expounds an hard place, there is nothing
that makes it sooner to be understood then a similitude: A Profitable use of
a similitude.
for although oftentimes many reasons be brought, and those which be of
force, nevertheless, experience shows, that by them one cannot so easily
conceive many difficulties: but if one uses a familiar similitude, and easy
to be understood, it comes to pass, that hard things are without labor
understood: and all those reasons which were alleged before, to make the
matter plain, are made clear and manifest by similitudes. Wherefore the
preacher must study for the same with great travail and industry, that he
may exercise his charge with mote fruit.

Let us come now to the fifth point, ye is, often to garnish our sermons with
examples: we say that it is necessary for this reason principally: that is,
because they have in themselves maruailous virtue and force, to move the
hearer, because they show the truth of many things come to pass, of which we
have places and testimonies in the scripture, in such sort, that when we
would have the truth of any doctrine to be understood, or to stir up the
hearer to the embracing of any virtue, The use of examples.
or to fly any vice: we must first propound those testimonies, which do
command, or that do exhort, or do forbid the one or the other, then we must
bring an example, which does show as it were with the finger, the effect and
performance of the testimonies. We may note also, that when we may allege
many, it is good to place those first, which are of less force to move the
hearers, then to urge the stronger (as we have counseled to do, in bringing
of reasons one after another) because of the incredible weight which this
manner of teaching has toward all sorts of men. It is true, that when
occasion is given to make clear some portion of Scripture, something hard,
that we cannot use fit examples, as we may do if we do describe the
filthiness of some vice, or the dignity of some virtue, or some such like
thing, we may then understand, that only they are to be used in the handling
of those things which are needful to be made plain by them. For the sixth
point, which is, that it is very profitable to make a brief conclusion, The
conclusion.
of all that which he has handled, we say, that it is necessary for this
reason: that is, that if they which have well hearkened has kept any thing,
they may have their memory very much refreshed and comforted, by a brief sum
of that which they have heard: and as for them that have been negligent in
hearing in the time of the Sermon, hearing the sum thereof, may be awakened
to lend their ears, and to retain some thing, and to return with some
instruction. But because it is easy to speak and discourse of diverse methods,
but it is hard to observe them: we will here set down two Sermons, of
things which seems very hard to conceive, and in the said two Sermons, all
the practice of the said method may clearly be perceived: to the end they
may be set down as patterns, that they that will go about to follow the
same, may do it more easily. The first shall be made of that which Saint James
says, Iam. 3.5.
in his third Capter and fifth verse, touching the tongue. The second shall be
grounded upon the Lords Supper, following the words which the Evangelists,
and Saint Paul uses, saying: This is my body, etc. Let us come to the first
and set down the text as it is in Saint James. The tongue is a little member,
and boasts of great things, behold how great a matter a little fire kindles.
6. And the tongue is fire, yea a world of wickedness, etc. But because it is
there said: The tongue is a world of wickedness, Iam. 3.5.6
and that it may seem to some, that it is an hyperpolicall speech, that is,
an excessive kind of speaking, all the parts of that sermon must be considered,
to understand, how they do agree together.

As in the beginning, God in creating of all things which are in the world, he
made man also, as the best and most excellent of all his works, to this end,
that he might first know him, The beginning taken from the text.
and then honor and glorify him: so man must know, that his duty toward
his Creator, is, to acknowledge him, and to give him that honor and reverence
that is due unto him, and to set forth his glory as much as he can. For seeing
that God is the beginning, the proceeding, and maintainer of his life, so he
ought to think, that his duty is not discharged, if he does employ some part
of his life, or some force of the mind, or the body, to praise him, but even
from his birth, until his last gasp, he must employ all ye powers of his soul
to magnify him, meditating continually in his word, and laboring for the
understanding of his sacred mysteries, to discourse of them by his reason, and
to imprint them in his memory, and in sum, to dedicate all his heart and his
inward affections, to advance his name. Secondly, to discharge this duty
faithfully, we must also earnestly apply all our exterior members, as well as
the inward faculties of the soul to praise him: that is, the mouth, the
lips, the tongue, the feet, the hands, the arms, and all other parts in
general, because we have received them of God for this end. But because god
has made and placed the parts of ma^^ body, some more excellent then other,
and more fit to praise him every way, as his admirable and inco^prehensible
wisdom has seen it necessary, so man must know, that the dignity and
excellency, which his members have received one above another, ought to be
used, to preach his praises more the^ other. It is the^ most certain, that
amongst all ye members of man's body which god has made for his service, he
has framed the tongue above the rest, to which he has given a property,
prerogative, and prehemine^ce, which the other parts have not, that by that,
when it is well governed, ye word of god is preached with incredible
edificatio^: by ye we set forth his magnificence in a singular manner, by that
his holy name, and his sacred majesty is sanctified more and more, by that we
pray unto God, and call upon him in all our necessities, and by that we speak
good of our neighbors, by that we instruct them, by that charity is kindled
toward men, faith increases, the fear of God shines more and more, and
does spread it self, as it were a fire in the midst of al the^ that make
profession of the doctrine of salvation, by Jesus Christ: and in sum, by that
we see a world of good things: The exposition of the beginning.
that is, a spring and fountain of all sorts of virtues, for which many study,
which were cold before, and by the same tongue, they are brought into ye
exercise of them, and kept and confirmed more and more in their duty: but
since the coming into the world of the devil, the sworn enemy of man's
salvation, the good hermony of our affections in praising God, have turned by
his malice the use of the tongue to all mischief, in such sort, that in steed
it now should be the principal instrument in man, to praise God, and to give
glory unto him, it is converted quite contrary, to offend him diverse ways.
That was given unto us to stir up all other members, to employ themselves
to the celebration of his divine praises, as well in the naming of GOD, with
the cheifest reverence, and of our brethren, and our neighbors, as we are
bound by the duty of charity. But now alas: this little member is most
dangerous: by that we speak evil of our brethren, backebite them by envying
their virtue, showing our contempt of those gifts, and graces which they have
received, by that we do diminish as much as in us lies, their estimation, and
credit, and make all men know, that we have our heart full of wickedness, and
sinister affections, toward them: but that which is more, it is no less
disordered toward God, for to despite him, as much as men may: for by this,
we dishonor him, speak evil of him, by this wicked miscreants do belch out
infinite outrages, and execrable blasphemies against his sacred majesty, which
they intollerably tear in sunder: briefly, by this they commit a multitude of
innumerable sins. This is the reason why S. James says, that this little
member boasts it self of great things, that it is a fire which kindles a
forest, that it is a world of wickedness. (By which words he would signify
no other thing, but from the slaundering and intemperancie of the tongue, many
mischiefs arises, when the bridle is let loose. The division.
) But for the better understanding of this, we must observe two points: the
first is, that by nature, we all are subject to this evil, and detraction of
the tongue. Secondly, that being all subject heereunto, we must take heed of
flattering of our selves, but rather with might and maine avoid the same, and
the better to fly from it, The Amplification of the first part.
to consider the horrible mischiefs which comes from it. Concerning the first
part, we must consider, that al in general has this vice so deeply rooted in
our bowelles, that it is impossible to abstain from the same altogether, we
are so depraved in all our affections.

This is the reason that Saint Paul says, lively pointing out the nature of
man, Romans 3
and showing how it is corrupt in it self, There is none righteous, no not
one. There is none that understands: there is none that seeks God. They
have all gone out of the way, they have been made altogether unprofitable:
there is none that does good, no not one. Their throat is an open sepulcher,
they have used their tongues to deceit: the poison of Aspes is under their
lips: whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness, etc. By which place he
shows, that all universally, are evil speakers, and slanderers, fowlie
abusing our tongue: and although he speaks principally of ye corruption of
our nature, after the sin of our first parents, he might also very easily
speak of the rest of our corruption, which remains after our regeneration,
and so much the rather, because the greatest servants of GOD, do ordinarily
complain of this evil, to which they are so addicted, that they cannot
refrain themselves without a great combat, and violence offered to their
nature.

And for this cause, David which by the testimony of the scripture, was a man
after Gods heart, striving against this vice: although he were one of the most
patientest that ever were, in bearing injuries done unto him, yet he prays
earnestly unto God in this manner.

Set a watch, O Lord before my mouth, Psalm. 14
and keep the door of my lips Unto which very well agrees that which Saint
James says: In many things we sin all: Iam. 3
If any man sin not in word, he is a perfect man, and able to bridle all the
body.

According to this, mention is made in a certain place of a memorable hystory
of a great Personage, who having oftentimes imagined, that there is nothing so
hard as to bridle the tongue, he says, that he has long considered and
meditated upon the thirty and ninth. Psalm. of David, where it is said, I
thought I will take bread to my ways, that I sin not with my tongue: Psalm. 39
I will keep my mouth brideled while the wicked is in my sight. But says he,
when he was dying, I have lived thirty seaue^ years, and yet I have not
understood the meaning of that place, although I have travailed to find out
the same. What then would he signify hereby, but that it was a matter of
great difficulty to bridle this little member, but that it will break out
beyond her bounds, in defaming them which do displease us any manner of way.
And indeed, we must not think that David practiced that which he says in this
place, but he would give us to understand, that he labored to contain himself
as much as he could, that although he lived amongst the outrages of the wicked,
yet nevertheless, he endured them patiently, knowing well, that those things
came not to pass at adventure, but by the providence of God, who would after
this manner exercise him, and in truth, he that will take these words so
stricktly, he shall marueilously be deceived: I mean, that would think
never any angry, or furious word escaped David against the wicked: so that he
that can find a man that does not offend in his tongue, he shall be the most
perfect among the living. Some have very well said: that God foreseeing the
fury, and intameable violence of the tongue, has barred and enclosed the same
with a very strong double wall: that is, with the teeth first, and then with
the lips, which should be as it were two bulwarks, and rampieres: yet
nevertheless it cannot be kept (...) pass ye grace of God, hindering him, he
has spent al his endeavors, to obscure with dark clouds and confusion, that he
might do something which he desired. For there is no point of doctrine at this
day by which so many discordes and controversies, are stirred up, as by this
sacrament, so that whereas Christ has left this sacrament, principally, to
unite christians together with so straight a band, as the parts of the body
are joined with the head. Satan I say, has caused that at this day, by this
sacrament, al Christendom is disunited, divided, and torn in pieces, which is
a lamentable thing to hear, and more pitiful to behold: and this comes to
pass by the just judgment of God, for the unthankfulness of christians. But
what is to be done? as satan has bin and is very diligent to corrupt the true
sense of this institution, so we also should be as diligent to search out the
true understanding, that we may overcome him, because that it is a thing more
then reasonable, that the faithful should be assured of their salvation, The
application of the exord. with a brief exposition of the text.
that the devil should not have power to withstand them. And because that these
be the chief words, (This is my body, this is my blood) by which the devil
has blinded ye understanding of many, so that they could not conceive the true
meaning, it is our duty to seek out the true understanding, with a docible
and patient spirit. Let us note in the first place, that the Evangelists, and
Saint Paul, saying here, That Jesus Christ having taken the bread, that he eat
it with his Disciples, that he brake it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying,
Take eat, etc. that in these words, there is the institution of the supper,
the which was instituted ye night before he suffered, after supper, and after
that he celebrated the eating of the passover. This institution does contain
three principal points, the first is, the signs, and the ceremonies: the
second, their signification: the third, the agreement that they have the one
with the other. As concerning the signs, there are but two, ye bread, and the
wine, which do represent the body and blood of Jesus Christ, because they
have the selfsame virtue to nourish our souls, as the common bread and wine
which we do ordinarily use for our necessity, has a proper power to nourish
our bodies. For this cause Jesus Christ calls himself in many places, The
bread of life: not to speak properly, that that bread which is distributed
into the Supper, is the bread of life of it self, for it differs nothing,
neither the wine also, from that which we do ordinarily use: but this bread
and this wine do nourish our souls, because they are ordained of God to this
effect. There are two signs, to signify, that in him is a full and perfect
spiritual nourishment: that is to say, ^l that is requisite for our salvation:
and also the better to make us call to mind his death and ^assion: because that
the wine which signifi^th his blood shed, is so lively represented in that
before our eyes. Let us come to the ce^emonies, which be double, whereof one
does ^oncern him that does administer ye Supper, ^he other him which does
communicate. Tou^hing him yt does administer, it is his part to ^^ke the bread,
and to break, as pastors do ordi^arily, which does signify that the body of
jesus Christ was broken with infinite sorrows ^^d horrible agonies, to deliver
us from euerla^^ng death, as he himself declared when he ^^id: This is my
body broken: and afterward pre^ted the bread and the cup of wine, to bear
^^tnes that God for his part, does present vn^^ us Jesus Christ, and with him
al his graces ^^d spiritual riches: and for his part, does ^^we near by this
Supper, to commu^^ate himself unto us. The ceremony, (...) to take the bread
and the wine, which are ^esented unto us, and to eat, and to drink. ^^ter the
institution of the supper, we must ^^me to these words, Take, eat, drink,
this is (...) body and my blood, do this it remembrance ^^s: and to
understand them more cleare^^ we may observe, that they do contain a
commandment and a promise. The co^ma^deme^t is expressed in these words: Take
eat^ drink, do this in remembrance of me: and when (...) is said, This is my
body, this is my blood, there (...) the promise. All which words do signify a^
much as if Christ should have said, this brea^ and this wine does so represent
my body an^^ my blood, that you which do partake these v^sible signs, I do
assure you, that you partic^pate that which they do represent: that is (...)
say, my body and my blood: and that this is th^^ true interpretation of the
words of Ies^^ Christ, it is manifest by other testimonies (...) the
scripture, and this shall be the second poi^^ of this Sermon. But before we
begin (...) confirm by them our interpretation, A confutation of the reasons
of the Papists.
we m^^ first examine whether the papists have ^^ny reason or no, to
understand their transu^stantiatio^. And this is, as they say, when Chr^^^
said, This is my body, this is my blood, that the word is, does signify to
transubstantiate, a^^ to convert, and by consequent, that the bre^^ and the
wine were transubstantiated into (...) body, and into his blood. First we
answer that this word (is) which is a verb substa^ti^^ does not signify in any
place of the scriptu^^ to convert and transubstantiate, and that i^ should so
signify, many absurdities would f^^low, as we might produce many places, wh^^
very strange absurdities would be perceiu^^ whether it is said in Genesis yt
Joseph interpreting the ^^came of Pharaoh, which was, yt he had seen (...) fat
kine, and 7. lean: It is there set down, (...) at the 7. lean kine, are 7.
years of barren^sse: and the 7. fat kine, 7. years of plenty. (...) we
should take according to the letter (...) is word (are) which is the same word
which ^eere used, we must needs conclude, that ^^ese seven kine were indeed,
and really seven ^^res, which should be a strange absurdity. and when it is
said in Saint John, that Jesus ^^rist is a vine, and his father the
hus^^nd-man, we must conclude, that Ie^^^ Christ is converted into a vine, and
^OD into an hushand-man: that is, sub^^ntially and essentially, which were an
^^rrible thing to hear, and more hard to ^^eeue. And because some may object,
that (...) kind of speech is set down to ^^e the similitudes (and they be
indeed ^^ilitudes, and not a sacramental man^^ of speaking) we could produce
many ^de of speeches which are sacramental, (...) one shall suffice. Saint
Paul says, That fathers did all eat the same spiritual meat, (...) did all
drink the same spiritual drink, (...) they drank of the spiritual Rocks
that ^^wed them:) and he adds, and the Rock^ (...) Christ. This word (was)
is so to be ^^n as in this place, if then this be well considered, what man
is there of soun^ judgment, that will understand by this m^ner of speaking,
that this Rock was tro^ substantiated indeed, and really into Christ as he
must of necessity understand, if this ^pinion of the papists be true? Let us
conclu^ then, that these words properly cann^^ bear this signication: for if
Jesus Ch^^^^ would have signified so much, he wou^^ rather have said, this
shall be ma^^ my body, or turned into my body. A^ if these words should be
understood wi^^out a figure, as the Papists would have they should signify
rather that his bo^^ and his blood, should be turned i^ the Bread and Wine,
and not that (...) Bread and the Wine should be tur^^ into the substance of
the body of Chr^^^ because we find some such like th^^ in the Scripture, as
we may read in ^nesis, Genesis 19.
where it is said, That Lot his V^ was turned into a Pillar of Salt, and (...)
pillar of salt was to be seen, where to Lots Wife was turned. So that it (...)
be said after this sort, This Pille^ Salt is the Wife of Lot: to note that
(...) his Wife was turned into that Pillar: (...) they that do hear these
words, (...) understand it so. For these wor^ The Pillar of Sale, cannot
signify the (...) thing properly, therefore a proper signification must needs
be found out. So in like manner when it is here said, This is my body,
this is my blood, these words cannot any way bear this signification, that
we should understand by them a real conversion into the body and blood of
Christ.

Moreover, these words of transubstantiation, do bring with them three
absurdityes. The first is, that if the bread and wine should be turned into
the body and blood of Jesus Christ, there should be no sign in the Supper,
and so there should be no sacrament, which cannot be without a visible sign.
The second is, that the blood of Jesus Christ should be separated from his
body, which is also absurd and impossible. The third, that Jesus Christ
should have a body infinite, and by consequent, he should not be true man,
nor truly ascended into heaven, which should overthrow the principal
Articles of our faith. And it is to no purpose to object here, that he has a
gloryfied body, by which he may be at one time in diverse places together, for
this reply is vain, because he had no such body, when as he instituted
the Supper: and besides, his glorification, did not any way diminish the nature
of a true body, but only did make him infinite, as an ancient Doctor has
very well said. And wherefore it is said in the Acts of the Apostles, That
the heavens should contain him until the day of judgment, when he shall
visiblie descend, as he was seen to ascend. The fourth is, that infidels and
hypocrites coming to the Lords Supper, should truly participate the body
and blood of Christ, and so it must needs follow, that GOD and the devil
should be lodged together. And besides these absurdities, which do beat
down transubstantiation, experience it self is against it. We may perceive
the bread and wine to consume away, being long time kept, for this does show
most plainly, that the substance of them is not changed. As also these words
being well understood, do overthrow transubstantiation, so they do likewise
confute their Cousin germane, which is Consubstantiation: that is, those which
do affirm, that the body of Jesus Christ being every where, it must needs
be in the Bread of the Lords Supper, that it is either above or below, or
at one side, or within, as his blood is in the Wine. The words of Jesus
Christ, cannot likewise bear this sense. For if they will so understand them,
Jesus Christ must have said, My body shall be with this bread, and my blood
with this wine. Moreover, this should be to fall to a fleshlye and carnal
eating, which cause us to fall into the three last absurdities of
transubstantiation.

When Jesus Christ says to the Capernaites, who did imagine a carnal eating
(because he had said, That unless one eat his Flesh, and drink his blood,
that he cannot have eternal life.) He said unto them in the Verse, three
score and three, expounding himself: It is the spirit that quickneth, the
flesh profits nothing: the words that I speak vn-you, are spirit and life.
Is not this place clear enough? to show, that hese words must be
understood, spiritually and not carnallye? And although that there he
speaks not of a sacramental eating, but of that which is made by the word
of GOD, which is received by faith, notwithstanding it may very well imparte
thus much, because it is the same kind of eating in substance, so that
whatsoever is spoken of the one, does belong also to the other: and seeing that
question is made of the nourishment of the soul which is spiritual, and that
the food thereof is spiritual, it must necessarily follow, that the eating
must be also spiritual, and not gross, and carnal. And to be so, it cannot
otherwise be, but that the bread and wine should be nothing else but signs
only of the body, and blood of Christ: and that they do always remain bread
and wine, after the words of consecration, and after the partaking thereof. As
it is easy by Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 10.
where he says: The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the
communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the
communion of the body of Christ? It is not said, that the cup of blessing which
one blesses, is the blood of Christ really, and yt the bread which we break,
is the proper and substantial body of Christ: but that it is the communion of
the one, and of the other, by the which words he declares plainly, that the
bread and the wine does always remain bread and wine, but they are certain
and infallible pledges, of that communion, which we have in ye body of Christ.
See also, yt the bread, and the wine, are nothing but signs of the body, and
of the blood of Christ: yet nevertheless we do participate of the same, as
truly, as if we should eat his flesh, and drink his blood, after a carnal
manner. Let us add, that this interpretation (which is the second point we
have to handle) causes no inconvenience, and that by the same, those four
absurdities which are recited before, are avoided: for by the same, the signs
remain in their own nature, the blood of Jesus Christ, is not separated from
his body, his humainitie is not diminished, neither the truth of his
ascension, and sitting at the right hand of his Father.

And further, The Amplifying of the second part.
wicked men shall not partake of the body of Christ, and of his blood. But what
will be objected, if this be the true meaning of Christ? how is it declared
by more manifest words, and less doubtful? One answers, that this promise
cannot be made by a more brief kind of speech, and more significant. For if
he had said, This is the pledge, and the sign of my body, there should not
have been a promise as there is, unless he had used more words, as if he
should have said: I assure you, that this bread, and this Wine, does so
represent unto you my body, and my blood, that as often as you do partake of
these visible things, you shall truly communicate of that which is signified
unto you. And so it must needs have come to pass, that Christ must have
done, as flatterers that go about to persuade any man, use many words, and
arguments, but there is no force many times in their speech, as commonly it
happens to those that being desirous to make others, believe something, they
have copy of words, but little matter. Contrariwise, serious and grave things,
do require ordinarily few words, but very significant, and full of force, and
majesty: we see for the most part, that Kings and Princes speaking of any
matter of importance to them that are about them, oftentimes they use but one
word, which they do print in their mind, as though it were some oracle from
heaven, they do ponder, and imagine to find out that which he would say, that
if they used many words, they would not so easily be carried away, and they
which heard them, would not be so attentive to consider them. Namely, this is
perceived in great men, when as they make promises to their familiars, for
being so made in few words, they have more grace and weight. So Jesus Christ
in this place speaking to his Disciples, to communicate with them his body, and
his blood, (which was a thing of great importance) he spoke in few words. This
is my body and my blood, that is to say, which signifies my body, and my
blood. And this was also for the benifit of the Disciples: for they having
understood these words of their Master, they might think themselves what
their master meant, when he said: This is my body. For when he spoke these
words unto them, they were a long time at the table, eating and drinking with
him, and he never spoke any such thing: so that they might conclude with
themselves, that by these words, he would signify some great matter: so that
this thing being well considered, his Disciples might be the more wakened by
these few words full of weight and majesty, diligently to ponder them, as if
he had used many words. Although already this matter is sufficiently
manifested, yet we will make it more evident by these reasons following. First
that spirit of God, has used the like speech as he has done here in the
promise of all the sacraments, of the old testament, that is, in giving the
name of the thing signified, and invisible, unto the exterior sign. As we
read in Genesis, Genesis 17
that God being willing to assure Abraham and his posterity, that
Circumcision was a certain sign unto them, that he had received them into his
covenant, he calls Circumcision his covenant, Exodus 12.
in few words. The like says Moses of the Sacrament of the Paschall Lamb,
calling it the Lords passover: for to signify unto the Jews, that they
should be assured of the continual favor of God, having given them a taste of
his incomprehensible bounty, when he sent his destroying Angel, who slew all
the first borne, as well of men as of beasts, in all the houses of Egypt, and
passed over the children of Israel, without doing them any hurt, whereof that
ceremony of the Paschall Lamb, was to them a sacrament. To these kinds of
speaking, we may join that which S. Paul uses, 2 Cor. 10
where he says: That our Fathers have eat the same meat, and drunk the same
drink in the wilderness, which we have done, because that the rock out of
which issued the water which they drank, was Christ: for this manner of
speech is altogether like this. But let us diligently observe, that this
manner of speaking,) This is my body, whereof here question is made: is likewise
so used in our common tongue, as for example, If a king shows favor unto a
male factor, giving unto him, the letters of his favor, sealed with his own
seal, it is said commonly to the malefactor, behold thy pardon: and yet
nevertheless, those letters which are given him, are not his pardon, but a
certain and infallible sign of his pardon. So in this sacrament we see the
like, for they are called seals of the word of God. As Saint Paul does bear
witness of Circumcision: Romans 4
which he calls to the Romans, The seal of the righteousness of faith. It
seems, that it was impossible to use any plainer kind of speech to
understand, Christ's meaning, without any conceit of carnal eating, and humain
drinking, as though we were deuourers of men like those kind of people, called
Anthropophagi, and Cyclopes. But we may cause a greater light to shine to our
selves, when we are certainly assured, that we do partake the body and blood of
Christ, by says: which is the proper instrument which God has given us, to
eat his body, and drink his blood, that is, that we constantly believe, that
we communicate truly with his body, and that our consciences are thereof so
well assured, The mean how we do partake the body, and blood of Christ in,
the supper.
that we need not to doubt. Therefore one of the Fathers has said, that when
we come to this sacrament, that we must not prepare our teeth nor our mouth,
but yt we must believe, and the^ we have eaten Jesus Chrst, and for this cause
faith (as some of ye ancient doctors affirm) is ye eye, by which we see
Christ: ye hand, by which we take hold of him, ye arm, by which we do embrace
him, and are united unto him. And eue^ as when we see any thing with our eyes,
yt we are assured yt we see it, when we hold any thing in our hands, we doubt
not but yt we hold it, when we eat any meat, and drink any drink, we feel ye
same in our mouth, and in our taste, so ought we to be assured, yt we do
communicate with ye body of Christ, and with his blood, yea we may say, we are
more certain thereof, because our outward se^ces are oftentimes deceived, the
eye thinks to see a thing ye which it sees not: or it is some other thing
the^ ye eye takes it to be: the ear takes one sound for another: yt palyet
swalloweth down some meat, although it be somewhat bitter, and finds it to be
sweet, if it be good and wholesome, it thinks it to be evil, if it be
venomous, it does not perceive it, and so it falls out in the other senses,
which are deceived in every thing. But faith being true and sincere, cannot
be so deceived. So that a Christian may conclude, that he is more assured by
the instrument of faith, to perticipate ye body and blood of Jesus Christ in
the sacrament, then by the sight of his eyes, hearing of his ears, touching of
his hands, or tasting with his mouth. And finally if we should set down that
which is commonly objected in this place, that is, how this can be done, and
that Jesus Christ is aloft in heaven, and we below upon the earth, yet
nevertheless, that he should give unto us his body, and his blood. To this we
answer, yt God can do it by his word, which is incomprehensible: but to the
end it shall not seem so strange to our carnal understanding, Notable
similitudes, showing clearly how we do partake the body of Christ.
we would use a familiar similitude, to make the same more evident. The first
shall be taken from the sun, the which as it does communicate by his beams,
and reuerborations, his force and efficacy, unto them that live here below,
although it be a dead creature, as the Philosophers affirm: by a far greater
reason Jesus Christ the Creator, the son of righteousness, being on high in
Heaven, at the right hand of his father, he can more easily communicate his
body and his blood in the Supper, by an infinite virtue, and an
incomprehensible power of his spirit, because unto him, it is no matter of any
difficulty, to join things together that are far distant, as those that are
near.

The other similitude although it be weak, yet it may serve to understand this
mystery, (for it is a hard thing to find out those things which are strong
enough, to signify in any sort this incomprehensible secret) it shall be
taken from a great and high Tree, which from the center of the earth, reaches
as it were unto the heavens (as mention is made of such a tree, which
Nabuchadnezar saw in his dream) seeing that the life and the virtue which
does maintain all the branches and leaves in this tree, be in the root,
which although it be hidden in the earth, yet it does easily nourish, and
gives a growing life unto the highest boughs, although they be far from
the root, wherein is the spring, and fountain of life. if I say, this
creature without life, can do this easily, why should we not believe that
Jesus Christ the Creator and conseruer of all things, can communicate unto us
his substance, to nourish our selves, without coming down from heaven, by his
spirit, seeing that he has promised the same: and he makes us to feel it
by experience, when it pleases him? Wherefore we may infallibly conclude,
that Jesus Christ nourishes and quickneth our souls, and waters them by his
blood, in this holy sacrament, so certainly, that we need not any thing to
doubt, if so be that we have faith, which being formed in us by the spirit of
God, does engender in us so much the more great persuasions, as it is great and
plentiful in us: so that if we suffer our selves always to be led by this
spirit, we shall feel more and more his presence in this holy Sacrament:
provided also, that we do disburden our selves of all carnal opinions. Eor
if we be replenished with them, and suffer our selves to be governed by them,
it is to be feared, least that we loose his presence altogether, and as we
may say, with extreme grief and sorrow, that many seeking the same, with
their own carnal fantasy, have miserably lost the same, and have found the
presence of the devil. For all contentions of words, injuries, cruel and
bloody wars, which are stirred up and kindled, and which me^ do practice one
against another, to spoil themselves altogether, are nothing else but the
blasts of Satan, who being present in the midst of them, does prick them
forward to ^^ch mischiefs. And in truth, if Jesus Christ, Conclusion
which is nothing else but love and goodness, ^oth reign by his spirit, we
shall perceive a^ongst christians, another kind of union and ^oniunction, then
usually is to be found: but ^^at violent pride and bitterness which is in the
^ottome of our heart, being the principal ^use, let us earnestly pray unto
God to ^arge us clean, that being void thereof, we ^ay unite and join our
selves by this holy sa^ament, with peace and concord, and being us straightly
tied and coupled, we may (...) together with one heart and will, give ho^ur
and praise unto him, as to our Master, ^ing, and Lord, to whom be all glory
and ^^iestie, both now and ever, Amen.

We may judge by this kind of preaching, ^w profitable it is, by the reading of
these ^o sermons, in which all the foresaid method ^ontained. For although in
this last we do (...) allege examples, as in the first, we did because the
matter is diverse, and we cannot (...) fitly, because no point of any virtue
a^th, unto which we might exhort the peo^^, nor of any vice, from which we
should dis^de them: but it was a point of doctrine ^^ch is so high and difficult
to understand, (...) it requires many reasons to make it ^ine, as we have
done in this place. It is true that when one will illustrate any point of
doctrine, he must use examples, as the scripture speaking of justification of
faith, does propose the examble of Abraham, easily to make the same to be
understood: but this is altogether in a diverse thing, then this whereof we
have spoken, as every man may gather of himself, that I need not advertise
the reader to take heed of confounding these things together. Let us go on
forward with our matter, and let us observe, that to keep that method before
spoken of with most fruit, it is good to observe here two points. The first
is, that to handle high matters, and full o^ weight (as some be more then
other) i^ is expedient to prepare the people t^ hearken unto the same
attentively, an^ to do the same. We may use an insinuation, both in the
beginning, and also oftentimes in the midst of the Sermon, as if on^ should
say, hearken, lend your ears, a^tend, and you shall hear a maruailous thing
a matter that concerns you, and that wi^ bring incredible comfort unto you, or
some such like speech. And in this we shall immitate the Prophets, which have
oftentim^ used it, as Moses, Esaias, and others, wh^ being desirous to stir
up the dulnes^ of the people, they have called the he^uen and the earth to
witness of that which they have spoken, crying out unto them, to hear the
voice of GOD, to the end, that by these means they might make men ashamed, if
they hearkened not unto the word of God. For it is as much as if they would
have said, that if the heaven and the earth do yield obedience unto the word
of GOD, The Preacher must devise all means that he can to persuade the people.
which are creatures without life, that may confound men with shame, which are
living creatures, if they do not readily submit themselves unto his sacred
word: and even so preachers, must use these and the like kind of speeches,
when they shall see it necessary. The second is, that in expounding serious
matters, especially before the people, to use also grave words and significant,
lively expressing that which we do expound. For experience does show, that
a man has no grace at all, when he expounds an high matter with light and
base words, not expressing sufficiently the force and virtue of those things
which he handles, as when one expounds a small matter, and of no
importance, with words full of majesty. Therefore a preacher must have
discretion how to use the one and the other. And because that in nature, more
things are found then words, as Aristotle says (whereof comes Homonomyes,
that is, when by one and the sam^ word, we understand diverse things) h^ must
endeavor himself principally, (...) heap up a treasor of words, so
signif^cant, that when he purposes to expoun^ any thing to the people, who is
ordinaril^ rude, he may the better comprehend the same in many words: I mean
not, that he should speak the same words again but other words,
signifying the sam^thing: and when as he knows the first signify less, and
the other more and so, that there is more weight in the one then in the other,
The Preacher must be rich in words, the better to express the matter which he
handieth.
as they follow in order: for if by few words and simple, we do expound a
serious matte^ unto the common people, they shall no^ well understand, by
reason of their dul^nesse and ignorance. And this also is according to the
imitation of the Scripture which does use many words, that signifiet^ all one
thing, and it does repeat oftentime the same words, to make us stay long
upon them, as we may plainly see i^ the Books of Moses, so often as he
doot^ make mention of any miracle: and in the book of Joshua also, rehearsing
that miracle in passing the flood Jordan, and many others: and also almost in
every book o^ the Prophets. And verily, it is impossibl^ that men by their
industry and art in teaching, can set down any better or more profitable
manner of instructing and persuading the people, and so to become eloquent:
there is no way (I say) so good, then to follow, and diligently to keep the
phrase of the scripture. But if we do expound any thing to men learned and
of knowledge, or to show our sufficiency, or to apply our selves unto their
capacity, we may better expound in few words full of force, then in many:
because they can understand that by few words, which others cannot by many.
Wherefore the Preacher applying himself to the one and the other, he must
have discretion to observe this in his due time and place.

CHAP. V. What is to be observed in the pronouncing of the Sermon unto the
people, with edification.
COncerning the manner of pronunciation, it is hard to prescribe and set down
precepts, which are to be observed in our-Sermons to the people, by reason of
the diversity of the voice. For some have a shrill and slender voice, other a
great, some speak low, and soft, other high and sounding, etc. So that the
best way for every one, is to be acquainted with his own voice, and so to
order his speech: but unto whom GOD has given a fit and agreeable voice,
he must take great heed in governing the same: for seeing that such a voice
is one of the greatest gifts of GOD that a Preacher can have, he must beware
that he does apply the same to the best use: but how shall he use it?
principally in preaching, he shall keep always the same tenor sufficiently
high, that all may understand every word that he does utter: A good voice
in a preacher, is a singular gift of God.
when he also shall speak distinctly and leyserly, for to speak aloude and
fast, the hearer cannot understand, and by consequent, not conceive that which
the Preacher says. Sen. in Epist.
Seneca speaking of that manner which Cicero used in the pronouncing of his
Orations, that he spoke for the most part distinctly and readily, that is, it
came from him with great ease, not hastly, that in him there was a kind of
easiness, no celeritie: afterward he adds: I desire then in an Orator,
that his words may pass from him without any let, and that he pronounces
his words, as though they should flow from him. And this is that which a
preacher should labor for in the pronouncing of Sermons unto the people,
because of the great profit that comes thereof.

Let us join unto this another saying of the same Author, that the
ornaments of learning and eloquence, do consist in the fit pronuntiation and
gesture of the body, with which he that is furnished, he may assail the
hearers three manner of ways. The profit of the voice when it is ordered as it
ought to be
First in pearcing into their ears. Secondly, in delighting them. Thirdly, in
gayning their hearts. And here we may observe two points very profitable
for the preacher. The first is concerning pronuntiation, the which as
experience teaches, has great force in teaching, especially when it is well
ordered. For although a man be profounde in knowledge, yet if he has no
grace in pronouncing, he can little edify, but if he be garnished with a
mild spirit, and with a grace of pronuntiation, he does maruailously edify,
although he handle not deep and profounde matters.

But well to order, and to dispose this voice, what must he do? he must
oftentimes change the same, according to the occasions which may be offered,
that is, in speaking sometime high and sometime low but in such sort, that he
may be understood of all, if it be possible. Moreover, he must consider, when
he speaks of sweet and delightful things (as of the promises of god) that he
do likewise in some sort express the sweetness of them, by his voice: and
when he speaks of fearful things, which are to astonish the hearers, as
with the judgments of god, and threatenings against men, it is necessary to
force the voice, and to make the hearer as it were, When a preacher does
denounce the judgments of God, he must speak harshly. When he speaks of the
promises of God, pleasantly.
to tremble at the denuntiation of them. For in truth, as Cicero has very well
said, it is a fault in an Orator, when he shows a thing full of pleasure and
delight, with sorrowful words, as when he pronou^ceth a base thing, with a
pleasant and delicate style. The other point is, when he speaks of any thing
done, he must use so much pronu^tiation, as is requisite, because it is of no
small force, when it is done with modesty: but if it be done with affectatio^,
to please the hearers and if it has immodesty mingled with it, as the shaking
of the whole body, the moving of the hands, of the feet, and of the arms,
and with the turning of the head altogether affected (although he may edify
the ruder sort, because that oftentimes they are more ravished with such
motions, the^ with the voice and instruction) he must avoid it as much as he
can.

The reason is, because that preachers, which do declare good and profitable
things (which do require humility) they ought to show in all things, a
singular modesty. That were more tolerable in courts, wherein matters are
pleaded, for lawyers, and rhethoritians, and orators, which handle matters,
which may better agree with such kind of speaking, then with the sacred
divinity. It is true also, that he must not be scrupulous, as some, which
would not have us to use any gesture at all, nor to delight the hearer in any
thing. As an honest and profitable gesture becomes the Preacher, so an
immodestie unseemly, and he must abstain from it.
For if the hearer be delighted with the preacher (using an honest gesture)
and takes a singular pleasure in hearing him, yt may also very much edify, if
he hears with desire: and from this delight, there may proceed also some
fruit, that he may receive, which takes such pleasure in hearing: so that for
this cause, we may apply our selves somewhat to delight the audience. But he
must take heed of one fault, into which he may fall, especially in regard of
his voice, that is, How the voice may be abused.
in making it to resound, and to give an Echo, that nothing is heard but the
sound, and little instruction, is gathered of all that is pronounced by such a
pleasant and delightful voice. For it is a thing not only indecent, but also
very vicious, to pronounce a light and vain thing with a grave voice, as
though it were a matter worthy great commendation, as to speak of grave and
serious matters with a resounding, and delectable voice. He may fall into this
extremity, when being puffed up, with I know not what opinion of himself,
and of his sufficiency, does despise study, speaking that which comes into
his mind, thinking that he has sufficiently preached, although he never much
thought upon that which he spoke. Such be like some amongst the Philosophers,
who do not only boast to know any thing, but that they can answer readily to
every demand, without needing any preparation, or meditation: but as the
behavior of these men, has justly bin thought rediculous of many of the
sounder Philosophers, the custom of Preachers which go about to make the like
vaunt of their vanity, is more worthy to be laughed at, and blamed, because it
is almost a thing impossible to speak well of an high and serious matter a
long time, The preacher must never preach without study. 1 Orat.
and to edification, without thinking upon the same before hand. Cicero says,
that it is profitable sometime to speak on the sudden, but it is more
profitable when one is prepared thereunto, because there cannot be much joyce
in that which is without premeditation.

Demosthenes has better met with this fault, He yt preaches the word
neglige^tly, he procures the curse of God, but he that performs his duty
with diligence and a good conscience, he gets the blessing of God.
saying: He is a very bad man that will speak, or that goes to speak
seriously of weighty matters, without being prepared: If this be true as it
is, into what discredit may ye divine Preacher fall, who dares, without having
thought upon the matter before, go into the Pulpit, to declare, not the word of
a King, nor of an earthly Monarch, but of the living God? Then ihinke with thy
self what a mischief thou fallest into, when thou art guilty of this fault.

Thou have not to do with men, but with God, whose person thou do
represent. If thou be negligent in his service, dooest thou not think with
thy self, that GOD which has so honored thee, and exalted thee so high, as
to be his Ambassador or messenger, will not be grievously offended with thee?
Think thou not that Jesus Christ who was willing to die for thee, and for
those sheep that he has committed unto thee, that he will not punish thee for
thy flouthfulnesse, if thou disdainest this so honorable a charge?

Again, do thou not imagine, that such idleness is detestable to the
Angels, who watches continually for the preservation of the faithful? And
further will, not thine own conscience be a thousand witnesses, which will
cruelly torment thee, and accuse thee before God of thy negligence, and
carelessness, and of ye small zeal, which thou bear toward the glory of
God? But consider on the contrary side, if thou be fervent in study, to
divide the word of God with most edification, and that ordinarily thou do
not declare the same, without preparation, and yt the people which come by
heaps to thy sermons, do return content, and satisfied, God, Jesus Christ,
who sees thy travail, thy diligence, thy zeal for the salvation of ye
faithful, will abundantly bless thee, the Angels will rejoice, thine own
conscience will yield unto thee a singular co^tentatio^ will bring unto thee,
souereign comfort, and will always set thee in the rest and tranquillity of
the soul. All this, with many other reasons may prick thee forward, to the
performing of thy duty, not to go forward in thy calling negligently. But
behold also one point which likewise may provoke thee more cheerfully to
perform thy duty, yt seeing that it may so happen, that thou shall preach
before a great multitude, if thou be well prepared, then thou may more
edify, then thou haste done many years before, either by writing, or
otherwise: and therefore thou must take heed that thou do not let slip so
good an occasion. To conclude this matter, we may observe, that seeing that it
is a great pain (as Cicero says in his first book de Natura deo:) to speak
alone before a multitude of men, then when every one ha^keneth, and that there
is almost none which does not more mark the faults of the preacher: The
preacher must desire of God the spirit of discretion, when he goes to expound
Gods word.
then that which is well spoken, and if any good lesson be given, it quickly
slippeth out of the mind of the hearers. It concerns us seriously to advise
to speak with fear and great discretion of the spirit, and before we begin,
we must remember to beg the same grace at Gods hand, with ardent and devout
prayer.

CHAP. VI. Of the manner of disputing.
IT is high time now to come to the second part of the ministry, that is, To
convince the adversaries with sound doctrine. Under this part, we comprehend
the disputations and co^fere^ces of learned men, and especially of divines: for
seeing yt all exercises ought to be ordained (as they are in many places) to
frame themselves to convince those who do resist the truth: we may very fitly
contain such disputations and conferences, under the form of reasoning. But
we understand not by these conferences, and disputations, only those that are
used certain hours in the universities, or other where, which are not common
to every one, but we understand also, and principally, those which ought to be
used oftentimes, betwixt them which do apply themselves to some study, either
in familiar discourses in the house, or in walking abroad, or in sum, upon such
occations, as may be offered. We say that such conferences are necessary,
because they are a good means to make others acquainted with that knowledge
which we have, or with that which we have not, and he that can have conference
with them with whom he does converse, he may peradventure know them, whom he
knows not before: by this loving manner of conferring with them.

2. By this conference we may learn much (so that they be done modestly, and
with an affection to search the truth of any thing, otherwise they cause more
harm then good) for if they that confer with us, be our superiors, that
is, if they be esteemed for great men, we must firmly retain those reasons,
which they do propose: but if they be our equals, and that in conferring with
them, we perceive that they do excel us, that may enge^der in us a kind of
holy and lawdable jealousy, which may stir us the more lively to apply our
study. Moreover it comes to pass, that we may better retain those things,
which by conference we do debate upon by diverse reasons, the^ those things that
we hear or read oftentimes of our selves, whereby a great commodity redoundeth
unto us. Thirdly, when we have studied and heaped up much knowledge, unless we
do impart the same to others by conference, it little avails, and remains by
us almost unprofitable. Further we may ad, that such conferences be necessary,
not only because our knowledge should remain as it were barren: as principally
for these inco^ueniences which often times happens. First of al, by reason we
may deceive our selves in our knowledge, and how is that? that is, in
conceiving of many things which we read, another manner of understanding then we
ought, as it falls out many times among many, who reading certain authors,
understands the^ otherwise then the author meant the^, but by often
conference, they may be made clear diverse ways. Secondly, seeing yt
naturally knowledge puffs up, and makes the most part of men proud, it is
great marvel, if those which have gotten knowledge, and which are desirous to
obtain it, become not insole^t, if they live privately, without communicating
their gifts with other men: whereof it comes, that such having a preiudicate
opinion of their own sufficiency, do despise others, and make no reckoning of
any but of themselves. And this is ye cause, that such oftentimes by
incou^tring of others in conference, being reprehended and discovered to be
ignorant, they are very much grieved and cast down, and this is because
principally they perceive ye report of their sufficiency to be diminished, and
thereby to be dishonored. Insomuch, that some when they come into company, do
blush for shame: other do pursue with deadlye hatred, those which have reproved
them, other break out into intemperate passions, and do defend by all means that
error, whereof they were reproved, although it be very foul and monstrous,
imagining by that stiffness in opinion, in some sort to recover that honor,
which they think to be made less: whereby oftentimes they fall into great and
horrible mischiefs. To be brief, such accidents do cast them headlong into
strange troubles, and perturbations of the soul, as we may see by experience,
and many can be good and sufficient witnesses hereof. But when one is
accustomed to be reproved, and to reprove, or to be overcome, or to overcome,
it is profitable both for him that is overcome, and reproved: as for him that
does overcome, or reprove. It is profitable for him yt is ouercom, or reproved,
in this, that when he is reproved in some reasoning, as may fall out, it is not
grievous to him at al, because he is accustomed to it: but contrary, it is
pleasant, and profitable, because by this means he learneth, according to the
saying of one of ye fathers, that when one is reproved, he is instructed. It is
profitable also for him yt does reprove and overcome, in this that being
accustomed to overcome, and to be overcome, he does not therefore despise him
which is overcome, or reproved, although he be far more sufficient then him:
because that in such a case, if he should despise him, it might so come to
pass, that being reproved, or overcome, he should fall into the same contempt,
unto which he would bring him, whom he has reproved, or overcome. And by this
means the vanity of them may be corrected, who having reproved or taught any
one in some childish thing, and of some small importance, do afterward make
their boasts and brags of it, to their own praise, and to the contempt of them,
whom they have reproved or taught: in which they do many times rather show
their sottishnes, and ignorance, then their learning and wisdom. To what end
then such conferences serves, every one may discern by these reasons set
down: and above all things (the same being as that ointment called vnguentum
catholicum, to purge us of that folly, and imaginary fantasy, which we
conceive ordinarily of our own sufficiency,) we may conclude, that the
exercise of them is so profitable, The preacher must be skillful in disputing
as the want of them is hurtful. But seeing that we handle here principally
the manner of disputing, which is altogether necessary for the^ which desire the
office of a preacher, to convince the gainsayers of the truth: we say
generally, yt a preacher must not less apply his study, diligently to attain
unto the art of disputing, to be able to convince, the^ to the faculty of
preaching with commendation. And the rather at this day, because we live in
such an age, in which the truth is so obscured and inwrapped, in such crafty
subtilties, that the simple and ignorant men, are made to believe, that light
is darkness, and truth falsehood: so yt it is above al things necessary, that
the preacher be endued with the knowledge of disputing, to defend the truth
against the subtle practices of ye adversaries of the same. But here he must
take heed of an extremity, that in steed of being a good disputer, Sophistry
burteth much.
he becomes not a Sophister. This extremity is dangerous for two reasons: the
first is, that he ye learneth it, trauaileth greatly to attain it, and when he
has gotten ye same, it profits him nothing at all, but greatly hurts him.
For we see by experience, that they that are as it were drunke^ with the same,
thinking themselves unequal to others, they become for the most part very
proud and insolent, full of vain glory, which be great hindrances to attain
unto any soundness in learning. There be some that compare very fitly the
Sophister unto a certain beast called Bonasus, who carries horns which serve
him to no use, but are burdensome, because they are inwrapped the one within
the other: in like manner, Sophisters have logic so intricate, that it cannot
serve their turns, but rather do them much harm. The second reason is, that
it is also hurtful, as well to others, as to themselves. For they unto whom
they speak, for the most part cannot understand what they say, and that which
is worse, they do often seduce and deceive many, who cannot conceive or judge
of their subtilties. And we must not be mistaken, as though we blamed
logic, as men ignorant of the same: for we know by experience, yt it is so
necessary for a Preacher, that without it, he cannot not only convince the
gainsayers, but also he cannot handle the word of God with good order and
disposition: A fit similitude, showing the use of logic, when it is soberly
studied, and the abuse in the excess.
but we do find fault with the excess, into which many enter after this study,
because yt the excess does much and more harm, then a mean knowledge thereof
does good. For even as the Iuy leaves when they are applied outwardly to ye
sinows, do very much ease the pain, but if one drink the juice of the herb, it
hurts them: as certain natural philosophers have said: even so if one be
excessive in the study of logic, it shall greatly hinder his other studies, and
especially his godliness: but if he shall lightly touch it as it were without, he
shall further his learning. It is truly said, Cannon of Pope Urban.
that seeing that Sophistry is devised, as a certain Cannon says, not to
build, but to destroy, not to make ye truth manifest, but to obscure it, and
that the preacher must defend it against all the obstacles thereof, it is good
that he understands Sophistry, not to use it to deceive others, but to
defend himself, and that they use it as physicians do venomous herbs: that
is, as it is profitable for them to know them, that they carefully take heed of
them, and that they may use them (if occasion serves) in some cause of
necessity, The Pastor also must not be ignorant of Sophistry, to the end
he may maintain the sound doctrine against all Sophisters. But if he that
desires to be a preacher, will excel in this Art, not contenting himself
with a mean knowledge therein, he may spend much of his time unprofitably,
and when he has well sweat at it, he shall find no great use thereof. For it is
not the right way to come to a sound knowledge, but a wrong and crooked way, in
which all they that have walked, they have strangely erred, as we may see at
this day many, who affecting sound knowledge, have stayed too long in this,
and that for want of judgment, which is the cause they travail much, and yet
still remain barren. This is the complaint of an ancient Doctor, saying: Hug.
3. Didasco.
Whereof comes it to pass, that so great a multitude of learners, of which
many have a good spirit, and do use exercise, and yet very few are found
which do attain unto true knowledge: we must know that in every action
whatsoever it be, we must observe two things. The first is, to know the
work which one goes about to do: The second is, to be acquainted with the
means of compassing the same: for these two things must be so knitte
together, that the one without the other is unprofitable. After he adds,
that wisdom is better then force, for wisdom does that by and by, which
force is a long time in doing. To attain sound knowledge, we must proceed in
our studies with judgment.
Also in every study whatsoever it be, he that labors without order and
discretion, he trauaileth well, but he brings not his study to that
perfection as is convenient, and he is like unto him that beats the air, or
casts stones against the wind. Look upon (says he a little after) two men
walking in the forest, the one going in a crooked way, the other in a plain,
both go to the same place by diverse ways, but both do not a like, but he that
goes the right way sooner comes to his iournies end then the other. This is
that which we see at this day in many scholars, who being light witted, and
having no judgment, do miserably loose the greatest part of their time in
trifles and sophistical quiddities. They think yt they can never understand
divinity, without the perfect understanding of Aristotle's Organum, and so
being seduced with these vain thoughts, they ever after crucify themselves:
so yt they that imagine that they have very great knowledge, they do believe
that they have found the bean in the cake, and they that have entered somewhat
further, persuade themselves, yt for their learning none is to be compared to
the^, and they make no reckoning of any, although their knowledge be never so
good, unless they fit their conceit in this matter. So that they are in such
taking, as they be which drink of the water of the flood Gallus, which is in
Phrygia, which eases all them that have any disease in their bodies (for it
has such a virtue, as certain Philosophers bear witness, to cure in some
sort, all the diseases of the body) when one drinks moderately thereof, but if
it be drunk without measure, it makes men mad: even so those that are
drunke^ with the study of philosophy, do loose often times their
understanding, and become frantic: but they are wise, As the moderate study
of philosophy does frame the judgment, so the excess makes one to loose his
understanding.
who contenting themselves with a moderate knowledge of Logic, and of all
kind of Philosophy, makes it to serve them after, as a good instrument, the
better to attain unto the other sciences.

There are at this day many commentaryes upon Aristotle's Organum, the which,
if they were diligently read, they might cause one to understand as much as is
expedient to know: but amongst others, there is a translation in French of S.
Fresne, a Gentleman and Councellor to the French King, a man of rare knowledge,
who for his rare and surpassing dexterity, has made that Organum so easy, by
those exquisite ornaments, wherewith he has enriched the same, that he that
will seriously read it, if he be but a little seen in Logic, and has any
judgment, he may get more knowledge in that art in four or five months,
then one may get in reading, before many other commentaryes, in three or
four years. In which we and our posterity are much beholding unto him, in
that he^ has showed so short a way to come to that knowledge, which before we
could not attain unto, but in long time, and that not so surely, as by
following his steps.

Let us besides, here add a notable point, principally for them who cannot
conveniently go and stay long at the schools, to learn the art of
disputation: that is, that to overcome the gainsayers, they may do it with
natural Logic: so that it be grounded upon the word of God. And in truth,
that is the true form to dispute in Divinity, to have sound and exact
knowledge of the places of the Scripture: for whatsoever argument it be, (how
subtle soever,) the propositions must be proved by the Text of Scripture,
Natural logic may convince the adversaries of the truth.
it is certain, that if one be sufficientlye grounded in the understanding
thereof, the Arguments may easily be overthrown that are propounded unto us.
For if we understand the places, upon which their sillogismes are grounded,
they may easily be answered without any difficulty. And let us mark, that
if we must apply our selves principally to know well the reasons of some
difficulty which may be objected, and yet that there be many ignorant to
make syllogismes, and yet nevertheless, they may propose great difficulties,
unto which unless you answer by lively reasons, they will not be satisfied,
and if you will dispute with them syllogistically, they will think you
impertinent to the matter, as unless the disputation be made in the School
by syllogism, it is counted absurd. And although many are to be found at
this day, which themselves make books which are not unprofitable, it is not
greatly to be discommended. And we may add that those that are filled with
sound reasons, Adversaries of the truth, must be confuted by sound reasons,
and not by subtlety.
that they can readily prove or confute any thing, although they understand
not the manner of making a syllogism (seeing that it is impossible for them
that seldom or never frequent the schools) they are to be preferred before
those, which have no other thing then some trifling cauils.

But because peradventure we have no sufficient authority to persuade this to
some, we will produce the authorities of the ancient, who are more
experienced in these things, then any man at this day can be. Peter Rau.
says in a certain Sermon, that there is nothing more worthy to be hated
then subtlety, if there be nothing else but subtlety. For what profits a
man to spend all his days in that, of which there is no use, neither in the
house, nor in the war, neither in pleading, nor in the Court, nor in the
Church, nor any other where, but only in the schools. Seneca writing to
Lucilius, says, What is sharper then an ear of corn? and to what use serves
it? such (says he) is the mind which waxes proud with subtlety, and has
in it self no gravity. The same author says likewise in another place, what
profit is it to overthrow the writings of others? to confirm sophistical
fallacies by words alone? to condemn the writings of the ancient, and to
mislike all things that is not found in the writings of their masters? The
same Seneca, in his forty and five Epistle says, that cauilling, robs the
time: and he adds, we tie knottes with our words, by doubtful
significations, and a little after, we do untie them again. To what purpose
do thou distinguish the similitudes, The vanity of them who takes pleasure in
nothing but subtilties.
by which a man cannot be taken, unless he disputes? Things deceive them, that
discern them not: Sophistmes hurts them not that knows them not, nor
profits him, that knows them. And in this sixteenth Epistle, he says:
(deriding such subtilties) I might deserve by right to be counted a fool of
all, if when old men and women, do gather up stones, for the fortification of
a town, and that the army of young men do expect the enemy at the gate, and
when a sign is given them to go out, and when the shot flies about their
ears, and they be come to blows, if I (I say) should be so idle, that then I
should propound such frivolous questions as these: Thou have that thou have not
lost: thou have not lost horns, therefore thou have them: should not I be
counted a very Iddiot, (...) I should be devising of such follies at that ^^me
when I am besieged? And further, he ^ddeth, what shall I do? death follows
me, ^fe flies from me, to encounter with this ^^are, give me something,
cause me to ex^ell fear, and if then thou make this Sillo^isme, Mus is a
syllable, Mus does gnawe ^^e chest, Time must be applied about things
necessary.
therefore a syllable does gnawe the ^hest: what assurance shall I have of this
kind ^f reasoning? or what comfort in the midst ^f my dangers? O childish
folly, we take ^elight herein, and consume our selves with ^^bour, in learning
these things. If we have so ^uch time to spend, it must be employed ^^refully
about necessary matters: what fol^e is it to learn frivolous, and vain
things, (...) such great scarcity of of time? And in another place he says
very notably: Wherefore ^ost thou torment thy self, in a question which (...)
better to be despised, then to be resol^ed in? wherefore the preacher, and
especially ^e that desires this fu^ction, must apply him^^lfe, to a sound
manner of conuincing the ad^ersaries of the truth, and to take heed that ^e be
not like unto those young me^, In prolog. super Math.
of whom ^hrysostom speaks, who being in ye schools, ^e delighted more with
painted things, the^ ^^nd matters, and that they follow more the fairest
things, then the profitable, and the love not so much those things, which be
practice, as those that have but an outwar^ show, and do delight more to taste
the swee^nesse of the leaves, then to be nourished wi^^ the abundance of the
fruit.

CHAP. VII. How we must admonish and reprove, which the third part of the
Ministry.
Let us come to the thir^ part of ye Ministry, wc must admonish with
courtesy.
which is, to exhort sinners to r^pentance, and amendm^ of life. In which we
mu^^ observe, ye reproof mu^^ be joined with admon^tion: Not that we mean
hereby, that in a matters where we use admonition, therew^ should use
reprehension: but as it is the offic^ of the Preacher, to stir up the people to
the performance of their duty, by good exho^tations, so likewise, where he
sees it necessary, he must use reprehensions. But above al^ it seems
expedient, that in all the admonitions, which he makes, whether they be^
public, or private, he uses courteous an^ loving persuasions. But always
having regard of those persons, with whom he has to do, following the
counsel of Saint Paul, who says: Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a
Father: and the younger men as Brethren. The elder women as mothers, the
younger, as Sisters, with all pureness, and so consequently with all others.

But because there is not much difficulty in this, let us come to those
reprehe^sio^s, Great discretion must be used in reprehension.
as well in houses, as abroad, which must be don with as great courtesy as may
be possible. For seeing that reprehension is of it self rude, and unpleasant,
it must be carried, with great discretion.

When the Physicians go to visit their Patients, they do consider, a long
time, how they may remove away the disease, before they apply any medicine,
for if they should use any physic not knowing the sickness, they might make
the disease the greater. So Pastors must use this wisdom. But as the
Physicians, do diligently take heed to apply a pleasant Medicine, where a
sharper is necessary, and the Surgeon does not make a gentle plaster:
where he must use a cautery: the preachers in like manner ought both publicly
and privately take heed, yt they use not alluring speeches, when they should
speak sharply. And because it is an easy matter for the Preacher to fall into
this fault, principally then, when they are called to speak before Kings and
Princes, it is a matter of great difficulty. For great men are displeased to
hear themselves censured, and commonly they are incensed in such sort, that
those that reprehend them, are oftentimes in danger. To correct this fear, we
must do that which the word of god commands us: and herein follow the example
of the prophets. The testimonies of the word for this point, are almost
infinite, where this is commanded, and every one may read the same: but we
will produce some of the ancient fathers, The preacher must not flatter whom
he should reprove.
which are known to every one, which ought to be of great importance to
persuade every one to overcome this difficulty. First, when Saint Augustine
speaks in his book de Doctri. Christi. That the tongues of flatterers do
bind men in their sins: this ought much to move the Pastor. For seeing that
he is ordained by God, to reprehend sin, and to detest them, that commits
them, and if he does it not, he heapeth up the wrath of God upon his own head.
Secondly, whereas Saint Ambrose says, in his sixth Epistle: that there is
nothing more dangerous for the Minister in respect of God, nor more vile
toward men, then not to pronounce freely the truth, which he knows and
sees: this saying also ought to stir up the Pastor, to reprehend evil without
flattery. Thirdly, whereas S. Gregory in a certain Homily says, That we that
live in the oblations of the faithful, the which they offer for their sins,
if we eat their oblations, and conceal their sins, we eat their sins.
He says also in the same place, Consider my brethren, what a condemnation you
procure to your selves, when without labor ye take the wages of labor: what a
heinous crime is this, to take the price of sin, and in our preaching, to
speak nothing against sin? Also he says in one of his Homilyes upon
Ezechiel: We that are called Priests, besides many sins which are proper
unto us, we do add unto our selves other men's sins, when we do not
reprove them: that is to say, so many as die in their sins, we are the
cause of their deaths, if we reprehende them not, as our duty requires. All
these sayings ought to enter into us, and to pearce through the marrow, if we
be negligent and cold in declaring the faults of them which are committed unto
us by Jesus Christ. This verily is a point to be noted, if we take the wages of
men, then we ought to be diligent and watchful to reprehende them, when
occasion serves, because that may prevail very much to amend them.

The opinion of some is, that if they reprehend freely, that they shall not be
paid: and the opinion of some ignorant men is, who imagine that they ought not
to be censured in their iniquities, when they give any thing to the Pastor.
Whether it be lawful to reprehende princes.
But some will reply, that this must be done toward Artizans, and simple men,
by the contentation, or coffeehouse of whom no inconvenience may arise: but
toward kings and princes, we must take great heed, and deal wisely, because
that many fearful accidents may come by their displeasure. We answer, that
the honor of God, which we ought to seek in all things, and above all, and
the salvation of souls, whereof we have the dispensation, ought to cause us to
despise these vain and frivolous conceits. We must not (says saint Ierom) so
flatter Princes, Lib. 7. upon Esaias.
as that the truth of the Scriptures should be despised. And in truth, we must
principally beware in our reprehensions, that we ought more to esteem the
truth of God, then fear to offend great men, when we are moved with zeal of
their salvation. And this also is to be done by the example of the Prophets and
Apostles. The man of God of whom mention is made in the 1. Sam. 2. 1. Sam. 2
feared not to reprove Helie the high Priest, when he denounces that God
would punish him, because he so much cockered his sons. Samuel without fear
told Saul that God would punish him, because he had despised the commandment
of the Lord, 1. Sam. 15


David having committed adultery, is freely reproved by the Prophet Nathan. 2.
Sam. 12
So likewise by Gad, 2. Sam. 24
when as contrary to the commandment of God, he numbered the people. In the
first book of the Kings, Diverse notable examples of kings, who were reproved
by the prophets. 1. King. 14
we read that the Prophet Ahiiah denounces the wrath of God against Solomon,
(who was a king of the greatest Majesty that ever was) because of his
Idolatry. Also in the same book it is said, that Ahiiah the Prophet tolds the
wife of King Jeroboam, the death of his son, and the destruction of his
house. Iehu foretold Baasa his ruin, 1, King. 16
and the ruin of his family. We read that Eliah did foreshew the famine to
Ahab, 1. King. 17
because of his Idolatry. And in the 20. 20
we read, that he foreshewed, that God would afflict him, and his people,
because he had saved the life of Benhadad. And in the 2. King. 22. 2. King. 22
Hulda the Prophetess does denounce to Josias many myseries. In the 2. of the
Chron. 2. Chron. 24
the Prophet Zacharias does prophecy many miseries to Ioas, who had forsaken
the law of God, for which cause Zacharias was stoned to death, by the
commandment of the same Ioas: Ezechiel Ezchiel. 22
does prophecy against the bloody City, etc.

John the Baptist reproved Herod freely for his incest, and the Apostles
oftentimes reprehended the high priests. Let us conclude then, that a
preacher, if he will be perfect in those things that appertains to the
ministry, he ought not more to fail in his duty in this point, then in any
other part of his charge: and in truth, having overcome this difficulty here
mentioned, I know none that are greater, which he ought to detest, amongst
those injuries and dangers, whereunto commonly he is subject.

CHAP. VIII. At what age he must exercise the ministry.
BEfore we come to the handling of this point, it shall not be from our matter,
to set down here, of what age he should be that minds to take upon him the
charge of the ministry. For seeing that it is a matter of great importance, to
preach the word as it ought to be, and to be skillful in conuincing the
enemies of the truth, also to admonish and reprehend in time and place, as it
is requisite and expedient. To do these things aptly, every one must confess
that he ought to have great experience, and to get this experience, it is
necessary that he be of sufficient age. Gregory Nazianzene has very well
said, that great advise must be taken of what age he is, that goes about the
office of a preacher, for fear least if any come unto it before their time,
they may come short in doing their duty when time requires: as if he would
say, he hurts himself in entering into this function, before he comes to
mature age. And further he adds, that as birds will fly before their
feathers be grown, in steed of flying aloft, they fall to the ground. Also as
a woman, having conceived in her womb, if she suffer abortion, and is
delivered before her time, she fills not the house, but the grave: that is,
her fruit dies as soon as it has life. So those that take upon them this
charge before convenient time, or to say better, before they be furnished with
sufficient gifts, fit for that calling, they do more go backward the^ forward.
God in old time ordained, At what age the Leuits began their office
that the Leuits (which should be admitted to his service, and be employed in
the Tabernacle of the congregation, should be of the age of twenty five, or
above, as we may read in the book of Numbers: Numb. 8.
and in the fourth chap. we may read, that the same Levites should be thirty
years old or upward: but in the fourth, there is a question made of the^ which
were sufficiently made fit, who were 30. years old. But those that were but
25. it was to show ye those that were of this age, they should be framed and
made fit for ye Leuitical priesthood, for whose instruction it seems that Ged
appointed 5. years, that in that time they might be made fit. It seems that
our savior Jesus Christ had regard hereof, seeing yt he preached not before he
was 30. years old. And to this end Greg. Nazianzene says, yt none must
preach when they are too young, because they cannot be stored with compete^t
knowledge for this charge, until they come to ripe age, setting before us the
example of our redeemer, who did not execute this office before ye age of 30.
years, although without blame he might very well have done it before: how
much more, sinful men ought to take heed, how they take upon the^ the execution
of this charge, falling into many faults, before they come to perfect age. But
because God has not commanded in his law, yt the Leuits should be 25. or 30.
years of age, to the end that all those that aspire to the office of the
Ministry, should follow them: neither did our savior Jesus Christ enterprise
this charge at thirty years, to the end, that they that publish the will of
the Lord, should imitate him, but that the one and the other was done for many
reasons, which are too long to recite. We say that now we must not regard yt
age, but principally the gifts of god bestowed upon them, whom he will have to
serve in this function, and for this cause, god has no respect neither of age,
nor youth, for the setting forth of his glory. It is well said in the book of
Wisdoms, In making Ministers, there must be greater regard of the gifts of
God, then of age. Wisd. 4 Age is not always a sign of wisdom Job. 32.
that The honorable age is not that which is of long time, neither that which
is measured by the number of years, but wisdom is the gray hair, and an
undefiled life is the old age. And to this agrees that which Elihu says in
Job, who perceiving that the three friends of Job had not spoken to ye purpose
of the judgment of god, concerning Job, he says, that Great men are not
always wise, neither do the aged always understand judgment: as if he would
have said, it is not age always that brings wisdom, but the grace of God.
For seeing that youth is ordinarily subject to contempt, or to envy, toward
all sorts of men we ought wisely to regard, that the graces of God which are
in young me^, be not made less profitable by the contempt and envy of the aged,
as it comes to pass too often. This is yt which Paul had respect unto,
writing to Timothy, when he says, Let no man despise thy youth, 1. Tim. 4.
and this precept he gives, In whom envy prevails most.
because that many times the glory of God, which might be greatly advanced by
young men, is beaten back very often by contempt or excessive envy, with which
they are secretly persecuted by the^ which are in some authority and credit.
In his book de verb. dom.
S. Austen says, ye envy is engendered commonly amongst three sorts of men:
that is, those that be equal, do envy one another for their equality: and those
that are in base estate, do pursue with envy those that are greater then
themselves, because they are inferior unto the^: and those which are in great
estate, do bite with envy those that be under them, being endued with
excellent graces, for fear least they be like unto them, or yt they do
surpass the^. Beza upon the life of Calvin.
The great light of the church Calvin, being ready to yield up his soul unto
God, amongst many lesso^s which he gave unto the^ that came to visit him, he
did gravely admonish young men, Many times old men do envy young men.
to carry themselves modestly, and to eschew pride, vainity, and folly, which
are ye vices to which they are subject: but having perceived that old men did
envy young me^, who^ they knew to be adorned with singular gifts, A grave
admonition of Calvin, as well to old as young
he exhorted the^ lively to expel out of themselves this accursed passion. The
lesson of such a man ought to be of great weight, as well with young men, as
with the aged, with young men, because it may be unto them of one side, an
wholesome medicine, to cure them of vain opinions, which oftentimes they do
conceive of themselves: and on the other side, to be an exercise of patience
unto them, that seeing themselves beset with the envy of the aged, in respect
of their gifts, unto which they cannot attain. With the aged, to make them
diligently to consider, in that God does freely distribute his gifts unto all
men, they must take heed, that they deprive not the Church of God of the^, for
the edification whereof, he does communicate his blessings, the which, they
ought above all things to prefer before their particular affections. We will
allege here a most memorable history, which ought to be well considered, both
of young and old, the which we our selves, pray you to weigh exactly. There was
a yo^g man named Po^ponius Algier, an Italian born, of the town of Nola, in
the kingdom of Naples: of whom it is reported, that being taken at Venice,
where he studied, A notable example of a young maa, which old men should
consider, not to despise youth.
and being brought before the Senate of the city, for the profession of the
truth, he disputed with so great admiration against the adversaries of the
same, that he was carried from thence, unto Rome, to Pope Paulus the fourth,
where being assaulted, with disputation, he answered so to the purpose, in the
Popes court, that all they which were present, were ravished with a^miration,
and objected to him, yt they were ashamed that he should correct the church
(for they disputed about the church) seeing that he was not yet 24. years of
age, he answered to this objection, that we read in the scripture, That
understanding is not given by age, Luke 1. Dan. 2.
but that the spirit breaths where it lists. John Baptist received the holy
ghost in his mothers womb. Daniel was a young child when he was brought before
Nabucadnezer, yet nevertheless the scripture says, that he was filled with
wisdom and understanding, the three Hebrews which were with Daniel were
likewise young (for they were called children) yet they were wise, and of
understanding in divine matters. Timothy and Titus were not very old when
they were chosen Bishops. Gal. 4
And does not Saint Paul say, that they are in bondage, ye observe days, and
times, and months, and years: what answer you to your own laws, which
commands the bishop being aged, The last Chapter, distinc: 38
not to refuse to learn of those, which are younger and learneder the^
himself. If this be so, why do you blame my youth. I pray God yt this and
such like words may be well practiced, especially by old men, the^ ye church of
god should recciue such commodity oftentimes, as it is hindered in many places,
because these things are not so well marked. Wherefore let us conclude in one
word, that when question is made of ye choice of a minister, that no regard is
to be made so much of the multitude of years, as of the graces of God, which
are in them, by whom God will be served, provided always, that these graces
be accompanied with a modest gravity, which does recompense the default of
age, which may be thought to cause some contempt of those that be young.

CHAP. IX. The third part of the difficulties of the ministry, which do
consist in diverse manners of afflictions, unto which ministers be subject.
Let us come now to the sixth, and last difficulty, which may be of great
force to make al me^ loath the ministry, which bears any love to ye same,
and that is contempt, opprobries, ignomynies, and injuries, unto which
ordinarily pastors are exposed. But because these accidents be almost infinite,
we will recite only the greatest, and we will reduce them all to eleven, or
twelve in number, the which we will set down in order, The principal
afflictions, unto which the; Prescher of the w^t be subject.
as we have done in other matters, which we have handled before, placing ye
least, and more tolerable first, afterward those which are more hard and
troublesome to suffer. Not yt we say, yt the Pastors always shall fall into
these accidents, but because they have happened unto the prophets and Apostles,
the Ministers also which do succeed them in the preaching of the Gospel may
fall into them (as they do indeed) when it shall please God so to try them. 2
Chro. 32
First, they are exposed to laughter, and mocking, as we read of the
messengers of God, who having reproved the people of Israel, because they had
forsaken the Lotd, and had given themselves to the abominations of the
gentiles, it is said: That the Princes, Ezech. 12 24. 1 Cor. 4
and the priests, and the people, mocked the messengers of God, and despised
his words, and misused his prophets, until the wrath of the Lord arose against
his people, and till there was no remedy. Saint Paul says, speaking of the
Apostles: we are made a gazing stock unto the world, and to the Angels, and to
men.

2 Chro. 8
Secondly, they are deadly hated of profane men, and even of Kings, as we may
read, what Ahab answered Iehosophat, the King of Judah, when he had demanded
of him, whether there were any other prophet of the Lord, to enquire of him
whether God would deliver out of their hands Ramoth Gilead, or no, which they
both beseeged: Psalm. 109
he answered, I say to Iehosophat, that there was one Michaiath the son of
Judah, but he hated him. These be those of whom David complayneth, calling them
traitors, and flatterers, who have rendered evil for good, and hatred for love.
Thirdly, they are iniuried, sometime one way, sometime another way. The good
Elizeus going up to Bethel, heard the children that did injury him, calling
him Ball pate, hall pate. 2 King. 2
The Prophets are called men of contention, and that strives with the whole
earth. Fourthly, Iere. 15 Ose. 4
they are subject to false accusations. Osea was persecuted after this manner:
and almost all the other prophets.

Fifthly, Iere. 29
they are subject to be most villainously betrayed, as Ieremias was by Semeias
the Nehelamite, because of a book that he sent into Babylon. Sixthly, they are
subject to many ambushers, which are prepared for the^: as we may read, how
Elyas complains that he was left alone, 1 King. 19
of the Prophets of the Lord, and that they sought to take away his life.
Seauenthly, they are subject to slanders, as that they are seditious,
turbulent, blasphemers: This is a reproach to Elyas: also to Ieremias. Eighthly,
1 King. 18 Iere. 43.5
that they are subject to imprisonment. Examples whereof we may see, how Ahab
imprisoned Michcas. 1 King. 22
Also by Jeremy who was at diverse times put in prison, when Nabucadnezar
besieged Jerusalem, Iere. 20.32
by Zedechias the King of Judah. Hanani the Prophet, having reproved the king
Asa, for making alliance with the King of Syria, 2 Chro. 16
he was imprisoned by him. The Apostles also were often thus used, as we my
read in the book of the Acts. Ninthly they are brought unto judgment, to be
condemned as evil dooers: we may see this in the prophecy of Ieremias, Iere.
26
who when he exhorted the people to turn unto god, he was made a prisoner by
the false prophets, and finally brought to judgment: S. Paul was used liwise
after the same manner. Tenthly, they are subject to blows, as we read of
Micheas, who received a blow upon the cheek of Ziakiiah the sonnne of
Chenaanah, also of Jeremiah who was stricken by Pashur, and the other Apostles
passed by this way. Iere. 20
Eleuenthly, we may ad, ye they must bear also (which is most hard and
intolerable) to be reviled of wicked me^, 2 Samuel 6 2 King. 9 Wisd: 5 Mark. 3
when they are enraged, as David, Iehu, just me^, S. Paul, and Jesus Christ
himself. And to this we may join another difficulty which is not less
grievous then ye other, The prophes are subject to famine.
that they are subject to famine. Elias was pressed with this necessity, and
was nourished by ravens, and at an other time, by the widow of Sarepta. Also
those hundred prophets, 1 King. 17
which were nourished by Obadiah in the cave, with bread and water. To conclude
when they are lastly cruelly massacred, 1 King 18
as wicked men. They are also subject to many other afflictions, which were too
long to recite: of which we have plentiful examples. We read that the Prophets
of the Lord were destroyed by Iezabell, of which Elias complains. 1 King. 1^
19 Math. 5.26 Luke 13 1 These. 2
The prophet Vrias of whom mention is made in the 26. of Jeremy, was he not
slain by king Ioachim, hearing ye words, which he prophesied in the name of the
Lord, against the City Jerusalem? Did not John the Baptist loose his head,
because he reproved Herod of his incest, as it is written in Math? James the
Brother of John, Math. 14
was slain by the sword of King Herod: that is, Herod Agrippa the son of
Aristobulus, the which Aristobulus was the son of that Herod, which put to
death the infants of Bethleem: And Saint Steven the first Martyr, It is
impossible to exercise the office of a Minister, if we do not renounce the
world.
was he not stoned to death, because he did lively reprove the Jews of their
rebellion, hardness of heart, Idolatries, and many other sins which they
had committed, and did daily continewe in committing the same? I leave it
now to all that be of sound judgment, to think whither it be a great cause
of bitterness of the heart, and incredible trouble for a man to exercise this
most noble and excellent calling that is in the world, and to receive for his
reward, such biting scoffs, contempts, outrages, injuries, and intolerable
reproaches. And briefly, to be exposed to so many cruel and violent deaths. It
is altogether impossible to bear all these things, if he do not renounce the
world, and dedicate himself wholely to the service of God, whom he must
always look unto, and not to stand upon the estimation of men. The Prophets
are called in the scriptures, Me^ of god, the light of the world, the salt of
the earth, the Ministers of reconciliation. And amongst worldly men, they are
esteemed also prophets, but false Prophets: seducers: Impes of Satan: the
darkness of the world: the corruption of the earth: seditious: disturbers of
the peace and quietness of the common wealth. They are adorned in the word of
God, with the titles of Angels, and also they are called Gods: and of men of
this world, they are accounted wicked and unclean spirits, even devils. It was
said, that Jesus Christ cast out devils, by Beelzebub the chief of the devils.
If this was spoken of our Savior Jesus Christ, A comparison between the honor
of God given in his word to his Pastors, and the dishonor, unto which they are
subject by the world.
much less ought his Disciples to be ashamed, if they be honored with the
same or the like Epithites. But as Jesus Christ has overcome the world, and
consequently, all the ways of contempt, violence, and cruelty, and finally,
has valiantly tryumphed over them: all his Disciples also, especially
faithful Pastors, which are his chief servants, ought to follow the steps
of their master, being made partakers of that notable victory which he has
gotten, after that they have manfully fought the co^bat. The co^^ort which
Ministers must take hold of in the midst of their misery.
This is the comfort which they ought at al times to propound before the^, in
the midst of their miseries, and afflictions, for that will bring unto them
more contentment and joy, then the malice and wickedness, can cause trouble.
This is that comfort which they always feel in their conscience, which will
make sweet the bitterness of their sorrows which they endure in this world.
And do they feel this comfort? when they cast their sight upon the
infallible promises of God, which do assure them to bear more then these,
even to the end of all those hard travels, and miseryes, which they must
patiently overcome. And particularly, when they do behold those wonderful
works, which God has done by the administration of their ministry and when
they do consider what god has done in times past by the ministry of the
Prophets, and Apostles, whose successors they are in the administration of
their charge, they may the better be known of what account they are toward
God, to the end, they may be the better confirmed in their vocation, by the
consideration of those marvelous effects, by which God would authorize their
ministry. Wherefore it shall be very good, here to make a brief recital,
and discourse of those notable exploits which God has done, and yet does when
it pleases him by his servants in their charge, to the end that this may bring
a double fold profit: first unto them for their singular comfort, which they
ought to oppose against all those trials, with which the world do molest them:
secondly, to the end that many amongst the people which makes no great
account of them, may be moved to esteem them as it appertains to their
duty.

CHAP. X. Wherein is declared the wonderful force and power which God has
discovered, when it has pleased him, by them which have preached his word,
the better to commend their ministry.
We say then, that God does honor so much the charge of prophecy, which he
does execute by them that are called thereunto, by reason of many miracles
which are wrought by them, after a strange manner, that they may astonish the
whole world, whether it be in war, or peace, whether it be in sickness, or
health, whether it be in famine or plenty, or at any other time, God, I say,
does work miracles by the^ in the waters, in the earth, in the air, amongst
men which dwell upon the earth, yea, and in the heavens themselves: and
finally, the Scripture shows, that their prayers have mounted up unto God,
they have kept him back from doing that which he was determined to do: let
us speak of these things in order. First, In war nothing overthrows the
purposes of the enemy, so much as the prayer of the servants of God.
in warte, then when the children of God, are very much oppressed by their
enemies, who do conspire together to overthrow them altogether, there was no
better counsel given to make frustrate their purposes, and to bring to naught
their wicked and bloody enterprises, but when such prayed unto GOD earnestly
against them. This is that which David the great king and Prophet did, when he
was assaulted by his own son Absolon, after such a subtle and crafty
manner, that there was no outward appearaunce of escape, but he must needs
have been utterly undone, had not God provided for him, for fearing greatly
the counsel of Achitophel, which was esteemed at that time as a divine Oracle,
he prayed unto God after a vehement manner, that it would please him to
deliver him from the counsel of that disloyal and treacherous subject: he was
delivered, and all the people with him. To this purpose we may allege that
which is spoken in the Psalm: Psalm. 119
that by this means Gods children do surpass the counsel of the wise: and
how is that? When he staieth upon the law of the Lord, wherein he meditateth
day and night. Secondly, when our enemies do begin to execute their enterprises
against us, there is nothing which is of such force to bridle them, and retain
them, to bring them to naught, then the prayers of the true preachers of the
word. How came it to pass, that the Amalachites, cruel minded men, were
overcome by the Israelites? Was it not by the prayer of Moses? For it is said
in Exodus: Exodus, 17
When Moses held up his hands, Israel prevailed: but when he let his
hands down, Amalech prevailed. Now Moses hands were heavy, there fore they
took a stone, and put it under him, and he sat upon it: And Aaron and Hur
stayed up his hands, the one of the one side, and the other on the other side:
So his hands were steddie, until the going down of the Sun. And Joshua
discomfited Amalech, and his people, with the edge of the sword. But behold a
most notable example, to show plainly what force there is in the prayers of
the Prophets. 1, Sam, 7


We read of the people of Israel, being even ready to be slain by the
fury of the Philistines, not knowing what to do, they had recourse unto
Samuel, and they earnestly entreated him to pray unto the Lord for them, and
they pray him to multiply his prayers in these words. Cease not to cry unto
the Lord our God for us, that be may save us out of the hand of the
Philistines. What came to pass? It is added, That at the prayer and sacrifice
which he made, the Lord thundered with a great thunder that day upon the
Philistines, and scattered them: so they were slain before Israel.

Moreover, we may see that God by the power of the prayer of his servants, does
not only destroy his enemies by ordinary means, and instruments, but by those
that are extraordinary, that it gives men great occasion to wonder: when he
would save his children, he has deprived their enemies of their sight. We
read, 2 Kig. 6
that when Elizeus had advertised the King of Israel, of all that the King of
Ashur had enterprysed against him, the king of Syria, knowing yt it was Elizeus
that discovered his purposes to the king of Israel, by the spirit of prophecy,
he sent a great army into Dothan to take him: what happened to the king of
Seria? He was himself deceived after an usual manner, his army at the prayer
of Elizeus was stricken with blindness by the Lord, presently after the
Prophet Elizeus had so prayed, O Lord, I pray thee strike this people with
blindness. So they were themselves delivered into the hands of their enemies,
in danger of loosing their lives, and they had been destroyed, had it not
been, that God also would myraculously, by his Prophet preserve them, as
they, were by him delivered into the hand of their enemy the king of Israel.

Let us go further, if any question be made of appeasing the wrath of God by
the faithful, who have provoked the Lord diverse ways, who preserues them
from the execution of his indignation, but only those that have authority to
preach the word? What did preserve the Jews from mortality, and destruction,
when God was maruellously stirred up against them, but the earnest petition
of Moses which he made unto the Lord? At that time when God would have
destroyed them, because of their murmuring, hardness of heart, and madness,
in that they would have stoned Caleb and Joshua, as God had declared to Moses.
Moses, I say, did not he disarme the wrath and fury of the Lord, by this
notable request? I beseech thee let the power of my Lord be great,
according as thou have spoken, saying: Number. 14.
The Lord is slow to anger, and of great mercy, and forgiving iniquity and
sin, but not making the wicked innocent, and visiting the wickedness of the
fathers upon the Children, unto the third and fourth generation. Be merciful
I beseech thee, unto the iniquity of this people, according to thy great
mercy, and as thou have forgiven this people from Egypt, even until now. And
the Lord said, The prayers of the servants of god, appeaseth Gods wrath, when
he is stirred up against his people. Number. 16.
I have forgiven it according to thy request.

Let us join unto this History, another which is in the same Book, and
let us behold yet more plainly, in what account with God, the messengers of
the word of God are. We read there, that the people having murmured against
Moses and Aaron, and that God consumed them as a burning fire, Moses said unto
Aaron, Take the Censor, and put fire therein of the Altar, and put therein
Incense, and go quickly unto the congregation, and make an attonment for them,
to appease the Lord, by his requests and supplications. When Aaron had done as
Moses commanded him, after the death of fourteen thousand and seven hundred,
the plague stayed. If then God has given them force to cure the diseases of
the soul, that is, to turn away the punishments of God, which he purposed to
power forth upon men for their sins, it is not so admirable, if they have
cured the diseases of the body. But that none should doubt hereof, behold how
Moses delivered by his prayers, his Sister Miryam from her leprosy, which
happened unto her, because that she and her brother Aaron grudged against
Moses, because he had married a woman, which was an Ethiopian. We read in the
first of the Kings, 13. Number. 12. God heals corporal diseases by the prayers
of his servants. 1, King: 13
After that the man of God had cried against the Altar of Jeroboam and his
Priests, the King Jeroboam stretched forth his hand to lay hold on him, and
his hand dried up, wherefore Jeroboam being afraid, prayed the man of God to
pray unto God for him, that his hand might be as it was before, which when the
man of God had done, ^. King. 5
his hand became as whole as the other. Elizeus likewise, cured Naaman of his
leprosy. Saint Paul and some other of the Apostles, have made the lame to go,
and restored their members to the impotent, and have brought many to perfect
health, when they were possessed with diverse diseases, the^ when they went
about to preach the word of God. Let us come likewise to other points which
are more commendable, and that is, that the virtue of the Pastor does not
extend it self only to the diseases of the body, but to all the health of
men: that is, even as they have cured the diseases of the body, so they have
made those sick yt were whole, sometime in one of their members, as Elimas
resisting Paul, at his word became blind. Act 13. The word of the servants of
God, does slay the wicked when it pleases God. Act, 5
Sometimes those that be whole in body, have bin stricken down by their word, as
Ananias and Saphira bears witness. For it is written that they fell down dead
at the word of Peter, who reproved them because they lied to the holy ghost.
Let us go forward and ad unto this, how that ye force of their word stretches
eue^ unto the elements, which are insensible and without l^fe, God has caused
the^ nevertheless to obey their voice, The elements do obey the word of god
uttered by his servants. Exodus 15
to ye end that we may better know the power of him that has set them a work.
Let us speak of the waters first of all, if they be filthy, bitter, and
unprofitable by any accident, when God wills, he can bring to pass, that by
their ministry they may become sweet: Moses and Elizeus does testify the same.
We read in Exodus that when ye people murmured against Moses at Marah, when the
waters were so bitter, that the people could not by any means drink them,
Moses cried unto God, and the Lord taught him a kind of wood, which he cast
into the bitter waters, and they became sweet. And in the second of the Kings
we read, how that Elizeus being in Jericho, 1. King. 2.
and how that when he dwelt in Jericho, that it was a good land, but the
waters were naught, he caused a new cruse to be brought, and put salt
therein, and he went to the spring of the waters, and there he cast the salt,
and he said, Thus says the Lord, I have healed this water, death shall no
more come thereof, neither barrennes to the ground. And in the fourth chapter
of the same book, we read, that he made sweet the pottage of ye prophets, 2.
King. 4
which was bitter by casting meal into the same. Moreover, as God by them has
healed the eleme^t of the water, being corrupted in some place, so he could
show by experience, that he has given them the same power over other elements.
And let us consider a little by our selves, whether it be not a matter of as
great difficulty to divide the seas, and the floods of waters, as to change
the bitterness of ye water into a sweet taste. 2. King. 2.
We do read, that this has bin done by the^: for it is said, that Elias with
his cloak divided the flood Iordane, and passed over with Elizeus, and
likewise Elizeus returning from whence he came, divided the same waters by his
prayer, having the cloak of Elias, and saying. Where is the Lord God of Elias,
etc. How came it to pass likewise, yt Moses cut in sunder the red sea with his
rod? and how became it dry land? was it not by the commandment of God,
performed by the hand of Moses? And how was it that the waters of Jordan were
parted in sunder, to give place to the children of Israel to pass over? was it
not by the means of Joshua, whom when God would extol, he said unto him, that
he should command the priests to carry the arc of the covenant before the
people, and that he should be their guide to conduct them over without any
fear of danger. God has multiplied ordinary things by his word, uttered by
the mouth of his servants. 2. King. 4
Now let us come unto other points of the power of God showed by them, which
are no less then those which we have made mention of before, as to increase
the corn, the bread, the oil, and such like. The holy scriptures do teach
us what the servant of God have done. The widow of a Prophet being left in
debt, and not able to pay the same, nor to sustain her family in the time of
the famine, and the creditor of her husband, coming to take her two sons to
be his bondmen, she came and complained to Elizeus, who asking her what she
had in her house, she answered that she had nothing but a pitcher of Oil, the
prophet said unto her, go and borrow the vessels of al thy neighbors abroad,
empty vessels, and spare not. And when thou art come in, thou shall shut the
door upon thee and upon thy sons, and pour out into all those vessels, and
set aside those that are full. So she departed from him, and shut the door
upon her, and upon her sons. And they brought to her, and she powered out.
And when the, vessels were full, she said to her son bring me yet a
vessel, and he said unto her, 1. King: 17
there is no more vessels. We may see the like example of the widow of
Sarepta, of whom when the prophet Eliah had demanded in the time of a famine,
a little water and a morsel of bread, she having answered him, that she
had but a little Oil in a cruse, and a little meal in a barrel, and that
she had gathered sticks to dress the same for her and her son, and then when
they had eaten it, they should die. What came to pass? The prophet told her
that she should not doubt to give unto him, because the Lord had said, that her
meal and her oil should not fail, which presently she found to be true by
experience, for neither the one nor the other was wasted, according to the word
of the Lord. Elizeus multiplied the loaves of the first fruits, which he gave
unto those which were hungry, 1. King. 4
which were an 100. men in number. Further we may observe, that even as the
prophets do command when it pleases God, the waters which are upon the earth,
and that they do obey them, so they may do the like with the waters above the
earth, 1: King: 17
as we may see by the example of Eliah, who said unto Achab, that in certain
years, there should be neither dew, nor rain, but at his word alone. And
afterwatd it is said, The word of the servants of god causes the waters above
and below to obey.
that Eliah bowing his face down to the ground, and putting it betwixt his
knees, he prayed earnestly seven times, unto God, and he saw at length, the
heavens to wax black, with clouds, and with wind, and after, there followed a
great rain. This is that which S. James says: Eliah was a man subject to like
passions, as we are, Iam. 5
and he prayed earnestly, that it might not rain, and it rayned not on the
earth, for three years, and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven
gave rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. We read also an history,
more notable, that Iehoram the King of Israel, Iehosophat, and the King of
Edom, and their army being in distress, for lack of water, then when they went
to make war against Moab, 2 King: 3
it is set down that these three Kings went to Elizeus, to enquire of him,
concerning the word of the Lord. Elizeus said unto them, Thus says the Lord:
ye shall neither see wind, nor rain, yet the valley shall be filled with
water, that ye may drink, both ye, and your cattle, and your beasts. And in
the morning, the valleys and the ditches, were filled with water. And what
more? if question be made of the air, which is another Element: has not god
made it manifest, that he can use it when he pleases, to execute after a
wonderful manner the just judgments of God his Master? The air obeyed the
word of the Lord uttered by his servant.
The ten plagues wherewith Pharaoh was stricken, does bear hereof sufficient
witness. First, when he turned by the rod of Moses, the waters into blood:
Secondly, when he filled with frogs, all the floods, rivers, and ponds,
which were in the country of Egypt: In the third place, when he sent lice:
fourthly, when he sent noisome flies: Fifthly, when he sent the murrein of
Beasts: Sixthly, the plague of botches, and sores: Seventhly, the hayle, by
which Pharaoh was constrained to confess his sin: Eighthly, the
grassehoppers: Ninthly, darkness: Tenthly, the death of the first borne, both
of man and beast.

Let us see whether their power does not stretch unto the two other Elements:
that is, to the fire, and the earth, by what authenticque testimonies may we
prove the same? Concerning fire: we read, that when King Ahaziah fell sick,
he sent two captains with fifty me^ of arms, one after another unto Elias:
they in a bravery commanding the prophet to speak with the King. 2 King. 1
Elias answered them, If I be a man of God, let fire come down from Heaven,
and devour thee and thy fifty: So fire came down from heaven and devoured
him, and his fifty. And if question be made whether the earth has served
them, we want not examples hereof, where we may see, Number. 16
that at their word, the earth opened. Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and one
hundred and fifty men, who rebelled against Moses, were swallowed up alive,
and all that they had, when the earth cloaue asunder at the word of Moses,
when he spoke after this manner to the congregation which were assembled about
the Tabernacle.

If these men dye the common death of all men, or if they be visited after the
visitation of all men, the Lord has not sent me. But if the Lord make a new
thing, and the earth open her mouth and swallow them up with all that they
have, and they go down quick unto the pit, then you shall understand, that
these men have provoked the Lord.

This example shows, that the earth denies not her obedience unto them, no
more then the other elements, when God will stir up the force that is in them.

What can we say besides this, seeing that the Pastors in their charges, are of
more force then the Elements? What thing is there so strong and fearful that
does not yield at their words? Lions, Bears, which are cruel Beasts,
Lions Bears and other wild beasts do yield to the word of the servants of God.
2 King ^
cannot be exempted, for in part, these beasts have served the Prophets, and
servants of God, for the execution of the judgments of God: The bears do
bear witness, who served Elisha to devour the forty and two children which
called him Ball pate, Ball pate: others have been overcome as it were in
combat, by the servants of God, as mention is made in the 1. Sam. 1 Samuel 17
of David, who vanquished a bear, and a lion. Daniel Dan. 6
being cast into the Lions den, for to be devoured of them, by his prayers he
stopped their mouths. We read in the Acts, how that a viper leaped out of the
fire upon the hand of Saint Paul, and did him no hurt. But some will object
that there is death, Act. 28
which is not at their commandment, for she cannot be made to to yield. It
is also said in the common proverb. That there is a remedy for all things
except death.

We answer, that neither this is exempted. And in truth it is a most notable
point, that as the word of the servants of God, is more strong then the life
of men, so it is also stronger then death it self: that even as God, when he
wills, by the word of his servants he kills men, so also by the same word
he rayseth them up from death. Behold four examples that does make proof
hereof: and here we may not, that seeing that this thing is very hard to be
believed, God has not left one example alone, or two in his word, but even
four, that he might make it the better known, what force he gives to his
Prophets when he pleases. 1, King, 17
Elias restored the son of ye woman of Sarepta from death to life. 2. Elisha
recovered his hostess son. 3. 2. King, 4 Acts 9
Tabitha, a great alms giver, was restored by Saint Peter. 4. A young man
called Eutichus, falling from an high loft, being dead, Acts 20
was restored to life by Saint Paul. If we should go further, we might
allege that the Devils which rules over death, are not exempted: For they are
easily overcome by the virtue of this word pronounced by their mouth.

And we may see a notable example in Saint Paul, Acts 16
whom a certain maid (when he was at Philippi in Macedonia) commonly
followed, who had the spirit of divination, at whom Paul being grieved, he
turned about to the spirit and said, I command thee in the name of Jesus
Christ that thou come out of her, and he came out the same hour. This was an
effect of that power which was given by Jesus Christ to the Apostles. Mat. 10.
Mat. 10
to cast out unclean spirits, and to cure all kind of diseases. Is it
possible to devise any thing, by those which have the ripest wits, which is
more strong then the voice of the good Pastors and Prophets? We have proved
that there is nothing, neither in earth, nor in the air, nor in hell it self,
which is not constrained to yield, and submit it self unto the power of their
word. Nothing remains then, but that we must needs affirm, that God only
is almighty, and yet he is of such goodness, that he suffers himself to be
overcome, sometime by the word and prayer of his servants, in such sort that
having determined to punish, and destroy the^ that have provoked him, he has
bin kept back and vanquished by their prayers, as though he were more weak,
and his servants the conquerors, as though they were the stronger. This is very
true, Exodus 23
as we may see plainly by an example. We read that the people of ye Jews,
seeing Moses to stay too long, before he returned unto them from the mount
Sinai (where he received the tables of the law, written by the finger of God)
they caused a Calfe of gold to be made, which they worshipped: with which
their fact God being angry, he threatened to destroy them: and as he went about
to perform that which he had spoken, he was appeased by the prayers of
Moses, who made his supplication unto him after this manner. O Lord, why does
thy wrath wax hot against thy people, which thou have brought out of the land
of Egypt, with great power, and with a mighty hand? Remember Abraham, Isaac,
and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou swarest by thy own self, and saidest
unto them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of the heaven. After it
is added. Then the Lord changed his mind from the evil, which he threatened
to do unto his people. See here, that the Lord was hindered to do that which
he was almost resolved to do. But let us observe here the chief point, that
God knowing well how he might be moved by the request of his servant Moses, the
History reports that God spoke after this sort unto Moses, in the tenth
verse, Let me alone, that my wrath may wax hot against them, for I will
consume them. Wherefore says he, Let me? But that Moses held him as it were by
the arms, and bound his hands by his prayers, to the end that he should
not destroy them, even as one will hold a man incenced with choler, that he
strikes not another, or else tie fast his arms, and his hands to repress
him. As indeed the devout prayers, and ardent inuocations of the servant of
God, are even bonds and chains, which tieth, and chaineth, the fury and
indignation of the Lord, being provoked against the sins and transgressions
of men, and many places bears witness in the scripture, and experience
shows it diverse ways, O immortal God, what heart is so hard whose
intrailes are so like the adamant stone, which cannot be softened by a deep
consideration of the unspeakable and incredible goodness of God, in this
behalf? what man I pray you: cannot be maruailously moved, by those miraculous
Works of God, which he has performed by the ministers of his word? What man
is there fearing God, that comprehends this although but in small measure, that
does not give singular honor unto them, whom god has adorned with this charge
which is so honorable? and moreover, does not desire with a most fervent
affection, that god would stir up more that are such, by the means of whom
we might see his Kingdom to flourish plentifully, and that of Satan to be
diminished? For in truth, there is no better way to come to such happiness,
the^ to have a great number of faithful Pastors. Every one the^ may easily
perceive, that they are not without great reason set forth, with the titles of
Prophets, Men of God, Angels, and with the title of God himself: and for this
cause, it is impossible for any man not only to do, but once to imagine to do
that which he has performed by them, how that he works by them as by
instruments, which he has vouchsafed to choose of his inco^prehensible
goodness to serve him. But some will say, what? will you have it that the
myraculous acts of the Prophets, and Apostles, and other great men, should be
now attribu^ed to the Pastors which are in these days? And must they be so
honored as the Prophets were? not only of the simple people (amongst whom many
which went unto them called themselves their servants, 1. King. 18
as Obadiah called Elias Lord, when he spoke unto him, and named himself his
servant, and that widow of who^ we have spoken before, when she spoke to
Elisha, she said, Thy servant, thy handmaide prays thee, or causes thee to
understand, 2 King. 4
and when she spoke of her husband, she named him his servant, etc.) but also
they were regarded of Kings, because they went unto them, in respect of a
singular reverence that they bare toward them, to enquire of the word of the
Lord, as we have alleged, how Iehoram, Iehosaphat, and the king of Edom, and
many other kings, which commonly did demand their counsel in their affairs,
by reason of the great honor that they bare toward them. It may be the^, some
will reply, that the ministers which live now should do ye which they did. We
answer, that all which they did, must not be attributed to their persons (for
they were men as we are) but unto their ministry: And because it pleases God
to send us forth to be messengers of his word, as he did them, why should not
that honor which was attributed to their ministry, be attributed to ours,
because that is all one? There is only this difference, that the grace of God
was more plentifully powered forth by them, then by us: and therefore, we must
ad, that as the grace of God was more amply declared by them, so also a greater
honor was due unto them: even so now at this day he must be most honored,
unto whom God has communicated most graces, otherwise he that will not do
it, must be reckoned unthankful unto the goodness of God. Moreover if he
that is inferior to another, be grieved because he is not so much reverenced,
and honored as he that does excel him in gifts (although they be both of the
same function) we say that he is to be accounted a proud, and envious man.
But also we must consider, that seeing that God will be served by our
Ministry, as he was by that of the Prophets and Apostles, it pleases him also
that we should be accounted of, as they were, according to the measure of
graces, which it pleases him to distribute to every one. For although that the
Preachers now at this day, have not such a fullness of gifts, as they had to do
such miraculous things, nevertheless, having the charge of preaching his
word, when it pleases him, he may furnish them with such graces, as they may
perform the like things, or else come near unto them. It might also be
objected, that we should recite something done by them, which were a matter of
no great difficulty. For all they unto whom God has given eyes to see more
clearly, then the simple people, may bear sufficient witness, that in these
latter times, God has raised up some extraordinarllye unto the holy ministry,
who has done as miraculous things, as those of the Prophets and Apostles. Not
many years are passed since the whole world was plunged in gross darkness,
and ignorance, so that it was a hard thing to say, whither there was a church,
or the doctrine of Jesus Christ or no. They themselves which had the charge
to teach others, had their eyes so closed up with those errors with which the
world was inwrapped, that they confirmed others in their errors, thinking that
there was no other truth, then that which they set forth, in such sort, that
it seemed an impossible thing, to cause any spark of light to appear amongst
these dark clouds, yet nevertheless, God in a moment then when every one
thought least upon it, God stirred up some of his servants, who being endued
with the motions of his holy spirit, they Preached his holy word more purely,
then before, and by wrighting, and lively voice, in a short time so much
abuses, such corruption, both in the doctrine and manners of all sorts of men,
and principally, of those that had the place of teaching others were reformed:
yt it is a hard thing to speak, or rather to believe, how many Empires,
Kingdoms, Monarchies, and Commonwealths, being covered and buried in these
corruptions and accursed errors, were by the Ministry of the servants of God
enlightened, yea and finally, drawn out of these deep pits of darkness. And
that which is more admirable, that God in the beginning having stirred up a
simple Munk, has by him alone founding and pronouncing his word, and by his
writing, shaken all the foundations of the Babilonicall Empire, and that in a
short time, which a man would have thought had bin sufficiently defended,
against all the injuries of future ages. Plessis in his treatise of the church.
Lib. 3. ca. 15
And that which is most maruailous, in that time when the Pope as a God
commanded all the earth, and was adored of Kings, served of Emperors, who gave
and took away kingdoms at his pleasure, that to enquire out his doings it was
hard, (as the proverb is) to touch the holy mountain, or to open ones mouth
against heaven. The voice of this simle Munke was like a fire, who having first
of all begun in a little corner of the world, it spread it self almost
through the whole world, and it took hold of whole kingdoms and Empires,
which were with the same altogether inflamed. This was the Trumpet, the sound
whereof was blown throughout all the borders of the earth: at this sound the
most mighty and valiant kings have trembled in their thrones: to be brief,
this Munke with a few of his companions, have drawn the most and greatest
part of Christendom out of the claws of Antichrist, a thousand millions of
men, who were blind from their birth, have had their eyes opened by their
Ministry, and afterward, having perceived and known the wholesome truth, have
constantly persisted in the sme, even until death.

This verily being weighed in an equal balance, is as great a miracle as
has been done by the Prophets and Apostles: yea, and rather we are to
acknowledge, that this is a miracle of miracles, insomuch, that this great
miracle is done without a miracle. Then if these things be so, (not to make
any longer discourse of this matter) who is it that looking more narrowly upon
these maruailous and more then admirable exployts, which are done by the
Pastors of our age, is not astonished, and even ravished with the unspeakable
Majesty of their actions, and has them in singular reverence, and loves them
not with all his heart and affection? who can sufficiently commend the
excellency of their charge? who can express how profitable, and necessary,
the administration thereof is? what man is there that loves godliness and true
honor, which does not earnestly desire to be so much honored, as to be
employed in this function. In what happiness may he think himself to be,
that is in some measure capable to serve God in this calling.

CHAP. XI. An Exhortation to young men, to bend their Studies to the holy
Ministry, with a confutation of those common objections which do discourage
them.
IN truth now, being in the way lively to exhort the youth to take upon them
this holy charge, from which they may be discouraged by reason of the infinite
difficulties which are presented before them, we do it the more willingly,
because we desire nothing more then the glory of God, and the salvation of
our Brethren, both which, cannot be better furthered then by this charge. But
alas, which way shall I begin? The beauty, dignity, and incomparable
profit of the same, ought to be as sharp spurs, to stir up every one.
When one desires that some should apply themselves unto those things, which
do appear so good in outward show, to allure and draw men thereunto, it is
very necessary to use many reasons and arguments, to bring them thereunto,
and to prick them forward: but in things that be of themselves maruailous,
excellent, and very profitable, every one ought to embrace them of his own
accord. There is no lightness so glorious, as that of the Ministry, there is
no calling, to be compared thereunto, in dignity and profit: whereof then
comes it to pass, that many do so little regard it? Plato has said that
virtue is so fair, that if her beauty could be discerned with these corporal
eyes, it would provoke great love of itself: what difference is there between
the beauty of the ministry, A confutation of the objection of the ambitious.
and yt of moral virtue? if one would propose unto himself the little reckoning
and account, which is ordinarily made of ministers, he would detest the same:
we answer yt this is the objection of an ambitious man, and to correct this
ambition, thou must set before thy eyes, that the honor which thou do desire
and gape after, it is worldly and vain. And if it be so, thou want
judgment in desiring it, and in that thou show the folly and vanity of
thy mind. Further, thou must consider, that the honor which thou dreamest of,
to be in some other calling, is often times troublesome, grievous, which is
dear before it be gotten, and hard to be kept. He that will be a physician,
how many travails and cares must he pass through? how often must he watch in
the night, before he can attain his purpose, and when he thinks that he has
attained it, how must he toil and labor to be known, and to be had in
estimation? when he is once known, and sought after for his skill, is he then
more quiet and at rest? must he not sometime rise out of his bed to help his
patient? he must make haste, he must ride in post many times with the danger
of the loss of his own health: what more? when he comes to visit his
patient, what savors is he constrained to smell? and the better to know the
quality of ye disease, and the issue thereof, he must sometime view the very
excrements of the sick man, and taste them: what pleasure I pray you, or what
delight ca^ he take in that? does the lawyer endure less travels? does he
enjoy his honors with more peace and tranquillity of the mind? how many times
in the day, does one or other come and knock at his gate, and break his head
with soliciting his matter, which he has committed unto his hand? Moreover,
thou must consider, that all these affairs for which they are so tormented,
and continually vexed, they are about earthly things, and so consequently, all
the honor and profit which they get by the same, is transitory, and vanish away
as the smoke. To conclude, meditate thou upon this, for thy comfort, that thou
art honored in the administration of thy ministry, of all those that are
wise, and fear God: and seeing that is the true honor, which comes from
good men, and not from sensual men, we may conclude, that thou have more honor
then the other. For in truth, the honor that is received from men well
instructed, is to be preferred before that which is given of the ignorant. But
of all things propound before thee, that thou art honored of God. For the
scripture speaking of the Preachers of the word, does teach us, that Christ
has said: Whosoever honoreth you, honors me, etc. In this world when we are
honored of Kings and Princes, and great Lords, we make more account of that
honor, then of that which we receive from those that be inferiors, because
that the greater that they are that honors us, so ought their honor to be
prised and valued. Seeing then God does so honor Ministers and their Ministry,
that he attributes that honor unto them, which is given unto himself:
wherefore do thou that art a Pastor, take care for the honor of men? And if
thou do add hereunto, those honorable titles which are given unto faithful
Pastors, thou would make less account of the honor of the world, and
esteem more the incomparable honor of the ministry. But if any other shall
object, that therefore he is discouraged, because that the Ministers for the
most part are poor, needy, and in misery, we answer that this is the
objection of a covetous man: A confutation of the objection of the covetous.
and to correct this vice of covetousness, consider on the other side, that
they that have more means to live by, then other, yet they also be poor: and
further, that poverty is no vice, but that it is as acceptable unto God of it
self, as riches, when as well the one as the other do come from GOD, if they
be used as they ought.

Secondly, think with thy self, that there is at this day, almost no men, which
are addicted to any other study, as to any art mechanic, who do find more
easily, honest conditions to live, then those that have given them selves to
the study of divinity, as we have seen within this seven or eight years,
that many Physicians, Lawyers, Advocates, Proctors, Notaries, many merchants,
many great Lords and gentlemen, being gone out of France, and other places,
are constrained to travail up and down in strange Countries, and have
suffered much want, although they have been skillful in their profession, and
have been rich at home, but those that have studied divinity, have found
always many commodities to sweeten the rigor of their exile. Thirdly,
consider, that if they have not such goods, and richesse, as many Marchaunts,
Artificers, and other men of trades in this world, that God has given unto
them a contented life, which is accompanied with godliness, and the fear of
God.

In the fourth place, thou must meditate, that GGD is the plentiful rewarder
of all the Ministers of GOD, and thou must think upon all those excellent
promises of GOD, which he makes in his word, to nourish all living
creatures. For if he feeds the beasts of the field, he will much more
nourish men, and if he nourishes all men, much more the faithful, and
principally those whom he has appointed, for the teaching and leading of them.
To make an end of this point, set before thine eyes, that if they abound not
in temporal, and earthly goods: yet they are rich in the knowledge of the
word of God, in the understanding, and revealing of his secrets, which are the
true riches of the soul: and seeing that those be the true riches, consider
that the more thou aboundest with the^, the more thou art truly rich: for these
riches will bring unto thee so much joy and gladness, as the corporal and
worldly goods, do bring unto them that possess them, grief, and care, and so
enjoying these true and sincere spiritual rithes, why do thou take such
thought for the riches of this world? If another does reply, A confutation of
those that love pleasure.
that his heart is pulled down, because that ministers are ordinarily
sorrowful, pensive, full of care and melancholy, I may demand of him, why are
they more then other men? These be vain and imaginary fancies, forged in the
brain, of I know not what worldly men, for they are as joyful as other, and
it is as lawful for them as for any other. It is true, it is their duty to be
sage, wise, prudent, modest, grave, and honest, but this does not hinder them,
but that they may use a moderate joy, and agreeable to their vocation: and on
the contrary, this joy does bring more contentation, as it differs from the
rejoicing of the profane. Seneca says in a certain place, that we must
govern our selves in such sort, that none may think us too severe, and again,
that none despise us, as those that be vile and contemptible, and that we must
more delight in profitable matters, then in things that be rediculous: and he
adds, that one may mingle sometime amongst grave and serious matters, those
things that be pleasant, but we must take heed that they be so tempered, that
they do not discredit their honor. If this be so, who is he that thinks the
Pastor worthy of reprehension, if sometime upon occasion he uses pleasant
words, and full of delight (which are more the signs of gentleman-like nature,
then of any vice) seeing that it is proper and natural to great and rare
personages to have (as it is said in the common proverb) some grace in their
speech? But some will object that they must of necessity abstain from many
pleasures, which are lawful to others, which be in other callings. Let us
demand of them again what they be, if one imagines that they ought not to
use the natural pleasures, which are, to drink, to eat soberlie, and many
such like, which our outward senses do enjoy, he may be answered, that it is
lawful for them to use them, as it was for the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
and Jesus Christ himself, who was present at a marriage, and at banquets, and
had the fruition of these ordinary things, as well as any other. If any mean
those pleasures which are unprofitable and superfluous, he may be answered,
that these pleasures are proper unto Epicures, and are common to brute beasts.
If one understands carnal pleasures, as to gourmandize, and to be drunken, and
to be riotous in excess, in which sensual men do take their pleasure, he
may be answered, that these be the pleasures of voluptuous men, and that
such pleasures be of their own nature so filthy, detestable, and infamous,
that when they are once named, they ought to be abhorred, by reason of those
infinite mischiefs which they draw after them, without making any mention of
the shame, sorrow, and repentance, which do ordinarily accompany them. But
let us oppose unto these, that they may continually possess the joy of the
spirit, which is the true joy, I mean the understanding of the holy scripture,
the meditations of the same, the revelation of the great secrets of God: Romans
24. Gal. 5.
this is the joy of the holy ghost, of which Saint Paul speaks, and mention
is made in all the word of GOD. This is the joy with which the Angels are
satisfied, and rejoice with all the elect and faithful that may be, the which
is joy with out comparison what can any desire that is greater? and why should
any be less affectionate, A confutation of the objection of those that be
careful.
to the study of the Ministry, if that he be but deprived of those
pleasures which are profane and unlawful. Finally, if another shall say, that
he is kept back from dedicating of himself unto the Ministry, because that
Ministers are subject unto infinite dangers, we answer, that this is the
reply of a coward, and of a fainthearted man: we may oppose against this,
that princes, gentlemen, soldiers, merchants, Chrysostom upon the second of
Matthew.
and every condition of men, do not live more safely. The higher that Princes
are exalted, the more they are assailed with fear and continual dangers.
Always (says Chrysostom) a great state is subject to great fear, as the
bows of trees, ye higher that they are, the more are they shaken with every
little puff of wind that blows, so those that are exalted unto the top of
the greatest honors, are often times troubled, and do imagine their estate
almost desperate, not only by every small report of bad news yt may be
brought unto them, but also they are oftentimes in daily fear of them, which
are appointed for the protection of their person. The gentleman is no less
assured, neither in peace nor war. In peace it is most certain, that he must
suffer and endure many pains and troubles, in conuersing with them, with whom
he has any thing to do, and this likewise is common to every condition of
man. In war, amongst the torments of mind which he may have (if it may be
called the torment of the mind) he must be ready to find out his Prince,
and to obey in all things that it pleases him to command him. To be brief,
he must not stay at his own house, for otherwise he may be counted a carter,
or one that keeps the chimnie corner, or else he may fall into some other mark
of infamy The estate of the soldier is nothing better, for he is compassed
with so many dangers, that every hour he shall put his life in hazard,
seeing that he must sometime go to the assault, sometime to the skirmish,
sometime to the battle, sometime to the breach, and many other encounters,
which death many times follows hard at the heels. The Merchant lives not more
safely, but with more fear and trembling. How does he quake for fear many
times, when he goes up and down to fayres, is he not constrained to pass
through woods and forests? It seems unto him, that he always beholds
thieves and robbers after his tail, to rob him of his treasure, and sometime
to cut his throat, and that not without cause, because he commonly spieth out
such in his way. Is he in greater security upon the sea? The pirates, and
other spies, lie always in wait to catch him, without making any mention of
the tempests, and stormye weather, unto which, they are continually exposed,
and are not far from death, but even the breadth of two inches, as one of the
philosophers has said. To be brief, every man, of what art or mystery so
ever he be, is he not subject to many hazards, yea unto more then the
ministers are? because that they commonly staying with their flock, according
to their calling, are in more safety then those that travail hither and
thither? But if it so fall out, that they be in danger when they are with
their flock, in the midst or nigh to the adversaries of the truth, there is
none of their faithful hearers, but that will use all ye means they can, yea
and ve^ter their lives for the preservation of their person, as we have seen
many times in France, and in other places, that many have bin preserved by
these means. When they are in the army, their vocation is to preach, to advise,
to admonish, and principally to be near unto the^ which do command, and not to
go and ru^ at al encou^ters, as captains, and soldiers, and other must do,
according to their duty, and co^seque^tly, they are not environed with so many
dangers as other men are. Further, propose unto thy self, that if they endure
any afflictions, or torments of the mind, that it is for the honor of God. And
consider that if Princes, Noble men, and Artizans, do suffer voluntarily an
infinite marterdome, one for ambition, the other for covetousness, an other I
know not for what vanities, much more, none ought to fear, or to doubt at all
to be troubled, or to suffer shipwreck, even of life it self, for the
advancement of the glory of God, and for the salvation of his brethren, which
are things so rare, and so precious, that the son of God doubted not to shed
his blood for the^. What joy and comfort may come unto them by these
sufferings, for which the Apostles and other of the faithful rejoiced so much?
What man is so eloquent, that can express this in words? But for thy
sovereign comfort, set before thee, that he whom thou seruest, is strong, and
mighty, for to defend thee against any thing that may happen: who is thy
rock, thy buckler, thy Tower, and who will never forsake thee in time of need.
God says by his Prophet, Zach. 2
That he that touches the faithful, touches the apple of his eye. He
speaks this of all the faithful in general: how much more then, does he
understand the Pastors, whom he has ordained to be guides unto others. In
man's body there is nothing that we do so charily regard, as the apple of the
eye, because that is the guide of the other members. If then the Pastors be
the apples of the eyes of God, that is, those whom he loves, and keeps as
his only treasure, who doubts, but that he has more care in preserving
them, then we have in keeping our sight? To conclude, if any man opposes
whatsoever he can, or what he may devise or invent, as obstacles and
hinderaunces to dissuade any from the love of the ministry of the word of
God: we know also that there are sufficient aunswers to confute him, and which
are of more force by the grace of God to inflame them that have any heart at
all (if they can understand them) that no reasons can be alleged to discourage
them. Wherefore, let us beseech the Lord God, with an ardent heart, and devout
mind, that whereas the ministry is a divine and spiritual thing, and men by
nature sensual, and given unto the world, that it would please him by virtue
of the holy Ghost, to root out of diverse men's hearts, these carnal and wordly
affections, and plant, and as it were imprint in them, a holy desire of
applying themselves most earnestly unto this holy vocation: that he would
vouchsafe, to inflame our hearts more and more, with the fire of his holy
spirit, and so form and fashion them, that they shall not need any further
help. Finally, that he would direct and guide them, that they may be able to
finish and accomplish their courses, in such sort, that the efficacy and power
thereof, may redounde unto the restoring of many Kingdoms unto Christ, yea
even unto the renewing of the face of the whole earth, the whole being done for
the singular comfort of the faithful, and principally, for the advancement of
Gods glory: to whom be all honor, praise and glory, both now and evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.

