An Oration as touching the life and death of the famous and worthy man D.
Andrewe Hyperius, penned and pronounced (...) assembly of all the States of
the City of Marpurge, by Wygandus Orthius: And done into English by John
LVD^A^ 1577.

Hominis vita varijs fortune vicibus assidue rotatur.

soldier on chariot

To the right worshipful Master Alexander Nowell Deane of the Cathedral
Church of Saint Paul in London: Continuance of health and all things
prosperous in Christ Jesus.
Having accomplished and gone through with all things apperteyning to the
edition of this former Book, (right worshipful) It was my hap to light upon
this Oration p^ened in good and pure Latin by Wigandus Orthius, as concerning
the life and death of the famous and worthy man D. Andrew Hyperius, author and
co^poser of the same Book. Which when I had once read over, and finding it to
be both pleasant and profitable, by reason as well of the variety of matter as
also of the aptnes of the phrase and holeso^nes of the argument, and perceiving
again that it might minister no small occasion to the Reader, whereby the
better to like, not only of this, but of all other the works of this most
excellent writer: I could by no means satisfy my self, till such time as I
had turned the same into our English tongue, and placed it (as a thing several
by it self) in the later end of this volume. The thing it self (I grant) is
small, but if the substance of the matter be considered, it may seem
(peradventure) to be (I will not say great but) such as neither the Reader
shall have cause to repent him off in reading, nor I cause to forethincke me
off in writing [Sed vino vendibili non est opus suspensa haedera,] Howbeit why
I have been so bold to put it forth under the title of your name, as you
(purcha^ce) may marvel, so have I to render some reason. First I was moved
unto it by the example of the penner of this Oration, who causing it to be
fixed in the later end of a work begone and not finished by the Author thereof
D. Andrewe Hyperius, entitled The Method of Divinity, dedicateth the same to
his very friend and Scholemaster, Master John Princierus. Secondly I was
induced so to do by the likeness and resembla^ce of the persons: that is to say,
of D. Andrew Hyperius, and D. Alexander Nowell: the one a famous
Superintendente in Marpurge, a City of high Almayne, the other a most worthy
Deane of the Cathedral Church of S. Paul in London: the one renowned after
his death for his rare gifts of learning and godliness of life, the other yet
living with no less commedatio^, as well as for his manifold knowledge in
things divine and humayne, as also for his singular ornaments of Curtesye,
Affability, Modesty etc. The one a Mirror of his time for his notable
frugalitie and sobriety, the other a spectacle of our age for his bou^tifulnes
and good hospitality. But I cannot prosecute this point so far as I justly
might, considering tha^ neither is it any part of my purpose to set forth your
praises (otherwise then by occasion) neither (I am sure) conceive you any
pleasure at all in hearing of them: seeing you are wont to ascribe al praise
and glory unto god alone, and unto man nothing but shame and confusion. The
third thing that alured me to the doing of it, was the consideration of the
near friendship and familiarity that remains between your worship and that
Reverend father, my Lord of London: whereby I thought it not amiss (considering
my duty to both) to join and lincke you together (as in one band of amity)
so in one littell volume. Fourthly and lastly, I was stirred or rather
compelled hereunto, as well by the certain report of your rare benignity
toward all men, and especially poor Scollers and ministers of the Church, as
also by infallible experience of that bountiful Curtesy, which naturally is
ingenerate in you, and flows (as a man would say) even unto those with whom
you are smally acquainted. For which causes as you cannot be but greatly
beloved of all in general and of me in special, so covet I again (by some
means) to testify the grateful signification of my good meaning in this
behalf, which I cannot otherwise do then by this simple demonstration of my
good will and ready observance toward you. This only remains, that you
(according to the goodness of your nature) accept my doings in good part:
esteeming rather by this little what a great deal more means, then by the
smalnes of the gift to misconstrue the mind of the giver. Vale Integerime vir:
et Deus opt. Max. Dominationem tuam quam dintissime incolumem seruet, domisque
suis eximijs eandem indies augea., locupletet, diteseat.

From Wethersselde the.xxviii. of May. 1577. Your worships always most humble
in the Lord, John Ludham.

An Oration as touching the life and death of the famous and worthy man Andrew
Hyperius, penned and pronounced by Wygandus Orthius professor of Divinity in
the city of Marpurge, the xxvii. of Februarij. 1564.
IF I should even in the very first beginning of my Oration break forth into
tears, and fall to weeping (right honorable Lord Governor, right worshipful
and grave Fathers) I suppose there is none yt would not willingly pardon my
dolor and grief so justly conceived. For why, we have lost, as you see, ye
most grave Divine* D. Andrew Hyperius. We have all forgone a most worthy
companion, many are deprived of a most excellent Scholemaster: But I, for my
part, have lost not only a companion and scholemaster, but also a most sweet
and comfortable kinseman: who was first unto me the author and beginner of my
study in Divinity, who became always afterward a helper and furtherer in it:
whom I used as a councellor in all my affairs and dealinges, without whose
counsel and advice I attempted nothing privately at home, nothing publickely
in the schole: with whom I was accustomed to confer my studyes, by reason (as
ye know) of the domestical acquaintance and familiarity betwixt us.

Such a man, such a companion, such a master, such a friend, such a kinseman
have I lost. Therefore amiddest the public and common mourning and
lamentation of all good men, there is also happened unto me a private and
peculiar cause of sorowing. For neither can I now look upon mine Aunt bereft
of a most excellent husband, nor upon my Cousyns deprived of a most worthy
parent, in the midst of their so great heaviness and grief, without the
sheadding of my tears. But yet as for this my private sorrow, either time might
mitigate it: or ye consideration of our common mortality might assuage it: if
so be a greater, that is to say, an universal and public calamity encresed
not our heuines; which through ye death of this most excellent man is come not
only to our schole, and to the Churches of Hassia, but also to all Germany,
and even to all the nations in Christendom besides.

For why, believe me, we have not lost an obscure person, we have not lost a
common or country Divine: but we have lost even the light of our Schole, we
have lost even the chief and principal Divine of our Churches: whose matches
our Country of Germany has sewe living at this day, but his betters at any
time whither ever it had any in matters of Divinity I can not tell. Which
thing both procures unto me most woeful heaviness: and this also causes no
less grief, that many there be (the more is the pity) men no doubt wicked
and ungodly, that neither see nor understand what a great treasure we have
lost: but as those that are altogether without sense or feeling, suppose the
often deaths of so famous and worthy men to belong nothing at all unto them.
Which truly, whether they be so pronlyke and flyntie that they can nothing
be moved with the common calamities of Churches and Schools, or whither they
be so folishe and brainesicke that they perceive not what inconvenience
happens by the death of so worthy personages: they seem unto me rather
worthy to be hissed at than to be winked at without controlment.

But let us be wayle the death of our Hyperius, and not suffer our selves to
become wickedly unkind to him for so great benefits of his. And yet truly as
for me both my incredible sorrow, and also the slenderness of my manner of
speech might seem worthily to excuse me from this function of speaking: if as
well the greatness of this man's benefyts bestowed upon me, as also the
consideration of our College of brethren did not exact and require these
present tears of my Oration. I will endeavor therefore somewhat to resist my
grief: and whose eyes dyinge I closed with many tears, to him also, if it be
possible, will I perform this duty without tears. I will then by your
patience (most learned fathers) speak first of the life and death of Doctor
Andrew Hyperius, and next of the cause and manner of our heaviness and mourning:
which two parts of my Oration, after I have once accomplished, I will so make
an end. In the mean time I beseech you, as you have always loved our
Hyperius for his notable learning and godliness of life, so give your
diligent attendance.

Andrewe Gererdus Hyperius, was borne at Hypiris, a notable town of Flanders.
It was the year of our Lord by computation 1911. in which year, the xvi. day
of May, immediately after six of the clock at night, he was delivered into
the world (...) He had a Father of the same name Andrew Gererde, a famous
Lawyer among them at Hyperis: his mothers name was Katherine Coets, descended
of the noble family of a house in Gaunte. The parents forthwith delivered
their child in the year of his age 11, after he had now already
indifferently tasted the rules and principles of Grammar, to one James Papa, a
noble Poet of that time, to be further traded in learning: who then taught a
Schole in Vastine besides the river Lisa. In whose Schole also the child heard
John Sepanus, a man, as he was then counted exactly learned, and not unskillful
in the Greek and Hebrew tongues. After in the year of his age 13. he passed
the borders of Flanders, that together with good letters he might learn also
the French tongue: where in the Schools he heard teaching, John Lacteus, from
whose mouth were said to flow most sweet phrases of speech like unto milk.
The year following he was sent to Tornaye, where a Schole of three tongues was
looked for to be opened, the gouerner whereof was Nicholas Buscoducensis. But
when the Schole was planted and should have been opened, he without any longer
tariau^ce returned into his Country. The father coueted by all means that
this his son, as in good letters, so should he enstructed in good manners.
Therefore when he had no fancy to send him to Louayne, because he saw the youth
there to be corrupted with over much liberty: neither could be also
conveniently send him to Parise, where he (the father himself) had lived a
young man certain years, by reason of hot and continual wars that then
were abroch between the Emperor Charles the fyft, and Francys the French king:
he was constreigned for a time to keep his son at home, where he occupied
himself in writing out of Acts, as they call them, with his fathers Clearkes.
And truly there wanted very little, but that he had even then taken his leave
of ye study of good letters, wherein he was now meetely well profited: when in
the mean time his father, whom he loved very dearly, the xii. day of June,
Anno. 1525; departed out of this life^ who lying on his death bed had given
to his mother very straight charge of this thing especially, that as soon as
the said wars were broken up, she should send her son Andrew to Parise,
there to prosecute his learning and study. Truce therefore being taken
between the Emperor Charles and king Francis, Hyperius went first to Parise,
in the year of our Lord 1528. the day before the Calendes of Augusto.

He was commended by letters to Anthony Helhuck of Vastine, who was at that
time a Senator of the Parliament, and to John of Campis Curtesian, a public
professor of Divinity: to ye one that in ye time of war, if need were, he
should have his necessary charges borne: to the other, that he might be seen
too as touching the order of his studies. Hyperius therefore first keept a good
space in this man's house, while he learned the rules and precepts of Logic in
the College Caluiacum. Then the year next following after he was come to
Parise, he grew into great familiarity with Ioachime Ringelberge, a man
notably well learned, who in this College Caluiacum taught at that time both
briefly and learnedly diverse and sundry things.

But in the third year, he began now privately to instruct others in ye
principles of Logic and Rhetoric, when in the mean time he himself became
a bearer of ye books of Aristotle's Phisickes, yt according to ye custom of
the Scoles, he might with ye residue of his companions, atteyne to ye degree of
Master of Art. Which three years being ended, he returned into his Country,
yt he might both salute his friends, and also learn whither there were any
patrimony leaft him or no. Whereupon the year following (which was the
thousand five hundred and two and thirty) when he perceived a sufficient
patrimony to be still remaining unto him for the longer continuance of his
studies, he gate him again to Parise, of purpose now to bestow his time in the
exercise of grauer studies. He then first of all began to apply his mind to
the study of Divinity, of which facultye at that time the exercises were most
famous in the Scole of Parise. He resorted therefore diligently to the Scoles
of Divines: sometimes also he would hear certain Lectures in the Decrees, out
of which the Divines then more used to prove their assertions, than out of the
holy Scriptures. Moreover he would now and then, for recreations sake, enter
into the Scoles of the Physicians, forasmuch as he was always eue^ (as a man
would say) by nature very much delighted with the study of Physic. In the
mean season he forgate not to hear diligently the professors of the tongues,
especially Cleonarde, Sturmius, Latomus: and taught himself privately,
chiefly Frenchmen, and Spaniardes. But about that time he was greatly desirous
to travail other Countries and provinces of France; both to the intent he
might more exactly learn the French tongue, and also more thoroughly be
acquainted with the manners and conditions of all that nation. Therefore every
year, especially in ye months of January, February, and March, wherein for
the most part public Lectures in the Schools were intermitted, or at least
wise more neglygently handeled: he, adjoining to Himself trusty friends, and
such as were desirous of learning, trauayled into other provinces, and visited
the famous universities. And so within three years space, for the time of those
months, I spoke off, he surueyed almost all France over, and a good part of
Italye, that especially by name which lies between the Alps and Bononye.
Afterward he came again into his Country, in the year.1535. but from thence
he went forthwith to Louayne, whither he had caused before his Library to be
transported out of France. Much about the same time, for the satisfaction of
his mind, he trauayled well near over all ye lower Germanye, to wit,
Gelderland, Phryseland, Traiect, Holand, Seland. Thence next in the year of
our Lord 1537, and of his age 26, he purposed with himself to go visit the
higher Germanye: to ye intent he might see the more famous Schools in it, and
the learned men in them. He visited therefore the same year Colen, Marpurge,
Erford, Lipsia, Witenberge. From thence yt self same year retourning into his
Country, about the end of the month of August, he was persuaded by thaduice
and entreatie of his friends, to determine with himself to take upon him now in
some place ye charge and office of teaching: to the intent, that having now
spent away his stock in ye Schools and in trauayling of Countries, he might
pass his time more quietly at home with his friends. And verily his fri^edes,
vnbeknowing unto him, had procured already a Grant or Charter from the Bishop
of Rome, wherein were granted to Hyperius yearly out of a certain Abbay large
and liberal revenues. Only this thing remained, that ye assent and agreement
of John Carondilet Chauncelor to the Emperor and Archebishp of Panorman, was
in this behalf to be obtained. But it came to pass (no doubt) by gods
providence, that not only no grant could be had from him; but also there was
likely to proceed from him great and iminent danger. For Hyperius was accused
to the said Archbishop by those ye such for the same living that be stood for,
that he had been in high Germany: which thing at that time was counted not
only odious for the hatred that was borne to pure religion, but also a matter
very full of hazard and peril. Hyperius therefore, least having now consumed
his patrimony he should become a burden to his friends, began again by the
advice of certain godly and learned men, to bend his mind to the further
trauayling of Countries. And even then had he conceived some desire to go into
Italye, and the rather because he had now already meetely well before trauayled
over France and Germanye: but when the wars began again to wax whot
between the Emperor and the French king, and all passages by that means
became very dangerous, being shette out from Italye, he sailed into Britayne,
where he might by letters more easily be certified from his friends; if at any
time any better hope of preferment shined forth in his Country. And like as
in other nations, so also in Britayne he labored to knew those men especially
whose names by learning were become any thing famous. By which occasion he
chanced to light vnpon Charles Montioye a noble baron of England, whom the
great Erasmus of Roterodam both most amply and often commends in his
writings. He having very friendly conferred with Hyperius of many and sondrye
matters, when he perceived his towardnes, first offering unto him a large and
liberal stipend, brought him home to his house: whereby ye space of four years
and somewhat more Hyperius lived to his great likement and contentation, and
conferred with the Lord Montioy touching studies of good letters. The year
therefore of our Lord 1540. in ye month of July, he at ye charges of Montioye
visited the university of Cambridge. The same year was beheaded Thomas
Cromwell, as well because he had been the Author of the marriage of Anne of
Cleue, as also for that he was suspected to be of the sincerer religion. About
the same time also was burnt for the profession of the purer religion Robert
Barnes with certain other.

Yea and some were put to death, because they would not allow that the king
of England should be called the supreme head of ye Church of England next
under Christ. Further there were set forth certain perilous Edictes against
strangers. Which news moved Hyperius to bethincke himself of his return
into Germanye. But before he departed out of England, he visited also the
year following in ye month of February, the ancient university of Oxforde.
From thence he came to London in the month of May, and having set his
matters at a stay, took his leave of the Lord Montioye, who labored
exceedingly to have kept Hyperius still with him. Wherefore the xii. day of the
same month he arrived at Antuerpe: from whence co^ueighing himself into his
Country, he reposed himself certain days with his friends. But the fame of
the Common weal and Schole of Strausburgh, and especially ye renown of Bucer,
enforced Hyperius to travail also that part of the higher Germanye. Therefore
when he was about to set forth toward Strasborough in ye way as he went, he
came hither to Marpurge, whilst his carriage and books were brought by ye
Carriers to Franckforde. For he knew right well, yt he might both live better
cheap with us whilst he tarried for his books, than in any other place of
the Rhyne: and also hoped, that he should here easily obtain to the famous
and learned men, that taught at Strasborough, letters of commendation: and that
especially from the friendly and kindeharted man Master Gerardus Nouiomagus,
who had both known Hyperius before time, and also lived himself for a ^^ace
at Strasborough. This was the occasion of Hyperius coming to this Schole of
Marpurge: to the which he came, the xv. day of June, Anno 1^4^, and in the
full 30 year of his age. The coming of Hyperius was most acceptable to Master
Nouiomagus: who began very diligently to entreat with Hyperius, that he should
here purpose to remain, puttinge him in sure and certain hope both of a place
to teach in, and also of liberal entertainment. Therefore when John Ficinus,
Chauncelor to our most noble prince, a man for his notable virtue worthy of
eternal memory, was returned from the Commission or parliament of Rentzburgh:
Nouiomagus labored with him as touching Hyperius. Nouiomagus affyrmed, that
since the meeting was at Henaulde, Anno 40* where he being sent from our
prince was present, he could never have his health: neither was he able to
endure those pains in teachinge, which before he had suffered. And therefore
required, that Hyperius might be appointed in his room: who, for so much as he
through his infyrmitie was not of power sufficient, might take upon him to
read. Ficinus mislyked not the good counsel of Nouiomagus: but incontinently
calls Hyperius unto him, exhorts him to abide still at Marpurge, and to
show forth some token and trial of his learning. For it would come to pass,
that in case he gave forth any notable testimony of his learning, an honest
stripend should be appointed him for his pains. Hyperius being with these and
other such like reasons persuaded, abode still at Marpurge, wtin a small time
after dies master Nouiomagus, ye x. of January in ye year following, in whose
place next by thauthority of ye masters of ye profissio^ succeeded Hyperius:
and, look what Epistles of S. Paul Nouiomagus had used before to interpret,
the same began he also to expound. And when he had by the space of two years
and more, single as he was, trauayled in this trade and function of teachinge,
he resolved with himself to marrye: for so much as he suppose that (...) could
not conveniently p^sse his days without a wife, and the rather because he was
not greatly sound as touching bodily health.

He took to wise therefore in the year, 1544. the xxvii. day of Februarye,
Katherine Orthia, Daughter of Lodowick Orthius sometimes Treasorer of Marpurge:
whom John Happelius an honest Citizen had left a widow with two children. Of
this his wife, whom he always loved most derely, he begat six sons and
sower daughters: whereof only two sons and three daughters do still remain
alive.

But how and in what order he has now by the space of these xxii. years
behaved himself amongst us as well in teaching publicly ye holy Scriptures,
as also privately the liberal Sciences, we have now next of all to consider.
In which office and function of teachinge there seem unto me these four
things chiefly to be required. First, a singular learning, joined with much
readinge and experience of things: next, a substanciall power and faculty of
teachinge: then, fidelity and diligence: and last of all, gravity and
constancye of life and conversation. And that learning is required in a
Teacher, and the use of many things, there is no man that doubts. For who is
he that ever could well be taught, and reap any fruit of learning, of an
unlearned man? No more truly can a man perceive any thing that good is, of
one that is unlearned, than of a stone he can learn to fly. But as learning
is very requisite and necessary: so it is in no wise alone sufficient for a man
that is occupied in the Scoles, unless ye power also of teachinge be joined
with it. Thou may find many men very well learned, and cunning in ye
knowledge of things: which nevertheless, for so much as they are destitute of
this power in teaching, yield no fruit at all neither to Schools nor Churches.

Whereupon the Apostle also requires such a one to be the Bishop of a Church,
as is Didacticos: that is to say, endued with the gift and faculty of
Teachinge. Neither must fidelity and diligence be sundered from these twain,
which if it be absent, neither then also will any fruit redounde to the
hearers, though the man be otherwise both learned and eloquent. And in him
especially that will profess ye holy Scriptures, is this faithfulness (which we
speak off) of necessity required. Whereupon likewise Thapostle to the
Corinthians, as touching the ministers of the word speaks in this wise: Let
a man so esteem of us, as of the ministers of Christ, and disposers of the
mysteries of God: among whom, 1. Cor. 4.1.^.
this especially is required, that they be found faithful. But no less
necessary also is this last point, namely that to doctrine and erudition the
life and manners may be agreeable.

A foul shame it is
For him that does teach,
When the thing he finds fault with
Against himself does preach.
And our beloved Paul requires a Bishop to be unreprovable, 1. Timo. ^.2.3.
not stubborn, not wrathful, not given to wine, no fighter, not given to
filthy lucre: but a keeper of hospitality, a lover of virtue, modest, upright,
holy, sober. For what do those Teachers profit their herers, yt do pluck down
by their naughty living, yt which they builded up by their well teaching? yt by
their lives and daily manners show the^ selves to dislike greatly of those
things, which they prescribe unto others to be followed? With what (I will not
say) authority, but with what face can ye teacher reprove vices in ye Schole, as
dronkennes, riotousnes, covetousness, incontinency, and such like: which is
himself (I will not say) often times dr^nke, but always druncke? not only
given to riot, but also lives so wickedly in all superfluity, that he
supposes gods majesty to be of no power at all? which is so covetous, that of
every fylthy occasion he gapeth after insatiable gain? who finally has so
wallowed in scurrilitie and uncleanness al his life long, that he doubts also
whither he may account these heinous sins and enormities for sins and vices
or no? All the pointed therefore, which we have spoken off, are required in a
Teacher: which if we shall diligently consider, in what measure they have been
in this our Hyperius, we shall find to have been very great. And first verily,
as touching the singular learning of this man what shall I say? I may speak
the more freely, most excellent fathers, of the dead: for so much as I shall not
now seem to flatter him being dead, that I never fawned upon beeinge alive.
Great was the knowledge that this man had of the tongues, more great of the
liberal arts and of philosophy, but of the holy Scriptures and
Ecclesiastical histories and of all the old and ancient Church most great of
all. That which I speak, to be true, you your selves know, most learned
fathers, and can very well testifye: who have heard him publicly teachinge,
who have heard him disputinge with great commendation, who have heard him
familiarly talkinge with his friends.

Many other witnesses there be thoroughout all Germanye, and other nations, men
famously learned, which either resorted to his Scoles, or other wise were more
familiarly acquainted with him. His books are witnesses that he wrote and
published, which are of great learned men esteemed and read among the works
of the best learned writers: as those short Scolies upon the Epistle to the
Romans: as, the two books Of framing of Divine Sermons: as, the four books
touching a Divine: as, the two books Of reading and daily meditation of the
holy Scriptures: as, that Cathechisme or Short Instruction which he last put
forth.

Many other books of his are witnesses also, penned and written by him with
great labors and watchinges, which we are sorry could not of him be ouerseene
and recognized: that so, which would have turned to the great profit of all
studious Divines, they might have come abroad. For he had written as well in
Philosophye, some things: as, Touching the order of Study, Of Logic,
Rhetoric, Arithmetic, Geometry, Cosmography, The Science perspectiue: some
things of Astronomy, and likewise of Natural causes, and Scolies to the ten
books of Aristotle's Ethickes: as also in Divinity many notable matters: as,
touching The not forsaking of the studies of holy Scripture, three books: Of
Divine places, four books: Obseruatio^s of places upon those parcels of ye
Gospels, which are usually read in Churches every Sunday, Again, Of the life
and manners of students: Of public liberality toward the poor: Of
ecclesiastical Schools: Of the marriage of Ministers of the Church, How a man
ought to prove himself: Of the providence of God, Moreover, upon all the
Epistles of Saint Paul certain peculiar forms of speaking: and the Method of
Divinity, of which having appointed six books, he had not yet finished three.
He had begu^ likewise to write 12. books entitled of Scolasticall vacations,
and as touching the Ordering of the Church 6. books. Which books, if he him
self might have corrected and fully accomplished: then should have appeared
sufficiently out of them his divine wit, the^ should have shined forth
sufficiently his notable learning, the^ would have been seen sufficiently his
wonderful knowledge of ye ancient histories of the Church, the^ would have
been apparent sufficiently his grounded practice and experience of manifold
things, together with his deep and excellent wisdom. But even out of those
notwithstanding which he has already put forth, may all these things also be
sufficiently perceived, though I should hold my peace. We have maruayled
forsooth often times, whenever any thing was propounded in familiar talk as
touching Ecclesiastical matters, to hear yt he had always in a readiness out
of ancient histories some thing that made for the matter in question, and how
he did so promptly illustrate and determine the same. But there was no less
power in the man of teaching and arguing, then there was furniture of learning
and erudition. With what force and facilitye be taught, the self same can
testify, that are witnesses before of his other gifts: what dexterity in
disputing, what sharpenes of wit he always used, his bearers do remember.
He would not (as many are wont to do) dally and scoff at the arguments
proposed: neither handeled he the matter with clamoures and outcryes, whereby
no profit could redound to the hearers: but he so openly and gravely discussed
all things, that the diligent hearers might receive thereby most ample fruit.
And in this his manner as well of teaching as of reasoning, he was always from
time to time of so great modestye, and of so great constancye: that neither
would he unadvisedly move idle questions, neither alter or interrupt the order
of teaching that he had once with judgment taken in hand. As touching which
thing, you remember I am sure, right learned Master Chunrade Matthew, my very
worshipful kinseman, what he said the self same day he let his life, either
of us both you and I being present with him. I, says he, have always been
careful of this in the Schole, that I might propound profitable doctrine to my
hearers, and avoid idle and superfluous questions: I have taken diligent
heed, least I should give any occasion of contentions, and have evermore
retained one uniform order of teaching: and so long as I live, will reteyne.
These in a manner were his words: which when we had heard not without tears,
we affirmed that we were witnesses of that matter: and how that we likewise had
always hitherto kept the fame order of teaching, and would keep also
hereafter. But as touching that which perteyneth to his fidelity and
diligence, in the office of teaching, there is no cause why I should say
much. I appeal to the felfe same to testify of his diligence that were
witnesses even now of his learning and abilitye in teaching. This is certain,
he was ravished with so great zeal and feruencie in promoting the studies of
holy Scriptures, that over and besides the labors ye were enjoined him, he
would also often times ^hoose to himself vacant hours, wherein he might teach
something extraordinarily. He dilige^ly procured and set forward the exercises
of disputations and declamations, wherein as he alone by the space of certain
years was always with great travail the chief: so afterward when other of us
also his companions kept our course in ye order, he was both willingly and
commonly present.

As for the form and manner of preaching in the Schole, with what great labor,
I pray you, with what great paynfulnes did he order it? He prescribed common
places, which he thought most needeful to be handeled: he corrected the Sermons
written by Students, before they were recited: he heard also them that were
appointed to preach, before they should openly come into the Church: to the
intent that if any thing were amiss either in their voice, or in their
gestures, yt also might be amended. He praised those, yt had well behaved
themselves in these exercises: he reproved and pricked forward ye negligent
and slothful unto diligence. He had adjoined to these kinds of exercises,
besides an Examining in matters of Divinity, which he appointed once commonly
in two years, a certain order also of Divine Consultation: where some question
being propofided either of Doctrine, or of rites and matters Ecclesiastical,
he would bid every one in order to put forth his opinion in a full and
continewed form of speaking: to ye intent that so by diverse and sundry
sentences on either side given, it might be perceived out of many what was
true, and what false, what made for the purpose, and what might be said
against it. All which labors be so willingly took upon him, that having also
no reward appointed for his pains, he nevertheless most diligently
prosecuted the same. I omit his private studies, of which I will now say
nothing more, then that which I may truly avouch: namely, that he was never at
home alone, but yt he either wrote something, or read something, or meditated
something: so far forth that be seemed unto me even to weaken and debilitate
the strength of his body, and eue^ to consume him self with over great studies
and labors. There was in him besides all these things, a most diligent
meditation touching the reforming of Churches, wherein he was occupied day and
night. For he coueted greatly to revoke the people of our Nation to the pattern
of ye primityue Church: he coueted to remove many tryfles, which being derived
from the Papa^ye do still remain with us, and to reduce the simplicitye of the
old fathers in the practice of religion: he coueted to restore the
Ecclesiastical discipline, sore d^^ayed to the great loss^ and detriment of
Churches.

In which his holy purpose how farfoorth he travailed, and how great fruit he
ministered unto all Churches, we shall the^ understand, when as, he being now
dead and gone, these meditations (of which also we have given some ynckeling
before) although imperfect, shall come into light. Concerning which things
much more might of one be said, and that with great commendation, but that I
hasten to the other parts of my Oration. In praising therefore the life and
manners of this most famous and excellent man, there is no cause why I should
much stand, especially before you and in your presence. He was sufficiently
known unto you all, even strangers also knew sufficiently the state of his
life. In diet and apparel he was always most temperate, in feasting most
sober, in talk and dealing most friendly and just. As he detested from his
heart those insatiable quaffinges and uncomely speeches commonly practiced of
our Countrymen at the time of their bancquetinges: so again would he now and
then be willingly present at the moderate feasts and pleasant meetinges of
his friends. Thus, he neither allowed of the things that were unseemly: nor
disallowed of ye things that might be granted to the honest recreation of the
mind. To be short, he so behaved himself in all places and toward all men,
that his manner seemed not only pleasant to the learned, but also most sweet
and delectable to the rude and ignorant. By reason whereof, how dear he was
not only to our Scole, but also to the whole city, the manyfold tears of all
sorts of people which your eyes have seen shed at the solemnity of his
burial, do sufficiently declare. But when as by the space of 22. years, and
odd months, he had in such order as we have said, behaved him self: as he
was a man of no great health, so when he had labored certain weeks before
with continual rhewmes and coughes, the xxiii. day of Ianuarye he began to wax
sore sick and to keep his bed. He complained most chiefly of the pains of
his head, breast and sides: and now and then all his members so burned, that
they seemed to be shaken with a certain quiuering or trembling ague. And
verily all that week, when as yet we did not despair of his life, he talked
and conferred many things both with others, and also especially with me who
was of ever present with him, as touching matters perteyning to ye Scole, as
touching Divine studies, as touching the reformation of Churches. He said
amongst other things, that there should order be taken, if he lived, for the
pertition of certain labors betwixt us, especially those of ordering of
Sermons: which for because he had hitherto sustained alone, he thought that he
had lost his health. Now the 30. day of January which was the Lords day, when
the Lords supper was celebrated in the sacred assembly, he desired that the
holy bread and cup might, after the custom of ye ancient church, be brought
also unto him. Of which after that he with his family had tasted, he grew now
more sicker tha^ before. And then ye day following, he began diligently to give
in charge to his wife, what he would have done after his death: and to
command his children that they should behave themselves both toward God and
their mother godlily, and toward all other uprightly and honestly. Amongst
the rest, when a little boy of his, of three years old, stood by his beds
side: Learn, says he, my child, the commandments of the Lord, and he
shall take care of thee. After much talk had, he entreated diligently with
those that for duties sake came to visit him, as touching the profession of his
faith, and the constancy of that doctrine which he had taught. And truly the
very first day of February, wherein also he departed, all his talk was
altogether in this, that he might testify unto those whom he saw present:
that he remained euento the last gasp constant and inflexible in that
profession of faith and doctrine, which he so many years had professed in the
Scole. As touching which point I might now make a further discourse, most
excellent fathers, but that the tears for remembrance of these things break
forth from mine eyes. About the evening of the same day, when he had once
again spoken some things touching ye co^stantcy of his faith and perseuaraunce
therein: he began to take his leave of us, and even to labor for life. Yet
knew he still every man, and being required would make answer with broken
words and dying speches: till after 8. of ye clock at night, when it was
about half an hour to 9. he gave up his spirit unto God: having not as yet
fully fynished the 53. year of his age.

You have the history of the life and death of ye most grave and reverend
Divine D. Andrew Hyperius: which, as I could, I have both briefly and simply
declared unto you.

I come now to our mourning and heaviness, right worshipful fathers: which as
it is wonderful great and incredible, so can it not be lawful and just,
unless we were moved with most weighty causes to the most: bitter sense and
sorrow of our minds. Men are wont for two causes especially to mourn at
Funerals. First, for so much as they suppose them to be evil dealt withal, whom
they bewail being dead. Secondly for because they recount with themselves
what great inco^modities do redounde by their death, either privately to
themselves or publickely to the common wealth. The former cause takes no place
in our heaviness: the later ministers unto us sadness most sorrowful. For we
are not either enta^geled with that error that we should suppose the mind to
be extinguished together with the body: Or we are not so ungodly, as to doubt
of the eternal felicity, which after this life all that have lived with faith
and a good conscience shall enjoy. Nay verily we are resolved by a most
certain and just persuasion, that our dear Hyperius, as he always lived a
godly and holy life, so has he now the full fruition of the most sweet and
comfortable presence of Gods majesty, the company and fellowship of Angels,
and the society of holy and blessed men. Neither truly do we suppose that
there was in him either any such likement or love of this life, as that we
should think him to dye with desire of a longer life. He saw well enough,
with what great cares this miserable life was replenished: he knew well
enough, that so long as we continue in this tabernacle, we are wanderers from
the Lord: he was not ignorant that the godly being loosed from the bond of
this flesh, do go unto the Lord. Wherefore, albeit he was in such wise
conuersaunt in huge and mighty labors, that he was not in ye mean time
greatly grieved with the tediousness of this life: yet notwithstanding was he
carried continally with a longing desire of the immortal and everlasting life.
He was accustomed, oftentimes in the Scole, oftentimes in familiar talk to
co^memorate unto v^ and as a man would say, to lay before our eyes, that
wonderful garboyle that was in these days abr^ch thoroughout the whole world:
and to prognesticate in opinion, that there was yet a most lamentable confusion
as well of religion as also of Empires and kingdoms shortly to follow. His
conjectures he gathered not out of the constellations of the stars, as they
call them: but out and from the consideration of the things themselves, which
were open and apparaunt in the sight of all men. He said that kingdoms and
Empires were never so ill established in the time of our ancestors, as they
were now for the most part. For some were holden of Children: some were
governed by Women: other some ruled by young men, which were newly come to take
upon them the charge of the Common wealth. He affyrmed that there were in
deed some Princes remaining in government, but very few, both grave in years,
and also expert in ye use of things, which did as it were still every way
sustain with their shoulders the whole weight and burden of the Empire. He
remembered the Scoles scattered and torn in sunder throughout all Europe,
either by civil wars, or by the woeful persecution of the Godly, or by the
death and decay of famous and worthy Teachers. He showed the state of our
Churches, how miserably they were afflicted, as well for that they were beereft
of their notable Pastors and Doctors, whose like were not to be found to
succeed them: as also because they were vexed with strange and lamentable
discordes: and further that such were the times now and manners of men, that it
seemed that almighty God very shortly, being provoked with our manifold
enormities, would take away his kingdom from us, and give it unto others, yt
should bring forth more worthy fruits. These things did he use as well, at
other times often to recount, and to wish of God that he might first be taken
out of this life before he should fall into that perturbation and confusion of
all things, which he in mind foresawe: as also immediately after the first
time when he began to keep his bed, he said thus unto me suspecting nothing
as yet as touching his death: There is nothing, quoth he, that may delight me
any more in this present life. Therefore I will most willingly, whenever it
shall please the Lord, give over the same, that I may go unto Christ.
Wherefore like as he wished not for any longer life: so, whither we have an
eye to that which he here left behind him, or consider what he has obtained
after his death: who would not think that he is both very well provided for,
and also in happy and blessed estate? He has escaped the troubles and
calamities of this wretched life: he enjoys now perpetual and never
changing delights with Christ. He has put off that body of his, subject to
corruption: He looks now to put on a body immortal and incorruptible. He has
forsaken these Scoles of ours: he is admitted into the Scole of heaven. Whom
here he saw as it were in a glass by a dark speaking: him now he beholds
face to face. The crown of glory that never shall decay, which he always in
the whole course of his studies and labors trauayled unto: is now given unto
him of the Lord, wherein he tryumpheth and rejoices. Wherefore we are not
stricken into this plight and heaviness, for that or as though we thought him
to be lost or in evil case: but for because we ponder in our minds, what
great dommage and detriment we have both privately and publickely sustained by
his death. Neither truly is our private discommoditie boyde of sorrowing in
this case. For if I should say, that I were nothing moved with the death of my
most excellent kinseman, nothing touched with the heavy cheer of mine Aunt,
nothing grieved with ye dolfull distress of my Cousens: how rightly I should
do it, I leave it to the stern^ Philosophers surnamed Astorgoi to consider
off: but certes (if I so said) I should lie. Those things do move me, and
greatly disquiet me: which nevertheless I will not go about to amplify in
speaking, least I should seem to increase mine own sorrow.

What if I should bewail with tears the death of him that was only my
Scholemaster? there is no man I suppose of sound iudgdement that would find
fault with my so doing: but would rather judge me to do the duty of a kind
and thankful Scholar. For it can hardly come to pass, but that we shall be
heartily grieved for those that have deserved well of us, when they are taken
from us. Who then can maruayle, as this our private dolor and distress though
it be bitter and incredible? which nevertheless, if our schole could any way
be comforted, might easily be assuaged and diminished. But when I apply
hereunto the thoughts and cogitations of my mind, then becomes our grief
much more grievous, yea and such as can scarcely admit any consolation. For
what it is, most reverend fathers (to the intent that what Cicero said of his
Common wealth, the same also I may speak of our Scole) what is it, I say, that
can possibly comfort me in so great darkness and ruins of our Scole? So great
is the loss and decay of all things, and the recovery of them past hoping
for. For we have lost a most famous Doctor, a singular Ornament of the Divine
faculty, the sovereign star and light of our whole Scole and Congregation:
neither do we see in the mean time, who may succeed with the like fruit of
our studyes so worthy a man, so grave a Divine, so learned and modest a Teacher.

Saint Ambrose at the Funeral solemnite of the Emperor Theodosius, to the
intent he might put the common wealth in good hope of successors said thus:
Therefore, so worthy an Emperor is departed from us, but he is not altogether
departed fr^o us: for he has leaft unto us his children, in whom we ought to
acknowledge him, and in whom we both see him and feel him. Ambrose might well
and truly say this, of Honorius and Arcadius. But I for my part, what hope of
a successor can I put you in? That is of so great fidelity, of so great
diligence, of so great modesty, as was our Hyperius always in teaching the
holy Scriptures? Which things I would ye should take to be so spoken of me,
not as though I altogether dispayred of our studies (for albeit thy be
vehemently, shaken by the death of this man, yet God our almighty father will
at his good pleasure prosper and provide for them) but that, as of Elia the
prophet taken up into heaven Elisha his Scoller cried out, Abi Abi rakcab
Israel ^pharasain: that is to say, My Father, my father, the chariot of Israel
and the horsemen thereof: so we also may not without good cause complain of
our master Hyperius, thus taken from us. Although in very deed, when I wey
more deeply the whole matter with my self, most worthy Senators, I scarcely
see what spark of hope (to be accounted off) is left, not only to us, but
also to all Germanye. Pure religion was in the time of our fathers sore
oppressed through the tyranny of the Bishops: none otherwise then was a great
while ago the Common wealth of the Hebrews thorugh the violence and
oppressions of the bordering Nations. As the Lord in old time had mercy upon
the Hebrews, so has he had now also compassion upon us, that like as then he
stirred up valiant Capytaynes and godly Judges, that did set the people in
their former liberty: so now in these days had be raised up many notable
Doctors, that might and did restore religion to hi^ former purity, and deliver
us from that pontifical tyranny. Which either Capitaynes, or Doctors of the
Church, seeing the Lord does now by littel and littel call away to himself,
as in the years past Luther, Bucer, Melanchthon, and many other: and in these
last xv. months Martyr, Musculus, and our Hyperius: we are truly to be
afraid, least these so many and great lights of the church being extinct,
considering that very few men or none remain of like dignity, of like
learning and experience, there succeed other, which not (as the former) will
defend and maynteyne our liberty restored, but will hamper us again in ^ new
servitude and bondage. Yea verily when as those Capytaines being taken away,
every man may seem to do and say what he list: it is greatly to be feared,
least for our offenses, all our religion be again enwrapped in most vgsom
darkness, and so utterly obscured and defaced.

For undoubtedly as for the light of the truth, which after those dolfull
times of darkness, wherein our forefathers were entangeled, by the great
benefit of God has shined unto us: our people can now in these days so ill
away with all, that they do not only openly and manifestly contemn the
clear light, but even covet also most greedely to return back again to
their former darkness, as it were to the flesh pottes of Aegipt. Furthermore
what the life of our Countrymen is, what ye manners of them are that glory of
the profession of pure religion, we see. I speak not only of ye c^omon
people, and basest sort of men: but I speak of those, whom we all have in
admiration, whom we reverence, whom we praise and highly esteem off. So
great is the contempt of religion amongst a great number, so great the
neglecting of godliness, so great the suppression of virtue: yt they may well
seem to be no Christians at all, but very saluage and barbarous people. Which
things seeing they are true, there is no man verily, that can imagine this our
dread and fear to be vainly or without cause conceived. God winketh for a
time at our sins and enormities, as he is a long suffering GOD, and slow to
wrath: But nevertheless when he sees there is no hope left of amendment of
life, and that our sins do proclaim now even open war against heaven it
self: then suddenly provoked to anger, he prepares himself to take vengeance.

Which when he intends to do, he oftetimes takes good men from us, least
they should the good with the bad, the godly with the ungodly be enwrapped
together in these plages. But now I may seem peraduentu^re to give an over
unlucky guess as touching the state of our Schools and Churches: wherefore
then do I not rather turn my talk unto you, most grave and prudent fathers?
Whom I pray and beseech most heartily, that you would every one of you, so far
forth as ye are able, bend all your travail and dilignce to the mayntenaunce
and preservation of godly studies. And you especially I call upon, most
excellent Companions: thee, I say most reverend Rector Lonicerus, thee most
vigilant pastor Rodingus, and you al furthermore that teach the holy Scriptures
either in the Schole with us, or in the Church: hereunto I beseech you bend all
your co^itations, and all your endeavors, namely that our sacred and divine
studies may prosper and flourish. Proceed to teach, as you do, diligently and
faithfully: study for the maintenance of peace and tranquillity.

Let us propound unto our hearers not idle questions as touching vain and
frivolous matters: but (as our Hyperius always did) those principles most
chiefly of the doctrine of religion, which shall be necessary to the
conservation of the purity of faith, and most profitable to the information of
life and manners. Let us have no dealing with unlucky contentions, whereby we
see now some Schools to be most grievously battered and shaken. Let this our
Schole rest (as by Gods grace it has already many years rested) from
importunate striuings and brablementes. Let us follow alonely in teaching the
chief points of religion the holy Scripturesithe writings, I mean, of the
Prophets and Apostles. Let no man's authority so prevail with us, let no
Counsel be of such credit, no patched writing of such force: that we should
depart so much as a hears breadth either from the authority of the Scripture,
or from the phrase of Thapostles, or from the forms of speaking used by the
holy GHOST himself. These marks let us prescribe unto our selves as it were
to ame at: Let us keep us with in ye compass of these bounds. For so, yea so it
will com to pass yt we shall not be carried about hither and thither with ye
wind and vanity of every doctrine: but shall ramayne constant in our
profession, and shall always from time to time keep a certain form of s^u^d
doctrine. And you also most diligent hearers, you, I say, that are studious of
the holy Scriptures, I do not only exhort, but also pray and beseech you,
wey with your selves the state of Religion and the state of our Churches:
consider what perils hang over our heads in these days by reason of the
wickedness of our lives and manners: behold how many famous Doctors and notable
lights of the Church our almighty father has in a short space-taken from us.
All ye most excellent Teachers our heavenly father calls out of this life by
littell and littell home to himself: many other, neither so well learned
neither such lovers of peace and concord, he leaves still alive: which are not
so careful as touching ye safety and preservation of ye Churches, as they be
for their own private authority and gains: which seek not so much the peace
left unto us of Christ, as they do their own praise and glory, though it be
by fetting the Lords Sanctuary on fire: and which, if thy were not brideled by
thautoritie of godly maiestrates, would confound heaven and earth together.
Consider I say, and seriously ponder all these things. Pray unto our heavenly
father, that he would vouchsasafe to preserve his Church amongst us, that he
would govern it and sanctify it by his holy Spirit: pray ye that in stead
of this our Hyperius now taken from us, he would give unto us many godly
Teachers, learned, peasible, constant. For your parts also, give your diligent
attendaunce unto the holy Scriptures, read them, study the^, meditate upon
them, learn out of them a cartaine form of Christian doctrine: and to this
end alone apply all the force of your wits that many of you may come forth
so furnished with knowledge and understanding, that you may one day he placed in
the rooms of those notable Capitaines called forth of their stations to the
Lord, to the great profit and commodity of ye Church. And we all pray thee, O
almighty Father, which in so short a space take out of the unthankful
world, so many famous Teachers, and leauest behind many troublers of ye peace
and enemies of the Church: raise up in ye steads of these notable ministers of
CHRIST, many other, which may teach and govern thy Church. Nourish and defend
the studies of good men, which labor to this end, yt they may serve thy
Church. Furnish our minds, O father we beseech thee, with the love of true
religion and virtue, that when thy son our Lord Jesus Christ shall come at
the last day to Judgment, be may at the least find some remnantes of faith
and sincerity amongst us.

FINIS.
Of framing of Divine Sermons, or popular interpretation of the Scriptures, the
first Book.
What the common and popular order of interpreting the Scriptures is: and how
excellent a function they have that teach the people in the Church. Cap. I.
NO man doubts but that there be two manner of ways of interpreting the
scriptures used of skillful divines, I. Two vvayes of interpreting the
scriptures: and certain points proper to the^ both.
the one Scholastical, peculyer to ye schools, ye other Popular pertaining to
the people. That one is apt for the assembles of learned men and young
studients some deal profited in good letters: This other is altogether applied
to instruct the confused multitude, wherein are very many rude, ignorant and
unlearned. The first is exercised within the narrow compass of the Schools:
The second takes place in the large and spacious temples. The one strict and
straight laced, savoring Philosophical solytarinesse and severity: The other
stretched forth, franck and at liberty, yea and delightinge in the light and
(as ye would say) in the court of Orators. In yt are mani things exacted after
the rule of Logical brevity and simplicity: In this, Rhetorical bounty and
furniture ministers much grace and decency. A collation of the order of
teaching in Schools and in Churches.
Wherefore if a place out of the holy Scriptures be offered at any time to a
teacher in the schools to be explaned and interpreted, he, by and by sticks
wholly therein, as one shut up in a straight prison, vinfolde and enclosure, and
not only discusseth dilygently the things themselves in general and all the
parts of them, but also in a manner every word and syllable, thinkinge it
unlawful to omit any thing, or so much as a little to wrench aside. But he
that instructe^ the people, sercheth and selecteth out of an argument ^^^posed,
some certain common places and such as he perceives above the residew, to be
most congruent to the time, place, and persons, in discoursing whereof at
large, he bestows his time, and to the intent the more large and ample a
scope may be opened unto him, now and then he ouerskippeth some things in the
text of the holy Scripture, or touches only each thing slightly by the way,
and as it were mindinge some other matter. Again he that reads in the
School, heapeth together proofs and foundations with as great judgment and
dexterity as he can, and coueteth to use those in especial in which he
perceyueth most pithe and strength to remain: But he that undertakes to
speak unto the people, is not so careful or anxious but scrapeth together
arguments of all sorts, and armeth himself with probable reasons, even such
as are heard commonly among the meaner sort of men, as he that directs all
things to the capacity of his common auditory. He yt teaches in the schole
wittingly and willingly neglects those things that pertain to the procuring
of benevolence, to the moving of affections, moreover digressions, tedious
descriptions, which the Greeks call (...) Hypotyposes, amplificatio^s,
artificial elegancye of words, many and diverse figuers, to be short, all the
furniture and ornaments of an oration, and affects not so much as to seem
once studious of bountifulness in speaking, but as one astricted to that
law, whereby the crier proclaimed in Areopagus to speak, (...), that is,
without proeme and affections, he is contented with a simple, yet pure and
perspicious kind of speech: On the other side, he to whom it appertains to
speak before the multitude, seeks and provides dilygently with wonderful
circumspection all the said stuff and furniture, so far forth as it avails to
teach, refel, exhort, reprove, (...) of (...)
comfort, and of nothing makes more account, then that he may draw and stir up
the minds of his auditors unto what part he will, after the manner and quality
of things (...) ^ident. Neither were it hard to bring forth examples, in which
the self fame arguments or ^heames out of the scriptures are handled one way
after ye manner of Scholastical interpretation, an other way, after the common
or Popular. And surely out of the writings of the ancient fathers may be
taken not a few, and those most learnedlye explaned and set forth. Popular.
For after ye Popular interpretation, all the Sermons for the most part of the
prophets, and of Christ are expounded, and many also of the exhortations,
corrections, and consolations of the apostle Paul: Furthermore those things
yt are read under the titles of Homelies, Sermons, or Oratio^s in ye holy
fathers, Origin, Chrisostom, Basyl, Nazianzene, Augustine, Maximus, Leo, and
(after these) Gregory, Beda, Bernard, and such like. Whereunto may be added ye
explanations of Augustine upon ye Gospel of John, and some certain of ye
Psalms. Scholasticall.
But to Scholasticall interpretation do appertain certain more grave and
subtle disputations of S.Paul, namely, yt touching man's justification, in his
epistle to the Romans, (in which yet notwithstanding the apostle breketh
forth successively into exhortations and consolations peculier to another kind
of interpreting) and to the Galathyans, with some in the first to the
Corinthyans: twain also in the Epistle to the Hebrews, the one of the two
natures in Christ, the other concerning the abrogation of the Leuiticall
priesthood, and the everlasting priesthood of Christ. To the same order may
justly be ascribed all the commentaries of Saint Ierom upon the prophets, of
Saint Ambrose upon the Epistles of S. Paul, also the epistles and
disputations of S. August. Breefelye, whosoever is endued with any judgment at
al, being furthered with those things yt we have already touched, may esely
discern to whether kind of interpretation, each sentence and treatise of divine
matters ought to be referred. Transition.
Howbeit since we have already spoken of Scolastical interpretation of ye
scriptures: when as we intreted of ye order of divine study, so much as ye
matter the^ seemed to suffer and require: now it seems good to put forth some
things more large (for so much as we have diverse and sundry times (...) earnestly
moved by a number of men thereunto) concerning Popular interpretation, The
proposition.
or that is all one, of framing of divine sermons to the people. Which if they
shall seem scarce absolute in learning, as truly I must needs confess them
to be: Yet have we bestowed some travail and pains, at the least that they
should be apt and correspodent to ye time present, and to the capacities of
young beginners and such as be unskillful, who^ we have taken in hand to
instruct, which also our hope is we shall by some means obtain.

Now my purpose is to deuyde this work into two books: The partition of this
work.
Whereof in the former I entend to declare and touch all those things that are
common in general to all Sermons: In the later such things as be peculiar
severally to every kind of sermon, and ought exactly to be noted and observed
in the same.

But in very good season even in the first entry (as ye would say) of this
book, II. The excelency of the Preachers office.
shall we call to memory how excellent their function is, that declare unto the
people the divine oracles. The prophet Malachy. Cap. 2. terms him ye teaches
in the Church, Of the name.
the angel of the Lord of hosts. Which word sith it properly signifies
the office of him that brings the commandments of God unto men, each
man's mind hearing the same, may forthwith of necessity, conceive some
thing then man more high and excelent, and approchinge more near to the
heavenly nature. 1. Cor. 3.
Moreover, ye prechers are called (...) of god himself as though God vouched
safe to admytte them as his fellows and companions in the work of buyldinge
and establishing his church. Philipp. 2.
For by like reason in a manner ye apostle Paul terms his frnd Epaphroditus,
(...), Cor. 4.
that is to say, fellow labourer or (as other list to turn it) companyon and
fellow Soldier. No less notable is it that the same Apostle affyrmeth the
faithful teachers to be (...), yt is, governors and stuardes of the household
and secret affairs of God. (...) as it would be to reckon up the residewe of
the titles (...) ^^llations of like and greater dignity, as also ye wise and
sage sayings, examples, types and other ornaments wherewith the Preachers of
the Gospel, above all that can be said, Of the dignity of the thing.
are adorned and set forth. Yea and among all ecclesiastical functions, I
suppose there is no man that either can or will deny this one to excel far
away there rest. For it is evident yt in it is placed the most excellent office
of the whole ministry of the Gospel. For why, Christ departing from the earth,
gave in charge to his disciples that before all things, they should stoutely
apply^ the office of teaching.

Go (says he) into the whole world, Marc. 16.
and preach the Gospel to every creature. In which place the charge of
teaching is preferred before Baptism or administration of the Sacraments: Like
as also the hearing of the word ought of necessity to go before the
confession of faith. Whereupon it comes to pass also that the Apostle
chalengeth to himself, by his own right, the faculty of teachinge, as the
peculyer office of Thapp^stolike order, leaving to' other all other kind of
actions. 1. Cor. ^.
Christ sent not me (says he) to Baptize, but that I should preach the
Gospel. Neither is there any other more certain and sure mark, whereby the
true Church may be discerned from the false, then by sound doctrine: Since even
heritickes also have the Sacraments in their meetinges and conuenticles, but
as for sound doctrine they can in no wise boast or brag of.

Finally if the service wherewith God is most chiefly delighted, be sought for,
even this undoubtedly, consists also in the publyke denunciation of the
Gospel. Whereupon the Apostle Paul again to the Romans 1. doubted not to
make his vaunt that he worshipped God in spyrit and truth, by preachinge the
Gospel of Jesus Christ. And in the 15. Chapter he professes that grace was
for this cause given him of God that he should be a minister of Christ Jesus
to the Gentiles, administringe the Gospel of God to the intent the oblation of
the Gentiles might become acceptable, sanctified by the holy Ghost. For these
consyderations, the same Apostle both wisely and grauelye pronounced, that all
those that are desirous to aspyre to this kind of life, do covet an honest
calling: and again that all such as are duly occupied therein, ought of al
men to be loved, and had in high estimation.

He that coueteth the office of a Bishop (says he) desires an honest
work. And, The Elders that govern well, are worthy of double honor, those
inespecyally that labor in the word and in teaching. For the Scripture
says: 1. Timoth. 5.
Thou shall not mosell the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. And
the woorkman is worthy of his hyre.

Last of all, what inestimable glory remains also after this life for the
faithful teachers, the noble Prophet Daniel has left in writing. Daniell. 12.
They that teach others (says he) shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament, and those that turn many unto righteousness, shall be as the
Stars for ever and ever. Which words like as they may be an occasion to
move them to dilygence in their office, so again do they minister unto them
incomperable solace in their labors and travails. And seeing the Prophet
entreteth there most chiefly of those things that shall come to pass about
the end of the world, those undoubtedly, whosoever they be, that in these
days, and in this declyning age of the world: do with all dylygence and
fydelytie sustain the troubles of teachinge in the Church, may worthylye
interpret the same prophetical Oracle to appertain unto themselves.

With what things it behooves him to be furnished, that takes upon him the
office of teachinge in the Church. Cap. II.
Moreover, Three things needful in a Preacher: and what
whosoever takes upon him the excellent office of teachinge the people in the
church, ought to be furnished inespecially with three things: Learning,
Purity of manners, and with a Spirit or power in teaching.

For wittily is it said of Gregory Nazianzene in his Apology d^ Fuga: I.
Learning.
That it is the point of notorious mad me^, to take upon them to teach others,
before they themselves be sufficiently taught: For that were according to the
proverb, Vltra crepidare, Vltera crepidare is a word taken prouerbially,
vvhwere a man will take upon him further then his knowledge will serve.
and to meddle with divine matters to the peril of the soul. Those therefore
that endeavor themselves to teach the people in sacred assemblies, have need
of a double doctrine and understanding: The one of things divine, which they
properlye call divinity, comprised in ye holy writings of the Prophets and
Apostles: The other of things human, in which we do not only account the
arts called Liberal, and the parts of Philosophy commonly handled in the
Schools, and likewise the tongues, but also civil discripline, and judgment
of polytyke and ^econonicall affairs. And that verily is necessary to the
Preacher to thin^ent he may sincerely inculke and repeat the principles of
Christian religion, confyrme the good in their godly opinions, confute the
evil and these that be of a sinister judgment. And this to the end he may with
the greater grace and dexterytie order al things, but chiefly discover and
condemn all kind of vices, which reign in diverse and sundry sorts of men.
For how shall he prudentlye frame his Sermon against Usurye and many unjust
bargaynes and contractes, either else against leude and cancred Customs
commonly received, that have not some kind of knowledge of civil affairs?
Esaias cap. 22. reprouinge the vain counsels of the people touching the munition
of the City, wherein the ungodly in the time of war did put more affiaunce
then in God himself, and in many other places besides, wherein he rebukes
diverse sins and enormities, does sufficiently declare that he was not
ignorant of civil matters. How many things, moreover, may thou see in
Jeremy, Ezechiell, Daniell and other of the Prophets, which do not obscurely
argue, that they were right diligent markers and wise esteemers of a number of
things perteyninge to the state civil? The same thing does Christ testifye
of himself in many parables, of which sort is that of the unjust Stuarde,
Luke. 16: of the Talentes, Math. 25. and many of his whole Sermons beesides.
Also out of the Sacred Chronicle of the Acts of Thapostles, and out of the
Epistles, may easily be gathered that the Apostle Paul was reasonablye well
seen both in ye laws of the Romans, and also in rourtlike and forensicall
actions. It is requisite, therefore, by all means, that ecclesiastical teachers
be not only some deny skilful in dyuine, but also in humayne matters, and
specially in polytike and a conomicall affairs, and so far forth skilful to,
as may be necessary to the furtheraunce of their flock committed unto them,
and the impeachment of all kind of wickedness and impyetie. But no small
number of things appertinent to this kind, as well by the familyar
acquaintance with men of mean wisdom, so they be seen in use and
experyence, as also by the dylygent annotation of such affairs as daily come
to pass, and the inuestigation of the causes and circumstaunces in the same,
every good and well disposed man may easily gather and conceive.

Now that sanctimony of life ought to be required in a Preacher of the Gospel,
every man may judge: seeinge it profits nothing at all to edifye the Church
of GOD in word, if that which is already builded up, be subverted again
with evil conditions. A good life is as it were a scale, whereby sound
doctrine is confirmed in the hearers.

A thing most unseemly it is, in ^ace he that professes to be a Physician,
and will take upon him to heal others of their infirmities, be himself all
scabbye and full of byles. Physician, wyil they all say, heal thy self.

Therefore, ought all men to set Christ before them as their Scholemaster,
Luck 4. 1. Timoth 3. Tit. 1.
whom we may hear preach not only in word, but also effectually in deed.
For which cause the Apostle most dilygentlye prescribed what manner of men
Bysshoppes or Elders, and likewise Decons with their whole families ought to
be, with what virtues he would have them chiefelye garnished and from what
vices he would wyshe them to be free.

Albeit this is also to be added, that where we may not have altogether so
perfect and absolute Preachers in every respect, as we covet and desire: yet
ought we to suffer and embrace those, whose doctrine is sound and with no
s^ot of heresye, or noisome opinions infected. For whither any through envy,
Phellipp. 1.
or through contention, or through occasion, do teach, so they preach Christ,
all is well, and God is to be thanked.

No man is borne without his fault, great always is the fragilytie of
mankind, and on every side evermore are we misers environed about, with
certain domestical furies (as ye would say) continually enticing us to sin.
In like manner, there is no man that can eschew the bytyng teeth of detraction.
And in no place may thou not (in these days specially) behold the
malignaunt multitude (what say I multitude? yea even those also that take upon
them far beyond the common sort) whettinge their tusshes, to slander and
backbit the ministers of the Church, even there also where they have no just
cause or occasion so to do. A number of Sicophants there be, of the sect and
faction to that wicked Doeg (in whom Ambrose expoundinge the sixth of Luke,
says appeared a type of Judas the traitor) that have the cast to construe and
interpret actions, of themselves void of all blame, as huge crimes and
enormities and in their accusations, to make more then mountains of miles, or
oliphants of flies. Whosoever therefore is wise, will not rashly give heed unto
those, that commonly and willingly speak evil of Ecclesiastical teachers.
Whether may be referred that which the same apostle, no less gravely
prescribes touching the life and conversation of Elders, 1. Timoth 5.
then carefully and wiselye admonishes, that an accusation against a priest or
elder, is in no wise to be admitted without two or three witnesses.

In the third place we said that to a Preacher is needful and requisite a
spyrite and power in teachinge. III. Power in teachinge.
I understand by the name of Spirit and power, a certain peculyar faculty
of proposynge sound doctrine, and also of moving and drawing of minds, ^^
the intent, that as many as is possible may reap most ample fruite^ and as few
as may be presume to disalowe any thing as vain and unfruitful. Which
faculty, in one place is called (...) power, in an other place (...) boldness
of speech, sometime (...) might, now and than (...), Spirit, erewhile again
(...), the demonstration of the spirit and power. For so do the Evangelists
testify of Christ.

He taught as one having power. Math. 7. Marc. 1. Luke 4.
All men were astonished at his doctrine, because his word was joined with
power. And the Apostle Paul 1. Corinthians. 2. My words and my preaching were
not in flattringe phrases of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the
spirit and of power, that your faith might not be in the wisdom of men, but
in the power of GOD. Which form of speakinge he uses also in the fourth
Chapter of the same Epistle. Again, in the fourth of the Acts, Peter filled
with the holy ghost, is had in admiration for his liberty in speaking. And in
the same chapter the Apostles pray unto God that he would give his servants
grace to speak the word with all boldness. In the 6. cap. is commended Steven
full of says and strength, or rather power, (for the word (...) is there read)
and that none could resist the wisdom and spyrite which spoke in him. Of like
sort and effect is it that the Lord says unto Jeremy: Behold, Jeremy. 1.
I have given (says he) my words into thy mouth, behold I have appointed
thee this day over nations, and over Kingdoms, that thou may pluck up and
root out, subvert and destroy, build and plant.

Many more places there be which do not obscurely make mention of this faculty
and power in speaking. But it appears yt the apostle joined these three
things together. I mean, Doctrine, Purity of life and Faculty or Power in
teaching, in that place where he says unto Timothy: 2. Timoth. 1.
Take a pattern of the wholesome words, which thou haste hard of me, with
faith and love which is in Christ Jesus. The notable thing given thee in
charge, keep through the holy ghost, which dwells in us.

By wholesome words, is plainly and sufficientlye enough distincted and meante,
Doctrine: by faith and love, Purity of life: by the excellent thing given
in charge and the holy ghost, Faculty or the gift of teachinge. And certes so
far forth is this power and virtue in teaching^, which me have touched in ye
third^ and l^ste place, requisite in all those that will teach the people, that
albeit they be endued with learning, and also with integrity of m^ner yet ts^e
th^^ be destitute of th^^ one, let them never l^^^e to accomplish any thing
worthy of prase or commendation.

Wherefore, so much the more must all me^^e labor the matter, that prepare
themselves to the function of (...), or that have (...) unto; that (...) like
as they are furnished with (...), and good manners, so also adorned with a
spyrite and power in teaching, they may come forth into the publyke Theater of
the Church.

Moreover, Spirit or power in teachinge whence it comes, and how it is
increased.
the spirit or power in teachinge, (to the intent we may ad this also) is given
freely of God in the first calling: but ye increaseme^t thereof is obtained of
hint through often prayer: Finally it is nourished and preserved with a fervent
study of procuringe the health and salvation of the hearers. Whereof the
first verylye is manifest. That God gives the spirit in teching.
For whomsoever GOD voucheth safe to choose and selecte to the excellent
excellent office of teachinge the people in the Church, the same also
immediatelye he freely garnisheth with his spyrite and gifts, necessary to so
weighty a charge.

A plentiful witness of himself is Ieremye. Cap. 1. who, when he had said
that he could not speak as one that was a child: hears the Lord saying
unto him: Thou shall go unto all that I will send thee unto, and all things
that I will give thee in charge, shalt thou speak: I have given my words
into thy mouth, etc. Christ likewise is a witness of the same matter,
promysyng to send and give to his Apostles and Disciples the holy ghost, Joan.
16. Math. 10.
that should teach them in all truth, which should strengthen and furnishe
their minds, and in their extreme peril^ even with Kings; and Princes also
minister unto them, in due time, what things they should speak. To be
short, the Apostle Paul affirms, 2. Cor. 30.
that it is GOD that makes the ministers of the news Testamente meet both to
thinck and to speak.

The second point beecommeth plain and perspycious by this, That the
increasement of the spirit, is obtained of God with (...) prayer.
that Thapostles in the Acts Cap. 4 do make their petitions unto GOD, that
he would grant unto his servant, That they might speak the word with
all confidence and lybertye.

And Paul not only himself, for the same cause sueth unto GOD with
continual prayers, but also requesteth and beseeches others to do the same:
Ephe. 6.
Pray (says he) for me, that the word may be given unto me in the
openinge of my mouth, with liberty, to the end, I may make manifest the
mystery of the Gospel, for the which I supply an ambassade in chains, that I
may speak therein freely, as I ought to speak. Again in the 2. Thessa. 3.
Pray for us, brethren, that the word of the Lord may have free passage, and
be gloryfied. For which cause also there is a custom received in all
Churches, that all Divine Sermons shall begin with public invocation: In
which invocation, it behooves all men with their whole hearts to pray, first
that the Teachers may sincerelye and with boldness open and explane the word
of God: then that GOD would vouchsaue to illustrate the hearts of the hearers,
to the end they may rightly understand the doctrine proposed, and duly use and
practice the same. That the godly and earnest teachers shall have good and
happy succes in their doctrine.
As touching the third, it is certain, that where the office enjoined of
GOD, is with zealous and fervent affection executed, it cannot be, but that he
of his bountiful goodness will bring to pass, that happy and prosperous
success shall follow and ensue. For GOD will not suffer the great labors and
industry of good men seriouslye seeking his glory, to become frustrate and
void of fruit. For this cause, the doctrine of the word of GOD is not in one
place alone, resembled unto seed that brings forth much fruit.

The Apostle also exhorts Timothy not to neglect the gift given unto him, but
to exercise himself dylygently, Esaias. 55 Luke. 8 1. Timoth 4.
to the intent his profiting might be apparaunt in all things. For if he gave
attendaunce to him self and to learning, and continued therein, it would come
to pass, that he should both save himself, and his hearers. And certainly he
that doubts not of his calling, he that is assured of the verytie of the
doctrine which he professes, he that cannot be reproved of any manifest
crime, he that is pryuye in his conscience of his own fidelytie and
dylligence, he that accounts nothing of more weight and imporfau^ce, then
to sanctify the name of God on earth, and to gain as many unto Christ as is
possible. Undoubtedly he speaks boldly and vnbashfully that which God
commands. The sharp and vehement Oration of this man, strikes and perceth
the hearts of the hearers, pea he does not only prick men forward to the
amendment of life, but plainly forces and compels them. Wherefore there
is no man, but that may perceive him to be decked and adorned with a singular
spirit and power in teachinge, even of GOD himself. The study and affection
of a true Preacher by the description of Saint Paule^
But such a study, and such godly affections, the Apostle very artificially
describes. 1 Thessalonians, 2. his words (no doubt) are worthy of us to be
remembered, and such as all Preachers ought contiunally to have in a table
before their eyes.

Ye your selves know, brethren, (says he) our entrau^ce in unto you, how
that it was not in vain: but after that we had fuffered before, and were
shamfully entreated at Philippos (as ye well know) we behaved our selves
boldly in our God, to speak unto you the Gospel of god with much striving.
For our exhortacion was not to bring you to error, nor yet to uncleanness,
neither was it with guile, but as we were allowed of god, that the gospel
should be committed unto us, even so we speak: not as though we intended to
please men, but God, which tries our hearts. Neither was our conversation at
any time with flattringe words (as ye well know:) neither in cloked
covetousness, (God is record:) neither sought we praise of men, neither of
you, nor yet of any other, when we might have been in authority as the Apostle
of Christ: but we were tender among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her
children: so our affection beeinge toward you, our good will was to have delte
to you, not only the gospel of God, but even our own souls also, because ye
were dear unto us. Ye remember brethren, our labor and trauaill: for we
labored day and night, because were would not be bur^henous to any of you, and
preached unto you the gospel of God. Ye are witnesses, and so is god, how
holily and justly, and unblameably we behaved our selves among you that
believe: as ye know, how that we exhorted, and comforted, and besought every of
you, as a father his children, that ye would walk worthy of God, which has
called you to his kingdom and glory. Which words if they were so exactley
weighed and considered, as meet it were they should, do euidentlye declare ye
the apostle taught in spirit and power: albeit those yet that immedialy follow,
touching the notable effect of his Sermons, do more perfectly prove and
illustrate the same. The effect of S. Paul's Sermons.
Wherefore (says he) we thancke God without ceasinge because that when ye
received of us the word, whereby ye learned god, ye received it not as the
word of man, but even as it was in deed the word of God, which works in you
that believe. The like will, the like study, and the like feruency, Act. ^0.
we may perceive in that orati^o, which the apostle had to yt Elders of ye
church at Ephesus, a little before he trauayled to Jerusalem. But we may not
coueniently (least we should be over tedious) repeat ye same at this prelente.
Therefore, we said not without cause, yt the spirit and power in teaching is
both nourished and conserved with an ardent study of procuring ye health and
salvation of ye hearers. Conclusio^^
But as touching al these points, I mean lerning, innocence of life, and
spirit or power in teaching, ye reader, may observe much more matter in ye
epistles to Timothy and Titus which verili for so much as they seem altogether
prepared to expres ye whole office of a precher, whosoever takes upon him the
charge of teching ye people may worthily read, yea and often read them again.
The cause of the premises hitherto, touching those things that are
necessary to a preacher.
Thus much we thought good to premise to thinte^t, we might make it plain and
apparent, yt ye office of teching ye people in ye church, is of far more
difficulty and weight, then a number suppose it to be: and yt it ought not
rashly and unadvisedly to be taken in hand of every one, much less greedily to
be invaded. No small number there be ye atteine to ye government of churches,
yea, and (yt I may use ye words of Iere.) make have to run before they be sent:
Ieremye. 2^
and yet are touched, in ye mean time, with very little or no care at al of
obteining of god his spirit and power in teaching. Bishops, therefore, above
all men, ought to be circumspect in this behalf, that they commit not rashely
this reverend function to every one that will sue for the same, especially to
young men, who^ neither knowledge of ye holy Scriptures, nor the use and
experience of things, or any earnest study and zeal of religion, do commend
and set forth. Neither was it without good cause spoken of the Apostle that
wise workman in the church of God, where he says: ^ Timo. 5.
Lay no hands hastily upon any man, neither be partaker of other means sins.

The end of a Preacher what it is. Cap. III.
But what the end of a Preacher is, may partly be perceived by those things
that we have next before touched. In what things the Preacher ought to
bestow his labor.
His work and labor chiefly consists in this, that with all study and
inforcement he advance and set forth those things that conduce to the
salvation and reconciliation of man unto God. Whereunto it perteyneth, The
Gospel what. ^ Cor. 5.
that the Gospel is called the word of health, and by which men obtain
remission of sins. And wisely says the Apostle: It seemed good unto God, by
the folishnesse of preachinge, to save them that believe. In the same Epistle
also. Cap. 9. I became all things to all men, that I might save at the least
some. God gave unto us the ministry of reconciliation, and put in us the word
of atonement. In effect, The end limited to a Preacher.
sith the office of a Preacher, is by the aid of the holy Scriptures to
accomplish all things, we doubt not to affirm, that to be the end appointed
to a Preacher, which the holy ghost by the mouth of the Apostle has prescribed
in the sacred Scriptures: ^. Timo. 3.
The holy Scripture (says he) is able to make thee wise to salvation. Then,
therefore does the Preacher give apparaunt signification, that he with his
whole heart and power, is bent to promot and advance ye spiritual profit and
utility of men: When as he handles and confirms true and wholesome opinions,
reproves and gravely confuteth things erroneous and hurtful: when he
dilygently inculketh and infers those things that are requisite to the
godly and due information of life, The marks of a true preacher.
again, severely controlleth those that offend, labouryng to bring them into
the right way: Lastly when he exhorts, beseeches, blames the sluggishe and
dull, and comfort the afflicted: finally pretermitteth no jot of those
things, whereby he trusts the minds of his audytors may be trained and
drawn unto Christ our Savior.

That many things are common to the Preacher with the Orator, and of the
office of the Preacher, cap. IIII.
THat many things are common to to the Preacher with the Orator, That many
things are common to the preacher with the orator: and what.
Saint Augustine in his fourth Book of Christian doctrine, does copiously
declare. Therefore, the parts of an Orator, which are accounted of some to be,
Invention, Disposition, Elocution, Memory, and Pronounciation, may rightlye be
called also the parts of a Preacher. Yea and these three: I. II. III. IIII
to Teach, to Delight, to Turn: Likewise again the three kinds of
speakying, Loftye, Base, Mean: Moreover, the whole craft of varienge the
Oration by Schemes and Tropes, pertains indifferently to the Preacher and
Orator, as Saint Augustine in the same book does wittily confess and
learnedly prove. To be short, whatsoever is necessary to the Preacher in
disposition, Elocution, and Memory, the Rhetoritians have exactlye taught all
that in their woorkhouses: wherefore (in my opinion) the Preachers may most
conuenientlye learn those parts out of them. Rhetoric (...)
Certainly, he that has been somdeale exercised in the Schools of the
Rhetoritians before he be received into the order of Preachers, shall come much
more apt and better furnished then many other, and may be bold to hope, that
he shall accomplish somewhat in the Church, worthy of praise and commendation.
Which thing to be true, the excellent institution in the faculty of well
speaking, of the most famous men, Cyprian, Chrysostom, Basilius, Gregorius,
Nazianzenus, and other does abundantly argue: who being not a little furthered
with the furniture of oratorycall art, became easily of all other the most
notable Preachers.

But pronounciation, for as much as it is now far otherwise used, That the
rhetorical precepts of Pronounciation, pertain not to a Preacher.
then it was in times past, and that all things ought with greater gravity,
yea majesty, to be done in the Temple then in the court (to the which only
the Rhetoritians sometime informed their Disciples) again, sith every Province
and every language has his proper decorum and comeliness both in
Pronounciation and gesture, which in an other place would not so well be
lyked off: It shall be good for the Preacher, not to search the art of
Pronouncinge out of the Schools of ancient Orators, but to endeavor himself
rather to imitate those Masters, whom he perceives, above the residue, to
be commended for their excellent grace and dexterity, in Pronounciation and
behavior, especially in their own native Country and region.

By all these things it may appear, That the preacher differs in many
things from the Orator, and that chiefelye in Invention.
that the Preacher has many points, chiefly in Invention, wherein he
differs from the Orator. Which thing seeinge it is so, it shall be our
part, in opening of Invention, to employ a special labor and dilygence.
Albeit, in the mean time, if we shall perceive any thing to happen by the way
as touching disposition, needful to be marked, we will in no wise dissemble it.

What matter the Preacher shall choose to handle and entreat off. Cap. V.
Christ in one place says that the Ecclesiastical teacher, Math. 13.
is like unto an householder, which brings out of his treasury, things both
new and old. And the Apostle calls the same a faithful and wise stuarde or
Dispensator in the house of GOD. 1. Cor. 4.
Wherefore the Preacher shall with all dylygence and fydelytie apply himself
unto this, that as ^fte as he is purposed in his mind to teach and to
exhybite some specyaltie of his wisdom, What matter the Preacher shall chose.
he chose and selecte such matter, as may be Profitable, Easy, and
Necessary. Which, how and after, what sort it ought to be understood, it
is requisite that we declare more at large.

The universal doctrine of the Gospel is (no doubt) very profitable, I.
Profitable.
but it falls out (how I know not) that that is found to engender most
ample commodities, especially with the rude people, whereby Faith properly is
nourished, whereby men are provoked to charytie and good works, and lastly
whereby the hope as well of the true believers as also of the good dooers is
strengthened and confirmed. For the whole man as well internell as external
has need to be enstructed and taught: not only as touching the duties of
this life present, whereof some are toward God, and other some toward men,
but also as touching the expectation of the life to come. For through the
knowledge and right use of these things, man fynallye is made perfect, and
procures to himself an entryce to the true and everlasting felycitie. And
surely the doctrine of Faith and Love or Charytie does most duly teach and
instruct this present life, when as faith agreeing to the inward man, shows
schiefelye what we owe unto god, and love enforming ye outward man, teaches
what we owe not only unto god, but also to men. But hope with the things that
cleave thereunto, do certify us of those benefits of the life to come, with the
expectation whereof, Of matter profitable, three special places, and which.
we ought to sustain and proppe up our languishing minds weryed and laden
with misery. Wherefore the Preacher shall wholly be occupied in handlyng and
discoursing of these places most chiefly which are contained under Faith, Love
and Hope, Now, to Faith belong these places; of the goodness and power of God,
of the free mercy of God toward us, of the benefits purchased by Christ, of
the merit and effect of the death and of all the actions of Christ, of the
gifts of the holy ghost, of repentance and true mortification, of faith and
spiritual vivification, of the remission of sins, of the justification of
man through faith in Jesus Christ, of the right invocation of the name of GOD,
of the daily exercise of prayer, of thanks giuinge, of the sincere
worshippinge of God, as namely in what points it consists, of the dignity,
effect, and the love of the word of God, of the promises of God, of confession
of the known verity, of constancye in faith. Likewise, against the abusers of
the name of God, against oaths and swearing, against sundry supersticions,
against rites of Idolatry, against new spronge up heresies. Also, those first
articles of relygion contained in the Symboll of the apostles, called the
Creed, are to be placed in this tribe or form.

To the order of Love perteine these places: of the amendment of life, 2.
Places of Love.
of the integrity of manners, of chastity, of modesty, of avoiding of
offenses, of kyndnes and lyberalytie, of alms, and other good deeds, of
patience, of bearing the cross, of forgiuinge of those that hurt us, of
praying for all men, even for our enemies, of humilytie, of obedience to
magistarates. Also, of those things that become every man in his calling and
trade of life. Moreover, against y^e, against drounkennes, against slaundryng
and detraction, against fornication, against superfluity in apparel and other
things, against filthy idleness, against usurers, against evil and noisome
customs, against al kind of vi^es which from time to time do creep in
amongst us. Lastly, to these ought to be added the declaration of ye Decaloge,
especially the commandments of the second table. Now the doctrine of the
church, of the communion of the Church, of the authorytie of the Church, of
ecclesiastical discipline, of the sacraments, of the institution and right use
of the same, is wholly applied to the exercise of faith and love jointly
together.

Last of all, to Hope, are these places to be referred: of eternal life in the
kingdom of heaven, 3. Places of Hope.
of the glory of the souls and bodies after this life with Christ sittinge at
the right hand of God the father, of the resurrection of the body, of the last
judgment to be executed by Christ, of the reward of good works in the world
present and to come, of the assured deliverance of the godly out of dangers,
of the pains and sondrye calamities of the wicked, of the everlasting
condemnation of ye ungodly. But who is able to reckon up and rehearce all
places in order? These verily are the chief and principal, which have every
where in the sacred scriptures in the sermons of the Prophets, of Christ and
the Apostles most plentifully expressed, and that most holesomly are propounded
and set forth to the multitude in the Church, and of which the teachers of the
people shall never at any time sufficientlye, never out of season entreat. And
that we have rightlye and properlye recited and digested these said places,
this may be a proof, that the Apostle writing to Timothy and Titus (whom he
had ordained bishops and teachers in the Churches of of God) inculketh every
where the same, and with like diligence undoubtedly commands them to be urged
and inculked of others. And to Titus. 3. he wills generallye all foolish and
unprofitable questions by all means to be avoided and eschewed. Thus much,
therefore, concerning the profit and vtylitie of matter.

We said in the second place that an easy matter ought to be chosen. II.
Easy why one easi matter ought to be chosen.
And that for these causes: Among the multitude the greatest part is rude and
unlearned, or if there be any in place that are learned in deed, yet where is
one amongst them all that is expert in divine matters? or how many shall thou
find in the multitude that be divines, and such divines, as can rightly
attain to matters hard and difficult? which thing sith it is so, in vain
shall those things be proposed in a Sermon, that either none at al, or else
very few may understand. He must remember, what soever he be that teaches in
the church, that he serves the turn of the multitude, and that he ought to
provide rather for many then a few. And what, if by handling of hard and
difficult places some peril comes rather to be feared, then profit and
commodity to be looked for? for in deed, when some curious hearers begin once
to cast in their minds how with study and dilygence they may perceive the
mysteries of divine matters, this commonly comes in ure: that by long and
much searching they fall into errors, and whilst they call to remembrance
diverse and sundry interpretations, they conceive strange and fantastical
opinions, which immediatelye after they obstinatly hold and defend, and to
the great hurt and disturbance both of them selves, and also of others, yea of
the whole church, they delight to dispearce them among the unlearned. For this
cause, 1. Timo 1.6. 2. Timo 2.3. Tit. 1.3.
therefore, the apostle often times warns us to avoid all kind of doctrine
that conduces not to godliness, that makes men proud and hye minded, yea
curious and supertitious rather then godly disposed, that stirs up strif,
brawling and debate, and that edifieth few or none at all. And the Apostle
Peter in his last epistle Cap. 3. In the epistles (says he) of our brother
Paul, are some things hard to be understood, which the ignorant and
unconstant do wreste, like as other also of the Scriptures to their own
destruction. Eunomius bishop of Cyzicene (by ye report of Sozomenus) whilst he
discussed on a tune hard places to ye people, of ye substance of god, Trip.
histor. Lib. 7. Cap. 1^.
of ye knowledge of god, adhibiting also captious and intrycate, reasons of
Logic, ministered occasion of an uproar, in which he was expelled both from the
city and also from his byshoprick. And we in our time have hard, how some
moving diverse dark and perplexed questions, have given occasion of much evil
and inconvenience, but of very little or no good at al. Where if peradventure
in the book or part of the book which is expounded, Occupation.
some difficult place do offer it self, that can not conuenientlye be
pretermitted: then my counsel is that this moderation be used. The place shall
in deed be opened but soberly and in few words: then simply and plainly:
How a hard place is to be expounded.
lastly with an exhortation added, concerning the true and right use of the
same doctrine. By these three means it is forseene and provided, that no
scrupulus and superfluous questions and disceptations shall arise and remain
among the people. Which trade of teaching we may ascribe to the apostle, who
has showed the same unto us. Among the Thessalonians were some, 2. Thessal. 2.
A place of Paul, touching the last coming of Christ.
that with many words, very curyously and diversely disputed of the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ to the last judgment: which controversy the Apostle
being desirous to dissolve and break up, first briefly uses in manner of a
preface and admonishes them that they would not immoderatly be terrified or
moved with the words of false teachers: moreover, mindinge to signifi that ye
time of Christ's second coming was not yet to be looked for, he heapeth not
together many arguments or prophesies out of the Prophets, but with one only
reason derived of the sign or token, he proves them to err, that went about
to uphold the contrary.

For before the Lord come, that wicked man Antichriste must be revealed,
wherefore, seeing he is not yet in sight, it is not to be believed that the
coming of the Lord is at hand.

Then fortwith as pertaining to the demonstration of the right use of the same
doctrine, he exhorts them that they would be of good comfort, and give thanks
unto God that vouched safe to elect them to salvation, neither would suffer
them to be of their number that should be seduced by Antichrist: howbeit that
this one thing remained, namly, that they would abide constant in faith, and
with all their endeavor fly and eschew false teachers.

The same Apostle, where to the Romans. 9. in his disputation of the
reiection of the Jews and calling of the Gentiles, An other place of the
same, touching the reicetion of the Jews and calling of the Gentiles
he falls into a very hard place concerning predestination and free election,
coveting to declare that God whether he electeth or rejects, deals always
iustelye and uprightly: first verily infers one or two examples of Jacob and
Esau, then of Pharao, and forth with a similitude of the Potter, (for these are
proofs very fit to teach the rude and ignorant people) afterward as one
terryfied with the difficulty of the cause, he breaks off (as ye would say)
the continuance of his tale. Either of which his dooyngs (no doubt) is very
well to be lyked, for the one was profitable to the plainnes and perspicuitie of
the matter, the other very necessary for breuities sake and the avoiding of
error. Finally, in the cap. 11. shettinge up his whole disputation, he
teaches very learnedly to the Gentiles, the true use of his whole doctrine,
when as he puts them in mind, that they should not be proud for this
cause, that being taken out of the wild Olive tree (you have yet an other
similitude) they are grafted into ye true Olive: for yt it might come to pass,
that they should again be cut off. And at the length, as though he had waded
further then he would, he ends with an exclamation: O the deepenesse (says
he) of the riches, and wisdom, and knowledge of God. So, I say he is wise, and
the same also worthy the name of an Apostle, that is well exercised in the
interpretation of the sriptures, wherefore, let it not repent us to follow and
imitate the example of so worthy ^ doctor in hard and difficult places.

Last of all, III. Necessary Tit. 3. Necessary matter, what.
the Preacher ought to choose matter necessary, and (as the Apostle wills)
omit superfluous. I understand that to be necessary, which is most agreeable to
the time and place, and which the present multitude can not well be without.

There be in deed a number of divine places very profitable, Divine places
though profitable, yet not al fit for every place and time.
but yet not al meet to be expounded in every place and time. Some people have
their peculiar vices, and in some one city reign diverse enormities, which to
an other city are scarce lie known. Moreover, among some be stirred up
contencions and varieties touching the doctrine of religion, again amongst
other some all things are quiet. Therefore in ^ace thou speak of crimes and
errors to the people, in whom those crimes or errors are not to be found,
truly thou do not wisely. For it is to be feared least thy sharp and
tedious reprehension breed offense among those that be weak, which will now
begin to learn some evil of thee, that before they were ignorant off.

They that minister medicines to the whole, do rather hurt them, then confirm
they health. But on the other side, if in any place sins or strange heresies
do budde forth, thou do not eftsoons, and before they take deep root,
meet with them and endeavor to root them out, all the blame of the evil
shall be imputed unto thee: and if, where it behooued thee stoutly to speak,
thou filthily hold thy peace, Esaias. 56.
you shall worthily be reported off according to ye sayi^g of ye prophet Esaias, A
dumb dog, not daring to bark. The preacher must sometime vary his oration.


Furthermore, it so chances often times that diverse and sondrye affairs
happen, of which it stands the preacher upon to frame Orations of diverse
kinds: as when the common wealth is oppressed with famine, pestilence or
war, when the fruits of the field lie beaten down with hayle or
intemperature of the air, when sedition, tumults or other dangers are to be
feared. Again, it is the part of a teacher to comfort the dismayed multitude,
to induce them to the knowledge of their sins, to stir them up to implore and
call upon the mercy of God.

To be short, how many and sundry soever the euentes in humane matters be, so
many and sundry Sermons may and ought to be had, yea and necessity it self
does from time to time teach us, to use now one form of speaking, and now and
then another. By these things, therefore, it may appear unto all men, what
kind of matter ought openly to be handled of the ministers of ye church.
Neither is it to be doubled, but ye the holy fathers as many as were ever
occupied in this most excellent function of preaching, had a right dilygent
care and consideration of these things. For undoubtedly to the intent the
ancient Doctors of the Church might at all times propose the like matter, The
order and manner of the ancient doctors of the church in their teching.
yt we have spoken of, to the people in sacred assemblies, they one while
explaned the holy canonical books entirely from the beginning to the end, an
other while, some part of the holy Bible, now and then, some certain chapter
or place excerpted out of the same, again sometime, they framed their oration
of any matter offered and insident by occasion. The pastor with the other
ministers ought to consult, as touching the matter of the Sermon, according to
the manner and condition of the time.
And lest they should be thought not to have so dilligent regard and
consideration of the public vtilytie and edifying of the whole congregation,
as was meet and expedient, their custom was (which custom in many places
does yet still endure, and where it is abolished ought woorthily to be
restored again) that in every Church the pastor with the residewe of the
priests or elders labouryng together as well in the word as in government,
should meet and assemble themselves, and then maturely delyberate and define,
according to the state of the church and manner of the time present, what
books, or what parts thereof, what places out of the same, finally what matter
or what chapters were most expedyent to be handled and illustrated to the
people. Therefore the ministers of the word, like as the affairs of the
faithful required in every place, after the advice and determination of the
College of Elders, were either occupied in ye interpretation of certain of ye
scriptures, or did inculke more exactly and frequently then they were
accustomed some certain sound principles of religion, or, by reason of
ravening wolves, that is to say, heretics and hipocrits, they impugned and
subverted their absurd opinions, or reproved the vices of certain brethrne
living rather after the flesh then after the spirit, and excited them to diverse
and sundry virtues, or else they used apt consolations for some public
calamity, that had lately happened. Neither thought they yt sufficient, if an
argument proposed were once or twice, One and the same matter diverse times
handeled of all the ministers to the people.
and of one only speaker entreated off, but as many as were there placed in
the ministry, prosecuted in many sermons, the self same cause, with great and
wonderful consent. And of this custom of the more ancient and purer church,
we find written by Tertulian, Cap. 39. Apologetici, We came together (says
he) to commemorate the divine scriptures, if the qualiti of the times present
does compel us either to premonish, or to reknowlege any thing, certes with holy
communication, we feed our faith, we arest our hope, we fix our affiaunce,
and with often repetitions and suggestions we confirm the discipline of
precepts. More clear is that which S. August. explaninge the 34, and 139.
Psalm. as he himself counts them, also in his second Sermon upon the 36.
Psalm, about the beginning says, that he was commanded of his brethrne and
companions, to interpret those Psalms. Moreover, as touching entier whole
books of scripture expounded to the people, examples there be nothing obscure.
Origin opened and interpreted to the people certain books of the old
testament, as well out of ye law as out of the prophets: namly, Genesis,
Exodus, Leuiticus, Numbers, Joshua, What fathers expounded to the people whole
books
etc. albeit some parcelles thereof are wanting. But Chrisostom has more grace
in his homylies upon Gensis, upon the gospel of Matthew and John, and on the
Epistles of S. Puele. S. August. also in ye beginning of his exposition of S.
John's epistle, shows yt he had explaned in order at ye whole gospel of S.
John, and when as by reason of feastful days falling in the mean time,
necessity requ^rod certain readings out of ye gospel to be recited and
declared, he would proceed, (those days being past) in the tra^tation of ye
said epistle of S. John. Neither want their sermons wherein are opened and
expounded certain parts of the sacred scriptures. Who they were that
explaned certain parts or percels of the holy books to the people.
Basil in eleven homilies uttered apparauntly the beginning of Genesis
touching the creation of things, and some certain Psalms. There be extant
also certain percels of Esaias, Jeremy, and Ezechiel, in like order illustred of
Origin. We may read, in like manner, the most learned homilies of Chrisostom
upon some of the Psalms. If a man require Sermons compacted and applied to the
explication of some one place out of the Scriptures he shall find every where
inowe. Sermons framed to the exposition of so^e one place out of the scriptures.
In Chrisostom thou shall see homilies concerning those words in Genesis: I
will put enmity and discord betwixt thee and the woman, also touching ye faith
of Abraham, and offeringe up of Isaac, of Joseph sold by his brethren, of the
continency of Joseph, of that which is written Iudicum. 1. Iephthe went forth
to battle, and vowed a vow, etc. of Anna Elcano, of the education of Samuel,
4. homiles. Long it were to reken up what places of ye scripture the same
author has in like manner explaned. Which thing may by very good right also,
be said of August. Of Basil are set forth two homilies, the one upon the
beginning of the proverbs of Solomon, the other upon th'intry of S. John's
gospel. Among the homilies of Gregorye Nazia^zene, there is one extant, wherein
is expressed the euangelical history, touching the Pharisees that tempted
Christ with a question propounded: Whether it were lawful for a man to put
away his wife for every cause. Moreover, in many places ye custom is, to have
upon ye Sundaies, certain fragments as well out of the history of ye Gospel, as
also out of ye epistles of thapostles, and words of the prophets, repeated in
sacred assemblies, and faithfully expounded to ye hearers. Sermons of things
offered by occasion.
Last of al, diverse and sundry orations may be see^e of every thing offered by
occasion in diverse and sundry writers. For in the works of Chrisostom in his
fifte Tome we read sermons touchi^g ye calamity of ye city of Antioche, through
sedition and rebellion there raised: touching ye wrath of the Emperor against
the Antiochians, and that the fear of Princes is profitable: to the
maiestrates sent from the Emperor Theodosius for enquiry after the subuerters
of the regal images: of the atonemente and reconsilyation of the Emperor with
the City (the occasion of all which homilies thou shalt learn out of
Theodoretus. Lib. 5. Cap. 19. and 20. And out of Tripart historia. lib. 9. Cap.
32): of women that decked themselves with gold and garlands, and followed
diuinations and inchantmentes: of those that receive unworthily the divine and
holy mysteries: of them that believe not the pains of hell fire: of alms: of
concord: that moderate temptations are profitable: also, after his return
from his former exile. etc.

Nazianzenus in like manner, Orations made of virtues and-gainst vices.
has put forth the Sermons, as that wherein he excuses himself, that he
had absteined a certain time from his ecclesiastical function: a consolation
touching the calamity of the hayle: Item, to the subjects stricken with fear,
and the Emperor moved with ire: also, touching regard and provision to be had
for the poor. etc. There is extant a Sermon of Cyprian of like effect made
when the pestilence waxed hot. Hitherto may the Sermons be asscribed also
uttered in the praise of certain virtues, or in dispraise of certain vices, of
which sort Basil has ministered some unto ye Church, Chrisostme very many:
Again the funeral orations likewise of Nazianzen and Ambrose.

But in all Sermons upon what occasion soever they be framed and made, A
Cantion to be used in sermons.
this Cantion is in any wise to be marked and taken heed off, namelye that
nothing be brought in or aleadged, but that which is certain, substanciall,
found, taken out of the holy Scriptures, out of interpretors worthy credit,
or out of the chief and most allowable Historyographers, and by all means
agreeinge with the doctrine expressly contained in the volume of the Sacred
Bible. For those men that propouned sects or opinions grounded upon no good
foundation, and those that delight to tell fabulous tales and hystoryes, as a
number of craftye and subtle fellows have devised and imagined for their own
lucres sake of Saints, either of them indifferently do incur reprehension:
The one sort are evil spoken of as unskillful and mutable and the other be
reproved of leuitie and avarice. Transition.
We have spoken of the end and matter of Sermons, it is meet that we add
some things also concerning their form.

Some things touching the forms of sacred Sermons. Cap. VI.
EVery Sermon ought to be brief: Sermon how and after what sort it ought to
be.
then, to consist of plain and perspicious speech: thirdlye, to have parts
rightly ordained. The first is necessary to the intent the people may cheerfully
and without yrcksomnesse come together to sacred assemblies, I. Brief.
and the more easily commend unto their memory the things that are heard.
For it is by no means requisite that ecclesiastical sermons should exceed in
prolixitie Orations, sometimes accustomed to be made of Orators in their
consistory. Therefore duly to them both, as well Preachers, as Orators, were
given certain dyals for to measure the hours withal. And many things may in
few words be declared.

The second is required as well for the unlearned whereof there is a great
number in the multitude, II. Perspicious.
as also for the avdyding of all suspicion of sinister and fraudulent dealyng.
For in deed, an oration over cunninglye made and after a sort inuolued,
induces the hearers, to think and surmise that some thing else is sought for,
rather then their profit.

Wherefore, albeit a man be thorowlye furnished with all kind of preparation
and furniture of speaking, yet shall he so advisedly behave himself to the
people, as though he followed by no means the traces of art, being mindful
of that saying, that it is a notable point of cunning to dissemble Art.

Now he shall obtain the faculty of speaking plainly in the Pulpet, that
understands well the mother tongue, that has used some space the company of
those that sound it purelie, that has accustomed to hear the Sermons of fine
teachers, in the same tongue, that has dylygentlye read over their Books,
that are judged to have excelled therein, but yet he shall pass all the
resydewe, that is endued with a certain prerogative of nature, and has a
faculty and modesty in speaking, as ye would say, ingenerate. It is no less
virtue to speak apertly, simply, and popularly, then learnedly, sharply, and
grauelye. Which virtue very excellent and rare all men must of necessity
grant, beyond the residewe, alonely to Chrysostom among the Geeke writers,
whom truly I would wish vncessauntlye that all Junior Preachers should read
both day and night, yea and (if it were possible) transiate him with like
happiness and fertility into the vulgar tongue. Neither ought even those that
are learned in deed to be ashamed to borrowe and mutuate diverse places of
christian doctrine, yea and that in a manner verbatim, out of Chrysostom (who
not without good cause has obtained this notable name) or other, if
peradventure there may any be found like unto him.

Now for the third point, III. Consisting of lavvfull parts.
namely, that a Sermon should consist of his lawful parts, who knows not
that it is required as the principal matter in every oration, for not so
much as an epistle written privately to one of familyar affairs, ran be
destitute of the a^t order and disposition of her parts, how much more then
ought the parts of a sermon, which is made of most grave and weighty matters to
ye whole multitude, to be placed in order? Not only the learners, but also the
teachers themselves have need of just disposition of parts: these verily,
least in the discourse of their Sermon they should be compelled to stound,
and by silence to doubt of what point it were best for them to speak: and
those to the intent they may the more easily perceive each thing by hearing, and
when they are returned home, or whersoeuer else they will repeat the principal
parts and Chapters by heart. Truly there is nothing more unseemly, nothing
more perilous, then if a man presume to teach in the Church ex tempore, and
without premeditatio^, or rather rashly without choice to power out every thing.

Wherefore also the most excellent Doctors of the church furnished thorowlye as
well with the knowledge of the divine Scriptures, The care and diligence of the
ancient Doctors before the Sermon.
as also with the use and experience of very many things, had a custome^ in
times past, to write out their whole Sermons, made and digested with great
diligence, before they should come to the sacred assembly. That they did, not
only because they were often times present in the multitude of hearers, learned
men and such as were expert in ye holy scriptures, which marked and observed
every little thing that was spoken, and in ca^e any trippe were committed,
could by and by note it and put it up, but also for so much as all things
were with great fidelity and diligence received of ye Notaries, by reason of
adversaries, namely, either ethnicks or heretics, which afterward hatefully
and disdaynefully reasoned of those things that were spoken of the Preachers.
Some again declared in writing certain chapters, or else using the help of
Notaries or Clerks, expounded those things that they had premeditated before.

Such a Notary had Cyprian, being a very stripeling named Paulus Concordiensis,
such to the number of seven and more were given to Origin by Ambrose, a learned
and welthy man, as witnesses Ierom in his work of Ecclesiastical writers.
Augustine declares in his preface to the.118. Psalm, that he had expounded
for the most part all the Psalms partly by preaching, partly by rehercinge
to the people. There is no doubt, therefore, but that he committed to
remembrance at home, those things by writing, yt be minded afterward ope^l^
to utter. Certes we may gather out of the words of Gregory in a certain homily
had upon the holy day of Easter, touching the women that came to the Sepulcher
of Christ, Marc. 16.
that even in that age it was a common matter with most Preachers, to write
their interpretations for good orders sake, and the helping of their memorye^,
and then out of wrytinge to recite them openly before the multitude of the
faithful.

Let all Preachers therefore understand, that it is their parts, after the
example of these most famous men, studiously to digest into papers, what soever
things they have determined to speak in sacred assemblies to the profit and
furtheraunce of their hearers: and at all times let them repute with
themselves, yt in every frequent audytory, are always some present yt be more
ready to reprove, then to allow or follow, and that will many times, call into
question (Censorlike) even those things that are welt and most warely spoken.

Whereupon, 1. Timoth 4.
as the Apostle charge Timothy being notablye exrcised in the affairs of ye
Church, to give attendaunce to readyng, exhortation, and doctrine: Even so the
Bishops of our time, shall worthyly give in charge, to all those that they
prefer to the sacred function of teaching, that they also apply themselves to
wrytinge, that is to say, that they with serious meditation excogitate and
search out those things that pertain unto Sermons to be hard before the
people, when they have found them out reduce them into order, and lastly
having aptlye disposed them, comprehend them in writing. Which thing, then
will these men dilygentlye do and accomplish, when as the Bishops, at such
time as they yearly visyte and surueye their several Churches, shall some
what sharply chastise all those that they perceive to be negligent in this
behalf.

This dilygence and industrye of the Bishops, will stir up and procure
diligence in the Preachers, which will successively bring forth incredible
profit and vtilyty to all churches.

How many kinds of divine Sermons there be: how manyfolde the state is: and
of two sorts of theames. Cap. VII.
THose things that have hitherto been spoken, every man may perceive, to be
agreeable and concordaunt indifferently to all sacred Sermons: Now it is
requisyte that we distinguishe and point out certain kinds of Sermons, to
the intent we may further note, what ought chiefly so be marked and observed in
every one of them, and that we gather together (so far as may be) apt and
meet precepts of each of them severally apart.

Since therefore, The kinds of Rhetorical cases, not agreeing to divine Sermons
the action of a Preacher in the Church of God, is much discrepant from the
action of a Rhetoritian in the guyld hall, I freely confess that I can in no
wise fancy their judgment, that endeavor to bring, those three kinds of
cases, I mean Demonstratiue, Delibratiue, and Judicial, out of the profane
market place, into the sacred and reverend Church, and set them forth, unto
preachers to be immitated and followed. Who knows not that both the name and
action of cases, as they are divided into those kinds, are properly as well of
all Orators as also of Lawyers referred to the place of common plea, called
Forum, and that of those very cases, sprange the name of Casepleaders? But as
vnfytting as the name of Casepleader is to him that delivers publykelye unto
the chosen people of God, the doctrine of Christian religion: even so absurd
and inconvenient a thing it were, that Sermons of divine matters holden in
^acred assemblies, should be called cases. We see, moreover, how greatly some
labor and toil, and what evil success they have, whilst they go about to
wrest and (after a sort) to join, all the forms of divine Sermons to the
three kinds of cases before rehearced. Neither can we any otherwise judge,
then that Divinity, of all other disciplines the chief, is most grieuouslye
injured of those men, that suppose her faculties to be so slender and bare, as
though she had not furniture and implements sufficient, especially for
th'ecclesiasticall function, in her own proper house at home.

With most sovereign right therefore shall we endeavor our selves to draw out
of the entrails of the scriptures, both what and how many kinds of divine
Sermons there be.

The Apostle Paul of all Preachers the Lode star affyrmeth, yt all the holy
scripture is most chiefly profitable to five things, that is to say, to
doctrine, to redargution, to correction, to institution, and to consolation.
For thus we read. 2. Timothy. 3. All scripture inspired of God, is profitable
to learning, to reproving, to correction, to instruction which is in
righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, prepared to every good
work. Moreover to the Romans 15. What soever things are written before are
written for our learning, that through patience and consolation of the
scriptures we might have hope. Doctrine, or (...), I. The signification of the
word doctrine.
signifies the tractation and confirmation of all true principles and
opinions, as when with arguments taken out of the writings of the Prophets and
Apostles, it is proved that there is but one GOD omnipotent, eternal, just,
merciful, that God made all things, and by his providence governs the same,
when also the doctrine is expounded, concerning ye three persons, and the
properties of every person of the church, of ye law, of sin, of the gospel, of
repentance, of faith, of charytie, of hope, of the sacraments, of ye
resurrection of the dead, of eternal life. etc. These and such like places are
frequentlye found in the Scriptures, explaned in a just method, and after the
popular mener of teaching.

Redargution or (...), II. Of Redargution.
is no other thing then a destruction or confutation of false and eronious
opinions, which are obtruded of the enemies of truth to deceue the ignorant
and unlearned. For it is necessary that their mouths be stopped by thautority
of gods word: for which cause the Apostle, would have him to be a Bishop or
teacher of the church, yt could (...), that is to say, reprove and convince
the gayn^speakers. Thou shall see not seeldome times in the Sermons of the
Prophets, of Christ and thapostles, the fantastical surmises of the
Gentiles, of the false prophets, Pharisees and such like grievously assaulted
and utterly overthrown. III. Of Institution.
Furthermore, Institution, (...), understand to be that whereby the life and
manners are informed unto Godliness.

The holy Scriptures do abound with precepts and exhortations of this kind,
into which sufficiently tedyous and prolixe, every man slippeth, even without
occasion, and intending some other matter. IIII. Of Correction.
Correction, (...) is after a contrary order occupied in reproving of corrupt
manners, and of those crimes, where unto many men are perceived to be given. The
Prophets and Apostles in their Sermons are in nothing more busye, then
inueyinge against their sins and wickedness, whom they covet to train to
repentance, and to have them become honest and virtuous. V. Of consolation.
Last of all, under the name of (...) or Consolation, what ought to be
understood, there is no man that can be ignorant, seeing every one of us
being daily convicted of our own iniquity, do feel by experyence how
greatly we stand in need of consolations, prepared for all events. And surely
of comfortes and consolations, which may assuredly stay and erect up afflicted
minds, the sacred scripture is a most plentiful storehouse. If therefore we
will hear S. Paul, That all Sermons ought to be referred to these five kinds.
what soever things may profitably be spoken out of the scriptures, it is
requisite that they be referred to these five ends or chapters. Why then may we
not say, that according to these same chapters, all kinds of sermons ought to
be distincted and divided? Hereunto is added, that there is no treaty that
hapeneth any where in the sacred scriptures, which may not be placed under some
one of these chapters, as under a certain captain and guide.

It were no long work, to demonstrate, in the volumes of the Prophets and
Apostles, just Sermons, the arguments and titles whereof might most aptly be
prefixed after the said Chapters, a proof of which matter, we will bring in
the sequel hereof, and especially in the second Book, where shall be noted
diverse and sundry examples. And what if all things necessary to be known to a
man careful of his salvation, are found to be laid up, abundantly in the
same chapters? for what things soever pertayne to sincere religion and
christian piety, are referred either unto (...) that is to say, That al things
are referred, either unto (...), or unto (...).
knowledge or science, or else unto (...), that is action or doing. The author
of this particion, least any man should find fault therewith, we have the
Apostle Paul, which prays unto God that all the godly may be filled as well
with the knowledge of the mysteries and will of God, as also that, after the
measure of knowledge which fell unto them, they might fructify in all good
works. And (...) verily is then made perfect, Philipp. 1. Coloss. 1
when as those things are perceived and allowed, which been true and agreeable
to the first truth manifested by the holy ghost, and again, those things be
rejected which are false and untrue. Here then are eftsoons perceived (...),
doctrine and r^dargution. The seedplots of these five chapters.
But (...) leaning upon actitons or works, is altogether in this continually,
that it may show forth worthy examples of honesty and unfeigned holiness, and as
for things filthy and reprochefull, shonne them with all endeavor. In the
mean while, in that one point, (...), or institution bewrays it self: In
this other (...), or correction. Where as if again it chances any man,
either in these things which are referred unto (...), or in those that
perteyne unto (...), to doubt: waver, or fear, in such sort that some great
danger of falling seems to hang over his head, then must seasonable remedy
be applied, by ministringe apt consolations. It is plain therefore that the
order of comfortinge in the fifth place, ought in this wise of necessity to be
adjoined unto the premises. Moreover, three things, by the consent of all men
are determined to be of themselves most worthy, in which the spiritual life of
man, does wholely consist, namely, Faith, Charity, and Hope: For when these
things be in any man, ye divine oracles testify that, he shall never perish.
And surely Faith stickinge fast to the certain rules of the holy Ghost, is
sustained and fortefied with doctrine, and redargution: Charity, busily
applying to good works, is furthered and helped forward with Institution and
Correction: Lastly, Hope is nourished and cherished, with sweet consolation and
comfort.

Yea, and in thorder of these Chapters may al those things be disposed also,
That the Rhetorical kinds of cases also are contained under these five orders
of Sermons, but not contrariwise.
which the Rhetoricians do comprehend in the three said common kinds of
Cases: But on the other side, not all the things again that are comprised in
those Chapters, can have place under those kinds of cases. For those things
that among the Oracles are ascribed to the kind Iuditiall, may conveniently
be handeled in redargution or correction: Of which that one is applied to the
state definit, and this other to the state of qualytie: But those things which
are attributed, to the kinds delyberatiue and demonstratiue, be very aptelie
placed under institution, touching which matter, we shall have an other place
again else where to entreat of. But if thou should require of the
Rhetoritians a kind of case, to the which doctrine or consolation might be
referred, they could give none at all, as those that have evermore set over
the whole practice of Teachinge and comfortynge to the Philosophers of
Universities, and thin-habitauntes of Scoles, giuinge themselves to over much
ease and idleness in the mean time. But he that will follow the course and
direction of those five Chapiters or fountaynes, shall pretermit no order of
Teaching, which may serve any thing at all to the furtheraunce: and
information of the minds of wretched men. Which things seeinge they be so,
He passes to the explication of the kinds of Sermons.
it is very meet and requisite undoubtedly, that we distinguishe and divide in
order the kinds of divine Sermons, which are preached to the multitude in
sacred assembles, after the said Chapiters and conclusions: The names of the
kinds.
And the first kind verily may be called (...), that is to say, doctrinall or
didascalick: The second (...), redargutiue or reprehensiue: The third (...),
institutiue or instructiue (be it lawful for us to use these terms in this
our profession, not vnaptely expressinge the sense of our mind) the fourth
(...), correctiue: The fifte (...), comfortatiue. Neither shall it now be
hard or difficulte, to define every kind, and to show, what sorts of
Sermons are correspondent to the same. 1. Didascalick
Let the kind Didascalicke therefore be that, wherein any one true sentence
or more, are proved, confirmed, and declared* Of this sort is the assertion of
the resurrection of the dead, disscussed after a familyar kind of speech 1. Corinthians. 15. Moses, Deuteronomy. 9. and 10. teaches the people in a grave oration,
that all benefits received are to be ascribed, only unto God. 2. redargutiue
The kind Redargutiue is that, wherein a false sentence or opinion is
destroyed and subverted, Esaias. Cap. 44. preaches against Idolatrye. Christ,
Math. 15. impugneth and assaulteth the traditions of men, and their
pr^posterous judgment in them. 3. Instructiue.
Math. 22. He refelleth the Saduces, which divided the resurrection of the
dead.

The kind Instructiue is wherein men are induced to lead a godly and holy life.
Deuteronomy. 11. Moses exhorts the people to observe dilygently the law of God.
Thappostle 1. Cor. 16 and also. 2. Cor. 8. admonishes that they would collect
their almse, and send it to Jerusalem. Howbeit, when the same Apostle. 1. Cor.
10. to the same effect says, that the things which are written, are written
(...) for our admonityon, nothing lets but that this Instructiue kind may
be called also (...) that is to say, admonitory.

The Correctiue kind is that, wherein the corrupt manners of men are reproved and
chastised. iiii. correctiue
Esaias. cap. 28. inueigheth bitterly against the excess and superfluity of the
Jews. The same prophet Cap. 58. condemns the sightly works of the hypocrites,
and requires of them the true fruits of godliness. Christ Math. 5. and in a
good part of the. 6. conuerteth his oration inespecially to the hypocrites, and
with like diligence, declares in what points true perfection and righteousness
does consist.

Of the kind Comfortatiue, v. Comfortatiue.
are al Sermons prepared to the erection of daunted and desolate minds. There
be extant comfortable sermons in Esaye. cap. 40. and in the eight following,
where he bids the people, being in the captiuytie of Babylon, to be of good
courage and comfort. Of the like argument we may read a sermon of Jeremy.
29.30.31. Christ, John. 15. comfort and fortyfieth his disciples against the
storms of persecution to come. Therefore, to these five kinds of sermons, all
men shall worthyly give place in the Church, and sith they are so plainly
noted and distinguished of the Apostle himself. Let no man be to buysy either
in diminishing or increafing of this number.

Some man peradventure will contend that all these things may be reduced to
the number of three, 2. Timoth 3. Romans 15. Preoccupatio^ An other particion of
the ^^des.
as that the first should be (...), in which might be included the kind
didascalick and redargutiue: the second (...), which should contein
institution and correction: and the third (...): but as well for other
considerations, as also by reason of thauthorytie of thappostle, and the
greater perspicuities sake, it is much better to reteyne both the number and
order which we have already spoken off.

Sometime overmuch subtelty in handlyng especyally of the sacred scriptures,
does sooner hurt then profit. Never the less; no man can deny, but that
there may decently be added an other certain kind also, namely Mixte, vi.
Mixed kind
in which the parts are taken and compacted out of the sundry kinds before
specified. Wherefore, in care we, in the sequel hereof, shall entreat of
these six kinds of dyuine sermons, I mean, didascalick, redargutiue,
Instructiue, correctiue, comfortatiue, and Mixte, notinge by the way, what
ought to be observed in every of them, we shall seem to have taught that
which may be sufficient, and fully to have accompllished our duty in this
behalf. Transition.
Now what the State is, and how many forms thereof, what also ^how manifold
the Theme, it is meet further that we compendiously declare.

The State is a brief su^me of the whole matter, State, vhat.
whereof a man purposes to speak, and even the argument and fountain of the
whole oration. For if thou be determined in thy mind either to write or speak
of any matter, thou considerest and definest with thy self, what thing
inespecially thou couetest to bring to pass.

Thou say therefore, that thou will entreat of the prouydence of God, of the
final blessedness of man, of the resurrection of the dead, against dronkennes,
against excess in apparel, and so forth.

Again if thou will make a trial of an other man's writing, principally taken
out of the holy Scripture, it is necessary that thou exactly, and perhaps
oftener then once, read over the whole, or a part, or else some certain place
thereof (as the case shall require): which when thou have done; thou
pronouncest that the author entreats of this or that matter. Therefore this
short and absolute comprehension of the whole place or form of speakinge, is
called the State. And often times the State is contained in the very titles or
inscriptions of the Sermons, That the title of Sermons do oftetimes conteyne
the ^^ate.
which are prefixed to the homilies of the holy fathers, Chrisostom, Augustine,
and others. In Chrisostom, we read these inscriptions, which do signify
unto us the State of the Sermons ^ as that it behooves a Christian to live
virtuously and godlily: That virtue of every small occasion is to be
enterprysed: That almose gyuing is an art most gaynefull: Of those that
believe not the pains of hell: Of them that receive the Sacraments
unworthily: That sins whither they be alive or dead are to be lamented:
That poverty is profitable: That it is better to suffer wrong then to do
wrong: Of prayer: Of repentance: Of vain glory and ambition: Of envy:
Against riot and superfluity, etc. Look therefore how many kinds of Sermons
be prefixed, so many forms of States also shall appear. As Soon as thou
perceyuest what the State is, thou may easily pronounce, to what kind of
Sermon it ought to be referred. The State touching those that believe not the
pains of hell, is of the kind redargutiue. Where we entreat against envy,
vain glory, riot etc. The State is of the kind correctiue. That a Christian
ought to live devoutly and holily, the State is of the kind instructiue. In
like manner is it to be judged of that, that poverty is profitable. That it is
better to suffer, then to do injury, may be reduced to the kind
comfortatiue, unless some had liver have it of the kind instructiue.
Howebeit, to a Sermon of mixed kind, no one certain state, may be assigned,
but according to the variety of parts, it is requisite that diverse states
also be allotted out.

Moreover, Theme what: and how manyfolde.
the sentence wherein the State of every Sermon is expressed, they have
accustomed to call the Theme. Where if the State be rendered in one word, then
is it called a simple Theme: as if thou determinest to speak of Faith, of
works, of death, of patience, these will be simple Themes: Faith, works,
death, patience. But if the State do consist of many words, and even of a just
proposition, they call that Theme compound, as when it is said, that Faith
does justify, good works do obtain with God the benefit and reward as well
of the life present as of the life to come, the death of the godly is not to be
bewailed, patience for rigtuousnes sake or confession of the truth makes men
happy. And when as either a book of holy Scripture, or a part, or some place
out of the book is taken in hand to be declared openly, it is no hard matter,
after ye words be recited, to express the State by some Theme, especially
compound. Hitherto, concerning the diverse kinds of Sermons, States and Themes.

That Sermons of every kind ought to be divided into certian parts, and how
many those are: then of readinge of the sacred Scripture. Cap. viii.
NOw in what kind soever a Sermon shall be instituted, That Sermons of every
kind are to be divided into parts.
it is first of all to be provided, that, like as it is said, when we
entreated of the form of divine sermons, it be divided into certain parts. The
parts of a Sermon.
The parts commonly received are in number seven, yt is to say: reding of the
sacred scripture, Invocation, Exordiu^, proposition or division, Confirmation,
Confutation, co^clusio^. But when and after what sort these ought to be applied
and generally to be ha^dele^, we will in o^der oftsoones declare. I. Reading.


As touching therefore the reading of holy scripture, The manner of reading in
the old church.
we find that this was the custom of the ancient Church Some one, to whom
ye office was appointed, ^^citod (...) ^^lye and distinctly some parcel out of
the holy Scripture and by and by, some other learned m^n w^nt up into the
pulpit to declare those things that were read.

We read Acts 13 when Paul with his companyons were entered into the sinagoge
on the sabbath day at Antioche in Pisidia that after the reading of the (...)
and the prophets, the Rulers of the Sinagoge sent unto them saying: Men and
brethren if there be any among you that can speak words of exhortation to the
people, say on. Christ Luke. 4. went up himself and read, and then sitting
down interpreted the same to the great admiration of all men.

Of this laudable custom, therefore, of the synagog our forefathers learned to
appoint Readers in every church, which should publicly rehearce the books of
the sacred scripture Socrates. lib. 10. cap. 3. of his Tripartite history,
witnesses that John Chrysostom did for a certain time supply the office of a
reader. Epiphanius also in his Summary of the catholic faith, makes mention
of the same order, and the manner of ordeyning them is read in the eight cannon
of the fourth counsel of Carthage. Further out of Augustine touching the words
of the Lord in the Gospel of John. Sermon. 45. may be gathered that the
scriptures were first recited of the Reader, and then that the elder or Bishop
followed immediately to expound them. But now for the most part he in the
beginning of the Sermon reads the Scriptures, that declares them also more
at large: which thing verily is the^ most convenient to be done, when a man
takes in hand to explane some entire book of the old or new Testament.
Albeit thou may often times see also one to read the scriptures and an other
to interpret the same. But we suppose it to make no matter at all.

Howbeit whereas upon occasion offered the sermon is ordained, That reading
sometime goes not before the Sermon.
there the readinge of ye scripture is not accustomed to go before, but he that
teaches, either choseth out a few, words only or some short sentence
freely out of the scriptures, which namly, he judges to be most agreeable to
his purpose: or else making no mention at all of any place out of the Scriptures
he begins forthwith to speak: whereof that very seeldome, this very often
has been frequented of the fathers.

Examples of the former kind are these: Nazianzenus in his Sermon to the
subjects stricken with fear by reason of the wrath of the Emperor Theodosius
the first, usurps the words out of Jeremy, 4. Ah my belly, ah my bowels,
and the inward parts of my body, I am sore grieved, my heart pants within
me. The same Author framing his oration of the holy feast of Easter, premiseth
the words of Habacuc. 2. I will stand upon my watch. Chrysostom entreatinge
of the troubled common wealth of Antioche, and of his return out of exile,
does often times inculke in the beginning of his Sermon that saying of Job:
Blessed be God. Basil being desirous to persuade the people to pacifye the
wrath of GOD, alleges these words out of Amos. 3. The Lion has roared, who
will not be afraid? the Lord God has spoken, and who will not prophesy?
Again where he exhorts them to fast: Blow up the Trumpet in Sion, upon our
solemn feast day, out of the 81. Psalm, and Joel. 2. Of the later kind,
that is so say, where no words of the sacred Scripture are put before, there be
examples in them very frequente and common.

Now let us ad hereunto this also. Namely, What book^ ought to be read.
that no other books ought to be read and expounded in sacred assemblies, but
those only that are accounted to be canonical, concerning which thing we may
read it established by the 59. canon of the counsel of Laodicia. The Preacher
must also take heed in any wife, that when he recites the holy scripture out
of the Pulpet in his Country language, h^^ uses the best and most allowable
translation that may be, and such a one as is known and common to the people.
That the precher ought not rashlye to innouate any thing in the sacred
scriptures.
For truly a proper and exact translation brings so great light unto
things, that it deserves to be esteemed in steed of a commentary.

Neither shall the preacher unadvisedly alter or innouate any thing therein:
least that whilst he is thought of the learned to speak affectiuely and
curiouslye, of the unlearned fondly and folshly, he so provoke the offense of
many against himsefe.

Spiridion Bishop of Cypres in thassembly of many bishops, Sozomenus.
Tripart. histo lib. 1. cap. 10.
and in the presence of all the people, durst openly rebuke Tryphillus bishop
of Ledres, who being puffed up in pride with the visor of his eloquence, when
he came to these words of the euangelycall hystory: Take up thy bed and
walk, for the word (...) he planted in an other, to wit, (...), which
signifies a course or simple bed. Then says Spiridion unto him, art thou
better then he that said (...), in as much as thou art ashamed to use his
words? It is not much unlike unto this, that Augustine in his 10. epistle
writing to Ierom, tells how a certain bishop in Aphrica, when as he recited
a place in Jonas the prophet otherwise then was contained in the vulgar
translation of that time, was in great peril through the rage of the people
offended with the strangenes of the phrase, and had almost been thrust from his
Sea, if he had not promised eftsoons to render an account of his doing. Albeit
that Preacher shat do very well who at such time as he premeditateth at home
by himself those things that he shall afterward utter a broad, has always
at hand most perfect and sound exemplars: which again let him confer one with
an other, and (the matter so requiringe) compare the Latin with the Greek and
Hebrew: and out of all these together draw forth apt and peculiar sentences,
to be proponed in the vulger speech to the multitude in the time of his sermon.
This diligence, this honest and gentle curiosity is so far absent from
incurringe reprehension, that it is reputed worthy to be prosecuted of all men
with praise and commendation.

Of Invocation. Cap. ix.
THe manner of Invocation used in the beginning of sermons is showed also unto
us of the Apostles, The order of invocation in the beginning of Sermons, of
vvho^ first set forth?
Acts 4. where they pray unto God that he would give them utterance to speak
the word with all boldness. Likewise where the Apostle Paul wills and
beseeches that prayer be made unto God for him and for the course of the
Gospel. For verily as well in the whole busynes of sincere religion, as also
most specially in doctrine, the ministers do in deed plant and water, 1. Cor.
3 Diverse manners of prayinge.
but god gives the increase. And certes the ancient fathers made their
prayers before the Exordium or beginning of their Sermons, I. Of the ^athers.
as Augustine plainly testifies lib. 4. Cap. 1, of christian doctrine.

The Preacher prayed (which Augustine does not obscurely signify) that the
spirit of God might be given him to teach freely and sincerely, What the
precher and what the people ought to prai for.
then that his hearers might conceive all things aright, and convert them to
the institution of a spiritual life: The auditors, they again prayed both for
the Preacher and for themselves to the same effect. II.
But now in some Churches we see that prayer is put immediately after the
Exordium. III.
There be Churches also where prayer is made before the place of scripture be
recited. IIII.
And again in some place the whole multitude makes invocation with a song and
Psalm, and some other where, every one prays in silence by himself. But
whatsoever the custom of Churches and congregations is, it behooves invocation
to be brief, pure, Invocation, what it ought to be.
and dyrected, to th'attainment of the aid of the holy ghost, that he would
vouchsafe to inform and enstructe the mind as well of the teacher as also of
the hearers.

Of Exordium. Cap. x.
EXordiums in all kinds of Sermons are very free and at lybertye. The manner of
Exordinge most conveniently shevved in examples.
Wherefore the apt manner of exordinge may rather be showed in the examples of
the Sermons which the Prophets, Christ, Th'appostles, and holy fathers have
set forth, then comprehended in precepts and rules. Whether Exordiums be
a^lvaries needful.
Neither is it always needful that the beginnings of sacred Sermons be so
instituted as that we should make our hearers attentive, apt to be taught,
and beneuolent. For the matters of which we entreat may and ought of
themselves to cause the hearers to be so enclyned. Neither does any man for
the most part, set his foot toward the church, but that he is already
persuaded that he shall hear those things, that he ought, worthilye and
greedely to learn, yea and bear away to his own profit and commodytie.

Therefore the very circumstaunces and causes incident of things do minister
now one, The matter of exordium whence it is to be taken.
now another matter of Exordium. In the mean time we will note certain
points, according to the diversity of the arguments which are handeled, to
be observed in general. When as a whole book is expounded to the people,
Observations of Exordium. ^^n thapplication of a whole book
often times Exordimus are taken of transition. Chrysostom upon Genesis homily.
16. I suppose (says he) that we have sufficiently yester day to our power
interpreted and explaned the place touching the tree. For we have taught unto
your patience, wherefore the divine Scripture calls it the tree of knowledge
of good and evil: therefore this day we intend to proceed to ye matters
following, to the intent ye may learn the unspeakable mercy of God, and how
great moderation of speech he has used, having regard and foresight of our
nature, homily. 17, he begins with rehersall or repetition of those
things, which the day before were expressed, and admonishes his auditors,
that they should convert them to spiritual fruit. Oftentimes he uses
similitudes, touching deynties or delicates of feasts to be prepared,
touching disseases of bodies to be expelled, and many more of like sort
declaringe in the mean time, that in spiritual affairs, and in refection and
care of the soul, all those things are to be considered and observed which
are accustomed to be done in corporal matters, or in conservation of the
body. Homily.5. and.6. he by and by in the beginning reproves and sharply
rebukes those that used to gadde to the beholdinge of combats in the Theater,
and cared not for coming to divine Sermons. Again the ninth homily he
begins with chidinge, because he saw very few or none resort to the
scacred assembly. Moreover in his.12. and 14. homily he prayseth them: yea,
and in the later he thanketh them also for that they came cheerfully to hear
the interpretation of the holy Scriptures. For he hoped that no small
spiritual fruit should ensue therevppon. These things be therefore of us
remembered, to the intent all men should understand, that, when an entier book
is expounded, it is in our liberty to prepare Exordiums of sundry sorts,
according to the manner of circumstau^ces and causes incident. It is a very
familiar thing with Chrysostom, eftsoons to approve or declare ye proposition
of his Exordium, or else to illustrate the same with some similitude or
comparison, and then to ad to some things, whereby he may make his hearers
either attentive or beneuolent. For verily in trayninge and excitinge the
minds of his auditors, he is both a dilygent and wonderful artificer.

But in case the liberty of Exordiums be so great in thexplication of a whole
book: It is an easy matter to judge, 2. In thexplication of a part of the
book.
that they may no less franckely order the matter, which take in hand to
expound only a part or fragment of ye book, or any one place whatsoever
taken out of the Scriptures.

But most commonly in those Sermons which are framed of a parcel or some
certain place of a book, Exordium, are derived of the commendation of the
Author, out of whom the Reading was recited. Now and then of the utility of
the doctrine which shines principally in the same lesson. Somtymes again
after the lessen read, some one place in few words is repeated in the
beginning of the Sermon, that inespecially of which the Preacher has
determined more at large to entreat. We will add to some examples. Chrysostom
in a certain homily to the people of Antioche, taking in hand to expound the
place of Saint Paul unto Timothy: Use a littel wine for thy stomach, and thy
often infirmities: Begins with the dignity of the Apostle, and compares
him to a Trumpet and Harp. The same interpretinge the Psalm. 127. immediately
after the beginning of the Psalm recited: unto thee have I lifted up mine
eyes, begins his Sermon, with that, that it is good to be strycken with
adversity. Again, homily. 68. he repeateth in the entry thereof these words
out of the first to the Thessalonians, Cap. 5. Dear brethrne (says Saint
Paul) rejoice always, pray without ceassing give thanks in all things. For
this is the will of God. And forthwith he adds: Always to be thankful, is
the point of a house wisely instructed. Thou have suffered some distress, but
if thou will thy self, it is no distress. Give thanks to God, and thine
evil shall be turned into good. It is a custom also commonly received, to take
and drive beginninges of circumstaunces, of causes, of similitudes, or of other
places. So Chrisostom expoundinge the euanglicall history of ye woman of
Canaan, begins with the praise of the diligence and constancy of the
hearers. In the history of Elias conveyed into heaven in a fyrie Chariot, he
begins with a similitude, taken of ye manner, whereby kings are accustomed
to reward those that hazard themselves in battle with a Chariot, or else to
granish the^ with some other princely (...): whervppon he g^thereth that God
would also in li^^e manner adorn his faithful minister Elias with a Chariot,
and so draw him up into heaven. Nazianzenus at the Gospel which is read in
the 18. Chap. of Matthew, begins his Sermon with the labor and diligence of
Christ in trayning of men to the truth. III
But that which we have already said may suffice in this place. When a Sermon
is framed of an argument offered by occasion of time, it is lawful to derive an
Exordium out of diverse and sondri things and places. But nevertheless the most
apt and usual order of all other is this, namely, wherein at the beginning
is by and by opened, of what matter or business we purpose to entreat.

As near as is possible, The first words of Thexordium must as near as may
be, answer to the matter.
the first words of Thexordium ought to be aunswerable to the matter it self,
which thou haste taken upon thee to handle, yea, and the very same, either
taken out of some place of Scripture, or simply expressinge the kind and manner
of the business. Out of the Scriptures are taken these beginninges:
Nazianzenus in his Sermon to ye subjects stricke^ with fear by reason of ye
displeasure of the Emperor, uses ye words of Jeremy. 4^ Oh my bowels, and
the inner parts of my body, I am sore grieved, etc. And Basil when he takes
in hand to entreat of fasting, boroweth the words of Ioell. Blow up the
Trumpet in Sion, upon the notable day of your solemnity, etc. As we have
littell before remembered, when an argument or proposition is expressed in
simple words, without any place of Scripture ^^nexed, thereunto, a man may
find diverse and sundry Exordiums in Chrisostom, Nazianzenus, and other more.
Nazianzenus begins his Sermon which he made to those that came by water out
of AEgipt, in this sort: To them, that are of AEgipt, will I speak: Albeit he
does not yet there open what manner of argument he will handle.

Nevertheless he entreats afterward of the mystery of the Trinity. But
when he said that he would speak to those that came from the Church of
Alexandria, which Athanasius, and after him Peter bishops there, had rightly
enstructed in sound doctrine of the Trinity, and they coming to
Constantinople, were now approached to the Church, where Gregory Nazianzene, (a
stout defendour of the Trinity and of one substance in the same) then taught,
the hearers might easily perceive that Gregory upon that occasion would
speak of their faithful consent, in the confession of the Trinity. Touching
which thing somewhat there is Tripart. Histo. lib. 9. Cap. 13. The same
taking in hand to speak his mind, concerning provision and care to be had
for the poor, begins thus: Men and brethrne, yea, and (as I may say)
fellow beggars, for we are all the sort of us poor and needinge the grace
and goodness of god (although one may seem to go before an other) if ye
have measured with small measures, receive and embrace these words touching
the love and good will which ye ought to bear toward the poor. Thexorgiums
in this kind of Sermons are otherwise as we have said very large and free.
Esaias. Cap. 1. reprouinge the enormities of his own nation, especially the
sin of hipocrisy and contempt of the true service God, begins with an
exclamation or contestation of all creatures, and therewithal introduces God
himself grievously expostulatinge the matter. For his whole oration from the
beginning forth on is very vehement and ardent. Peter willing to rebuke the
perverse judgment of the people, Act. 2.
touching the miracle of the tongues, uses a place of attentiveness, then
wisely remoueth the crime of drunkenness objected unto them and so proceeds
to the cause of Christ our savior. Act. 7. and. 13.
Steven, and Paul desirous to expound the business of the Gospel, take the
beginning of their Sermons of the calling of Abraham.

By these things it is manifest, after what sort Exordiums ought to be
framed and joined together, when ye matter so requires that a Sermon be made
of a Theme simple. For the like reason is in this, that was in the other
before. But as for Exordiums discrepante from the cause, and such as are far
fetched, or also very tedyous and prolixe, no wise man will allow. And yet
notwithstanding sometimes they are to be borne with all in sacred Sermons,
upon this condition, that they tend to some edifyinge of the congregation,
and be applied to the commodity of times and persons, and be aptely and
conveniently handled. But then most chiefly are they to be admytted, when some
things be propounded to the people, that may not conveniently be enterlaced
in the enarration following, or else are judged expedient for some other cause
and consideration. Some such Exordiums are extante in the homilyes of
Chrisostom upon ye book of Genesis, in the which Exordiums he exhorts,
chydeth, or does some like thing a ye would say on the sudden. Such an
Exordium also Paul seems to usurp. Acts. 17. Where he begins with
reprehension of the supersticion of Thathenienses, and with the Altar of the
unknown God. Afterward he goes on to declare Christ to be true GOD, and to
make him known unto all men.

Neither is this to be passed over, Exordium sometime omitted.
that the Exordium sometimes may be omytted, and the proposition or division
eftesoones produced Chrysostom in his Sermon of the three childrne, the
discourse (says he) of three childrne shall be handeled, whose faith, with
what glorious praise and commendation it does resounde, the healthful and
hurtlesse flames of fire do testify. Also homily. 33. to the people of
Antioche he says: Go to my dear brethrne, let us repeat the things that
we have said before, and show this day unto you how that almose is an art,
yea, and of all arts the most gayneful. This thing comes to pass, either
where some Sermons went immediately before, in which the people is made
sufficiently attent already: Or when the straightness of time will not suffer
the Sermon to be protracted: Or else peradventure, a man must preach in such
a day or place, as very few do assemble and meet together to the hearing
of divine service.

Of Division or Proposition. Cap. XI.
FRom Exordium we pass immediately to Division or Proposition. Proposition
when it is to be used.


Therefore when we purpose to entreat of one only matter thorowout our whole
Sermon, it shall be sufficient to comprehend the same in a proposition.

But in case we frame our Oration of many matters, Division when.
then Division is to be had, conteyninge all the parts and members of which
we shall orderly speak.

And the Proposition verily, Proposition where it is to be placed.
is somtymes put in the beginning of Thexordium, which we have a litell
before admonished most commonly to be done in Sermons that are made of matters
offered by occasion: But most of all it is annexed immediately after the
Exordium. Example of the former is in Chrysostom, Homily. 38. Which is
entitled of humility and rest.

Let us not be to wise in our own opinions, says he, O brethrne, neither
yet be puffed up in pride, seeing we are earth and ashes, smoke, and
shadows. Examples of the later kind are extante in the same author every
where plenty. Homily. 19. to the husandemen, and of others to be eschewed,
after a long Exordium, wherein he commends the simplicity of the country
life: Again, says he, let us bend the force of our talk against
swearinge, to the intent this wicked custom may be plucked up by the roots out
of the minds of al men. Item Homily. 55. which is written against those that
are given to riot and voluptuousness: I will tell you how many griefs and
perturbations they be subject unto, that are drowned in pleasure and
superfluity.

Moreover, An example of Division.
an example of Division very proper and elegante is to be seen in the Oration
of Nazianzenus, made at the funeral of his brother Caesarius: First, says
he, we will some deal touch the Law of mourninge for the dead accustomably
used, so that we may both shed tears, and also by the way fall into
admiration: Then we will show the weakness and imbecillitie of mankind, and
entreat somewhat of ye Dignity of ye mind: lastly we will minister due
consolation to those that mourn, and transfer their sorrow from the flesh,
and from temporal things, unto things spiritual and eternal.

Every Division ought to be brief, ordinary, and clear: Division what and
after what sort it ought to be
That is to say, not consistinge of many members (scarce more at any time then
three): Secondely, they must be placed aright, as the nature of things does
require: Thirdly it is convenient that all things be expressed with clear
and manifest words.

And then also is it thought to be necessary, Division when needful.
when as we purpose in our mind to examine diverse distinct and sundry places
in the discourse of our Sermon, or also when one certain place offreth it
self to be handeled to the obscurenesse and difficulty whereof, reason
requires, by making a particion, some light to be inferred. For truly
Division is worthily added to, as well for the due order in disposition of
parts, and for an apt method in Teachinge, as also to illustrate and set
forth the matter, yea, and also to healpe and further memory. That all the
members of Division are not alvvayes declared.


In the mean season it is to be noted, that Division sometime is mentioned in
the Exordium, or immediately after the Exordium, of the several members whereof
notwithstanding, it is not our purpose to entreat, but only in one or two.
Nazianzenus in his oration of the holy Lauer, after a place of attention, the
sacred Scriptures, says he shows unto us a threefold generation, one of
the body: an other of Baptism: the third of resurrection. Then after a few
words. Wherefore of the two natiuities, the first, I say, and last, it
perteyneth not to this present time to discourse: But of the midlemost, and
that which is now needful unto us, which also is called the day of
illumination we will presently entreat.

It comes in ure also sometime, that a Sermon may be made of diverse and
sundry places, That many and diverse places are handled somtymes without any
division goinge before.
and yet no division at all going before. But yet in this kind, this caution
is accustomed to be used, that as often as progression is made from one place
to an other, so often is put to, either some conclusion or transition, or new
place of attention, or (to be short) some other note of distinction, whereby
the hearers may easily perceive, that some new place is in hand. In the
Sermons of Chrisostom no small number of such forms are to be found.
Homylie. 28. entitled against swearinge, and, that being in poverty we ought
to give GOD thanckes, he consumes the first part of his Oration in
detestinge oaths and perjury, and at length concludes protestinge: That if he
might perceive any, after that whatsoever they were, that would not leave off
their accustomable swearinge and forswearinge, he would exclude them utterly
from the participation of the holy communion, whether they were rich or poor.
For he for his part, would for none of them all, run into the danger of
everlasting dampnation. Afterward he proceeds to the later part, touthinge
poverty patiently to be borne, saying: when therefore, O man, thou shall be
oppressed with poverty or sickness, if by no other means, yet at the least
learn of ye very beggars ye go in ye streets to be thankful unto God.
Therefore by ye conclusion every man might judge how that part was at an end:
and the words following did not obscurely declare, that an other matter was
taken in hand.

In other of his Sermons, may be seen transitions, exhortations, Transitions,
exortacions, and other such like figures in division do oftetimes betoken a
new argument.
and other figures and phrases of sentences, which do signifye that he goes
speedely on to an other matter or argument. Such examples are these: hitherto
has been sufficiently spoken touching the evils that are engendered through
ire. Now let us speak of the commodities that come of meekness. Also: But go
to let us see how necessary a thing patience is. Or: well, somewhat now must we
say (according to the time) of fasting: Or: but why do we not also, seeing it
may now conveniently be done, add somewhat of fasting?

Also: Moreover, take dilligent heed, my brother, that as well all thy words,
as thy deeds, may savor the love of honesty and shamefastnes. Again, where
peradventure a Sermon of chastitye has gone before, there passage shall
rightlye be made to the place of sobryatie in meat, drink, and clothing, in
this wise: But yet is all our talk of the excellency of chastytie spent in
vain, except also we add some things against superfluity in meat, drink,
and clothing. Or thus: But now be attentive and give good ear unto those
things that remain to be spoken against excess in meat, drink, and apparel.
Again: Seeing we have hitherto sufficiently enough spoken of the fear of God,
I do not doubt, but that it will be very acceptable unto you, my dear
brethren, if we shall entreat also of patience in adversity.

What need many words? In the Sermons of the Prophets, in certain of Paul's
Epistles, in most of the homilies of Chrysostom, and of other holy fathers, it
is no difficult matter, to observe a number of such like forms of
Translitions, as these.

Yea and the Preachers themselves do sometimes by a certain silence, or pause
put between, or by some other like reason signify, that they will proceed
and pass over to an other place. Sometimes again, That proposition and
division both are now and then neglected.
(but especially when an entier book is with continual ^^a^ration expounded
to the people) neither any proposition or division at all is premised, but
Thexordiu^ being ended, some few words are recited, touching the contents of
the sacred book, out of which, eftsoons some spiritual doctrine is picked
and the same briefly declared according to ye capacity of the hearers. But
afterward immediately progression is made to the sacred words folowinge, where
likewise one or two places are noted, with an exhortation added to the
multitude, that they would commend them to their memory, and that every one
privately would endeavor themselves to convert them to the instruction and
reformation of their lives. In Chrisosto^ thou may find diverse examples.
homily. 13. upon Gene. after the Exordium: Let us now therefore see, says he,
what we are taught by blessed Moses, speaking these words not of him self, but
enspired of ye holy (...) And the Lord God took man whom he had made. Where
o^t of those two words Lord and God, he featly gather (...) ^unfutation of
the heretics, which contended that ye son was less then ye fater. Which
doctrine at that time by reason of the Arrians was in very good season set
forth, but now seeing ye heresy is exti^ct, it takes not so good place,
neither is it very necessary. Then forthwith he prosecuteth ye text: And he
placed him in the Garden of pleasure. In which words he admonishes to be
observed, how great the mercy, care and providence of God is toward mankind.
Afterward because it follows in the text: To the intent he should husband it and
keep it: he hrieflly gives us to understand, how perilous a thing idleness
is, and therefore, ye man ought always to be occupied about some good
exercise. In the same manner he proceeds orderly as well in that as also in
many other of his sermons. Which order is found oftentimes observed in those
sermons also yt are occupied in the explication of a part o^ any book: but
chiefly when Sermons are made to the multitude, wherein are mixed diverse learned
men: or that have been accustomed to hear diligently the scriptures expounded.
Which thing every man may perceive, that will not negligently read over the
homilies of the holy fathers, Chrysostom, Augustine, Gregory, Leo, Maximus.
etc. by whom diverse and sundry evangelical historyes accustomablye recited in
sacred assemblies, are explaned. But as touching this whole manner of
collecting many and diverse places, which as distinct parts, ought orderly to be
expounded, and some truly brieflye, and other some more at large, shall be
entreated more conveniently in the second Book, where, what things are
proper and peculiar to every kind of sermon, we will severally endeavor our
selves to declare.

Of Confirmation. Cap. XII.
COnfirmation, The place of Confirmation.
follows next after proposition or division, and is in very deed ye most
worthy part of all the Sermon, and therefore requires more labor, diligence,
and industry, then the other parts. And sithe the chief treasury of
arguments consists in this one, the minds of all the hearers are wont to
be intentiuely fixed therevppon, and every man privately gathers and
commits to memory that which he supposes to be most fruitful.

But yet the handelyng thereof of can not be conueighed in any one and simple
form. Confirmation can not one way be handeled.
For like as the kinds of Sermons are divided, even so Confirmatio^s in every
kind be supported with peculiar places of arguments.

Wherefore, what places they been that are chiefly congruent to every kind of
Sermon, The order of things to be said touching confirmation
shall both more largely and exactly be showed of us hearafter: Now at this
present it seems good only to note, as it were by the way, certain points
worthy to be observed generally in all confirmations. Which we in certain
chapters or observations orderlye digested will briefly and perspiciously
comprise. Chapters of observations.


I We have admonished in the proceeding chapter, that often times in one and
the self same Sermon, diverse and sundry places are handeled, and that passage
is made from one place to another. But how and after what sort these ought to
be found out, gathered together, and explaned in every kind, it is not now
requisite to be declared. Therefore here in this first place is this to be
observed: yt whether it shall be thought good to prosecute one common place, or
two, or three of the chiefes^, through out the whole sermon, we must principally
remember, yt every one ought to be expounded in a certain peculyar method, yea
and a certain peculyar order of confirmation applied unto every of them. For
verily it is a plain case of it self, that other arguments must be sought,
and the same also otherwise digested, when we entend to infer consolation:
other, when we purpose to confirm or convince an opinion: other, when we
exhort our hearers to any thing: and other when we rebuke sin and
wickedness. Therefore to one and the self same Sermon according to the
diversity of places, or parts, it is necessary that a diverse practice and
cunning be applied and annexed.

II Now what place soever thou take in hand beware that thou so handle the
same, as that for the present state of things, it nay (in thy judgment) be
most expedient. For undoubtedly, common custom and daily manners, the
tranquilytie, or preturbation of the church, vices every where growing and
increasing, the form and state of the common wealth, the constitution of the
whole city, do oftentimes require, that thou use a new form and manner of
speakinge. For of cities, thou shall see one florishe with the Princes Court,
an other illustrated with the high Senate house and chief counsel of the
whole Region, in an other a noble and famous School, an other notable through
some Mart or Market, in an other ^ company of noble and ritche men, an
other to be inhabited with a great number of artificers an other to nourysh and
sustain many soldiers (such as are placed for continual garrisons in the
borders of kingdoms and provinces) an other to be frequented of citizens
whereof the greater part is given to husbandry, to be short, in an other, some
other kind of men to abound and bear rule.

Therefore, so far forth as is possible, it is requisyte that thou accomodate
the whole coming and experience in expounding of common places, to the manners
and conditions of the people that are present, and to the state of the whole
City: namely so, that examples, similitudes, comparisons, Item reprehensions
of vices and enormities, be in such sort prepared and handeled, as that it is
most lykely, they shall best perceive them. To thaccomplyshing of which thing
we have need of a certain cyuill policye and prudence.

III It is a very common matter with Chrysostom and other holy fathers, when
they take in hand any other place at large, to expound in the beginning with
apparaunt words the sum of the whole business, and euidentlye to interpret
the same, to the intent all the hearers may perceive what their meaning is, and
whither that part of their sermon do tend.

IIII Sometime also they render a reason of their device, and show how necessary
and profitable it is for them to entreat presently of that very matter and
argument.

V Hereupon they gather together certain special proofs, taken out of the
sacred Scriptures, and do brieflye declare how they agree to their purpose,
whether they be prepared to prove or confute an opinion, or to move and exhort.

VI But as touching the order of proofs, the Rhetorytians, have given
precepts, that the first and last place is to be given to the most effectual,
and the slendrest to be placed in the midst: but surely we perceive that the
holy Fathers have used herein their lybertye, and according to the qualytie of
their business, have diversely disposed their proofs. Wherefore we will here
prescribe nothing at all, but only admonish, that no man bring forth any
without judgment.

VII Now and then also one or other proof (if peradventure there be any that
seem to be obseure, or if we covet to have any, as most firm and clear, to
be deeply fixed and settled in the minds of our hearers) is somewhat more fully
and evidently to be discussed and examyned.

VIII Then after may be mingled similitudes of all sorts, hat is to say,
scraped together out of affairs politic, domestical, and daily actions of
men, yea and of all kind of things as well in life, as without life, which
do both bring exceedinge much light, and also are most apt of all other to
teach and enstructe the common people. Thou shall find very few Sermons in
Chrysostom, in which are not a number of similitudes, and that in every part of
his Sermon, contained.

Neither may and man lightly be compared unto him in this practice. So also are
the Sermons of Christ and the Prophets to be seen, bewtified and adorned with
the frequency of similitudes or parables.

IX Opportunely next are adjoined certain examples or historyes taken out of
the sacred Scriptures, wherein is declared the truth and certayntie of that
thing which we chiefly covet to inculcate, and make known. For the very
rude, senseles, and uncivil people also do easily understand histories, and
even with a certain pleasure hear them.

X If it be thought convenient, now and then, some hystory, by adding
amplyfications, or deducing out of it some s^raunge probations, more delectable
to the ear is set forth to the hearers. In which practice, how skilful
Chrysostom was, each man may perceive, as well in other places as also by his
homily. 19. to the husbandmen, and touching oaths to be eschued, where he
declares the history of king Esechias, vanquisshed and taken prisoner of
Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, by reason of his oath and promise violated and
broken.

XI After proufes and examples alleged out of ye Scriptures, sometimes may
rightly be added to other proufes also apt to win credit, and persuade,
which by the very sense of nature, or by the judgment of Phylosophye, or of
humane reason, do bring with them probabilytie and lykelyhod. Of which kind
is it, that Chrysostom and other of the fathers do successively inculcate many
things, touching the frame of the world, and the wonderful bewty thereof, of
diverse and sundry creatures, and the effects of the same, and out of these do
collect a manifold doctrine, of the good will of God toward us, or of our duties
both toward God and toward our neighbor, Again, sometimes (and yet
scarcely) the opinions and sentences of philosophers and poets are alleged and
brought forth. But least any man should despise that which we here say, as a
thing either fryuolous or suspicious, we have examples of this study and
dilygence set forth in the sacred scriptures. For next after the Prophets using
oftentimes reasons derived of nature, we may see Christ himself to preach of
grass, of Lilies, of Sparowes. etc. and out of these things to prove, how
admyrable the providence of God is in the furniture and preservation of all
things.

The Apostle Paul. 1. Cor. 11. Nature it self (says he) teaches you this,
that to a man, if he have long hair, it is a reproach: contrariwise to a
woman, if she have long hair, it is a praise, for so much as her hair is
given her for a cover. In the same Epistle Chap. 15. proving the opinion
touching the resurrection of the body, he produces examples of seed cast into
the earth, and there putting on a new form or fashion. Then of the diversity
of flesh, where he distinguishes the flesh of men, of beasts, of fishes, of
fowls: and also of bodies, whereof he makes some celestial other some
terrestrial.

The same apostle in ye Acts cap. ^7. alleges half a verse out of the poet
AEratus. 1. Cor. 15. a verse out of the Comical poet Menader, to Titus, Cap. 1.
an other verse out of Epimenides.

And albeit it is not convenient to take witness and trial of those whom we
know to be estraunged from our relygion, yet as we said, is it tolerable, so
that it be done sparinglye and selde, and to convince stifnecked and hard
hearted men, further, in using now and then, this cantion, to say that we
usurp those kind of reasons deryued of man's wisdom, to the intent christian
hearers may be ashamed of their ignorance, sloth, dullness, incredulity, or
that they may know themselves to be convicted even of the heathen and
profane sort utterly void of all spirytuall knowledge. Which thing truly we
have observed now and then to be usually done of the fathers immitatinge the
Prophets, Christ and Thappostles. Chrysostom in his homily 28. touching
swearing to be avoided. After that ye can not (says he) be persuaded by the
scriptures, I will admonish you by foreign and external examples. This did
God also among the Jews saying: Go into the Islands Cethim and Kedar, send
and know, if that nation have chauned her Gods, which nevertheless ore no
Gods. And unto the brute beasts he oftetimes sends them, thus saying: Go to
the Ante and the Be thou sluggard.

This therefore will I now say unto you. Remember the Gentile Philosophers, and
then shall ye know, of how great punyshement we are worthy, that despise
and contemn the laws of God.

This he. And to this end and purpose also the Apostle seems to speak of
the Cretensians. A certain Prophet of their own Country, said: That the
Cretes, are always liers, evil beasts, and slow bellies. This testimony is
true, wherefore rebuke them sharply.

XII. Sometimes thou shall see in the midst of the discourse a certain
brief digression to be made, wherein either vices are reproved or exhortation
is framed unto virtue. Which Digressions very opportunely and with a certain
grace also are accustomed oftentimes to slyppe from those that have not
premedicated before what to speak.

XIII. Lastly, yt which remains is bestowed in mouinge of affections; to the
intent all men may the more willingly and cher^fully embrace the su^me and
effect of the argument or common place of us handeled, and that beeinge drawn
after a sort to consent unto us, they may carry about the same perpetually
imprinted in their minds.

This therefore is a certain common and simple form of findinge out,
collectinge, and disposinge of proufes, a^te to expound and declare common
places in sacred Sermons (howsoever it be of us set forth) which we perceive
to have been oftentimes used, A praise of the said form of deriuing,
collecting, and disposinge of proufes.
not only of the ancient fathers of great o^^imation, but also of the holy
prophets and Apostle^, like as wae have al^eady showed.

It favors of no running at all, there is nothing in it artificially
devised, yet nevertheless to the common course of nature, and the plain
simplicity of the multitude, it serves inespecially and agrees more the any
other. Wherefore it is not to be contemned or neglected, chiefly seeinge, as
an Orator, even so it becomes also a Preacher, always to avoid, so much as
in him lies, the suspicion of over much cunninge and curiosity.

Now there be two things (to the intent I may addde this also by the way)
where with a man shall be furthered very much to thatteyninge of this easy
order of popular Teaching. The manner of popular Teaching vvhe^ce it is derived.


The former is, that, after the Sermons of the Prophets, I.
Christ, and Thapostles, (whereunto always ye first place and dignity is due)
he accustom diligently and with sharp dyindication of the parts thereof, to
peruse (...) the Homilies of certain of the fathers, but chiefly about the
rest o^ John Chrysostom.

Yet can we not dissemble, but that the doings of Chrysostom so often of us
commended, are to be read with great discretion, warely, and not save of
those that have before been well exercised in the principal common places of
Christian doctrine. Which thing also is me to to be understood of the
Commentaries of other holy Fathers, like as S. Augustine also in his works,
wishes ye readerse to use their censure and judgment, as may be seen in his
Epistle. 7. to Marcellinus. 19. to Hieronimus, 3. to Fortunatianus. II


The later is, whosoever coueteth at any time to preach readily and to the
purpose, him it behooves to gather together, and to note in paper books, as
many both sentences and examples out of the holy canonical Scriptures as is
possible, touching all the common places belonginge to the whole course of
Diuintie, which may at all times, and unto every argument proposed, stand him
in stead, and be in a readiness. He verily must dilligently travail in both
these points, that desires at any time with plentiful fruit of the spirit
to enstruct the people unto godliness in the Church of Christ.

Of Confutation. Cap. XIII.
WHere, if at any time the case so requires that some things, Confutation
how and after what sort it ought to be.
alleged of adversaries against our opinion, be confuted, that shall in deed
be accomplished, rather after an Oratoriall manner, then Logical, but yet
compendiously and with perspicuous reasons agreeable to the capacity of the
hearers. Example hereof be these: Chrysostom in his Homily. 78. entitled:
That it is better to suffer wrong then do wrong: after he had said: Therefore
God commanndeth us to suffer injury and does all things, that he might
withdraw us from worldly things, and make us to understand what glory is, what
dishonor, what los, what gain: he adds this objection with a solution also
adjoined thereunto: But it is a grievous thing (thou will say) to suffer
injury and reproach. It is not grievous, no, it is not (I say) O man. How
long will thou stick astonyed about things present and transitory for
neither would GOD have instituted that, if it had beue to grievous or
burthenous.

But mark what I shall say: he that does injury, goes his way, having in
deed money, but yet a wounded conscience. He that suff^eth injury, is
deprived of his money, but has trust to GOD ward, a possession verily more
worth then innnumerable treasures.

Therefore the Objection is solued, by settinge against a little corporal loss
of him that suffers wrong, a greater spiritual detriment of him that does
the wrong. And a litell after in the same place: What? Say thou, I am
deprived of all my goods, and biddest thou me hold my peace? I have suffered
reproach, and would thou have me take it patiently? But how can I? Forsooth
very ea^ely, if thou would look only up into heaven, if thou would be
hold the pleasant bewty thereof, and consider how GOD has promised to take
thee up thither after thou have manfully suffered wrong and injury.

This do therefore, and lookinge toward heaven, suppose that thou art made
like unto him that sits there upon Cherubins. For he was both vexed with
reproach and injury, and yet he suffered patiently:

He endured in reuilmentes, and yet sought no reuengment: he was stricken, and
strak not again: But contrariwyse, he gave them innumerable benefits that
committed suth things, and commanded us to be followers of him.

This solution is taken of the hope of reward promised, of thexample of Christ
him else and of God, and likewise of his commandment. Confutations where to
be placed and put.


Now it is in no wise necessary, that those things that need confutation
should be heaped up together into one place, to the intent all things
should be dissolueed at once, but it is lawful to disperse them through
diverse and sundry parts of the whole Sermon, that whersoeuer any thing by
occasion comes to mind, which we suppose may be objected to our sentence
and opinion, there we may confute the same without any further delay. Examples
of which observation may every where be seen in the Sermons of the Prophets,
Apostles, and holy fathers.

For certes it is not the fasshion, that just confutations, and such as we see
used in Courtelyke cases among the Rethoritians, should be instituted in
evangelical Sermons. For why, he provides not well for the people, that will
seem to pester them with the hearing of over many aunswers and solutions of
objections in one Sermon.

Nevertheless, if it happen at any time, (thaffayres of the Church so
requiringe) that the whole Sermon be^ applied to the reprouinge of a false
opinion, or to the correction and abolishinge of superstitions, or of some
evil inueterate custom, then doubtelesse it is both seemly and also very
requisite, that all things be dissolved in order that are produced of
obstinat men for the defense of their errors. For great labor and diligence is
needful to the extirpinge and rooting out of perverse opinions, wherewith the
minds of men have any long time been infected, seeinge they always subtly
and craftily go about to imagine and contriue a number of things to establish
and confirm their noysom opinions withal.

For after this sort we may see confuted in the book of Solomon, which is
entitled Ecclesiastes, the false and erroneous opinions of many touching the
sovereign felicity. And the Apostle Paul in his Epistle to the Romans.
Cap. 5.6. and 7. wisely infringeth and dissolueeth no few things, which the
adversaries objected against the doctrine of justification by faith without
works.

Moreover, the Preacher shall use all the order and con^ing in confutation,
which we see to be prescribed to ye Orators, and he shall franckely use
negation, elevation, Diverse forms of confutation.
translation, excusation, digression, regestion, inuersion, distinction,
absolution, conquestion, inuestigation of the matter and form of arguments
after the manner of Logic, and whatsoever else is of this kind. For of all
these things examples may be showed in ye Sermons of Christ, the Prophets and
Apostles.

Notwithstanding he must take dilligent heed of this, Confutation must be
void of sophystry.
that his Confutation be utterly void of all subtle sophistry, that it be
without ostentation of the deceytfull drinks of Logic, and lawelyke
craftiness, to be short, that it be without any desire of cauillinge: And
that verily for this cause, least any man shoulds suspect him either to trifle,
or else to be desirous to circumuent and begyle his auditors: Whereof the one
is the point of shameful vanity and the other of malicious subteltie.

Full well goes the ecclesiastical discourse forward, that is seen to be
decked and adorned with verity and simplicity.

Some there be that in confutinge now and then become so hot and vehement,
Co^tumelious chidinges to be avoided.
that as men enraged with ire, they brast forth into contumelious reproaches
yea, and sometimes into Thiestes execratio^s, which whilst they do they
exceed all measure and mediocritie. These men we wish to be admonished, that
they would endeavor themselves to restrain, with the bridell of charity, the
excursion of their vehement and hasty Oration. For it less offends, albeit
it be a sharp reprehension, if it may be understood to proceed of charity.

These things, touching the manner of Confutinge applied to the Popular
understanding, and congruent to every kind of Sermons, whither it be a whole
book, Conclusion.
or a part of the book or some certain place that is expounded, or whither
we entreat of affairs offered by occasion of time, may suffice. For the things
that ought besides to be accommodate as proper to the kind r^dargutiue or
correctiue, those things we will with more diligence declare, when we shall
severally entreat of ye same kinds.

Of Conclusion. Cap. XIII.
IN every sacred Sermon, Conclusion, double: of the part, and of the whole
Oration, which is called peroratio^. What is to be repeated in the Conclusion.
each part or common place does crave a brief conclusion: but besides that a
certain apt and convenient peroration must be added to the whole oration.

Now it this, if many notable places out of a whole book, or a part of a
book, have been examined, a short repetitio^ is rightely made of some principal
points and Chapters thereof. If two or three places have been expounded, then of
every one in order may be called into memory some certain proufes, such as
seem to be most emine^t and probable: now and then, the Preacher strayeth
only in those things that pertayne to the last place, the doctrine and
utility whereof he alonely studiously commends. But in case some one
certain place of Scripture, or a Theme simple or compound, shall through out
the whole Sermon be declared at large, or that the Sermon be taken in hand
touching business, which the state of the Church requires to be handeled,
then for the most part a peroration is accustomably bestowed in moving of
affections, to ye intent, me^ may be stirred to desire or eschew, to allow or
dissalowe, that whereof entreaty has been made.

Sometime to Sermons of every kind are annexed exhortation, Affections to be
moved also in a peroration. Exhort. Reprove.
or obiurgations utterly divided from those places that are before expounded:
Which then truly rightely comes to pass, when certain affairs do happen,
whereof it behooves the people to be admonished.

So Chrisostom in a place in the end of his Sermon, rebukes those that
neglectinge divine Sermons used to gadd to the Theater to behold there the
games on horseback called Ludi equestres. The same in his Ho^^lie 19. upon
Genesis after the Scriptures declared with a brief conclusion, he passes to
an exhortation, wherein he detesteth covetousness, and requires all men that
they would endeavor themselves to help the poor, and to give almose unto
them. In his Homily. 15. after he had besought his hearers that they would
commend unto their memory, the things that had been spoken touching the
incomnparable mercy of GOD, he admonishes them that they woulds labor to
pass the residewe of ye Lent fruitefully, and study not only to absteyne
from meats, but also much more from sin and wicked attemptes.

But most commonly he concludes simply in prayinge and beseacute;echinge his
audientes, Simply to pray and beeseech.
that they would have dilligent consideration of the wholesome doctrine
propounded unto them, that they would repeat it after they were returned
home, somtymes also declare it unto others (which we may see him to have done,
Homily. 2.14. and 20. upon Genesis, and else where) and finally convert it
wholely to the amendment of their lives.

Moreover now and then the Preachers do admonish in the conclusion, The
herers to be admonished of the matter of the next Sermon. Certain means of
finishinge sacred Sermons.
of what matter they are determined to entreat in their Sermon followinge.

Out of Chrysostom Homily. 4. upon Genesis, also. 4. upon the first Epistle
to the Corinth. Item, his. 5. Tome, Homily. 28. against Swearinge, some gather
that the custom was in the church in times past, that the people after the
end of the Sermon, should clappe their hands and make acclamations, I
but so as much as this custom seems to have followed from the Theater or
market place, it is worthily obsolete and grown out of ure. II


Much better it is verily to end all sacred Sermons with prayer, III
or (that we certaynely know to be done in some place) with the confession
of faith, that is to say with the repetition of the Symboll Apostolyke or
Nicaene.

Of Amplification, Cap. XV.
Whatsoever thing is profitable either to teach perspicuousely, What things
the Preacher shall get to himself.
or also to move and persuade withal, all that shall the Preacher purchase to
himself as most requisite and necessary furniture. Therefore, let him know,
that argumentations tripartite, quinquepartite, Enthymemata: also Schemes and
Tropes: further, the craft of amplifying and moving of affections, and finally
whatsoever else of this order is taught of the Rhetoritians, masters of well
speakinge, do appertain and belong unto him. Howbeit our purpose is not to
speak any thing at all touching the forms of arguments, of Schemes or
Tropes, forasmuch as we do gather these things only for their sakes, unto
who^ we supppose all those things to be already very well known.

But nevertheless we will note somewhat touching amplification, Of
amplification, what he will speak.
for that we perceive many of the holy Fathers to have been studiously occupied
in handelinge of the same: Yea, and somewhat otherwise to usurp amplifications,
and to allege also other manner of arguments, the^ the Orators are accustomed.

For the Preacher does not use amplification, to the intent to bring to pass,
why the Preacher must use amplification
that the matter might appear either greater or lesser then it is of it self,
or (as it is fayed) that of a fly might be made an Elephante, or again of an
Elephante a fly, in which point the Rhetoritians do most chiefly labor,
couetinge withal to corrupt the judgment of the hearers, and to withdraw
them from the right scope: but to the end, it may be acknowledged of all men
to be such and so great, as is meet and requisite that it should be in
deed which verily is no other thing, the^ to reclayme men erring from the
truth, to a prudent and sincere judgment. Amplificatio^, when to be used.
And herevppon we may also gather, when and at what time the practice of
amplification ought most conveniently to be used.

For if at any time thou happenest upon those places, amplifications we must
labor to bring them to this point, that they may be able to conceive both what
and how great every thing is.

And often times it comes to pass, that certain sins,

Of these therefore when the Preacher shall fortune to entreat, he shall not
without good cause, by vsinge of amplyfications, go about to declare the
greatness of the same. In respect whereof. Esaias Cap. 1. Jews by comparisons
and such like places.

Christ in like manner Math. 5, amplifieth diverse and sundry offenses, as namely
reproach of our neighbor, concupiscence, perjury, and proves them to be much
more grievous then a great number did suppose.

Again, some there be that esteem certain things more highly then they
ought to be esteemed, as for example, we may see some men to attribute so much
unto ceremonies, rights, men's traditions. etc. that they are not affrayd to
prefer them before the very commandments of god. Therefore when it shall be
for the behoof of the hearers to entreat of these things, the Preacher shall
prudently extenuate al observations or traditions, yea and with necessary and
probable arguments (so much as lies in him) conclude, that they are by no
means to be compared with the precepts of Gods law.

Christ, Matthew, 15. and Mark. 7. does grievously reprove the preposterous
judgments of men in this behalf.

And Paul in his epistle to the Colossians does with wonderful dexteritye
shake up and bring into contempt the vphoulders and maynteyners of traditions.

Sometimes it so falls out that certain notable virtues are neglected, or be
not esteemed as they are worthy: wherefore through amplifications they shall
be advanced to the dignitye which of right they ought to have.

In respect whereof the Apostle to the Romans 4. does amplyfye the faith of
Adraham, by the causes and circumstaunces thereof, to the intent, that all men
might perceive, that the faith whereby Abraham so greatly pleased god and was
accepted of him, and whereby also men ought to be justified, was not cold and
light: but vehement, notable, and very wonderful.

Who contrary to hope (says he) believed in hope, that he should be the
father of many nations, according to that which was spoken: So shall thy seed
be.

And he faynted not in the faith, nor considered his own body now dead, whon
he was almost an hundred years old, neither yet the barennesse of Saraes
womb.

He staggard not at the promise of God through unbelief: but was strong in
faith, giuinge glory to GOD: and being full certifyed that what he had
promised, he was able also to perform.

And therefore was it reckoned unto him for righteousness.

There is extant also a grave amplyfycation of the same Apostle, touching the
wrath of God to be feared of all those that will not acknowledge Christ to be
the true Messiah:

Take heed my brethrne (says he) least at any time there be in you an evil
heart of unbelief, Hebr, 3.4
to depart from the living God: but exhort ye one an other daily, while it
is called to day, least any of you be hardened, through the deceitfulness of
sin.

For we are made pertakers of Christ, if we keep sure unto the end the
beginning of the substaune, and so forth as it is in the text. For the place
is long.

Moreover, Whence the Preacher may take orders of amplyfiynge.
the Preacher may use all the furniture of amplyfyinge, that the Schole of
Orators ministers unto him.

Wherefore, as touching that which pertayneth unto words, he may mingle
together (...), I. Out of the faculty of Orators.
expolition, definition, description, distribution, heapinge up of matter,
encrea^ement:

As touching the things themselves, he may transfer (...) to (...), that is
to say, pass from a question definite to a question infinite or common place,
he may examine (so far forth as the nature of the argument will suffer) the
causes, to wit, the matter, form, effect, end:

Moreover the circumstaunces, as the person, time, place, manner, instrument,
occasion, and so forth. Then, things happening or signs, whereof some be
antesede^ts, some subsequentes, other some annixed to the business it self:
also comparisons, similitudes, contentions, contraries: and whatsoeruer things
else are in this kind set forth of the Rhetoritians.

Again further, II. Out of divinity it self
the Preacher may borrowe many points of amplifying out of Theologye it self,
which has no small number of peculyar places, apt and correspondent to every
kind of argument as well as any other discipline beside, like as we shall a
little after declare.

Therefore he that teaches the people, does often times frame his
amplyfication, Ab attributis Dei, that is, of the properties of God, as that
God searches the heart, that he can not be deceived: Of the Commandment of
God: Of the Promises set forth: Of the Threatninge of punishments: Of the
Calling of Man to the knowledge of the truth: Of Electinge into the Church
of God: Of Spiritual gifts received: Of a General sentence in Divinity: Of
the Predictions of the Prophets: Of that, that they be things spyrytuall: Of
the time of the Law: Of the Time of the Gospel: Of the Sign to the thing
signyfyed: Of a thing spyrytuall to a thing Corporal: And again of a thing
corporal to a thing Spyrytuall, etc.

Which to the intent we may in some sort make plain, and evident, it shall not
be amiss to add one or two examples touching the same.

Esaye Capitulo, 15. Examples.
prophesyinge before that it would come to pass, I
that all the most noble Cities of the Moabites should be destroyed, in an
Oration not over long in deed, but yet very proper and elegante, amplyfieth
the perilles and dangers which he foresawe to hang over them.

All their heads (says he) were balde, and all their beardes shaven.

In her Streets are they gyrded about with Sackcloth, in all the tops of her
houses and Streets shall be nothing but mourning and weeping.

Hesbon and Eleale shall cry, that their voice shall be heard unto Iahaz:
and therefore the armed soldiers also of Moab shall bleat out and cry for
very sorrow of their minds.

And so forth as it follows through out the whole Chapter.

Chrysostom, in his homily. 19. entitled to the husbandme^, and against
swearing, to the end he might teach how grievous a sin it is to swear
falsely, and violate an oath, says in the beginning, that not only those ye
periure themselves shall be punished, but also their whole houses and families
by the just judgment of God shall utterly be subverted and destroyed. Which he
proves generally by the example of the destruction of the Sodomits, in which,
for the offenses of some, not only the men, but also the very walls, the
houses and buyldings, yea and the very earth it self, seemed to sustain most
bitter torments, the very relics of synders and ashes, with perpetual
barennesse, remaining even until this day.

Afterward he adds further that he will make also a special demonstration,
how that for the perjury, and ye of one man, it may come to pass, not only
some one house, but also a large and ample City, yea and some whole Province
and Country to be destroyed by the just vengeance of God.

By and by therefore he produces the historye out of the fourth book of the
Kings. Cap. 24. and 25. of King Zedechias, or Zidkijahu, who, after that he
was made King of Judah by Nabuchodonosor king of Babylon, kept not touch and
covenant with him, but striking a league with the king of AEgipt, in the ninth
year of his reign he sought means to reuolte; for which cause the kingdom
of Judah (notwithstanding the puissaunce thereof) was utterly rooted by and
overthrown.

And besides this, he infers diverse and sundry reasons to aggrauate the
sin of Zedechias, but amongst ye rest, he takes one trim and notable
specialytie out of the Prophesy of Ezechiel, cap. 17. For when as by chance
some had said, that the country of Judah was not punished for the violating of
an oath, but rather for other offenses: Chrysostom recites, touching the same
matter, the judgment of Ezechiel, (...) plainly testifies that the subuercion
of the Jews happened through the breakings of covenant with the king of
Babylon. Upon which occasion he properlye expounds and conningly
interprets the parable of the Prophet of the two Eagles and of the vineyard,
whereof the one Eagle betokened the king of Babylon, the other, the king of
Egypt, and the vineyarde the kingdom of Judah.

After this, he prosecuteth the things that partaine to ye history. And
whereas it is reported in ye story, that the City was besieged almost by the
space of three years, out of that circumstaunce he exaggerateth the evil,
admonishinge that, by the continuance of time and also by the perilles
adjoined thereunto, as on the one side honger and famishmente, on the other,
fierce and outrageous slaughter, the greuousenes of the sin might be
esteemed. But he adds further in the same place, an other reason derived of
the providence and ordinance of God, saying: Therefore would God have the City
oppressed with so long a seege, that the king relenting, might confess his
sin, and also through the persuasion and impulsion of the Inhabitauntes,
willingly yield himself to the Babilonians: by which means verily it seemed
that some kind of redress might have been procured to so great calamities.

Wherefore so long time together to persist obstinate in his evil, and not to
be touched with repentance, when God specially so many ways invited him, was
very heinous and horrible to consider.

And even this also makes to the augmentation of the ^^ime, that the King in
the mean while, would not give ear unto those that told him the truth, and
counseled him for the best.

Concerning which matter Chrysostom adds the prophesye and counsel of
Jeremy, which is extant Ierem. 38. For he being inspyred with the spyrit of
God, counseled and foretold unto the King, requiryng his advice, that if he
would willinglye submit himself to the King of Babylon, he should be
received into favor, and his kingdom by that means should remain in safety:
but in case he refused so to do, he should be ledd away a captive and his City
consumed with fire. But Jeremy preached to a deaf man. Wherefore in this
respect again is Zedechias greatly to be accused.

Then consequentlye as it were, per (...) he describes the spoylyng and
profanation of the Temple, the burning of the City, the walls plucked down,
the boot^es carried away, the Princes stayne with the sword, the people led
away captive, eftsoons repenting and in^ulking withal that perjury and
breakinge of promise were the causes of all these calamities.

With these things not contented, he proceeds further and shows the pains
which the king himself sustained: declarynge the same to be double or two
fold, the one deprivation of his sight, the other captivity.

And forthwith he amplyfyeth them booth: the first verily, for as much as
before he was made blind, he was constrained to see his children slain in his
presence: the later, for that from thence forth he should become a Spectacle
and an example to the whole world, but chifely unto those nations, through
whose dominions he should afterward be ledd away captive.

Where again, be conningly accords two prophesyes the one seeming contrary
to the other, and proves them in the end to be booth true, by the success
that ensued upon the same.

The one of them was, that Zedechias should not see Babylon: the other that
he should be led away into Babylon:

Whereof that one (saye^^ he) was accomplished when in Judah it self he had
his eyes plucked out: this other likewise found true, when after he was
carried away into Babylon with a great number of other captives more.

He adds yet (finally) an other amplyfication to the hearers taken out of the
comparyson of the time of the Law, to the time of the Gospel. If those that
lived under the law were so grieuousely punished for perjury, what great
plagues do remain for those, that now in these days, when the light of the
Gospel most clearly shyneth, are not ashamed to forswear themselves? But I
cease to make any further annotations upon that place furnyshed with all kind
of conninge and conueig^aunce.

By these things it may sufficientlye be perceived, that amplyfications are
often times gathered out of those places, which Diuinitye, challenges as
proper to it self.

III
The same Chrysostom in his homily, 46. upon Genesis, with wonderful prudence
and dexteritye amplyfieth (like as did. Origin also before him) the faith of
Abraham, and his obedience derived of faith, being ready to offer up his only
son Isaac: the discourse whereof whosoever will attentively read, he shall
hardly (I am sure) refrain him self from tears.

IIII
Again in his homily. 14. touching the temerarious oath of Saul, 1. Reg. 14
wherein he swore that who so ever did taste any bread before the evening
should dye the death, it is an easy matter to observe many mo amplifications
derived out of diverse and sundry places of Divinity.

I cannot choose, but that I must needs add this also by the way, What manner
of arguments ought to be ministered unto children for thexercise of their style.
and (as ye would say) minding of some other matter. Some there be that
propounde unto the youth in Schools arguments, in which they may exercise their
style, and make a trial of the towardnes of their wit: but those for the most
part are taken out of fables, or certes things vain and frivolous, that I say
not, sometimes filthy, or otherwise hu^^fill^ But how much better should the
Scolemasters do, if they would oftentimes prescribe unto their Scollers
committed to their charge, and to those inespecially that are informed, to the
study of divine letters, arguments taken out of the holy Scriptures, and
would command them to explicate and in explicating to adorn the same, one
while by amplifications, an other while, by other forms of exercises,
according to the imitation of Chrysostom or some other excellent divines.

Of mouinge of affections. Cap. XVI.
THe Preacher shall not employe his least care in mouinge of affections, Thar
the manner of moving of affections ought to be known of the Preacher.
for so much as all the learned sort do confess, that he stands of no one
thing more in need, then he does of this one only faculty.

They that teach no otherwise in the temple, then professors are accustomed in
the Scoles, it cannot be that they should be the authors of any great
spiritual fruits, and very few or none are seen to be induced with such
Sermons to repentance and amendment of life. Wherefore, whosoever he be that
has once taken upon him the office of teaching in the church, must with great
industry apply himself unto this, yt he may at the length feel himself able
to perform somewhat worthy of commendation in this behalf.

We in the mean time will add to some things that serve unto this end: The
order and division of the things to be spoken touching moving of affections. I
When affections are to be moved.
and first verily we will declare when and what time it is convenient to move
affections: then next, where or in what part of the Sermon: lastly in what
places or with what practice it may be done.

It is well known out of the books of the Rhetoritians, that the common
affections are accounted to be four: Gladness, Hope, Fear, Grief. And under
gladness are ordinarily placed, deletation, vaunting or bosting: under hope,
desire, indige^ce, or need: Under fear, slothfulness, shamfastnes, terror,
timorousnes, trembling, preturbatio^: Division of affections.
Under grief are, envy, ire, evil will, hatred, emulatio^, pity, sorrow,
lamentation, carfulness, paynefulnesse, desperation, etc.

Now the Preachers do not accustomably use to excite the minds of their
hearers, (...) affecti^^^ (...) to be (...) of the ^^^^^er.
to every of the kinds of affections now reherced, but unto those most
chiefly which every man at the first sight may know distinctly to be most
convenient and, as it were, destinate to divine affairs, that is to say, to
things perteyninge to the eternal salvation of mankind. They induce therefore
their hearers most specially to the care of obteyning salvation, to sorrow or
indignation for offenses committed, to the lothsomnesse and hatred of sins,
to the love of virtue, to the fear of gods judgment and of punishment, to the
hope of mercy to be obtained with God, to compassion and love toward our
neighbor, and unto those affections besides, that are unto these most
semblable, but scarcely to any other. Wherefore the mener of mouinge of
affections assigned unto Preachers in the Church, is not altogether like unto
that, that the Orators use in their Forum or Consistory.

To the intent therefore thou may know when and at what time it is meet
and convenient that affections be moved of the Preacher, How to know when
affections are to be moved.
before all things the parts of the whole Sermon, and the principal places,
which are specially to be touched therein, ought effectually to be comprised in
the mind and reduced to a perfect order.

For the tractation of what place soever thou shall judge to be most profitable
and necessary either to the state of the Church, or to the time and causes
incident, in the illustration thereof chiefly, beyond the rest, thou shall
employ thy dilligent labor, and also endeavor thy self to move the affections
of the hearers.

The effect of our meaning, is this: Thou expoundest some entier book of
Scripture, or some part of a book: in the words that come next to hand,
are found (peradventure) touched diverse and sundry profitable places, whereof
some do conteyne manifold doctrine, othersome redargutions, other
institucions, other corrections, or consolations. And in these one there is
most apt to stir up the minds of men unto virtue, very requisite in the
life of man, and chiefly in respect of present considerations: therefore,
thou shalt understand that this same place is in such sort to be declared
of thee, that thou may endeavor thy self to move the affections, either
more vehement or moderate, according as thou shalt see it expedient.

At what time therefore, thou shalt perceive men to be given to drounkennesse
and excess, if there happen any where in the Sermon a place of sobriety and
temperance, or against superfluity, in this verily thou shalt longest tarry,
and through exhortation or reprehension, so stir up the affections of the
hearers, that they may both covet sobriety and abandon excess.

Moreover, where many of the common sort are oppressed with poverty and that
there is every where great scarcity of vittayle, and yet in the mean time
charity very cold, and uneath any where to be found: if then a convenient
place offer it self touching liberality, thou shalt with all thy power go
about to explayne it at large, and with as great industry as thou can,
induce the minds of the hearers to bountifulness, and compassion toward the
poor. Furthermore, there happens peradventure a place whereby it is signified
that God would have littell children to come unto him: Here very fitly shall
be entreated of the love of parents toward their childrne, yea, and with
some vehemence also, and provocation of minds, shall the parents be urged to
send their childrne to Scole in time convenient, and provide that they may
rightely be enstructed in the principles of godliness.

To be short, if at any time an history or precepte, or sentence be purposed
upon, which produces a place of consta^cy and fortitude in the confession of
faith, this place certes shall worthily so much the more amply be declared, by
how much, very few are to be found in these days, that by reason of public
dangers, but especially for the perturbatio^ of ye Church, dare consta^tely
abide by ye truth.

And verily in this self same argument, shall all the cunning in moving of
affections be seasonably set abroch, II Where, or in what part of the Sermon
affections are to be moved.
and men provoked with great sharpness of words and sentences, to constancy
and fortitude in the confession of the truth. Somtymes also beside the
tractation of common places, or explication of the scripture, there is mingled,
either in the beginning of the Sermon, or in the end, or else (by digression)
in the midst, some exhortation or obiurgation, in which the oration assurgeth
even to the styrringe up and concitation of affections.

Examples thou may find not rare in Chrysostom and other ecclesiastical
writers.

By these things it is evidently to be perceived, in what part of the Sermon
affections ought to be moved. Not in confirmation only, but also in the
Exordium, and conclusion: Not only where the confirmation drawethe to an end,
but also wheresoever else the consideration of those things that are touched
will seem to require, shall it be convenient to stir up the motions of the
mind. To the Preacher ought a greater liberty to be given by all means then
to the Orator, like as also the Preacher may do many other things with
comlynesse, that are not in the mean time to be attempted of the Rhetoritian.
For the Preacher charge, commands, sharply rebukes, threateneth,
pronounces, as one in place of authority, and as a Judge, the sentence of
excommunication: But the Rhetoritian supposes none of these things to be
lawful unto him, but rather he is compelled now and then fowly to flatter and
fawn upon the Judges, somtymes also to prostrat himself as an humble
supplyaunt, before the tribunal seat, and what not and Chrysostom in his
Homily. 26. entitled, That we ought to be vert^^^sely occupied in the
least things, and that we ought not to swear, forthwyth in the very entry
of his Sermon, repeateth many things gravely and with a certain Episcopal
dignity, whereby he induces the hearers to fear the judgment of God, and
also the severity of ecclesiastical discipline. Howbeit, in whatsoever
exhortations, reprehensions or obiurgations it be, that place ought chiefly
and frequently to be given to the mouinge of affections of minds, it is much
better known, then that it is needful here to be admonished, the daily
custom of teachers in the Church not obscurely, prouinge and confirminge the
same.

Moreover, III With what skill and cunning the affection are to be moved. I.
Mean.
with what furniture of arguments or with what kind of art the Preacher may
conveniently move and stir up the minds of the hearers, we will eftesoones
declare. Before all things it is very necessary that he which speaks, do
conceive such like affections in his mind, and raise them up in himself,
yea, and (after a sort) shows them forth to be seen unto others, as he
coueteth to he translated into the minds of his auditors. For he that both
in words, voice, countenance, and apt gesture, declares himself to lamente
and be sorry either for the peril of some, or for the common misery of all
men, ^ee alone seems forthwyth to provoke the residewe to pity and
compassion: He that burns wholly in himself, and is altogether inflamed to
attempt some notable thing, he by his oration and (as it were) by his own
example may incense others to enterprise the like: He that does utterly
abandon vices himself, and expresses the same accordingly by the testimony of
his mind, he undoubtedly at the length shall train others to the hatred and
detestation of the same. How we may stir up affections in our selves.
A man may stir up affections in himself diverse ways.

First, by the dilligent consideration of the things ye are before his eyes as
namely when a man very exactly discusseth and ensercheth in his mind, all and
every point annexed to the matter it self. Which thing nevertheless cannot
be done but of him, that knows perfectly the nature and kind of the
business in hand.

Secondely, by a vehement imagination or fantasy, when a man with most
atte^tiue cogitatio^ apprehends, and depaynteth to himself the forms and
simylitudes of the things whereof he entreats, which afterward he so
fixes and setleth in his mind, as if his own private cause were in handling,
and as though he should perpetually muse upon that thing alone.

Thirdly, these things are furthered, yea, and increased also, if a man shall
attentively read and peruse some one place (especially) in the sacred
Scriptures, wherein the affections are judged to be most cunningely and
artificially moved: in which it shall be convenient so long time to stay, as
the mind may fully conceive those things that agree with the purpose. After
which sort certain Emperors be reported (and among these also Alexander of
Macedony) as often as they intended to join battle with their enemies, to
have enflamed themselves by the readinge of certain verses, wherein some
horrible conflicte committed, was of some Poet described and set forth.
Fourthly, in case thou desire earnestely to be moved and affected thy self,
it is requisite that thou labor to obtain that of God, (who turns and
enforces the hearts of men at his pleasure) and say with the Plalmist: Psalm.
119.
Inclyne my heart O God unto thy testimonies.

And herevppon is now opened unto us also the second mean whereby a man may
mou ye minds of his hearers. II. Mean.
For it behooves him in the beginning of his Sermon to pray unto God with
fervent prayer, yt it would please him by his holy spirit so to frame and
direct the hearts of all men, that they may both easily perceive those things
that are spoken of the truth, and also by all means embrace and accomplish
the same.

Full well said Augustine, that all the preachinge of the verity profits a
man nothing at all, De ciuita. de^. Lib. 15. Cap. 6 III.
unless God by his interior grace, govern and work in the heart.

Thirdely, it cannot be dissembled, but that the moderate pronunciation of a
lively voice together with a decent and comely gesture of the speaker, does
add great force and importance to the mouinge of affections.

Which thing to be true the very Gentiles also themselves do testify.

Demosthenes, being oftentimes demanded what the chief and principal point
was in the wholle kind of well speakinge, would always make answer that it
was gesture and ponunciation.

Again Aeschines his adversary affirmed; that the oration of Demosthenes which
he had with great grace rehearsed, would deserve incomparable admiration with
the hearers, in case it might fortune them to hear Demosthenes himself but
pronouncing his own words. So far forth is one and the self same. Oration
(by diverse men, pronounced) perceived to be one while of more, an other while
of less power and strength.

Fourthly, IIII
most effectually of all do they move ye minds of men, to whom is given of
God that virtue or power of spirit in Teaching, which we said, in the second
Chapter of this present Book, to be most requisite and necessary to every
Preacher. For all men must confess that the power of mouinge affections, does
not in such wise consist in exquisite terms, exact of speech and apt
pronounciatio^, but that a much greater dignity, brightness, yea, and majesty
does rest in this manner of speakinge, wherein we see some men to excel and
shine before others. For we know by experience that some commonly speak
atogither without art, and very simply and plainly, and yet in the mean time
do draw their hearers whithersoeuer they list. etc.

And herevppon it comes to pass, that in Thappostles speakinge so simpely
and plainly, (I had almost said also rudely and disordredly) is so often
times commended their wonderful power in speaking and teaching, whereby all the
most learned and smooth tongued enemies of the Gospel have maruaylously from
time to time been vanquyshed and compelled to give place. Neither does this
excellent gift happen to any other, then unto those that are seriously
occupied in Gods business, which thing is the cause why the apostle so
studiously sets the same (ad oppositum) against the faculty of well
Speakinge which the Rhetoritians do challenge to themselves as their own
proper right.

My preachinge (says he) was not in the flatteringe phrases of man's
wisdom, 1. Corinthians. 2.
but in the demonstration of the spirit and of power. Again: we have not
received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of God, to the
intent we may know those things that be given us of Christ, which also we
speak, not in words taught by man's wisdom, but such as we are learned by
the holy Ghost. V.
Fifthly, the matter themselves (many times) whereof entreatie is made, be of
great weight and force to the stirring up of the motions of minds. For there
happen some things of such a nature, that the narration thereof (though it be
rude and homely) do most swiftely and deeply sincke into the hearts of ye
hearers, Genesis 43.44.45
and that do very greatly move and delight the same.

We may take, for examples sake, the narration of Joseph acknowledgeing his
brethrne, when he held the chief government of the common wealth of
AEgipte: which who (I pray you) except, he be of flynt can reed without
weeping? Grigory Nazianzene in his first oration touching the reconcilement of
the Monks, affirms that he never read the Threnes of the Prophet Jeremy,
without shedding of tears. 2. Samuel. 18.
Very short but yet very vehement and lamentable is the complaynt of David
bewailing ye death of his son Absolo^. To these may be adjoined certain Sermons
pronounced by Christ a litel before his death Sixthly, Joan. 14.15.
to ye same effect are ordained certain places artificial, VI.
whereof we may perceive not a few to be taken out of the rules of the
Rhetoritians, but many more also out of Divinity it self, and out of the
sacred scriptures. What these places be and to the moving of what affections
every one do serve, it shall not be a lost labor briefly to declare.

Therefore, Places apt to provoke grief and indignation for offeces committed.
if the Preacher at any time be desirous to bring to pass in his Sermon, that
men utterly desperate and past hope (in a manner) of recovery thould become
careful of atteyning unto eternal salvation, he may borrowe certain reasons
and arguments out of these places that follow.

1 Of the honesty of the cause. For it were a vere fylthy and dishonest thing
to persist in that kind of life, of which all good men would be ashamed.

2 Of the lothsomnesse and greatness of sins. Either of which is to be
learned out of the law of God.

3 Of the knowledge of man's fragilitie.

What is this life but a vapor suddenly vanishing a way? why therefore do we
not speedely frame our selves to the amendment of life?

4 Of the miseries as well external as internal which being subject to the
crimes of this life, are adjoined thereunto. A great misery it is to live in
contempt, and perpetual vexation of mind.

5 Of the harms that accompany for the most part the fylthynesse of this life:
as loss of good name and estimation, loss and consumption of goods, to be
cast down from the degree and estate of honor, etc.

Add also hereunto the evils that shall follow after this life.

6 Of innumerable benefits which shall happen through the purposing of a better
life. Where it behooves us to remember the promises of God.

7 Of the necessity of the matter. Except we repent, we are utterly undone,
and shall do nothing else then heap more sins upon more. And may so many
thretninges of God him self set forth in the Scriptures nothing move us at
all?

8 Of the easynesse of the matter. God planteth in the minds of all men a
certain study and desire of health. The same at all times inuiteth, allureth,
draws us, and lays open unto us a most easy entrance unto salvation. What
need many words? As well these places, as also many other besides, may be
observed in the Sermons of Christ, the prophets and Apostles, touching
repentance and amendment of life. Peter in his first Sermon that he made
Act. 2. using some certain places of this kind, does by and by so move the
hearers, that they forthwith were pricked in their hearts, and very desyrously
required to know what they might do to obtain salvation.

Moreover ye Preacher shall use partly these same, partly also some other
places, if at any time he endeavors to move his hearers unto sorrow or
indignation for their offenses committed; or unto hatred and detessation, not
of wretched and miserable men (as the Orators are accustomed to do) but of
sins and of the devil continually without ceasing provoking us to evil.

For truly Divinity teaches us ye even our enemies also are to be helped
with all manner duties of Godliness, and Christ wills us to pray unto God
the father for the health and salvation of our adversaries.

Furthermore we have observed among the Divine writers, II. Places apt to
procure hatred of any vice.
to the stirryng up of hatred and detestation of any one or more vices, these
places followynge as fyt to be used:

1 Of the authorytie and diligence of these men that before us labored by all
means to extirpate and root out those vices out of the company of the
faithful.

2 Of the greatness of the same vices, as namelye that they are not common,
that they be strange, seldom heard off, etc.

3 Of the quality of the persons yt be infected with those nices.

4 Of the very shape, matter, and other circumstaumces of ye same vices, which
declare their filthynesse and indignity.

5 Of that, yt even by the secret instinct of nature alone al men ought to
abhor and abstain from them.

6 Likewise sins are compared with sins, and those that be touched, are
showed to be far more grievous then all the residew.

7 Of the greatness of the evils, that be already spronge out of the sins
present, and yt may afterward redounde to potterytie. Places out of Divinity
serving to the same effect.
And these places verily may be taken as specifyed of the Orators: but out of
Divinity are deryued grounds of greater weight and importance, as:

8 Of that, that we ought not to be so filthy and vile, as that we should
submit our minds and bodies to our enemy the Devil to serve his wicked and
diabolical suggestions.

9 Of that, yt we incur the crime of disloyalty, yea and of high treason
also, if we reuolte from the tents of our savior Christ unto Beliall.

10 of that, yt it is a great ingratitude, and yt more is an extreme cruelty
to crucify Christ a fresh through our sins, and to despise his blood wherewith
he has once washed and sanctified us.

11 Of that, yt by defylynge our selves with sin, we grieve the holy ghost, and
do slander the holy angels our keepers, yea and the universal church of God.

12 Of ye, that by the grace of God assisting us, we may be able to refist the
temptor and traitor satan, tame our flesh, abandon evil thoughts, etc.

13 Of that, yt if we harken unto the Devil, all the fault shall be imputed to
us, and unto our iniquity, neither shall it be lawful to pretend any excuse
at all, but even we our selves shall bes punished for those enormities, which
by the provocation of the devil we commit.

14 Of the pains yt are threatened unto sinners, and the same not only
temporal, but, also eternal, to ye avoiding and eschewing whereof, there is no
way for us to be found except we repenting implore the aid of Christ.

Sometimes occasion is offered unto the preacher, To the stirring up of love.
to sti^ up his audients unto love, that is to say, unto charytie or
benevolence. Which truly then chiefly comes to pass, when as entrety is
made of some notable virtue, or when the excellent deed of some Patryarke,
Prophet, Apostle, or of any other man of worthy memory, is celebrated and
solempnised.

For here it is convenient to provoke the minds of men, and (so farforth as
may be) to inflame them to love and embrace so excellent and rare a virtue, and
to the fervent study of imitating so notable a deed.

To the furtheraunce therefore of this matter much auaylable will be the
reasons taken out of the places of things to be desired and things to be
eschewed, to wit: 1 Of the honestye. Of the thing. 2 Of the godliness. Of
the thing. 3 Of the religiousnesse. Of the thing. 4 Of the gloryousnesse. Of
the thing. 5 Of the easynesse. Of the thing. 6 Of the necessity. Of the
thing.


All which things may briefly be confirmed and illustrated by reasons,
sentences, examples, similitudes, deryued out of the treasury of the sacred
scriptures, Item: 7 Of the causes of things. 8 Of the circumstaunces. 9 Of the
signs, or accidents, as well 10 Antecedent, and 11 Adjoined to the matter it
self, as also 12 Conssquent, etc.


Which kind of places verily and those deduced out of Divinity; we see the
holy Prophets to use, as often as they exhort unto righteousness, unto modesty,
unto humility, unto the confession of the known truth, unto the diligence
observation of the true worshippinge of God. Neither does any thing what
soever appertinent to this kind of business, less notably appear in those
Sermons of Chrysostom, in which he endeavors to train men unto patience,
sobryetie, hospitalytie, liberality toward the poor, and other such like
virtues.

Now to cause yt fear of gods judgment to be imprinted in the minds of the
hearers, will be a help and furtheraunce proofs drawn forth.

1 Of the the greatness of our sins, which it behooves to be amplyfyed out
of the law, by and through all the circumstaunces thereof.

2 Of our own unworthiness, and proper offense.

3 Of our own imbecilitie and weakness.

We that are void and destitute of all kind of virtues, what shall we object
against the iudement of God?

4 Of that, that it is necessary the threatninges of God thould be accomplished
without any exception.

5 Of the grieuousnes of the pains that are euidentley mentioned and set forth
in the threatenings of God.

6 Of that, that God executes those things indifferentlye, whereby both his
justice becomes famous, and his mercy also apparaunt.

7 Of the examples of those men, who^ we know to have been sharply punished of
God for their sins.

8 Of that, that God, if he punishes not by and by, and if not in this life:
yet after a short time, or at least after this life, he repayeth due penalties
according to the deserts.

9 Of that, that no evasion of man's wisdom or industrye will serve to escape
and wind out of Gods judgment.

It is no difficult matter to accord also some other places, unto these
arguments, touched before in the premises. The controlling Sermons of the
Prophets and Apostles, Obiurgatory Sermons.
or of Chrysostom and other holy fathers do throughlye abound in this kind.
Places to procure hope of mercy.


Further to the procurement of hope and desire of mercy do conduce a number of
places accustomed to be used in consolations, I
but especially these:

2 Of the confession of sins before God.

3 Of our humilytie or mortification.

4 Of the continual imploration of Gods aid. God despises not the prayers of
them that humble themselves, and despair of their own strength.

5 Of the power of the spirit assistinge us in our prayers.

6 Of the promises of God.

7 Of the natural goodness of God that is the promiser, whereby he will both
be prayed unto, and also graciousely grant our peticions.

8 Of that, that God delights to stand by his word and promise, and will
deceive no man.

9 Of the intercession of Christ our mediator.

10 Of the effect of the death, and all the merits of Christ.

11 Of that, that our father knows our necessities, yea even before the ask.

12 Of our election, vocation, justification.

13 Of that, that God never utterly forsakes those that be his, but with
fatherly compassion helps them before they fall into any extreme danger.

To the furtheraunce also hereof, let the Sermons consolatory or comfortatiue
be read disposed to the fortifiynge and erecting of minds in the conflicts of
temptations, and (no doubt) a much more plentiful matter will offer it self
in them, then can of us in few words be comprised.

Lastly if thou intendest to provoke the minds of men unto pity and
compassion, Places to move men to co^passi^on.
which then truly is expedyent to be done, when the people is to be admonished
and required, to be helpful to the poor and needye, to succor them that are
afflicted with sickness, shypwracke, casualtie of fire, rage of waters, war,
or such like calamity, to labor with all dilygence to reduce those that err,
or those that are almost fallen into desperation, into the right way again, or
to pray unto God for their health and safety, thou shall conveniently gather
some reasons of these places followynge.

1 Of the age: as, if it be a child, or an old man that is afflicted.

2 Of the sex.

3 Of the condition or impotencye of the party: as, if it be a poor man, if
it be a widow, orphan, etc.

4 Of the innocence of life. Of him that has hurt no man, nor shamefully and
prodigally consumed his substance, we sooner take pity and compassion.

5 Of the former estate: happy, prosperous, etc.

6 Of the kind of the calamity.

7 Of the greatness thereof.

8 Of the comparison of the present evil with other discommodities.

9 Of the place, time, instrument, manner, and other circumstaunces.

10 Of the power and cruelty of those that inferred the injury.

11 Of the providence of God disposing all things wisely and to the best,
which also would have present examples of calamities to be extant for our
sakes, to the end a trial might be had how we ought to behave our selves in
the afflictions of other men, and that we might have occasion to exercise the
duties of Charytie toward the oppressed

12 Of the dignity of him that is distressed, as namely that he is our
brother, pertaker of the same spiritual regen^ration with us, and redeemed
with the self same blood of Christ.

13 Also of that, that our brother which is oppressed does not suffer only for
his own offenses, but rather for the example of others: as Christ interprets
the casualtye of those men that were slain by the fall of the Tower in Siloe.

14 Of the fear of the like evils hanginge over our heads. For the
punishments which we see inflicted unto others, we ought to know that the same
also are prepared for us at all times by the good will and just iudgmente of
God.

15 Likewise of the precepts of God, whereby we are commanded to be merciful
unto other.

16 Of the promises that are set forth unto those that exercise the deeds of
mercy.

17 Of the threatninges both of temporal and eternal pains, which do hang
over as well the body as the soul of those that are not touched with
compassion toward others.

18 Of the auoydyinge and contemninge of the sleightes of our spiritual
enemies the flesh, the world, the devil, that call us away from well doing,
and continually seek to draw us into danger, misery, and thraldom. But be
it sufficient to have rehearced these places in order, which do minister
occasion whereby also other fit and convenient places may be excogitate.

Moreover sometime are published the most ample benefits purchassed by Christ:
How he benifits of christ are to be published and declared.
very well therefore shall the Preacher with all force of words, and
couragiousnes of mind extimulate his hearers, to wheigh exactely ye greatenes
of Christ's benefits, I
to the intent, that by their ame^dement of life, II
and by their good and godly conversation hereafter they may endeavor to show
themselves thankful for the same. In this behalf therefore he shall not
without good cause bestow great labor and diligence.

But as we said before, Places of moving of affections where, and in what
order they are most fitly to be taken.
like as these things are properly pertaininge to Divinity, even so the
places applied to the mouinge of affections, can not more conuenintly be
collected out of any other faculty (those only excepted which we see to be
contained among the rules of the Rhetoricians) then out of Divinity it self.
Howebeit to stand longer upon these points, and to occupy the time in
repeating and discoursing of these and such like places, would be but a
superfluous labor.

We seem to have performed that which to our duty appertains, in as much as
we have (after a sort) showed away, wherein they that begin at any time to
trace, shall easily enure themselves to draw out of the fountaynes of
Divinity places apt for every kind of argument. For Divinity is very
rich, and ministers most plentifully and liberally to every one that seeks,
all kind of furniture requisite to the faculty of well speakinge.

But as touching figures which serve to the moving of affections, Figures.
it is not neeedfull yt we should ad any thing further then ye Orators have
done. For such as they have taught to be profitable for this purpose, all
those shall ye Preacher at his liberty appropriate to his own oration.

Wherefore repetition, heapinge of matter, increaseme^t, A heap of figures.
contention, exclamation, interrogation, subjection, apostrophe, communication,
dubitation, permission, silence, hyperbole, effiction, imagination,
hypotyposis, and other figures of the same kind do take place beeinge with
judgment applied.

Albet oftetymes also the Preacher settinge a side all art and cunninge and
utterly excluding all furniture and preparation does vehemently move and
enclyne: When namely the oracles of God, the testimonies of the Prophets, the
precepts, promyses, comminations of God himself, the interpretations of the
holy Prophets, by reason of their certeynty, dignity, and gravity, are
perceived to be of so great weight and importance, especially if a certain
comely and grave manner of elocution be adjoined thereunto, that they may
eftesoones draw yea, and compel also even those men that are stiff and rude,
unto mercy, indignation, hatred, fear, hope, love, study and disire of
imitation.

For it behooves that to be true which the Lord himself says by the Prophet
Jeremy: namely that his word is as it were a fire, Jeremy. 23.
and like unto a hammer that breaks in sunder the hard stone.

Also that which the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews affirms: Heb. 4.
The word of GOD is very quick and mighty in operation, and sharper then any
two edged sword, and enters through, even to the dividing a sonder of the
soul and the spirit, and of the joints and the marye, and is a discerner of
the thoughts, and of the intentes of the heart.

In which behalf truly, that the Preacher is in better case then the Orator,
all men must needs confess.

Furthermore, where the Orators be of opinion that it is not good to stick
long, Not good to carry long in vehement affections.
especially in the affections that are over vehemente, in that point we also
assente unto them: seeinge the things that are over vehement can in no wise
be of any long contynuau^ce. But as for the gentiller sort of affections,
Nullum viole^cum perpetuu^, Phisicum dogma.
to disperse them through every part of the Sermon, it is very seemly and
profitable for the Oration ye always creeps low by the ground and never at
any time mounteth up a lofte or waxes hot, Myld affections every vvher to be
meinte.
it is very like that such a one will bring tediousnes and be disliked of the
hearers.

Such as be luke warm in the actions of piety, Apoc. 1.
the Lord hates, and promises ye he will spewe the^ out of his mouth: what
shall we then judge of their Sermons, that make others luke warm also?

Wherefore I might worthily add hereunto examples wherein affections are
moved, Examples.
out of the Prophets and Apostles, and likewise out of the holy fathers, I
might also explane some things perticulerly by themselves, making a perfect
demonstration of the whole art: but I fear lest my discourse thould exceed
her prescribed compass. Howbeit some points I will show briefly by ye way. To
the care of obteininge salvation Esaias soliciteth Cap. 23. Ezechiell Cap. 6.16
18. Also Peter in he 2. and. 3. of the Acts: where he first of all proves
that they ought to have acknowledged Christ to be very God, and forthwith
imbraydeth the^ with their insatiable cruelty, which they practiced toward
the same Christ. Love or benevolence the Apostle Paul vehemently exciteth.
Acts 20. and 1 Thessalonians. 2. Of which Sermons mention is made above, where we
entreated of the spirit or power in teachinge. The fear of gods judgment.
Esaias, stricketh into ye minds of his hearers Cap. 1. likewise where he
describes the miserable desolation of the province of Judah, saying: Every
head is pierced with pensiveness, etc. Also, where he desirous to exaggerate
their sins as the causes of the desolation, calls the princes of the Jews,
the princes of Sodom, and the people the people of Emor, etc. Of the same
kind of Sermons there be certain parts, Cap. 3.10.13. Also Heb. 3. and. 4.
To the hope of mercy Esaias induces, and the rest of the prophets: in which
places after sharp controlmentes, they descend to co^solations, and do
prophesy and promise remission of sins to be obtained through Christ. Notable
is that Sermon touching ye deliverance of the Church by Christ, and that
through the free mercy of God. Cap. 52.53. In like manner of the effects of
iustifycation to be received after this life, Rom 8. For we suffer together
with him (says he) that we may together with him also be glorified, and so
forth to the end of the Chapter.

Among the Sermons of Chrysostom thou shall find very few or none, The
Sermons of Crisostom, what.
wherein he handeleth any one common place, and either provoke unto virtue,
or disswadeth and deterreth from vice, or else entreats of some business
offced by occasion of time, but that in them he vehemently moves affections:
and that truly one while, by ye weight and dignity of the things themselves,
an other while, by his singular eloquence, and grace in speaking, wherein he
surmounteth a great number of his order and calling. Read inespecially the
20. homily of his fifte Tome, touching the return of Bishop Flauianus, who was
sent forth to pacify the Emperor: where he introduces an ancient and
reverend Bishop, with incredible endeavor and sweetness of speech, turning ye
mind of the wrathful prince unto mercy and compassion, Read also in ye same
Tome, the Sermon which he made, when co^sultation was had touching his
banishment: a Sermon in deed very brief, but to ye stirring up of love and
affection, both in matter and words excellently well furnished and appointed.

Finally let ye Sermons be read entitled, against ye cursed. and detestable
custom of swearing and perjury, against ire, against envy, backbitinge,
detraction, ryotte, covetousness, and other of the same kind.

And hitherto as touching those things, which are common to all kinds of
Sermons, Conclusion of the first book.
and may be taken as general Rules and precepts of the whole faculty of
Preachinge: It remains that we compendiously declare, what points are
proper to every kind, that is to say, how and by what means it may be
discerned unto what kind every Sermon is to be referred, Transition to the
latter book, with a brief declaration of the whole tractation.
then, what special places of arguments ought to be in a readiness to the
apt preparation of Confirmations, again, what Cantions are to be observed in
every of the kinds for the avoiding of inconveniences, and whatsoever else is
semblable hereunto.

FINIS.
Of framing of Divine Sermons or popular interpretation of the Scriptures, the
Second Book.
How and by what means a man may perceive unto what kind of Sermon, every
sacred Sermon ought to be referred. Cap. I.
LIke as those men that intend to make any sumptuous buyldinge, or to pitche
their Tents, before all things are very circumspect, where they may have a
fit and convenient place for their purpose, and of this one thing alone are
careful above measure, as being certainly persuaded, if they here chance to
err and go amiss, that it will be unprofitable whatsoever they shall
afterward take in hand: Even so it stands him greatly upon that has
determined to Preach in thassemblye of Christian people, eftesones to observe
unto what kind of Sermon, the matter which he will chose to entreat off, ought
to be referred: for unless he be assured at the beginning touching the kind
of his Sermon, he shall never atteyne to an apt and perfect order of invention
and disposition of his arguments, but of necessitye they will appear confused,
inconvenient, unordered, and (as it is said in ye proverb) Loose shreddes, and
sand without mortar, whatsoeur shall be heaped together. Neither truly can any
man fruitfully speak of any matter unto others, neither shall the hearers
perceive what his meaning is, except he first of all prefixe to himself a
certain scope, acording to the which al his reasons may be directed. That the
case stands thus (least we should stay any longer herein) experience it
self does teach. Therefore, he that deuiseth to entreat of religion to the
people, let this be his first care, even to find out the kind of his sermon
following. That is brought to pass in this wise.

If thou take in hand any part of the sacred Scripture to expound, it is
verilye thy duty, to bestow sometime in readinge and perusing it over oftener
then once or twice, attentively weighing and considering every part and
parsell thereof, with all the causes and circumstances of the same. Then thou
shall dilligently recount and gather with thy self, what the authors meaning
is in the whole, and so far forth as may be, thou shalt in a brief, sentence
comprise the sum and effect thereof. This sentence shall be the state of the
whole Sermon. Again, when thou have once expressed the state, it is an easy
matter to be seen, whither in it be commended any true doctine, or any false
doctrine confuted, whither men be excited to the doing of good actions, or
reproved for their evil deeds, to be short, whither there be any thing
therein prepared for consolation.

Therefore, when thou percey^est true doctrine to be established, thou shalt
pronounce the Sermon to be of the kind Didascalick: when any false doctrine
is refelled, thou shall affirm it to perteyne to the kind Redargutiue. But if
men be induced to those things that do set forth sanctimony of life, and
integrity of manners, the Sermon shall then be of the kind Instructiue: If
the corrupt state of life be found fault with and condemned, it shabe reduced
to the kind Correctiue. Again if in the state it self, there happen to be
found matter of consolation, the Sermon may be avouched to be instituted in
the kind comfortatiue or Consolatory.

Howbeit, to collect the state of an entire book of scripture, The state of an
entier book, hard to be found.
it is a thing very difficulte, seeinge few or none are to be found, whereof
the sum may be reduced in one sentence

The state of the book which is entitled Ecclesiastes, is: that the
sovereign felicity is the conjunction with God, and the perpetual fruition
of the dietie. The state of the Songs of Solomon, Saint Paul has expressed,
as it appears Ephesians. 5. where he says: that Christ has loved his Church, and
that he has given himself for it to the intent he might sanctify the same.

The state of the evangelical history by him written Ihon himself declares
in his own sense Cap. 20. namely that Jesus is Christ the son of God, by
whom the believers obtain everlasting life.

Now every man may easily judge that these three states of entier books are to
be referred to the kind didascalick, as those that conteyne the chief
principles of Christian religion.

But when a part of any one book is explayned, it is of no great difficulty,
The state of a part of a book.
to find out the state. For one while, by consideringe the order of the
arguments consequently followinge one an other, and tendinge to one and the
same scope, it is soon, and easily enough to be picked out: other whiles
again, the divine writers themselves do in apt and perspicuous words set
forth the same. Steven, Act. 7. has a Sermon very sharp and vehement, the
state whereof is: That true relygion does not consist in the Temple or
ceremonies, but in faith to God ward, and his son Jesus Christ.

For to this scope do concur as well those things that were spoken of the
accusers of Saint Steven, as also the acts which he calls to memory, in
all that time, wherein there was no Temple among the Jews consecrate unto GOD,
likewise the prophesies of Moses touching the cumminge of Christ, also the
words added by him, lastly concerning the same matter.

It appears therefore evidently that the holy Sermon of Steven is of the
kind redargutiue, inasmuch as ye false persuasion of the sanctity of
Jerusalem and the temple, is subverted theirein.

Where Paul the Apostle exhorts the Bishops or elders, Act. 10.
to provide for themselves and the flock, lest any hurt or detriment should
be ministered on the sodeyne by false Teachers, the discourse of his Oration
does not obscurely demonstrate, that his wholle Sermon is of the kind
instructiue. In that part of the Epistle to the Romans whih consists in
the 9.10. and 11. Chapiters, how it is affirmed of the Apostle, that the Jews
ought, by the justice of GOD to be rejected, and the Gintiles to be called by
gods mercy to the knowledge of ye truth, the arguments in due order placed do
more apparently signify, then that it may be dissembled. Therefore we conclude
ye all that tractation also is of the kind didascalick.

Moreover those men that render the state of their Oration themselves, The
state of the Oration where it is to be rendered, Romans 1.
do it sometimes in the beginning, sometimes in the later end.

Examples of the state rendered in the entry of ye disputation are these: The
Gospel is the power of God to salvation to every one that believes. The
righteousness of God by it is revealed from faith to faith.

The same state or general proposition is repeated more apparauntly cap. 3. we
suppose (says he) that man is justified by faith with out the works of the
law. Therefore is that state of the kind didascalick. Moses, Deuteronomy.
11. admonishes all the Israelites in the beginning, to obey the
commandments of God with their whole heart which likewise he inculketh in ye
end: wherefore all that Sermon is of the kind Institutiue, or instructiue.
Esaias. Cap. 40. begins in this sort: Comfort, O ye prophets, O comfort
my people, and in the words followinge each one makes to consolation. By
means whereof it appears sufficiently that his Sermon there is instituted in
the kind consolatory.

Again, Peter. Act. 10. being in the house of Cornelius, adds to the state
of his Sermon in the very end, saying: Whosoever believes in the name of
Jesus, shall receive (through him) remission of his sins.

In like manner S. Paul in the later end of his Sermon: Act. 13.
By him (says he) is declared unto you forgiveness of sins, from the which ye
could not be justified by the law of Moses. It is requisite, therefore,
that we reduce these two Sermons to the kind didascalik.

Again the same S. Paul reasoninge of them that were fallen a sleep in
Christ, in ye beginning of the same place, says, Be not sorrowful: and in the
end he adds, Comfort your selves one an other with these words. ^1 Thessalonians.
4.
Who therefore perceyueth not that part to be contained in the kind
Consolatory? And certes if any man be determined to expound in his Sermon some
certain place or sentence out of the scriptures, he, after his owner
arbitrament; choseth out such a one as he supposes, to be most meet and
convenient for his purpose, for which cause it is very necessary, that ye state
of his Sermon be known unto him, before he takes ye same place in hand. The
like judgment is worthily to be taken of those men yt are prepared to speak,
of business offered by occasion, or of a Theme either simple or compound. For in
as much as it behooves the^ to prefixe to themselves a certain state or
general proposition, truly it can not be chosen but that they must be very
well instructed as touching the kind of Sermon, unto which their dicourse
followinge, does apperteyne. But these things, touching the manner of finding
out the kind, whereunto all sacred sermons are ref^rred^ we suppose to be
sufficient.

That there ought in every kind of Sermon, certain things to be observed as
proper to the same kind: and first, how that may be accomplished in the
kind didascalick or doctrinall. cap. II.
IN our former Book entreating of all and singular the parts of divine
sermons, we have showed certain brief and ordynary forms of exhordiums,
propositions, divisions, and conclusions: But when we were come to
confirmation, we admonisshed that there was no small diversity to be seen in
this, and no little study and dilygence required to the apt and convenient
pertractation thereof.

That thing how true it is, it is time that I declare, Confirmatio^s Places of
Invention, and Ca^tions, ought to be diverse according to the variety of the
Kinds.
and that by discoursing orderly through all the kinds of Sermons. For truly
as there is great difference of the things, which are handled in every kind: so
is it very requisyte and needful that diverse and sundry kinds of furniture
be provided. For who sees not the great variaunce and contraryetie that is
betwixt a true opinion and a false opinion?

Again what diversity there is, in defending the one and impugning the other?
Furthermore, great is the difference between virtue and vice, and in stirring
up to the one and dissuading from the other. Moreover, of the perils which
continually oppress us and on every side beset us, wonderful is the variety.

Whosoever therefore is endued but with a mean judgment, perceyueth that in
all these things confyrmations ^ught diversely to be framed, and manifold
places of invention, together with sundry and distinct ca^tions to be sought
for. Wherefore this diversity of co^firmatio^s we will first take in hand to
declare in the kind didascalick: in which if we shall bestow somewhat the more
diligence, it shall be lawful for us to use fewer words hereafter in the
other kinds.

Three things, Three things to be observed in confirmation of the kind
didascalick.
therefore, are prudently to be considered of him that will preach and compose
his Sermon in the kind didascalick, so soon as (having ended the exordium)
he shall come to the pithe and effect of the matter

I First he shall mark, whether it be expedient that a certain form of
confirmation be used, or altogether committed.

II Secondlye, it is necessary that he have at hand places of inuencion
congruent and correspondent to this kind, by the direction whereof he shall
excogitate and utter those things, that may holsomelye be put forth to the
multitude.

III Thirdly, he shall have in a readiness certain cautions, wherewith being
furthered, he shall provide and foresee, lest any thing rashly, vnsauourily,
friuolously, lest any thing vain, superstuous, defective, or redundant, do
escape him in the sacred assembly. Of these three points so far forth as they
are peculiar to the Didascalick kind, we will orderly entreat.

It is not without cause, I. He that will speak unto the people, when he shall
use confirmation and when not.
that we affirm it expedyent unto him that will speak to the people, to
delibrate whether confirmation ought to be instituted, or no. For often times
all the order of confyrming is omitted, and the preacher can in no case use the
fame, though he would never so feine. For when it stands him upon simply to
interpret the text of the holy Scriptures as it lies, he is compelled to
follow ye order in his enarration, and to vsurp such kind of arguments and
proofs, again, to examine those common places, which and what manner, as well
the words as the matters placed in the text do apparauntly minister. And it
were a great offense to pass over those reasons and common places undiscussed,
which are openly touched in the scriptures read before. Hereunto is added that
this same faithful explanation of the scriptures, is not always conueighed a
like after one rate, in the company of Christian hearers.

For sometimes, many and diverse common places are noted in the scripture
recited, containing very godly and profitable matter, but amongst them all
only a few supposed to be most fruitful, are with as great industrye as may
be, expounded.

Sometime the whole explanation of Scripture, is aptly distributed into two or
three chapters, or parts, or common places (it makes no great matter how we
term them). Yea now and then also thou may see the whole divine redynge,
with all the parts thereof, to be directed to a more ample explication of one
only common place.

Moreover some whiles all and every member of ye scripture is briefly and
precisely run over, to the intent afterward some one common place by it self,
may more franckly and abundantlye be declared.

Which things whilst they are in this wise accomplished, certes there is no
kind of thing here that may seem to bear the form or countenance of a
just confirmation.

Again on the other side, there is special consideration where lawful
confirmation may seasonably be admitted. For whenever any one place or
sentence out of the scriptures is openly explaned, or a man undertakes to
handle a Theme simple or compound, then worthily is just confirmation to be
adorned, furnished with all kind of preparation, and withal, are to be heaped
together arguments deduced out of those places of Invention which we see to be
attributed to the kind didascalick.

And (that I may speak briefly) if the matter so requires that a Book of
Scripture, or any part thereof be opened to the people, there is no place left
unto confirmation: but if a place or sentence taken out of the scriptures, or a
Theme simple or compounde, and peradventure choice be made of some common
place, or affairs, incydent by occasion of time to be entreated off, then
there is no let but that a just Confirmation may be used.

Let us now proceed to speak of the places of Invention.

Whenever it shall be thought good to handle a divine Sermon, II What places
are to be used.
certain places ought always to be in a retines, by the order and direction
whereof thou may find out and (as it were) draw out of couerte into light
as well the things that are convenient to the explycation and illustratinge of
thy purpose, as also those things that are known to be auayleable to the
edification of the hearers. All the places which we use in this behalf, A
particion of places.
it is requisite that we divide into two forms or orders, far otherwise
truly then the Logicians or Philosophers have been accustomed.

The first form compriseth those that admonyshe and show unto us, I Form.
how and after what sort we may gather out of the Scriptures which we have
read the chief common places touching all the doctrine of pietye, of faith,
and touching the duties of charytye and hope.

II. The later form conteyneth those places of Invention out of which are
deryued apt arguments to discribe and set forth the nature and forte of that
thing, of which we purpose to entreat.

The first form shows plainly Theological or divine places, and such as
are usurped in no other disciplynes: the last comprehends places
Philosophical, albeit some also Theological.

Of the former order are accounted five, that is to say: Places of the former
order.
I Doctrine. II Redargution. III Institution. IIII Correction. V Consolation.


Which places, whence we have taken them, Whence these places are taken, and
when we may rightly use them.
and how it behooves us to use them arighte unto the end which we talk off,
it is easy to be known by the words of the Apostle. 2. Timoth. 3. and Romans
15.

All scripture (says he) is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to
doctrine, to reprove, to correction, to instruction which is in righteousness,
that the man of God may be perfect, instructed unto all good works. And, what
soever things have been written before time, were written for our learning, that
we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures, might have hope.

Like as therefore we may briefly learn out of these words, how and by what
means the kinds of divine sermons ought conveniently to be divided, even so
the Apostle in the same words plainly shows how and after what sort we may
pick not out of ye scriptures which we shall fortune to read fruitful and
plentious matter of speaking, whereby faith, hope, love, and all the duties of
sincere godliness may among true christian hearers be advanced and promoted.
Which thing to the intent, all men may the more easily understand, I will not
let somewhat more exactly to speak of every of them in order.

I Doctrine which compriseth an assertion and comprobation of true opinions,
admonishes us that we should diligently ensearche, whether in the words of
Scripture which we have in hand, any thing be either openly affirmed or
covertly signified that ought to be referred to some article (as they term
it) of faith, or to a principle of christian religion.

For it can not be, but that, when we have some space together stirred up the
powers of our mind in musing and consideringe of things, some such matter will
come to remembrance, if in the mean time we bear about fixed in our memory
all the articles of faith, or the principal points and common places of
christian doctrine.

And it is no strange matter, in one and the self same sentence to find
things couched and bestowed that do belong to many and diverse common places of
chirstian religion.

Where if (to be short) we would go about to confirm the sentence there noted
and perceived with one or two testiemonies of Scripture, it is incredible how
trimly the matter would go forward, in as much as our oration should become
not only more clear and lightsome, but also more rich and plenteous.

II Redargution ministers unto our minds how that the confutation of false
assertions is dilligentlye to be sought out. For so much is signified by the
name of Redargution.

He that will go about to prepare redargution, shall first seriously
consider, whether the very words of Scripture simply taken do apparauntly
confute and false opinion or no. Where if it be so in deed, then is
redargution plain of it self, neither is it needful to proceed any further
for the serching out thereof.

But if there be extant no open redargution, but rather a doctrine and
assertion of some true opinion, it behooves thee to recou^t studiously with thy
self, whether in these days or in times past any heretics, or philosophers,
or wise men of this world, have at any time mayntayned the contrary sentence.

Such a sentence false and contrary being found, it is to be deemed that the
same is confuted with those very words of Scripture, with which the true
assertion was confirmed. For it is out of al question, yt, a true sentence or
opinion being offered, whatsoever is inferred repugnaunte thereunto, is to be
counted among false and erroneous opinions.

By means whereof it comes to pass, that every false sentence is by the same
reason impugned and subverted, by which the true was before defended and
mayntayned. As for example: Romans ^. it is said, that through sy^n^ ^ame death.
In these words is contained a true sentence namelye, touching the effect of
sin. And certes very aptly is added eftsoons a redargution, where a man out
of them gathers and reasons, their opinion to be false and untrue which
following that subtle serpent go about to persuade men, that death is in no
wise to be feared by reason of sin, and by that means, do blind the
miserable minds of men, and thruste them headlonge into eternal destruction.

III Institution whereunto are reduced all places touching the good and godly
framing of life and manners, it is no very hard matter to find.

Often times the sentence which occurreth in holy scripture, comprehends a
notable exhortation unto virtue, or else shows how the life and manners of a
Christian man ought to be without all sin and offense.

The sentences, therefore, that are of themselves such, it is meet they be
accepted for holsom admonitions.

Examples not a few are to be found in the later parts of the epistles of
Saint Paul, in which the Apostle always for the most part contendeth, that
it behooves those that are once justified by faith to pass all their whole
lives in godly conversation and honesty.

That thing is witnessed in the epistle to the Romans. Cap. 12.13. etc.
Likewise in the epistle to the Galat. in part of the cap. 5. and cap. 6. the
whole, to the Ephesians. cap 4.5.6.

But where as be not such apparaunt exhortations, but happily some sentences are
declared, there may nevertheless rasely be gathered out of ye same those
things that conduce to the right institution of life.

That thing is most conveniently brought to pass, when the use of every
sentence or assertion is brought to light, so far forth as it is applied to
the common course of man's life.

The Apostle Romans. 6. teaches us this sentence, saying: We ought not to
abuse the grace of God to the lilbertie of sin. He adds a reason on the
contrary part: Because we are dead unto sin.

The proof of the same reason follows of the effect and end of Baptism. In
Baptism we renownce and dye unto sin, By and by he annexeth an exhortation
or institution derived out of the proper use of the same assertions.

Even so we also (says he) ought to walk in newness of life.

Again the Apostle confirminge the end or effect of Baptism, by a reason
taken of the efficatie of Christ's death, says, that death was utterly
vanquished of Christ, and that it has no more power over him. Which truly
ought to be taken for a principle.

Then forth with the Apostle herevppon sorteth out an institution meruaylously
to the purpose. Let not sin (says he) reign in your mortal body. To the
same effect when one has explaned the doctrine touching the will of man, and
the weakness of our own strenght, he shall we good right and this, that we are
to be instructed and admonished by that general sentence, how we ought
(acknowledging our so great infirmity) to be humble and meek, not to stand
high in our own conceytes, to attribute nothing unto our selves, to depend
wholly upon God only which governs our will and actions, and finally to
look for all good things of him alone. In which behalf, we may see some
things heaped together of the Apostle Romans 7.

These things (undoubtedly) be of great importance to the information of life
in righteousness, as every man may perceive.

IIII Correction or Reprehension is contrary to Institution, as that which
sharply controlleth ye vices and corruptions of manners. Therefore after the
collection of Instytutions, Corrections may without difficulty be excogitate.
For he that speaking of the effect and end of Babtisme, had added to a
notable institution, saying, Those that are baptized ought to walk in newness
of life: He also in very good season infers a grievous Correction, blaminge
those, namely, with a vehement and sharp Oration, which albeit they delight to
be called Christians, yet nevertheless live a life nothing aunswerable to their
most holy profession, and do so behave themselves in all their dealinges, as
though they had quight forgotten that they were once baptized into the name of
Christ.

But he that can wisely discern, unto what virtues and godly actions, what
vices are directly contrary, he will sone call to mind, how, after
institutions put forth touching any manner of cause, he may adioyne also
Corrections congruent both to the persons, time and business.

V Consolations according to the frequency and greatness of thaduersities and
discommodities that trouble us, are dilligently to be sought for of every man:
But of those inespecially that are somewhat exercised in the books of holy
Scripture, they may easily he drawn forth at all times.

And yt not only because in the^ as well se^tences, as examples do every where
offer themselves yeldinge most plentiful matter of consolations against all
calamities and misfortunes, but also for so much as they may very welbe selected
out of the assertions which a little before were declared. For why may not,
saying somewhat now is already spoken touching the effect of Baytisme by the
death of Christ (I gladly stick in ye same example) why may not (I say) a man
avouch: that miserable men are well delte withal, and that great occasion is
offered unto them to hope for all good things at the hands of GOD, when as
they behold God as well by his word, as by the sacraments by him instituted
to certify and assure them of the remission of their sins by his son Jesus
Christ? And that there is no cause why they should cast themselves hedlonge
into the whirlpoole of desperation so long as they fix their mind upon the
promysses of GOD and the couenaunte which he has made with us.

Hitherto touching the five principal Divine places of ^^^ention, whereupon
the mind ought with all enforcement and diligence to be intentiuely set,
so often as out of the Scriptures which are openly explaned, we intend to
excerpte certain common places profitable for the Church.

Seeing ye Apostle himself so evidently affyrmeth, that we ought to gather
every where out of the readinge of the Scriptures, whatsoever is auayleable to
doctrine, to reprove, to institution, to correction, to consolation: whom may
we rather follow for our author then him? And why should nto we (I mean so
many as are conuersante in the ministry) employ our wholle labors and
studyes upon this, that we may draw forth of the Scriptures these most
wholesome and profitable things? Certes this invention of common places is, as
ye would say, the ground work and foundation, whereupon the wholle frame
of all Divine Sermons does consist.

For unless thou shall in this wise note the common places according to the
diversity of the members of Scripture, thou endeuourest in vain to utter any
thing, whereout any fruit may be hoped for to redounde to the hearers.

But he that will follow this order and method of invention after the fine
places before goinge, shall never be destitute of plenteous, godly and
profitable matter of speakinge.

Verily I suppose there be some will say that this device is straung and very
difficulte. But forasmuch as we have ye Apostle Paul, the ringeleader of all
preachers as ye teacher thereof, who can worthily suspect it, or lightely
esteem of it? Moreover I dare warraunt to those that shall be bu^ meanly
furnished with the knowledge of common places perceyuinge to Christian
religyon, that it will even forthwith beecome easy, well lyked off, and
fruitful. There is no man, I am sure, will ever repent him of his pains
taken. That which is attempted to the advancement of godliness comes
always of necessity unto good success.

And we a litell after will add some examples, which shall open a way unto all
men, and make it very plain and easy, all impedimentes set a part.

Neither in this didascalik kind ^ons, The use of the places of the first
order.
but also in the other kinds of Sermons, those things that are spoken
touching these places, may conveniently be applied to all and every
explication of Scripture, like as, so often as it shall be requisite, we will
again admonish.

Now let us entreat of the places of invention apperteyninge to the second
form or orded. II Places of the later order


These declare unto us, how and after what sort we may more nearly try
and axamine the nature of every thing (of which at the least any thing in
Divine Sermons may truly be said or disc^^rs^d) and heap together proofs or
arguments meet to the accomplishement thereof.

For by them we easily learn, what every thing is, Principal Questions.
how many parts or forms be thereof, what the causes, what the offectes or
duties; what things be of alyaunce, what Contrary thereunto, as those that
plainly appear to be destinate to the explication of these questions. He that
shall diligently discuss the said questions, is supposed to have am^ly and
thoroughly atteined whatsoever is worthy to be known as touching that thing.
Which thing is the cause why the Logicians and Philosoph^^s do^ very highly
esteem them, and maruelously commend ^he^. Theen both the (...) use (...) them
to be agreeable to his treatise taken in ha^^. (...)
We will therefore rehearse them, and do nothing else then ^eherse the^: for
hint yt is desirous to know more we remit to ye maste^s and teachers of Logic^^
But (...) they profit to ye (...) and indagatio^ of divine affayr (...) at
large sufficiently enough declared in our Theological Topics. At seems good
here only to dispose them in such wise, as by the same diligence I may set
forth unto the eye, to the explication of what questions every of them may and
ought to be applied.

To the declaration of the question, what the thing is, are referred: Places
of the question, what is the matter.
I. Definition of the name, II. Definition of the thing, III. General kind,
IIII. Special kind, V. Difference, VI. Property.


To the discussion of the question, How many parts or how manyfolde the
thing is, be annexed: Places the question, how many parts, or how
manifold the thing is. Places of the question, touching the causes of the
thing. Places of the question, what be the effects or offices
VII. Division, VIII. Wholle, IX. Parts.


To the question of causes do accord: X. Matter, XI. Form, XII. Effect,
XIII. End.


He that will explane the question, what be the effects or offices of the
thing, must have regard to the: XIIII. Euentes, XV. Effects, XVI. Destinata,
XVII. Adiacentia, XVIII. Acts, XIX. Subject.


For a man to find out what be of alyaunce or aiffiniti^ to the thing, he
ought to respect, Places of the question, what be of affinity.
XX. Coniugata, XXI. Contingentia, XXII. Signa, or Signs, wherein for the most
part Contingentia do consist, XXIII. Circumstaunces, XXIIII. Pronunciata,
XXV. Similia, XXVI. Comparata.


The question, what be the contraries of the thing, Places of the question,
what be the contraryes.
is absolved by searchinge out, XXVII. Opposita, XXVIII. Disparata.


The said places are taught of the Logicians, who (as it is meet and
convenient those arts to serve the turn of more worthy acts) do minister
the same to the professors of other disciplines, but especially of Divinity,
to be used.

Moreover Theology is accustomed to produce other places also to the
explication of things in the kind didascalik, Other Theological places in
the kind didascalik.
and in the books of the prophets and Apostles we may perceive no small
number of probations derived of the places followinge.

1 Of the usurpation of the voice of any man in the sacred Scriptures. Romans 4.
Thapostle in that promise made of God unto Abraham Genes. 17. I have appointed
thee to be the father of many nations, weighinge the word Nations, he
reasons in this sort: Abraham is the father of many nations, Ergo, the
Gentiles also seeinge they are the children of Abraham, shall be pertakers of
the spiritual benefits purchased by Christ, which were promised to Abraham
and to his seed.

2 Of the certain form of speaking, or of the phrase of holy Scripture. Romans
4.
Man's justification or beatification the Apostle interprets to be the
remission of sins, and the not imputinge thereof, which he confirms by the
words of the Psalmiste taken out of the 23. Psalm: Blessed are they whose
iniquities be remitted, and whose sins are covered. Blessed is that man to
whom the Lord will not impute sin. Math. 2^
Christ affirms himself to be very God out of the words of David Psalm. 109:
The Lord said unto my Lord, sit on my right hand. If David calls him
Lord, how is he then his son?

3 Of the signification of the words to ye sentence or meaning of the
speaker. It behooves this most chiefly to be observed in figurative speeches:
albeit even where no figures be at all yet some obscurity may seem to lurk.
Now this must be removed by searchinge the authors mind out of the
circumstaunces, or out of the things either antecedent or consequent.

4 Of words goinge before and coming after. This also is a help in no wise
to be neglected. For where it seems good out of some place of Scripture to
confirm a doctrine or sentence, it is requisite forthwith to mark as well the
words antecedent as consequent, and out of them to declare the sentence to be
true which we proponed.

5 Of a general sentence in Divinity. Such a one is this, Deuteronomy. 10. God is no
respecter of persons. Therefore Peter. Act. 10 gathers herevppon that the
Gentiles also in case they fear God, and give themselves unto righteousness,
may be accepted with God.

6 Of the things atributed to God. God is true, therefore will he perform his
promyses, Romans 3.
and prove us to be liers. God is rightuous, wherefore of him shall the world
be judged.

7 Of the sign to the thing signified. We are baptized, Romans 6. Tit. 3. 1.
John. 1.
therefore are we cleansed from our sins by ye blood of Christ.

8 Of one time to an other, or of the time of the law to the time of the
Gospel. Romans ^^. it is showed how at all times some are elected by the grace
of God to salvation, and therefore that we ought not to cast away all hope
touching certain of the Jews to be saved, and that by this argument out of
the ^. Reg. 19. Know ye not (says he) what the Scripture says of Elias?
How he cries unto God against Israel, saying, Lord they have killed thy
prophets, and broken down thine altars, and I was left alone, and they lie
in awayte for my life. But what answer makes God unto him? I have reserved
unto my self seven thowsande men, that have not bowed their knees to Baall.
Even so in this time also have some remained according to the election of grace.

9 Of one time to all times. Exodus 33.
I will have compassion on whom I have compassion, and I will have mercy upon
whom I have mercy. It is known that these words were thus spoken of God when
he threatened destruction to the Israelites by reason of their uproar in the
absence of Moses and their worshippinge of the golden calfe. But the Apostle
doubts not to usurp those words which God then pronounced in his anger for
the cause about-sayde, to prove that God at all times choseth some, and of his
mercy, when it pleases him, willingely saves them.

10 Of the head to the members. Romans 3.
Christ the son of God has received an heavenly inheritance, the same
therefore shall those also receive that believe, which truly by adoption are
the sons of God.

11 Of the members to the head. Some things that be attributed in the body of
the Church to the members, are not vnaptely transferred also to Christ, the
head of the Church. Heb. 4. and 5. The high Priests that be chosen of men,
for so much as they are compassed about with infirmity, are moved also with the
feelinge of other men's infirmities. The man Christ therefore being made an
high Priest, and tempted in all things, is moved with the feelinge of our
infirmities.

But in no wise may humayne matters be applied unto Christ, in which is to
be seen the corruption of sin.

12 Of a thing corporal to a thing spiritual. The promyses made of GOD to
our fathers touching temporal benefits, caused them to lay hold upon
spiritual and everlasting benefits.

Inasmuch as these carnal things are after a sort shadows and ti^es of things
spiritual and eternal. Heb. 11.
By faith Abraham departed into the land of promise as into a strange country
when as he dwelled in tabernacles with Isaac and Jacob coheires of the same
promise. For he looked for a city having a sure foundation, the buylder and
founder whereof is God. Of which place this is the sum: By faith Abraham
went out of his own. Couutrey and came to the land of promise, therefore by
faith likewise must we come to heaven or to the heavenly City.

13 Of a thing spiritual to a thing corporal. Esaye, Cap. 59. the Lord
says: My house shall be called the house of prayer amongst all people. That
mention is there made of the spiritual house of God, that is to say, of the
Church or congregation of the faithful, whom it behooves continually to
worship God a right and truly to call upon the name of the Lord, it is
manifest by other things which in that place do both go before and also
follow after. And certes Christ whilst he throws the buyers and sellers out
of the material. Temple of Jerusalem, applies the same words to his
purpose, and argues in this sort: In the Church or spiritual house of God,
it is meet that invocation of the Lords name be exercised without ceassinge,
Ergo therefore in the material Temple also it behooves prayers continually to
be made. See thou not therefore how that is deduced to a thing corporal,
which before was simply spoken of a thing spiritual?

14 Of a thing earthly to a thing heavenly. The author of the Apocalypes.
Cap. 7. transferreth the words, which Esaias the Prophet had usurped Cap. 49.
touching the felicity to follow, when the Gospel should be divulged into
all the provinces of the world, to celebrate the rest and glory which the
Saints that dye for the confession of the truth, do obtain in the life to
come in heaven.

The words are these: They shall not honger nor thirste any more, neither
shall the Sun rise or fall upon them, nor any heat: For the Lamb which is
in the mids of the throne (as one that pitiet^e them) shall lead them forth
to the comfortable springs of water.

The words therefore spoken of these things that ought to be done in earth,
are translated to those that come to pas in heaven.

This form of reasoninge does not much differ from that, which a little before
we entitled, of a thing corporal to a spiritual.

15 Of the threatening of God to the effect thereof. Thapostle affirms the
time to be at hand, Romans 10
wherein the Jews ought to be rejected and excluded from the church of God,
and the Gentiles to be called and to succeed the Jews, addinge to a grievous
communication published of God in time past touching that matter: I will
provoke you to envy by a people which is no people, Deuteronomy. 32
by foolish nation will I stir you unto wrath.

That which God has once determined concerning ye punishment of wicked men
must of necessity be accomplished, except peradventure some condition be
either openly or pryuily adjoined to the threatening.

16 Of the promise of God to the effect thereof. Abraham staggered not at the
promise of God through incredulity, but being made strong by faith gave the
glory to God, conceiving a certain persuasion, that he which had promised, was
able also to perform.

So is it read Romans 4. we may therefore argue in this sort: God has promised,
ergo, he will undoubtedly perform. Here also must heed be taken whether any
manner of condition be annexed to the promise.

17 Of a prophesy or prophetical prediction.

The Evangelists do very frequently commend unto us this place of invention,
so often namely as they show this or that thing to be therefore accomplished in or
by Christ, for so much as it was necessary those things should be fulfilled
which were spoken before of the Prophets touching the same.

18 Of the truth of a divine or prophetical determination. The things that
are once pronounced and decreed of God or of some notable Prophet by Gods
commandment, those things must of necessity be accounted certain and sure.
He that understands how to argue conveniently of a general sentence, shall
also well perceive the use of this place.

19 Of the person of one good man to the person of all the godly. So gathers
the Apostle Romans 4: Abraham was justified by faith, therefore shall all that
believe likewise, be justified by faith. It is not written, says he, for his
cause only that it was imputed unto him, but also for our sakes, to whom it
shall be imputed if we believe, etc.

20 Of the person of one ungodly man, to all.

The hardeninge of Pharao came of God, Romans 9
therefore, comes the hardenyng of all other wicked persons of GOD likewise.

21 Of a type or figure to the truethment thereby. The bones of the lamb that
was eaten at Easter might not be diminished: John, 19
ergo, neither ought the legs of Christ hanging on the Cross to be broken.

And the tipes of the prophet Jonas and of the brason serpent erected in the
wilderness Christ interprets of himself. Math, 12 Joan. 3 Number. 21
So then we may elegantly gather: they that beheld the serpent in the desert;
were healed: ergo, those also that believe and hope in CHRIST, shall obtain
salvation.

22 Of an allegory to the thing signified.

The prophet Esaias. Cap. 54. by an allegorye and in many words teaches how
wonderfully the Church increases. Rejoice thou baren, says he, that bear
no Children: break forth and cry thou that trauailest not, for she that is
desolat has many mo children, then she which has an husband. And the Apostle
intending to demonstrat that albeit the Jews raged never so much yet it would
come to pass that the church collected of the Gentiles should be increased
and amplyfyed, yea even then when by reason of troubles and contentio^s if
should be supposed to be utterly destroyed, applies the same alleg^ry very
fifly, and says: If she that was baren and despised, as Sara, Gala. 4.
does yet bring forth children, and her posterity increases beyond all men's
expectation: why should we not believe that the Church, though small and
abiecte, receives daily encreasement also?

These places, therefore, if not always all, These places, who may use, and
when.
yet at the least a great sort of them, and one while these, an other while
those, do they rightly use that have to speak in sacred assemblies. And then
verily do they use them, when as they shall entreat, either of a certain
place or sentence of holy Scripture, or of business offered by occasion of time,
or else of a theme simple or compounde, like as afterward we will once again
admonish, when we shall come to the addinge to of some peculiar examples.

They have need undoubtedly of a right judgment and of some wisdom and
experience in this behalf gotten by the continual readinge and ^earinge
partly of the Scriptures, partly of some faithful and probable interpreters.

He truly shall best provide for himself, and may at the length be able to
perform some thing worthy of praise and commendation, who so will dilligently
observe ye profes and reasons extant in the didascalick Sermons of the
prophets, Christ and Apostles, and will enserch the places out of which they
are taken and deduced, and finally being night and day studious of imitation,
will endeavor after his power and abilytie to practice the same.

Now unto this kind, for so much as it is weighty and diffyculte, and no small
wisdom is required therein, we will worthily adioyne (like as we undertook
to do) certain Cantions, whereby every man may be premonisshed to use
dilligent heed, and circumspection in his procedings. III. Cantions of the
kind didascalick.
Which we have in like manner determined to do in the other kinds followinge.

I In doctrines or princyples of relygion to be taught before the people, it
is very requisite to be considered what manner of persons the hearers are and
how far forth traded in the knowledge of divine matters. For it is necessary
that all the order of teaching, so often, I say, as it is thought good to
examine any sentence, be tempered according to their capacity.

Christ himself that we should be circumspect^ in this behalf has admonished
us, when as he said to his Apostles: Joan. 16
I have many things to say unto you, but ye can not bear them away now. And
the apostle: I could not speak unto you brethren, 1. Cor. 3.
as unto spiritual, but as unto carnal as unto babes in Christ. I have
nourished you with milk, and not with meat. For ye could not as yet away with
it, neither can ye as yet. It is certain, therefore, that the things which
are true, undoubted, and taken out of the word of God are to be taught and set
forth unto all men. And albeit a man takes in hand one and the self same
doctrine to handle and entreat off, yet truly ought he to attempt all things
far otherwise among the hearers and Citizens of an ample city, having now of
long time ben accustomed to hare men excellinge in learning and eloquence,
then in an obscure place, where men of rude wits and manners can never attain
to any thing, but that which shall very grossly be inculked and beaten into
their heads. To which effect well nere S. August. has somewhat in his
treatise 98. upon the gospel of John

II What hearers soever shall betide, let the tractation of those points be
eschewed and pretermitted which do smally conduce unto godliness, and the
inquifition and knowledge whereof do make the hearers rather curious then
godly disposed. Whereunto pertayneth that which Thapostle writing in diverse
places unto Timothye and Titus, 1. Tim. 1.4.6, 2. Tim. 2.3 Tit. 1.^.
forbids any place to be given in the church to doctrine which is not after
godliness, to foolish and fantastical questions, to contencions, and
striuings about the law, which are unprofitable and superfluous, and which do
rather procure division then edifiyng.

III After thou have chosen out such a sentence or assertion as is holsomelye
to be handled and entreated off, it is requisyte that thou dilligently
enserche and perpende the doctrine contained in the books of the prophets and
Apostles touching the same, which only is the foundation of the truth and the
rule that all men ought of necessity to follow.

Then shall thou wisely examine also ye sentences and judgments of other
divines, which in their commentaries do explane the scriptures and the
assertions contained in the^, and shall with judgment accommodate and inserte
into thy Sermons all the notable points comprised therein. Which labor shall
redounde to thy double commodytie. For first thou may bebolde without
bashement or fear of reprehension to determine and defyne upon all matters,
albeit thou namest no authors openly. Where if it lyketh thee afterward to name
the authors themselves, thou shall declare by that means the consent of the
churches, and of the learned men in the same touching that assertion.

With which consent truly it can not be spoken how greatly the hearers will
be moved not so much with folded arms (as they say) to embrace sound
doctrine as with stiff and obstinate minds to defend and mayntaine the same.

IIII According to the weight or utility and dignyfie of the things digested
as well out of the sacred scriptures, as also out of the commentaries of
learned writers thou shall take advice, whether it be expedyent briefly to run
over the sentence or to handle it at large.

But how soever it shall like thee to do in this behalf, thou must be sure
and certain of an apt method, such a one as the nature of the sentence to be
declared admits, and such as most chiefly agrees to the times, places, and
capacities of the hearers. For an other sentence requires to be handeled in an
other method.

And this seems to be yt which the Apostle means saying unto Timothye:

Study to yield thy self approved unto God, a woorkman not to be despised,
duly dividing the word of truth.

V All good men do consent, that to the establishinge of a principle of
christian religion, reasons and foundations ought not to be required from any
other place, then out of those books which are ackowledged of all men to be
canonical. As touching which matter look Ireneus. lib. 1. Cap. 1. Augustine
against Faustus the Maniche Liber. 11. cap. 5. De natura et gratia cap. 61.
Epist. 19. ad Hieronymum.

VI Dilligent heed must be taken, lest any proofs or resons appear to be
hardly wrested or over far fet. For where as the hearers do perceive but
even one of these, there they less esteem of the rest, and begin forthwith
to suspect the Preacher, yea and to accuse him privily either of deceit, or
ignorance.

VII That proof shall always be of most importance, which is drawn out of
the simple meaning and singnyfycation of the words.

For the truth is delighted with playnnes and simplicity: and more simplicytie
can not be used, then where; all tropes and figures laid aparte, words are
taken in their native and proper sense.

By this means all things shall be sound, certain, and to ye purpose,
wherewith the assertion shall be proved.

VIII Hereupon it follows, that similitudes ought scarcely and sparingly,
tipes and allegories very seeldome or never to be used in confirmation of
assertions, as out of which, arguments are derived (by the opinion of all men)
scarce firm and effectual. Neither is it in deed meet for every artificer
to shape allegories, wherefore to a young practicioner, that he should much
comber himself in devising hereof, I would not become the author.

Of which thing, we have admonished the studious young men in the second
book and five and thirtye Chapter of our work de Theologo. Where if thou
think good notwithstanding to practice any part of this kind, be it so
truly, but with this condition, whilst other arguments having more pith and
strength in them do proceed as we may see the Apostle Paul Galathians. 4.
at the end of his disputation to use an allegory or rather a type of two
brethren, which he says to signyfye two Testaments.

IX Moreover, due regard must be had, least we interlace any thing in any
place, that by reason of the difficultye or obscurity thereof, or by reason of
ye indirect manner of speaking, may be drawn by the wicked sort, simple,
unlearned, or other what soever, to the establishement of a false opinion, or
to the defense of mischife and impiety. After which sort Saint Peter said,
there were some unlearned and inconstant men that wrested certain things to
their own perdicion, which Paul the Apostle had faithfully and sincerely
taught in his epistles.

So far forth do men rauishe even those things also that are very well spoken
of most excellent and holy writers to an other end, then they wrote them for.

And surely it can not be denied, but that the Preachers themselves do often
times give occasion of evil speakinge. How commonly, I pray you, are
complaints heard in these days of a number, which taught in deed doctrine both
profitable and necessary, but that the hearers did not eft soones allow it and
receive it, the Preachers themselves were the cause, whilst they used such
forms of speaking as all men for the most part abandoned as foolish and
profane.

I was my self on a time present in a company assembled at a sermon, where
one entreated in such wise of good works, as if he had been resolved to
dissuade his hearers from them, he could not have done it more conveniently
any other way.

Howbeit this inconvenience for the most part may be remedied two manner of
ways.

The one is, if thou endeuorest thy self to speak always advisedly and
properlye, and do with diligence premeditate every thing at home.

But the surest way, when there is danger in the forms of speakinge, is to
stick fast in the phrases of holy scripture it self.

The other is, that when thou privily suspectest that any thing may maliciously
be objected, ye exhibit in time certain preoccupations whereby the occasion of
sinister interpretation, and detraction may be prevented and taken away. Which
thing we may perceive to be studioufly and every where observed of the Apostle
Paul.

X After a sentence, either briefly, or more at large declared, let
admonitions never at any time be neglected touching the true use thereof, as
well publiekly perteyninge to the whole Church as also privately to be referred
to every man's conscience: Of the doctrine, whose use lies hidd, the
knowledge is vain, and in a manner, superfluous.

For so S. Paul, to the arguments whereby he had proved that all those which
be baptized are dead unto sin, and ought afterward to live only unto
rightuousenes, adds an exhortation, wherein he admonissheth that they would
dilligently endeavor to do that thing: Let not sin therefore, says he,
reign in your mortal bodies, etc. In some part of the 4. chapter, and also of
the fyft to the Galathians, the apostle techeth, how they yt are graffed in
christ through baptism, are delivered from the law, neither ought they to
look to be justified thereby: and by and by he adds that which declares
the right use of the same doctrine, saying:

Ye were called into liberty, my brethren, only that ye should not give
liberty by occasion to the flesh, but serve ye one an other through love.

XI Neither is this truly to be pretermitted. It falls out sometimes that the
teacher of the people in the explication of some one sentence does err somewhat
from the scope of truth, and exhibiteth, for things certain and true, things
uncertain and false.

For what if he that enters the sacred Pulpit, be not as yet sufficioutlye
exercised himself in the contemplation and tractation of divine affayrers? Or
follows peraduenturs some one only writer which he has redd, having not
heard ye judgments of other? or to be short whiles certain questions
sometime in the Church, especially such as are called in controversy be, in
process of time more fully and manifestly discussed; then to fore they were?
what if he could not as yet come to the sight of the later and sounder
opinions? And who is able to rehearce all the causes and occasions of error?

Therefore let not him, whom it shall fortune by any means to fail in his
teachinge, be ashamed to confess and acknowledge in time convenient, that he
was of late intangeled in error, and the offense which he committed by not
teachinge of sound doctrine, or by unadvised speakinge, he will now make
amends for, by bringinge a more sound interpretation: That he has since
that time somdeale profited, as one day teaches an other, and the later
cogitations (according to the proverb) are wont to be wiser then the first.

He that became a guide unto others, whereby they fell into the ditche, the
same shall worthily show the way how they may again recover and escape.
Neither ought the hearers to be offended greatly in this behalf. For it
behooves all men to remember, that they are men which are placed in the
ecclesiastical function, and therefore that nothing humayne is estraunged
from them.

And it is the property of man's nature to errre: Of malice or madness to
persist in error: but of the singular goodness and grace of God after the fall
to be again erected.

Wherefore if any of the hearers do stomach the matter and disdain that they
were a littell before seduced, it is meet the same do now again rejoice,
and, as ye would say, congratulate both with themselves and their teacher and
especially to give unto God most hearty thanks, when they perceive themselves
to be brought again out of the darkness of error into the light of truth.
As touching this Cantion, Augusine has somewhat in his book de Catechizandis
Rudibus cap. 11. and in his book de verbis Apostoli sermon. 22. But many more
things yt may make the Preachers wise and circumspect in this behalf,
erperie^ce it self will teach and the long exercise of preachinge. Neither is
it possible that all things should be comprehended in rules and precepts.

And at all times lightly there chances some thing unlooked for which
compels digression to be made from ye order of precepts and purposed
aduertisementes.

Now it is requisite that we put forth some examples of Sermons of the kind
didascalick. Examples of Sermons of the kind didascalick.
It is always meet, and in deed for many causes expedient, that all men with
sharp and intentive mind look upon the notable examples of Sermons which
the Prophets, Christ and Apostles have had. For, to follow and imitate these
in all points so far as may be, as it is a thing most semely, so is it also
most sure.

Next whom it may be lawful to commend the more famous Preachers, and
especially the ancient fathers, which to have excelled in the gifts of the
holy Ghost, there is no man that knows not.

Wherefore, that all good things do happen unto men by the only goodness of
God Moses teaches in a just Sermon. Deuteronomy. 9. and 10. almost throughout.
Esaias. Cap. 1. briefly declares that eternal worshipping without ye affection
of ye heart, and integrity of life is unprofitable. The sane Cap. 25.26.27.
preaches of the rewards of the godly and of the punishment of the wicked.

Again, Cap. 66. of the true worshippinge of GOD. Christ Math. 5. preaches of
ye true blessedness, of the right use of the law. Cap. 6. of confidence in God:
or, if thou will, of the providence of GOD, cap. 11. of ye punishment of those
ye despise the gospel. cap. 13. of the dilligent hearing of the word of God,
and of theffectes of the word. cap. 16. of the confession of faith, and of the
known truth. Cap. 17, of obedience and honor due unto Magistrates, Cap. 19.
he teaches what great reward remains for them that constantely cleave
unto the Gospel. Cap. 20. how it comes to pass by the free mercy of God
alone, that the believers are called, justified and glorified. Cap. 24. and 25.
of the end and consummation of the world, and of the coming of Christ unto
judgment. Joan. 14.15.16. of fortitude and patience in persecution for
religious sake, of Charity and perfect love. etc. Act. 13. Saint Paul
declares what ye gospel is. In his epistle to ye To. ye one disputation
touching justification by faith without ye works of ye law, the other likewise
cap. 9.10.11. as concerning ye reiection of the Jews and calling of the
Gentiles, might be propounded in stead of examples, but that they are
written rather after the Scolasticall manner of teachinge then after the
popular, albeit the last do approach most near unto the popular.

The same is to be judged of the disputation to the Galath. 3. which in all
points agrees with the former to the Romans aforesaid, except that it
serves more for the people. But most fit and proper to this present
business is the assertion of the re^urrection of the dead. 1. Corinthians. 15 Also
to the Heb. 1. and 2. touching the two natures in Christ. Again cap.
5.6.7.8.9.10. of the abrogatio^ of the Leuiticall priesthood and legal
sacrifices, and of the succession of ths eternal priesthod and ye only
sacrifice of Christ. In Chrysostom are extant many Sermons of this kind,
especially in his enarratio^ of the Gospels of Matthew and John.

Notable is the Homily. 60. upon Matthew, where he disputes of the cause of
sin.

Likewise in his fifth Tome Homilye. 48 touching the fearful iudgenent of
GOD. Homilye. 71. that fasting profits nothing, if innocence of life be
away. Homily. 77. that a sinner after his fall ougthe not to despair. Lastely
his. 6. Sermons, and 3. books, of the providence of GOD: For these also to be
written popularly, no man denies.

Whenever any part of the holy Scripture is to be expounded in the Kind
didascalik, that many and diverse common places may be noted therein, out of
which it shall be convenient ot chose and declare some more exactely and at
large. Cap. III.
ALbeit there cannot a more absolute order of Preachinge be set forth to be
followed, then that which shyneth in the examples of Sermons, which partly the
Prophets, Apostles and Christ himself, and partly certain of the holy
fathers have had: Yet notwithstanding I suppose it will be greatly
profitable, in case I shall further declare more at large, how every man may
rightly use, whenever he will, those things that in manner of precepts are
of me put forth in the former Chapter.

For I trust it will come to pass, that by this means, all men shall somewhat
more easily and prudently judge both of those examples, whereof I rehearced
even now, as ye would say, a cataloge: and also by littell and littell enure
themselves, cunningly to excogitate and find out such things as may aptly be
alleged touching any manner of Theames, or readinges of Scripture offered unto
them. We said that, in this didascalik kind, somwhile no form of
confirmation at all is to be observed, erewhile again that some certain
form is to be used: and in neither of them progression to be made after one
and the same manner but no small diversity to be permitted.

Of this diversity, therefore, it seems good unto me, to entreat by
putting forth some examples, to the intents they may come forth prepared and
furnished to all assayes, that will endeavor themselves to execute ye offices
and duties of an Evangelical Teacher. But before all things, we will bring
them, as it were by the hand, unto this point that every man may easily
perceive, how and after what sort, when a part of holy Scripture is offered
to be explaned, many and diverse common places may be drawn and noted out of
the same, again how some may with judgment be selected out of them, and
somewhat more dillygently be declared before the multitude. Parts twofolde in
the sacred Sciptures.


The parts of holy Scripture are accustomed to be set forth in two sorts.

1 The one consists in a continual historical narration, in which
notwithstanding somwhere appears that which does not obscurely argue, to
what kind of Sermons the same ought to be ascribed.

For in deed the most part of the narrations in the Evangelists do perteyne
to the kind didascalick, for so much as they do chiefly establishe this
doctrine, to wit, that, Jesus is Christ, that is to say, the true Messins and
true God, by whom; whosoever believe us him, do aspire to eternal salvation
Which doctrine or general sentence, to be the common scope of the Evangelical
narrations, John Cap. 20. has expressed.

2 The other sort is, when all that part is simply spente and consumed in
teachinge, namely so, as with arguments distinct, and one followinge an other,
and directed to one and the self same end, a certain sentence or assertion
is there handeled and set forth.

Example may be taken out of the fourth Chapter of the Epistle to the
Romans. No man sees not in all that Chapter diverse proofs and reasones to
be packed together, whereof every one proves a man to be justified by faith
without works.

Wherefore that the same Chapter is of the kind didascalick, seeinge such a
doctrine is there plainly confirmed, each man may easily judge.

Of either part of the sacred Scriptures, it shall be requisite at this
present that we note so much as we shall think meet and sufficient. Common
places, how and after what sort to be gathered.


Of which sort soever it shall fortune the holy reading to be offered, it is
necessary that he which is desposed to gather and excerpte common places,
before all things do peruse over the wholle once and peradventure twyse or
thrice, till such time, as he may well conceive the simple meaning of the
words.

Then let him return back to the canuessinge of all the parts and members,
and stayinge a littell at every of them, let him consider, and weigh more
deeply with him self, whither any thing may be drawn out of ye words of
the same member perteyninge, either unto doctrine, yt is to say, the
confirmation of true assertions, or to the redargution of false opinions, or to
the institution of life in righteousness, or to the correction of unjust
dealinge, or lastely unto consolation.

For as we have before specified, it behooves these five general Divine
places of invention of be continuallye conuersaunt in our minds, as those
that sufficienely declare of themselves, how we ought to search, disclose
and pronounce common places contained in the words of Scripture, and in the
sentences of the wholle course of Christian doctrine.

For they are beyond measure plentiful, and do eftsoon bring forth
profitable common places, of all things, which are necessary to the perfection
of a Christian man. Neither occurreth any readinge of Scripture so barren and
unfruitful, but that the words placed in the text, do minister some thing
answerable to those general places. But go to, let us make a trial, and take
in hand some examples of the former sort, which namely consist in historical
narrations, and let us examyn them according to the said five general places
of invention. For when we have opened a way in the narrations historical,
wherein, seems always to be the greater difficulty, it will be an easy matter
to go forward to the tractatio^ of examples of the other sort, in which are
simply declared assertions of our religion.

Let the history therefore be recited out of the Evangelist Marc. Cap. 8 which
is this: 1. Example of the former sort.
When there was a very great company, and had nothing to eat, Jesus calling
his disciples unto him, says unto them: I have compassion on the people,
because they have been with me now three days, and have nothing to eat:
And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faynte by
the way: for diverse of them came from far. And his Disciples answered him:
from whence can a man satisfy these men with bread here in the wilderness?
And he asked them: how many loaves have ye? They said seven. And he
commanded the people to sit down no the ground. And he took the seven
loves, and when he had given thanks, he brake, and gave to his disciples, to
set before them: and they did set them before the people. And they had a few
small fishes: and when he had blessed, he commanded them also to be set before
the^. So they did eat and were suffised: and they took up of the broken meat,
that was left, seuen-baskets full. And they that had eaten, were about four
thousand: and he sent them away. Kind.


Let us see then unto what kind of Sermon this sacred Lesson is to be
referred. That it is of the kind didascalick, no man doubts. For therefore
are these notable miracles described and set sorth, that all men might be
induced to confess, that Christ is true God, and that they might believe in
him. For so John Baptist, when he being in prison heard of the doings of
Christ, Math, 11.
sent his disciples more truly for others sakes the^ his own, which inquired:
whither he were that promised and of so long time looked for Messiah, or no? But
Christ answered in such wise, as he would have it gathered by his works,
that he was in deed that promissed Messiah and Savior.

Yea, and else where Christ more then once or twice affirmed to the same effect,
that the works which he did, Joan. 5.10.14.
testified of him ye he was the son of god and god himself. The state therefore
of this present reading is didascalick: namely, State,
that Christ is the author of so great a mirackle, that he is the true
Messiah and very God, by whom all men may obtain salvation through faith.

Now in passinge through all the members, and having respect every where unto
those five general places of invention, let us dilligently enserch, in that
order which we spoke off, Common places.
the sundry common places of Christian doctrine contained in the same.

Where there was a very great company, says he, and had nothing to eat,
etc.

1 First, when the Evangelist shows that a very great multitude was gathered
together to hear the words of Christ, here by and by an instruction offreth
it self, whereby we are admonished with great study and endeavor to couit
after ye knowledge of goods word, wherein all the will and pleasure of God is
most apparauntely discovered.

2 Secondely, here is to be noted a correction or reprehension of those
persons, that are found slow and dull above measure, unto those things that
pertayne to the Salvation of their souls, and do scarcely think once in a
year of hearing the holesom doctrine of the Scriptures.

3 And because it is added: That the company hadd nothing to eat, it is an
undoubted argument, that those hearers were more careful of the things that
pertayne to the mind, then of those things that concerned their teeth or
bellies, and that they longed more ardently after spiritual benefits, then
after temporal. Wherefore here also I observe a new place, which beelongeth
to justification, or else an assertion or doctrine: Namely, that we ought
always in the first place to cast our care upon spiritual benefits: And
in the last place, upon corporal.

In which behalf Christ, Math. 6.
First seek (says he) the kingdom of GOD and the righteousness thereof,
and and all these things shall be ministered unto you.

Yea, and the same also has taught us in our daily prayer, first to desire
of our heavenly father the sanctification of his name, the enlargement of his
spiritual kingdom, the study of accomplishing his will: and after that our
daily bread with other things necessary for our lives.

IIII Again here is understood a correction to be, forasmuch as they are
reproved which are more intentive about things earthly and transitorye, then
heavenly and eternal.

It follows in the Text.

And Jesus called his disciples unto him, and said unto them: I have
compassion on the people, because they have been with me now three days, and
have nothing to eat.

We will note here in this place manyfolde points of doctrine.

V The first is, touching the mercy and providence of God, where with he never
fa^leth to help and assist us. Yea and before we ask, he knows what things
we have need of, and sees by what means he may best provide for us, which
thing Christ also himself Matthew 6. full well has expressed.

VI The second, God provides for us not only sprytuall things, and that
generally and universally for all: but also things corporal and that
partycularly for every man.

VII The third, God will provide for those most chiefly above the rest, that
abide and continue longest with him: that is to say, that studiously embrace
sound doctrine, and persevere in the love and confession thereof, reposing all
their hope and confidence in God alone.

VIII Now out of these points of doctrine, rises a certain and incomparble
consolation which it behooves the godly to have continually before their eyes.

They that remain with God, and depend wholly upon GOD, shall of him never be
forsaken or left destitute. First god would rain down Manna from heaven as
he did in times past for the Israelits in the wilderness, or send his angel to
minister bread and water, as he did sometime to the wandering Helias, then
suffer so much as one of his little flock, to perish for lack of sustenaunce.

God esteems much more of good men, then, of Ravens or Sparrowes, Math. 6.
Psalm. 14
which in the mean time he mercifullye feeds.

It is added moreover in the Gospel.

And if I send them away fasting to their own houses, they will faint by the
way. For diverse of them came from far.

In which words we may perceive both a doctrine and institutions.

IX A doctrine verily, that miserable men, if God should forsake them, were not
able to endure, and that it is not in their power or strength to acquire to
themselves so much as corporal benifites necessary for the sustentation of
their wretched life: how much more then passes it their power to get things
spiritual?

When God once withdraws his hand, we begin forthwith to decay, which
testifies Psalm. 124.127.etc.

Thinstitutions lurking herein are these.

X We are admonished, when we know that we can do nothing at all without God,
to acknowledge our own weakness and infirmity.

XI Again, we are admonished to pray unto God continually, that he would not
leave us destitute, but minister unto us things both spiritual and also
temporal, as he sees them to be expedyent for us.

It follows:

And his disciples answered him: Form whence can a man satisfy these men with
bread here in the wilderness?

XII Doctrine. Man's reason cannot perceive how provision may be made for the
necessities of our life.

Carnal wisdom is astonished and to seek so often as danger, or any
misfortune does chance. And yet in the mean time, the things that are
impossible to men, are not only possible, but also cysye unto God.

Wherefore an institution or enstruction is here also to be gathered.

XIII We ought verily in all dangers to put our confidence in God, and to
commit our selves, and all that we have, unto his wisdom good will and
pleasure: Otherwise, if we stick to our own wisdom, if we conceive nothing
in our mind, further then human reason does persuade, ti is to be feared
least we fall headlonge into desperation. Whether it pertayneth, Mat. ^6
that the disciples being doubtful by reason they had neglected to take
bread, are called (...), of little says.

XIIII Whereupon follows also a certain redargution or correction, namely of
those men, which if they perceive any thing at al to be wanting unto them, or
do not by and by feel present help in their necessity, they so take on
through the impotency of their mind, as though the Furies themselves* did
drive them forward, by means whereof they begin at the length to despair
utterly of the aid and assistaunce of GOD. It follows.

And he asked them: How many loaves have ye? They said, seven. And he
commanded the people to sit down on the ground.

We may note in these words, besides a doctrine a place also consolatory.

XV. and XVI. God suffers not his children long to be troubled, 1. Cor*
he permits them not be tempted above their strength.

Man's reason in deed or this flesh of ours, increases the heap of
temptations, and compels us in a manner to mistrust: who can (says human
reason) satissie these men with bread in the wilderness? But God by and by
shows a present aid and remedy, and that which man's power wants, he
wounderfullye makes god, if so be we cast our care and confydence upon
him, and commit the whole business unto him. Let us never therefore doubt of
Gods goodness toward us, or put any mistruct in our matters, but be most
assuredly persuaded that, like as he can, so also he will help us in time
convenient, and when it shall seem good unto him.

Let us go on to that which follows.

And he took the seven loves, and when he had given thanks, he brake, and
gave to his disciples, to set before the^. And they did set them before the
people. And they had a few small sisshes: and when he had blessed, he
commanded them also to be set before them.

B^holde when we hear Christ giving of thanks, and also blessinge, we see a
double instruction set forth unto us.

XVII The one, that as often as we take meat or drinck, we should pray unto God,
that he would sanctify it by the virtue of his word, and grant that it may
be wholesome unto us.

XVIII The other, that we should always give God thanks for the daily
benefits, which he of his goodness most frankly and bountifully bestows
upon us.

It behooves all fathers and masters of householdes to teach their familes,
and to see that they neither eat nor drink without grace and thanks giving
before and after meat. And not alonely for meat and drinck, but also let us
persuade our selves that it is our duty with like dillgence to pray and give
thanks for all other benefits whatsoever.

XIX. Now perhaps yt may also conveniently handle this doctrine: namely, that
God has created meats to be taken with thanks giving of the faithful, and
of those that: have known the truth: again that whatsoever God has created,
is good: and nothing to be rejected, if it be received with giving of thanks.
^ Tim. 4
For it is sanctified by the word of God and by prayer.

It follows, further, in the Text.

So they did eat and were suffised, and they took up of the broken meat, that
was left, seven baskets full,

L^e here an institution.

XX It is not enough for us to give thanks, when it chances us to be full fed
and suffised: but God moreover wills us, that we should not wastfully and
prodigally spend those things yt are left, or contemptuously cast them away,
but carefully and deintily to reserve them: and that truly, to the intent there
might always be remaining with us some testimony of Gods good will, whereby he
ministers all things more aboundantlye then we need: again, to the end we
may know that God gives the increase, yea and adds his blessing to our
substance, even then when we are not aware:

Lastly, to the intent we may have what to give and bestow upon other needy
creatures. For whatsoever remains over and besides our daily expenses, we
ought to know that it is no other thing, then a present matter, to exercise the
duties of godlynes withal.

At the length this also is added:

And they that had eaten, were about four thousand.

XXI Therefore the goodness and power of God is in all things to be considered:
the one truly whereby he feeds all men, whether they be good or bad: the
other whereby he feeds an innumerable multitude with a few loaves, and then
inespecially when all things are geason and hard to be come by.

XXII. That which Christ accomplished here by his divine power, is of us to be
merueyled at, reave renced, and celebrated: that which he did by his singular
goodness, is of us also to be followed. For certes it stands us upon to
deserve well of all men, yea even of our very enemies. We see therefore in few
words, partly a doctrine, partly an instruction, to lurk.

The last clawse.

And he sent them away.

We may gather here a doctrine as touching God, and likewise a notable
institution of our life. Jacob. 1


XXIII God gives liberally, and in the mean time vpbraideth not, he requires
not one thing for an other, he seeks not for glory after the manner of men, he
coueteth not the favor of the people, to the intent to obtain the dignity of a
prince or potentate, but rather he escheweth al company, coveting to go away
unespied.

XXIIII We therefore ought in like manner to immitate this goodness of Christ
joined with humility, and to endeavor our selves, so much as lies in us, to
do good works, not seeking for any glory or reward of men thereby.

Behold therefore these common places to the number of four and twenty upon a
brief euangelycall hystory packed and heaped of us together, whereof some do
comprehend the confirmation of trus doctrine, and the redargution of false:
other some, the institution, and correction of life: again othersome comfort
or consolation.

Now he that preaches unto the people, Whether all common places occurring in
a part of Scripture ought to be declared.
shall in no wise utter and expound at large all the said places, but out of
so many he shall chose a few, in ye more ample tractation whereof (the residew
pretermitted) he shall somewhat the longer stay. Which, how and after what
sort it ought to be done to the edifyinge and behoof of the Church, we will
endeavor in certain Observations to comprise: whereof this be the first:
Observations in expoundi^g of common places.


I. Common places to be expounded at large to the people the Preacher shall not
take but a few among so many, to wit, three, four, or five. The reasons are
priest and at hand: It behooves him to provide best for the capacytle of his
hearers, and to see what chiefly is expedient for the^, and that they be not
to much burdened or ouercharged with matter: again what the rude and
ignorunte ma ye best perceive and retain in memory, to the intent that after
they be returned home they may repeat and commend somewhat to their frinds and
familiars being either sick or hail.

For that it is worthily required of all Christians, that so soon as they be
come home to their houses, or at the least in the evening before they go to
bed, they should talk and propounde something of the sacred Scriptures to their
aqualls and companions, Chrysostom in his enarration upon Genesis homil. 29.
upon the gospel of John homil. 13.52. etc. abundauntly teaches and
parswadeth.

Hereunto is added that in a heap of so many places together, seldom or never,
any one place can so be examined, as that it may but indifferently satisfy
the hearers. For by that means no other thing should be done then many
places, slightly, and as it were beside the purpose, only touched, and not
declared.

Furthermore the ignoraunte and unlearned sort do very hardely reap any
fruit at all out of so great brevity, whom reason would not only to be
taught but also to be moved and persuaded. Yea, and by such short and over
brief speakinge, it would of necessity come to pass, that the same things
should oftetimes be iterated and repeated to ye great ircksomnes, of all men.

Moreover it is much better and more thankful to the preacher, in case he
expound now these now those places somewhat more exactly, and with as great
sharpenes as may be, setle them in the minds of his hearers. And look what
places he leaves untouched at one time the same at an other time convenient he
shall evidently declare. For if a man repeat often the same places, with like
brevity, and with like form of words, it is to be feared truly lest he
incur that which a certain Poet pleasauntly spoke: And that same Harper
eke, Horat de Art Poetie.

Is to be laughed to scorn, that aye
Upon on stringe does streke.


II. Where if thou will needs utter and allege diverse and soundry common
places, as in deed sometimes the present readinge of Scripture does minister
many and the same very profitable, yet shall thou labor with more fydelytye
and deliygence specially in explayninge of three or four: as for the other and
those also very few, it shall be sufficient briefly, and, as it were,
houerly to touch them, all the residue pretermitted.

After which sort Crysostom in his 60. homily upon Mathewe, coming to those
words in the text: I say unto you that their angels in heaven do always
behold the face of my father, prudently gathers and notes an assertion,
namely, that to every man are appointed certain angels as their kepers or
overseers. But be absolueth this place in very few words, efts^nes proceeding
to other matters, as more profitable and apt for the enformation of life. For
he passes to a common place, touching the not contemninge of our brethren.

III. Let those common places be chosen, that are suffycie^tly large and
apparaunt, and that conteyne nothing intricate or doubteful, to thintente,
thou may entreat amply and plainly, and popularly to the hearers.

For there be some matters very barren, and (as ye would say) pent up in a
straight prison, and the same also obscure with dark and perplexed questions.

If any such therefore do happen in the holy scripture which is expounded, it
is much better to cover or dissemble them with silence then with many words to
stand upon the same.

Of this kind it is, it a man explaning ye history out of Luke 16. touching
the rich gloutton buried in hell, and Lazarus raried into Abraham's bosom,
should go about a long time and with much a do to deteine his audytory,
alleging many things of Abraham's bosom, whereof seeing the opinions of
interpreters, yea even of the learned sort, be so diverse and discrepant, few
things certain and fruifull can be said: where in the mean time in the
very same hystory many profitable places might holsomely be handeled, as
against superfluity in meat and apparaile, against covetousness, touching
poverty to be taken in good part, touching the poor not to be contemned, of
alms deeds, of the mercy and justice of God, of the rewards of the godly and
pains of the wicked. In sumnme, all those places shall be pretermitted, which
engender perith us and perplexed questions or dissentions amongst the people,
or do by any means cast doubts into the consciences of good men, or lastly
do minister small ^^^^^tie or pro^ite.

4. Out of the manyfolde, places which are profitable, and apparaunt, those
chiefly (before the residewe) shall be chosen to be discussed, that are
most apt and convenient for the place and time.

As for example there happen in the Evangelical history places containing
assertions, and the same peradventure touching high and mystical matters:
Again other places* wherein vices are reproved, and perhaps the very same
where with the multitude is known that present time to be infected, or other
places enstructinge the life and manners of men.

Here truly it shall be the part, of a wise Preacher, to omit those places
that demonstrate the assertions of faith, and to turn himself unto those,
that teach the duties of love, wherein sins are corrected, and corrupt
manners amended, saying the multitude is unapt to conceive that doctrine, and of
this also stands great^ly in need.

Be it sufficient once for all generally to note, that the places touching
assertions, especially of greater weight and importance, are not to be
handeled, but before that multitude, in which are mixed many learned men, as is
to be seen in great Towns or Cities: and then most chiefly, suben any
heresies or errors be crepte in, which it is expedient to refute by those
assertions more plainly expounded: Again with such perspicuitie, as not only
the learned, but also the unlearned may perceive them.

In which order verily Chrysostom also with wonderful prudence and dexterity
decideth many hard and difficulte places, as, touching the cause of sin in his
said homily. 60. upon Mathewe, and that by reason of the Manichees which in
those days had far and nere spread their venime of two principles or
beginninges, or the one whereof they affirmed all things to be made:
touching the same substance and equal dignity of each person in the holy
Trinity in duiers and sundry Sermons, because of the Arrians of that age.
Nazianzenus both gave and followed the like counsel in a number of his
Orations.

Among the places which are applied to the institution of life in
righteousness, or to correction, those always before other shall profitably
be declared, which concern the present state and conditions of the Church. As
touching which thing somewhat we have said already, what time we entreated of
the matter of Sermons.

These things thus generally premised, let us now weighe and consider what
common places, may seem most chiefly to be chosen out of those which we
have gathered upon the historical narration aforegoinge. Marc. 8. according
to the state of the Church and of the hearers, to the intent a fruitful
Sermon may be had.

Certes be that is purposed to teach and instruct that kind of people which
inhabiteth small Towns and Villages, shall with very good right take those
places that to such manners and dispositions are most agreeable.

Such places are, Places meet for the inhabitauntes of small towns and
viliages.
these: Of the dilligente hearing of gods word: Of seekinge first after
spiritual, then after temrorall benefits: Against those that so gape after
carnal, things. that they utterly neglect things spiritual: Of prayer and
thanks giuinge for meat and drink, and other daily benefits of GOD
bestowed upon us.

Again if peradventure there has happened lately any calamity or publyke
danger, then with great fruit shall be handeled a place consolatory, as
namely that GOD suffers not his children long time to be troubled, or
tempted above their strength etc. These kind of places, I say, that minister
either instruction or consolacion, shall very fytly and profytably be declared
to the unlearned people, to whose capacity and profit in life and
conversation all the whole oration of the Preacher ought to he applied.

But in bigger towns or cities, where frequente assemblies be, Places to be
expounded in lager towns.
in which no small number of learned men are intermedled, and many of the
citizens and common people can judge indifferently well touching the doctrine
of religion, there in deed, both the places which we rehearced may rightly
be discussed (for what doctrine tendinge to godlynes shall there unseasonably
or vnfruitefully be taught, where men of all sorts and degrees are assembled
together?

Albeit with somewhat more ample furniture as well of arguments as of phrases
in speakinge, that is to say both of matters, and words: And besides them
other places also, which are occupied in the confirmation or coufutation of
assertions, of which sort we have showed some packed up in the foresaid
Evangelical history.

For such a one is that, touching the merry and providence of GOD, whereby he
never ceasseth to care for our affairs, and ministers abundantly unto us not
only spiritual but also things corporal, and that to every one, yea, and
in all our proceedinges, so that not so much as a heaire of our head without
his good will and wise preordinaunce falls off, or perishes.

Also touching man's infirmity, whereby it comes to pass, that we cannot
of our own selves endure, or by our own industry prepare things necessary
for our lyuinge: Further, that man's wisdom is astonyed in all difficulties
and danngers.

Finially the Preacher ought in this behalf to use a singular prudence and
sharpness of wit, to the intent he may become all things to all men, and
save so many as is possible. The Apostle Paul says that he spoke to the
Corinthians as unto carnal and babes in Christ, and that he nourished them
with milk, and not with strong meats, forasmuch as they were not able to
perceive any grave or profounde doctrine, as men given to lucre and carnal
things: But to others (undoubtedly) which had more profited and gone forward,
he preached the Gospel after an other manner of teachinge, and by propoundinge
places of greater weighte and importance.

In like manner therefore shall the wise dispenser of gods holy word, having a
dilligente consideration of the persons, times, and places, amongste many
places offringe themselves, choose only a few, such namely as he supposes
will bring most profit to the Church, and the same shall be more amply and
plainly explane.

As for the residewe, he shall either (as is aforesaid) very sparingely
touch, or altogether pretermit them. But to the intent, those men that endeavor
to take upon them the office of teachinge in the Church, may the more easily
and coueniently enure themselves, after the five general divine places of
invention, to reap a large and plentiful croppe of fruit, we will (not
vnwillingely) add one or two examples more.

For in deed every interpreter of the Scriptures ought to have those places in
a readiness and at hand, thorough much musinge and meditatinge upon them.

Therefore let us examyne the manyfolde doctrine contained in every the members
of the Evangelical narration, ^. Example,
as touching Christ woorshipped of the wise men, which is extant Math. 2.

When Jesus was borne in Bethlehem, a City of Jury, in the days of Herod the
King: Behold, there came wise men from the East to Jerusalem, saying: where
is he that is borne king of Jews? For we have seen his star in the East,
and are come to worship him. When Herod the king had hard these things, he
was troubled, and all the City of Jerusalem with him. And when he had
gathered all the chief priests and Scribes of the people together, he
demanded of them where Christ should be borne. And they said unto him: At
Bethlem in Jury.

For thus it is written by the prophet: And thou Bethlem in the land of Judah,
art not the least among the Princes of Judah. For out of thee shall there come
a captain, that shall govern my people Israel.

Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise men, enquired of them
dilligently, what time the star appeared. And he cent them to Bethlem, and
said: Go, and fearche dilligently for the young child, and when ye have
found him, bring me word again, that I may come, and worship him also. When
they had hard the King, they departed, and lo, the star which they saw in
the East, went before them, till it came and stood over the place wherein the
young child was. When they saw the star, they reioysed exceedingly with great
joy. And went into the house, and found the young child with Mary his
mother, and fell down, and worshipped him, and opened their treasures, and
presented unto him gifts, gold, and Frankensence, and Mirre. And after they
were warned of God in a dream, that they should not go again to Herod,
they returned into their own country an other way.

The kind is known to be didascalick. Kind. State.
For ye State is: that Christ is both true man and true God. For both his
nativity after the flesh is briefly repeated, and also it is showed that the
wise men which came out of far countries, gave unto him divine worship.
Wherefore it beehoueth our faith of and in Christ, true and perfect God, to be
maruelously confirmed.

The whole narration may be divided into two parts: whereof the one and
principal declares, how the wise men worshipped and accknoweledged Christ,
very man and very God, to be their savior: The other depainteth forth Herod
taking counsel how to oppress and confound Christ. Wonderful (no doubt)
and most diverse are the dispositions of men toward Christ then newly borne:
Some dwell far off, and take long iorneyes to worship him: other some have
their bidinge in ye same place where Christ is borne, and seek forthwith to
destroy him. Even so comes it to pass often times, look upon whom god most
liberally powers and bestows his spiritual gifts and graces, as the pure
doctrine of his word and such like, those make small accounte of them, yea (I
had almost said) contemn and despise the^: but among them, to whom has
happened scarcely any taste at all of the same benefytes, they are most highly
esteemed and most gredily defired.

In the days of Herod the King, behold, there came wise men from the East to
Jerusalem.

I Doctrine. The circumstances touching the time, touching the condition of
the persons coming, and touching ye place whence they came, do not only
purchase credit to the Evangelist reportinge such things, but also minister
no small momente to the fortifyinge and establishinge of our faith likewise in
Christ. That they came out of Persia it is likely, as well for that Persia is
situate directly Eastwarde to Palestine: as also because they that in Greek are
called (...) or (...) amomge the Latins Sapientes: amongst ye Persians are
commonly termed Magi: that is to say, wise men. Witnesses here of are Hierom
upon Daniell, and Chrysostom upon Matthew.

II. Doctrine. The Gentiles, according to the oracles of the prophets, began
to be called unto Christ, as soon as he was borne upon earth. Whereupon the
wise men are of some celebrated as ye first and original confessio^s of christ.

III. Doctrine. God or Christ, without having any respect or choice of
persons, calls all men unto him indifferently, and voucheth safe to
illustrate their hearts with his holy spirit. Frste are called the Jews, then
the Gentiles: afterward poor simple Shepherds, then again learned expert
or wise men. So far forth in Christ there is neither Jew nor Gentile,
circumcision or uncircumcision, Romans 2. Coloss. 3.
Barbarian, Scythian, bond or free.

IIII. Institution. It is our part and duty, (in what place soever we be)
with all our endeavor to seek after Christ. Those men came from the furthest
part of all Persia, with great costs and charges, with great pain and
trauile, and in so long and tedious a journey, also with incredible peril of
their lives. What behooves us therefore to do, who, wheresoever our mind is
endued and garnisshed with faith, Math. 18.
may there be sure to find Christ? Christ is at home at our houses, and
obteineth the middell place wheresoever two or three be gathered together in
his name.

Where is he that is borne King of Jews?

V. Doctrine. Luc. 1.13.1^.23.
Christ is a true king, albeit his kingdom be not of this world, temporal,
or such a one as is gotten and confyrmed by force of arms, and strength of
men: but heavenly, Joan 8. Heb. 7.
spiritual, eternal, and establyshed all only by the power of God.

VI. Institution. It is worthy of great admiration that a few strangers, in
an unknown Country, in the chief and principal city of all Iurye, where
the kings Court with his warlicke garrison was residente, durst make so
notable a confession of Christ being as yet base and obscure, of whom no aid
or succoure seemed to be looked for, by reason whereof great stirs ensued,
the king and all Jerusalem being vehemently troubled. But that came to pass
undoubtedly, forasmuch as they were enflamed with an inuinsible faith toward
God, and the holy Ghost moved and drove forward their minds.

Let us therefore learn in like manner, being instructed with a sound and
steedfast Faith, vnbashfullye, and courageously contemning all dangers
whatsoever, which seem to be set before us, or also daily to be renewed of
Satan and the world, to confess Jesus Christ to be our king and Savior:
yea, and by all possible means to publishe and declare his name.

Let the tyrauntes (like unto Herod) storm and stamp, let the hypocrites
forge their wiles and snares, let the Scribes and Pharisees take their crafty
counsayles together, yet will not we cease with all our heart and mind to
seek, and with all boldness to confess Christ to be our king and Savior.

VII Correction. Where are now those (...), those dastardes, which even when
all things are safe and sound, do yield no confession at all of Christ or of
faith in Christ? Let them be ashamed of their ingratitude toward God.

For we have seen his Star in the East.

VIII Doctrine. God reuealeth his will unto men diverse ways. First truly
internally, to wit, by the secret inspiration of his spirit wherewith he
eftsoons moves the hearts of all men, which is so far forth necessary every
where, that without it no knowledge is supsed to be certain and sure.

And often times verily God certifieth by this means as well the regenerate as
not regenerate of most grave and weighty matters. Secondely externally: and
that, either by his angels appearinge some time in visible form: Or by men,
such as were the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and the elect of all ages,
which move and persuade other to the faith and the holy actions of love: Or by
other creatures void of reason, amongst which may be numbered, as well all
this wholle frame of the world, distincted and adorned with her parts, as
also the fire in the bushe, the cloud in likeness of a pillar, and the
star, whereof we now speak, etc. By these and such like means, God,
whenever it pleases him, declares unto mankind his goodness, justice, and
power.

IX. Institution. We are admonished by the example of she wise men, that we
should not be idle gasers and beholders of such tokens, if at any time they
appear. For God by his providence ordayneth all these things, and
undoubtedly to our instruction though not always known unto us.

X Redargution. They err and are deceived not only in the stars, but also al
ye heaven over, as they say, which by reason the wise men, were taught, by the
guidinge of a star, that Christ the savior of mankind was borne, go about
to commend Astrology, which they call judicial and coniecturall, as an art
certain and infallible.

For that star was not of the number either of fixed or erraticall, but
verily a new star, which god would haus for a time to be seen, and again
to banishe out of sight.

Yea, rather truly it was no star at all, if we will credit Chrysostom,
but only the likeness of a star.

In like manner the wise men gathered not by that star any thing touching
the manner of Christ's life, or of those things which it behooved afterward to
chance unto him, as neither they observed after the order of the
Mathematickes, the disposition and aspect of other Planetes according to their
regions or houses, but they were taught that Christ is the king and savior as
well of the Jews as also of the Gentiles. Moreover, that his kingedome is
spiritual and heavenly, not carnal and earthly. Whereupon it necessarily,
follows, that whatsoever they obtained, they received it by the revelation of
the holy ghost, and not by the canons of Astrology again, yt by the same
spirit and star (which was with them in steed of ye external word and even of
a preacher himself) they were brought to the faith and the confession of
faith, and that nothing ever came into their minds as touching Astrological
conjecture.

XI. and XII. Doctrine and Institution.

Seeinge further that God vouchsafes to teach the wise men in this sort by a
Star, and not by angels or men, we shall here worthily note the wonderful
counsel and purpose of God, whereby so often as he determines to persuade any
unto him, he applies himself (such is his wisdom and goodness) to their
capacities, to the intent verily they may profytte and go forewarde through
those things wherewith they are most chiefly acquainted.

Wherefore it pleased God to call unto him the wise men of the Gentiles being
dilligent enserchers of natural causes, by a sign appeering in heaven.

For the Star was as fytte an instrument for that purpose among those
Persians, as the preaching of the word is known to be a most apt and ordinary
instrument amongst other nations.

But a while after, when the wise men had stepped up to somewhat an higher
degree in the school of Christian doctrine, he instructed them with the
words of the Prophet which they heard at Jerusalem.

Last of all, (as being further profited) he taught them also by his angels in
a dream.

Heerevpon therefore we have to understand what great prudence and dexterytie
is required in them, that take upon them to teach, or by reason of their
office ought to teach others.

Certes it is very requisite that they accommodate themselves (in all that they
may) to the capacity of their hearers, and make also their proofs and reasons
of things usual, familyar and well known.

For so Paul the apostle preachinge of Christ the true God to the Athenienses
takes occasion of speaking of a thing, manifest to all men, to wit, of the
altar dedicate to the unknown God: Afterward he proceeds unto reasons
proving the power and goodness of GOD, plainly perceived of all by the only
instinction of nature.

And we are come, to worship him.

XIII. and XIIII. Doctrine and Institution.

They which see the Star, that is to say, that have teathers and guides, of
whom they may by the word be rightly instructed in the exercises of
Godliness, in their minds faith springs, and withal they are stirred up to
the true worshipping and pure invocation of God and unto other things adjoined
hereunto: But they that have not teachers of the word, or refuse to hear
such as they have, doubtless it can not be, that they should lay a right
the foundations of faith, or otherwise profytte therein.

For faith comes of hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Romans 10.


Let us all therefore pray unto God, that if the truth has not as yet shined
unto us, he would send those that might inform us, by hearing of whom we
may also conceive true faith in Christ.

But if the truth has now already been revealed unto us, then that we may
rightly use it and direct the knowledge which we have gotten, to the true
invocation of Christ, through a lively faith and sanctimony of life.

XV. Doctrine. The wise men, whilst they profess themselves to be come to
worship Christ, do not obscurely testify and declare his divine nature.
Deuteronomy. 6. Math. 4.
For it is the Lord that ought to be worshipped.

When Herod the King had heard these things, he was troubled, and all the
city of Jerusalem with him.

XVI. Correction. Wonderful is the difference between the Gospel, and men
following the world and the things that are in it.

As Soon as by the grace of God the truth of the gospel waxes clear,
Princes and a great number of people seek means to stop the course thereof.
For the devil without ceassing, moves by his champions (such as are
described, Acts. 16.17.18.19.21.23. etc.) bloody broils and tragidies, sows
battles, seditions and tumults, trusting he thal bring to pass by this means,
that sound doctrine shall be evil spoken of, suspected and become hateful,
and so by little and little be utterly explosed and abandoned of al men. And
the world now adays nourishes every where an huge heard of Satan's
bonde^laues, which at all times go about craftily to take away the truth and
to hinder the studies of the holy scriptures.

But they labor in vain, as it is manisest that Herod also with his
conspiratours attempted all things in vain.

The truth may for a time be assaulted and hidden, but expugned and vttery
abolyshed it can not be.

So also the ungodly may accomplish some thing after their own desire, but
in the mean time the misers and blind bussardes do not perceive that the
victory which they have of the poor ministers of the word, will turn to
their own destruction.

For such is this kind of conflicte, that whosoever have the upper hand in
it, are in deed miserablye vanquisshed and put to the foil.

And victory in this respect is nothing else then a token of GODS wrath and
vengeance, which bursteth forth either upon the children, nephews, or upon
the posterytie to come.

XVII. Institution. Which of us soever will declare our selves to be the
children of the light, if at any time we perceive the Star of truth to
shine anywhere unto us, let us not with wicked Herod and his adherentes be
troubled and keep a stir, but rather as joyful and glad let us run to
meet it, embrace it with both our arms, and give thanks unto God for it.

XVIII. Doctrine. Herod, through ambition, riches, avarice, and ingratitude
toward god, was driven to resist. He feared least a new king rising up, he
should be put from his kingedom. The unthankful multitude always prove to the
worste, willingly joins it self to the will of princes, especially in evil
matters. It is evident, therefore, that men of haughtye mind, proud, puffed
up, vaineglorious, drunk thorough pleasant fortune, covetous, unthankful to
god ward, craftye, unstable, and such as in a moment apply themselves unto all
things thorough a certain carnal wisdom they have, do not lightly embrace
the Gospel, and do very hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. As touching
which thing, Christ Math. 8.19. Luc. 18. and the Apostles also else where do
preach.

And when he had gathered all the chief priests and Scribes of the people
together, he demanded, of them where Christ should be borne.

XIX Correction. The ungodly being provoked with the majesty of the truth
appearinge, seek diverse and sondrye ways to oppress it.

They apoint commissions, they call counsels and sinodes, and pretermitte no
^ote of those things, which they suppose will be profitable to the
furtheraunce of their mischief.

The men of Anathoth go craftelye about to intrappe Jeremy. Iere. 11.


XX Doctrine. Out of the mischeuous endeavors of men the Lord often times
draws that which is good.

The consultations and mandates of the wicked King touching the enserchinge of
the truth were the cause that the truth which before lay hidden, was out of
the monuments of the prophets brought into light.

Except this dilligent inquisition had been made by the kings commandment,
neither the Persian wise men nether the Jews, yea nor yet we at this day
should have so certain knowledge of the place, wherein Christ was borne.

Behold after what sort God wonderfully provides for his church, and how in
it men profit and go forward in the knowledge of things spiritual.

There sprang up heresies, cruel and barbarous persecutions against the
professors of the truth: in the mean season the church stands steadfast, and
is increased, not only for that it profits in the doctrine of faith, but
also forasmuch as it becomes more ware and provident in avoiding or enduringe
of dangers, and in humility, modesty, patience, and other virtues,
exercises it self not without great gain and advantage.

For so truly it pleases GOD to delude the enterprises of the wicked, Romans ^.
and to bring to pass, that to the godly al things turn to the best.

XXI Institution. It is to be observed in this present place, that the
colloquies and assemblies of learned men touching matters perteyninge to
religion and the state of the Church, are often times ordained to a very goodende
and purpose.

And albeit there be commonly in such assemblies some hypocrites or other, yet
is the truth by them or by the godly adjoined with them sifted out and brought
to light.

The wise men verily declare their opinion of the Star, the Jews search the
scriptures, and wh^lest in this sort as well natural reason, as the word of
God are with judgment and dexterity conferred together, a certain definitive
sentence is gathered out of them both.

XXII, and XXIII. Institution, and Correction. Herod asking counsel of the
chief priests and scribes, opportunelye admoniseth us, that in all matters of
doubt we should crave advice of those men that are perfectlye seen in the
same.

It is not without cause commonly spoken abroad: Let every man exercise
himself in ye art which he knows. But now adays a great number of men do
ouermuche offend in this behalf.

They presume to give sentence touching matters of religion, that never had any
^aste in the sacred scriptures, yea, that as well in manners as in opinions are
clean void of all godliness and pyetie. What good should we hope for at
their hands?

And they said unto him: At Bethlem in Jury For thus it is written by the
Prophet: And thou Bethlem in the land of Judah, art not the least among the
princes of Judah. For out of the shall there come a captain, that shall govern
my people Israel.

XXIIII. Doctrine. Right excellent is the dignity of the Scriptures. For the
scripture alone is unto us a certain and assured rule, faithfully showing the
truth as touching Christ and all things necessary to salvation.

Philosophycall proofs flowing out of the rivers of man's reason, are of great
weight, and bring no small light to things dark and obsecure: But in case
they be compared with the scriptures, they ought to give place as far unmeet
to match with them. Like as truly when the wise men were come to Jerusalem,
where the scripture had her place, and (as ye would say) her mansion house,
the star which they had seen in the East forthwith disappeered and withdrew
it self.

XXV. and XXVI. Doctrine and Institution.

In Micheas the Prophet cap. 5. it is thus read word for word.

And thou Bethlem Ephrata art little among the thousands of Judah, out of thee
shall he comforth unto me which shall be the governor in Israel, whose
outgoinges have been from the beginning, and from everlasting.

It appears therefore that the Evangelist expressed the prophesye so far
only as was agreeable to his purpose. Howbeit in the words of the prophet, not
only the humanytie of Christ but also his divinity is plainly described and
set forth.

And here again likewise in this place is suggested unto us the wonderful
goodness of God to be considered, and the holy Scripture most highly commended.

For it pleased God even immediately at the beginning to open and manifest his
purpose, touching the procuringe of the salvation of mankind by his son, and
to the inient men should become daily more certain and sure of so great and
worthy a thing, and their faith by that means be nourished and increased, he
vouched safe also to declare long before all the whole manner and the very
circumstances how every thing should betide.

Hitherto it pertayneth that the prophet Micheas so long time before, showed
as it were with his finger, the place where Christ should he borne.

It is our part to give unto God continual thanks, and perpetually to praise
him which would have as well the holy fathers as also our faith by that means
to be established. And as for the holy scriptures, in which those premises
and prophesies are contained, and is declared how and after what sort they all
at the length were accomplyshed and performed, let us have them evermore in
high estimation, reverence them, read and reuolue them without intermission,
from the judgment whereof to swerve but a hairs breddthe, as they say, is to
be counted a very wickedness.

XXVII. Doctrine. By ye words of ye Prophet, Christ is described to be a King
and Lord, but such a King as whose kingdom is not carnal, but in deed
spiritual, consisting in the hearts of the faithful, and streatchinge so
far as the limits of the catholic and everlasting church do extend. This
church compriseth all the saints and elect, and is an eternal church, the
bounds whereof are contained partly in heaven, and partly in and about the
whole world. This honor therefore and title of a king we find attributed to
Christ, both now at his nativity of the Gentile wise men, and again at the
time of his death of ye president Pilte a Gentile also, albeit not knowinge
what he did. But the Jews both first and last in such wise employed their
diligence, that from them the doctrine of salvation was derived to the
Gentiles. Now what manner of kingedome this is, it is of Christ in many places,
as in the parables wherein he calls the church the kingedome of heaven,
likewise when he fleed least he should have been made a King of the people,
again before Pilate, etc. Plainly and evidently declared.

XXVIII. Redargution. The false and treacherous Jews do now impudently
interpret these words touching the kingedome and principality to concern
Zorobabell, of whom mention is made Esdr. 2. Heggeus. 1. etc. And yet besides
that they are convinced by the authority of their own auncitors, into whose
head, duringe the time that Herod reigned and enquired the truth of the
matter, no such things ever came, it can by no means be understood of
Zorobabell, which is added of the Prophet, namely, that his outgoinges have
been from the beginning and from everlasting.

This was very well noted of Chrysostom. And thus do the Jaws reiecte the
verity explaned unto them of their doctors, and daily devise absurd and false
interpretacio^s of the divine oracles, in such sort that now it is evident
that they are given up of god into a reprobate sense, and that as well the
scriptures as every other thing besides (yet thorough their own deserving)
is become pernicious unto them.

XXIX. Institution. But go to let us by the example of the wise men submit
our selves wholly unto Christ our king, and acknowledge ye incomparable
benefits which we may receive of him, if so be we will believe in him with our
wholle heart, and with such fidelitye and diligence as is meet, obey his
commandments.

Where as if we believe an obey him in deed, then are we true Israelites, and
citizens regestred in the kingdom of heaven. Romans 9.
Not all that are of Israel, are Israelites, but they that are the children of
promise.

Then Herod, when he had privily called the wise me^, enquired, of them
diligently, what time the Star appeared. And he sent them to Bethelem, and
said: Go and search diligently for the young child, an when ye have found
him, bring me word again, that I may come and worship him also.

xxx. Correction. The ungodly albeit they have rightly been enstructed as
touching the truth, yet is their conscience never in quiet. They give no
credit to the Scriptures, and therefore they turn themselves to the devises
of man's wisdom. But as soon as they perceive themselves to be convinced as
well by the Scripture as by natural reason, they know not in the world which
way to turn them. Wherefore they convert themselves to deceites and wiles, and
when they are fully bent in their minds upon mischief, and in ye mean time
stand in doubt of all things, they seem as though they were moved with some
favor and zeal of the truth, but in very deed they imagine nothing else, then
how to deface and oppress it. But at the length their malice, one way or
other, brusteth forth in such wise that the godly may both eschew them and
avoid their snares pryuily prepared.

xxxi. Institution. All the godly therefore are admonished to beeware and
circumspecte, and to observe diligently, so far forth as may be, the tokens
whereby they may find out the fraud and impiety of those men, with whom they
have to do.

Those that go about to oppress the truth, some are tirauntes, some
hipocrites: of either of them we may behold the image and pattern in Herod
alone, and go no further. Both of them at the first coulloure their devises,
yea and fame themselue to seek with the godly to promote ye sincere
worshipping of God, as Herod says here that he will worship Christ. But
surely those affections of the mind^ shime not forth, neither does that spirit
appear to be in them, which otherwise is to be found in the godly sort: but
rather always there are noted in them either some words or deeds, out of
which it is no hard matter to gather their contempt and hatred of pure
religion.

Such a one is this, where Herod here not without disdain calls Christ a
child, saying: Search diligently for the young child.

Neither truly can the wicked any otherwise do, then extinuate the dignity
of Christ, the word of God, the Church, the ministry of the gospel: and one
while openly, an other while ouerthwartly, give some signifycation of their
malignante mind, especially when they fear either that it will come to pass,
that their enormites shall be disclosed and reproved, or else their credit and
commodity any thing empayred.

There is no doubt but that the Jews, perceived some such signs in them, E^d.
4.
which after they were brought out of Babylon into Jury, would have joined
themselves as inhabitauntes unto the Jews, returned out of captivity, in
buildinge of the Temple: Howbeit Zorobabell would not admit them: and that for
good cause.

For albeit they avouched themselves to worship together with them one and
the same GOD, yet notwithstanding sone after they declared many way^s how cruel
and vnmercyful enemies they were of pure and sincere religion.

And lo^ the Star which they had seen in the East, went before them, till
it came and stood over the place, where the child was.

XXXII, and XXXIII. Doctrine, and Institution.

The judgment of the Scriptures is heard, the common incklinge engraven in the
minds of all men, likewise natural causes are considered: and that, to the
intent all those things (so far forth as may be) being compared among
themselves, both our Faith might be confirmed, and also the knowledge of
spiritual things, chiefly of the righteousness, goodness, mercy, and power
of God, might grow and increase, in us.

To which end and purpose God himself often times is accoustomed else where to
adioyne eftesones unto his word and doctrine notable works and effects.

Let us not contemn therefore the reasons and natural causes which do
illustrate and set forth unto us the knowledge contained in the word of God,
and wonderfully help forward our weak understanding.

XXXIIII. Doctrine. There was need of a Star, which should show not only
the City, but also the house, yea and the child himself.

It is very lykely that all thing there were so vile and abiecte, that no man
would have thought Christ the king to be there. Albeit the Scripture be a
faithful wytnes and testifyer of the truth, yet, is it needful for us to
learn many things of men, of causes natural, of signs, and other of the
same kind, which are ordynary and allowed of God, and so be made certain of
many particular things necessary to be known.

And when they saw the star, they rejoiced exceedingly with great joy.

XXXV. Institution. The doctrine touching spiritual matters by which we are
directed unto Christ, and do profit in Christ, we ought to embrace with gladd
and joyful mind and also to give thanckes unto God for the same. Which thing
truly they gladly will do that have any understanding at all what great
v^ili^ie and profit comes of sound doctrine. And entering into the house,
they found the young child with Mary his Mother, and fell down and
worshipped him, and openinge their treasures, they presented unto him gifts,
Good, and Frankensence, and Myrhe.

XXXXVI, and XXXVII. Doctrine and Institution

Faith fyxed on the promises of God is not dcceiued, but like as god that
promises is true, so ye faith also of the belieuer fyndeth at the length the
truth by experience, and perceyueth in deed the large fruits of faith. By
faith the wise men were drawn out of far Countries into Bethlem (for how
should they have taken upon them so long, difficulte, and dangerous a
journey, the way being altogether unknown unto them, except they had been
incensed with a wonderful Faith?) there then they found in very deed that
which before they believed.

Therefore let us also, lokinge upon the promises of god touching the
benefytes as well of the life present as to come, never cast away our faith,
but by the example of the faithful Abraham, beyond hope believe under hope,
nothing doubtinge, but that God will perform his promises, if not for our
cause, which verily are unworthy of his benefytes, yet for his own sake.

xxxviii. Doctrine. The wise men whilst they honor Christ with that honor
which is due to God alone, do confess Christ not only to be man but also
true and perfect God.

Which thing they first learned in Persia by revelation from heaven, afterward
in Jury by the oracles of the Prophets.

XXXIX. and XL. Redargucion and Doctrine

Here are convinced all heretics as the Ebionites, Cerinthians and such like,
which contended that Christ is only pure man, and not God. But much more
grievously are confuted the Jews, which when they had heard partly of the wise
men, partly out of the Scripture, many and most certain testimonies touching
Christ, yet would they not adioyne them selves to the wise men, to the intent
to worship him: as neither they will be persuaded to this day to worship
and ackonwledge Christ to be true God. How much better had it been never to
have had any knowledge of Christ at all? for undoubtedly look how much more
manifestly Christ is declared unto them, so much more grievously shall they be
punished, which refuse to believe in him being known. But in deed those
things ought to be fulfilled which God long before by his Prophets had
pronounced touching the calling of the Gentiles to come, Esaias. 10.16. Romans
9.10.11.
and the reiection of the Jews, and of a people to be raised up of no peole,
and of those that were a people in deed, to be abolished.

Which things truly from the time ye the wise men came to worship Christ,
began wonderfully to be accomplished and even to this present day are performed.

It is requisite therefore that the doctrine touching the calling of the
Gentiles be noted in this place.

XLI. Doctrine. To worship with the body prostrate, and to offer gifts, are
outward signs, to declare the inward disposition of the mind.

For GOD has ordained that in profession of relygyon certain rites and
ceremonies should be usurped in the Church, with which men might testyfye
every way their godly and obedient mind.

And for this cause would God himself likewise declare his will toward men
by certain Sacraments of him instituted: whereof such are the actions, that
like as they show forth always some signification of the faith of men to god
ward, so also they yield the like signification of the good will of God
toward men. And yet is it not lawful to admit here every sort of signs, but
those only which are found established by the word of God. For to go about
to reduce again the superstitious rites of of the Gentiles alredye abolished
and abandoned by gods word, were an heinous offense.

XLII. Doctrine. By the very kind and manner of their presents, the wise men
declare, that they make a true and perfect confession of Christ the son of
God. They offered Gold, as who says, acknowledginge him to be their King and
Lord, which should most wisely govern and most mightily, defend his
spiritual kingedome, that is to say, his Church wherein they themselves were
enrolled. Kings and Princes command Gold or Coinage too be paid unto them.

Whylest they offer Frankensence, they confess him to be very God. For in
sacrificing or consecrating of things, it was a cus^ome commonly received for
the most part amongst all people, to offer Frankensence.

Wherefore Marcellinus the Bishop by castinge three greynes of Frankensence
into the fire, is judged to have attributed a kind of divinity to his Idols.
The offering of Myrhe testifies that Christ is true man, which should dye the
death. The people of the East parts, and especially the Jews, had a custom
to season the bodies of the dead with Myrhe, by ye virtue whereof they we kept
from putrefaction, as the Physician do avouch.

They therefore that confess themselves first before the congregation to be
citizens of the Church of God, and afterward that Christ is both true God and
true man, do make (as we think) so notable a confession of faith, that
nothing can be further required therein.

XLIII. Institution. We are admonished also by the example of the wise men, as
well in our mind as in our body to worship Christ, to confess and
acknowledge him to be the head and Lord over his church, and as very man so
also to be very god. Moreover we offer gold or money to Christ, Math. 25.
if we deal to our needy berthre^ any part of our own proper substance. God
gives us richies, and therefore will he be honored wc our riches but the^ is he
honored when we give to his members. We offer Myrhe, when we take diligent
heed, least ye corrupcion of sins do defile either our selves or others. We
offer Frankensence of a most sweet sauoure, when our good deeds to the glory
of GOD and edifiinge of our neighbor do shine forth and become apparaunte to
all men. Finally we draw forth of our treasuries gifts grateful to God, Romans
12.
if, as the Apostle monisheth and besecheth, We wake our bodies a quick
sacrifice, holy, and acceptable unto God, which is our reasonable service, and
not fasshion our selves after the shape of this world.

XLIIII. Correction. What punishments are not they worthy off, which having
abundantly wherewith (after the example of the wise men) to honor and worship
Christ the son of God, do yet nothing at all? they give not to the poor,
they make no confession of Christ, to the short, thou can find nothing in
them whereby thou may know them to be Christians. And although such appear
outwardly to be sober and modest, yet are they no better then the good and
modest Gentiles. For no man is ignorant, that of a Christian man far other
duties and otherwise done are required, then of a Gentile.

And after they were warned of God in a dream, tha^ they should not go again
to Herod, they returned into their own country an other way.

xlv. Doctrine. The providence of God is ever bent to the moderating and
aduauncing of human affairs. For, that Christ new born might be kept from
danger, yt the wise men might return home safe and sound, yt the rags of
wicked Herod might be brideled and stayed, God according to his unsearchable
wisdom provided fyt and convenient means. Who would have thought ye by this
means the Innocents should have been saved, and the tirau^t repressed? But
truly God is no more destitute of his purpose, the^ he cease to take care
fro us: which in deed is so great and wonderful, ye even whilst we be a
sleep, he suggesteth unto us ye which is needful to be done. So far forth
also do the godly often times even in their sleep profit more in good things,
then the wicked continually wakinge profit in evil.

xlvi Redargution. Why do ye ungodly wax proud, bosting of their ownestrength?
why threaten they to do al things as they lust? why do they not rather
observe, how easily and quickly all their devises are overthrown? as for
example whatsoever Herod went about is subverted only by a dream.

XLVII. Consolation. Let the godly consider these things diligently, and
believe that God will never fail them. For he will destroy both his and their
enemies, when and by what means we least suppose: If so be we repose our hope
and confidence in him, he will bring to pass undoubtedly whatsoever he shall
judge to be expedient for our salvation.

XLVIII. Doctrine. By this place it is manifest, that often times dreams are
sent of God, and that men when they dream are taught of God, and warned of
most weighty matters.

A little after the Evangelist declares that Iosephe likewise was by an Angel
admonished in his sleep to fly into Aegipt: and again how after certain
years expired he was commanded by like means to return into Jury. Many
examples are extant as well in ye old as new testament. And mark in the mean
time, how diverse and sundry ways God opens his will to men.

XLIX. Institution. The faith and obedience of the wise men is commended,
which did not unwillingly obey the monition given in their sleep. There might
easily have risen in their minds new doubts and scruples, and they might
peradventure have thought thus: If this, whom we have worshipped, were God, he
would be nothing afraid of Herod, neither should we be forbidden to return to
Herod. But they in no wise troubled themselves with any such curious
inquisition, yea utterly excluding al such cogitations, they accomplished with
cheerful mind ye which they were commanded. Let us therefore also enure our
selves without backslyding to obey the voice of god, which we often times hear,
if not in dreams, yet certes in the holy Scripture, in the universal engine
of this world, in our understanding and perfect reason, in those things that
teach us publyquely in the church, and that privately provoke us to the
things that (...) good and just, finally, in the notable deeds and examples
of holy men. For by these and such like means God at all times talks with
us, and provoke us to obedyence, and all kind of virtues.

L. Institution. What other thing shall we suppose the godly wise men to do
after they were returned into Persia, then all the days of their life with
great gladness and favor to have preached unto their nation this Jesus who^
first they had learned by secret revelation, and by the star, afterward by
the Scriptures, and had believed and worshipped him both as very God the son
of his heavenly father, and also as very man the savior and redemer of
mankind?

In like manner, therefore, if there be any of us, which are before the residew
of our brethren, lightened and advanced of God to an higher knowledge of
spiritual things, let us not suffer our selves by any means to be let,
but that we may preach Christ sincerely, faithfullye inform al others,
confyrme and strengthen those that have any whit profyted, and lastly direct
all our thoughts, words, and deeds to celebrate the glory of CHRIST, and
procure the profyt and vtilytie of our brethren.

Now if according to the manner of the time present, and according to the state
of the Church, it seems good to selecte a few places amongst so many, then
chiefly shall be urged with great fruit, those that excite men to make
confession of Christ both true God and true man. Such places are
4.6.7.13.16.17.41.42.43.

In these if a man stand somewhat long, and spend the principal part of
his sermon, he shall very much profyt his hearers, especially the slow and
duller sort.

Among the people given to the supersticious observation of celestial motions,
of days, of hours, or to diuinations, the 9. and 10. place shall prudently be
discussed: whereunto it behooves those things to be applied which are judged
conformable to the same argument, according as thou shall deem it profitable
to the capacities of the hearers. For so does Chrisostom also upon this place
refel in many words iuditiall Astrology. If it be expedient to inueigh with
sharp speaking against the enemies of the evangelical verity, the 14. 15.
16. 17. 18. 28. 29. 30. 31. places, will minister large and sufficient matter
enough. Finally where the people neglectinge Gods word and diume affairs is
to be stirred up and awaked from their filthy sluggishnesse, and to be
induced to the hearing and love of Gods word, it shall be convenient to stick
some what the longer in the enarration of the places, 3. 5. 8. 9. 11. 12. 13.
14. 16. 17. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. 30.

Thus much to have admonisshed is sufficient. Here follows an other example
out of Luke. 2.

And his father and mother marueiled at those things, Example. III.
which were spoken of him. And Simeon blessed them, and said unto Mary his
mother: Behold, this child is set to be the fall and vprising again of many
in Israel, and for a sign which is spoken against. And moreover the sword
shall pearce thy soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. And
there was a prophetisse one Anna the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Aser,
which was of a great age, and had lived with an husband seven years from
her virginity. And she had been a widow about four score and four years:
which departed not from the temple, but served God with fastinges and prayers
night and day.

And she came forth that same hour, and praised the Lord, and spoke of him,
to al them that looked for redemption in Israel. And when they had performed
all things according to the law of the Lord, they returned into Galile, to
their own city Nazareth.

And the child grew and waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with
wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.

This narration contains a double confession of Jesus Christ, Division.
namely that he is the true Messiah promised to the fathers, State.
and true God (for this is the state and sum of this present reading): the
one made by Simeon, ye other by Anna the prophetisse, two persons of great
estimation, and of notable sanctimony of life. Kind.
Whatsoever therefore is here rehearsed pertains to the kind didascalick.

And his father and mother merueiled at those things, which were spoken of him.
I. Confession.


These words are thus added to ye sermon and thanks giving of Simeo^ going
next immediately before: we ought in the mean time to observe here
dilligently, what things conduce to ye common places of christian doctrine.
These are such as follow.

I. Doctrine. The foundation whereupon our faith in christ does stay, are ye
revelations sent of God to ye godly, or the church. For by this means were
taught and enstructed the shepherds, Simeo^, Anna, Zacharias, Elizabeth and
many other more e^flamed with holy ye ghost, which al confessed and testified ye
Jesus is ye promised Messiah, and savior of our souls. Therefore albeit many
other reasons do co^cur which may worthily induce us to believe in Christ, yet
ought these testimonies to be of great weight and importance we us, and to stir
up faith in us. For which cause also it is evident y^ they were registered
among the sacred scriptures.

II. Institution. It becomes us highy to esteem of ye holy scriptures,
which contain those notable testimonies of Christ our savior, and out of
the^ to seek ye ground and confirmation of our faith. And moreover we must
dilligently enserch, hear, observe, and reuolue ye witnesses of all famous men
touching Christ and the universal doctrine of religion, whether the same be
newlye revealed by the holy Ghost, or taken out of the Srpitures. For by this
means Faith has even from the beginning been planted in the church, and yet
still grows and is nourished, like as in deed there have been, be, and will
be some at all times which are not afraid to bear witness of. Christ, even
when the hazard of their life is set before their eyes. For which cause they
are called Act. 1. and else where, Confessors and Martirs, that is to say
witnesses. Therefore with their testimonies also often times revoked into memory,
we ought to strengthen and fortify our faith.

III. Redargution. Forasmuch as both here in this place and also else where
Joseph is called the father of Christ, a great sort gathered that Christ was
borne of the seed of Joseph and that Mary remained not an undefiled virgin.
But they are convinced by those things which we read Luke. 1: When the angel
had declared unto Mary, that she should bear a child: How can this thing be
so, says she, seeing I know not a man? The angel answered forthwith:

The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall
ouershadowe thee. And therefore the holy one that shall be borne, shall be
called the son of God.

And Simeon blessed them.

IIII. and V. Institution and Correction. It is our duty in like manner to wish
well and congratulate with those whom God voucheth safe to adorn with his
spyrituall benefits, yea and we ought also to give thanks and sing praises
unto God for them.

The angel Gabriel and Elizabeth called the virgin Mary, in semblable wise,
blessed and happy above al women. But those ye do not rejoice in other men's
gifts and graces, especially spiritual, but envy and disdain them, declare
themselves sufficiently not to be Christ's disciples, neither to acknowledge
the benefits of God in his saints. Wherefore as of envy and hatred, so also
deserve they to be accused of ingratitude.

And said unto Marye his Mother: Behold this child is set to be the fall
and vprisinge again of many in Israel, and for a sign that is spoken against.

VI Doctrine. Simeon calls to mind the oracles of the Prophets as touching
Christ, and chiefly that of Esaias. 28: The word of the Lord shall be to them
an offense, that they may go on and fall backward and be broken in pieces. And
after a few words: Behold I lay in Sion a stone, an approved stone, a corner
stone, a precious stone, a sure foundation: he that believes, let him not be
to hastye.

Which place Peter also Act. 4. likewise in his first Epi^^le cap. 2.
interprets after the mind of Simeon, saying: Christ is a stone set to be
an offense and ruin of them that will not believe, and to be an vprising
again of the believers.

To the same effect also speaks Saint Paul Romans 9. who again 2. Cor. 2.
doubts not to pronounce the very gospel to be a sweet smell unto God. to
those verily that are saved, the favor of life unto life: But to them that
perish, the savor of death unto death.

Here upon it follows that whether men be saved or damned it depends
chiefly of Christ. For they that beeleeue in him obtain salvation, but those
that will not believe are damned: like as Christ himself also defyneth Marc.
16. Who then perceives not the most ample dignity of Christ to be here
celebrated and set forth? Furthermore, as those ye are saved ought to ascribe
the benefyt of their salvation only to God and to his goodness, Ephesians. 2.
seeinge namely they receive also the very power of believing freely of God
(for faith is the gift of God): even so those that perish, perish only
through their own defaulte whilst they refuse to believe and to receive the
benefyts offered.

Which thing the Apostle Romans 10 out of the same prophet Esaias obiecteth to the
unbelieving Jews. All the day long, says he, have I stretched out my hands
to a people that believes not, and that speaks against me. Therefore not
unto God, but to our own malice and wickedness ought our damnation to be
imputed.

VII. Redargution. Like as Christ by him self and simply is the cause of the
risinge up of many, and not the cause of ruin or falling but accidentally or
by occasion: So the Gospel also by it self is the power of God to salvation
to every one that believes: but if debate, sedition, or any public
calamities do arise, that comes to pass only by occasion, which ungodly
men, hypocrites couetuous misers, tirauntes and such like do seek and procure.

For as soon as they perceive that by the Gospel their incredulity, and
corrupt manners are reproved, and drawn to the tribunal seat of God and
there condemned, they leave no stone unturned, to the intent they may oppress
it and utterly extinguish it.

Let therefore those maliparte and subtle deceyeurs hold their tougues which
in these days falslye slander the Gospel and most cruelly molest all good
men with false accusations, as though Christ were the ruin and fall of a
great number by himself, as though the Gospel did nothing else then destroy
and mar all, and lastely as though the godly teachers were the authors of
dissentions, sects, seditions, tumults. etc.

When as in very deed they wish well even from the botome of their heart to
all sorts of men, and labor by all means to erecte, edify, save, and train
all men to a better life in CHRIST Jesus.

But what do thou? Such complayntes of the ungodly have been heard even
from the first beginning, as in the time of Elias, Ieremye, and Micheas the
Prophets, in the time of the Apostles, and in all ages hereafter shall the
ears of men be troubled and disquieted with such slanderous voices. But how
these are to be resisted and their mouths to be stopped, every man may learn
out of Tertulian cap. 4..41. of, his Apologeticus, out of Cyprian against
Demetrianus, Augustines books of the City of God, and the hystory of Orosius.

VIII Institution. Let us pray continually unto god our heavenly father, that
he will not lead us at any time into temptacion, nor suffer us to stomble at
the offendicles, which, of the humility of Christ, or of the doctrine of the
Gospel, or of the condition of the ministers, or of some other like cause, may
seem to arise. Where if by reason of our infirmity, or also by the just
judgment of God for our sins, it chances us at length to fall: then that
he w^ulde by his mercy and for the glory of his name, erect and lift us up
again.

IX. and X. Doctrine and Institution. That Christ^ was an offense to a great
number of the Iewishe nation, the Apostle Romans 9.10.11. plainly shows, where
he disputes of the reprobation of the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles.
Again, 1. Corinthians. 1. We preach Christ crucified to the Jews an offense, and
to the Gentiles folishnesse.

Paul also and Barnabas to the Jews, To you first, say they, Act. 13.
it behooved the word of God to be spoken, but forasmuch as ye repel it, and
judge your selves vnworth, of eternal life, behold we are turned to the
Gentiles. Likewise Peter in the second chapter of his first epistle, does not
obscurely reason of this matter.

Wherefore all men are admonished, and especially those whom GOD has
vouchsafed to illustrate, more then other, with the knowledge of his sincere
doctrine, to ponder deeply with themselves, what manner of example is in the
Jewish nation set forth unto all that are graffed into the church of God.

That people was peculiarly well beloved of GOD, and of them alone God gathered
to himself an holy Church: but yet for their ingratitude they were rejected.
They therefore that now stand in faith, let them not be proud thereof,
knowings ye their ruin is at all times likewise to be feared. Certain it is,
that if we which have long since received the light of the gospel, do not
proceed to bring forth fruits worthy of the gospel otherwise then hitherto
we have done, God will sooner then we be aware take him kingdom away from us,
and give it to a nation that will bring forth worthy fruits in deed.

When will ye ^wake, O ye stubburne and stiffenecked people oppressed with
continual sleep?

XI. and XII. Institution and Consolation. With what force and power all wiches
hypocrites, false teachars, heretics and tyrauntes have to this present day
withstoode our savior and redeemer Christ, from the time that he was first
manifested in the flesh, may partly out of the Evangelical, history, Acts
and writings of the Apostles, partly out of the Ecclesiastical stories,
enough and to much appear.

And surely in Christ, which is in many things set forth to us for an example,
shines a type or figure of ye christian life and even of the whole Church.

Wherefore seeinge Christ himself has always sustained contradictions and
controlementes, it is not to be meruayled at, if the godly also be oftetymes
and in many things spoken against.

For contradiction or persecution we may know to be as a sure token, whereby
the true Church of Christ is discerned from the sinagoge of Satan.

For so it is provided, that, as many as will live godly in Christ Jesus, must
suffer, persecution. 2. Timoth 3. Galat. 4.
And as he that was borne after the flesh, persecuted him that was borne
after the spirit: even so is it now.

And our Lord Christ himself unto his disciples, John 15*
If ye were of the world, says he, the world would love his own. If they
have persecuted me, they will also per^ute you.

But let us be of a good courage, and comfort our selves in aduersitye by the
example of Christ goinge before us.

We know well enough that servants can not be in better place, then their
lord is in: wherefore let us valyauntly sustain the lot that God has
appointed us in the confession of the Gospel, nothing doubting, Romans 8.
But that if we suffer and be humbled here with Christ, we shall also with him
be exalted and have the fruitio^ of eternal glory.

And moreover the sword shall pearce the soul that the thoughts of many
hearts may be opened.

XIII. Doctrine. The blessed Virgin her self sufferd no doubt exceeding much
grief and anguishe for Christ's cause. For what heart had she, (may we think)
I say not when for fear of Herod she was driven to fly into Aegipte, and
there live long time an exull, nor when afterward being lost by the way she
fought her son very carefully in every company, but when she saw him hanging
on the cross, and distressed with all kind of contumelies? There is no doubt
but that she was then vehemensly troubled, and had almost thought, that he was
not the true Messiah whom before she believed, and of whom she had conceived a
most certain hope.

Such an offendicle therefore or at least such inward heaviness, is noted by
the Metonimye of a sword bringinge sorrow with it.

Howebeit here we may learn, that no man is so perfect, but that now and
then he suffers some offense (vaynquished by the infyrmitie of the fleesh) by
reason of Christ or the Gospel.

For even the Saints also do oftetimes complain, Psalm. 73.
that their feet are well nie caused to slide: whiles they behold the godly
here on earth to be afflicted and the wicked to florishe in sprosperitie.

But so it is, Corinth. 10.
God helps his chosen in due time, and by streatchinge forth, as it were, his
hand, lifts them up, whom he perceyueth to be in danger.

Temptations are not perpetual, neither does God suffer any to be tormoyled
with them above their strength.

XIIII. Institution. Let us acknowledge therefore our own weakness, and if at
any time it chances us to waver and fail either in doctrine or deeds, let
us remember that we are not better then the residue of the Saints, and with
all let us require and expecte at gods hand, that he would confyrme us in the
truth.

XV. Doctrine. Ruin or vprisinge, as they happen for Christ's cause, are not
light or hidden, such as many be apprehended only by thoughts, but very
grave, sharp, vehement, and such as are apparaunt and open, so that all men
have power to judge of them.

For all manner of offenses do first spring in the heart, where the thoughts
do accuse or also excuse one an other, and as ye would say, strive and
conflicte among themselves, notwithstanding a little while after they break
forth into words or else into manifest deeds.

So lurked the offense of CHRIST some whiles in the heart of Peter, whylest he
privily thought: That Christ, whom the Jews so spitefully entreated, was in no
wise the true Messiah.

But in short space aster his thoughts were disclosed, when he openly revolted
from Christ, yea and flatly denied that ever he knew him.

Wherefore how Christ was to him an occasion of ruin or fallinge, every manne
might then easily judge.

Contrariwise, they that believe, do first in their heart believe unto
righteousness, and afterward with their mouth make confession to salvation.

Which whilst they do, all men may judge, how CHRIST is to them a
ressurection or vprisynge again.

XVI. Institution. Seeing therefore the case stands thus, that every offense is
first conceived in the heart, and after comes abroad into light: It be honeth
us truly to pray unfeignedly to God, that he would vouchsafe so to purge and
fortify our hearts with his spirit, that no offenses take any root in them.

Or if at any time we begin to waver and doubt as touching the dignity of
Christ, or excellency of the Gospel, then that he would by his holy spirit
and word strengthen us, before such cogitations come to light, whereby extreme
destruction should of nessitye follow.

And there was one Anna a prophetisse the daughter of Phanuell of the tribe of
Aser: she was of a great age, II. Confession of Christ.
and had lived with an husband seven years from her virginity. And she had
been a widow about four score and four years, which departed not from the
temple, but served god with fastinges and prayers night and day.

XVII. Doctrine. In this second part touching the confession of Anna, where
many things are rehearced attributed to her person, as the name of Anne, the
gift wherewith she was adorned, prophecy, her parents, tribe, age, her
former state of life, her widdowehoode, place, she departed not out of the
temple, her exercise or manners, she served GOD with fastinges and prayers night
and day: these things, I say, thus attributed unto her, we shall perceive to
be heaped together to the amplifyinge and augmentinge of her dignity, by
reason whereof the authority of her testimonye or confession which she made of
Christ, is of necessity also illustrated and increased.

Hereupon we have to consider that there is no estate or degree of men, which
God refuses but that even to all, so they embrace righteousness and piety,
the holy ghost is given and the truth revealed.

Behold, I beseech you, what great diuersitye there is, of those that confess
and celebrate CHRIST as soon as he is borne. Some are angels, some are human
creatures, and of them both men and women, some are simple and rude
shepehardes, and the same Jews and neighbors borne, some are learned some
unlearned, some are pagan wise men and strangers, some are married folk, as
Zacharias and Elizabeth, some single as Anna the widow etc.

For certes he that was sent to procure the salvation of all men, is worthily
made manifest to all sorts or men, and of the same honored and praised.

XVIII. Institution. Let every man have a diligent consideration of his own
calling, and be altogether in this, that he may please the Lord in that
state whereunto he is called. 1. Corinthians. 7. Colloss. 3.


For in each kind of life we may serve and please GOD, least any man should
thinck y^ he might justly pretend, any excuse. Albeit it can not be
dissembled but that sometime in one kind of life more opportunity do happen
to ye furtheraunce of pure invocation, and to the accomplishement of such like
duties of piety, then in an other, which thing both here in this place, and
also 1. Corinthians, 7. touching single life, we see to be signified

XIX. Institution. Amongeste other exercises of godlynes here is commended unto
us the continual inuocetion of gods name, and fasting, whereof that
norrysheth Faith, this humylytye and mortyfycatyon of the flesh.

Neither shall thou think it suffycient in case, thou exercysest thy self in
these kind of Godly actyons, whilst common prayers or public fasting is
appointed, but rather thou shall endeavor thy self to this, that of thine
own accord, without the appoyntement or commaudement of any man, thou may
cheerfully accomplyth all things, as it is evident the widow Anna did.

God is most chiefly delighted with a free hearted, cheerfully, and liberal
worship.

But severally by name these exericses are to be commended to Widows, unto
whom is set forth and be painted in Anna the Prophetist, an absolute image
and pattern of life rightly to be framed. Whereunto may be added that whch is
read as touching Widows. 1. Timoth. 5.

And she came forth that same hour, and praised the lord, and spoke of him,
to all that looked for redemption in Israel

XX, and XXI. Doctrine and Institution. This thing may all men worthily judge
to be even miraculous, that so many men and women of diverse degrees and calling
having no talk or communiation together before and without making any
conspirasie, should pronounce one and the same sentence of Christ namely that
he is both true God and true man, the Messiah, that was promised to the fathers.

And cer^es this consent and agreement of ye doctrine and confession of Christ,
ought greatly to confirm and establishe our faith.

Neither let us doubt to adioyne our selves unto that Church, in which is heard
a perpetual consent both in the doctrine and confession of Christ.

For this confession is as it were a mark and token whereby the true Church is
adorned, and sequestered from the false.

They that consent and agree not with the catholic Church of God, which even
from the beginning of the world has always confessed and preached Christ
to be the true Messiah, which should break the Serpents head do exclude
themselves from the Church of Christ, and departinge away, become the authors
of new sects.

And surely without the Church which stands upon a perpetual consent of
doctrine, no man can nay more obtain salvation, then without the ark of Noah
any could be saved from drowninge, the flood covering and swallowinge up all
things.

Therefore nothing is more amyable thou the concord and unity of the Church,
seeing where the same is by the temeritie and mallyce of wicked men once broken
and dissolved, it can by no Counsels, Synodes, Colloquies or assemblies be
amended and redressed, except the holy Ghost do after a certain privy and
wonderful manner conciliate the minds of those that be at variaunce.

XXII and XIII. Doctrine and Institution.

Confession as touching. Christ ought not to be done in hudder mudder, but
openly and before all the Congregation. Let our news followers of Nicodemus go
pack them hence, which are of opinion that they do abundantly satisfy the
duties of Christians, when as they whisper in the ears of two or three that
they profess the truth of Christ.

But that is not suffieient: For it is required that thou make also confession
before all men, whenever the opportunity of confessing shall offer it self
to the glory of God and edifiynge of our neighbor.

And this opportunity is not to be omitted, but rather diligently to be sought
for: For as Anna was inflamed with incredible feruency of faith, which durst so
promptly and freely confess Christ openly in the very temple* Even so we also,
if at least there remain any spark of sincere faith in us, ought no less
wyllingly and vnbashefully to confess Christ as occasion shall serve, and be
ready to render an account of our faith to every one that will require the sam^.

XXIIII. Doctrine. The Euangeliste does not obscurely signify, that Anna
witnessed by her confession that the redemption and deliverance of mankind,
which was brought into the power and servitude of sin and death, ough to be
accomplished only be Christ, which the Law and Prophets had every where
declared.

XXV. and XXVI. Doctrine and Consolation.

The expectation and loking for redemption is a notable token of the true
Church. For in the Church alone remains the undoubted hope as touching
redemption and salvation, and the godly sort only done with an unshaken
Faith look for salvation by and for Christ.

For which cause the church is thought to be armed with such a Faith touching
Christ our savior, that the gates of hell can not prevail against it.

Therefore with this hope of redemption to be had in the Church let the godly
comfort them selves in all dangers and temptations.

With this hope let the weaker sort be armed as often as they shall enter into
any spiritual conflictes.

And thou whosoever thou art, take heed in any wise, that thou be always in
the noumber of them, that look for redemption of Christ.

Which if thou do care for in deed, thou shall no doubt feel every where
great peace and consolation.

And when they had performed all things according to the law of the lord,
they returned into Galile, to their own city Nazareth.

XXVII. and XXVIII. Doctrine and Institution.

By the law of God it was commanded, that every first borne should be brought
and consecrated to the Lord. Number. ^.
Gods law has nothing vain or superfluous in it, but what soever God
commands, is grounded upon just and weighty causes.

Wherefore God says well that all the first borne in Israel was due unto him,
from that time wherein he struck all the first borne in the land of Aegipt.
But now all even as many as profess Christ's religion ought to be brought
forth and consecrated to God, forasmuch as all the glory and benediction of
that ancient people is con^eighed by Christ to the beleeuinge Gentiles, as
Peter in his first Epistle Cap. 2. aparauntly teaches: You, says ^ee, are a
chosen Kind, a Kinglye priesthod, an holy nation.

We are admonished therefore that we should with all study and diligence
endeavor our selves to observe the law of God.

If Christ the author and lord of the law, did humbly submit himself to the
law, what excuse shall we make, whereby we should not obey the law? It remains
therefore that we consecrate our selves wholly unto God, not only in our young
and tender age, but also all our life long.

The ceremonies and oblations of Moses are verilye in our days abolyshed,
neither is it required of us that we should offer for our children Turtle
doves or young pigeons:

Nevertheless it is our part and duty in case we have any children borne unto
us, first to acknowledge them to be given by the only goodness of God, and
that we owe unto him unspeakable thanks for so great a benefit. Moreover we
shall consecrate them unto the Lord, if so far forth as lies in us, we
bring them up in the fear of God, and in the simplicity of doves, in modesty
and innocencye, and so instruct them throughout all their life, as that for
their sanctimony and virtues the name of God may be gloryfyed on earth.

This is one manner of conseeratinge children to the Lord, set forth unto al
christians: Ye fathers bring up your children in the nourtour and correction
of the Lord. Ephesians. 6
For the whole institution and chastisement ought to be directed to the glory
of the Lord.

And the child grew, and waxed strong in spirit, and was filled with
wisdom, and the grace of God was upon him.

XXIX. Doctrine. All things truly in Christ are very excellent and singular,
and that by reason of his dyuine nature joined to his humayne.

Notwithstanding we may judge also in general of all children, especially
those that are borne of faithful parents, that the holy Ghost vouchsafes
likewise to strengthen them, which in deed is the most ample benefytte of God
toward us. For this cause Christ not in one place greatly commends little
children.

Except ye turn and become as young children, Math. 18.
ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven. Suffer little children to come
unto me and forbid them not, Luc. 18.
for of such is the kingedom of God, etc.

XXX. Redargution. Who therefore is of so mischeuous a mind, to cry out ye
young children, which Christ so much commends can not be partakers of
spiritual benefyts? and to restrain them from baptism and all sacred rites?
God voucheth safe to sanctifye some even in their mothers womb, Iere. 1.
which is reported of Jeremy and John the Baptist, in the scriptures, some he
sanctifies eftsoons in their childhood, Luc. 1.
as Samson and others: why doste thou the^ envy such, and wilt not suffer them
to be consecrated to the Lord?

xxxi. Institution. How much better that we do, if we entirely love young
children being so dear unto god, and deuoutely reverence them as the elect
organs of God? again if we pray to our heavenly father, that he would
inform their hearts with his holy spirit, and direct them to learn and
embrace true piety and godlynes?

For the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. Proverb. 1.


Let children therefore be nourtered and taught in the elements of sound
doctrine. Where the foundations shall in this wise be laid, the lord will add
happy success and procedinges in the rest.

He will fill them with wisdom, and the grace of GOD shall be upon them, as
it shall seem good unto the Lord, in whom alone it lies to prescribe the
mean. O happy are those children of whom it may in some sort be judged that
God does illustrate them with the light of ^is grace.

xxxii. Correction. Albeit it chiefelye depends of the goodness of God, that
children are made strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and by the special
grace of God prospered in all their proceedinges, yet that a great help and
furtheraunce hereunto remains also in the parents, no man is ignorant.

The first education of children even alone for the most part is the cause,
that we have either good or ill citiezens. For look what impes we bring up,
such men in a manner does the common wealth receive of us afterward.

Beware how thou think them to prove good men, whom being boys, thou see
to be of rude and dissolute manners.

What great infection of evils children take of their parents, and what
mischeuous examples they mark oftetimes at this age in their gouerners and
masters, no man can with tongue express or declare.

There is no doubt, but that this inordinate education of children, which now a
days we may every where behold, does portende some bloody happes, and great
calamities very shortly to ensue.

But let us pray unto God that he will guide us all with his grace, and turn
away in time the mischiefs hanginge over our heads.

How if consideration be had of the time present, then with good right shall be
handeled before the Church the 1. and 2. Of the places before going, which, and
when most chiefly to be handled.
places, which are as touching the certainty of the christian faith, also the
20. 21. 22. 23. of the agreement in doctrine and confession of the same before
the Church of God.

It is certain, that these places being either severally at large or jointly
among themselves (for so much as if thou lokest upon the matter, they are of
allyaunce together) clearelye explayned, will engender no little fruit in the
minds of the hearers, and will bring to pass that a great number shall
couragiouslye embrace the GOSPEL, and with all seek by all means possible to
promote and advance the same.

Moreover, for those that in these days do slander and bark against the
labors of godly teachers, and that forge and contriue no few things whereby
they may bring as well the Gospel it self as also the interpreters thereof
into hatred and hasard, it shall be for the behoof of the church, if the 6.
and 7. places, against them to whom Christ is an offense, be more largely and
amplye declared.

Where if it like thee rather to erect and comfort those that now in many
provinces are most cruelly oppressed for the confession of the truth, thou
shall oportunely entreat of the 9. 10. 11. 12. 20. 21. places.

But in case any be disposed to frame such a Sermon, whereby all sorts of men
may be admonished and moved unto pyetie and sanctimony of life, very fyt for
this purpose will be the 17. 18. 19. places more copyouselye discoursed.

But who knows not what detestable demeanor and corruption of manners is now
every where to be seen in children? again what great negligence there is as
well of parents as of Scholemaisters in the good bringing up of Children?

Therefore he should best provide for the utility of many, that shall determine
with himself to tarry somewhat long in those things, that are briefly touched
in the 29. 30. 31. 32. places.

What need many words? Out of the places hitherto declared thou shalt chose
now these now those to be more at large discoursed and illustrated, which thou
shall deem most convenient for the state of the Church, the time, places, and
persons.

We have exhybited three examples of the kind didascalike derived out of
historycall narrations, and how it behooves to excrepte and digeste common
places out of every member thereof, I suppose it is of us sufficiently
declared:

Now reason requires that we add also an example of the other form, Things
to be observed in the examples of the other form.
in which namely no continual narration is knit together but some doctrine is
simply expressed, and the same also with certain arguments and reasons
confyrmed.

It is dilligentlye to be provided and foreseen in this form, I
that the scope and certain meaning or doctrine of that part or parcel, which
is taken out of the holy Scripture to be declared to the people, be before all
things thoroughly known and perceived. And that always for the most part is
expressly to be found either in the beeginning or else in the end of the
reading.

John Baptiste seeing Jesus coming unto him, had in deed a very brief, but
yet a grave and and high Sermon as touching Christ, whereof he himself makes
this the end, saying:

I have seen and testified, that this is the son of God.

It is plain therefore that all that Sermon of John tends to this end:
John. 1
that he might declare, Chrst to be God the son of God.

In the epistle to the Hebrews, it is learnedly declared, that Christ is both
God the son of God, and also man, and that two natures do consist in one
person. Wherefore in the very entrye of the Epistle it is clearly said:

That God the father, as he spoke in times paste to our forefathers which
believed, by his Prophets, so in these later days he has spoken by his son
very God and very man.

And yt this scope or state ought always first to be found out, before it be
pronounced as touching the kind of the Sermon, it is above rehearced.

Secondly, II
in the examples of this form many and diverse arguments are found for the
most part orderly disposed, and applied to confyrme one and the same state or
article of doctrine. Those it behooves always so to be taken and expounded as
that they may be understood to tend directly to the self same state.

For it is necessary that all things be directed to one and the same scope,
which the Scripture it self proposes.

Further, III
hereof it follows thirdly, that in examining of every argument, many and
diverse places ought not rashelye to be drawn out of the parts or members of
them, and that least such plentye and diversity might withdraw the minds
from the chief and principal state or scope of the matter.

Lastly, IIII
albeit some places also may be drawn forth, such inesp^ciallye as are diverse
and some what differente from the state it self, yet shall it not be expedient
to stand ouerlong in the enarration thereof.

For it would be very absurd, to turn away the oration from that which is
the head and fountain of the business. These things it seemed good thus
briefly to premise.

Let us take in hand therefore the short Sermon of John the Baptist touching
our Lord Christ, Example.
as it is read John. 1.

John sees Iefus coming unto him, and says: Behold the lamb of God,
which takes away the sins of the world. This is he of whom I said: after
me comes a man, which went before me: for he was before me, and I knew him
not, but that he should be declared to Israel, therefore am I come baptisinge
with water. And John bare record, saying: I saw the spirit descend from
heaven like unto a dove, and abode upon him, and I knew him not, but he that
sent me to baptize in water, the same said unto me: Upon whom thou shall see
the spirit descend, and tarry still on him, the same is he which baptiseth
with the holy ghost. And I saw and bare record, that he is the son of God.

In this brief Sermon John the Baptist affirms and proves, State.
that Christ is not only man, but also God the son of God. For this is the
conclusion and likewise the state of this present Sermon.

Whereupon every man may easily consider, seeinge there is handled here a
doctrine as touching the divinity of Christ, that it is of the kind
didascalick. Kind.


The arguments or proofs how and after what sort they are distincted and
divided, we will eftsoons declare. Arguments.


And here we say again that our faith in this place ought greatly to be
confyrmed as touching the divine nature in Christ. Yea and the example also of
John Baptiste does not a little excite us to make confession of our faith. But
let us examine every part and member by it self.

John sees Jesus coming unto him.

I. Doctrine. Jesus came to John, as well that by his presence he might cause
him to be strong, courageous, and constant in the office of teaching, as also
that by such an occasion the people might more fully be taught of John, that
Christ is the Messiah promised in times paste to the fathers, and that the same
also is both true GOD and true man, by whom mankind should be delivered from
sin and everlasting damnation.

Whereupon truly it becomes plain and evident, that GOD, like as he
determined from everlasting to send his son into the world, to the intent
those that believe in him might likewise be made the children of GOD, and
obtain salvation: even so when the same his son was come down to the earth,
he ordained and would have to be extante certain fytte and convenient means,
by which men might be moved and persuaded to believe.

In these points therefore ought to be put the coming of Christ unto John, and
the Sermon of John that follows immediately of Christ.

II Institustion. Herevppon we learn, that we ought both to minister unto
other all occasion of promotinge the truth and of preaching Christ, and also
to take it being offered of others. Certes where the same may be had* we must
in no wise suffer it to slyp away.

Wherefore the Apostle, Act. 13.14.17.18.19
to what place soever he came, as soon as he was entered into the Synagogs or
Schools, preached Christ with great and invincible courage, and refuted the
Jews that withstoode and contraryed his doctrine.

III. Correction. They are reproved indifferentlye as well that get
opportunity, and yet dare not utter any thing o^enly as touching the Gospel,
neither give any ynckling or signifycation, that they have any knowledge
thereof, as also that labor by all means, to hinder the study of the holy
Scriptures, and to stop the course of gods word.

For in deed either of them do sufficiently declare themselves to be
unwilling, that Christ should come unto John, and by him be commended to the
people.

And says: Behold the lamb of God, that takes away the sins of the
world.

IIII. I. Reason whereby it is proved that Christ is not only man but also God.
Doctrine. The first reason whereby John declares Christ not only to be man,
but also God, derived of the type to the truth, and of the prophetical
predictions to the thing present.

In times past it was presignifyed and foretold, partly by diverse sacrifyces
and rites, and partly by the oracles of the holy prophets, that there would one
day come a lamb with whose blood the sins of the whole world should be
cleansed. And certes that Lamb is this which we fee, Christ.

Christ therefore expiateth the synns of the world with his blood and death.

Howbeit by blood and death is noted the humanytie of Christ which is
plainly expressed Heb. 2.

Again heerevpon it follows, that Christ, for so much as he purges sins,
is also very God. For no man can deny that by his own proper power and virtue
to expiat, take away, and remitte sins, belongs only unto God.

But as touching that which perteyneth to sacrifices or rites, ^he Scripture
most apparauntly entreats, as of the Paschall Lamb Exodus 12, of the two
Lambs to be offered daily continually Exodus 29, and Number. 28. finally of the
Lamb to be given after certain days of cleansing for every child new borne
Leuit. 12.

To these tipes and figures ye John directed the force and sharpnes of his
mind, no man stands in doubt: The prophesye if we requiyre, Christ Esaias. 53.
is depainted and described in the likeness of a Lamb holding her peace, when
she is lead away to the place of slaughter.

Therefore that Lamb both God and man, which the tipes and predictions of the
prophets foretold should come, John affirms to be present, and that it
ought to be acknowledged in Christ.

And what other thing seems to be signified by the particle Ecce Behoulde,
then a difference betwixt the law and the Gospel? In the time of the law
were inculked in the Church figures and prophesies of the Lamb to come, but
under the Gospll the Lamb it self is openly seen.

Wherefore, here upon may easily be gathered the certaintye and excellensye of
the Gospel and of the evangelical doctrine, before the law. As touching
which thing also 2. Corinthians. 3. We have here then a double doctrine declared
at once.

V. and VI. Doctrine and Institution.

The power and goodness of our savior Christ is not a littell amplyfied, when
as John very aptly says, that by him are taken away the sins of the world.

For it is signified that there can not be so many or so great sins at any
time committed, but that the blood of Christ is sufficient to make satisfaction
for them. Which amplification John expressed also in his first Epistle Cap. 2.
saying: He is the propitiatio^ for our sins, and not for our sins only, but
also for the sins of the whole world.

And certes it is true, if the will of God and of Christ be considered, the
fruit of his blood suffices and is applied universally to all men: but if
regard be had to the will of men, there commethe oftetimes an impediment
therefrom, whereby they can not be pertakers of spiritual benefits.

VII. Redargution. They are greatly deceived, that seek^ for remission of
sins any other way, then by Christ. There is no other Lamb that has power
to forgive sins, but this alone to whom John wills all men spedily to come.

Be thine own works never so excellent, and presume never so much with god
after thine own deserving, 1. Joan. 1.
yet must thou needs grant of necessitye unto this lamb the right and power
of pardoninge thy sins.

VIII. Institution. Where if we feel then our selves to be oppressed with the
grievous burden of our sins (for we must all confess of necessity the case
so to stand with us): Let us fly unto this our advocate and redemer Christ,
and pray humblye to God the father being justly offended with us, that it
would please him to be pacified for the blood of his innocent son, 1. Corinthians. 5.
for so much as he also is the paschall Lamb offered up for us, and not impute
unto us any more our sins.

For what shall it profyt us to have Christ appointed the Lamb, by whose death
the sins of the world should be taken away, if in the mean time those
things which we have committed, be not done away?

To the end thereof the benefytes and merits of Christ may be applied unto
us albeit unworthy, it is our parts and duties both day and night to pray
unto God our heavenly father with a pure and constant faith.

IX. Consolation. With what thing may doubtful and careful consciences more
fortify and confirm themselves, then when they understand that by this means
the undefiled Lamb Jesus Christ is set forth unto the^, through whose
intercession, as many as being moved with repentance of their former offenses
believe in him, do obtain ouerlastinge salvation?

X. Institution. We ought to yield continual thanks unto God ye father who
has given us to live at those times in which ye Lamb so long before promised
and looked for of the holy fathers is exhibited in the flesh, and has with his
precious blood and death as with a ransom given, made satisfaction for the
sins of all men. Luc. 10.


Many Kings and Prophets have been desirous to se the things that you see,
and have not seen them: and to hear the things that you hear, and have not
heard them, etc.

This is he of whom I said: After me comes a man, which went before me. For
he was before me, and I knew him not, but that he should be declared to
Israel, therefore am I come baptisinge with water.

The second reason prouinge Christ to be GOD, taken of his eternity. Christ
came after me, to wit, II. Reason.
as touching the flesh and his human nature: and yet went the very same
before me in respect of his dyuinitye.

But if Christ be eternal it is plain that he is also very GOD.

And in deed Christ was simplye before John in the beginning and from
everlasting, as the maker and creator of the same John: But yet in taking of
manes nature he is known to be after John, namely by the space of Sy^e months
or thereaboutes, as the angel Luc. 1. does wytnes.

XI. Institution. John, in auouchinge himself fo have borne ye same record of
Christ before yt he hears now, admonishes us that we ought never at any time
to be beterred either with any fear or shamefastenes from the confession of
the Gospel, but rather whenever occasion is offered, that we should clearly
and vnbashefully pronounce whatsoever we think of Christ and of all the
Evangelical doctrine.

A good song, though it be oftetimes repeated (according to the proverb) is
always grateful to the hearers.

Add moreover that in this place is commended the constancye and perpetual
consent of godly teachers in sound and wholesome doctrine. John confesses
still the same thing now in the presence of Christ, which he had pronounced
before of Christ being absente.

Nothing is to be altered or transposed in the substance of doctrine or
foundation of faith. The doctrine that has once been sound and true, must of
necessity always be true, like as God himeselfe also, of whom all sound
doctrine does proceed, is altogether immutable.

XII. Doctrine. Here is a notable confession of the two natures in Christ, when
as Christ is described, by the one to have been before John, and by the other
to have come after John.

Therefore John shows Christ openly, and commends him taking away the
sins of the world, as he is one person in which two natures are joined
together.

For truly it behooves us that we understand Christ to have accomplisshed,
according to either nature, the things that pertayne to our salvation.

For in case Christ ought to have executed the business of our salvation only
after his divine nature, then it had in no wise been needful for him to have
put on human flesh.

XIII. Redargution. By what means shall they defend their cause, which
affirm: That the Word or Son, being the second person in the divine
essence, did then first take his beginning, when he took upon him man's
flesh? John very wisely confesses that he was before him, God undoubtedly
begotten of God before all worlds, John. 8.
in which respect Christ also himself said that he was before Abraham was
borne.

XIIII. Institution. Of some peradventure might be suspected so diligent and
often repeted a co^mendatian of Christ by John, as though, thorough a certain
human affection, and perhaps for kinredes sake (Inasmuch as Elyzabeth Luc. 1.
is accounted to be Mary's cousin) the one fawned upon the other, John
answers: How should I either by reason of flattery or any other sinister
affection commend Christ, when as I never before this time had any kind of
acquayntaunce with him, neither did I ever see him till now?

I, says he, knew him not. And it is very likely that Christ was unknow to
John, not only because John kept in the Countreye and in the defart far off,
and Christ lived always in towns and near to Jerusalem, but also for that
Christ until that present time wherein he was baptized, had as yet gotten
himself no name and renown by reason of any myra^les.

But then did John begin to know Christ when he came to be baptized of him,
at what time John was taught by divine revelation, that Christ was present,
which had been promised a redeemer to the fathers, and of whom he long before
had begone to preach.

Wherefore here are all men admonished, and especially those that teach in the
Church, or that are occupied by any means about thaffayres of religion, that
they both speak warely and deal wisely, and put forth nothing after the
corrupt affection of mind.

Where if they smell any offendicles to be imminente, then that they prudently
turn them away with some Preoccupation or prevention, by premonishinge all
their hearers in time: and finally yt they labor by all means possible to
bring to pass, that all men may understand, that they sincerely and
vprightely do accomplish their duty.

And let them in the mean season go forward stoutly to execute the office
joined them of GOD, as John also says, when he was commanded to baptize, he
was then likewise commanded to celebrate and preche Christ to the intent he
might become known unto all Israel.

For so was John appointed by the providence of God, that he should inform
the minds of all men to the doctrine of Christ and also to the sacrament by
Christ after to be instituted.

XV. Correction. Woe therefore unto them, that both speak and do all things
after their own fantasye and affection, to the great offense of all good men,
that I say nothing of the huge loss and detriment of Churches, and of the
corruption of pure religion that does follow therevppon.

Those that can not say of them, whom they commend, I knew them not, do not
well provide doubtless for the behouse of the Church. For I speak chiefly of
them that are placed in the ecclesiastical function: albeit even in the civil
state also we may perceye over many things to be determined and done after the
corrupt affections of men, which (no doubt) deserve sharply to be reproved.

XVI. Doctrine. Vocation to a certain office, is the gift of God. Neither is
any man apt to teach ye Gospel, or to accomplish any thing as it ought to be,
except God himself will first call him.

For he as soon as he calls, ministers gifts also by which a man becomes
meet for his calling. And here upon truly it comes to pass, that those
men that thrust in themselves before they be called, do hardely prove ever
fytte for the turn, or at least do feel by experience no happy success to
follow of their doings.

XVII. Institution. They therefore that perceive themselves to be called of
God, and especially to the function of preachinge the gospel, let them take
dilligente heed, that they omit not to do those things that are beseminge
for them. In all their sermons and actions let them declare themselves to be
desirous of nothing more, then that Christ may be manyfested to Israel, that
is to say, to the Church of God.

Neither let them suffer themselves either by threateninges or flatteries of
any men to be let and sequestered from their godly purpose.

XVIII. Correction. They incur reprehension that either do not their office
committed unto them at all, or else do it neglygently: neither preach Christ,
but themselves: and do seek more carefullye after the things that are their
own, then after the things that are Jesus Christ's. Against which hipocrites,
the Apostle oftetimes very sharply, as they are worthy, inueigheth.

XIX. Doctrine. These offices are joined together, to manifest Christ to
Israel, and to baptize with water, that is to say, to preach the word and
administer the sacraments.

For doctrine and the sacraments rightly ministered, are two marks declaringe
the true Church, and of necessity where Christ bears rule, there either
office is dilligently exercysed with out intermissyon, as John also confesses
both of them to be committed unto him of God.

But there is, moreover, in the words water, a certain (...) worthy to be
observed.

For John signifies that he is not the author of any new doctrine, or
baptism: but only the minister of either of them, and that the inward
workinge thereof is to be looked for of an other more worthy, namely of Christ
himself true and very God, which alone (as it is said a little after)
baptiseth with the holy Ghost, and ought alone to be acknowledged the authoure
as well of the Euangelycall Doctrine, as also of the Sacrament of Baptism*
Therefore by this means John makes it known, that he does all things not
after his own arbitremente, but by the commandment of God himself. Which
thing let al men worthily endeavor to follow, that sustain any office in
the Church.

And John bare record, saying: I saw the spirit descend from heaven like
unto a dove, and abode upon him, and I knew him not. But he that sent me to
baptize in water, the same said unto me: Upon whom thou shall see the
spirit descend, and tarry still on him, the same is he which baptiseth with
the holy Ghost.

XX. Institution. Forasmuch as John goes still on to confess and preach
Christ, we are admonished also, not once or twice, but frequently and as often
as occasion shall serve, yea and with great enforcemente of mind, even before
the whole world to perform and accomplish the same. Mth. 10. Marc. 2. Luc.
12.
For Christ himself also that we should so do, has most gravely commanded.

XXI. and XXII. Doctrine and Institution God never omitteth to reveal those
things unto men which are necessary to be known to salvation neither does he
ever omit to give that which is required to the accomplishement of those
things that are agreeable to every man's calling.

Our heavenly father did lovingly reveal unto John as well how he ought to
baptize in the name of him that was to come, as also how amongst many to be
baptized he should know Christ coming unto him, and the same also to be very
God. And that was done, to the intent he might most diligently and certainly
execute his office of publishinge Christ, and remission of sins thorough him.
Let us not doubt therefore but that our most merciful father will make
manifest unto us also whatsoever things are to be believed, or to be done
according to ye manner of our calling. And doubteles he daily reuealeth unto
us, if not by ministering new apparitions or miracles, yet by setting forth
openly ye holy scripture, 2. Pe^. 1 Esaias 8 Luc. 1.6 Galat. 1
which al is nothing else, then a divine revelation, and the same most absolute
and certain, as whereby all other revelations ought as by a touchstone to be
tried and examined.

XXIII Doctrine. III and IIII. Reasons.
John now puts forth here the third reason, yea and the fourth also
whereby he proves Christ to be very God, the former taken of the power or
office of Christ, the later of the sign, and either of them declared of God
the father himself.

For thus John reasons: He is God that can baptize with the holy ghost, that
is, give the holy ghost by his own authorytie. But Christ can this do,
Christ therefore is God.

The Mayor is supposed to be manifest of it self, forasmuch as so great power
can light upon no man, but upon God. The Minor he confyrmeth of the sign or
pronunciatum of the heavenly father.

God the father of heaven which commanded me to baptize, signified unto me
that he had power to give the holy ghost, upon whom the holy spirit should
desende and abide in lykenes of a dove.

But this sign I have found to be in Christ. Christ is he therefore that can
give the holy ghost.

Wherefore if we duly weigh the matter, the divinity of Christ is here proved
and commended by two signs. The one is, that the holy ghost came down upon
Christ, and tarried on him. The other, that Christ baptiseth with the holy ghost.

In which two signs Christ incomparably excels all other creatures, and
all sorts of men though never so holy. For in deed the holy ghost in like
manner comes down upon other men, and yet does not so abide in them, as that
he always works effectually in them.

Inasmuch as the Apostles themselves, after they had received the holy ghost in
a visible form, are read to have been touched somewhat with human
infyrmities, and that the holy ghost ceased for a time to put forth his
strength in them.

Peter, Galath. 2. went not directly to the truth of the gospel. Paul and
Barnabas, Act. 15. so bitterly tarred betwixt themselves, that the one was
sequestered from the other. David, after he had received the holy ghost, and
many excellent gifts, Psalm 51.
committed adultrye, whereunto he adjoined also manslaughter: But again when
his sins were forgiven him, he was confyrmed of the holy ghost.

Moreover, men in deed do baptize, but yet only with water, and administering
no other thing then the outward sign: but Christ baptiseth with the spirit,
and ministers inward and spyrituall effects. It appears therefore
sufficiently that Christ by those signs is declared to be very God.

XXIIII. Redargution. They are greatly deceived, that suppose the sacraments,
either of the external action it self, or of the dignity of the ministers,
to take force and effect.

It is nothing so. For John baptiseth only we water: But Christ alone baptiseth
with the spirit. The effect therefore of the sacraments proceeds only of God
the author, or of the spirit which in the sacred action is given.

xxv. Institution We ought to pray continually to our heavenly father, that
whilst things external and earthly are ministered unto us by the ministers of
the Church, whether I say, we hear the word from them sounding in our ears,
or whether we often use the sacraments, we may there with all also receive
internal, spiritual, and heavenly fruits. For all utter and corporal things
will be vain, yea hurtful unto us, unless our whole mind being through
faith fixed upon the divine promises, God voucheth safe to impart his holy
spirit, which may puryfy our hearts, and make us pertakers of internal and
spiritual benefyts.

And I saw, and testified that he is the son of God. xxvi. Institution. We
said in the beginning that the conclusion is such, as that it conteyneth both
the state and sum of the whole sermon. For it is in such wise declared, as we
may learn, that the confession which we make of Christ, ought to be frank and
aperte, then also to be expressed with apt and perspicuous words. Thou see
therefore in this sermon three or four arguments to be heaped together of
John Baptiste, whereby he manyfestly proves that Christ is God.

Wherefore special labor must be employed in the explanation of the same
arguments, and it shall be convenient to declare at large, that the power of
remittinge sins is reserved only to God, that God alone is from everlasting,
that the holy ghost effectually working is perpetually present with God alone,
that it pertayneth only unto God to baptize with the holy ghost: and that all
these things are apparauntly to be found in Christ Jesus.

From this state and square line it is not good to digress. Or if there be any
other places which (in judgment) may profytably be admixed in respect of the
time, yet shall they not be but briefly and (as ye would say) beside the
purpose, run over. Howbeit these things peradventure might better have been
showed in the explication of the fourth chapter of the epistle to the Romans,
or. 3. and 4. to the Galathians, where it is avouched, that man is justified by
faith without works: But it is requisite that those lessons be kept in store
for the chapters following.

Now that which we have hitherto exhibited to demonstrate, how and after what
sort out of any readyng of the Scriptures offered manifold and sundry common
places ought to be drawn, I suppose for this time to be sufficient.

And I trust verilye that of those things, which are to this end and
purpose of me set forth, many shall reap no small fruit and commodytye, as
the things that may woonderfullye profytte not only such as teach the
people in the church, but also that instruct young Scholars of good towardenes
in common and public Schools.

That all the whole reding of holy Scripture, which is offered to be declared,
is sometimes aptely distributed into two or three chapters only or parts, or
principal common places. Cap. IIII.
Moreover, they, to whom the preceding^ order of drawyng forth so many common
places seems to be over busye and painful, shall have now an other much
more easy exhibited unto them.

And that is, when the sacred Sermon it so appointed, An other form of Sermons.
that the whole readyng of scripture, which is in hand, may be distributed
into two or three chapters only, or parts, or common places. For as we have
said already, how we term these parts, it makes no great matter.

And here certes those general divine places of Invention, What places are
here to be used.
which we before rehearced, are not so much to be put in practice, as a
certain Rethorical or Logical manner of dividing: when as of the present
reading only some of the larger parts are examined, of which intrealy may
orderly be made.

Neither is it always needeful to be considered, whether in the text of ye
holy reding there be already exta^t a lawful division of the parts made by the
author himself, but it is enough, if even, where al things are cohere^t
together, a distinction be in such wise made, as that two or three common
places, which we shall suppose will be most profitable to ye hearers, may be
drawn forth, more freely and at large to be declared, whiles in ye mean time
digression be in no wise made from the native sense and meaning of the sacred
words.

And further, these parts or places are so divided, Parts, how to be divided.
that sometime they are all referred to one and the same fountain of doctrine,
sometime again they be not of one sort or matter, but may be ascribed to
diverse fountains.

Therefore in this behalf there is left no small liberty, which truly every
man may more easily perceive by examples, that shall forthwith be added, then we
can declare by any manner of precepts or rules.

Neither is it to be doubted, but that he which in that order, that is spoken
of in the Chapter next before, has once learned out of one reading of holy
Scripture to collect many and diverse places, may easily also note and excerpt a
few notable parts or places before the resydewe.

And certes to say that this form of Sermons flows out of the former, Great
affinity and aliaunce of this kind of Sermons with the former.
and that they have great affinity together the one with the other, we shall
not speak much from the purpose.

And of these Sermons, that are resolved into certain parts or places, there
occurreth in the sacred scriptures examples very notable and famous.

I Christ himself of one sermon in the kind didascalick makes three distinct
parts. Example.


For in the first place he teaches, Math. 5.
in what points christian perfection and the true beatitude consists:

In the second be adds some things touching their duties that aspire unto
perfection, and chiefly how they ought to surmount all other in sanctimony of
life: Ye are says he, the salt of the earth, etc.

In the last place he shows by diverse examples heaped together, what the
right understanding of the law is, and how it ought to be observed, of those
that are perfect. And that these parts are in this wise to be joined
together, Chrisostom does not obscurely signify, when in his homily 18. upon
Matthew, expounding the last part, he reduces into memory certain things
before spoken as touching the beatitudes.

II Those things that follow immediately in Matthew cap. 6. it is plain that
they belong to an other kind of Sermon, to wit, Redargutiue, or rather
Correctiue, forasmuch as Christ there manifestlye reproves the abuses and
imperfections that do commonly spring about alms giving, prayers, fastings.
etc.

III To our purpose more agrees the Sermon extants Math. 24. and 25. Which
Christ being required of his disciples had in the kind didascalik as touching
the end and consumation of the world.

He deuideth it into three parts, whereof in the first he digesteth and
recounteth diverse signs, which go before and prenunciate the time of
Christ's coming to judgment: In the second part, he exhorts all men to be
vigilant and sober in their office, and that whilst they look for the Lord,
they rightlye dispose both themselves and all their affairs: Watch, says he,
for ye know not what hour your Lord will come: In the third part, he
declares after what manner and order the said judgment shall be executed by
Christ. What time the son of man shall come in his glory and all the holy
angels with him, and so forth as it follows even to the end of the chapter.

We may read, Sermons framed of sundry parables.
moreover, many Sermons of Christ composed of diverse parables, which are
found not always to be of one argument.

For Math, 13. Example.
Christ uses a parable of a man scatteringe his seed, which fell in diverse
places, wherein he notes, that like as the minds of the hearers are affected,
so the doctrine published, to some truly becomes holsom, and to othersome
nothing profitable at all.

He adds forthwith the second, as touching the enemy that in the night time
sowed cockle amongst the wheat, which parable may very well be understood, of
the corruptions, as well of false opinions, as also of perverse manners creeping
by little and little into the church. Then follows the third, of a little
grain of Mustard seed, growing up into a tree: which (I doubt not) may be
interpreted of the wonderful effect and fruit of the euangelycall doctrine
spreading it self most largely abroad. The fourth is, 1. Corinthians. 5^
of a little leaven quickly sowerynge the whole lump of dough, whereby I
suppose to be signified after the judgment of the apostle, that through a
little error once admitted, all things are forthwith infected though never so
well devised or religiously appointed. Among these Sermons, therefore of
Christ, that which we reherced in the second place, has parts belonginge
to one and the self same place: But in the first and second the parts seem
not in like manner to agree on every side betwixt themselves, but thou may
auouche, that they are rather after a sort disioyned and to be referred unto
diverse chapters.

Howbeit like as in the preceedynge chapter o also in this we repeat again to
be observed, Common places, may also be taken out of holy historical
narrations.
that certain parts or notable common places may no less aptly to be drawn
out of the sacred historycall narrations, then out of those readings, which
contain a simple doctrine.

But all these things shall become more clear and evident, in case the matter
be discoursed by examples propounded. Let us take therefore the first example
out of Mark the seuenthe: I. Example.


And he departed again from the coasts of Tire and Sydon, and came to the sea
of Galilee, through the mids of the coasts of the ten Cities. And they
brought unto him one that was deaf, and had an impedyment in his speech: and
they prayed him to put his hand upon him. And when he had taken him aside
from the people, he put his fingers into his ears, and did spitte, and touched
his tongue, and looked up to heaven, and sighed, and said unto him: Ephphatha,
that is to say, be opened. And straight way his ears were opened, and the
string of his tongue was loosened, and he spoke plain. And he commanded them
that they should tell no man: But the more he forbad them, so much the more a
great deal they published it. And were beyond measure astonished, saying: He
has done all things well, he has made both the deaf to hear, and the
dumb to speak.

That it is of the kind didascalick, kind*
it may appear by this, that the noble works and power of miracles, do
plainly prove Christ to be God, which also the beholders that were present, do
openly confess.

But we shall very aptly divide this readyng into three parts.

I By the example of those, that bring the deaf etc dumb man to Christ, we
learn, what great force and efficacye there is in an other man's faith.

Whosoever is endued with a true and lively faith, he, as one altogether
depending upon god alone, obteyneth chieflye for himself whatsoever (so it be
dulye requested) at Gods hand.

But when the same faith goes forewarde to work through love, and more
largely to extend it self, then it makes intercession also unto God for
others, and those things that God foreseeth to be profitable, he mercyfully
grants.

II Where Christ is described to have restored unto the miserable man power
both of hearing and speakinge, we have to consider how Christ behaueth himself
toward those that believe, and how ready God is at all times to help poor
and wretched creatures, especially when he is humblye and with an assured
mind prayed unto.

III We hear that those men for the benefyt received preached and published
Christ with as great an endeavor as they could.

We therefore are in like manner admonished, whenever we shall perceive any
benefyts, either spiritual and internal, or corporal and external, to have
happened unto us from God, (but can then be any time or season given, wherein
we have not good experience hereof?) to yield unto him continual thanks for
the same, to celebrate his power and goodness amongst all men, and to move
others to congratulate and do the semblable with us. II. Example.


Let us proceed to an other example. In the fifte of Luke we read thus:

It came to pass; that when the people preassed upon him, to hear the word
of God, he stood by the lake of Genezareth, and saw two ships standinge
by the lake side. But the fishermen were gone out of them, and were wasshinge
their nets. And he entered into one of the ships, which perteyned to Simon,
and prayed him that he would thruste out a little from the land: and he sat
down, and taught the people out of the ship. When he had left speakinge,
he said unto Simon: Launche out into the diepe, and let slip your nets to
make a draught. And Simon answered, and said unto him: Master, we have
labored all night, and have taken nothing: Nevertheless at thy
commandment. I will lose forth the net. And when they had this done, they
enclosed a great multitude of fisshes: But their net brake. And they beckened
unto their fellows, which were in the other ship, that they should come and
help them: and they came, and filled both the ships, that they suncke
again. When Simon Peter saw this, he feel down at Jesus knees, saying:
Lord go from me, for I am a sinful man. For he was utterly astonished, and
all that were with him, at the draught of fisshes, which they had taken. And so
was also James and John the sons of Zebedee, which were parteners with Simon.
And Jesus said unto Simon: Fear not, from henceforth thou shall catch men. And
when they had brought up their boats to the shore, they forsook all, and
followed him.

And here again by the miracle of the taking of innumberable fisshes, Kind.
and of the minds of the disciples sodeinly styrred up to forsake all and
follow Christ, is per^^icuously proved the divinity of Christ. Therefore that
this narration is of ye kind didascalick no man can deny?

I. But here in the first place is commended and set forth, the admirable
diligence of Christ, and his feruensy in teachinge the people, and spreadinge
abroad every where the truth: and again the wonderful desire of the people in
learning of the truth.

Here therefore, not only they that teach the people in the Church, but also
the hearers themselves, have, wherewith greatly to be excited, and what to set
before them to imitate and follow.

II. After his Sermon ended, Christ commands his disciples to cast forth
their nets, and straightwaye they take an incredible draught of fisshes.

Herevppon we may gather that, Math. ^.
when our chief and principal care is to seek the kingedome of God, and the
righteousness thereof, and shall not in ye mean time forbear diligently to
perform, that which our calling and kind of life does require, then no jot
of those things which we stand in need of for the necessities of our life,
shall be wanting unto us.

III. When a man after the example of Peter^ on the one side considers the
greatenes of Gods benefits and power, and on the other side beholds his own
abiecte state and condition, by reason chiefly of his sins which come to his
remembrance, so far is it off, ye God would have him terrified and driven into
despair, that he even wills him also to hope for better things, and
increases him with new and more ample benefits.

For in deed the knowledge of our sins ought to endure us, not that we
should be turned from God and fall into desperation, but that we should
hasten unto God, and long to be reconsiled unto him through our mediator Jesus
Christ.

Vain is repentance and sorrow for sins passed, if faith and true
consolation do not follow.

IIII. As they by the word of Christ were called to the Apostolic office, and
quiclye followed him, so ought we always to pray unto God, that whatsoever
seems good unto him as touching every one of us, he would vouhsafe to
appointe and give us to persist in our calling, and to obey his good will and
pleasure in all things.

We are not sufficient of our selves to think any thing, as of our selves,
but if we be able to do any thing; 2. Cor. 3.
it comes of God, which has made us able ministers of the new testamente.
Further, there is no doubt, but that by like reason, men must of necessity be
drawn, and made apt of God to every kind of calling.

Let us take in hand an other example not historycall, III. Example.
out of the epistle to the Romans the sixte Chapter.

As many of us as are baptized into Jesus Christ, are baptized into his death.
We are buried then with him by baptism into his death, that like as Christ
was raised from the dead by the glory of the father, even so we also should
walk in newnes of life. For if we be grafte together in him by the likeness of
his death: we shall in like manner be partakers, of the resurrection Knowinge
this, that our old man is crucified with him also, that the body of sin
might utterly be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin. For he
that is dead, is justified from sin. And if we be dead with Christ, we
believe that we shall also live with him: knowinge that Christ being raised
from the dead, dies no more: death has no more power over him. For as
touching that he died, he died concerning sin once: And as touching that he
lives, he lives unto god. Likewise reken your selves to be dead to sin,
but alive unto God thorough Jesus Christ our Lord.

The state is: State.
That those which are once justified thorough faith and baptized into Christ,
ought always after to live godly and Christianly. Which thing the apostle
also else where very often and with pithy reasons avouches. This readinge
therefore is ascribed to the kind didascalick. Kind.


I. Here before all things is commended unto us baptism, as being instituted
of Christ our Lord, and taking effects of his most precious blood and death,
and as that which is necessary to all beleuers, forasmuch as by it they are
engraffed into the Church of God, and by reason of it are named Christians.

II. The effects of baptism ough^ exactely to be observed, especially that by
baptism we are made pertakers of the death of Christ, and of all the benefits
derived therefrom to the believers: of which sort are remission of sins
passed, life, everlasting salvation etc.

Moreover that it behooves all those that are baptized, to dye unto sin, and
live only unto righteousness. For thus the Apostle reasons: All we which are
baptized, are made pertakers of the death of Christ. But Christ dying, dyed
unto sin. Therefore are we also by baptism dead unto sin. And if we be
deads unto sin, it were very convenient for us to covet to live again
thereunto. And certes it is true that, we in baptism do dye unto sin, and
sin dies unto us: forasmuch as in baptism all our sins are washed away,
and the holy Ghost is given unto us, by whom both the force of sin and
concupiscence is restrained, and repressed, and we not only are induced to
well doing, but also are vehemently helped forward.

For this cause also all, before they be baptized, do openly before ye church
of God, forsake the world, and ye devil that brought sin into the world, to
the intent they might thereby declare, that they will hereafter have no manner of
thing to do with them, but will institute a new and holy kind of life.

III. they that are once babtized into Christ ought highly to esteem all
things, that are put forth as touching Christ, forasmuch as Christ is given
unto us not only to pay the price of our redemption out of the power of the
devil, and also to be an example, and whom we should with all our endeavor
imitate and follow, in those things specially which may be convenient for us.
Hitherto perteyne the two reasons, whereby the Apostle plainly proves, that
we, for that we are baptized, ought to be dead unto sin. The one is taken of
the effect and final cause of the death of Christ. You know (says he) that
this is the proper effect and end of Christ's death, that sin is abolished,
and that to the intent we should not serve it any more.

But this effect of Christ's death he seems to despise, whosoever after
remission of sins once received, will return again unto sin. Wherefore it
is necessary^ that we remain still dead unto sin. The other reason is
derived of a similitude, as touching civil servitude, which by the coming
of death takes an end.

As he that ciuilly is a bondeman, so soon as he dies, is delivered from his
power to whom he was bound: Even so we which were the bondeslaues of sin,
seeinge in baptism we dye once with Christ, ought by no means to serve sin
any more.

Here therefore is set forth unto us the example of Christ himself, whom both
in dyinge once unto sin and living again unto roghtuousenes, we ought to
imitate and follow. By this dilygent imitation we shall both be called and be
in very dead perfect Christians. These examples thus to have propounded be it
sufficient. Examples of the auncien^ fathers.


Further amongst the ancient writers of homilies very many things and the
same also right learned may of every man be noted.

Chrisostom divided his homily. 60. upon Mathewe, entreating upon those
words of the. 18. chapter, woe be unto the world, because of offenses, it
must needs be that offenses come, etc. Into two parts: whereof in ye former
he argues very gravely (certes) and yet popularly and with great cunning, as
touching the cause of sin: in the later by reason of those words: Take
heed that ye despise not one of these litell ones: he entreats of the not
contemning of our brethren: whence at ye length he slippeth to a place, as
concerning the care that parents ought to have, least their children be
idely and filthily brought up. The same in his homily 62. declaring out of the
said Chapter of Mathewe, the parable of the man yt was a king which would take
accountes of his servants, chooses these pomtes most chiefly to discuss at
large: first, that sins are not alike: Second, where as we, which offend
against God deserving most excellently well at our hands, and against men, do
covet notwithstanding to have all our offenses forgiven us: that it is very
good reason, why we should in like manner forbear others, that have by any
means hurt or endammaged us: Third, that it is better to suffer wrong whereby
an other mollesteth thee, then to offer or infer injury to an other. But in
these days specially thou shall se all the most notable preachers for the most
part, to divide their Sermons which they have unto the people, into three or
four chapters, parts, or common places.

I suppose therefore that those whom we have taken in hand to instruct, can not
justly complain, that they want any excelent authors, whose counsayles and
steps they may follow.

But to proceed, the parts, after they be in this sort once noted and
disposed, they are accustomed often times to explane more at large, namely by
inferringe as well proofs and sentences, as also apt historyes out of the
store house of the holy Scriptures: Moreover, by applying similitudes,
comparisons, and whatsoever else is of that kind profitable to teach,
illustrat, and move: all which things (so far forth as may be) they adioyne to
the understanding of the hearers and to the present state of things. As
touching which diligence and industry somewhat we have said in our former
book, what time we noted some things in general of confyrmation.

Hereupon it comes to pass that they deem this order of treatinge, to be
easy, and of no great labor, and like as to them that teach, so also to the
hearers, who^ it is best not to be ouerated with over many places or parts,
very apt and accommodate.

That sometimes the whole sacred readinge is with all the parts thereof to be
directed to the explication of one common place. Cap. V.
IT happens sometimes that a sacred readinge is offered, so subsistinge and
linked together in parts, that every one may in order of discourse be aptely
referred, to one and the same common place. By common place I here understand
the state it self, and the certain preposition which is summarily excerpted
out of the whole readinge, and may profitably be prefixed, to the intent a
further entreatye may be made thereof. Howbeit he that coueteth to find out
this same state, What things to be considered and done of him that will find
out the state.
has need inespecially to bestow some time in readinge and reuoluinge the
sacred lesson, and to search diligently, with ripe judgment, whither and to
what end it wholly tends. For take this by the way, let no man think that
he can by interpretation apply the whole readinge to one common place, except
the very parts thereof be by a certain propinquitie and consent joined
together after a sort between themselves.

Wherefore the profitablest way is, by glidinge eftesoones thorough all the
parts, to look, whether thou may in them observe any certain order and
progression of causes, effects, contingents, connexes, adiacents, and such
like places howsoever allied one with an other.

Where if thou find such an order in deed, then may the whole order of
parts be easily deduced to one certain common place. Howbeit this manner of
interpretinge is scarcely used any other where, then in historycall narrations.

For where any thing is simpely affirmed, and many arguments prouinge the
same thing be in a didascalick method orderly digested, there no man shall
devise to excogitate any strange thing, neither induce any thing discordinge
from the same.

In the first to the Corenthes cap. 15. is proved and established with most
learned and weighty arguments the chiefest principle of Christian religion,
namely touhinge the resurrection of the dead: I pray theee therefore, were it
a point of wisdom, either to search out other arguments as more fytte for
the purpose, or otherwise to interpret the self same, then the simple and
plain sense of the words requires? Him that should go about to attempt
this thing all men undoubtedly would accounte to be madd.

Therefore it shall be best for us to tarry and abide still in historycall
narrations.

An example of an entier history as touching one common place explayned in the
kind didascalick, amongst other very excellent and fytte, occurreth in the
epistle to ye Hebrews cap. 7. where whatsoever is read in the old Testamente
of Melchisedick, we may see very aptely expounded to declare Jesus Christ to be
the only high and everlasting Bishop of gods Church. And least we should any
longer deteine the reader, we will even forthwith make a proof of the matter.
Example.


There is extante Luke 24. a very proper narration of the two disciples
gooinge to Emaus.

Two of the disciples of Jesus went that same day to a town which was from
Jerusalem about threescore furlonges, called Emaus. And they talked together
of all these things that were done. And it came to pass, as they communed
together, and reasoned, that Jesus himself drew nere, and went with them.
But their eyes were holden, that they could not know him. And he said unto
them: What manner of co^munications are these that ye have one to an other, as
ye walk, and are sad?

And the one (named Cleopas) answered and said unto him: Art thou only a
stranger in Jerusalem, and have not known the things that are come to pass
there in these days? And he said unto them: what things? And they said unto
him: of Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet, mighty in deed and in word
before God, and all the people. And how the high priests, and our rulers
delivered him to be condemned to death, and have crucified him. But we trusted
that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel: and as touching all
these things, to day is the third day, that they were done. Yea and certain
women among us made us astonished, which came early to the sepulcher, and when
they found not his body, they came saying, that they had also seen a vision of
angels, which said that he was alive. Therefore certain of them which were
with us, went to the sepulcher, and found it even so as the women had said,
but him they saw not. Then he said unto them: O fools and slow of heart to
believe all that the Prophets have spoken. Ought not Christ to have suffered
these things, and to enter into his glory? And he began at Moses, and at all
the prophets, and interpretd unto them in all the scriptures, the things
which were written of him. And they drew near to the town, which they went
unto, but he made as though he would have gone further. But they constrained
him, saying: Abide with us, for it draws toward night, and the day is far
spent. And so he went in to tarry with them. And it came to pass, as he sat at
the table with them, he took bread and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave
it unto them.

Then their eyes were opened, and they knew him: but he was taken out of
their sight. And they said between themselves: Did not our hearts burn within
us, while he talked with us, by the way, and when he opened to us the
scriptures? And they rose up the same hour and returned to Jerusalem, and
found the eleven gathered together, and them that were with the^, which said:
The Lord is risen in deed, and has appeered to Simon. The^ they told what
things were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of
bread.

Whilst I somewhat briefly come over this readyng, I perceive that in it is
most clearly showed, how and by what means the disciples came to the
knowledge of the truth of Christ, and how after many things it is said, that
their eyes were opened, and that the Lord was known of them.

Therefore I may seem very aptely to gather the state of the whole reading,
State.
namely, how we may aspire to the knowledge of God and the truth of his word?

Kind
Wherefore I doubt not to pronounce this reading to be placed in the kind
didascalick.

Moreover I see the parts to be so disposed and so mutually followinge one an
other, that any man may very well note and point out in them, Disposition.
as it were, certain steps and degrees whereby the godly are brought unto
true and perfect knowledge.

Which thing how it may with ease be accomplyshed, I will in few words
rehearce, and (as ye would say) with certain points added declare.

They talked together.

I The first degree to come to an absolute knowledge of the truth, as touching
Christ and the will of God, is constituted in holy and godly meditations, and
in a feruente desire of perceiving the truth.

Which desire or study GOD himself other whiles graffeth in the minds of
men, ministringe of his own accord occasion of godly meditations, like as
those things that were done at Jerusalem, gave cause to the disciples to talk
and common of Christ.

And Jesus himself drew near.

II As Soon as any do earnestly begin to apply their mind to thatteynement
of divine knowledge, God himself vouchsafes to be present with them, and to
favor their godly desires.

Wherefore they easily perceive their minds to be wonderfully and in a
certain secret manner inflamed, their counsayls to us directed, and a mean
whereby they may profyt, to be opened.

By means whereof we may learn that the second step or degree, whereby the
way is laid open to the knowledge of things divine, consists in the sincere
calling upon the name of GOD, and in the present aid and help of the same.

There is no cause why any man should persuade himself, that he can happily
attempt the study of holy things, if he first implore not humbly the divine
aid, and feel the same to be present with him.

And for this cause does James cap, 1. gravely admonish us, that we should ask
spiritual wisdom of him that gives it, namely GOD. etc.

One of them answered whose name was Cleopas.

III The third degree of profyting in things spiritual, is the diligent
conferrence with others, especially with the learneder sort.

And God is wont always to those that with all their heart long after the
knowledge of heavenly things, to minister apt helps and instruments of all
sorts. For the holy ghost commands Phillip to approach more near to the
chariot wherein the Eunuche (queen Candaces chief governor) was carried to the
intent he might clearly interpret the scriptures read but not understood.
Act. 8


God by an angel wills Cornelius the Centurion, to send speedily to Ioppa
for Simo^ Peter, Act. 10.
of whom he might be instructed in the doctrine of true religyon. And here in
this place Christ himself comes forth in this own person rather then those
his disciples should be destitute of a faithful instructor.

What, that a place very profitable to the commendation of the heavenly
doctrine falls in, where it is said: That Jesus of Nazreth was a prophet
mighty in deed and in word before God and all the people?

Truly very notable effects of the celestial doctrine are here set forth
before our eyes.

Yea and certain women among us.

IIII They that covet to profyt in sound and holy doctrine, what time they have
diligently conferred as touching the truth with other godly men of all
sorts and degrees, in the forrth place they shall exactly weigh and perpende
all men's opinions, sayings, interpretations, disputations, yea they, shall
mark also visions, revelations, dreams, of which the Prophet Ioell speaks
capi. 2. signs and wonders, and of al these things so far forth as in them
lies, they shall prudently show their judgment.

Finally they shall try all things (as the Apostle says 1 Thessalonians. 5.) and
hold that which is good.

But that all sorts of men ought worthily to employ their endeavor to the
doctrine of piety it is plain and evident, forasmuch as we see the care and
duty even of women also toward Christ crucified, dead, and buried, to be here
vehemently praised and set forth.

They found it even so as the women had said.

There is good hope, that the godly may there very well profyt and go
forward where as consent and agreement is found in sound doctrine, which
alone is of great importance to the establishing of Gods church, and to the
amplyfying thereof.

And he said unto them: O ye fools.

V Ater the opinions of other men heard and prudently weighed, there remains
an other mark, or fyft step, which the disciples must climb. That is, that
the judgment of the Scriptures themselves, which is most perfect and above all
other, may always be harkened unto.

For unto these must of necessity be referred, whatsoever is at any time
produced as touching the doctrine of truth. We see how Christ and the
Apostles do fortyfye all their assertions with the testimonies of the law and
the prophets: how much more meet is it therefore yt we stick fast for the
authorytie of the law. (...) thee (...) be set, Christ and Apostles? upon this
foundation whatsoever is builts, that shall be certain, sound, and stable in
the churh, and he shall be judged to have more profyted others, whosoever shall
build in this sort.

Again it can nothe chosen, but that it must needful, whatsoever is taken
from any at (...), and obtruded for sound (...).

And they drew (...) to the town.

VI (...) all times, the thankfulness their (...) God that distributeth to every
(...) his gift^ (...) measure as pleases him, as also to (...) by which they
know and confess themselves to be helped for (...).

For to those that are thankful, and do rightlye use the gifts granted unto
them* God willinglye (...) more, Math. 25.
and commits unto them as it were new tallents. But from the unthankful,
and those that either know not or will not use them aright, are taken a way
again, such those that they have already gotten.

And their eyes were opened.

Truly they that are thankful, do feel^ in themselves manifest increasements
of knowledge, God undoubtedly augmenting and be w^ifying his gifts in them.

And in this behalf we see the Apostle Paul praying with great effect to God
the father, Ephesians. 3. Philip. 1.
that the love of all his heaters might yet more and more abound in knowledge,
and in all spiritual understanding etc.

And they rose up the same hour, and returned.

VII Moreover when a man is come to the exact knowledge judge of the (...)
shall (...) ^^ught to (...), but shall inde^^^ (...) all (...) possible to
bring others also to (...).

Therefore we shall freely and* but a (...) confess the known truth, he shall
labor to (...) other both private and publicly (...) forth as opportunity
will serve, (...) and friendly confer with other learned men, moved not so much
with desyr of teaching as of learning, and finally in all his actions he shall
set before his eyes both the edyfying of his hearers and increasement of the
church.

For to these ^^des most thief (...) God gives to the faithful the (...) of
things spiritual, with these ^^tion the (...) good will toward God and men,
by this (...) concord and agreement in doctrine in nourished in all Churches,
and to be short, by such diligence is the Church of God confirmed, increased;
and preserved.

An other example out of Matthew cap. 16.

When Jesus was come into the coasts of Cesarea philippi, II. Example.
he asked his disciples, saying: whom do men say that I, the son of man am?
And they said: Some say, John Baptist, and some, Elias: and others Hieremias,
or one of the prophets. He said unto them, but whom say ye that I am? Then
Simon Peter answered, and said: Thou art Christ the son of the lyuinge God.
And Jesus answered, and said unto him: Blessed art thou Simon, the son of
Iona, for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my father which
is in heaven. And I say unto thee again, that thou art Peter, and upon this
rock will I build my Church, and the gates of hell shall not prevail against
it. And I will give thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever thou
shall lose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven.

There is no man but perceyueth the Evangelist Matthew to commemorate, how and
after what forte Christ exacted of his diseiples the confession of faith, and
what manner of confession Peter made in the name of all the rest.

Therefore we shall not unaptly affirm the state of this readying to be that the
confession of faith ought necessarylye to be made of every one of us. State.


And that this state pertayneth to the kind didascalick it is more manifest
then that it needs to be proved.

This state being prefixed, these things may profitablye be noted as referred
to the same.

And they said* Some say John Baptiste.

I. It is no easy matter always, to render a pure and perfyt confession of
the truth.

For often times, partl^^y reason of the wonderful myste and ignorance
continually cleaning to al men, and part^ly through the great plenty of obscure
and dark disputations, diverse judgments, and varyable opinions, of other one^
which are supposet to be wise, the minds yea even of excellent and good men
are in such wise let and hindered us that they can not determine any thing
certain touching matters of religion.

Examples hereof if ever there were any, be in these our days most chiefly to
be seen.

In the mean season, it stands every one greatly in hand, Romans 10.
that is at the least touched with any ca^e at all, of his ^a^^^tion, to be
fully resolved in his conscience as son^thing matters of faith, neither can he
iustlye pretend why excuse, why he ^^^lo^ refine so to be.

Christ therefore (...) does (...) seek to know what the (...) are but he (...)
instantly (...) would freely confess at on^^ what they (...) or

Flesh and blood (...) healed it unto thee.

II. Here ^e^ see whe^^^ the power of making a perfect confession comes: The
things that are of GOD, no man truly knows, but the spirit of God, and he
who^ the holy ghost has taught.

The natural man pere^y^^eth not the things of the spirit of God. 1. Corinthians.
2.


And our heavenly father has hidden those things from the wise and prudente,
Math. 11.
and has revealed them to Babes.

And again the holy Scripture, which is the princypall aid and instruement
to procure the knowledge of the truth, 2. Pet. 1.
is wholl^ given and opened by the gift of god, and without revelation is not
understood.

To be short, God grants unto every man so much knowledge of spirytuall
things, as he judges to, be profitable for him.

Upon this ro^^ will I build my Church*

III. The notable (...) and effects of a pure confession* First, by the
confession of faith the true Church is knowwen, and decerned from all foreine
assemblies, whether they be of the Jews, Turks, or hypocrites.

Second, where constancy in a true confession ^^ineth forth, there the Church
remains (...) and the (...) challenge to himself no right or intereste^.

Let h^resides spring up never so fall ^et tyraunts (...) hyhypocrits imagine
what they can, yet as long as the confesson of faith shall be (...) whole and it
(...), so long shall be (...)

Third, (...) that (...) confession is found to (...) and approved with God,
God gives power ^oth to judge au^^^^^^ wisely.

For the judgments of bindinge and loosinge, is no other where rightly and
lawfully exercised save in the true church. Wherefore a pure confession of
Faith by us made, causes that every one of us also is known to be a lively
member of Gods Church, and that we are safe from the power and snares of ye
diuill, and may besides that judge prudently of all things that are done, or
ought to be done in the Church. And in this wise, as well what belongs to the
whole Church, which rests in the pure confession of the Faith of Christ, as
also what perteyneth unto all men yeldinge a sound and sincere confession, it
seems to be aboundauntly declared.

But we will add also a third example out of John cap. 4. III. Example.
in which are learnedly discussed certain points as touching the nature of
Faith.

There was a certain Ruler, whose son wa sick at Capernaum. He, when he
heard that Jesus was come out of Judea into Galile, went unto him, and
besought him, that he would go down, and heal his son: For he was even at
tho point of death. Then said Jesus unto him: Except ye see signs and wonders,
ye will not believe. The Ruler said unto him: Sir, go down before my son
dye. Jesus said unto him: Go thy way, thy son lives. And the man believed
the word that Jesus had spoken unto him, and went his way. And as he was now
goinge down, his servants met him, saying: thy son lives. Then enquired
he of them the hour when he began to amend. And they said unto him, yester
day the seventh hour, the fever left him. Then the father knew, that it was
the same hour, in the which Jesus had said unto him, they son lives, And
he believed, and all his householde.

John the Evangelist pronounces very well that the man believed the word,
that Jesus had spoken unto him. And straight way he adds also: he believed,
and all his household. And in the very discourse the narration, it is showed
how he and all his house was induced to believe. These things therefore do
cause me to affirm, that in this present reading is declared how and by what
means, faith springs and is confirmed.

Wherefore the state shall be, touching the nature or beginning and encreasement
of faith. State.
And that this state is to be attributed to the kind didascalick, kind
each man may easily without any teacher, perceive.

He when he heard that Jesus.

I. First of all are put forth and heard certain things of god, and of his
good will and benefits toward mankind. The beginning of faith comes of
hearing: and hearing by the word of God.

He went unto him, and besought him.

II. By hearing the word, the mind of man is turned unto God. Moreover man
wishes and prays that he may be made pertaker of Gods benefits, And so to
pray our necessitye enforces us.

Except ye see signs and wonders.

III. A weak and wavering faith in men, displeases God: yet God according to
his mercy voucheth safe to make the same more strong and perfect. Ephesians. 1.
Faith is the gift of God, and he increases it being given. Wherefore we
ought with the Apostles to pray often times unto God, and say: Lord increase
in us our faith.

There be very many places of ye scripture which testify, Luc. 17. Math.
6.8.14 15.16. Luke 7.12.17. Romans 4,
that there ought to be distinguished certain degees, as it were and
encreasements of faith, and one while an infirm, weak, and imperfect, an
other while a strong, steadfast, and perfect faith to be noted.

Lord go down before he dies.

IIII. Faith being somewhat increased by the grace of god, proceadeth more
franckly to entreat and call upon God. Through pure and earnest invocation all
things are obtained at Gods hand.

Go thy way, thy son lives.

V. The faith as yet not fully perfect God mercifully looks upon, and
rendereth unto it according as it desires. And through faith men obtain of
God most ample benefits, Mat. 8.9.15, Mark. 2.5.10 Heb. 11.
like as spiritual, so also corporal.

The man believed the word.

VI. Faith by the word and promises of God is erected, receives strength, and
is made perfect.

Now as he was goinge down.

VII. Man becomes daily more strong in faith, that after the erample of
Abraham, he may even without hope believe under hope, whylest namely the
certainty of good promises do always more and more appear, and god never
ceasseth with new benefits to beautify and adorn ye godly.

And he believed and all his householde.

VIII. The incomparable force and effect as well of the word of God, as of
Faith. For both the certainty and truth of Gods word being made manifest
does stir up faith in a great number, and also the notable faith of one man
being put forth for an example unto others, inuyteth even these also after a
sort to believe. Hom. 4, Hen. 11.


In respect whereof we may see the eramples of the faith of the holy Saints
in the Scriptures worthy of imitation to be set before our eyes. Thou seeste
therefore how aptely it is declared throughout ye whole narratio,^ by what
means faith is ingendered, and at ye lenght becomes perfect.

One example more if we shall add, we will so make and end. IIII Example.
That shall be taken out of Mark. 16.

After that he appeared to the eleven as they sat together, and reproved them
of their unbelief, and hardenes of heart, because they believed not them that
had seen him, being risen up again. And he said unto them: Go ye into all
the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature. He that shall believe,
and be baptized, shall be saved: but he that will not believe shall be damned,
And these tokens shall follow them that believe: In my name they shall cast
out devils and shall speak with new tongue, and shall drive away serpents,
and if they shall drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: they shall
lay their hands on the sikle, and they shall recover.

So after the lord had spoken unto them, he was received into heaven, and sat
on the right hand of God. And they went forth, and preched every where, and the
lord wrought with them, and confirmed the word with signs that followed.

See thou not, how Christ vpbraideth his sluggish disciples with their
incredulitye and hardenesse of heart? Therefore least we at any time be reproved
for the like, we must take diligent heed, that, after we have hard,
believed, ad embraced the Gospel, we cleave constantlye to the same.

Wherefore let the state of this reading be: that ye Gospel is constantly and
freely to be cleaued unto. State.
As for those things that follow in the text, they shall aptely be taken in
stead of arguments or reasons confirminge the same. Neither truly shall it be
a hard matter so to axplane all the parts thereof, as that they may be
agreeable to our purpose.

Because they believed not them that had seen him, being risen again.

I The first reason. We ought to stick fast unto the Gospel of Christ, for
the authorities sake and testimony of those men that have seen, hard, and
declared the same unto us. For thus faith Christ Act. 1. to his apostles: Ye
shall be my witnesses, not only at Jerusalem, but also in all Jury, and Samaria,
and even to the worlds end. Peter like wise Act. 2. says: This Jesus has god
raised up, whereof we are all witnesses. And John in his first epist. cap. 1.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with
our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handeled of the word of
life: and show unto you that eternal life. God will have therefore ye testimony
of such men to be accounted of most great weight and importance amongst all
men.

Go into the whole world and preach.

II. The second reason, of the ^dicte or commandment of Christ. Christ gave
in charge to his apostles, yt they should publishe the gospel to all nations.
By the same diligence, no doubt, it is commanded also unto us, that we should
with all our endeavor embrace and reteyne the same.

He that believes, and is pabtized.

III. The third reason, of the promise and threateninge, which are annexed to
the commandment of God. Exodus 20.
In like manner we see promises and comminations adjoined to the precepts of
the Decaloge.

And these tokens shall follow them that believe.

IIII. The fourth reason, of the manifold gifts, whereby God unto this end
and purpose garnisheth and illustrateth his Church, that the certainty and
excellency of the Euangelical doctrine might be approved.

So the Lord after he had spoken.

V. The fifth reason. Whatsoever things have been hitherto spoken, are
established and confyrmed by the ascension of Christ himself into the heavens,
and by his syttinge at the right hand of the father. For by these two signs
or marks, he signified unto all men, how great his power and dignity were.
And undoubtedly to ascend by his own proper power into heaven, and to sit
at the right hand of the father, are most assured arguments of his divine
nature, in respect whereof he is in all points coequall with his father.

And they went forth and preached every where.

VI. The sixth reason, of the effects that followed. The apostles, like as they
were commanded, published the Gospel. They preached also every where:
Wherefore the knowledge of the Gospel has of necessity come even unto us
also and to ours.

No signs and wonders, neither the wonderful power of the holy Ghost, ne yet
any thing else was lackinge.

All these things therefore do convince yea and even compel us, that we
should ascribe all glory unto the gospel, and unto God the author of the
gospel, and that we should constantly cleave unto the same. For here
undoubtedly are remembered those things by which men of all former ages have
been most chiefly persuaded, to embrace, and highly esteem, the wholesome
doctrine of the Church, comprised in the volumes of the prophets and Apostles.
And thus much touching this evangelical narration of Mark 16.

There are in the third Chapter aforegoing certain readinges out of the
Evangelical history, explaned of us in such order as we there handeled and set
forth: and yet nothing lets, but that the very same, may no less
profitably then godly, be expounded also in this form whereof we now entreat.
Which thing truly I will not stick here briefly to declare.

That narration out of Mark. 6. as touching the multitude which was three days
without meat through ye desire they had to here ye most holy sermons of
Christ, does first of all wonderfully commend unto all men ye study of
learning and understanding the word of God. Therefore we shall worthily accept
this sentence in stead of the state. In ye second place is added ye which
declares, ye al those ye are touched with any desire at al of profiting in ye
doctrine of true religion are cared for of god, and ye god will in no wise
forsake them. I have compassion (says he) on the multitude. Thirdly, by ye
words of the disciples supposinge that it could not be that so many might be
satisfied with bread in the wilderness, may be gathered: that those which
prepare themselves to the study of sacred and heavenly things, are first
hindered and oppressed with many griefs and temptations, before they can
attain to their wished scope, yea and often times they strike upon ye rocks
(as they say) even in the very heaven it self, and are haled away from their
godly purpose. But whereas christ in ye fourth place demau^deth of his
disciples how many leaves they have, we are taught evidently thereby, ye God
has always in a readiness diverse apt and convenient means, whereby he may
prouibe for the godly, and next after spiritual or heavenly benefytes minister
also corporal or earthly.

For by ye means ye we least think off, god succureth all those that labor
and be in necessity. And therefore in the fyfte place Christ gives unto his
disciples, that they should set before others. for God sends always in
season teachers, which may with all fydelitie and diligence enstructe those
that are desirous to learn. Lastely and in the sixth place; they all eat and
are suffysed.

They that a little before hongered and thristed after the knowledge of the
truth, do now happily profyt therein, yea and so far forth do they
eftesoones proceed, ye there remains unto them, what they may give an
imparte unto others, and at the length may, either publicly or privately teach
the doctrine of piety unto the rest.

Now that history likewise of Matthew 2. as touching the wise men that come
from the East to worship Christ, it shall be very easy to apply wholly to the
tractation of one common place. The state or common place may aptly be
prefixed, as concerning vocation or calling.

This state being assigned, first of all shall be declared, whenever God
calls any man by a sign either external or internal, or rather by them
both, to the knowledge and confession of the Gospel, or else to some certain
kind of life, in which he may daily serve God and profit his neighbor, that
he ought not to refuse, but with cheerful heart to come and devoutly obaye
unto the caller.

In the second place where it is reported that Herod and ye whole city was
troubled, thou shall not without cause inculke an exhortation to overcome
temptations.

For thus commonly it comes to pass, as soon as any is elected and called of
God to a godly work Satan by and by together with his conspirators the flesh
and the world works wiles, and leaves nothing unattempted whereby they may
withdraw him from his good and holy purpose. But their follows in the third
place ye which in this kind of conflict brings an exceeding great comfort,
namely that against the most fierce and bitter temptations a present remedy is
to be sought for out of ye holy Scripture. The law, the prophets, and
Apostles do certify the conscience as touching things doubtefull, they
show most apparauntly where Christ is to be found, and where the mind
finally may rest in safetye.

For it is even the holy Scripture alone, that confirms and susteyneth thee
in the knowledge and confession of the Gospel, in sincere faith, in purity of
life and conversation. Fourthly, where the subtelty of Herod privily calling
the wise men unto him is disclosed, shall very well be added that after the
first and most grievous temptations are overcome, and after the mind is
confirmed, and that by the aid of Gods word, in her calling and holy purpose,
there remain as yet successively new dangers which hipocrits, which false
teachers or heretics, which tyrauntes, and such kind of adversaries of true
religion will forge and contriue.

For as long as we live here in this life, there is nothing but perils upon
perils, and even as if a certain rank of troubles were linked together with
chains, so does one distress after an other fasten upon the godly.

But yet we ought in no case to be discouraged in our minds through the
frequency or greatness of the perils.

Hitherto pertains that which follows in the fifth place, as touching the
departure of the wise men, and the star again going before them.

Thou shall here not vnexpertly add, yt he which by valiant striuinge bath
already escaped the dangers of the first and second sort, does now lie (as
it were) at anchor and rest in a quiet baye. For let the Champion of Christ
constantly ensue the first signs of his calling, but most diligently let him
follow the scripture, which does assure him of his vocation and all the order
of his duty, and he shall (undoubtedly) come unto that place, where he shall
see Christ in his glory, and obtain thorough him everlasting life. Math. 24.
He that endures to the end shall be saved.

Thou seeste therefore all the parts hereof not unaptly to be reduced to one
common place, as touching calling or vocation, and perseueraunce in the same.

Again in like manner the historye out of Luke. 2. as concerning the
confession, which as well Simeon, as Anna made of Christ, shall fruitfully be
expounded, by declaring out of it, how necessary it is, that all the
faithful, whenever opportunity will serve, should render an account, or
that which is all one, make confession of their faith.

And ye this is the state of the said reading, it shall truly us avouched, as
soon as mention shall be made of Simeon.

Secondly at the words of Siemon, in which he pronounces Christ to be put for
the ruin and vprysinge again of many, and for a sign which is spoken
against, and moreover that a sword shoul perce Mary's soul, shall aptely be
entreated as touching that point, that a confession made is always pursued
with offenses, sundry mocions, contencions and great dangers.

The world never cease to bring the godly confessors into peril and hazard.

Thirdly, where it is described what manner of person the said Anna was, how
godly and unblameably she lived, very oportunely next after those words
briefelye declared, shall be added, that wheresoever the confession of faith
takes place, there ought also manifest fruits of faith, and manifold exercises
of piety to be seen. Finally that confession is known to be perfect, which on
the one side is accompanied with the perils of temptations and perfecution, and
on the other side with the notable fruits of faith.

With such a confession God is delighted, the rest of the godly are
strengthened, the enemies are directed and discouraged, the Devil himself is
discomfited and subdude.

Fourthly, Anna is reported to have confessed like wise, and agreeing in all
points with Simeo^, to have spoken (...) so of Christ to al ye looked for
redemption. Not without cause therefore shall be declared in ye last place, how
it behooves, ye a confession in all ye parts and members thereof be agreeable
with the word of god, and further, ye it remain apparaunt, franck, firm and
constant, even to the end of life. And thus the whole sermon very near shall
be spent about one common plate touching the making of a confession of faith.
But I fear least there be some yt will cry out and accuse me to be over tedious:
wherefore I forbear to add any more examples.

Further there is no cause why any man should suppose ye here are digested
allegorical interpretations. For the state is always drawn forth out of
certain words apparauntly placed in the narration. Neither is digressio^ made
in the explication of the parts from the native sygnifycation of the words,
which in every allegory is accustomed to be done. Besides, there is no other
thing sought for here, then yt the interpretation of the parts, may both be
directed to one fountain or common place, and also converted to ye common
instruction of life in righteousness. For if sometimes out of doctrines, yet for
the most part we see all this order of interpreting to be gathered out of
institutions, which otherwise, according to yt form yt I have exhibited in the
third chapter, may be excerpted out of ye same members. And now and the^ there
happen such narratio^s, as seem to minister very little matter to teach:
wherefore it is no less requisite then profitable, yt the parts thereof be
expounded after this sort as touching some certain common and large stretching
place. Thefore truly a man may more rightly term all this kind of ^narration
instructiue or moral, then allegorycall. And to be true that we say, we will
show it by an example taken out of Christom.

For he in his homily 67. upon Matthew seeking occasion to provoke his hearers
to deserve well of the poor, selecteth two parts out of the text of the
euangelical histore, which he interprets of one and the same common place,
proceeding in the like order that we have done, and so long taryeth he in
them, as he judges to be most fyt and convenient.

The one part is of Christ the king meek and poor, which was contented to be
carried upon a she Ass: wherein Chrisostom teaches, yt those things are only of
us to be sought for, which the necessary use of life does require, and that
poverty is to be taken in good part of al men.

The other, wherein it is said, that some laid their garments upon the Ass,
and some spread them in the way: this Chrisostom explaneth as touching helping
and clothinge of the poor. Therefore to the commending and setting forth of
the poor tends the explications of the cause of the two parts, and
standinge somewhat long upon either of them with great sharpenes of speech,
setting abroche all the engings of arguments, he exhorts, urges, soliciteth,
impelleth all men to endeavor to be benefyciall to the poor.

Now that here are to be seen allegorycall interpretations, no man being in
his right mind, will affirm, but all men may easily perceive them to be
plain instructions. Howbeit in the same sermon Crisostom there rather uses an
allegory where he avouches: that by the Ass is sygnifyed the Jewish people
accustomed to bear the burden of the law: and by the Colte the Gentiles,
which lived always without the law, without burden, without the discipline of
Gods commandments.

That the Ass like wise and her Colts were brought of the disciples, forasmuch
as the Apostles by the preaching of the word ought to conduct both ye peoples
unto Christ. That Christ moreover rode upon either beast as their Lord, for
that he gathered to himself of either people an obedient Church, and that the
Gospel is patiently heard of their both.

That no man forbad the beasts to be brought unto christ, because it lies not
in the power of any man to stop the course of the Gospel.

In the Colt so suddenly admitting one to take his (...) without kicking to be
showed the prompt and ready mind of the Gentiles in receiving of the Gospel.
Again, whilst the Ass comes after the Colte to be signified, that after
Christ has drawn unto him all the Gentiles, the Jews also will one day with
great zeal follow after.

By the disciples putting their clothes upon the beasts, that Christ might the
more conveniently sit, to he mente the teachers of the Gospel, which ought not
unwillingly to bestow all that ever they have, yea even their body and soul,
so that their hearers may be furthered, and the glory of Christ more and more
set forth. And thus much welnigh has Chrisostom in that place.

But yet there is no man that seth not the interpretations to be very
discrepant, where one says, that forasmuch as Christ was contented to be
carried on an Ass and her Colte, we are taught, that we ought to live
contented with a few things, and patiently to bear our necessetie and
again for that Christ was carried upon an Ass and her Colte, to be
signified twoe peoples, to wit, the Jews and Gentiles, that should
acknowledge Christ to be their Lord, and receive his gospel.

Again there is found no small difference, in case where the disciples are
reported to have laid their garments upon the beasts, whereon Christ ought
to sit, it be one while added, that all men are there admonished willingly to
give clothes and other necessarys to the poor, an other while it be said to
signifye, how it behooves the Preachers of the Gospel to bestow all that
they have, yea even their body and soul for their flock.

Certes those former interpretations are excerpted out of the native sense of
the words standing in the text, and be perspicuously referred to the
institution of life, which thing is the cause, why Chrisostom discusseth them
with a more plentiful discourse: but in the later interpretacions digression
is made from the proper signifycation of the words, wherefore that they are
allegorycall, and for and that cause the less profitable to the information of
life and moving of affections, there is no man that can well dissemble:
whereupon also it pleased Chrysostom to touch them only in few words, and as it
were beside the purpose.

These things therefore being duly considered, it will be very easy, to give a
right judgment as touching the interpretations which we have used in this
present Chapter.

First is briefly and plainly expounded, in passing through all the parts,
whatsoever belongs to the sacred narration.

Then to every part is joined an interpretation, in which appears nothing
hard, wrested, or far fet: but out of the advised consideration of the words
and sentences are those things deduced, which engender wholesome institutions
or instructions of life.

And to make the matter more clear and lightsom, every thing is in such sort
disposed, that all things are directed to the nature and true use of one
common place. In which respect no doubt the hearers capacity is better
provided for, then if many things and the same diverse and not evident should
be obtruded.

Who therefore will deny this manner of interpretinge with great fruit to be
exercised, and to be both godly and profytably produced to the people in the
Church?

And, as I admonished in the beginning, to those that in the parts of the
historycall narration can not by observing a certain course and order of
causes, effects, contingents, and such like places, it is no hard matter to
make and adorn these kinds of interpretations.

But from allegories, such inespecially as very necessity it self does not
extort in those places of Scripture which of themselves sygnifye otherwise some
inconvenience, every man shall by mine advice (so far forth as may be) abstain.

We see in so great a work of the prophetical and apostolycall books how
few are used. It is plain that they are more apt to delight with then to
teach, and that none but very slender proofs are derived out of them, and
therefore that place is to be given unto them only after other arguments,
which have in them more pithe and strength.

They have very little or no gra^e at all, if they be diffused through all the
parts of an oration, yea the sacred Sermon which is on every side powdered with
allegories, is judged very slender and barren. And in a matter little
fruitful, to t^uet to seem witty, and to spend much time, no man will judge
it to be the part of a wise man, and of one that seeks the profyt of his
hearers.

Wherefore I purpose not to adioyne unto this our work any Chapter at al
touching allegorycall sermons.

These things that we should in this manner somewhat more pro^ixly the^ we
thought for prosecute and discourse, we were by the temeritie (yt we speak
nothing more bitterly) of some men's judgment, vehemently compelled.

That sometime the whole reading of the sacred Scripture is briefly run over,
to the intent some one common place may afterward more at large be declared.
Cap. VI.
WE find commonly in the sacred Sarmons of the holy fathers had unto the
people, the whole reading of scripture (even so much as had been recited) to
be discoursed with a compendious paraphrase, A readinge of the holy scripture
how it is used of the holy fathers to be declared to the people.
or some other like apt form of enarration, and yt part which remains
whole and principal to be consumed in the explication of one common place. And
that comes to pass, not only when an historycall narration, but also when a
tretise of doctrine taken out of the holy scriptures, is in hand. Examples
almost infinite are extant in John Chrisostom especially in his expositions
upon the sacred books, as Genesis, the Gospel of Matthew and John, and the
epistles of S. Paul, For in his homily 3. upon Genesis whilst his intent is
briefly to reprove y^ Gentiles, which supposed yt al things created were
governed by chance and fortune, he handeleth a common place at large, as
touching the reducinge of those that err into the right way: whence lastly he
falls to the commendation of alms. Again in his homiles. 7. and 8. he
entreats of reclayminge the Gentiles from their error, albeit in ye later
some things are added as concerning fasting. In his 4. homily, after the
parts of scripture before read declared, he touches the right use and manner
of fasting, and the restraynt of wicked lusts. A good part of his 26. homily
is spent in stirring up the hearers to render thanks unto God for his benefits
received. Homily 27. he reasons al large touching ye remitting of wrongs,
and yt not coveting of reu^gment. In ye greater part of his homily 30. he
entreats of fasting and prayer. Upon the Gospel of Math. homily 4.
Chrisosto^ declares in many words what manner of people yt people of god is yt
should be delivered from their sins (...) Christ, and withal admonishes every
man to study ^o show himself faithful, and to be one of the number of Gods
people. We might, out of ye gospel of Math. which conceiueth hystorycall
narrations, and out of Paul's epistles, in which is plainly exhibited ye
handling of manifold doctrine, produce and bring forth no few example (...)
seeing every man sufficiently perceives unto what end our discourse tends,
no man will think it needful.

Only therefore here we will admonish: how it comes to pass two manner of
ways, A common place is two manner of vvayes declared at large.
yt a common place after the scriptures expounded may be declared at large.

I Sometime occasion is taken of those things, yt in ye in self text of the
scriptures read are spoken or touched. In the homily upon Gene. 26. to speak
of thanks to be given unto God after his benefyts received, he is moved by the
example of the gratitude which he saw in Noe.

Homily 4. upon Matthew, is in good time prosecuted ye long discourse touching
the people of God, forasmuch as the angel had said, that Christ should save
his people from their sins.

Homily 67. upon Mathewe, it is reported in the text, that the disciples put
their clothes upon the beast, whereon their Lord should be carried: Herevppon
therefore takes Chrysostom occasyon to speak at large of clothing and
releeuing every way the poor.

II Again sometimes a common place is handeled in the second part of the
Sermon, not for that in the Scripture read before there happens any mention
thereof, but because the order of time, and the state of the Church do
greatly require it.

Wherefore when Chrysostom in the time of a publyke fast took in hand the
interpretation of the book of Genesis, he diverse times with very good cause
breaks forth into a common place of fasting.

So in an other place also in the chief and greatest part of his Oration, he
reproves certain vices, or does some other thing not unlike.

But howsoever it shall seem good to deal, it behooves wise deliberation to
be had at all times, as touching the choice of the places that are in this
sort to be handeled. For other things serve for other times, places, and
persons, which also is a thing commonly known.

How and after what sort one place of Scripture, or some certain sentence
ought conveniently to be handeled. Cap. VII.
NOt always an entier book, not always a part of a book is offered to be
declared, but often times it behooves the Sermon to be framed to the people, of
one only sentence, or of one place of Scripture, and ye same also not very
largely stretchinge.

But that the same order of gatheringe diverse common places should here be
usurped, which we have showed to be profitable in the premises, it can by no
means be. What then, will some man say, remains to be done? In what manner
and method shall one place or one certain sentence be fruitfully declared? We
(so far forth as we may) will set forth a most sit and absolute form, which,
except any shall devise a better, it shall be expedient for him to follow,
and as well for breuities sake, as also yt it may become the more clear and
evident, we will comprehend the same in certain observations.

I. Before all things it is convenient very carefully to consider and to
declare unto the people, upon what occasion, or to what end, the author of
the sacred book out of which the place or sentence is taken, spoke and
pronounced those words.

And that for this cause, that whilst we declare of what matter we will
speak, and what our purpose is, we may credibly auouche that we will in no
wise abuse an other man's saying, neither transfer it unto other purposes the^
is meet, but usurp it altogeher in the same, or at least in the like cause,
for which ye author himself did so speak. After this manner we may see Peter
Act. 2. intendinge to interpret certain words taken out of the Psalm. 16.
as touching Christ risynge again from death, prudently to add some things
of David and of his meaning and judgment in those words. And truly it
stands us very much upon, to deal faithfully and uprightly in this behalf.

For it is a grievous offense, yea and the holy Ghost is moved with unspeakable
reproach, in case a man does force or wreste any sentence out of the scriptures
to any other end or purpose then becomes him.

He that shall be found to have done this but once, does quickly loose all his
authority with the hearers, and afterward, yea even then when he alleges
the Scriptures aright, he shall hardely be credited.

To apply aptely and properly the Scriptures to present business and affairs,
is the principal virtue that belongs to a preacher.

II. Where it is now discovered, of what matter we mind to entreat, and
declared, that the sentence taken out of the holy scripture accords to our
purpose, the next point is, that we diligently consider, whether that very
sentence, as it stands in the sacred writer, does minister any proofs at
all, of causes, circumstaunces, signs, or discriptions, agreeable to the
business of which entreaty is made.

As many as are found to be such; shall worthily before any other be brought
forth, and as those that be of great weight and importance, forasmuch as they
answer to ye mind and method of the author, from which it is not lawful
unadvisedly to depart, and do in all points agree with our matters, shall
studiously be digested, adorned, and inculked.

Neither is it a hard matter, to draw forth such kind of proofs or
arguments, partly out of the things that lie hid and are included in the
sentence it self, and partly out of those things that either go before or
follow after the same.

Of this kind I would affirm it to be tht Peter Act. 2. in that Sermon
whereof mention is made before, to the intent he might show ye he rightely
usurps ye saying of David, reduces into memory, how David in that he was a
prophet, knew before hand that Christ after the flesh should take his
beginning out of his posteritye, and therefore also by the inspiration of the
holy Ghost prophesied before of Christ's rising again.

And whosoever is but meanly exercised in the holy scriptures, may easily
perceive, that in the same Psalm, as of the death and great deiection of
Christ, so also certain things are jointly spoken of his resurrection.

It is not much unlike, that ye Apostle Galat. 3. speakinge of the Gentiles
that should be blessed in the seed of Abraham, affirms those that are of
faith, to be the sons of Abraham, and how it was long before told unto
Abraham, that it would please God to justify the Gentiles by faith, again
where he adds, that the inheritance was given unto Abraham by promise.

III. Moreover it is very profitable to make as it were a certain resolution
of the whole sacred sentence, and to examine in a just balaunce every words
therein, and diligently to ensearche the signification, force and use of them.
And that, to thint^nt out of every of them may be gathered certain arguments
or proofs, agreeable to the state of thappointed Sermon, and may afterward be
oportunely applied to teach and instruct the hearers.

Of which craft and diligence (I mean in drawing forth of proofs out of
every word well nighe of any one sentence) we have the holy Scripture it
self, as a most expert maistres and most faithful teacher.

Which thing we will straight ways make plain and evident.

III. After the words wisely weighed and considered, it is requisite, that we
proceed with like industrye, to a more exact contemplation of the matters
themselves, or affairs, which in every sentence are signified.

For it is not very lykely, that there should any where happen things of them
selves so barren, that a man may not out of the^ (if at least he be not
altogether endued with a blount and blockishe wit) devise and excogitate some
profes profitable to teach. He that has once throughlye sifted and examined
the things, whereof he entreath, may easily find the means, to make his
oration become both fruitful, plentious, and delectable.

We see in this behalf the Apostle Paul, after arguments drawn out of every
word of one peculiar sentence, to heap up still a plentiful matter of other
proofs, and the same flowing out of the nature of the things themselves.

The examples which we will a litell after touch, shall plainly testify this
thing to he true.

V. Last of all, to him that fears and suspecteth that he shall want
sufficient matter of speaking, we give this advice namely that he put before
his eyes, the places of inuencion, which he knows to be attributed unto that
kind of Sermons, to which the sentence of the sacred author appertains.

For every kind of sermon, (as is before said) has certain proper and
peculiar places of invention, the order whereof being attentively considered,
we are eftsoon admonished of many things, which may aptely be spoken of each
kind of business taken in hand.

Therefore him that shall speak of a sentence or state of the kind
didascalick, we remitte to the places of invention as well divine as other not
divine, that he may so long exercise himself in them, as that he may procure
for his true meet and sufficient furniture thereby.

Of which thing we then also made mention, when as we heaped together some
things as touching the places of the kind didascalick, in the second
Chapter of this present book.

But to come to examples, where a full furnyshed explanatio^ of one place or
sentence is to be seen, we have none u^ore famous in the whole body of the
holy Scriptures, then in the Epistles and Thapostle Paul. Which albeit they be
rather written in a scolasticall, then in a popular kind of speaking, yet do
they import unto us no small help to the due framinge of Sermons to the people.

The first example very notable thou shall find in the fourth Chapter of the
Epistle to the Romans, I. Example.
where this short sentence or place out of Genesis 15. Abraham believed god,
and it was imputed unto him for righteousness, is with wonderful prudence and
dexteritye, expounded at large. The words truly are very few, if thou
respectest the number, but if thou look into the sense, thou shall perceive
in them to be most strongely proved, that men are justified by faith, and that
great plentye of arguments are ingendered therein.

The state of the whole disputation, State.
the Aposte had prefixed before in the 3. Chapter, saying: We suppose that a
man is justified by faith without the works of the law. To the confirmation
therefore of this state, 1. Argumen^
he judges ye noble example of the justification of Abraham to be most fit
and convenient, to the intent he might gather by order of reasoninge, that all
other men also are in like manner justified by faith.

Which his purpose he himself does not obscurly declare, when a litell after
he says, that it is not so written for him only, that it was imputed unto him
for righteousness, but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed if we, believe in
him that raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead etc.

Howbeit not contented to have showed in this wise that the said sentence
agrees wondrously well to his enterprised business, he deuideth it into parts,
and out of every part draws forth new arguments.

Wherefore forasmuch as in that sentence wherein it is said, that Abraham
believed and in beleeuinge was justified, by and by out of the word believe is
this argument subtelly contrived

If Abraham be justified, for that he believed, it follows of necessity ye
he was not justified by works. Ephesians. 2.
In as much as faith and works are after a sort repugaunte the one to ye
other. Now the Apostle renders this argument thus: If Abraham were justified
by works, he has wherein to glory, but not with god. For what says the
scripture? Abraham believed God, and it was conuted unto him for righteousness.
From hence the Apostle, bends the ernest contemplation of his mind to ye
signification of the word, II.
Impute: out of which he produces the second proof to this effect. To him
also that works not, but believes in God that justifies, his faith is by
grace counted for righteousness. But it should not be said, to be counted by
grace for righteousness, if he had deserved it by works: for then it should
rather be called wages or debte. Justification therefore comes not by works,
but freely and by grace. Like as in the former argument consideration is had of
ye antithetons, to work and believe: so here wages or debte is set against
imputation.

Thirdly the Apostle exactly notes the form of speaking, III.
To count or impute for righteousness. For it comes to his remembrance how
in the Psalm. 31. that man is called blessed, holy, and rightuous, to whom the
lord impueth not sin: Wherefore he determines that to impute unto
righteousness, is even all one with not to impute sins. For to remit or not to
impute sins, is as much as freely to pardon the^, or to judge one eightuous
without desert. Justification therefore comes by grace, and not by works.
And this is it that the apostle so studiously says: That God imputes unto man
righteousness without works. Wherefore out of every word we see notable
reasons to be drawn. Howbeit the apostle proceeds yet further, and as we
admonished in the 2. observation, he diligently enquireth what time faith was
imputed unto Abraham for righteousness.

Now he finds that thing to be done about fourtene years before
Circumcision. IIII.
Of this circumstance therefore of time, he gathers in the fourth place well
near after this manner: If Abraham had been justified by works, then chiefly
by circumcision. But by this he was not justified, forasmuch as righteousness
was imputed unto him long time before he was circumcised. Therefore in no wise
comes righteousness by works. The words of the Apostle as they stand in the
text are plain. Furthermore Thapostle interlaceth forth with the fifte
argument, V.
taken of ye use and signification of circumcision. Abraham received the sign
of circumcision as a seal of the righteousness of the says which he had, when
he was vnsircumcised. Which we may take even as if he had said: Circumcision
is not therefore received, to the intent any man should be justified thereby,
but that it might be a seal of ye assurance of righteousness now before
received by faith. For a man must always first believe and confess his faith,
or ever he can rightly use any sacrament instituted of god: and unless a man
alredye endued with faith do receive the sacraments, there is no cause why
he should hope yt they will become wholesome unto him.

There is no man that knows not the sacraments to be signs of the covenant
made before with God, and that they are added as seals of our reconciliatio^
with God, like as after ye bargainers are agreed betwixt them selves writings
and seals are accustomed to be made.

The sixth argument follows of that, ye we showed to be digested in the fourth
place. VI.
Seeing now it appears that faith was imputed unto Abraham for righteousness
before he was circumcised, and whilst he was yet uncircumcised it is a plain
case, that the Gentiles also which are not as yet circumcised, neither dare
chalendge to themselves any good work, may be justified by faith: and
generally that unto all men, whether they be circumcised or uncircumcised,
righteousness shall be imputed, so that by the example of Abraham (which is
indifferently the common parent and prince of all believers as well of the
circumcised, as having uncircumcision) they repose their faith and confidence
in God. He received, says he, he scale of the righteousness of the faith which
he had, when he was uncircumcised, that he should be the father of all them
that believe, not being circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to
them also. And the father of circumcision, not unto them only which are of the
circumcision, but unto them also that walk in the steps of the faith of our
father Abraham (which he had) when he was uncircumcised. Moreover in ye
seventh argument he declares that righteousness before god happens by
faith, forasmuch as it can not be that righteousness should be received by the
Law. Of which thing he renders also in the causes. For where the law is,
there imediately follows transgression: for such is our imbecilitie and
weakness that we can never exactely fulfill the law. Romans 8.
And where transgression is, what, I beseech you, is to be looked for but the
wrath of god?

By the law therefore or by works we can by no means atteyne unto
righteousness.

But to the intent he might the more easyly persuade the same thing, VIII.
he inserteth two inconveniences, which, if righteousness were not to be looked
for but by the law, should of necessytie follow. If righteousness or the
inheritance of spiritual benefytes should then only be received, when the
law were of us thoroughly fulfilled, our faith no doubt should be void, and the
promise of god of none effect. But yt it is a very absurd matter in case any
should avouch it thus to be, every man perceyueth. For GOD undoubtedly
performs that which he promises: as he that never ceasseth to be true and
just of his word.

And where as is the certain, fyrme, and infallible promise of God, there our
faith ought in no wise to waver or doubt. Let these things therefore he taken
in stead of the eight argument.

But now again the Apostle stays somewhat at this, IX.
that the holy scripture testyfieth that the promises belong not only unto
Abraham but also unto an his seed.

In which consideration being occupied he remembers that in the old
Testament the Gentiles also are contained in the seed of Abraham. For it was
said unto Abraham Genesis 17. I have appointed thee to be the father of many
nations.

Wherefore hereupon also he produces an other argument, which is framed in this
sort: The promised spiritual benefyts shall redound also to the seed of
Abraham. But the Gentiles are known to be the seed of Abraham. Ergo, the
promised benefits shall come in like manner to the Gentiles, though destitute of
the law and void of good works. Be this therefore the ninth argument taken of
the proper signification of the word Gentiles or Nations, and it belongs to
ye places of invention of which mention was made in the fifth observation.

X The tenth argument is added to derived of the nature of ye things
themselves, which kind of proofs we showed to be meet and requysyte in ye
fourth observation. Abraham, says he, above hope, believed under hope, that
he should be the father of many nations: Genes. 15
according to that which was spoken to him: So shall thy seed be. And he not
weak in the faith, considered not his own body, etc. The apostle in deed
describes the nature and force of the faith, which is imputed for
righteousness, and shows that it was very excellent in Abraham, and far
greater then any man could believe.

He says ye true and perfect faith, does assuredly and undoubtedly lay hold
upon those things, yt exceed man's reason, and ye by no menes are judged to be
hoped for, and besides, yt it neglects, dispiseth, and utterly remoueth al
things yt are thought to be a let or hindraunce unto it. For it always leans
upon God, to when nothing is impossible to be done. Such and so great a faith
therefore seeinge it shined forth in Abraham, it pleased god with merciful eyes
to behold it before al other works, and to impute it for righteousness.

XI Last of all, ye holy Apostle going about to bring his explanation to all
end, avouches that the same mean or way, yt Abraham was justified by, ought
also to be applied unto us: for therefore were those things written of Abraham,
to the end we might know, yt we in like manner by the example of Abraham
should without works be justified by faith. And thus much touching the
interpretation of one short sentence.

The second example being no less notable then the first is extant Galat. 3.
II. Example
where every word of the most known promise made unto Abraham Gene. 22. In
thee all nations shall be blessed, is so expounded and declared, yt it
likewise teaches yt men are justified before God, not by the works of the
law, but by faith.

III Example.
sBut yet far away surmounteth the third example which occurreth Heb. 5. and.
7. where every member of the fourth verse of the Psalm. 110: The Lord has
sworn and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec, is with such great art, industrye, and grace opened and explaned,
yt I need not doubt to affirm, yt no man's wit without the special direction
of ye holy ghost is able to immitate the like. For truly the apostle with many
and diverse proofs taken out of ye one testimony of scripture, plainly teaches
in ye same chapter, and in the three following: first that Christ is the true
priest after the order of Melchisedec, and ye the said prophecy of ye Psalm.
110. does most chifely agree unto him: secondly, yt the priesthod of Christ is
far more excelent the^ the priesthod of the law, which was after the order of
Aaron, or Leuiticall: thirdly, yt by ye priesthod of Christ appointed and
established through the patefaction of the Gospel, the priesthode of Aaron is
abolished: fourthly, that by the priesthod of Christ once constituted and
confyrmed, the old ceremonies and sacrifices, yea and the law it self take an
end.

What man would have thought, that out of one verse or clause might have been
drawn, matter of so many weighty points of Christian doctrine, and so diverse
and s^ndry proofs for every point? But thus it is, to whom the holy ghost
becomes a scholemaster, unto those all things are easy, plain, penetrable,
and ready. The thing it self speaks, that all that are placed in the
Ecclesiastical ministerye, are not so far for the enstructed of the holy
ghost, yt they may be counted equal with the Apostles or other pillars of the
Church: wherefore it is very requisite that the study and diligence of
immitation should appear and shine forth in them, and when they perceive
themselves not able to atteine the virtue and majesty of the Apostolic phrase
of speaking, then let them diligently next after the Apostles follow the
steps of the holy fathers, which we know with great laud and fruit in the
kind didascalick to have explaned sentences or single places of scripture in
the Church.

Chrisostom in his first Tome learnedly expounds in a just homily those
words of Gene. 3. IIII. Example out of the 1. tome of Chrysostom.
I will put enmity betwixt thee and the woman, between thy seed, and her
seed, etc. There is also an homily as touching these words of the Psalm 9. I
will declare all thy wondrous works. Another of the words out of the Psalm.
25. Lead me in thy truth, and teach me. Again of the words out of the
Psalm. 27. The Lord is my light and my salvation: whom then shall I fear?
Moreover of these words out of the Psalm. 85. Be not angry with us O Lord for
ever. Item out of the Psalm. 122. Peace be within thy walls, and
plentiousnesse within thy palaces.

In the second tome is read an homily concerning those words of Math. 25:
That which ye have done to one of these little ones, ye have done unto me.

In the third tome are expounded in entire Sermons these places: out of John
4. The true worshippers shall worship the father in spirit and truth. Out of
John 15. Ye are my friends, if ye do whatsoever I command you: which
sentence he explaneth in two homilies. Out of the i. Cor. xi. There must be
heresies, that the approved might be known. Out of other writers other
examples may be had.

Howbeit whenever the members of a sentence or any place, be in that order
which is spoken off, expounded and declared, it is the part truly of a wise
interpreter to consider, what special points been expedient out of them,
according to the state of the church and the public utility or necessity,
either largely or compendiouslye to be handeled. This thing is also to be
understood, that those, to whom it apperteyneth to preach of present
business and affairs offered by occasion, do sometimes excerpte some
sentence or place out of the scripture, and apply it to their purpose, sometimes
again use no place of scripture at all in the beginning.

What time therefore they prefixe to their Sermon any place of Scripture, they
shall very aptlye have recourse unto that form of interpreting, which in this
present Chapter we have endeavored to show and commend unto all men.

A simple Theme how it ought to be discussed in the kind Didascalick. Cap.
VIII.
Often times in this didascalik kind in which we are yet busy, having one while
no reding or sentence, of ye holy scriptures going before, an other while
again after ye somewhat has been declared out of the scriptures, it behooves
us to handle simple theames, and to entreat sometime more largely, sometime more
briefly, of faith, love, hope, the law, sin, death, of the Gospel, and such
like. Luke reports Act. 24. that Saint Paul disputed before the president
Felix, as touching justice and temperaunce, and of the judgment to come. Which
disputations would god we might have had, they would have been, no doubt,
greatly for our commodyty. Nevertheless we will assay, to exhibit a certain
order of examining those theames, profitable and easy to be known to all men.

It must be called to remembrance, that there were two forms or orders of
places of invention once attrybuted of us unto this kind, in the former whereof
we reherced the divine places, of us afterward termed somewhere general, that
is to say, doctrine, redargution, institution, correction, and consolation: in
the latter we disposed partly the places which commonly after the received
manner they call logical, and reduce them to certain questions, partelye other
also taken out of Divinity it self.

Now therefore let us see, how by the direction and aid of those places, a
single theme may and ought to be expounded with the fruit of the hearers. But
to the intent all this devise may become the more clear, and every man the
sooner perceive it, we will comprise in certain observations, Observations
whatsoever conduces thereunto.

I It seems good by all means, that he that will declare a simple theme, do
prescribe to himself (following the example of the Logicians) a certain order
of questions, and exactly search: First, What it is of which the sacred Sermon
is appointed: secondly, what parts, or how many forms be thereof: thirdelye,
what the causes be: fourthly, what the duties or effects: fyftely what
things be of aliaunce thereunto: sixthly and lastely, what contraries it has.

Neither shall any man think this order to be despised seeing it is very much
profitable, as well for the teacher as also for the learners, to have a
certain method retained and kept.

But me thinks I here some man obiecting unto me: that this form of
entreating which I speak off, is more frequented of Aristotle and of his
followers the Logicians, then of the Divines. And that very seldom or never
among the prophets or holy fathers are to be found any sermons simply
declared in this method.

Verily I will say that which is truth. To the enserching and drawing forth of
the nature of every thing out of darkness, as many (certes) as are wisely
occupied in the office of preaching, so often as they will entreat of simple
theames, do set before them, as a rule, this order of questions. But yet this
difference is to be marked between a Logician or philosopher, and a divine
preacher. The Logician truly by his own proper right, as he ye undertakes
and promises yt he will utter and bring forth whatsoever may probably be said
of every argument yt is offered, and imagines ye he has disciples desirous to
be come philosophers, very curiouslye and subtelty pursues the course of all
the said questions.

But the Divine, and specially the Preacher, which professes himself to be
the teacher of the whole multitude, and in it of a great number of unlearned,
suffers not his oration to be enclosed in so narrow straightes, but as one
raunging in a champion field, choseth those questions only to be explaned,
which he supposes to be most congruent to the understanding of his hearers,
and also most fyt for the place and time.

Wherefore albeit be premeditating at home in his study what things are
expedyent to be propounded in the Church, have those questions before his eyes
as the moderators of his thoughts, yet after that he has some while debated
the matter, he sticks fast in the inuestigation only of one or two or else
of three questions at the most.

Hereupon therefore grew the custom, whereby for the most part the pastors of
churches do in the first place learnedly discover, what the thing is of which
they purpose to entreat.

Where if they be persuaded that the thing is known already to the hearers,
then with good cause pretermit they that question. From thence they proceed to
an other question, which they deem to be most conueniente for the place time
and persons, and do allege somewhat peradventure of the third question,
which is as touching the causes.

This being accomplished, they pass to that which is the fourth in number,
namely, concerning the duties or effects.

And in this wise with the explication of two or happily of three questions they
make account to satisfy their hearers. Sometimes, and that not seldom, there
happen things, which in no case do admit all the said questions in Divinity.
As for example, there is offered a thing that can be divided into no parts or
forms: Why then should there be a question prefixed of diverse parts or
forms? In like manner when there can be given no contraryes of a thing,
doubtless it were very ridiculous, to assign a question to be discussed of
contraryes.

To be short, there may happen also such a theme, as may easily be conueighed
through all the orders of questions, yet notwithstanding the godly Preacher,
forasmuch as he enjoys (as I said) free lybertye, and delights in mature
deliberation and in sage advice taking, among many choseth not above two or
three questions to be declared in the sacred assembly.

The Logician and Philosopher do gladly try what they are able to do, and
do take pleasure in vauntynge of their wit: but the Preacher for his part,
weighs and considers what is most expedient to be done, according to the
place and time, for the godly enstruction and information of good men.

Where finally if it be greatelye for the behoof of the Church to have many
questions expounded, yet shall it be the part of a wise teacher to reserve
some till an other time.

II After thou have disposed and set in order the questions which thou iudgest
will serve thy turn, thou must have recourse to the places of the second
form, those inespecially, which the divines receive out of the schole of the
Logicians to be used: and according to their direction, thou shall excogitate
whatsoever may conveniently be said of the purposed theme.

But in such sort shall these things be gathered together, that, so far
forth as may be, each thing may be drawn out of the fountains of the
scriptures, or at the least confyrmed by the testimonies of the same. And
albeit there occur no where in the sacred Books common places explaned in
that order, which the questions and places to them attributed do prescribe,
yet may it truly be affirmed that some divine common places are to be found,
of which so many and diverse things here and there scattered in the Canonical
Scriptures are put in writing, that if the same were bound together (as ye
would say) in one bundell and brought forth, undoubtedly we should see
those places handeled in a just method.

For here certes is found that out of which may be framed a definition,
there that conduces to the furnishing of a division or partition, else where
are distinguished certain causes, there is again where are showed duties and
effects, in some place occurreth that which is to be counted for a contrary,
finally there can scarcely any thing be required necessary to the openinge of
the nature of a common place, which a painful man and one exercised in the
holy Scriptures may not draw out of them. And by this means it is brought to
pass, that those things which are put in order and alleged as touching a
common place, all men may perceive to be derived out of the Scriptures, and for
that cause to be of great weight and importance.

III. Moreover ye places which in the second form we called divine or
Theological, are in like manner to be co^sidred.

For even these also do minister unto the mind very high and excellent
things: Neither truly can it be chosen, but that he that has been some deal
envred in the readinge of the holy scriptures, shall receive of them great
help and furtheraunce to apt teachinge.

And whatsoever things are devised and invented by the direction of these
places, ought to be referred unto those questions, which we determined in the
beginning to go thorough with, and (with ripe judgment) to be placed in
their order.

IIII. Furthermore he shall in no case think himself to have sufficiently
done his duty, that according to the places reherced in the second form,
has found out those things, which after the order and nature of the questions
may be said, except also he endeavor further to illustrate the same things
being found out with diverse respects, as namely by producinge certain
grounds or testimonies, certain examples, similitudes, and other of the same
kind, and that (so much as in him lies) taken out of the holy scriptures, or
else out of the commentaries of the most famous writers.

For truly each man perceyueth that the proofs gathered together in such
brevity and straightenes as is used of the Logicians, do make ye treatise to
become bare and slender, and to breath forth only the ecliptic kind of
speakinge of the Scoles: but if there be added further some certain lights
and ornaments of things, together with a certain cleannes (at the least
way) of speech, then will the honor seemly for the Church, and congruent to
the minds and ears of the frequent auditory, appear. For it is not meet that
ye teacher of the multitude, should stand altogether upon simple and bare
invention, but he at his liberty breaks through and interrupteth the order
prescribed of the Lorgicians, according in deed as it is expedient, yea and
where all things are most chiefly instituted by art, there he studiously
hides and dissembleth art. And we may see every where in the sacred
Scriptures the wonderful liberty that is used in orderinge the propositions
of argumentations, reasons, confirmations of reasons, exornations, complexions,
and how holy men bestow great labor and diligence in this behalf, namely
ye their indifferent oration should not abhor from the popular coustome of
reasoninge.

V. Last of all this diligence is also required, that the manifold spiritual
use, of those things whch are duly collected to the explication of any
question, be added with out delay.

For as many arguments as are handeled for the explaning of any question, it is
very meet to be declared, and it is greatly for the behoof of the godly to
know, what fruit they may reap out of them.

For certes (which makes maruelously to the praise an dignitye of the holy
Scriptures) there is nothing occurrent in them neither do we attempt to
discuss any thing out of them, in which is not laid up some notable doctrine
very profitable to the confirmation of our faith, hope, charity, to the
stirring up of our minds, that we may acknowledge the good will of God
toward us, that we may give him thanks for his incomparable benefits, that
we may be made prompt and cheerful to render unto every man the duties of
love, also that we may priuatelye lead an holy and blameless life, that we
may timely and moderately correct those that err either in Doctrine or
manners, and finally that we may obtain comfort and redress in public or
private calamities.

And this order of openinge the use of those things, which shall be explaned
in the kind didascalick as touching any common place, we may find every
where in the Sermons of the prophets, Christ, and Thapostles, yea and in the
Epistles themselves: Where truly unless the lawful use be kept, and all
things transfered to the proof of piety, and amendment of life, the
knowledge doubtless of most excellent things remains very barren and
unfruitful.

Of this kind it is, that in the Epistle to the Romans the beginning of the
fifth Chapter, is discovered the spiritual use of the doctrine touching the
justification of man by faith, whilst many notable effects are repeated,
which accompany justification by faith, and do wonderfully extol the dignity
of Faith: that also in the sixth Chapter, after he had spoken of Baptism and
the effects thereof, he annexeth a grave exhortation, that they should reckon
themselves dead unto sin, but lyuinge unto GOD, to the intent they might
diligently foresee that sin should reign no more in them, neither that they
should give their members (as weapons of unrighteous) to sin etc.

Again the eight Chapter to to the Romans contains the use of the whole
disputation before going touching man's justification by Faith without works.

In like manner to the Romans Cap. 11. is put forth to be seen the use of
the discourse concerning the reiection of the Jews and vocation of the
Gentiles.

Wherefore that, one while at every argument or reason, an other while next
after the tractation of any question or entier place accomplished and ended,
those things ought to be added which may declare the use thereof, I supposse
it may by these things appear:

Howbeit whosoever shall have always in a readiness the divine places of
Invention of the first form or order, he shall be able profitably to perform
somewhat in this behalf. But we will in a brief example endeavor to
demonstrate, how greatly it avails to follow the advice given in these five
observations.

Let a single theme therefore be taken in hand, to wit Sin, and as
touching it let us examine only two questions, namely, what it is: and then,
How manifold it is, or how diverse the forms thereof be.

To him that considers somewhat of the first question and of the places
subjected thereunto, A declaration of sin, by the question, what it is.
these things come to memory: we perceive yt a man does sin, so often as he
tra^gresseth the law of god. Truly therefore it is said of John in his first
Epistle Cap 3. (...) Sin is the transgression of the law.

From him dissenteth not the Apostle Paul Romans 4. saying: Where no law is,
there is no transgression. And Romans 5. Sin is not imputed, while there is no
law.

Again in ye same Chapter: The law entered therevppon that the offense should
abound. Being therefore moved with these most weighty testymonies, we shall
not vnexpartely conclude with Augustine in his book 2. Cap. 4. touching the
consent of the Evangelists, that sin is the transgression of the law. Now
here upon we gather that man is utterly like to a most miserable and vile
servant, and of what state or condition soever he be in ye world, yet ye he is
not at his own choice or liberty, but brought perforce into the power of an
other. For he is the servant of the most mighty Lord, namely God, which also
created him: yea and in this life still preserves him, and by his son given
for his ransom, redeemeth him, and besides all this has power finally to
determine of him what he will. This Lord after his pleasure and wisdom
prescribes a law, to which if man will obey, he shall receive incomperable
rewards: if not, he shall sustain bitter pains both in this life and also
after this life

Which thing if we would somewhat more deeply consider, all our pride should
forthwith of necessity be quayled and beaten down. Why therefore do we not
without delay acknowledge onr estate, and layinge a side all haughtines and
pride, submit our selves unto our Lord and master, being for nothing more
careful, then that we may obey his commandments, and please him al our
life long? But yet is it not for all this, thoroughly known what sin is. To
the intent therefore we may more narrowly search the nature of sin, it is
requisite that we look upon the law it self, by the transgression whereof
sin is committed.

For so counsels the Apostle, where as Romans 3. he says: By the law comes
the knowledge of sin. Again Rom 7. I knew not sin but by the law. For I
had not known concupiscence, except the law had said: Thou shall not lust.
Let us weigh therefore what the law requires of us, what it commands, and
what it forbids, so shall the nature of sin more clearly appear unto us.
Certes the law forbids parcialitie in words.

Thou shall not bear, says it, false witness. It prohibiteth likewise unjust
doings. Thou shall not kill, says it, Thou shall not steal, etc. Moreover it
commands as well honest words as deeds, where it joins the parents to
be honored, forasmuch as it is plain, that the duties of honor, ought to be
performed, not only in words, but also in deeds. I proceed further, and
find that in the first precepte of the former table it is commanded, that we
should worship God with all our heart, with all our mind, and with all our
strength and again that in the last precept of the second table it is
forbidden, that we should not lust. By these things now it is manifest, that
by the law of God are condemned wicked words and deeds, all sinful lusts
and affections, and perverse cogitations and thoughts hidden in the very
entrayles of the heart. I will conclude therefore that sin is every lust,
thought, will, study, word and deed dissenting from the law of God.

And doubtless as touching deeds unjustly committed, there is no man but
judges of them, Jacob. 1.3.
yea and those things that are wickedly and desperately done, all men do (at
the least) priuilye detest and abhor as well in others as also in them
selves. Furthermore all men do agree, that we ought to be slow to speak,
that our tongue is to be refreyned, and that he finally is perfect that fails
not in his speech.

Besides this, Math. 12.
Christ himself affirms that we shall give account of every idle word that
proceeds out of our mouth. Howbeit that saying of thoughts may seem
peradventure to some over hard and dure, and therefore that it needs a
mitigation.

But so it is verily: he that has to do with God, there is no place left unto
him either of feigning or dissembling. Heb. 11.
For all things are bare, open and uncovered in the sight of God. Man judges
only of those things that be apparaunte without, wherein he is both often
times deceived, and also deceyueth: but God sercheth the very heart and reins,
and brings to light, whatsoever lie hidden within. Therefore Genes. 6. it is
said, that God saw all the thoughts of man's heart to be turned allwaies to
that which is evil. And Genes. 22. God said that he knew well inoughe, with
what mind king Abimeleche would cause Sara Abraham's wife to be brought unto
him.

But how should any Christians doubt, whither the secrets of hearts be open
unto God, when as the very Ethnickes have freely confessed, that God has
reserved that office only to himself? For the Gentiles as Paul reports
Romans 2. are a law to themselves, and show the effect of the law written in
their hearts, their conscience also bearinge witness, and their thoughts
accusing one an other, or excusinge, in the day when god shall judge the
secrets of me^. And therefore truly does ye co^sience prick, perce, sting, and
torment without ceasing: forasmuch as it knows that God not only sercheth
and finds out all secret sins and offenses, but also most severely
punishes the^. And verily so deep is this knowledge touching the condemnation
of wicked affections imprinted in the minds of al men, that even the heathen
law makers and judges doubted not to pronounce, that the will sometimes is to
be esteemed as the deed it self. Which thing also the Satyricall Poet in his
Satyr 13. noted in these verses followinge.

These pains and penalties of sin,
the only will sustaynes.
For look in whom a secret thought,
on mischief set, remaynes,
He guyltie is of thactuall deed, etc.
Now hitherto do these things tend, and therefore are they thus appointed,
to the intent we may know how that God, like as he would have man by him
created to consist of two most excellent parts, that is to say of mind and
body, so also that he would perpetually keep and retain him wholly adicted to
himself, and be of him devoutly worshipped in either of the said parts.

But God verily is a spirit, and therefore that kind of worship chiefly
pleases him, which proceeds from the most noble part of us, to wit, the
mind, the spirit or soul. And to the end this thing might the more
conveniently be in this wise of men accomplished, it has pleased God to impart
his spirit also to the faithful, by the which their spirit may be stirred up,
governed and helped forward to the right exhibitinge of spiritual worship.

By means whereof the spirit of god also witnesses together with the spirit
of the faithful, that they are the sons of god, and by like endeavor
induces them to cry: Abba, Eather. Moreover by this means the mind, the
heart, the soul, the spirit, the affections, thoughts, will, study and by
what name soever it may be called, whatsoever is found to be most excellent in
man, do proceed further in the internal and true spiritual service of God,
and in the same are exercised without intermission.

Again forasmuch as the same God is the creator also of man's body, it is
very meet doubtless, that this wonderful work in like manner do acknowledge,
reverence and celebrate his maker. Wherefore it behooves us also to worship God
in our body.

This thing is the cause, why the Apostle Romans 12. beseeches all the
believers, that they would make their bodies a quick sacrifice, holy, and
acceptable unto God, their reasonable service. And Romans 6. he exhorts them in
this manner: As you have given your members servants to vnclea^nes and
iniquity, from one iniquity to an other: Even so now give your members
servants unto righteousness, to holiness.

Which things forasmuch as they are so, consider, O man, and apply thy self
unto this, that thou may with all thine endeavor consecrate thy self wholly
unto god, serve him with all thine heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
strength, yea and with all thy body also.

Keep thy hands and beware, least thou commit any wicked act with them:
Refrain thy tongue, neither let any reproach, filthy speakinge, leasinge,
scurrilitie, or evil language proceed out of thy mouth: last of all study
also to bridle thy corrupt affections and cogitations.

Take heed thou be not brought into that belief, that thou maiste follow thy
fancye as touching thoughts, for that they are not seen, neither can any man
reprove thee for them: Inasmuch as out of the^ all manner of offenses, whither
they be committed with ye tongue or any other members, do take (as Christ
witnesses Mark. 7.) their beginning. But when thou feel thy self over
weak and almost destitute of strength, know that it is thy part and duty, to
call continually upon god thy heavenly father and with inward groninge and tears
to pray unto him, that he would create a pure heart within thee, yt he would
turn away thine eyes, least they behold vanytie, that he would apply thy
tongue to speak that which is good and godly, Psalm. 5.119. etc.
that he would direct thy hands to the doing of laudable actions and such as
are acceptable unto him, that he would keep thee wholly both in mind and body
harmeles and innocent, and that he would always further thee to the exercising
of the duties of godlynes and piety.

For undoubtedly except God of his mercy do provide that thou be not tempted,
or if temptation come, that thou be speedily delivered from it, thou can in
^o wise be free from sin. But thus far touching the question what the thing
is, I fear least over much. For in case we should seem to proseede in this
order, our discourse would grow to be over tedious.

It is requisite therefore that we use henceforwarde brevity, A division of
sin by the question, how manifold the thing is. Psalm. 51. Romans 5.^ Ephesians. 2.
and note only certain points of things briefly as touching the second
question. The sin in which we are borne is by the fall of our first parents
derived into all their posterity, whereof so great is the force, that we can
never be inclyned to that which is good, nor obey the law of God: wherefore we
are found guilty also through our own offense. There is a sin ye every man,
when he is now come to perfect reason and understanding, commits of his own
will, by transgressing the law of god either in thought, word, or deed. That
sin they call oryginall, this actual: of which chiefly we have hitherto
entreated. Moreover the holy scripture co^memorateth, sins of omission and
ignorance, as namely when one is found to be gilty, Leuit. 5. Psalm. 25
for that he has not performed those things which he ought, or in such order
as he ought to have done: again when he sins, where he least thought, yea
supposed also ye he had done well, 1. Tim. 1.
after which sort S. Paul confesses in more places then one, ye he had
grievously offended. Furthermore some sins are called strange or
extraordinary, 1. Tim. 5 Romans 1
as when a man comes into danger, and sustayneth blame for an other man's
offense. Math. 18. Romans 14.15 ^. Cor. 8
And what will ye say to yt sin? where Christ pronounces him worthy of most
grievous punishment, which shall minister to an other an offense, and occasion
of falling? But how hard a thing is it to know, whether ye brethren ye are
present be weak and soon offended, or whether they be strong and thoroughly
instructed. Again further, Math. 12. Luke. 12
ye sin committed against the holy ghost is said never to be forgiven. Now
among so many and sundry sorts of sins John teaches 1. Epist. cap. v. ye there
is one kind of sin unto death, and an other not unto death. But what shall
need many words? We are compelled to ^btles to say with the prophet: Psalm.
19.
Our errors or sins who may comprehend? So great therefore is the varyetie in
sins that it enforces us to confess, the law of god to be most largely
spread abroad, neither that we can so easily attain the sense and effect
thereof, as a great number do suppose. For what soever things are any where
discoursed or rehearsed in the sacred scriptures as touching good or evil
deeds, those things ought with very good right to be taken of us for a
commentary and interpretation of the same law.

Moreover it behooves us here to consider the seuerytie of Gods judgment,
when as wretched man is so many ways every where beset with perils, and for
the causes that he least supposes, found guilty of sin. For by this means
the whole world is in daungered to God, and God concludes al men under
unbelief: which nevertheless we may not so interpret to be done, that he
should destroy all men, and damn them for ever, but rather that he should
have compassion upon all men, Roma. iii.xi
and by that means set forth and make known his goodness every where.

Howbeit these things do admonish all the sort of us, that we should be
sober, vigilant, ware, circumspect and that we should studiously avoyde not
only open and manifest, but also privy and secret sins, yea all occasion of
sin, and even suspicion also.

We are lilke unto Pilgrims or to those that travail in a strange and
unknown country by ways, in which we are every moment in danger of thieves,
wild and venomous beasts, waters, down falls and such like hurtful and
perilous things. The devil, the world, and our flesh do never cease to lie
in awayt for us, they seek by a thousand wiles to draw us into their nets and
snares. But we must resist and valiantly strive against the^ by faith, prayers,
fastings, by the word of God, and other spiritual weapons, which Christ the
invincible confounder of all vices and wicked spirits has prepared, and has
vouched safe to show us how we should use them. 1. Pet. 5. Ephe. 5. Math. 4.17.
etc. Thou see what great plenty of things do offer themselves, and how large
fields are opened unto him, that will proceed after this manner. Wherefore we
will make an end.

In as much as the other questions may be reserved till an other time, namely
that touching the causes of sin, and another touching the effects, of which
sort in the scriptures are handeled no small number and (alas wretches that we
be) in so many troubles and calamities of our times, great store may daily be
observed.

But forasmuch as death also is numbered among the effects of sin, we will
add likewise an example (but briefly handeled) as thouching this. A
declaration of Death by certain questions.
He that will speak therefore of death, may aptly prefixe two questions, out of
which he shall find sufficient plenty of matters that he may declare to the
commodytie of his hearers.

Let them therefore be these: What death is, and what the effects of death. For
a description or definition of death this may be had: Death is the penalty of
sin justly inflicted of god unto al men, Gene. 2 Deuteronomy. 30. Romans 6. Romans 5.
like as al men also are sinners. It is derived of the causes, and abundantly
proved by the testimonies of the scriptures: God threateneth the pain of death
unto sinners.

The reward of sin is death. Through one man sin entered into the world, and
through sin death, and so death came upon al men, inasmuch as al we have
sinned. In which place are touched the chief causes of death, man, I say, and
sin, whereunto may be added out of Gene. 2. ye the Serpent also or the devil
is the author of death, which to the Hebrews. 2. is said to hold the empier of
death. Heb, 9 it is said: This is appointed to all men, that they shall once
dye, and after that comes the judgment. Out of which places, diverse and
sundry things may be drawn, to demonstrate more amply what Death is: And by
like industrye may the godly be excited to true humility of mind, to the
contempt of carthly things, to pass their life in the fear of God, to call
upon Gods mercy for the intigation of the pains which we through our sins
have deserved. etc.

When he shall come to the question of the effects, it shall be necessary to
discern the effects of death in the Godly, from the effects of death in the
ungodly, and that partlye by this means: first: The godly are persuaded that
death shall in no wise happen unto the^ to their condemnation and destruction,
but rather to their health and salvation, inasmuch as the sentence of
dampnation now long since pronounced against us, is by the death of Christ
utterly cancelled and rased out.

The law of the spirit of life through Christ Jesus has made me free from
the law of sin and death. Romans 3 Heb 2. 1. Pet. 3. 2. Cor. 5.
Christ by his death has abolished the power of death. Christ has once
suffered for our sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to
God. We know, that if our earthly ma^sion of this tabernacle be destroyed, we
have an other building of God, a mansion not made with hands, but eternal in
heaven. But as touching the vngodly^, they know, that death is appointed to
them, as a most bitter pain, and do feel undoubtedly ye heavy judgment of
damnation: by reason whereof it comes to pass also, that in temptations, but
chiefly in their extreme conflictes they are vehemently troubled, afflicted,
and do miserably faint and give over, I will not say for the most part
utterly despair. For what can they else do, in whom remains no hope or
confidence at all touching the remission of their sins? Evil shall slay the
ungodly, and they that hate the rightuous shall be desolate, Psalm. 34
Secondly: The godly, forasmuch as they suffer continually many adversities,
and so long as they live in this world, are vexed of the ungodly, do
willingly long after death, and with joyful minds embrace it, as they that
are not ignorant, that by it is given unto them an entrance to a happy and
blessed life. Philipp. 1.
I desire (says Saint Paul) to be dissolved, and be with Christ. We mourn
inwardly in our selves for the adoption looking for the redemption of our body.
Romans 8. 2. Cor. 5.
We groan in this our tabernacle, longing to be translated into that which is
from heaven. And after a few words: We trust and do better like, to be far
away absent from the body, and to be present with God. And 2. Pet. 1. Death is
called the putting off of this tabernacle. On the other side, ye ungodly, for
that they enjoy here in this life wealth and prosperity, and all things
happen unto them for the most part, after their hearts desire, are plucked
away sore against their wills, and do take it very grieuouslye if a man does
but once make mention of death unto them.

But what follows?

When they flatter themselves most of all, and think to settle themselves
here most sure, saying: O soul thou haste great abundance of wealth, enjoy
it at thy pleasure: Not long after, yea the very same time, and when they least
do suspect, they here it said: Thou fool, Luke 2^
this night shall they fetch thy soul from thee. And generally both of the
godly and ungodly we read. 2. These. 1. It is a rightuous thing with God, to
render unto those that persecute you, affliction, and unto you that are
persecuted, peace and tranquillity with us, when our lord Jesus shall be
revealed from heaven. And moreover Abraham says unto the rich man Luke 16.
Son remember, that thou in thy life time receiuedst thy pleasure, and Lazarus
in like manner received pain: but now is he comforted, and thou art punished.
Thirdly: when death is now to be entered into, the godly are not afraid, they
remain constant and invincible, they pray and call upon GOD, they desire to
have their sins pardoned through Christ, they praise and extol their most
merciful and heavenly father, they give him thanks, they wholly dedicate and
commend all that ever they have unto him.

They say we the apostle: I am fully persuaded, Romans 8.
that neither death, neither life can separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our lord. And again Romans xiiii. whether we live, or die, we
are the Lords. But the wicked and ungodly are altogether troubled, they tremble
for fear, their hearts fail them, they are angry with God, they curse, they
blaspheme. An example of such great diversity we may behold in the two thieves
yt were hanged on ye cross with Christ, of who^ both the actions and ends are
described to be very diverse, Luke 23. Math. 24. 1 Thessalonians 4. 1. Pet. 5 Apocalip.
20.21.
Fourthly: The godly being now dead, do rise again to everlasting life but to
ye wicked remains a second death to be suffered after ye death of their body.
This difference moreover is expressed Luke 16 by a manifest document as
touching the rich man and Lazerus.

These things be of no small force and moment to admonish and warn all estates
of men.

The ungodly may in good time be admonished to bethink them of conversion, and
amendment of life. To the auoydinge of sins it will profyt greatly, if they
often times be mindful of death, and of those things that follow after death.
The godly again may learn out of al these things, how they ought to behave
themselves as well in their life as also in death it self, they may learn
that death is in no wise to be feared of them, they may learn to despise the
world and all things that are in the world, they may rightly prepare
themselves unto death throughout their whole life, they may minister unto
others that are sick and at the point of death apt consolations, they may
learn how to strengthen and sustain themselves in their very last conflict
with death.

He that shall both by good reasons and also by apt and plain words declare
and illustrate all these things, or certain other happily besides, not
disagreeing from his purpose, shall be judged to have bestowed a very good and
wholesome labor in speaking.

But, as I said, there is left great liberty in the handeling of these kind
of theames, to the teachers in ye church, forasmuch as it behooves them often
times to enterlace many things, that conduce to reprove them that be of a
sinister judgment, to exhort, to rebuke, to comfort: by reason whereof it
comes to pass that the bounds of the Logicians be of necessity transgressed.

Chrysostom often times compares the ministers of the word with those men,
that use to furnishe their tables with deinty and delicate meats, the better
to entertain many guestes of diverse and sundry dietes. And very aptlye in my
opinion. For like as that feast maker is not thought to satisfy his guestes,
that sets before the^ one only kind of meat, and that always dressed
after one and the same manner, but ought rather ever and anon to alter ye kinds
of meat, and then cause them to be brought unto the bourd now dressed after
this fashion now after that: Even so the Preacher except he use sometimes
change and variety of matter in the invention and disposition of things, the
hearers will soon be weryed and yrked, and even glutted (as ye would say) with
a certain fullness and lothsomnesse of stomach.

Wherefore it may truly be said, that it is a work most hard and difficult,
to prescribe rules or perpetual observations, and such as may be sufficient,
to the college of Preachers.

One most certain rule there is, and that can in no wise deceive us, namely,
to imitate and follow with all dilygence and endeavor the examples of the holy
Sermons, which are extant as well in the sacred scriptures, as also which are
read in all the most allowed Doctors of the Church. Albeit there is no doubt,
but that the holy Ghost also the Prince and a lonely master of all true
teachers, what time he is in the beginning of the sacred Sermon, with a fervent
heart and perfect faith called upon, will both liberally minister and suggest,
and also most wisely dispose and put in order, what things so ever are to be
spoken: so far forth that the excellent preachers do often times perceive far
other matters to come into their minds standing in the pulpit, then they had
premeditated at (...), and that the same matters uttered ex tempore the (...)
to a better issue, and are more gredily and fruitfully received of the hearers,
then those which they had before exactely prepared and digested.

Howebeit examples of Sermons in which are to be seen simple theames godly and
profitably handeled, A heap of examples.
thou may find in Chysostome in his fifth Tome, as touching prayer, fasting,
repentance, of which also he entreats there in many sermons

Of his sermons touching gods providence we have before mentioned.

There be besides in men's hands certain orations of Basilius magnus
concerning fasting, baptism, humility, thanks giving, ire, envy. And of
Gregorius Nazianzenus, touching peace, and touching baptism.

I can not, but that I must needs add by the way for the better
admonishemente of the reader that a simple theme is at some times in such wise
declared, that the whole tractation thereof does pass to an other kind of
Sermon, then to the kind didascalick.

Some one promises (peradventure) that he will entreat of alms, but whilst
he goes on his whole Oration is spent in exhorting and persuading, that all
men would give gladly to the poor.

It is certain, that this Sermon shall more justly be referred to the kind
Institutiue, then to the kind didascalick. Again one takes in hand to
entreat of death, but he teaches in ye mean time that it is not to be feared
of ye godly, ye the dead are not immoderatly to be lamented May not a man say
ye he comfort more rather then teaches? In like manner he ye intends to
speak of ire, or envy, and reproves those vices as vehementlye as he can,
declaring that they are greatly to be abandoned of all men, there is no man (I
suppose) that will not grant him to be occupied in the kind Correctiue.

What the way and manner is to declare a theme compound in the kind
didascalick. Cap. IX.
A Theme compound is then offered to be handeled, when the state of the
Sermon to be had is declared in many words, and even in a full proposition
(as the Logicians use to speak) as when we say: Christ is very God and very
man, man is justified by faith without works, they that are justified ought to
be given to good works, the dead shall rise or revive again. But as often as
it is required of us, that we should expound a part of an holy book, or also
some certain place taken out of the holy Scripture, it is by all means very
requisite, that we express the state or sum of those things, whereof we
will entreat, in one theme compounde. And that the like thing happens
sometimes, when entreatie is made of an entier book of Scripture, we have
already by examples brought as touching Ecclesiastes, Cantica Salomonis, and
the Gospel after John, above declared. Besides when any thing falls out by
occasion to be talked off in the pulpit, it is necessary, that the same be
propounded in a theme compounde.

Of this sort it is, if I say: Honger or drouth is patiently and quietly of us
to be endured: God by his just judgment, sent the calamity that fell through
hail: Of the one Theme Basilius Magnus most gravely entreats of the other,
Gregorius Nazianzenus. Now hereby it may plainly appear, that the use of
those things which are to be touched in this Chapter, is of very great
importance in the Church of God. In the mean time it shall be lawful briefly
to absolve these things, forasmuch as very many points do accord hereunto,
which are sufficiently at large discussed in the former Chapters.

I. Where if so be therefore thou be determined, to handle a theme compounde,
when a whole book is taken in hand to be declared, or a part out of any book
of scripture is proposed to the multitude: there is no man yt sees not, the
very text of the divine words which are recited in the sacred assembly, to
minister and suggest by it self many and diverse things, which may both godly
and relygiousely be uttered, and through every part thereof be aptly dilated
and amplified. It shall then therefore be best, to imitate and follow some one
of those orders of expou^ding, which we have comprised in ye 3.4.5.6. chapters
of this present book.

II. But, where as no reading or lecture of holy Scripture over long shall go
before, but only either a brief sentence, or a place out of some sacred book
shall be taken in hand, or else no words at all be premised out of the
scriptures: the^ truly it shall be expedient thoroughly and exactly to
consider all those things in order, which we have in certain observations
comprehended, noted in the seventh Chapter, as touching the manner of
handelinge one place or sentence of scripture. For it is convenient, that ye
same consideration be had as well of a sentence, as of a theme compounde. A
proof hereof is this, that oftentimes those that are purposed to declare a
theme compound, do gladly borrowe some sentence out of ye scriptures, which
may be agreeable to their purpose, and do prefixe it before their Sermon, or in
any wise insert it.

The Apostle to the Romans 4. intendinge to prove that man is justified by
faith, takes that sentence out of Gene. 15. Abraham believed god, and it was
imputed unto him for righteousness. In the Epistle to the Galathians handeling
the same matter, he produces out of Geneses. 22 the promise of god made unto
Abraham: In thee, or in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed.
Moreover in the two said Epistles, and in that to ye Hebrews, is prefixed a
theme compounde, Romans 1. Galat. 3. Heb. 10.
or brief sentence out of ye prophet Abacuc, 2. The just man shall live by
faith. That the same craft or cunning therefore is aptly to be applied to the
tractatio^ of a theme co^pound, which a litell before we showed to be requisite
to ye discussing of a sentence, or place of holy scripture, there is no cause
why any man should doubt.

III. And forasmuch as we then also admonished, that it is sometime very
necessary, in case a resolution of a sentence or place taken out of the
Scriptures be had, and all the parts thereof examined a part, it shall be
profitable also to use the like experience in the tractation of a theme
compounde. When this thing is to be done, it shall be convenient not only to
go that way to work which we have showed to be open unto us in the holy
Scriptures, and that truly very excellent, but also we shall get furniture
of teachinge both substanciall and plentious out of those things which in ye
former Chapter be of us declared as touching ye explanation of simple
theames. For certes ye places, which divided into two forms or orders we showed
to be attributed to ye kind didascalicke, do give occasion of devising and
finding out great and weighty things of every theme that is offered.

Wherefore we shall not without cause require aid and succoure of them. As
touching all which things, here to repeat again with many words, that which
has been already said, would be very superfluous.

IIII. And surely seeinge the multitude and varyetie of things is infinite,
that are treated off in the Church, so often as the use and order of time do
require, there can no better counsel or advice be given, then that every man
have a special regard unto their Sermons, which have most aptely and holily
handeled theames compound, and that he endeavor so far forth as lies in him to
render and express in his sermons that which he perceyueth to have most force
and grace in them. Such Sermons are with great care and exact judgment to be
perused, to ye intent thou may examaine every thing occurrent in them, and
that which is best to be liked choycely digest and put in order as things to
be adjoined to thy household stuff, and to be usurped as thine own when time
and occasion shall serve. To make any futher declaration it is not necessary.

But examples wherein theames compounde of the kind didascalick are most
learnedly explaned, these inespecially be commended in the sacred Scriptures.
In the Epistle to the Romans the Apostle declares at large, that men are
justified by faith without the works of the law. Again cap. 9.10.11. That ye
Jews are rejected of god, and the Gentiles called, to be the people or Church
of God. In the first Epistle to the Corinthes cap. 15. it is proved by strong
arguments that the dead do all rise or revive again. In the Epistle to the
Galathyans, it is again confirmed, that men are justified by faith without the
works of the law, in the last part of the second Chapter, and also in the
3.4. and some part of the 5. Chapters. In the Epistle to the Ephesians
Thapostle teaches in three Chapters, that men by the only grace of God in
Christ, are elected, called, justified, and glorified.

The author of the Epistle to the Hebrews in two Chapters declares with
wonderful perspicuitye, that Christ is true God, and true man.

In the same Epistle cap. 7.8.9.10. out of one sentence of scripture are drawn
four distinct theames compounde, and every one of the^ is with certain and
assured reasons established and explaned: whereof the first is, that Christ is
a priest after the order of Melchisedec: the second, that the priesthode of
Christ is far more excellent then the priesthod of Aron or Leuiticus: the
third, that by the priesthod of Christ the Aaronicall priesthod is abolished:
the fourth, that by the priesthod of Christ the old ceremonies, sacrifices,
and even the law it self do take an end.

In deed I must needs confess, that the said Epistles are not written in the
popular kind of teaching, but it is undoubtedly to be granted, that in them
may be noted such a trade and manner of collectinge arguments and proufes, and
likewise such a disposition of things, as is to be found in no other books
of scripture beside.

Therefore even for this cause do we here worthily commend and set forth the
examples contained in them, where we have appointed to entreat of invention
and disposition. As for the Sermons of Christ and the prophets, we have out of
them showed some examples already in the second Chapter of this present book.
Out of Chrisostom Tome 5. may be added these sermons entitled thus: that
Christian ought to lead a holy and virtuous life.

That we must do well in the least things. That a Christian man ought with
great endeavor to tender Gods glory. That it behooves every man to be careful
for his own salvation. That their trespasses are to be remitted that have
offended us. That the remembrance of sins past does much profit. How we
should communicate the sacred mysteries. That we ought with all kind of duties
to give thanks unto God. That love does direct and accomplish all things.
That we ought to love even our enemies, that persecute us.

But it behooves not the young beginners, for whom we have written these
things, to be accombred and ouercharged with the multitude of examples.

Hitherto have we proceeded touching the diverse forms of Sermons in one and
the same kind Didascalick, in the tractation whereof like as with singular
fidelitye, so also with great diligence and industry have we specified those
things, which we supposed were most profitable for our purpose. We have in
deed been the longer herein, partly that we might make all things plain and
easy, and partly least we should of necessity be compelled (to our great
grief) to repeat again the same things in the discourses following. For
certes that in every kind of Sermons, so often as the case requires, one while
the parts and manifold readinges of the sacred books, an other while some
sentence or certain place out of ye Scriptures, moreover somwhile simple
theames, sometimes theames compounde are expounded and declared, there is no man
that is ignorant. And whosoever he be that has now already rightly conceived,
what ought to be done in every form of sermon in the kind didascalick, he
shall easily understand, what is likewise to be done in the other kinds of
Sermons, of which we will now take in hand to speak. For in case thou do
except the palces of invention, and also ye cantions proper to every kind, the
order and proportion of all the kinds will in a manner be all one.

With what great care and industry it is to be provided, that those things
which are alleged in the sermon out of the fountains of the scriptures or
from any other place, may skilfully and accordingely be applied to the matters
present. cap. x.
THat which shall now be spoken off, will profit much as well unto ye things,
that have been hitherto touched, as also unto those things that remain, and
may worthily be accounted among the chief and principal virtues of a
faithful teacher. That is this, that all those to whom it appertains to
enstructe the multitude, do with great care and diligence endeavor
themselves, cunningely and aptely to aplie those things which they in their
Sermon produce out of the fountains of the Scriptures, or from any other
where, either for proof, or illustratinge of their cause, to ye present state
of things and matters incident. For verily that it is by all means to be
provided and foreseen, that nothing, hard, wrested, or in any wise far fet,
be alleged out of the scriptures, when we intend to stablish the doctrine of
faith, or a principle of our religion, I suppose there is no man that knows
not. And certes our desire is not only to admonish the godly sort of this,
but we advertise the^ also, ye a special diligence ought to be employed in
this, ye the testimony which is found now fully ^o agree with ye business in
hand, be with an apt form of words declared, to be as fit and
correspondent thereunto, as if the divine author out of whom it is borrowed,
had first purposely spoken of the very same matter. And doubtless we see some,
when as they utter a prophecy, a promise, threatening, grave sentence, or a
notable example out of the canonical scriptures, to express it with such
comelines and decencye of speech, and so to apply it to the present state of
things, and even present it (as ye would say) to the eyes and senses, that
the hearers are compelled to judge, and not unwillingly to confess, that the
same thing was long ago spoken or written, for their sakes, and especially of
their times: neither can it be told, how greatly good men are delighted in
their minds, if at any time they chance to here some one excelling in this
craft. And in deed all Preachers for the most part do after one and ye same
manar go about to apply ye places of scripture to ye peculiar affairs of
their own church, but they do it not in any case we like success. Wherefore if
we see any in this behalf to surmount the reside we, we must needs interpret
it to come to pass by the singular gift of the holy ghost. Which thing seeing
it is so, we with very good right exhort all the ministers of gods word, yt
they would with all their power and enforcement apply themselves unto this
point, and crave of god their heavenly father yt he would vouchsafe to give
the^ his holy spirit, which may enstruct the^ in all things. There are found
in ye sacred scriptures some forms of such applications, if not described with
many words, yet right worthy to be of us exactly observed, and studiously
followed. For they enforced me by their grauitye and importau^ce, yt I should
think it expedient, to put those that will teach in ye church in remembrance
of them. Luc. 4.
Our savior Christ the prince of all preachers entered according to his custom
on the sabbath day into ye sinagog, and stood up to read. And there was
delivered unto him the book of ye prophet Esaias. And when he had unfolded ye
book, he found ye place where it was written: The spirit of the Lord is upon
me, and therefore he has anointed me, etc. Whereupon he began to say unto
them: This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears.

In which place Christ undoubtedly did with many words apply the oracle of
the prophet unto that time, as it was also convenient, to the intent all men
might clearly understand, that Esaias prophesied simply and without any
ambiguitie of Christ himself, and of that very state of things which then
was. And albeit ye application as Christ did exhibit it, be not committed to
writing, but only the sum or state thereof expressed, yet that it was very
fitly and congruently prepared, it appears sufficiently by the words that the
Evangelist adds.

And all, says he, gave witness unto him, and marueled at the grace of his
words, Acts. 2.
which proceeded out of his mouth. Moreover when the ungodly scoffers and
deriders hard the Apostles speak with diverse tongues, they were not ashamed
to say, that Thapostles were droncke and ouerladen with wine.

But Peter remoueth ye vice of dronke^nes both from himself and from the rest
of the Apostles, and as the case then required, interprets the prediction of
Ioell the prophet to be fulfilled. These are not droncke, as ye do suppose,
seeing it is but the third hour of the day, but this it is, that was spoken
by the prophet Joel: And it shall be in the later days, says God, I will
pour out my spirit upon all flesh etc.

And so a little after he applies them unto those things that had happened,
saying: Ye men of Israel, here these words: Jesus of Nazareth a man
approved of God among you in miracles, in signs and wonders, which God did by
him in the midst of you, as you your selves also know, him by the determinate
counsel etc. And again: He being therefore axalted on the right hand of
God, and having received of his father the promise of the holy ghost, has
shed forth this, which ye now see and hear etc.

But least any man should obiecte and say that those prophesies were in such
sort uttered in times past of Esaias and Joel, as that they could not be
expounded of any other things then those ye happened in ye time of Christ, I
will produce other examples that stretche further, and may not unaptly be
referred to all times.

Saint Paul entending to show how that men are justified by faith without the
works of the law, Romans 4.
takes a most strong and valiant reason of the example of Abraham, whom the
scripture pronounces to be justified by faith, saying: Abraham believed in
God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness. And after diverse and sundry
reasons deduced out of the same testimonye, he applies the very order of
justification to all sorts of men universally of every age and time in these
words: It is not written, says he, for him only, that it was imputed unto him
but also for us, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe in him that raised
up our Lord Jesus from the dead. Again to the Romans xi. Thapostle confirming
that God has not utterly forsaken ye people of ye Jews, who^ he knew before,
but that always some of them shall be saved: Know ye not, says he, what the
scripture says of Elias? How he makes intercession to god against Israel,
saying: Lord they have killed thy prophets, and subverted thine altars: and I
am left alone, and they ly in await for my life. But what says the answer of
God unto him? I have reserved unto my self seven thousand men, that have not
bowed their knees to the image of Baal. So therefore eue^ at this time also are
some left according to the election of grace.

And we see the same example to be transferred of writers to the elect and true
Church of all times. But a most pro^er and elegant form of appilcatio^ Saint
Paul has left unto us. i. Corin. x. where he affirms that the fathers in
the old Testament used in deed holy mysteries, which might worthily be
compared with ours, but when they abstayned not from wickedness, they were
severely punished according as they had deserved, and were overthrown in the
wilderness.

And these were figures, says he, to put us in remembrance, least we should
covet after evil things, as some of the^ coueted. And least we should be
worshippers of images as some of them were, as it is written: The people sat
down to eat and drinck, and rose up to play. And that we should not be
defiled with fornication, as some of them were defiled with fornication, and
fell in one day three and twenty thousand. And that we should not tempt
Christ, as some of them tempted, and were killed of serpents. Neither murmer
as some of them murmured, and were destroyed of the destroyer. Al these things
happened unto them by figures. But they are written for our learning, upon who^
are come the ends of the world. Wherefore let him that thinks he stands
take heed least he fall, etc.

These therefore and many other examples more in like manner handeled, we may
perceive to be applied to exhort and persuade men of all ages, which through a
certain confydence they have, that they are once registered in the Church of
God and do use in common the Sacraments, are seen to become the more boulde
unto all kinds of sin.

With no less diligence the Apostle to the intent he might prove them ye
believe the Gospel, Galat. 4.
and are justified by faith, to be free from the burdens of the law, declares
that it was long time before signified by an exquisyt type or figure, of the
two sons of Abraham, the one borne of a bondmaid, the other of a free woman:
Of whom nevertheless he (we omit many things for breuities sake) betokening
the law and those that seek to be justified by the law, is commanded with
his mother to be cast out, but to this embracing the Gospel is ye inheritance
given to enjoy. He applies those words to his purpose in the beginnng,
saying: Tell me ye that will be under the law, do ye no hear the law? For
it is written that Abraham had two sons, etc. Very wittely doubtless and
pythyly to make them attent. Again in the end: Wherefore brethren we are
sons not of the bondwoman, but of the free woman. Stand therefore in the
liberty that Christ has purchased for us, and be not again tangeled in the
yoke of bondage.

Thapostle likewise by the way in serteth somwaht touching the unquenchable
haters and contentions of the same brethren, and transferreth it to his, yea
and to our times, and to all the posteritye of the Church, saying: Like as then
he that was borne after the flesh, percecuted him that was borne after the
spirit, even so it is now. But there is no need that any thing should
further be added, seeinge every man now may easily perceive how and after
what sort it behooves us to follow and imitate holy and divine writers.
Howbeit if any man be desirous to know what manner of sayings chiefly out of
the scriptures, may and ought to be applied, unto things present and matters
incident: We briefly make him this answer, that what things soever are
occurrent in the canonical Scriptures are rightly and duly to be used, so
that as well the words as matters be agreeable and correspondent to our
purpose*

For thou seeste how the prophisies and promises of the prophets are of Christ
and Peter expounded of those things that then came to pass in Judea: thou
see Romans 4. a very short sentence touching the manner whereby Abraham was
justified, to be applied to the interprised disputation: thou see Romans 10.1.
Corinth. 10. Gal. 4. historical examples to be added to.

And in the place where the apostle 1. Corinthians. 9. goes about to prove, that
to the ministers of the Gospel all things necessary for this life are duly to
be ministered of the hearers, he takes out of Duet. 25. a certain precept, and
shows it to agree very well with the cause that he has in hand.

Speak I these things after the manner of men? Says not the law the same
also? For it is written in the law of Moses: Thou shall not mosell the mouth of
the ox that treads out the Corn. Does god care for oxen? Says he not this
altogether for our sakes? Yea for our sake is this written, that he which
eareth, might ear in hope: and he which soweh in hope, might be partaker of
his hope. It is no hard case to note in readinge many more examples, in which
diverse things that are spoken off may aptlye be joined together, and may
answer accordingly to the purposed matter.

For like as the Prophets do take and apply those their sayings out of the
law, Christ and the Apostles both out of the law and the Prophets: So have we
free lyberty to borrow all manner of sentences whatsoever, out of the law,
prophets, and apostles.

And not only old and ancient matters out of ye holy Scriptures, but also
late and new, not much past our memory or the memory of our fathers, yea and
such daily as still come to pass, add also things taken out of other
writers, as Poets, Historiographers, and such like, may sometimes fittely and
opportunly be adjoined to the confirmation of any thing belonging to the
present state of things.

For Christ when he labored to move all men alyke to repentance, to the
intent they might so with fear and trembling look for the coming of the
Lord, and some were then present that showed him of the Galilaeans, whose
blood Pilate had mingeled with their sacrifices, he aunswering them that told
him such news, says:

Suppose ye that these Galilaeans were sinners above all other Galilaeans,
because they suffered such things? I say unto you, no, for except ye repent,
ye shall all likewise perish. Either else suppose ye that those eighteen
persons upon whom the tower in Siloe fell and slew them, were detters more then
all the inhabitaunts of Jerusalem? I say unto you, no, but except ye repent, ye
shall al likewise perish. And Mat. 11. and Luke 7. Christ speaking of ye
stiffenecked Jews, which would neither admit his preaching nor ye preaching of
John Baptist: To whom shall I resemble, says he, the men of this generation,
and who^ are they like? They are like unto children sitting in the market
place, and crying one to an other and saying: we have piped unto you, and ye
have not dau^ced: we have song unto you a mournful song, and ye have not wept.
For John Baptist came neihter eating bread nor drincking wine, and ye say: he
has the devil. The son of man came eating and drincking, and ye say: Behold
a great eater and drincker of wine, a friend of Publicans and sinners. And
wisdom is justified of all her children.

Likewise the interpretations of the parables, as they are of Christ himself
made and put forth, be replenished with this kind of craft and workmanship of
applyinge. And how the Apostle in his most grave Sermons and Epistles, has
used the testimonies or sayings of the Poets, to wit, of Aratus Act. 17. of
Menander 1. Cor. 7.15. of Epimenides Titus. 1. it is better known then that it
shall be needful to reherce the places themselves.

But out of this admonition touching the heaping together of proofs or
arguments, to be skilfully and conveniently applied to the business of which
entreaty is made or to the present state of the Church, flows an other
exhortation, as wholesome and necessary as any other.

That is, that all men would wisely weigh and consider with themselves, how
far forth it shall be expedient to use the holy sermons, which other have
made and setle forth.

The causes of this exhortation when thou shall hear, whosoever thou art, I
know thou will pronounce the^ to be just and lawful.

We se (which is greatly to be marueled at) the minysters of Churches every
where to be so tied and fastened wholly to the books that conteyne the divine
sermons co^piled, with no little study, by others, that by reason thereof they
neglecte to read the sacred Bible, there wanted little but I had said, plainly
contemn it.

But it can not be dissembled, that the authors of those sermons do often times
adnixe long and tedious digressions, also interlace without order reasons and
arguments somewhat discrepant from ye scriptures openly recited: namely
forasmuch as they judged them in especially to be meet and convenient for the
place and time.

Now it can not be, that those self same things, should be apt and
correspondent to the present state of ye church, wherein thou supplyest the
office of teaching. Howbeit let us admit that there be no digressions at all,
and that the holy scriptures are simply and sincerely expounded in them: but
what makes that to thy purpose, I pray thee, if the whole explanation as it
lies, be directed most chifely to those points of Christian doctrine, which
in those places and times were in deed very aptely and with great grace
handeled of the Preachers, and fauourablye received of the hearers, where as
now in these days and with thy audien^es they will all be out of season?

To what end serves the explication of that portion of Scripture, wherein are
confuted the mayntayners and defenders of two contray beginninges the Manichees
or other heretics: whose assertions have now no where any place? What shall it
profyt to inueigh against those that gad to the Lystes or Theater to behold
plays and games, before that people which is utterly ignorant what those
terms mean?

Moreover it is no point of wisdom nor convenient to utter straight ways
every thing openly (especially in divine matters) that is gathered together
by the labor and judgment of other men.

For they do allege in deed out of the Scriptures, sentences, examples,
proofs and probations of all sorts, but forasmuch as some of them do note the
same very briefly, and only, as ye would say, by points or titles, some also
do scrape them together at all adventures, out of others, which have likewise
lately published and put forth Sermons: it is very requisite (except thou will
cast as well thy self as thy hearers into open danger) that thou should
diligently examine every thing, and taking a narrow new of the fountains of
scripture and observing there all things that either go before or follow
after, what causes or circumstaunces hang together, again what driftes of
reasons or arguments there be, and what force they be off, determine finally
with thy self, whether they be agreeable to thy purpose, or no.

And by the same pains taking that thou must of necessity sustain in this
behalf, thou thy self might as well after thine own lykement devise a new
and entier sermon according to the state of things present. But (to draw to an
end) be it so, that those strange and foreign Sermons be in all respects
perfect and sound, and that there is nothing, as touching either matters or
words, wanting in them: yet art thou very much deceived, which supposest that
thou shall with as good a grace set forth the doyngs of an other man, as
thou vtterest thine own made at home in thy house.

Labor, strive, enforce thy self so far as thy wits will suffer, and yet
truly will there never appear in thee that voice, that plyauntnes of sound,
that moderation of gesture and moving, that gravity, that ardent affection,
that power and vehemence in words, which were found in the first author.

Every man is the best and most grave reciter of his own doyngs. And the
chief part of a Preacher, teaching with commendation is absent, when he
wants pronounciation.

I omit to tell that if it shall fortune any of thy hearers to have ye very
same author at home, of who^ thou borrowest in a manner all things, it will
come to pass that in short space thou shall procure to thy self great haterd
and contempt amongst all men. I could my self (will they say) make as good a
Sermon as our Preacher. I can read at home at my house every day in the week
al ye he preaches, neither is there any cause why I should after this resort
to the church.

And by this means is engendered in their minds a certain contempt of holy
assembelies, and by little and little all ecclesiastical actions and the whole
ministry of the Church begin to wax vile and lothsom.

Verily I believe that those which do always thus use, yea rather abuse, the
labors of other men, and bring forth little or nothing of their own, are of
Gregory Nazianzenus well and thriftely taunted and taken up, where as in his
Apologeticus he says:

If there be any peradventure that have learned two or three sermons, out of
the ancient writers, and that happily more by hearing then by reading: Or in
case we have kanned a few Psalms here and there out of David, and afterward
do use them by apparelling them with a more fulsome and well plighted vesture,
or if we can brag and vaunt of Philosophy even to the stars,
counterfettinge a certain show of godliness, and disguising our face with
such like inventions, we will now in all the haste be praised, and had in
admiration, we think now forthwith to be placed over some peoples, we seem,
in our own fantasy, even from our cradels to be some consecrated Samuels: We
will also be counted wise and teachers of divine mysteries, yea and set our
selves among the Scribes and Doctors of law. etc. And certes it is to to be
lamented, that the labors of most excellent men replenished with no less
learning then godly zeal, should be racked to a far other end and purpose,
then the authors, when they put them forth, looked they should have come.

For we see how shamefully both the unlearned and learned do abuse them alike.

Those verily, when by the help of them, they craftily and deceitfully intrude
themselves into the ecclesiastical function, for the which they are unmeet,
and these for that as soon as they have gotten them, they become all together
sluggishe and slothful, they neglect to peruse the holy scripture and other
godly books, they are not careful, neither do they once think any more to
frame sermons by their own with and labor.

And yet it is most certain, that the scope and meaning of those good men was
not, to advance and promote unto dignity any impudente, unlearned and
shameless persons, or to maintain the sloth and vnlustines of any mean
scholars, and of all other they meant least to withdraw any from the readinge
of the canonical Scriptures.

But this rather they always wished, and hoped by all means it would come to
pass, that the Lucubrations which they consecrated to the whole Church, and
submitted to the judgment thereof, should redounde also to the profit and
utility of all the whole Congregation.

And amongst other, their desire was chiefly to profit those, that being
called to the ecclesiastical ministry, begin with commendation to exercise
themselves therein, to the intent doubtless they might out of their most sacred
works get a ready and familiar method of popular teachinge, to the intent
they might learn apt and usual phrases, the manner of findinge and disposinge
all manner of proofs, of chosinge and applyinge common places, and to be
short, the order of mouinge of affectious: again to the intent they might by
their example be stirred and provoked to the continual readinge of the
prophetical and Apostolic books, to the collection of apt reasons and
arguments out of the same, and to the diligent deuisinge and framinge of
sacred Sermons.

For like as those me^ that sell Sinamon, Galingale, nutmigs, cloves and mace,
and such like strange and precious spices, do use to give a piece of every of
them for a taste to the comers by to the intent they might the raher be
allured to bye. Even so they that have put forth books of holy sermons, have
wished, and desired nothing more, then by giuinge (as ye would say) a certain
taste of divine matters, to excite all men to the reading of holy books, and
to increase their, diligence in the study of imitatio^. Now hitherto do al
these things tend: We couit to perswad al those ye have already applied their
mind to the ministry of the Church, yea and we beseech them in Christ Jesus:
that first and formest they would withal possible diligence peruse and turn
over the sacred Scriptures contained in the body of the holy Bible, that they
would make them to be most familiar unto them, whiles they may have out of them
sundry and manifoulde matter of heavenly doctrine prepared against all euentes
and purposes: then after that they would with as great endeavor as they can,
enure themselves to make and describe godly Sermons after the pattern and
examples of the Sermons of Christ, the prophets, and Apostles: and lastely
that they would aptly and conveniently apply to their business in hand, those
things that they shall find in other doctors of the Church whither they be
Greeks or Latins, to be profitable for their use, directinge in the mean
time all things to the glory of God alone, and to the edifyinge of their
hearers. And so finally by this means shall they be judged, and that truly by
the verdicte of the authors themselves, rightly to use and enjoy the labors
and trauiles of other men.

Of the kind Redargutiue, or Reprehensiue. Cap. XI.
IN this kind which is ordained to reprove false assertions, Sermons commonly
are in such sort digested and disposed, as that one while the whole discourse
is occupied alonely in the reprehension of a false opinion: an other while in
one part of the Sermon is confuted and subverted a false assertion, in an other
is affirmed, and with as great industry as may be, urged a true assertion.

Where if in case the matter so requires, many Sermons also are appointed to
this business.

But as touching affirmation or application, how and after what sort it should
be used, it is plainly showed in the preceading Chapter: wherefore now the
order of confuting or reprouinge is only of us to be declared.

To ye furtheraunce therefore of this matter avails very much whatsoever is of
ye Logicians or Orators profitably put forth to confute and to assoyle reasons
or arguments with all. For those that obtrude false assertions to the simple
and unlearned, or sow them in ye Church, are perceived often times to bring in
for ye mayntenaunce of their quarrel proofs very subtle and sophistical, and
to defend themselves most chiefly by the healpes and sleightes of man's
wisdom. Wherefore whosoever he be that will valiauntly join battle with
them, must be indifferently well furnished with all kind of weapons and
pollecy of fightinge which they do use. False assertions be reproved many
ways, and weak and feeble arguments are diversely subverted.

I. The first way and manner therefore is this: to ye intent thou may find
what truth and falsehod ye troublesome, to wit, the four fold, five fold, and
such like curious and peynted proofs of the adversaries do contain in them,
it shall be very requisite, to reduce them into the form of sillogismes or apt
reasons, such (I mean) as are taught and set forth of the Logicians. For by
this brief and compe^dious mean, if there be any default lurking either in
the form, or in ye matter of ye argument, it may both quickly, and certainly
be perceived. And how the form of a reason is to be sifted and judged off, may
out of those things which are put forth touching the making of sillogismes
enthimemes and oher kinds of argumentations, again how the matter is to be
tried and examined, may out of the places of invention, and the rules adjoined
thereunto which they call consequencies, be aboundauntly known. Where therefore
if the preacher shall in any of the proves made by the adversaries perceive
defaulte either in form or in matter, he shall not doubt publykely to
denounce and disclose it: so notwithstanding as that he may purposely keep
back all art and cunninge so far as in him lies, keuered (as ye would say)
with a veyle. For in case thou should exhibit ye craft and workmanship of
Logic openly of all men to be seen, which comes chiefly to pass by
producing the very words of art out of ye schole into the Church, it is to be
feared doubtless, least thy solutions become as greatly suspected, as the
objections of thine adversary.

II. The second way and mean to discern and ponder according to there
importance the reasons of those that teach false things, depends upon ye
diligent enserchment of the Paralogismes, if there be any peradventure
entermedled with them. Therefore it is to be considered, whither the Paralogisme
be committed within ye compass of ye word, namely by equivocation,
amphibologia, composition, division, accent, phrase of speech: or whither the
Paralogisme happens to be without the compass of the word, as when there is
brought in a fallacion of the antecedent, a fallacio^ of the consequent, a
thing so after a sort spoken as though it were simply so, the not cause of a
thing as the cause, petitio principij, many interrogations, ignorance of the
elenche.

III. Moreover it profits much to observe the captious and subtle
arguments, such as are: antistrephon, ceratine, crocodelites, vtis,
pseudomenos, cacosistata, asystata. For these are accustomed sometime to fall
into doubtful and perplexed disputations. Solution real
And all these things verily pertain to the solution (called of the Logicians
of our time) real, as it is in their books to be seen. Further, the preacher
often times also takes advice of those things, Personal.
that belong to the solution called personal, and of the Orators very much
used.

IIII. Sometimes again we refell objections by regestion, that is to say, by
shewinge that it becomes not the adversaries to bring forth any such
cauilling objections, or by setting against them other questions alike crabbed
to see to. Which two manners of regestio^, we may perceive in the holy
Scriptures. The former we have to the Romans cap. 9. Thou will say then unto
me: why does he yet complain? For who can resist his will? Thapostle
answers: But O man who art thou that pleadest the matter against god? Albeit
he adds straight ways also an other apt and direct solution. Example of the
later is extant Math. 21. The Pristes and elders of the people said unto
Christ: By what authority do thou these things? and who gave thee this
power? Christ answered them: And I will demand of you one thing, which if ye
shall show me, I will also tell you, by what authority I do these things.
The baptism of John, was it from heaven, or was it of men?

V. Now and then also the sayings of yt adversaries are subverted by
elevation. And this is brought to pass two manner of ways: first by reiection,
to wit, when ye objection of an other is rejected as a thing light and very
slender with a certain signification of contempt or indignation, as Romans 3.
when some said: Let us do evil that good may come thereof: the apostle
reproves the^ saying nothing else then that their damnation is just. Which
words do proceed from a troubled mind by reason of the unworthiness of the
thing. Secondly it comes to pass by (...), whereby through expressing ye
words and gesture of the adversaries, or by like means, we deride them and
laugh them to scorn.

This manner ye Apostle uses Coless. 2. where against those that sought means
to draw them that were new borne in Christ to the observation of Iewishe
ceremonies, he says: Touch not, taste not, handle not, which all do perish
with the abuse thereof.

VI. The adversaries may in like manner be met withal by digression, whereby an
excursion is made from the purpose. Albeit the Preacher shall scarcely use this
any other where, then where ye solution of the objection propounded is easy
and apparaunt to every man, or where peradventure some inconvenience might
redounde to the hearers through a more plentiful tractation of that matter.

VII. Furthermore those things that are put forth of the Orators profitable to
confute and solute withal, the preacher shall duly challendge to himself as
common both to him and them.

Cicero in his book. 1. de inuentione entreatinge of reprehension, and Fabius
Quintilianus in his fifte book cap. 13. touching confutation, do teach some
things not to be refused.

In which notwithstanding the preacher must prudently dis^earne, what may
rightly by introduced into the Church, where all things ought to be
accomplished with great reverence and without the breach of charity, and what
is to be left to the brabbelinge pleadinge place.

VIII. Divinity shows also certain forms of solutinge or assoylinge
peculiar in a manner to it self and very much used and frequented. Chiefly and
principally ye judgment of God is often times set against the judgment of men,
or the saying of the superior against the saying of the inferior.

In which respect verily Christ Math. 15. infringeth the opinion and tradition
of the Pharisees, by opposinge against them the word and assertion of god him
self: when he proves them guilty, by reason they transgressed the
commandment of God through their own traditions.

IX. The true and native interpretation of the Scripture is alleged against
that, which was of other peruorstly put forth.

Christ Math. 4. unto that that the devil said: If thou be the son of God,
cast thy self down headlonge: For it is written, he shall give his Angels
charge over thee, and with their hands they shall bear thee up, least at any
time thou hurt thy foot against a stone: answers eftes^nes by bringinge a
true interpretation: It is written, says he Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy
God.

X. To the sentence by an other alleged is sometime added or opposed that
which in the same matter is chiefly to be considered.

When the devil had said unto Christ: If thou be the son of God, command
that these stones be made bread. Christ makes answer: Man lives not by bread
only, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. As who
says, Christ adds that whereupon depends chiefly the sustentation and
preservation of our life, and opposes and prefers spiritual nourishment to
that which is corporal.

XI. Necessity requires often times ye a concilement of ye places outwardly
repugnant be used and made, as touching which matter Augustine has copiously
entreated in his books de consensu Euaingelistaru^, likewise against Adimantus
the disciple of Maniches: and we also have briefly touched some things in our
second book de Theologo, co^cerninge the order of divine study.

XII. And moreover ye same places may stand us in great stead, and be often times
applied to redargution, which in the preceding chapter we recounted fit to the
confirmation of true doctrine. The diligent reading and examining of
confutations, which do here and there occur in ye sacred scriptures, will
evidently demonstrate many more things perteyning to this effect.

XIII. And like as to the solutions of arguments and reasons are very
opportunely and fitly added, those things that may stir up and provoke ye
minds of men to assent: even so at the end of that part or whole Sermon which
is ordained to reprove, shall not unprofitably be heaped together certain
perswasiue, or rather dehortatory reasons wehreby men may be deterred from
embracing false assertions, and premonished to take diligent heed of ye
infection of hipocrites. Such are reasons derived of ye study and scope of
false teachers, after which sort Christ and the Apostles do often times
forewarne the belieuers, likewise of the unprofitablenes, of the
unrightuousnes, of the peril and danger of the thing, etc.

Whereby are declared the damages and inconveniences, which out of errors and
dissentions, do redounde as well publikly to the Church, as also privately to
every man's conscience.

In which behalf may some things lawefully be entermedled meet for the
mouinge of affections.

But like as in the former kind, so in this also are certain Cantions very
requisite and necessary. Cantions.


I. The preacher shall endeavor himself with all industry and diligence to
bring to light ye subtle sophistry and fraudulent workinges of the
adversaries, but with such policy and discretion that he again be not
thought to use like sophistical dealinge. The talk of truth ought to be
plain and simple. For in case thou do nothing else then subtelly inueigh
against subteltie, thy tale will be as much suspected and disliked as their
tale whom thou impugnest, and the hearers will judge none other but that there
is come before them some noble pair of sophisters, as if they beheld
Protagoras and Euathlus on a day appointed brauling in the brabbelinge
consistory.

II. Howbeit neither is it necessary, nor expedient, publicly to ensearch and
narrowely to examaine all things, which are produced of the authors of false
assertions whither they be Ethnickes or heretics: least verily whilst we
go about to withdraw men from error, we minister occasion to some among the
hearers, especially to the curious, to enquire more scrupulously after them and
by this enquiry (as it commonly comes to pass) to slide and fall into
error. Counsel not much unlike to this gives S. Augustine, who in this
book de catechizandis rudibus cap. 7. has these words.

Then is man's infirmity to be enstructed and encouraged against temptations
and offenses, whither they be without, or in the Church it self: without
against the Gentiles, or Jews, or heretics, within against the chafe of the
Lords floor. Not that discourse should be made against all kinds of
froward and perverse men, nor that all their crooked and fantastical
opinions should by questions propounded be refelled: but it is to be declared
according to the shortness of time, that it was so sygnified before, and what
the profit of temptations is in teachinge of the faithful, and what wholesome
medicine there is in the example of Gods patience, who has determined to
suffer these things to the end. That which Augustine therefore thought good to
be done in teaching the elder sort, that I suppose in consideration of our
times will be profitable to the whole multitude, in which (no doubt) a number
may be found more rude and ignorant then those rude and simple of whom he
makes mention.

III Moreover the Preacher shall take diligent heed, least he be thought to
utter and pronounce any thing of a corrupt affection, of which sort it is, in
case he immoderately flattereth himself or those that favor his opinion, if
he commends all his own stuff more then is meet, or if so be he
inueigheth over bitterly against any of his adversaries, as though he were more
incensed with hatred of the persons, then with desire of defendinge the truth.

In deed he may touch the persons, sometimes also sharply, after which sort
we see the Pharisees to be handeled of Christ: but ^e must in no wise
pretermitte gravity, whereunto it behooves a godly zeal to be joined, and
that (as the Apostles speaks) according to knowledge: finally thorough love
he ought to avoid all offense giuinge.

IIII Again in the whole Sermon behooves great moderation to be used, whereby
all men may be given to understand, that their salvation and repentance is
ernestly sought for which have erred from the truth: and not their
condemnation. The good sheapheard directs all the drifte of his endeavors to
this end, that he may bring safely home the wanderyng sheep to the fold. Many
examples there be of Sermons pertayninge to this kind Redargutiue.

Esaias in his eight chapter reproves the Jews, for that they trusted more in
the strength of man then of God, what time they made a league with the
idolatrous AEgiptians.

The same in his 28. chap. preaches against those, that urged men's traditions
before the law of God. Again cap. 29.31. he inueigheth against them that
reposed their confidence in the help of man, and neglected to call upon God.
Item cap. 44.46.47. is idolatry confuted we strong and weighty reasons: cap.
66. hipocrysy and hypocritical observations.

In the 14. and 15. of Ezechiel, is disproued their opinion which maintained ye
God spared the wicked, for the godlyes ^ake that are meynt with the multitude.
Of the Evangelists are described and set forth many sermons wherein Christ
shakes up the Pharisees and the most part of their false assertions. Math.
5.6.7. Christ overthrows their judgment, ye would have the rightuousenes
which is accepted of God, to depend only upon outward actions; and as
touching the inward rightuousenes of the mind, which God most chiefly
requires, made no mention at all.

Math. 12. he rejects the preposterous interpretation of the Pharisees
touching the halowing of ye Sabbath day, and declares in what points the true
use thereof consists. Cap. 15. he subuerteth their false persuasions
concerning washings, choice of meats, etc. of which also. Mar. 7. Again Math.
22. he disputes against the Saduces denying the resurrection of ye dead. Cap.
23. he impugneth diverse and sundry assertions of the Pharisees, sharply rebuking
them and threatening vengeance unto them. Math. 19. and Mark. 10. is confounded
the false opinion of the Pharisees touching diuorcement. The confutation extant
in the epistle to the Romans, which begins in the fifth chapter, where it
is said, That hope makes not ashamed, and is protracted to the eight chapter,
forasmuch as it is full of art and skill, might worthily be put for an example,
but that the whole disputation approaches more near to the scholasticall manner
of teaching, then to the common or popular. Albeit the exhortations annexed
well nigh to every solution be very meet and requisite for those that do
teach the people. i. Cor. vii.

Thapostle assayleth them that simply condemned marriage, again those that
dissalowed the second marriage, that permitted diuourcement for religions sake,
likewise that exacted perpetual virginity. In the same epistle cap. 8.9.10.
the apostle rebukes those that abused the liberty of the Gospel, to the
offense of their weak brethren.

In the first to the These. in some part of the. 5. chapter, and in the last
cap. 2. he reproves them of error, which had spread abroad that the end of the
world was then at hand, and that Christ should come even straight ways to
judgment.

And although all things be of the Apostle very briefly and compendiously
handeled, yet is it not without profit for us to have shedwed the manner of
invention which is in him to be seen.

Chrisostom in his fifth Tome has left unto us two learned homilies 49. and 50.
wherein he entreats of those ye believe not the pains of hell.

There is also homily 21. bearing this title: An enstruction or information to
those ye were to be lightened and as touching women ye decked themselves with
garlands and gold, and followed forceries, and inchauntmentes. Likewise in a
certain homily had on the Calendes or first day of the month, he disputes
against them that observe new moons: homily.r. has some things against
idolatry. There be read two sermons of his made against desperation, or wherein
he shows, that we ought not to despair.

Now among the Sermons that are entituted, as touching the providence of God,
there be some which are spent in impugning of fatum or destenye, which it
behooves us to ascribe unto this order, and as such as declare a theme simple.

Besides, those against the Jews, against the Anomaei, and other in general
had against heretic, be appertayning to this from.

Basilius in a learned oration confuteth the^, that supposed God to be the
author of evil. Out of all these things it becomes plain and evident, that
what things soever be of the orators ascribed to the iuditiall kind belonging
to the state definitive, those ought to be referred to these two kinds
hitherto expressed, the didafcalick, I mean, and redargutiue.

For as often as question is moved touching any principle or point of doctrine,
certes to the end thou may determine whether it be true or false, and may
defend ye which is true: and destroy that which is false: thou have need to be
well advised by those things which we have given forth as touching these two
kinds.

Of the kind Institutiue or Instructiue. Cap. XII.
TO the kind Instructiue do appertain al those things in especially which
the Rethoricians have placed in the kind deliberatiue. What things are to be
ascribed out of the schools of the Rethoritians to the kind instructiue.
For persuasions, exhortations, admonitions, no man perceyueth not to tend to
the right information of man's life in righteousness, like as we have above
also declared. Further, those things ye he peculiar to ye kind demonstratiue,
and encomiastical, shall be reduced to this form. For when it falls out ye
there is praised in ye ecclesiastical asse^bly, either some person, as Abraham,
Job: or deed, as ye invincible fortitude and constan^y of ye Machabees in
confession of y^ truth: or any thing else, as bountifulness toward the poor,
hospitality, concord, Prophesye, fasting, Prayer: no man doubts these
things therefore chiefly to be done, to the intent the hearers might be
provoked either to the imitation of the like in their common trade of life, or
truly to praise and magnifye God, which would have such notable things
accomplished of his chosen.

Moreover to this order shall be transferred (...): Doxologe.
for so they called short exhortations whereby the pastors in times past were
accustomed in the Church to stir up the people to give God thanks for his
benefits received as well spiritual as corporal. Likewise also funeral
orations, whereby are praised in some respect the persons which have led an
upright and holy life, and of who^ the church can justly testify and bear
record. Again further it is no hard matter redily to recount such places as
do agree to these diverse fourmes of Sermons.

If therefore thou be desirous to persuade thy hearers, either to allow or to
accomplish any thing, The manner of persuading.
as that they would procure to be builded an hospital for the poor coming
out of strange Countries, or collections to be made on the feas^ful days to
redeem their captive brethren, or that they would labor to erect some
decayed schole, to restore the censure of the Church, which they call
excommunication, that they would receive again into favor those persons that
have been the authors of great and public offenses, etc. We will show a
compendious way how these things may be brought to pass.

I No small number of reasons may chiefly be deryued from those places, which
we see to be in use with the Orators: as, Of the honesty. Of the cause or
matter. Of the justice and equity. Of the cause or matter. Of the goodness.
Of the cause or matter. Of the profitablenesse. Of the cause or matter. Of the
surety. Of the cause or matter. Of the comlynes and commendation Of the cause
or matter. Of the necessity. Of the cause or matter. Of the easines or
possibilytie. Of the cause or matter.


II To declare any thing to be just, godly, praise worthy, necessary, many
grounds and proofs may be drawn out of the most plentiful storehouse of the
sacred Scriptures, which thou may dispose in what order thou will: Of the
commandment of God. Of the promises of God. Of the counsel of the holy
prophets or Apostles which seem to persuade some such like thing. Of the
examples and deeds of the holy Saints. Of the profit and utility, which will
redound to ye minds of the faithful or to the whole church.


Of the illustration of Gods majesty and glory when namely we show ye to the
setting forth of Gods glory, and to the sanctyfying of his name upon earth, the
thing that we speak off, will wonderfully avail.

Of the edifying of others, when we declare that the same deed will be
profitable to a great number of other, to the end they may be confirmed in
godlynes.

For these and such like places more, be as ye would say domestical and
companyon like to divinity, but to the Orators they are strange and
unaccustomed, if so be, I mean, they be handeled after the same manner, that
we see them to be handeled in the holy scriptures.

Now if thou be disposed to exhort or admonish, How to exhort.
thou have in this behalf also certain places at hand.

I And worthily in the first place shall thou put before thee those things
that may be taken out of Divinity, as a treasury by it self very rich and
plentiful.

Arguments are derived:

Of the praise of the thing whereof entreaty is made, or also of the persons
which we desire to admonish. For so the Apostle does oftetimes through praising
stir up men's minds.

Of the hope of the success. For God favors and gladly helps the endeuorus
of the faithful. Of the public expectation of other brethren or congregations.

Of the glory to be looked for, as well with God, as with men. For to require a
testimony of the truth of honest and good men, is an honest point. And all men
ought to labor in this, that they may to all every where be a good savor of
Christ.

It behooves all men to profit a like both by good report, and evil report,
and to promote the things that are Jesus Christ's.

But yet shall no good man covet over much to seek after glory with men, much
less shall he rest in it being gotten: and that for this cause, least whilst
be obteyneth temporal glory of men, he be spoiled of a more ample glory, to
wit, immortal, which he should have enjoyed of the immortal God.

Of the fear of ignominye or reproach.

For it may be objected unto them that they profit not in Christ, but rather
reuoult from Christ, as we see the Galathians to be taunted of the Apostle,
whom he doubts not to call foolysh, (...).

Of the certainty and greatness of the rewards which remain for us as well
in this life as also in the life to come. For there be promises of both kinds
put forth unto us.

II And here again be effectual those places that a little before I reherced,
to wit: Of the commandment of God, Of the promises of God, Of the threatenings
of God, Of the counsel of holy men, Of the examples and deeds of the same, Of
comparisons, etc.


III What shall I say, that of causes moreover and circumstaunces, may no
slender arguments be taken, when as in these often times lie hid many things,
which minister no small force to the styrring up of minds?

IIII Neither shall here be pretermitted the craft or cunning of moving of
affections.

For in case thou desyrest to induce the multitude to the love of virtue, to
the hatred of vice, to compassion toward the oppressed with wrong, to
indignation against the despisers of virtuous exercises, to the serue^t study
of any thing, it shall be thy part to set abroch all the engines of art and grace
in speaking. Hitherto finally do pertain also communications, obsecrations,
contestations, and such like figures, as we see oftentimes the prophets and
apostles to have used.

Furthermore he that will praise either a person, or deed, or thing, shall
understand that he must somewhat otherwise frame his talk in the Church, then
the company of Rethoritians is accustomed at the bar, or in the Schools.

For these truly when they praise any person do prefixe before their eyes
these places: The way and manner of praising.
the nation, country, lygnage, wounders or miracles that went before the
nativity, name, ornaments of the body, as favor, strength, comlines:
moreover education, studies, arts: also the goods or ornaments of the mind,
as wit, docilitye, sharpnes of sight, prudence, gentilnes, sobrietye,
grauitye, constancy, fortitude, godliness, zeal of religion: then the kind of
life, state or condition; likewise the benefits of fortune, as riches,
friendships, possessions, enheritau^ces: again the acts done both publickely
and privately: afterward the rewards of the acts done, as honors, offices,
triumphs: last of all the things accomplished in the old age, death, end of
life, opinion after death, signs or wonders going before or following after
death.

After this sort, I say, are ye Orators wont to run through all the degrees of
age.

But sometimes they distribute those places in this order, ye first they speak
of the gifts of the body, next of the gifts of fortune, and finally of the
gifts of the mind.

But verily the preacher in all this business uses so much unlike practice.

I. First truly the Church has not been accustomed to prosecute with praises
those that be a live, and still subject to all kinds of tempations and
sins, as the Orators have done in puttinge forth their Panegyricall and
plausible Orations uttered in praise and commendatio^ of men: as who says
iudgeinge that to be either the property of flatterers, or of such as prepare
a triumph before the victory: Of whom that the doings of those are shameful,
of these fond and folishe, it is plain and manifest.

But it prayseth and extolleth those only whom all good men trust assuredly to
be now translated into the fellowship and society of Saints.

II. Again the Preacher that will celebrate the praises of any good and holy
man, deals very slenderly with those places which we reherced, yea so far is
it off that he takes matter of praise, of the benefits of the body and of
fortune, that he scarce touches them at all, or if he does touch them, yet is
it beside the purpose, and not but to teach by the way, how that blessed man
trusted not or abused not those gifts and benefits.

III. Moreover, the Preacher many times expounds some Chapter of the holy
Scriptures recited in the public assembly, in which also he stands somewhat
long: and at length by little and little he takes in hand one or two, or
certes not lightly above three places as touching his life whose memory they
wish with all honor to be preserved, commendinge in them some virtues of his
more eminent and perspicuous.

IIII. Last of all the Ecclesiastical Teacher does with more earnest endeavor
enforce himself to this, that he may direct all his discourse to the
correctinge and amendinge of men's corrupt manners, and to frame in ye minds of
his hearers impressions of true godlynes, also to illustrate and seet forth the
glory of the heavenly Country: then how he may make that blessed man to be
had in admiration, to be wondered at, or worshipped.

For he that is occupied in praising of any virtuous person ought to prefixe to
himself a double scope or end. The one, that by hearing the gracious and
excellent deeds of worthy and famous men the godly hearers may be provoked to
praise and magnify GOD, who vouched safe to elect and call them, and to brings
to pass through them great and mighty things, whereby his name might be
sanctified and celebrated upon earth.

The other, that the multitude may be stirred and enflamed to the imitation of
their so notable deeds. Either of these scopes is evidently set forth in the
Scriptures. Touching the former Christ says Math. 5. Let your light so shine
before men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which
is in heaven.

To the Galath. 1. Thapostle: In me, says he, they glorified God, which
preached the faith that before I sought to destroy. As touching the later
likewise Christ Math. 11. Learn of me for I am meek and humble of heart.

Again 1. Corinthians. 11. Paul says? Be ye the followers of me, even as I am
of Christ. And Heb. 13. Remember them that have the oversight of you, which
have spoken to you the word of God: whose faith follow ye, considering the
end of their conversation.

Hitherto touching the praises of persons or holy men.

Moreover whosoever desires in his Sermon to praise an act or deed, How
deeds are to be praised.
as the act of king Josias breaking in pieces the Idols and restoringe the
true worship of God, or of Elias stoutely striving against the priests of
Baal, or of the Machabees valiauntly venturing their lives for the dignitye of
the truth and the ordinances of GOD, or of them that a litell before these
times provided by all means that sincere doctrine might be advanced in
churches, that the necessity of the poor might be relieved, etc. ought to
have in a readiness those things that serve to this purpose.

I. He shall declare before all things that the fact or deed which he
speaks off is honest, just, godly, profitable, praise worthy, agreeable to the
word and will of God.

II. Further he shall not neglecte to increase and amplify his furniture, by
the causes and circumstances thereof.

III. But he shall bestow his chief and principal labor in exhortinge unto
imitation, or if so be his hearers have already attempted the like deeds,
then to go forward in their good beginninges.

Good deeds are to be adorned with due commendation: but yet the chiefest care
of all ought to be employed about the profit and utility of the hearers.

Wherefore it is expedient that those good deeds be inespecially praised and
set forth, whereunto we chiefly covet (having regard both of the time and
state of the Church) to stir and provoke them that are committed unto us to
be taught.

The manner of praysinge of things is all one with the manner of praising of
deeds, The manner of praising of things
and the self same places are found very aptly applied to either purpose.

For the thing is honest and just, that has God for the author, which is
commanded of God, which he commends with diverse promises, and whereby the
knowledge that we have of God, receives increase or furtherance.

That thing is good and godly, which avails to the stirringe up of minds to
the study and embracinge of godlynes, or whereby godlynes is declared. Profit
and utility is derived into many parts.

First that is profitable, which helps to the settinge forth and sanctifying
of gods name on earth, then yt whereout commodities also do flow unto
miserable mankind. Besides, there is one commodity common to ye whole Church
an other peculiar to every private believer. Again one consists in spiritual
and internal gifts, an other in corporal and external gifts.

But it is not necessary that we should divide all the places in this order. The
chief things that are accustomed to be praised in the Church are, the word of
God, the continual reading and meditation thereof, the sundry kinds of life,
ye ministry of ye word, virginity, matrimony, likewise the gift wherewith
God voucheth safe to adorn his Church, as those that be rehearsed Romans 12.1.
Corinth. 12. Ephesians. 4. finally there are praised alms deeds, hospitality,
patience, etc.

As touching funeral Sermons, what the ancient fathers were accustomed to
do, Funeral sermons.
and what the majesty of our Churches and religion requires to be done, we
will briefly declare.

There be extant in the works of Gregory Nazianzene diverse and sondrye
funeral Orations, as those had at the burial of Basilius magnus, likewise of
Athanasius Alexandrius, again at the burial of Gregorius his father, Cesarius
his brother, and Gorgonia his sister.

Ambrose has left behind him four such orations, one of the Emperor
Theodosius, an other of Valentinian, and two as touching the departure of his
brother Satyrus, albeit Ambrose himself does entitle these last rather by the
name of books.

And like as it appears those fathers to have borrowed this example of
pronouncinge orations in funeral solemnities of the Gentiles, whose custom
(as we read) was to praise men when they should be buried, especially such as
were noble and famous, in an oration before a great assembly of people: Even so
they followed also their trade and fashion, when (as ye would say) sticking
fast to the rules of the Rethoritians as touching the praises of persons, they
rehearsed many things of his life that was fallen a sleep in ye Lord,
repeatinge all things from his very childehod even to his old age. And certes
who sees not this practice to sauoure of the very rites and institutions of
the Ethnickes?

But the ecclesiastical Teachers of our time in my judgment (as I may speak
without the displeasure of the godly) do in this behalf go more sincerely to
work and more according to sound religion, Funeral sermons hov^ to be
framed.
whilst they duly execute their office, in that order that follows.

I. If when they commend a funeral with their Sermon, they handle not praises
curiouslye contrived and couched together, but other places much more wholesome
and fit for the enformation of the hearers, such as are these: of preparation
unto death, that death is the penaltye of sin, of the miseries of man's
life, of the delyueraunce from them by death, of the contempt of the world and
all earthely things, of desiring ye felicity of the life to come, of the
immortalytye and eternal blessedness of sowles, of the resurrection of bodies,
of the last judgment, how an account is to be made therein of all the life
past, of Gods mercy open to all sinners if they repent but even at the last
gasp, again that the dead are not immoderately to be bewailed or lamented,
but that GOD rather is to be thanked, which has delivered them out of the most
filthy prison of their body, that the death of the saints is precious in the
lords sight, that they are all happy and blessed, to whom it is given to
sleep in the LORD, that is to say, in the confession of a true faith, and
who is able to reckon up the residewe?

II. Where if so be it be thought good after these places declared, that
somewhat be said of the brother which is brought to burial, then add they
briefly, and (as ye would say) shamefastely some thing touching the kind
of life that he embraced, and show how devoutly he served God therein, by
diligent performinge of those things that were his duty to do. Whereby ye
hearers also are given to understand what great industry it behooves them to
employe, to the intent every of them in their calling and kind of life may
become acceptable to God.

III. Peradventure also they commend, and set before them ye be alive to be
followed, one or other virtue wherein the brother deceassed excelled, or some
notable act done by him for the behoof of the Church, for the common wealth,
for redressinge the calamities of the poor, or his confession of Faith made in
the very conflicte of death.

Further, Doxologiae.
as touching the Doxologiae whereof we made mention before, they are not now
in use.

They were bestowed altogether in aduauncinge and co^mendinge of gods goodness
toward mankind, and in times past were premised in the sacred assemblye, to
the intent the people might with more willinge minds, and with greater
devotion sing holy himnes unto God, and give thanks to him for his most ample
benefits poured upon them, as well spiritual as corporal.

But now commonly for the most part in some parts of the Sermon is commended
and set forth after the same rate, the goodness and clemency of God, his
justice, severity, wrath, power, providence, and other points to him
attributed, and that verily to the end men might be moved and induced to
thanks giuinge, to eschew vice, to repentance, to amendment of life, to put
their trust and confidence in God.

But how these parts ought to be absolved and accomplished, it may be known
out of those things, that be already said.

Be it therefore sufficient to have in this wise given enstruction touching
all these things, now will we add certain Cantions, Cantions,
and then afterward examples.

I. The first Cantion. The Preacher must not endeavor himself to persuade any
thing to the multitude, but that which is necessary, and shows forth
present profit and utility.

II. In persuasions or exhortations there must appers in the speaker a
francknes or liberty joined with a certain favorable simplicity.

For the one adds weight or importau^ce, and vehemently moves, ye other
puts away al suspicion, that ye preacher be not thought either craftily to
handle his cause, or otherwise to seek his own private commodity.

Some there be that endeavor to set forth certain things, and do cunningly
pretend a certain veyle of religion, but by litell and litell they bewraye
themselves to tender more their owns gain and lucre, then the furtheraunce of
true religion.

Of which sort of craftesmen our age (alas the while) has brought forth to
to many: whom the success has openly proved to be such, as have sought means
to pamper their greedy paunch, and to gain, not souls to Christ, but money to
the insatiable God their helly.

III. By like reason he must take heed, that in any wise he be not perceived to
submit and abase himself in persuading more then is meet, for that truly is
the point not of teachers with grauitye, but of flatterers with great leauitye.

He that teaches the multitude, ought not to be careless in defending of his
own authority

IIII. Further as our exhortations ought to be-voyde of all rude inciulitye, so
again must we provide that we seem not over nice, secure, cold, or timorous.

V. Neither certes shall a man think that he does as much as he needs to
do, when he once or twice puts his hearers in mind of any thing, or
exhorts them to do this or that, but he must often times and with great
feruentnes repeat the self same cause, and that so long till he shall
perceive owe fruits to follow.

Chrysostom that it ought so to be, declares in many words in his sixth
homily upon the first Epistle to Timothye.

And we may see in the Sermons of the said father, diverse. and sundry
admonitions, sometimes also very long and applied to the moving of affections,
as touching the self same matters.

This likewise must not be forgotten. Where there be many ministers in one
Church to sustain the labors of teaching, there they shall viligently
common and entreat among themselves, of those affairs which they shall judge
to be profitable and necessary for the behouse of the Church, that with like
study and agreement they may handle the same before the people.

VI. Again he that purposes (the time so requiring) to publishe and set forth
the praises of some holy men, shall do it very sparingly, yea and shall
purposely avoid fond and fabulous histories, and the vain rablement of
miracles.

There be some stories of Saints carried about which are altogether unsavory
and untrue, some also openly rejected, as it may appear Distinctione XV. C.
Sancta Romana. Paul the Apostle to the Romans 15. reports that he by the
power of Christ had done many signs and wonders, and yet Luke in the Acts
touches very few.

Let us therefore likewise follow here in the wisdom of Luke.

II. In the praise and commendation of deeds and of things nothing must in
any wise be spoken for favor or flattery. But as in other things, so also in
praises ought a mean and measure to be prefixed.

VIII. Besides in all praise he must be sure to obsteine from such comparisons
as may engender envy and grudge. For comparisons are wont for the most part to
procure hatred and offense, even in profane matters:

Wherefore there is no cause why thou should hope that they will be well
thought off and allowed in divine matters.

IX. And with the same modesty and prudence it behoneth him to proceed in
funeral Sermons, in which some thing is inserted to the praise of him that
has left this transitory life.

X If there be any points beside in all these things to be observed, the due
consideration of the causes and circumstaunces thereof will easily prompt and
minister the same.

Now let us note some examples of this kind of sermons. Examples of
persvvasory Sermons.
Esaias cap. 49. labors to persuade all men that they would embrace the
Gospel and the son of GOD Jesus Christ, and so be graffed into the Church.
There is extant in Jeremy xxvii. a swasory Sermon, where the prophet persuades
the Jews, that if they will be saved, they must yield themselves to the king
of Babylon. The same cap. 29. is a perswader of them that were in Babylon, not
to attempt any alteration of the state in the common weal. i. Cor. xvi. and 2.
Cor. 8. Thapostle persuades ye Corin. that they would make a collection of
alms to be sent to Jerusalem, Chrisostom in a certain homily in his fifth
tome, persuades ye the bishop Seuerianus is to be received again, the force
of whose reason is expressed in ye Tripartite history lib. x. cap. x. In an
other homily he persuades the people, that they should not be moved or
disquieted in case it were his chance to be put away. Examples of hortory
sermons.
Hortatory or admonitory sermons are very rife and plentiful in the sacred
scriptures. Moses Deuteronomy. 6.11.28.29. warns all men straightly to keep and
fulfill the law of God. Look Esaias cap 40.55.56. Also Jeremy cap. 3.4.18.33.44.

For in all these places are grave and weighty Sermons wherein they exhort their
hearers to repentance, to the love of Gods word and amendment of life, etc.
Cap. 22. Jeremy exhorts the king to embrace justice.

There is none of all the prophets in a manner in whom thou may not note a
number of such like places. Moreover there be sundry sermons of Christ
pertaining to this effect. Mark. 9. Christ exhorts all men to beware least
they give offense to any. Cap. x. he exciteth every man to deny himself. cap.
12. he admonishes his hearers to shonne the Phariseis.

Saint Paul Act. 20. commands bishops to take diligent heed to their flock.

Chrisostom in his v. tome, in diverse and sundry sermons exhorts to
repentance, to humility, to love, to concord, to liberality toward the poor,
to the contempt of earthly things, glory, honor, etc.

Whereof in some may be seen the order of handelinge theames simple, in other
some theames compounde. The same Chrisostom explaneth a sentence or place of
Scripture in this kind with incredible skill and ^unninge in that his homily
so well known touching the words of the apostle unto Timothy: Use a little
wine for the weakness of thy stomach. Gregorius Nazianzenus has put forth a
notable oration as touching releeuing of the poor.

The praise of a person is to be seen handled in Esaias. 42 where Cyrus king of
the Persians is commended, Examples of a person praised.
and that so much the more magnificently, because he bare ye type and figure of
Christ.

Christ Luke 7. prayseth John Baptist.

Saint Paul in more places then one greatly commends Timothy. Chrysostom in
his v. tome preaches in commendation of Job, 1 Cor. 4 16 2. Cor. 1. Philippi.
2. 1. Thssa. 3
of Elias, of the Macabees, of the three children put into the fiery furnace, of
Susanna, of Inuentius and Maximius martirs.

Nazianzenus in like manner of Cyprian and the Machabees.

The praise of a deed how it is to be adorned and set forth, Examples of a
deed praised.
may be learned out of the epistle to the Philippia^s, and out of the first to
the Thessalonians. For these the Apostle praises, forasmuch as they pers^uered
constant in the confession of the truth, and suffered not themselves to be
withdrawn from the truth by any delusions or sophistications of the false
apostles. Chrisostom in his tome v. celebrateth in full sermons the
hospitality of Abraham, the patience of Job, and the notable deeds of other
holy men beside. To this order in like case may be ascribed out of tome v. his
third homily touching bishop Flauianus supplying an ambassade for the city of
Antioche to the Emperor Theodosius, where is extolled a like the deed both of
the bishop and the Emperor. In the 9. homilye are commended those that
absteyned from the custom of swearing.

In the homily 10. those that after meals repay^ed imediately to the church to
hear the divine sermon. Nazianzenus has left to posterytie three exquisit
sermons as touching peace making and atoneme^t of parties at varie^ce.

Concerning the praise of a thing be these thexamples: Examples of the praise
of a thing.
Psalm 119. conteyneth a praise of the law and word of God. Psalm. 78. a
praise of the church. Psalm. 133. a praise of unity and concord. Paul i. Cor.
xii. xiii. xiiii. commends diverse gifts, especially prophesye (which is the
faculty of interpreting the Scriptures) and love. To the praise of faith
perteine those things that are read Heb. xi Chrisosto^ in his tome v. praises
alms giving, in a certain homily wherein he proves it to be an art, and
that truly of all arts the most gainefull.

Tertulian and Cyprian commend patience in Sermons purposely written thereof. As
touching funeral sermons we have spoken sufficiently before.

Those may be counted for Doxologiae, Doxologiae.
which are expressed Esaias. 12.25.42. Again likewise many of the Psalm. songen
in the way of thanks giving: but above the residue those are most fit and apt
hereunto, wherein the whole multitude is provoked to give thanks, and praise
God: of which sort are the Psalms 81.92.93.95.96.98 99.100.103.104.105.

Chrisostom in his tome v. homily xi. exciteth the people to give God thanks
for their deliverance out of the dangers that were feared by reason of
discord and sedition.

Homily xii. he exhorts them to be thankful for their liberty obtained of
the Emperor Theodosius.

Likewise in the homilye which he made after his return out of exile.

Hereunto may be adjoined also three other homilies, whereof in the first he
teaches, that God is to be thanked, forasmuch as he commands no grievous
thing to be done: in the second, that to acknowledge GODS benefytes is the
greatest Sacrifyce that may be: in the third, that we ought to be thankful
unto God, not only in words, but also in deeds.

Of the kind Correctiue. Cap. XIII.
AS in the kind of Sermons Redargutiue are properly confuted and amended all
errors contained in assertions or principles of doctrine: Even so in the kind
Epanorthotick or Correctiue is reproved and corrected whatsoever is found
vicious and offensive either in manners or rites.

Therefore to this kind pertain all Sermons and Orations ordained to reclayme
men to a better trade of life, or to suppress unjust dealinges, or to condemn
vices which are rifely used, whither they do consist in persuasions, or
disswasions, either in dehortations, or rebukements.

For all these forms must we use when we take in hand to correct the manners
and conditions of men. For why we persuade and exhort that men leauinge vice
would embrace virtue, we dissuade and dehort from those things that are
justly to be reproved.

Moreover we blame the persons that are subject to any notorious vices, and we
teach and command their company and fellowship by all means to be avoided,
we rebuke naughty and uncomely deeds, we reprove the things themselves,
namely all kinds of sin and wickedness.

Unto this kind may inuectiue Orations, worthyly be thought to be allied. For
what do they else contain, then grievous corrections, or reprehensions of
unjust and injurious dealinge? Of such are a couple extant put forth of
Gregory, Nazianzene, against Iulianus. Of the same sort is there an Oration of
Chrysostom, touching Babilas the Martyr, As in which be contained, also many
things against the said Iulianus, which Oration notwithstanding bears the
title not of an Homily, but of a Book.

Albeit some man peradventure may judge, ye such wrytings tend not to ye
correction of any ye have offended (for how may he be corrected which is there
cheefely assaulted and inueighed against, when it is plain and evident ye the
same wicked person had now already by the miserable and ougly end of his life
sustained the pains of his impiety?) but rather to the comfort of the Godly,
which ought to rejoice and be glad, for that they are by Gods providence safely
delivered from the tyranny of their no less crafty then cruel enemy.

Howbeit after what sort soever thou be disposed to frame thy self to ye
correction of corrupted manners, whether I say by dissuading, or dehorting, or
reproouing, or by any other means, the very same places truly may serve thy
turn in this behalf, which are recyted orderly in every the parts of the
former kind. Only this must thou do, namely turn all the said places into
the contrary part.

For where any thing is to be persuaded (as we said) by reason of the honesty,
of the justice and equity, of the surety, of the easiness thereof, and so
forth: in this kind of Sermons verilye thou shalt with no great labor
dissuade any thing, if in case thou canste prove it to be dishonest, unjust,
iniuryous, perrillous, diffyculte. etc.

In the same order shalt thou proceed in dehortations, and controlements.

For those places which we have digested in the Chapter before going, being
declared after a contrary sort, shall every where be used and applied.

And doubtless whosoever he be that hears his purpose or fact to be reproved
and condemned with such like reasons and persuasions as these, it can not be
chosen but that he shall inwardlye be moved, and by little and little pierced (as
it were) in conscience, wholly submit and prostrate himself.

Which when it comes to pass, there is good hope offered, that he will every
day more then other forsake his former evil life, and return into the right
way again.

For in deed it ought to be the scope of all corrections, to bring men to the
knowledge of their sins, to the intent that seeing the greatness and
filthynes thereof, they might be touched with the care of their salvation, and
brought to amendment of life.

Wherefore what points soever be helpful and necessary to this end, whither
they be taught in the works of the Rhetoritians, or set forth in the holy
books of Divines, shall aptely and rightely be applied unto this kind of
Sermons.

As touching other points that are to be observed and marked in this kind,
they may be perceived partly out of those things that we have said in the
preceding chapter, and partly out of the cantions following.

But forasmuch as a number of things be required, yea and no small helps of
wisdom requisyte in him, that will rebuke sins with any fruit at all,
therefore it is necessary that we here draw forth and let down many cantions.

The first shall be of the care and feruentnesse, Cantions.
that ought first of all to be accounted off in Preachers.

I First verily the teacher of the church shall often times, and with all his
power (as I may say) consider with himself, that a good portion of his office
consists in reprouinge of sins and vices, and that he then finally truly
executes the function of a faithful Sheaphearde, when with all diligence he
provides and forseeth, least with the scabbe and ytching of some one swine the
whole flock in the Lords field should be corrupted and infected.

For undoubtedly that which in times past the Lord said unto the Prophet
Esaias Cap. 58.

Cry out of thy throat as loud as thou can, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and show my people their iniquity: that also ought all
Preachers to judge to be spoken unto them by the same Lord even until this
day.

And I believe verily Preachers might (as it were with spurs) prick forward
themselves to the execution of their office, in case they would often times
consider and have before their eyes that grave and weighty protestation of
Paul thapostle unto Timothy, and would interpret it to be made privately to
every one of them, yea and imagine that the lively voice of so worthy an
Apostle resounded daily and hourly in their ears.

The words of the Apostle be these: I protest before God and the Lord Jesus
Christ which shall judge the quick and the dead at the time of his appeering
and in his kingdom: Preach the word, be fervent in season and out of
season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all gentleness and doctrine.

It is certain that whosoever shall deeply engraue and imprinte these words
in his mind, will not lightly give occasion that any man may iustlye say of
him, that he either for fear of danger, or for hope of any commodytie is
slothful and negligent in reprouinge and condempninge the wicked.

But what manner of person it behooves him to be ye shall with grace and
authority accomplish this thing, we will eftsoons declare.

II It perteyneth verily to every Preacher freely and severely to control
vices, but none other for the most part shall do it with dignity and
comlyn^s, except those that be in some credit and estimation with the
multitude. Such most chiefly are old and ancient men honorable to all men by
reason of their age, and such as being sometime conuersaunt in publyke affairs
are supposed to have gotten the experience of many things.

Next unto these are those that be commended and well thought off for the
wonderful purity of their life, and be themselves void of all crime.

For with what face shall they accuse others, that are touched with the shame
and remorce of their own offenses? Then thirdly such as by their excellent
learning and erudition, deserve to have their words credited in all things.

In which two virtues, I mean learning and innocencye of life, Timothy
excelled, although but a young man.

Last of all those in whose words the power of the spirit do more openly show
forth it self.

It follows of the time wherein it is convenient to reprove sins and vices.

III And certes then ought sins to be reproved and controlled, when either
the place of scripture that is expounded, or state of the church, or manners of
the people do require the same.

For at what time certain vices and enormities begin to infect the multitude,
the ecclesiastical Teacher shall in repressing of them duly and seasonably be
altogether occupied.

First the sore is to be healed, before it grows to an incurable canker: For
To late is medicine sought,
When mischieues once by long delays
past all recure are brought.


And verily the Physician of the soul shall first of all endeavor himself to
cut away the greater maladies, then shall he take in hand those that be of
lesser danger.

IIII. And it is not to be passed over that Chrysostom said in his 4. homily
upon the Epistle of S. Paul to the Philippians: That then the Preacher ought
to keep silence, when he holdinge his peace, and findinge fault with nothing
that is done, there is sure and certain hope, that the evils which are
committed, may be turned away: but if the contrary comes to pass, so that
he keepinge silence enormities are not only not rooted up, but all things
also become worse and worse, then it is necessary, that he go forward in
reprouinge so much as he may do. For he that sharply rebukes sinners
albeit he does nothing else, yet thus much brings he to pass, that he
suffers not the mischief to grow any further.

And no less worthy to be noted is that which Augustistine has left written
in his book 1. cap. 9. de ciuitate dei: If therefore any man forbeareth to
reprove and find fault with wicked doers, for that he awayteth a more
convenient time, or fears least by that means they should become worse, or
that other weaklinges, which ought rather to be informed to a good and godly
life, should be hindered, and oppressed, and turned from the faith, this
seems not to rise of any corrupt desire that he has, but rather of the
rule and advice of charity.

And after a few words in the same chapter: They that are placed in the
higher degrees of life, providing for the most part for their fame and safety,
whilst they fear the wiles and invasions of wicked men, do refrain
themselves from reprouinge of them.

And although they stand not so greatly in doubt of them, that they yield
through any, their threateninges and impieties to perpetrate the like evils:
yet nevertheless the very same things which they commit not with them, they
will not commonly find fault with, when as peradventure they might by
reproving correct and amend some least if they could not, their own safety
and renoume should come into harsarde and decay. And this they do not upon
that consideration whereby they see their credit and safety to be necessary
for the profit of men to be e^structed, but father thorough that infirmity,
whereby they are delighted with a fawninge and flattering tongue, and with a
fair and calm day, and whereby they fear the judgment of the common sort,
and vexation or destruction of the flesh, that is, by reason of certain
bands of couetousenes wherewith they are enwrapped, and not for their duties
sake of love.

Thus much S. Augustine. Wherefore by these things when and how far forth it
is lawful to intermit the reprehension of vices, every man may easily judge.
Now what things remain chiefly to be reproved.

V. There is no kind of sins, in which the Preacher ought to wincke and be
tongue tied, or that may be pretermitted without reproof.

Therefore it is not inought egerly to inueigh and abandon such vices as are
very great and heinous, but even those also shall be brought to the judgment of
the Church and called into question, which ye common people esteem to be but
trifles in respect, neither do account them so great, as in deed they are.
Provided that those evils be spoken against with more diligence and vehemeny
which are grown to be of greatest force with the multitude, and by reason
whereof greater inconuenyences are feared.

VI. In the mean time the godly Preacher must take heed, least that being
moved with the false reports and surmises of some men, he fall to carpinge
and comtrolling of certain vices.

It is over often tried by experyence, and that truly with the great offense
of the whole Church, but with the greatest peril of the estimation and good
name of the preachers thmselues, what masses of mischief the over hastines of
some in beleeuinge every one that comes, especially women and light persons,
have brought in.

And AEneas Syluius reports in his book de aulicorum miserijs, that is,
touching the miseries of Courtiers, how a certain man of Millaine in times
past made a grievous complaint to one Bernardinus a Preacher, of all those that
lent their money upon usury, and that, verily to this end that when other
should cease and leave off so to do, he alone might reap huge gains and
prays by that trade.

Therefore neither those things that are noysed of the simple and ignorant,
nor those that be reported of subtle and craftye men, shall the minister of
the Gospel rashly admit forthwith to be declared out of the pulpit to the
people. The surest and saffest way is, (where at least be had lawefull meeting
and consultations of the Elders of the Church) to rebuke those crimes and
enormities, as touching which it shall be determined before in the self same
assembly, that they should openly be reproved and spoken against. Now follow
diverse things touching the manner of reproouing.

VII. Whenever it seems good to rebuke viees before all things it is
necessary to premise certain doctrine and reasons, where out men (though blunt
and rude) may learn, that those things which are of thee reproved, be very
grievous sins, and such as deserve eternal damnation. For very weak and
slender is that reproof or rebuke, which is not grounded upon Gods word, and
takes strength therefrom.

And that is it that the apostle means, when, after he had said, improve,
rebuke, exhort, he wisely adds, that it must be don, by applying of doctrine.

VIII. And that all corrections ought not to be framed a like, but one more
bitter and vehement, an other more mild and moderate, is a things well known
of it self, partly by the kind of crimes committed, and partly by the state
and condition of those men that are snarled and entangeled with the same
crimes. To the intent I say not, how in the Sermons of the prophets and of
Christ we may observe the like trade.

look what prudence and circumspection is requisite in driving away the
disseases of the body, the same truly is required in expellinge the maladies
of the mind. And as touching this difference wisely to be made Chrisostom has
somewhat in the beginning of his Enarration of the Epistle of Saint Paul to the
Galathians.

But it behooves us notwithstanding to declare, where it shall be convenient to
give place to the milder and where to the sharper sort of rebukes. First
therefore of the milder sort.

IX. There be certain offenses touching the amendment whereof it shall be
sufficient after a friendely and loving manner to admonish the hearers.

Of which sort it is, if a man speak against the affectation of new and
strange apparel, against the contempt of men's fond traditions, etc. Which
for the most part be peculiar but to few, and are in no wise to be accounted
among the manifest and greater sort of sins.

If a man therefore should with tragical clamours and bitter rebuckes cry out
against these things, he should bring to pass ye not only ye fantastical
people, but even the wiser sort also returning home, would in their common
talk sooner laugh him to scorn, then bethink them of any amendment at all.

X. And albeit the exhortation be gentill and soft, yet must heed be taken,
least any thing in it seem to extenuat the nature of sins.

For in deed it is an horrible sin for a man, in his talk to minish sin,
or to make it seem less then it is.

XI. Again this must likewise be foreseen and taken heed off, least whilst
thou gentilly admonishest thy hearers, and purposely also seek to a avoid
the extenuation of sin, thou so depaintest in the mean time and set
forth sin in his coolours, that thou privily tickle ye minds of thy hearers
and (as ye would say) egg them to conceive either a certain new desire of
sinninge, or else to take a certain pleasure of their sin lately committed.
Thou shall find those that are wonderfully delighted, when they hear those
vises pleasauntly described, which they know themselves to be addicted unto.
Now of the sharper sort of rebuckes.

XII. Full well is it said of Chrysostom: To speak gentilly and mildely to
scollers when there is need of roughnes and sharpnes, is the part, not of a
teacher, but rather of a corrupter and an enemy. Many sins there be therefore
which require more severe controlment and rebuke, especially those, that are
most apparauntly repugnaunt to the fenne commandments, that minister
manysolde matter of offenses, wherewith a great number of men of all sorts are
entangeled, finallye that are supposed to be such as can not be taken away,
without searing or cuttinge.

XIII. And in reproouing of these sins those things may have place whereof
we see mention to be made of others. Chrisostom upon Genesis homily 24.
requires to be pardoned speaking more sharply.

I know, says he, that these things will sting your ears, but pardon me. I
speak them through greedines of your salvation. Peradventure he imitateth ye
Apostle 2. Corinthians. 11. speaking in this sort: would god you had suffered me a
litell in my foolishnes. And in deed ye suffer me: for I am gelous to you
ward through the zeal of God. Am I become your enemy for speaking unto you
the truth? My babes of whom I travail again in birth, etc. Sometimes he that
takes in hand to accuse and rebuke others, numbreth himself with those whom
he accuses.

The prophets do adioyne themselves to the residwe of sinners, and pray for
pardon. And Paul 1. Timoth. 1. Christ came into the world, says he, to save
sinners, whereof I am chief.

Chrysostom on the first Epistle to the Corinthes homily 23. has these
words: All men at the very hearing of holesom Doctrine wax deaf, and thereby
are replenyshed with many evils: and we may behold the naked souls to be as
men are commonly wont in an army after the bront of battle, some dead, other
some wounded: even such there be in the Church. Wherefore I exhort and
admonish, that we may be provoked one to help and comfort an other: for I
also am of the number of them that be wonuded, and of those that want
medicine. But do not therefore despair. For albeit the wounds be great, yet
are they not past cure, etc. And moreover the same Chrysostom in his homily 4.
touching the Faith of Anna Samuels mother, when he perceived a very few to
be come together to the Church, inueigheth straight ways in a bitter Oration
against those that were absent, whom he would have to be severely admonished,
of them that were there present. The place is very proper and to the purspose,
but long and tedious. These things therefore and such like which may serve to
their use, it behooves the studious diligently to obsere.

XIIII. But in all this whole business, he that speaks must take heed that he
never chafe and become angry in such sort, as that he forgette ye bounds of
modesty, or be thought to be enflamed more with the displeasure of some men,
then with the hatred of their vices. We have seen at times some both in
voice, countenance, eyne, gesture, and to be short in the whole state of
their body, fowlely to deforme and disfigure themselves, again with rude
yellings and outcries to fill all things, and at length, through the rage and
impotency of their mind to depart out of the Pulpit, or at least forgetful of
the things that they spoke off a little before, not able to return to their
purposed matter.

Surely their hearers feared least they had been on the sudden attached with
an Apoplexy or some such like dissease. But I pray you was not this with the
more follye to find fault with ye lesse^ or with a greater madness so seek to
reform madness of others? liberty in speakinge deserves praise, fury is
counted blame worthy, and does utterly disgrace even those things that are most
wisely spoken: as we may read in the homily 17. upon the Acts of Thapostles
in the work which is of some ascribed unto Chrysostom.

XV. Moreover this discretion also is very requisite in a Preacher. He may
lawefully entreat of some vices more openly and grosely, as when he inu^ygheth
against a murderer or a dronkard, he shall accordingly declare and paint forth
ye cruelty of the one, and ye filthiness of ye other. But as touching some he
must in no wise deal with many words, but only with a grievous detestation
and horror touch the^ as it were houerly with his fingers ends, not
displaying ye manner how they are don and accomplished. In which sort are all
those sins well near, that be allied to whoredom, and leachery, the
procurement of barennes or miscariage of child, the use of paynting whereby
women do make themselves to seem bewtifull. Again ye fraudulent crafts
wherewith Chapmen and merchants do falsefie their wares, add unto them
coolour, weight, and other sleightes almost innumerable.

Certainly to broach and baye open these things is not good, least the same
vices which thou endeuorest to suppress, thou plant first of all thy self in
the minds of many that were before utterly ignorant thereof.

Albeit how far forth also it is lawefull for thee sometimes to stand upon
these points, and to defect after a shamfast sort some secret matters, to the
shame and reproach of those that are guilty therein, thou may learn out of
the Prophet Ezechiell cap. 16. and other places of the holy Scripture, besides
out of Chrisostom homil. 37. on the first Epistle to the Corinthes, and homily
5. upon the first to the Thessalonians.

Now let us distinguish and sort out the kinds of men, to the intent it may
appear and become evident upon whom chiefly the darts and dint of rebukes
ought of right, most frequently to be thrown.

XVI. As it is apparaunt that there is no state or degree of men void of
lusts or free from sin: so the Preacher shall in no wise let to blame and
accuse the enormities of all men without exception. To which effect it
pertains that the apostle writing as well unto Timothy, as to Titus, so
prouidently teacheath them, how and after what sort they should behave
themselves in oxhorting and reproouing of al sorts of men. And again the same
has generally commanded that those which offend should openly be reproved,
to the terror also of others.

That in like manner is universally to be taken, which long before to the
prophet Ezechiell (cap. 3.) god him self said: If thou shall not warn the
ungodly, nor speak unto him to dissuade him from his wicked way that he might
live, I will require his blood at thy hand. But if thou do admonish him,
the^ have thou delivered thine own soul. Wherefore to come to that which I
was about to say, the Teacher of the people shall judge all his hearers
indifferently, in this behalf, to be accounted in ye self same order, and
that there is none among them all which ought not to be subject to
Ecclestasticall discipline

XVII. But in the mean time there appears to be some difference made of
holy Teachers in reproouinge and comptrollinge of persons. The prophets, do
in their words both more often, and also more bitingely stinge the Jews,
(unto whom had shined plentifully the knowledge of gods will) then the Gentiles
drowned in ye diepe gulf of ignorance. Again the apostle Paul more severely
chideth the Galathians, then he does the Corinthians, or any other beside. The
same admonishes. Titus, that he shoule sharply reprove the Cretensians. And
this he does truly, not as though they should think it meet to have regard
only of the crimes themselves, but also of their qualities and kinds.
Moreover we see the Prophets, Apostles, and CHRIST chief Capteyn of the
preaching schole, to be accustomed as most commonly, so also most grievously,
to assault the ungodly priests, Doctors, Scribes, Pharyseis, the authors of
false opinions, and that for this cause inespecially in that settinge out their
external and counterfeit righteousness, they sought means to have the
internal and true righteousness in deed to be utterly buried under foot, and
again for ye they preferred men's traditions before ye law of god. With like
lyberty of speech do the prophets often times shake up the corrupt Judges,
terming them (...) and oppressors of the poor against all right and equity.
And peradventure for this cause do they assail both the sorts, that is to
say, one while the priests, an other while the Judges, for ye of these two
kinds of men depend the safety of the whole city, seeinge that from them sins
and vices are soon derived into all the people, and again these being brought
into order, it is an easy matter to reduce all the rest of their subjects to
the obedience of laws.

What need many words? we may gather out of these things, that how much the
more fowlely any are fallen, or be of more obstinate dispositions, or hurt more
through their offenses, then others, so much the more studiously and severely
are they to be corrected.

xviii. But in noting and reproouinge the vices of maiestrates there is need
of singular judgment. For some potentates there be which will suffer
themselves to be rebuked of some men, but not of every man: some again will
admit no teacher or instructor at all.

Saint Ambrose (as it is recorded in the Tripartite history lib. 9. cap 30)
trusting to the goodness of his cause which he had in hand, vnbashfully
reproved ye Emperor Theodosius, and he so worthy a prince took well at worth
the reprehension of so worthy a doctor, although it were bitter and public.
For unto Ambrose was known right well the notable towardnes of the Emperor, and
the feru^t zeal of his mind enclyned to equity: again Theodosius had
perfect trial and experience of the wisdom and integrytie of Ambrose. And
certes where the preacher himself leads a pure and unspotted life, and the
maiestrate for his part unfeignedly imbraceth justice, there do the wholesome
endeavors of the minister of the Gospel aspire to most happy success. John
Baptist doubted not openly to rep^oue the wicked king Herod, and he again (as
the Evangelist witnesses) feared and reverenced John.

Christ Luke 12 ouerthwartly pinched Herod, calling him fox. 2. Samucl. 12.
Nathan seemed to use as it were a certain stratageme or fine poleey, when
intending to reprove king Dauide, he sodeinly devised a parable of two men,
the one rich, the other poor. Neither is it a strange thing to observe other
parables also put forth of the prophets in hard and difficult matters, as
Esaias. 5. Iere. 24, etc.

To be short, it is plain and evident that maiestrates are to be reproved in
time and place as often as they depart from the path of righteousness: but with
what foresight and provision that is expedient to be done, no man can
certainly demonstrate by rules, but it is necessary, that every man according
to his own discretion, do partly out of the sermons of the prophets and of
Christ, partly out of the kind, causes, and circumstaunces of matters
incident gather and devise with him self.

Neither truly do I know very well how it comes to pass, that in the
Sermons of the Apostles we find not any thing over hardly spoken against any
maiestrates, but rather there occur many things whereby subjects are
admonished to obey them, yea though they be evil and wicked.

But I suppose two causes may be rendered of that matter.

One, for ye al gouerners of commonweals at ye time were every where ethnicks
and unbelievers, and therefore not as yet received into the society of the
church: whereunto the Apostles knew right well that their authorytie only
stretched. For those that were without, 1. Cor. 5
they left unto GOD alone to be judged.

The other, that forasmuch as the doctrine of the gospel was every where evil
spoken off, and of a great number also flaundered, as seditious and tending to
the decay of commonweals, the Apostles judged it very untimely, to exasperate
them with the over sharp controlment of their private vices, who^ being stirred
unto wrath they knew would forthwith seek by all means possible to hinder
and stop the course of the gospel. Where I might add, that ye apostles
peradventure enstructed by the holy ghost saw before, yt in reproouing the
princes of that age (who^ God as yet vouched not safe to call) they should
loose all their labor and travail.

But the process of our talk grows further then we think for.

XIX Certes that we ought more modestlye to deal sometimes with those that
supply any public charge, and are placed in the degree of worship or
dignity, the apostle seems to insinuate, where unto Timothy he says:
Rebuke not an Elder, but exhort him as a Father. 1 Timoth. 5


And we may doubtless prosecute the cause of religion and of the Church with
great feruentnes, and may also urge the severity of ecclesiastical discipline:
but yet this whole business requires a certain moderation and discretion.
Wherefore of some is improoued the sharpnes of Chrisostom in his correctory
Homily entitled, against Eutropius, of which see the Tripartite histo. lib.
10. cap. 4. The like judgment have a number given of the homily wherein ye same
Chrisostom (by reason of Eudocia the Empress, Tripartit. hist. lib. 10. cap. 13
whom he knew to be grievously displeased and to practice wiles against him)
displaied and laid open ye ungraciousness of women. Like wise of an other
against ye said Eudocia, ye beginning where of is: Eodem lib. et cap.
Herodias once again waxes mad, and is troubled, she longs once again to
get John's head in a dish.

XX But howsoever we prepare a Sermon to reprove our fuperiours, we must take
diligent heed, least we unadvisedly power forth any thing, whereby the
ungodly may snatch occasion either to utter or attempt any thing seditiously.

So to secke to take away offenses, that greater offenses grow thereby, seems
to be ye part of an unadvised, or rather of a mad man. And undoubtedly every
Ecclesiastical reprehension ought to tend, to amendment, not unto tumult: to
edification, not to destruction.

XXI And albeit so often as any degrees of men are touched (by way of rebuke) it
be expedient to refrain from their names, yet when entreaty is made of such
persons as procure destruction to the whole multitude, of which sort
inespecially are the authors of sects and open rebels, then is it lawful to
utter their names, or to paint forth their persons in their coolours.

For so does Paul the Apostle 1. Timothy 1.2. Timoth. 2. call Himenaeus,
Alexander and Philetus hetitickes by name, and wills them to be avoided.

Again in the same Epistle cap. 4. he touches Alexander the copper Smith.

But least any man should allege and say that this is done in an epistle
written privately to one, look Esaias cap. 22. openly preaching against Sobna the
scribe.

xxii Thou must not think much to reprove the self same crimes often times and
in diverse sermons, and truly so long, till thou shall perceive some amendment
to follow. Touching this thing Chrisosto^ admonishes in a certain homily
entitled, of David and Saul, and of tolleration or sufferaunce. The same also
has left unto us notable examples, especially where he inueigheth against
swearing, wrath, etc.

xxiii Now and then also he that has the oversight of the Church, does wisely
threaten those, that declare by euydent proof, that they will by no means
forsake their vycious lyuinge, how he will exclude them according to Christ's
institution from the holy table of the Lord, that is (as they use to speak)
excommunicate them, especially where the crimes be such that they minister
reproach to the Church only where they are committed, and be supposed to
require such a remedy or medicine. Which thing we may see Chrisostom to do
with a stout and valiant courage in his tome v. homily 26. and 28. where he
entreats against those that used unadvisedly to swear.

XXIIII Neither is this enough. The Preacher shall admonish also and exhort the
christian maiestrate, to put to his helpinge hand to the suppressinge of sin
and vice. Which thing truly he may easily bring to pass, in case he will but
inioyne a certain ciuyll penaltye to those that despise or deride the word of
GOD, and the censures of the Church.

For what shall the Preacher of the Gospel prevail with brutish and
degenerate people, though he stoutly set forth things profitable, and comptrole
the contrary, if so be the maiestrate does not acknowledge it also to be a
parcel of his charge, to aid and assist him?

Truly there shall never be any common weal established worthy the name of
christian, where it comes to pass that how much the teachers of the Church
do build up through their travail, in declayming continualy against vices, so
much again the civil maiestrates do pluck down, through their negligence, in
never seeinge execusion done upon those that be offenders.

XXV. But in all the order of reprouinge of sins it is very necessary, that
the minister of the word do studiously teach by what means sins and the
custom of sinning may best be avoided of every man.

Chrisostom in his tome v. homily. 5. does skilfully show a way, how the wicked
custom of swearinge might be eschewed. Ezechiel, whilst cap. 34. he
reprooueth evil pastors, by the same diligence declares, what the office of a
good sheapheard is.

xxvi I had almost forgotten this. Unto every bitter and vehement rebuke shall
be adjoined some temperature of comfort, and that chiefly by propoundinge unto
them that repent, certain and assured hope of mercy, which god accustometh
bountifully to exhibit to all those that unfeignedly crave it at his hands.

The manner is among the Physicians of bodies, to put to their simple purging
medicines, (when by their sharpenosse they molest the stomach or other parts of
the body) certain things to allay their strength, yea and with all bitter
medicines (least the mouth should be brought out of fast) to intermedle sweet
things.

We see therefore that this devise has lyked also the prophets the Physicians
of souls, whose perpetual fashion (in a manner) is, unto rebukes to join
consolations, and unto threatenings to add promises.

And why it ought so to be, this is the reason: The preacher must with all
diligence bend him self to this, that he bring sinners not only to sorrow of
mind or contrition as they call it, but also unto faith (for in these two
parts, that is to say, contrition or mortification and faith, is repentance
accomplished): and that for this cause, least such as find themselves gilty of
everlasting dampnation, being cast down by the seuerytie of Gods judgment,
should be driven headlong into desperation.

xxvii At length when the preacher feels and perceyueth that by his fidelity
and diligence, by his timely and untimely entreatings, pursuinges, cryings,
twitchinges, instigations, some are brought to amendment of life, he shall at
some convenient time praise them and comfort them, either publicly all in
general, or some also privately, and (as much as lies in him) shall be the
author unto them, of perseueringe in their good and godly purpose.

Which thing also we may perceive the prophets to have done often times, whilst
they commend and set forth the felicity of them, that reuoltinge from the
tents of ungodliness, do repair to the Ensigns of faith and repentance.

And it comes to pass truly by this means, that they do not lightly
return again to the filth of their former life, neither can justly be touched
with these proverbs: The dog is retired to his old vomit: and the sow washed
to her wallowing in the mire. 2. Pet. 2.


xxviii After all these things if it happens that the Preacher by reason of
his franck and severe, but yet just and necessary rebukes, do fall into the
hatred and displeasure of some men, yet shall he therefore in no wise be faint
hearted, nor as one discouraged cease from his work, but rather he shall more
and more harden him self, and go forward by all means to wrestle out amongst
them, to the intent that thing may come to pass in very deed which he
coueteth most chiefly to see.

And let him often times call to remembrance, what an excellent function he is
called and advanced to, not of men, but of God himself: also what incomparable
rewards be prepared of the same prisemaker God, for all those that do
valyauntlye scriue and continue to the end of their course.

There is no doubt, but that which is pryuie in himself, that he has with all
diligent endeavor and fidelity, faithfully performed and accomplished
whatsoever his duty was to do, but that he (I say) shall feel present comfort
never wanting unto him, and the holy Ghost shall surely witness with his
spirit that he has God in so great labors and difficulties favorable and
merciful unto him, and that he will not suffer him through ye unbridled rage of
his enemies to be oppressed or by any other means to faint and give over.

But the preacher himself moreover shall molify and break in sunder ye hearts
of a great number, and shall prevent the matter, least they should wrathfully
be inflamed against him, if so be he sometimes inculke in his sermon: that he
does that which he does altogether by virtue of his office: that it is not
lawful for him so much as the breadth of a nail to depart from the line of
truth, which the Lord himself has limited.

That he is the ambassador and messenger of the high GOD (for so does the
Prophet Malachy call the ministers of Churches Angels): and therefore that he
neither can, nor will utter any other thing, then that which his mighty prince
has given him in charge.

Again, that all things which he speaks are grounded upon the divine
Oracles, and defended by the force of the invincible truth.

That he in no wise fears the judgments of godly and learned men, which
shall uprightly and indifferently weigh and consider his cause.

That he for his part full sore against his will, and never without great grief
of mind, comes to the painful reproves and rebukements of sins, but
that he is drawn and enforced unto it, seeing both public necessity requires
it, and the common profit of his hearers persuades him thereunto.

That he chiefly does that which good Physicians use to do, who, not after
the will of the pacientes, but after the nature of the diseases, do minister
medicines some sharper some gentiller.

That it is a thing very uncivil, and against all humanitye to deal
contumeliously with him that well deserves: that that sick body is altogether
unworthy of help at his Leaches hand, which would reward him offryng an
wholesome (though somewhat bitter) potion unto him, with reuilement for his
labor.

Last of all, that he which will needs stand presumtuously against the
pastor of souls, does nothing else then (...), that is to say, keep battle
with God himself: and that it is a hard matter in the mean time, which God
said sometime to Saul, for him to kick against the prick. And that in deed
the poor minister of the Church may for a time (as one hated and despised of
the world) be vexed and afflicted: but the truth it self can never be
trodden down, or extinguished.

By these, I say, and such like reasons, the Teacher of the people shall
partly fortify and confyrme himself, and shall as ye would say prick forward
himself to the unfearful executinge of his office, and partly shall provide
and foresee, that few or none be offended with him by reason of that which he
does in reproouinge and comptrollinge of sin.

Besides this the kinsfolks and familiars of those that are stained with the
infection of sins, and do stand in need of the percinge meditine of
rebukes, ought gentilly and friendly to admonish them that they would not
conceive any displeasure against him that enformeth the^ of such things only
as are just, true, profitable, and necessary.

And that which is more, it behooves the magistrates themselves to provide,
and with all diligence to endeavor, that the Preachers be not of any man
baynously molested for their wholesome reprehensions sake or the sound doctrine
that they teach. 1. Timoth 5. 1. Corinthians 16. Heb. 13.


For the Apostle in more places then one wills, those that labor in the
word and in teachinge, to be highly esteemed, to be had in honor, and to be
preserved from all hostile violence, to the intent they may live with us
without fear or danger, and with joy and alacrity execute their office. But
let this be sufficient.

We have gathered into this place, as it was meet and convenient, many
Cantions, but yet many more may every man get and observe, as well by the
diligence perusinge of affairs incident, as also by the very order and
proceedinge in preachinge. We will add hereunto some notable Examples of this
kind of Sermons. Examples.
Esaias cap. 28. griuously inueigheth against the excess and superfluitye of the
Jews, and withal threateneth punishment unto them. Cap. 58. he condemns the
glorious works of the hipocrites, and requires of them the deeds of true
godliness.

Against the same also be preaches cap. 59. Jeremy. cap. 2.3.4.5.6. has left
unto us a notable Sermon, which may not without good cause be put for an
Example, as wherein he vpbraydeth and obiecteth to the pastors their
ignorance, unto all in common their neglecting of gods law, their fellowship
with the Gentiles, their oppression of the holy Prophets, their cruelty to the
poor Citizens, their Idolatrye, periuries, adultries, corrupt judgments,
etc. Through all which things he teaches that they had deserved great
plagues, and threateneth, that unless they repent and a mende their lives,
they will shortly fall upon the^. The same in a manner he does cap. 7.8.9.
Ezechiell cap. 11. labors in reproouings their contempt of gods word, their
crueltye to their subjects. Cap. 13.14. he touches false teachers and
hipocrites. Cap. 16. are accused the Idolatrye and ingratitude of the Jews.
Cap. 17. he compttolleth the felsehood of Zedechias.

And cap. 19.20. he detecteth the wickedness of the princes and rulers,
whereupon he falls to ye condempning of the common impietye and Idolatrye of
all men. Cap. 22. 23. he is in hand with the same matter. Cap. 28. he
entreats against the pride of the king of Tyrus. Cap. 34. against the
avarice and slouthfulnes of the priests. Hose cap. 1.2.3.4. has a full Sermon
disposed against sondrye enormities, but chiefly Idolatrye.

Of the like argument be the 5.6.7. chapters.

To be short look how many prophets there be, so many masters have thou
excelling in this craft.

Again such as these, be a number of Christ's sermons, wherein he reprooueth
the ungraciousness, as well of the rude multitude, as also of the Scribes and
Pharisees.

Look Math. cap. 11.12.16.21.23. Mark. 2.8.11. And further to this end ought
to be referred, the histories or actions tendinge to the extirpation of vices,
Mark. 11. Luke. 19.
as that touching the castinge out of the Temple those that bought and sold.
Neither want there examples in the Epistles to the Galathians and Corinthians.
For 1. Corinthians. 5. the Apostle expostulateth against those that had committed
offense, and wills them to be chastened by the censure of the Church. Cap. 6.
he inueigheth against brawelinges in law and wishes rather injury to be
suffered. In the same Chapter he speaks against sundry vices, but especially
against leachery and sensuality. Cap. 11. against the custom whereby men
prayed in the sacred assembly with their heads covered, and women with their
heads bare. Likewise against those that came not soberly and ^^aritably to the
Lords Supper. Cap. 12. against strifes raised by reason of spiritual gifts,
and chiefly through prophesy, and tongues. To the Galat. 6. he teaches how
spiritual brethren ought to be have themselves toward those that are fallen.

In Chrysostom are extant diverse and sundry Sermons against the detestable
custom of swearinge and perjury, whereof some be wholly applied unto this end
alone, as the 27. and 28. other some have only certain points mixed here and
there to that effect; as homily 5.6.7.8.9.10. 11.12.13.14.15.16.19.26.28. Of
which in some thou may find also certain things scattered against back
biting. Against that vice are the homilies 29.30.31. against ambition the 43.
against envy 44.45.53.

Against dronkennes and riot 54.55. against such as come unworthily to ye holy
mysteries in the Lords Supper 60. 61. also, that we give no offense to any
man: that we follow not the concupiscence of the flesh: against slouthfulnes
in well doing: against the desire of vain glory: aginst leachery and other
pleasures, etc.

Moreover it is be noted that unto these two kinds of Sermons, the
Instructiue, I mean, and Correctiue, may iustl, be added those things which
the Rethoritians in the kind judicial do affirm to make statum qualitatis
seu iuridicialem, the state of the qualitye or the state iuridiciall. For when
entreatye is made of deeds, and it is called into question, whither a thing be
done lawfully or injuriously, or whether a deed be just, or unjust: to the
doing truly of those things that be just, men are admonished and provoked, or
if they be don already, praised and commended: but the things that be unjust,
men are deterred and diswaded from, or it they be already committed, blamed and
condemned, and ye verily by the grounds and reasons taken out of those very
places, which to these two kinds instructiue and correctiue we have said to
be accommodate.

Of the kind Consolatory; or Comfortatiue. Cap. XIIII.
THat all mortal affairs are tossed and turmoyled evermore with the
tempestuous waves of innumerable dangers, and that we be all the sort of us
borne in that state and condition, that as well through the offense of our
first parents Adam and Eve, as also through our own corrupt nature we are
continually oppressed with sundry adversities and calamities, it is not
needful to be declared in words, seeing the daily events ye happen do much
more evidently then were to be wished, verify and demonstrate the same.

For truly we see by experience that the greatest number of men is miserably
vexed and distressed one while with war, or besiegement or sedition, an other
while with dearth and scarcitye of victuals, as having they corn fildes
destroyed through unseasonable weather, sometimes wi^th^^stilence, and other
contagious disseases, sometime with ouerflowinge of waters, sometime with the
rage of fire, and burning of villages or some part of the city, sometime with
eruell persecution for the confession of faith.

He therefore that in these public calamities can lift up those that be down,
comfort the sorrowful, confirm tho weak and wavering, shall be thought verily
to deserve well of all men, and to have fulfilled the duty both of a good
pastor, and also of an expert physician, But as touching ye Rhetoritians, they
have utterly cast from the^ this part, leauinge it to the Philosophers the
masters of life and manners.

Howbeit none in very deed can handle and adorn it more excellently then
Divines, as the profession of whom, like as it does far away surmount and
excel all others: so is it peculiarly ordained to the easing and asswaging of
soro we and griefs. Wherefore whosoever is destrous to comfort ye afflicted must
first of all borrow certain rules or proofs out of the places of the kind
instructiue, Proofs.
with which we use either to persuade or dissuade.

For what is it else to comfort, but to dissuade from grief?

Then shall he proceed to places of Divinity.

Of the first sort therefore be these places:

I. Of the honesty of the cause. Places, of the 1. sort, or order.
It is the part of a wise man with a strong and invincible courage to stand
steadfast in every danger.

It becomes men chiefly to embrace all manhood and prowess, but especially
constancye.

II. Of the justice and equitye of the cause.

It is meet and convenient to lay a side mourning, especially seeing we are
more favorably dealt withal then our deserts do require.

III. Of the profit or disprofit.

What profits it thee to lie tumbling in deformitye, to wast and consume thy
self with sorrow? Thou art grievous both to thee and thine, thou disquietest
both thy body and mind in vain.

IIII. Of the comelines and commendation.

All ye be of a sound judgment, do think it very uncomely and womannishe to
lament without measure, and to take so impaciently the chance that happens.
All things do inuit thee to patience.

V. Of the easines. Thou so often procurest to thy self a fresh new heaviness,
as often as thou proceedest to bewail thy case.

VI. Of the necessity. What meanest thou? Thou must bears and not blame that
which cannot be remedied. These rules also be taken out of the frontiers the
Philosophers.

VII. Of the kind of evils which we suffer, to wit that they are not so
grievous as they be commonly taken, yea that they be rather benefits then
euiles, as being certain prouokementes unto virtue. Again that they be not,
neither can be continual: that they molest the body only, and not the mind,
which is free from all damage and detriment: that they be common to us with
many: that they are recompensed with other commodities: that in respect of many
other inconveniences they are very small: that we have before valiantly
sustained the like, and also greeuouser things.

Now to the places of the other sort. Pleaces of the II. sort or order.


Truly there be conueighed alongest the feeldes of Divinity, very pleasant
and delectable rivers of Consolations, when as it appears to be given of GOD
unto mankind especially to this end, (I mean to comfort with all) as the
Apostle witnesses to the Romans. 15. Such places therefore we have here.
Divine places.


I. Of the providence of GOD. No man knows better then God himself what
things we have need off. He does nothing without special consideration.

Not so much as a hair of the believers perysheth without his will.

II. Of the aid and succor of the holy angels, unto wh^m is committed the
Charge of us, God so commanding it. Psalm. 91. He has given his angles charge.
etc.

III. Of the iustnes of the thing. God being displeased with our sins, justly
lays upon us present afflictions. Where if he would call our dooinges to a
straight account, we should be found to have deserved far greater plagues.

IIII. Of that, that all things work for the best to the faithful. Romans 8


God when he sends adversity, exercises his children, proves them, and
finally crowns them. Romans 5.
And Affliction ingendreth patience, patience proof, proof hope, hope makes
not ashamed.

V. Of the vprightnes of the conscience. 1. Pet. 3^
An upright conscience is a most ample comfort in adversity.

VI. Of that, that afflictions do minister cause unto us of humbling our
selves, of calling upon god, of exercising the duties of love toward our
neighbor, of contemning earthly things, etc.

VII. Of that, that God daily recompenseth the euiles which we suffer, with
new benefits doublefold. He inflicteth aduerstities beneath our deseit, but
he gives us benefits far above ^u^ deserving. Psalm. 8.
The mercy of God surmounteth his judgment.

VIII. Of that, that affliction is an evident token of the fatherly love, where
with God imbraceth us, and that we are the lawefull sons of God and no
bastardes. Heb. 12.


IX. Of the promises of God, touching the deliverance out of vaungels in this
life. 1, Cor. 10.
God never forsakes those that be his, neither suffers them to be tempted
above their strength. The Prophets do in their consolations enterlace promises
of diverse things to come, of the coming of Christ, of deliverance by the
same from spiritual tyranny and th^aldome, now and their of restoring the
common wealth of the Jews, etc.

It is a wise man's part diligently to enquire how the same places may be
applied to our matters.

That shall most conveniently be done, by comparinge the things that have
happened unto us, with those that in times past befell unto the Jews.

X. Of the necessary effect of gods election. Romans 8.
Whom God has chosen, them also he has glorified. If God be on our side, who
can be against us.

XI. Of the example of Christ, which is set forth unto us as a Captain to be
followed in humblenes, mortification, etc.

XII. Of the examples of holy men, whose wonderful patience has appeered, but
yet more maruaylous seemed their deliverance accomplished by the power and
goodness of God.

XIII. Of the certainty of rewards after this life. Through afflictions is
opened a way unto glory and to the kingdom of heaven. Act. 14.


XIIII. Of the excellency of the rewards that do remain for us after this
life. Romans 8.
The afflictions of this life are not worthy to be compared with the glory that
is to come. The afflictions be mome^tany, but the glory is everlasting. 2. Corinthians.


XV. Of the gloryfication of God. God is glorified by the fortitude and
constancy of the godly.

XVI. Of the edifyinge of other brethen. The rest of the godly are confirmed by
our example.

XVII. Of the present aid of the holy Ghost in helpinge our infirmity. Romans ^.


XVIII. Of the nature of hope and patience. By hope we are saved. Romans ^.


XIX. Of the effect of Christ's merits. For the fruits thereof are applied
at all times to the Faithful. Ibidem.


XX. Moreover of the very kind of danger against which consolation is
required, diverse and sundry proofs may be gathered, if the causes and
circumstances be wisely serched and considered.

If the pestilence or sicknesses which the Phistitions call Epidemiales do
rage and ware rife, this is no small comfort that these sicknesses spare none,
neither ritche, nor poor: that the life passed in riot and excess has justly
caused them: that David, when God pronounced his grievous judgment against him,
chose rather to be stricken with this rod, then with war or hunger.

If men suffer for the confession of the truth, that also must we construe in
good part according to ye saying of Peter, and interpret it to be a glorious
thing, in these days especially wherein the truth of the Gospel is efts^nes
most plentifully revealed to the whole world.

Judging our selves happy and reioysinge, Act. ^.
we ought to give thanks unto God, which are counted worthy to suffer rebuke
for his names sake.

If honger destroys our Country: yet that succor is to be hoped for of our
neighbors the people next adioyninge unto us: that there is some where
undoubtedly a Iosephe remayninge which has garners and Barnes full of corn
and grain for many years: that the LORD which feeds Ravens, which
nourished innumerable people in the wilderness, which by his angels caused
meat and drink to be ministered to the wanderinge Elias, and likewise to
Agar, may also be entreated, to minister things necessary for our living: that
he is able to bring to pass that a litell meal (if any be left) as we know
it came to pass to the widow of Sarepta, shall never fail or be wantinge.

Some of these reasons are derived of the power and goodness of GOD, some of
notable examples, and other some of other places.

And that I may briefly knit up the matter, the holy Scripture is like unto a
large and mighty sea, whereout in manner of waves one wallowinge after an other
by course, do steame up and flow over wonderful Consolations profitable for
all purposes, which the Preacher digestinge into certain places, shall always
have in a redines, to the intent that as often as any temptations shall assail
and invade wretched men, he may as well publicklye as pryuatelye deal and
distribute the same.

To note only a few cautions in this kind shall be sufficient.

For consolation is not (like to correction) subject to the hatreds and
abtrectations of men.

I. He that is determined to comfort others, must of necessity so frame
himself in all things, that he make them believe that he is earnestly touched
with the grief of the common calamity, and that he is in the mean time ready
bent to confirm and establish the minds of other. I know not how it comes
to pass, he talks a great deal better to our contentation, whom we perceive
to be endued with the like affection, that we are endued withal.

II It shall be always better and more convenient to collect many reasons
taken out of spyrytuall and eternal things, then out of carnal and
momentanye: like as it is meet and requisite that those things which do
issue out of the lively fountain of the sacred Scriptures, should be
preferred before those that are dreyned out of the standing lakes of Philosophy.

For after that sort we may see the Prophets often times to digest in order a
number of consolations, as touching the time of publishinge the Gospel, and
the spiritual kingdom of Christ.

III If we take upon us at any time to render and declare, any causes,
proceeding either of the providence, or of the justice of GOD or of any other
occasion, for the which God scourges and punishes us, we must not be ever
bold in iudgeing and determining of them, neither must we allege any, except
such as the holy Scripture without any ambiguitie has set forth, as general
and correspondent to the state of our times.

IIII In like manner, when we promise that certain and assured remedy or
deliverance will follow, we must never prescribe any one singular mean,
whereby the same may be accomplished.

And that truly for this cause, least if it falls out otherwise, then we
say, we become laughing stocks: as we know some, which couetinge to be taken
for Prophets and Soothsayers, when they promised all things prosperous, and
all things happened clean contrary, were openly laughed to scorn for their
labors, and truly in my judgment not unworthily.

V It is lawful sometimes to acknowledge the sorrow or grief to be instlye
inflicted, yet must we in any wise take heed, least in acknowledginge it
occasion be given, that it take increasement, and become unmeasurable.

In comfortinge, either so to increase sorrow, as that a womannish kind of
wayling and shricking should follow, or so to induce gladness that a childishe
reioycement and exultation should therevppon ensue, both these points do
indifferently incur reprehension.

VI As well those that teach as those that learn or hear, shall regard more
the internal consolation and quiet, which is settled in the mind and
conscience, then the external and that which consists in corporal and
earthly things.

Truly either of them (if so be it may be obtained without the loss of the
health of mind) is very profitable and worthily to be desired: but if there
be no remedy but the one must be wanting, then may a man most safely content
himself with the former.

They do easily contemn all the bitter misfortunes of this life, unto whom is
given the fruition of quiet conscience.

Wherefore Augustine his Sermon or treatise ^4. upon John truly and plainly
teaches, that the external comfort ought always to be measured by the
internal consolation.

Albeit the same thing may out of the prophets more perspicuously be perceived,
which if at any time they enterlace (by way of comforting) promises touching
corporal benefits, especially in the kingdom of the true Messiah our savior
Christ to be received, yet nevertheless will have the self same to be
understood only of things spyrytuall and internal.

For certes it is a familyar and as ye would say a peculiar matter with them,
to bring in and florishe over spirytuall things, under a certain coollour or
shadow of things corporal, and that verily to the intent they might even by
this means the more easily lift up the rude minds of men from gross and
earthly commodyties, to the contemplation of heavenly and celestial graces.

VII Last of al ye Preacher shall exhort al his hearers in general, to pray with
their whole heart unto God their heavenly father, that he would vouchsafe to
send down into their hearts the holy ghost the comforter, by whom truly alone
may all heaviness be expelled, sorrow mitigated, true fortitude increased, and
steadfast hope erected in the minds of wretched men.

For it is, as it were, the proper office of the holy ghost, to comfort and
confirm those that be afflicted. In consideration whereof he is of Christ
John. 14. and 16. called (...), that is to say, the comforter.

Now follow examples of Sermons consolatory. Esaias cap. 32. and 33. wills the
people to be of good cheer, for all things will fall out to their comfort.

Cap. 40 and in the eight following he comfort the people in the captivity
of Babylon.

Where albeit he has many reasons taken of the promises touching the coming
of Christ and the time of publishinge the gospel, yet there are sparsed other
also, which may serve often times to special use in diverse and sundry matters
(...) For this Prophet abounds above the rest in places consolatorye. Jeremy
sent a notable consolation written to the captives in Babylon cap. 29.30.31. To
the same effect also there is extant a sermon of Ezechiel cap. 38. and 40.

Christ comfort and encourages his disciples against the persecutions that
were to come.

Likewise he comfort them being heavy by reason of his death near at hand.
John. 15 John. 14


Again Luke 21 there is a Sermon, touching the things that shall happen before
the coming of the son of man, framed to the consolation of the godly, namely
that they may know ye time of their redemption to be then at hand. After many
other consolatory Sermons of Christ, the two Epistles to the Thessalonians are
written in this kind.

The last part also of the eight Chapter to ye Romans tends to this end. In
like manner to the Hebrews, the later part of the tenth chapter, with the first
part of the xii. cap. In Cyprian is read a Sermon touching mortalytie or
pestilence.

In Nazianzenus touching a strange kind of hayle and the calamity that it
caused. In Basil of honger and drouth.

Chrisostom in his fifth tome, homily. 4.5.6.7. again homily 13.14.15.16. With
great diligence comfort the people standing in danger, by reason of the
sedition stirred at Antioche. In many other of his homilies he handeleth here
and there diverse and sundry consolatory places.

Homily. 62. he teaches moderate temptations to be profitable. Lxiii. that
all things are to be endured for Christ's sake, and that the alterations of
things are not to be feared.

Lxiiii. and Lxv. that God is to be thanked even in temptations and conflicts.
Lxvi. that no man may come to the kingedome of heaven without afflictions.

Lxvii. that God recompenseth ye troubles which we suffer in this life, with
large and most ample benefits.

Lxviii. That to suffer injuries with a valiant courage for Gods cause, is a
most noble virtue. There is also a declamation of his wherein he teaches, that
no man is hurt but of himself. Funeral Orations.


To these may be added Funeral Orations, which he ordained to the comfort of
them that be a live.

Moreover some things which the ancient writers have published touching the
pacient suffering of martyrdom, are put forth, partly to the consolation,
partly to the confirmation of the faithful, which in those days were by
raging and frantic tyrauntes cruelly persecuted and tormented.

Of the mixed kind of Sermons. Cap. XV.
THat in one and the self same Sermon (whether some entier book, or parcel
of a book, or some matter incident by occasion of time be discoursed and
declared) many and sundry places may now and then among be admitted to be
entreated off, we have before in the first book admonished, alleging also
certain examples out of ye holy fathers to the same effect. Wherefore with
very good right there is appointed a certain mixed kind of Sermons, framed and
compacted indifferently out of diverse kinds by parts. Further it is no hard
matter in the first entrye, and even in the premeditation of the sermon ensuing
to discern, unto what kind every place, or every part does belong: that is to
say, whether it be of the kind Didascalick, or of the kind Reprehensiue or
Redargutiue, or of the kind Instructiue, or of the kind Correctiue, or lastly
of the kind Consolatory.

And when the very kind of the sermon is once known, it will be an easy thing
to collect a certain order of expoundinge, out of those things which in the
Chapters before going, are severally declared touching every kind.

As for examples of mixed or meint Sermons, there be extant not a few in the
Evangelists.

For Christ does often times in one continual Oration discuss diverse and
sundry places, and thereof truly some pertayninge to the doctrine of faith,
othersome to the information of life, or consolation.

It is no hard case to divide the parts and to distinguishe one from an other.

The first Epistle to the Corinthes how plentiful is it in this behalf? how
diuer matters does it contain? yea thou shall find almost never an Epistle
put forth by the Apostles, which is not distributed into diverse places.
Chrysostom as well other where, as also inespecialye where he popularly
interprets the books of holy Scripture, as Genesis, the Gospel of Matthew,
John, etc. Likewise Origin that long before him labored in the like calling,
do exhibit infinite examples of this matter, and the same also very fit and
convenient.

But these things touching the mixed kind thus compendiously to have
admonished, shall suffice.

That three things, are always to be regarded of the Preacher: the profit of
the hearers, comelynes in gesture and pronounciation, and the study of
concord. Cap. XVI.
VErily I suppose we have sufficiently expressed all things, which are
requisite to be known to the framing of all kind of sermons: wherefore it is
meet now that our discourse draw to an end. Only I entend here in this
place friendly to admonish every Preacher, yt he would inespecially remember,
three things, and (so long as he shall sustain the excellent function of
teaching the people) endeavor with all diligence and enforcement to practice and
observe them.

The first is, that he continually set before his eyes the profit and utility
of his hearers.

The second, that he be a very careful and diligent obseruer of decorum in the
universal order and grace of speaking.

The third and last, that he become not in any wise the author of any discords
in the Church, that is to say, neither vary from his fellow laborers in
doctrine, or opinions, nor minister any matter to the ignorant people of
brawlings or contentions.

Touching these three points truly he shall at all times be very solitious,
yea and bend here unto all his whole care and cogitation, whosoever to the
advancement of Gods glory upon earth is desirous in the Church faithfully to
deliver to the flock committed to his charge ye doctrine of sincere religion.

I But he declares himself ernestly to seek ye profit of his auditors, which
as well shows aparaunt signification of some notable good will toward them,
as also choseth such matters to entreat off, as out of which he trusts most
fruit and commodytye will redounde to his hearers.

Certes how desyrously, and with what ^urninge affection Christ coueted the
profit and vtilytie of his own nation, he himself expressed, where he says:
Math. 23.
that he would often times have gathered together the inhabitauntes of
Jerusalem even as a Hen gathers her chickhens under her wings.

Where I pray you is any creature to be found that so much tendereth the
safety of her young ones as the Hen.

Again Paul the apostle, how euidentlye, with what exquisyte words, and how
often does he declare, the incredible love, wherewith he embraced those most
tenderly from time to time, which he had once instructed in the principles of
religion? There be innumerable places in his Epistles, demonstratinge the same.

But as touching the judgment and dexterity requisite in choosinge of fit
and convenient matters, for so much as we have already spoken in the first
book, we will not here make any new repetition.

II. Howbeit as concerning comlines in gesture and pronunciation, briefly and
truly to speak what I think, look how great care is to be employed in
orderinge of the life, and daily conversation, even so great also ought
worthily to be taken to the due government and moderation of the speech.

For doubtless the speech is a certain portion of the life, and that truly
not the least.

And often times by the speech, is a great guess and judgment given touching
the whole inclynation and disposition of a man.

For it is plain and evident that purity and simplicity joined with prudence
and discretion, like as in life, so also in speech or communication is
commended of all men.

Wherefore the Preacher must at all times, but then chiefly when he begins
first to exercise himself in Teachinge the multitude, take diligent heed,
least he usurp any thing in words, in pronunciation, or also in gesture,
which may breed and engender contempt of his person with the people.

We have seen them sometimes that have so to often and in every Sermon
repeated some one word or sentence, we have seen them that have mingeled
(even to the lothsomnes of the hearers) tropes or figures, nothing fit and
correspondent to the divine matters which they had in hand, again we have
seen them that in the heart of their matter have uttered diverse times scarce
honest and comely motions.

And these things ministered occasion to curious carpers and controllers of
other men's doings, to scoffers and iesters among the rude sort, that when
they were disposed to procure sport and laughter in their iunkettinges and
tippling feasts, they thought there could be no utter thing for their turn,
then cunningly and pleasauntly to represent the words, the voice, the gesture
of the Preacher.

Yea and moreover they accustomed through the sames occasions, to miscall the
Preacher himself by some ridiculous name, as often as in their talk they made
any mention of him. What should I say more.

By reason of their vndisereete and unseemly gesture, some are made the common
talking stock and public pastime of the people.

But to ye anoyding of these inconuenie^ces which through unskillful dealing in
words and behavior be incurred and fallen into, two remedies seem good unto
me for this present time to be considered.

The one is, that whosoever takes in hand the function of preachinge do
forthwith set before him some one excellent Ecclesiastical Teacher, whose
name is famous and renowned, and who with singular grace and dexteritye
expounds the sacred Scriptures, in all respects so far as may be, to be
imitated and followed.

For most commonly it comes so to pass, that what all men do judge worthy
of commendation in an other that also thou mayelt allure thy self (if at least
thou feately and cunningly resemblest him in that point) will be well liked and
well thought off in thee.

He that applies diligence to the imitation and emulation of an other man, it
can not be chosen, but ye he shall at length obtain some of his virtues, whom
he coueteth to be like.

And he may always find some one, or more, (yea even near at hand also)
right worthy to be followed and imitated, which shall not be an arrogant and
partial esteemer of an other man's workemanshippe.

The other is, that the Preacher do request some good man being of a sound
and vncorrupt judgment, that he would vouchsafe sometime to admonish him
privately, when he perceives any thing in the speaker, that offends either
the ears or eyes of the hearers, and that in his judgment would be amended.

We our selves doubtless are more blind then Beetles in notinge of our own
proper faults, to omit (in the mean time) that a number also do even when
they commit offense, folishely fawn and flatter themselves: but some other
truly do espy many things, which escape us, and can wisely discern what
points are worthy of reprehension in us.

Certes many a one there be that would in time reform their own faltes, if
so be they might have such a Monitor as were void of all guyle and
dissimulation.

Which thing seeinge it is so, so far is it off, that the Preacher (if he be
a wise man) should take the matter grievously to be after a friendly and civil
sort comptrolled of any man, that he ought also to give hearty thanks to the
comptroller, as unto one (among sewe) that bears him especial good will and
friendship, couetinge by that means to provide very commodiously for his
estimation and dignity.

That great Prophet Moses the loadstarre and chieftain of all governors of
the Church, sufferd himself patiently to be admonished of most weighty
affairs by his father in law Hiethro, and willingly embraced and accomplished
his wholesome counsel and advice: why should not therefore ye private
reprehensio^ of some honest and sober man loving thee from his heart, be as
grateful and acceptable unto thee also?

The fool despises the chastiseme^t of his father, says the wise Solomon:
but he that endures correction, shall become wise. Again, he that hates
correction, shall dye. Proverb. 15. But he that longs to know more touching
this whole business of private admonitions, let him read attentively the
learned Homily of Chrisostom, deferendis reprehensionibus, and de conuersione
diui Pauli Apostli, concerning the taking in good part of reprehensions, and
the conversion of Saint Paul the Apostle in the first part whereof he yields
entire thanks to certain which had signified unto him, that the prolixitie of
the Exordiums which he very much used, greatly displeased and misliked his
hearers.

III. Now it is requisite that we speak somewhat as touching the last point,
that is to say, the study of norishing and establishing concord.

Surely the concord and tranquillity of Churches is many ways interrupted and
broken in sonder by the preachers themselves: of which seeing it would be over
long and troublesome to reckon up all, we will only at this present (for so much
as the matter so requires) rehearce some, omitting the rest.

We see therefore often times certain Preachers, especially young men, or (as
the Apostle terms them) young Scollers, and the same puffed up with a false
opinion of their notable learning and integritye, both to say and do all that
ever they can possible, to corrye favor with the multitude, to hunt after
vain glory, and to bring their fellow ministers into hatred and contempt.

Which when their Collages once understand, they by and by are as busy for
their parts, they beestirre them not a litell to bring to pass, that they
may be counted as good men of their hands as they or better, yea and they
seem to be at a full point rather to try and hazard any masl^ins, then they
will suffer their glory late gotten by their manhood and chivalrye to be
obscured and defaced (...) the victory by any means to be taken from them in
the battle.

See then how immediately and even at the first dash the unlucky seeds of
discord and dissension are sown.

Some there be that bring into the Chruches strange and unaccustomed phrases
or forms of speech, and that to this end that the ignorant and unlearned
might he made to believe that they teach and set forth marvelous and profound
mysteries, which other men never learned or hard of before: when as
notwithstanding they utter nothing worthy either of knowledge or admiration.

Wherefore even here again, as well their colleagues as the people, begin to
whisper and stomach somewhat against them.

Now and then thou may find such as not only in words, but also in the
thing it self, do vehemently differ and dissagree from their fellow
brethren, whiles namely they go about to graffe into the minds of their
hearers new and strange opinions touching the principles of religion, or at
least imagine some other things as hurtful and noisome: of which sort is
this, when they take upon them without cause why to innocate certain things
in the Rites and Seremonies of the Church, when they pretend I know not what
visions and reuealations, when they promise to prophesy and foretell of things
to come, and such like.

For by these sleightes and wiles as it were with charms and inchaun^me^ts,
they inueagle the simple sort to wonder at their doings and to have them in
admiration.

And there can be nothing so absurd and inconvenient at any time abtruded but
that it will of some be friendly and plausibly received.

Again the unconstant people through hearing of strange devises, are even with
the turninge of a hand divided into contrary factions.

Certain Preachers there are which do set wide open their ears (such is
their folly) to fond detractors and backbiters, which delight to bring
tidinges, what this or that body has at any time reported of them and their
Sermons, or of their manners and conditions, and in the mean while they
themselves feign and imagine many things that no man ever thought off or
speak off, yea and no small number of things well and friendly meant they
wrest and wringe to the worst part.

Here upon therefore and by this oceasion are again hard from ye Pulpet many
things uttered with great despite, angry and disdaynfull inuectiues, and if
there be any other things more bitter then these.

We have hard of some that have fallen to such outrageous folly, that they
would take advice of most vile persons, and busy tatlinge Gossups, and would
suffer themselves to be stinted and limited by them of what matters they
should entreat, and how and after what sort they should frame their Sermons
in the Church.

Wherefore here again is ministered manifold matter of errors, and therefore
also of contentions.

To be short, by these and such like means (for I entende not to touch any
more) it is brought to pass, that if there be many ministers of Churches in
one City, they heinously vary and contend one with an other, to ye great
offense doubtless not only of their next neighbors, but even of strangers
also and such as dwell a great way off from them: but if there be not many
ministers of Churches together in one place, yet do the rest of the states of
the common weal and the whole people exercise most bitter iarres and privy
hatreds among themselves.

Thus the small foundations of discord and dissension being once laid, no man
can lightlye express in words, how greatly the mischief grows, and how far
in short space it spreads abroad.

For suddenly from one place or other do break forth new deuisors of peritous
treacheries, with whom it is but a sport or pastime to set simple and plain
dealinge men together by the ears, to minister feedinge to the flames of
discord, and (as it is said in the proverb (to put fire to the match, or
oil in the furnace.

But by little and little the mischief creeps further, and first go to
havoc those things that are placed in the Church for good orders sake, then
next is trodden under foot the doctrine of religion, and (except politic
provision be had in time) the whole Church is at length utterly subverted and
overthrown.

Seeing then so many and great inconveniences do budde forth out of very small
beginninges of dissensions, and all truly be ascribed to some one rash and
temerarious Preacher: Ye perceive I doubt not (my dear brethren as many as
are advanced to the excellent founction of Teaching the people) that ye have
with all your possible power and enforcement to labor and endeavor your selves
studiously to embrace and nourish peace and concord. It behooves you often
times to consider and to imprint deeply in your minds, that in case ye shall
do otherwise, all men will forth with cry out every where with seditious
voices: that you are the great disturbers and hinderers of human society,
that you are the common distroyers and murderers of men, that from and through
you (whose duty it was chifely to provide salve for every fore) infinite evils
and mischiefs do redounde to the peril and decay of wretched Citizens.

It shall be requisite therefore for every Preacher to be very careful and
pro^i^elite, least that being surprised with his own inordinate love, he so
blind and deceive himself.

What does not self love and the ambitions desire of (...) ^usorce (...) or
tall to do? It is the ^oynt of one that to have all (...) ^unoberately (like
Thraso) to (...), but he seems to be most foolish that ^^tteth his confidence
in value glory.

They that (...) so please the world can not be the servant of Christ.

It is one thing for a man to sake the glory of Christ, an (...) thing to
(...) after his own glory.

Further, (...) that is to say, Striuings about words vain speeches, and new
found phrases, they that teach the people shall avoid and detest worse then a
dog, or Snake, remembringe that they have long before been admonished of
this thing.

Again, how greatly not only ecclesiastical Teachers, but also even as many
as are entered in the sacred rules of our religion, ought to abhor from the
assertion of false and erronius doctrine, the authors of holy books do every
where inculkate and declare.

Moreover that he is far from a wise man which is as her hastye of credit,
and will beleoue every prater and backbiter, besides, that there rise
innumerable inconveniences of detraction, although the wise Solomon had held
his peace, and the Prophets and Apostles said nothing at all, yet might it
very well be known and perceived even out of the Ethnicke writers which have
published many learned sentences touching the same thing.

Futhermore, that light and vile persons, also idle Dames and Huswines, in
matters specially appertaining to the Church, be in no wise to be heard and
harkened unto, every man (I suppose) is persuaded sufficiently in his own
mind or conscience, albeit truly we are by many proofs and experiments
taught in these days, how meet and convenient it is. What shall we further
say?

All good men ought assuredly to be persuaded of this, that he which causes
trouble and perturbation in the Church, but chiefly he that is the first
breaker of peace and beginner of discord, does more grievously offend, and
shall more sharply be punished at Gods hand, then be that has committed those
heinous crimes so commonly detested, I mean, murder, theft, adultrye, felonye,
or such like.

Whosoever shall once give occasion of schism and dissension in the Chruche,
may think continually that all those things are spoken of and against him,
which are mentioned of the holy Prophets and Apostles against false teachers
and fantastical authors of sects.

He need not hope to aspire to the heavenly Jerusalem, wherein alone is the
eternal fruition of eternal peace to be bad, which will not learn how happy
and joyful a thing it is for brethren of this earthly Jerusalem, Psalm. 133.
in the Lords house to dwell together in unity. But an end I must make there
is no remedy.

To the suppressing therefore of al these perils and inconveniences, the most
speedy and effectual remedy and most sovereign preservative is, if all as
well the Preachers as the people, do before every sermon, with as great
devotion as they can, humbly call upon God their heavenly father, and require
these three things to be given unto them:

First, that he would vouchsafe to puryfye and illustrate with his holy
Spirit all their hearts in general.

Second, that he would give unto the Preachers themselves both the will and
power freely to set forth all things profitable and wholesome: and also that
he would guide and govern their lips, tongue, members, and all their whole
action, least they utter any thing which is unseemly and uncomely.

Thirdly, that he would again vouchsafe to furnish and enstruct all their
hearts and minds together as well with desire of procuring and preserving of
peace, as also with an ernest endeavor of profyting in true godlynes, and
(finally) that he would make them all steadfast and constant in their holy and
godly purpose. Wherefore that Preacher may trust assuredly to have good and
fortunate success in Teachinge, which will duly consider and remember those
things, that have now of us been said.

Soli Deo honor et gloriae.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by Thomas East, dwellinge between Poules Wharfe: and
Baynardes Castle.


