CIRCES

Of John Baptista Gello, Florentine.

Translated out of Italion into English by Henry Iden.

ANNO DOMINI. M. D. LVII.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

To the right honorable ye lord Herbert of Cardiffe, Master Edward Herbert,
and Master Henry Compton, his brethren.
REdyng somtymes these Dialoges of Gelli (right honorable, and my singular
good lord and masters) and fynding them not only thought worthy translation
into other languages, but also dedication to kings, and Princes, I fell
likewise together with the instigation of diverse my friends, in such desire to
see the same in our toungue, that others have brought to pass in theirs: the
which hanynge now finished, as I have best been able, and considering how
goodly a glass it may be to them that know none other language then their
own, to see herein how like the brute beast, and far from his perfection
man is, without the understanding and folowinge of dyuyne things: And what his
perfect being is, having that, and may thereby set aparte, and leave those
base and sensual appetites led with mordinate will, taking a free course
guyded by reasonne, by the mean of the understanding: and threewithall
remembryng as well my bounden duty, both for benefit received by the goodness
of your right honorable father, and the most gentle affection (I persuade my
self your selves bear toward me) as also the prose of the undoubted towardnes
unto al virtues and knowledge, the mighty maker of all has put into you, in
this time of your tender ages, as an assured hopo of your most nyghe coming
to very true perfection: I have thought it my part, as one desirous rather
indedes then words to show mine assured service toward you, even as I have
of long time heretofore served in your educatio^, in one equal sort, so
likewise to unpart unto you these my small trauelles: though not aunswerable to
your honor and merits, yet of the best of my little power, and somewhat apt
for your conference in the Italion or other tounges, the which already you
well taste and savor of. Most humbly^, therefore besechyng, it may please
you, to accept this my mean traduction, not so much for the quality of the
gift, as for the great desire I have to show, not only my labors and pains
bound unto you, but my life also as it may stand instead: The eternal God
preserve you, with much increase of honor.

From London, the.xv. day of March. Your most humble

To the most myghtie and excellent Prince Cosimo de Medici, Duke of Florence.
AMong al things that are in the universal world, most virtuous and gentle
prince, it seems that man only can chose of him self, a state and end after
his own mind, and walking in that pathe, that most pleases him, can
rather rule his life freely according to tharbitremente of his own will, then
to thinclination of nature. For if ye nature of things be diligently
considered, to all the special kinds of them, there have been appointed and
with an inuyolable law assigned, by him who is cause of all, certain bounds,
out of the which they can by no possible means pass, changing into better
or worse sort, that being, that at the beginning was granted them. Whereas in
the power of man there has been freely put an ability to chose a way wherein he
might led his life most at his own pleasure. Ind almost like a new
Prometheus, to tra^sforme him self into what he most willed, taking like a
Cameleont the color of al those things unto the which with thaffecte he is
most nygh^.

And finally to make him self either earthly or divine and to pass over to
that state, that to the election of his free will shall be most agreeable Whereby
it is plainly seen, that whiles men, either by their ill chance, or their
noughtie choice, live holy bent and occup^ed in worldly things, fixinge their
eyes in these sensible obiectes, without any lifting the^ up to the heavens
at all, their condition is very little better, then that of brute beasts, or
rather they become almost like the other beasts, who whollye lack reason. And
contrary when they wythdrawe them the most they may from thence, and return
to there own true and proper operation, and lifting them selves from things
base and earthly, to things high and divine, are brought to their own true
perfection, like unto those happy spirits, who out of this corruptible world,
live in contemplation of divine things, their life is most happy and blessed.
This is the thing most mighty and excellent prince, to help others the most
that in me lies, as the proper and true duty of man is, following the steps
of the most learned Plu^a^che, that in these my present dialogues, I have
sought as I have been best able. And for that like as men are naturally bound
to give honor to God, not only with their mind and words, but also with some
outward sign, offeringe him of the most dear and precious things they have,
they also ought in that sort they best know and can, to honor always
their Princes, because they are (as the same Plutarche said) the very and true
Images of god, for that they keep the same degree in their states, that the
most high and myghtie God holds in the universal. I both by nature and
election servant of your highness, knoinge how much as well naturally, as by
benefits received, I am bound always to honor ye same, and not being able
to do it in such sort as I gladlye would, desiring at the lest to show the
redines of my good will, have taken courage to present the same with these,
such as they are, my small trauails, humbly praying your highness, that like as
god him self, as great as he is, never despises any gift, though most
small and of little valewe, offered him of a pure and sincere mind, the same
now like wise will not set light this my most little gift, sins although it be
of the best and most dear things I have, it may seem in very deed, to small
and poor, in respect of your highness and deserts of the same. I beseech then
finally your excellencye, that recompensinge every lack with the goodness of my
will, you will gentellye receive the same. Sins I desire nothing more, then as
my duetye is (being your most faithful and obedient servant) always to
serve and honor your highness. From Florence the first of March. 1548.

Giouanbaptista Gello.

The Argument
Ulysses after the wars of Troy, retourninge into Gretia his country, and
being by contrary winds to his navigations, driven to diverse and sundry
countries, arrived at the last in the Islande of Circes. Where he was by her
most gently received, and there for many courtesies that she showed him, tarried
a certain time, and so desirous to s^ his country again he asks her
license to depart, and also that she would cause all those Gretians, to become
men again, whom she had transfourmed into diverse beasts, and were then
there, that he might led them again into their own countries.

Circes grants him this favor, but yet with these conditions, that only
they that would should obtain this thing of him, and thothers should
remain, to end their lives there so in bodies of beasts. And because he
might know this thing of them, she grau^teth, to every one of them the power
to speak, even as he could when he was man. Ulysses seeks through all the
Island and speaks with many, who for diverse occasions will rather remain in
that life, then to become men again. Finally finding one, who considering well
the mightines of man, and how far he is more noble then any other beast, by
mean of thunderstanding desires to become man again as he was. And so being
restored by Ulysses, into his former being, first (as it is the duty of man)
having acknowledged and given thanckes unto the most high and mighty God of
all, they returned merelye together into their country.

The first Dyaloge. Ulysses and Circes, Oister and Moule.
Although the love that thou berest unto me most famous Circes, and thinfinite
curtesis yt at all times I find in the, are occasions, that I should wyllinglye
remain with thee in this thy fair and pleasant Islande: Yet the love of my
country, and the desire, (after so long wandering) to see my most dear friends,
stir me continually to depart from the, and to return to mine own house.
But before my departure, I would gladly know if among those, whom thou have
transfourmed into Lions, Wolves, Bears, and other beasts, there be any
Gretian?

Cir. Yea there are many my most dear Ulysses: But why doeste thou ask me
this?


Vli. Let us sytte down here on this rock, where both the syghte of the
diverse waves of the sea, and the pleasantness of the sweet wyndes, that
pass through these sauerye plants, swetelye blowyng, shall make our talk
much more delectable, and I will tell it thee.


Cir. Let us do what thou will Ulysses, for I desire none other thing then
to please the^.


Vli. The cause why I have asked thee most fair Circes, if amongst those
whom thou haste transfourmed into beasts, there be any Gretian, is for that I
would desire to obtain by my request at thy hand, that they might be
restored unto their humayne being, and I led them again with me into their
own country.


Cir. And why desyrest thou this?


Vli. For the love I bear unto them, and for that we are of one country,
hopyng thereby to be amongst my Gretians much praised. Whereas by the
contrary, being known that I were able to get them out of so miserable an
unhappy state, have suffered them so wretchedlye to lead their life in bodies
of beasts, I think it would be unto me no small blame.


Cir. And if others, as thou think Ulysses would praise thee for the same:
Yet they therefore would bear the so great hatred for ye hurt thou should do
them, that thou would repent the thereof a thousand times a day.


Vli. Is it harm then to cause one to return from a beast to a man?


Cir. Ye most harm. And to try the truth, ask of them, for I will not
grant thee this favor, except they also be contented therewith.


Vli. How may I know this of them, who being Beasts, understand not? nor
yet can speak? I doubt that thou mock me.


Cir. Change not thy mind, for I shall grant them speech.


Vli. And shall they have the self same discourse that they had when they were
men?


Cir. Yea for like as I changed them into beasts so shall I cause the
knowledge of very me^ to come into them again. And for to lose no more time:
see thou those two shelles fastened to yonder stone, that open and shette
again, and that hillocke of earth a little without the water, at the foot of
that Palm tree?


Vli. Yea I see them well.


Cir. In the one is an Oyster, and in the other a Mowle, who heretofore were men,
and Gretians, thou shalt speak with them. And because thou may more freely
do it, I will get me hence sportinge me on this strond. And when thou have
perceived their minds, come to me and I shall do as thou thy self will.


Vli. Truly this is a great matter that Cyrces has told me, that these
being thus in bodies of beasts, shall be able, (and by her means) to discourse
and reasonne with me. And it seems to me so incredyble that I dare not almost
prove it, fering that if it came not to pass, I should (as reason is) be
accounted a fool. But here is none besides her that can blame me therefore:
And yet can not she reasonably do it, for that she her self has counseled
me thereunto, and therefore I will not fail to prove. But how must I call
the^? I of my self can not tell how, but by the name that they have being
thus beasts? Let me so do then. Oister, O Oyster.


Oist. What will thou with me Ulysses.


Vli. I also would call thee by thy name if I knew it. But if thou be a
Gretian as Cyrces has told me, it may please thee to tell it me.


Oist. A Gretian I was, before I was changed into an Oyster, and I was of a
place beside Athens, and my name was Itacus: and because I was but poor I
became a Fysher.


Vli. Then rejoice. For the pity that I have of the, knowing that thou were
borne man, and the love that I bear the, for that thou art of my country,
have caused me to pray Cyrces to restore the into thy former shape, and that I
afterward may lead thee again with me into Gretia.


Oist. Follow that no farther Ulysses, for this thy wisdom and eloquence, for
the which thou art so much praised amongst thy Grecians, have no force at al
with me: So that go not about to counsel me with the one, that I leave so many
commodities, ye which I now in this state so happily enjoy without any thought
at al, nor to persuade me with the other that I should return man, since he is
the most unhappy creature, that is in all the world.


Vli. Oh my Itacus, when thou lost the shape of man, it should seem thou lost
reason also to say thus.


Oyst. Thou can not lease it. Ulysses thou, because thou haste it not, if
thou believe as thou say. But let us set injuries a part, and let us reason
friendly a little togethers, and thou shalt see if I that have proved the one
life and the other, can show thee that, that is true that I say.


Vli. Truly this would I gladdely see.


Oyst. Then harken unto me: But hear thou? I will that thou promise me that
while I open (as thou see) to speak, thou will watch, that some of these
traitorous reabbes, come not and cast a little stone between my two shelles,
whereby I could not afterward shet my self again.


Vli. And why so?


Oyst. To draw me afterward forth with his claws, and to feed him self of me,
for thus they are wo^t to do when they find us open.


Vli. Seo a subtle craft. And who has taught you to beware of them, and so
to fly these their deceyptes?


Oyst. Nature, that never fails to any thing, of that, that is necessary.


Vly. Be without fear, and speak safely, for I will watch.


Oyst. Go to then, harken unto me. Tell me a little Ulysses: you men that
glory your selves so much, to be more parfitte, and more wise then we, for
that you have the discourse of reason: do not you esteem those things more,
the which you judge to be better then the other?


Vli. Yea verily, and this rather is one of the chief signs whereby our
perfection and wisdom may be known. Forasmuch as the esteming of every
thing alike, comes of the little knowing of their nature and goodness, and is
a manifest token of folyshenes.


Oyst. And do not you love them better then the other of less estimation?


Vlis. Ye, because ever by the knowledge: either love or hatred follows.

For all those things that appear good unto us, are beloved and desired, and
contrary those that seem naught to us, are hated and eschewed.


Oyst. And loving them more then the rest, have you not also greater care of
them?


Vli. Who dowteth thereof?


Oyst. Think not thou that nature also does the self same, or that
intelligence that guides her? and with much more reason then you, because she
can not err, as oftenne times I have hard say of those Philosophers of
Athenes, whiles I, to sell the fish that I took, stood by the gallaries, where
they a great part of the day, disputed and reasoned together.


Vli. This think I also.


Oyst. If thou grant me this, thou have granted me also that we are better
and more noble then you.


Vli. And by what means?


Oyst. Because Nature making more account of us, then she has done of you,
it follows yt she loves us better. And loving us better she does it for none
other cause then for that, that I have told thee


Vli. What, me thinks thou art the best Logitian of Athenes.


Oyst. I know not what Logique means, consider how I may be a Logitian, I
speak in such sort as nature has taught me. And this reason might every one
make, that has the discourse of reason, and it is most true.


Vli. Yea if it were true that Nature set more by you, then she does by us.


Oist. This is easy to prove, and if thou will that I show it thee, harken
unto me, and because thou shall perceive the better, I will that we begin
from the first day that she brings forth both you and us into the world, the
which is the day of our birth. Where, tell me I pray thee, what care has she
showed to have of you, syns she causes you to be borne naked? where contrary
she has showed to esteem us much, causing us to come into the world clothed,
some with lether, some with hear, some with scales, some with one thing, and
some with an other, the which is a manifest token that she has greatly in her
heart minded our conservation.


Vli. This reason makes not for thee, for though she has made us naked, and
covered us with so thin a skin, that we are hurt by every little thing, she
^^th done it, for that we having to exercisethe fantasy, and other our inner
senses, far more diligently then you, to serve afterward the understanding:
it was conueniente that our members, and perticulerly those orgaines, and those
instruments, where those operations are made, should be of a more gentle, and
more light matter, and so also more subtle blood, and more hot then youres
are, whereby the wekenes of our complexion grows. For if we were made of those
evil humors, and those gross bluddes, that ye are (whereby it follows that
you ar more strong, and of more lusty complexion the^ we, but yet not of longer
life, for this comes of the temperature of ye complexion in which thing we
pass you very much, and therefore we have the perceueraunce of touching much
more perfyt then you, for it perceyueth every most little difference) it
should follow that we should be of little knowledge, and of little wit as you
are. For as these Phisnomiers say, the customs of the mind follow the
complexions of the body: whereby it is ever seen, that to the members of a
Lion, the conditions of a Lion, and to the members of a Bear the conditions of
a Bear follow. And that this is true, mark well among men, and thou shall
see, that they who are made of gross humors, are also gross of wit, and
contrary, they that are of thin and quick flesh, are likewise quick of
wit, so that nature willing to make us reasonable and of most perfect
knowledge, was in manner enforced to make us so.


Oist. Enforced, no I will not believe this yet, because she making all things,
might have made them as she had listed, and might very well have kept an
other rule, and an other order in them. And for an example, to make that water
of it self, should heat, and fire should refreshe.


Vli. Ye but this wonderful order the which is among all creatures and from
whence each one confesses his beauty to come, could not by this means have
been in the whole world.


Oist. No there should have been an other from whence an other manner of beuty
should have proceeded, peradventure far fairer the^ this.


Vli. Whiles we are upon peradventure we walk as out of the way. But what
matter makes it though nature has made us naked, since she has given us
such knowledge and strength, that we can cover us with your clothes?


Oist. Ye but with what danger how many of you have come to mischief, by your
myndinge to take us to serve your selves of ours? And besides this with how
great labor? For if you will be served with our skins, you must dress them,
our hear you must spinne them, weue them, and do a thousand other things
unto them, before you bring them into such frame, that you may serve your
selves of them.


Vli. These labors are sweet and pleasant unto us. Ye they are rather a
pastime to us the^ otherwise.


Oist. Ye, to them that do it for pastyme, as thou sometimes do, but ask a
little of those, who do it enforced by necessity, and to scratche out by their
labors, so much as may serve their very need, and thou shall see if they
will say, that these pains seem pleasant to them or no. I for mine own
part know that whiles I was a man, it grieved me so much to labor, that as I
have told the) I made my self a fyssher, and I would have willyngly put my
self to any more heinous occupation, so that I might not have labored,
esteminge it to be an art of oxen, who always labor, and when they can no
more, are then knocked on the head with a betell.


Vli. If thou made thee a fysher because thou would not labor, it should
chance to the as it does to al those that fly pains. Thou think it should
rounne after thee, for thou tookest an art in hand, wherein not doing it for
pleasure, there is more pains then in any other. And besides this, there is
infinite troubles of winds, of cold, of hete of the son abidden, and of many
other things.


Oist. And thou see well, that I will no more become man again, and I think
I have reason, consideringe besides this that nature has set little store by
you, for besides the bringing forth of you naked, she also has not made you
any house or habitation, of your own, where you might defend you from
thiniuries of the wether as she has made to us, yt which is a plain token,
that you are as rebels and banished of this world, having no place here of
your own.


Vli. What houses has she made to you?


Ois. What houses: Consider mine a little of these two shelles, with what great
art and commodity she has builte it for me: see how I open and shytte
casely as I have need to feed me, or to repose me, and to defend me from such
as would hurt me. Consider also what she has done for the Tortoflees, and for
the Snayles, and how easily they carye their houses with them.


Vli. And what houses has she made to the other beasts, being the more
part, and also to the birds?


Oyst. For the winter the holes and the dens of the earth, and for the
summer, the trees and hill tops.


Vli. Oh, fair houses, I think they be there in deed in very great ease.


Oyst. If there be not so many commodities there, as are in yours, nether are
there so many displeasures and thoughts.


Vli. And what displeasures and thoughts have we of ours that make them
after our own minds with our own hands?


Oist. What displeasures and thoughts: the maynteyninge of them, the reparing
of them, and the defending the^ from thinco^modities that time brings with
him? besides this, when rests any of you one hour in them with a quiet mind,
being never assured that they fall not on your back, and more then that, the
fear of the earthquakes, the which I remember, coming heretofore in our
country, the people feared in such sort, that the nyghtes they tarried in the
fields, and the days they went togethers on flocks like cranes, praying and
crying to the gods, and bearing about certain their old harnes, with
fyrebrandes a light in their hands, whereby it was plainelye known, that
fear ca^ do so much in you, that it causes you very often times to lose your
wits.


Vli. These are things that chance so seldom, that there is no head to be
taken thereof.


Oist. Besides this you can not build you other houses in every place as
nature has done to us, or in such sort that you may carry them after you, as
many of us may.


Vli. And what hurt is this, when we have one after our own mind? know
thou not that he yt is well should not change?


Oist. What hurt: if evil chance be that you have some neighbor who either
by his conditions, or by some science that he has, is by any means,
troblesome unto you, and against your mind what infelicitie is the not being
able to go any other where as we do? So that retourning to our first talk,
Nature having us in much more estimation, then you, as I have showed thee, and
she not able to fail, it follows that we are better and far more noble
then you.


Vli. This thy reason is only a little apparaunte, for although it seem that
nature has given you many mo commodities, then she has to us, she has done
it, for that she knew you were not able of your selves, to procure them unto
you. But here what I shall say unto thee, and thou shall see which of us is
more noble. Tell me I pray thee: whether is the master or the servant more
noble?


Oyst. The master I think as master.


Vli. Thou think well, and so also among all things, the thing is more
noble the which is end of others, then those things which are ordained to
mainteyne or to serve it. Whereof it also follows, that we being as your ends,
must be more noble then you. And that we be your ends, and that all you were
created by nature, to serve us, experience shows it plainly, sins we serve
our selves of you whiles you live, to bear our things from one place to
another, to labor the earth, and to a thousand other exercises, and after
when you are deed, to clothe us of your skins, and to feed us of your flesh.
Now see then whether you were made by nature for us or no.


Oist. If these reasons were true you should have been also made by her for the
earth, for at ye last she eats you al. And so should you also be less noble
then the earth, she being your end.


Vli. This consequence is nothing worth, and because thou shall understand it
the better, thou shall note there are two sorts of ends.


Oist. Ulisses, I will not that thou trouble thy self any more, for thou
begynnest to enter into those disputatio^s with me, that I heretofore have
heard in the galleries of Athens of those Philosofers, whiles I, (as I told
thee before) went about to sell those few fisshes that I had taken, to provide
me of such other necessaries as I had need of: the which (I think)
neither they nor others knew.

But I feel that the dew begins to fall, whereof I feed, opening me as thou
see, wherein I have so great delight, and without any trouble or thought at
all, that whylest I was man, I never proved the like. So that marvel no more
that I will remain thus. And if thou understand it otherwise, then be thou
so, and trouble me no more, for after that I have fedd, I will shet me again,
and take some rest, and without any most little thought at all, the which
very seldom chaunseth to you. And I esteem more this my contentation then al
yt ever I might hope to have at thy hands.


Vli. Truly I could scarsely have chanced worse: for it should seem, that
this fellow was of very little discourse in the world, and the art that he did,
declares it. For all they that attent to fyshe or to foul, (I speak of them
that do it for need, and not for pleasure) are vile persons, and of little
knowledge. And mark also how little knowledge he should have of the pleasures
of the world, syns he would barter them for a little dew that he now tastes
being thus an Oyster. Well, let me then thus leave him in this his misery, a
most just reward of his folly. And let me prove to reason a little with this
Moule, yt Circes told me was in yonder Hillocke of earth, for I shall perchance
happen on a man of more knowledge, I will get me a little nere her, and call
her. Moule, O Moule.


Mo. What will thou with me Ulysses? and what moves the thus to trouble my
quietness?


Vli. If thou knew what I had obtained of Circes (by my request, for thy
profitte) thou would not say that I were troblesom to the, if thou have the
use of reason like a man.


Mo. As though I hard it not even now of thee, whilst thou spakest with this
other Gretian, whom she transfourmed into an Oyster.


Vli. And that I may cause thee to return man, and deliver the from this
place and to lead thee again with me, into thy country, so that thou be a
Gretian as she told me.


Mo. A Gretian I was whiles I was man, and of the fairest part of all Etolia.


Vli. And desyrest not thou to be restored into thy first shape, I mean when
thou were a man, and to return unto thine own house.


Mo. This is not my desire, for the^ were I a fool.


Vli Is it folyshnes then to desire a better state?


Mo. No. But to seek to make it worse, as I should do to be come man again.
Because now I live with most great pleasure in this state, and in this kind,
where as being man, I should not so do, but I should live in continual
troubles, and pains importunate, whereof human nature is most aboundaunte.


Vli. And who has taught thee this so goodly matter? This ignoraunte fisher
with whom I spoke even now?


Mo. Even experience, maistres of all things, has taught it me, by the means
of the occupation that I had.


Vli. And in what sort has experience showed thee that we are more unhappy,
and more miserable then you?


Mo. I will tell thee one only experience, the which (as I have told thee) I
knew plainly by the means of mine exercise, of the which, thou afterward
may of thy self pycke out many others, that shall be of no less weight then
this.


Vli. And what was the art that thou dyddest exercise, that made thee to know
so false a thing? Tell on.


Mo. To till the ground.


Vli. I may well say now I am a foot, to get out of the hands of a fisher, and
to come into the hands of a plowman, who if he swerve not from his nature,
shall be much less able to understand reason then the other.


Mo. Do me none injury Ulysses with words, for every man is a man, and rather
take heed to that that I say, for if thou shalt well consider it, thou will
perchance repent, that Circes has not changed the also into some beast, as
she has done us.


Vli. Go to then, say on, for truly I desire nothing more.


Mo. What beast find thou in all the world, either of the water or of the
earth, the kinds of whom are almost infinite, to whom the earth of it self
brings not forth for him, wherewith to feed him, except to man? who, if he
will that she bring him forth his food, as to others, must labor it, and
with great pains sow it with his hands.


Vli. This error comes of him self, who will be nouryshed with over delicate
meats. But if he would live of the fruit that she of her self brings
forth, as other beasts do, this should not chance unto him.


Mo. And what grass, what sede and what fruits, brings she of her self
forth, not being helped by art, that are meet nor^shmente and conueniente
for the conservation of the life of man, and for the mayntenaunce of the
temperature of his complexion.


Vli. Is it not said that those first auneyente people, of thage that was
called the golden age, did live so?


Mo. O Ulysses, thou make profession of a wise man, and yet beleuest thou
these tales?


Vli. Well, when that also that thou say were true, yet this labor that man
endures to labor and till the ground, to water and keep the vynes, and to
plant fruytes, does it not bring there with so great delight and pleasure,
that it may be said, that nature has given it to man, for his pastime, and for
that he should not live in Idleness, and after for his wealth and profyt? And
that this is true, mark what large reward of fruit she gives after ward
for his pains? Whereby it seems that nothing is more sweet then husbandrye.
And besides this she has done it, for that manne should have wherewith to show
his wit, and cunninge, and how he is worthier then the other beasts are.


Mo. Nay rather because she should never take rest, nor never have one good
hour. And besides this to trouble him more, the fear of death is joined to
him in such sort that when the earth through contrary wethers, brings not
forth so largelye her fruits, one year as she was wont, he all that time
lives in danger and fear, that he be not enforced to dye for hunger, and he
never eats morsel without a thousand griefs, the which thing chau^seth
not to us. For when there wants any thing in the place, where we are, we
go most happelye into an other.


Vli. So that we also can not cause things to come out of those countries,
where there is haboundaunce, when there is dearthe in our own.


Mo. But with what labor and danger both by sea and land? And with what
unquietness of mind? the which is a far greater matter. Let this suffice thee
that your life is nothing else then a continual strife, now with one thing, and
now with an other, so that you have good reason to weep as ye do when you are
borne (the which none of us does) considering the infelicitie and mis^rye of
the state whereunto you come.


Vli. We can not weep therefore, for that we know it not, as thou do.


Mo. Although you know not, yet you begin to feel thincomodities of the place,
where you come to inhabit, the which (as I have told thee) as it is to all
other beasts accommodate, i^ is to you only, almost contrary, and
therefore wepinge is given only to you by nature.


Vli. How to us only* does not the horse weep also, as I have heard say.


Mo. I believe not but I think, that those tears, the which fall at certain
times from their eyes, grow by superfluitye that ascends to the hedde: for
that the horse is a very delicate beast. And if he weep, he does it for some
mischaunce that is happened unto him, as it might be, to change a master or
to lose the company of some other hor^^ whom he, (being very apt to love by
nature) had loved: but he does it not immediately after his birth, as you
do, who in deed have reason thereto (as I told thee even now) consideringe
that you must^ forthwith be bound and be nouryshed by the hands of others.
Neither can you of your selves do any thing at all, of those things, that
belong unto your own nature. So that Ulysses labor no more, for I for my
part, am one of those, that will rather dye then become man again.


Vli. O my Moule, it seems thou should also have done, as I said to yonder
Oyster, that at one time thou lost ye shape of man and reason also. And if thou
will see that to be true that I tell the: consider what beasts you are, for
if you were perfect in deed, I would say that you had some reason.


Mo. Why, what do we lack?


Vli. What do you lack? Thoyster the sense of smellinge and hearing, and that
that is more, the ability to move from one place to another: And thou the
fight, the which thou knoweste how worthy it is to be had in price,
geuynge knowledge unto us of mo differences of things, then any other sense.


Mo. We are not therefore imperfect, but we are so called by you, in respect of
those that have them all: but we should be imperfit in deed, if we lacked any
of those that belongs unto our kind.


Vli. Should it not then be better to have them?


Mo. Not the sight to me, as a Moule: neither to Thoister the smellinge, or
hearing, or ability to go from place to place, as an Oyster. And if thou will
know the reason thereof, harken unto me? Tell me I pray the, why is the power
to move from one place to another given unto you, but to go for those things
that ye lack?


Vli. Nature truly has not given it us for any other thing: And therefore
it is said that every motion grows of the need.


Mo. If you then had that nigh unto you the which you had need of, you would
not move?


Vli. No: Why should we?


Mo. What need then has that Oyster of the motion from one place to another,
if she have by her all that, that she has need of? And likewise of smelling,
nature geuinge her wherewith to feed, without any need to seek what is good
for her, and what is not. And so I, that must abide under the earth, where I
find that that contenteth me, what need have I of sight?


Vli. Although it be not necessary unto thee, yet thou should desire to
have it.


Mo. And why so? Syns it is not necessary to my nature, it is sufficient to
me, to be perfect in mine own kind. Desyrest thou to have the bryghtnes that a
star has: or the wings that a byrd has?


Vli. These are things that appertain not to men.


Mo. If other men had them, would thou then desire them?


Vli. Ye I think so.


Mo. And the like would I do, if other moules saw: but since other see not, I
neither think on it, nor yet desire it. So that labor no farther in
perswadinge me to return man, for that I am perfect in this my kind, and
live without any thought in the world, I will so remain, because I find
herein far fewer displeasures, then I did in the humayne life. Go then about
thy business, for I will get me a little farther under the earth.


Vli. I know not well whether I wake, or dreme* if I wake truly I am no more
the same Ulysses that I was wont to be, sins I have been able to cause neither
of these twain to believe the truth. And I hear tofore was wont to persuade
to my Gretians, what so ever I my self listed. But I think the default to come
of them: for I have chanced on two, who are not able to understand reason. And
it is also no great marvel, the one being a fysher and the other a plowman. But I
think it should not so^happen unto me, with every one of the rest, if
perchance they be not of one sort all. I will then return to Circes and
show her how I have sped, and pray her that she fail me not of as much as she
has promised me, and that she cause me to speak with some other, for I should
think it to much injury, though these never knew, neither will know any
good, to fail of this ben^fyte to the rest.


The second Dialoge. Cyrces, Ulysses, the Snake.
WHat say these thy Gretians my dear Ulysses, is there any of the^ that will
become man again?

Vli. Not one. It is true that I have spoken only with those two that thou
shewedst me, of whom the one was a fysher, and the other a plowman, whose lives
were so miserable and painful, that I nothing marvel they will not prove
the state of man again.


Cir. Think thou not Ulysses, that I have done this at adventure, for I was
willing thou should begin with those to see, that also in these base
states, the which have been heretofore so much praised by many of your
writers, there are so many incommodities, tha^ the most vile and imperfyte
beasts that may be sound, are in better case then they: And they have showed
thee, the reason thereof.


Vli. Ye but then the matter is, whether this come by the small knowledge of
them or not? For surely they should be men of most little wit, sins that state
wherein they were, seemed evil unto them, and yet they not able to change it.


Cir. The wit and wisdom of men is far better known, in being able to
accommodate them selves to live quietlye, in that state wherein they are, then
it is in chaunginge it, as also in the knowledge of players, in playing those
games well, that come to them by chance, although they be evil For in the one,
knowledge and wisdom work only, and in the other fortune: unto whose
arbitrament wise men always seek the least they may to put the^ selves.


Vli. Thou know Circes that there is no kind of creatures, amongst whom
greter differences are found, then among men, among whom if thou consider well
thou shall find some of such knowledge and wit, that they are almost like
unto the gods, and some others of so gross wit, and small knowledge, that
they seem almost bestes. So yt it is often douted, whether they have reasonable
souls or not, the which chaunseth not to any^ other beast. For if thou look
among Lions, and Bears, and amongst what other kind thou will, thou shall see
the one from the other very little different. And these two to whom thou have caused
me to speak, I think are truly of those, who knew very smally, either the
good or ill, that was in their own states, and therefore they have done as all
other like, who think always other states far better then their own.


Cir. If the good and the euylles that chance unto a man in that state wherein
he lives, could only be known by wit, and understanding, I would then
think thou saydest truth. But they are known by proof: and experience (as
thou know) causes each man to know things as they are. But abide, you
shall speak a little with that Snake that comes traversing the way toward
us, for as I remember me, he whom I changed into her, was a Gretian, and he
perchance shall satisfy the far better, then these other have done. And I
for this cause do give her power to answer thee, and to speak unto thee.


Vli. It should seem that she understands that thou talkest of her, for that
she stands so still, steadfastly beholding us.


Cir. It may so be, but speak unto her, and I in the mean season will walk
among these my nymphs, to pass the time along this sea bank.


Vli. I had so much pleasure to speak with those other two beasts, although I
could not persuade them, to that that I would, and that that is true, that I
am also determined to talk with this snake. Snake. O Snake.


Sna. What will thou Ulysses? But alas I understand and I speak, whether I de
turned again into man, as I was heretofore: God forbid this.


Vli* And what is the cause Snake, that thou would not become man again? is
the state wherein thou lyuedst perchance the cause?


Sna. Not so, but the nature it self of man, the which in very deed is none
other thing the^ a lodging of miseries.


Vli. Let me make ^eckening, I have even chaunsed on an other like unto the
first twain. Snake hear me a little. It is in my power to make thee return
man, for Cyrces whom I have prayed, for the love I bear unto you, because we
are of one country, has granted it me. Now may I use this goodly benefit
unto thee.


Sna. Then do it to some other, for I pray the^ to suffer me to end my life
after this sort. For truly I should have to great a loss, to change this
state with yours.


Vli. Why, what is the cause?


Sna. Have not they with whom thou haste spoken, told thee?


Vli. They were men of so base condition, and of so small knowledge, that I make
little account of their words. ^na. Did they not show the, the reason why they
would not become men again?


Vli, The One of them who was a Fysher, told me: because he would not take thought
where to dwell, the which care other Beasts have not, who abide, some in the
hollownes of the earth, some in the woods some on the trees, some in the water,
and some in diverse other places: and the other, who was a Plowman, for that he
would not till the earth, the which not being tylled, and sown by man,
brings not food forth for him of her self, as it does to other beasts.


Sna. And I, who, whiles I lived, was a Physician, will show the another, the
which is unto you an occasion of far greater misery, the^ they were. And yet
there, no such defense ca^ be made as may be made in thart of husba^dry, and
thart of building, wherein man is so excellent.


Vli And what is that? Tell it me I pray thee.


Sna. The weakness of the complexcion, that nature has given to you, by the
which you are subject to so many kinds of infirmities, that it can never be
said, that you are at any time perfectly in health, as we are. And besides
this, you are never so lustye, but for every little mysrule you do, you fear
to be sick.


Vli. This (as I said before to them) nature has done, because we may better
do our operations, the which we should not so easelye have don, if she had
made us of mattiers, of humors, and of blood, so gross, and strong, as she
has made you.


Sna. Nay, rather she has done it, to make you the most sick and weak
creatures that are in the world.


Vli. And when this that thou say were true, can not we beware of that that
hurts us, with that wisdom that she has given us?


Sna. Ye in some part, but it is so hard, that thou see how few do it, But
will thou se that she has done it, only for that she is your enemy? See
thou not that she has given unto you an appetite of feding so vnsaciate, and a
desire so immoderate, that you cease not continually to seek new meats? And
when you have found such as pleases you, you can not then measure your selves,
or very hardely eat as should suffice you, whereby afterward so many and so
grievous sicknesses grow on you.


Vli. What are these meats that we use, that were not made by nature, for our
maintenance and conservation?


Sna. What are these meats? infinite, and perticulerly all those that you use
to make good the others withal, and that are not good of them selves to eat,
as is salt, peper, and such like.


Vly. I for my part have wholly believed the contrary: Yea, rather I have heard
say, that man could not live without salt.


Sna. Because of the superfluities, that is engendered through over much eating,
and drinking, the which must afterward be dried. But if he were nouryshed of
simple meats, and so much only as neded, superfluous humors should not be
engendered, nor they should not need to be dried. But the matter stands in
this point, that man with these sawces (for so are al those called that are
not good of them selves, but make others good) makes his meats so much
better, and of more appetite, that provoked by the delight that is therein, he
eats much more then he has need of. And besides this, he is pricked and
stirred by the variety of tastes, to drink much more, then his nature
requires. Whereby grow after in him so many Catarres, reumes, swellings,
goutes to the ache, that they must after be plucked out, and a thousand other
infinite mischiefs, that follow afterward thereof, the which never chance
to any of us.


Vli. Surely in some part thereof thou say true.


Sna. Then consider us, that because nature has loved us better, she has not
given unto us this so v^ruly an appetite, whereby we have desire only to those
things that are good for us, and so much as our nature requires, and we will
not one morsel above this, nor we can not vary, or mingle our metes in such
sort, that they may enforce our appetyte with the pleasing us. But see thou
not also, that because you should fall into these inconveniences, she has
caused you to mingle, of those things with your meats, that were plainelye
obiectes of the smelling, because they should please you the better, and the
easelier deceive you^ as it were to say the musk, which is a ^ottones of an
impostematio^ of one of us the which thou would not take for any precious
thing: whereas to us she has not given any other pleasure in smelling then of
these things, that are necessary to nourishe us, and so much only also as
we have need to eat.


Vli. She has done this for yt we had need of greter quantity of brain, to
ye proportion of other bests yt which is naturally cold for yt the operations
of ye inner senses must be exercised in the same, to serve the understanding,
we may sometimes hete it, with savors the which are naturally all hute:
whereof we are bound unto her, because she hath^ given us this delight, and
pleasure, of smelling of good things, the which she has not done for you:
for you have pleasure of none other thing, then of that that your meats have.


Sna. I will tell thee true: I cannot well determine with my self, whether your
having of this sense more perfect then we, be either to your loss, or gaynes,
the evil smelles are so many mo that you smell, then the good. And has not she
caused that you your selves also in gendre in your own bodies, so great a
quantity of superfluities, that all they almost engendre evil savors, the
which is not so with us: the which thing is a most manifest sign, of the
weakness, and of the imperfectness of the complexcio^ of your nature, subject,
and bond (as I have told thee) unto so many and diverse sicknesses, the which
are not eue^ known by us. See thou not that in the eyes only, there be mo
then fyftye kinds of sicknesses?


Vli. And when this were so, we have means to remedy it.


Sna. And how?


Vli. With Physic, in the which art man is most excellent, and thou should
know it, if thou were a physician, as thou say.


Sna. This is the point that I would take: he at, for in this I think men
much more unhappy then we.


Vli. And why so? tell me thoccasion a little.


Sna. Because I think that medicines does far more hurt in you, then good:
and that you in using them, are not in your wits, and I alone am not in this
opinion: For thou know well, how many cities have been in your Gretia who
have prohibited and driven from them, the Physicians.


Vli. And why say thou this? Will thou deny that Physic is not one of
the seven liberal arts, most true, and most profi^table to man, take heed that
this come not out of thy mouth, that thou show not thy self one of those who
had therein no great knowledge, and therefore blamest it, obseruinge the
custom of many, who when they know not a thing, say it can not be known, and
that others know it not.


Sna. I will not deny that the same of it self is not an art most true and
profitable, and worthy of many praises, nor I will not also deny that I knew
very little thereof. even after that sort as others likewise know little
therein, but yet ^^ such sort as it may be know, I knew so much thereof that I
was reputed among the chief Phisitio^s of Gretia, and thou can bear good
witness thereof. For I know thou have heard infinite times of Agesimus of
Lesbos.


Vli. Art thou then Agesimus of Lesbos? thou, or to say better, ye spirit of
him?


Sna. I am he in deed, that going to se the world, arrived here by ship, and
was thus together with my companions changed into a beast.


Vli. I am very glad to speak with thee, for thy fame is yet so great through
all Gretia, that I should think to get no small thing, if I might lead the
unto them again a man as thou were before.


Sna. Of this I tell the true that thou reason no more, for I will never
consent thereunto. And because thou may see that I do it not without
reasonne, I say unto the, retourning to our former talk, that phisike may be
two ways considered. First, it may be considered as a science, and in this
manner it is most true, and most sure, because it only considers the
things universal, the which for that they are everlasting, and not variable,
engender a surety in us. And in this wise knowinge things by their occasions,
it is called a science and belongs to co^templation, the end whereof is only
to know the truth. And many after this sort know it, and I also knew my
part thereof. Phisike may likewise be considered as an art, and arts (as
thou know) come by experience, and after this sort it is most deceitful:
and that this is true physicians them selves confess it: saying that
experiences in this art are very deceitful. And thus it appertains unto the
active, the end whereof is the workynge and trauaylinge about the particular
things, and in this sort I confess unto the yt there is most little known
thereof and experience daily shows it.


Vli. From whence gottest thou the reputati^ that thou had, if thou knew
little how to work?


Sna. From the foolyshnes of many, who giving oftentimes small head to that
that men do, suffer them selves to be deceived by that that they say,


Vli. Truly men in their own cases, see light a very little way.


Sna. And in this above all others, for the desire they have to live. And if
thou will see it plainly, mark, that of those faults that they punyshe
others, they pay us by weyghte of gold, the which faults are so many and so
grievous, that it were ill for us if the earth hid them not: as one of our wise
men of Gretia said heretofore, who one day being asked, what thoccasion was
that he never had sickness, answered: because he never had to do with
Physicians.


Vli. Then that other our worthy manne understood it well, when he said:
that good Physician never took medicine.


Sna. Then thou should have added that other saying also.


Vli. Which?


Sna. That one good man of law, never stryueth with another. But yet there is
a worse thing, that to maynetayne this their deceipte in reputation, they give
men to understand that they take medecynes, causinge the pottecaries to
ordeyne them, and to send them to their houses, and they then cast them
away. And I have known of those that do it.


Vli. Who knows not that this your living is a deceyte? And that we do none
other thing then one begyle an other.


Sna. And the greteste deceptes that they do is, where belief plays the
chief part, for herein they practice more then in any other thing.


Vli. Thou see well it is wont to be said, that the belief that a paciente
has in the Physician, helps him often times, much more then the medycynes,
and he that can persuade most falselye, gets most credytte.


Sna. I knew it very well, for, for being able to speak well, and to
persuade well, and chiefelye unto women (to whose minds physicians are most
times taken, and not for being able to work well) I became in great credit.
But abide Ulysses, will thou see that men know not physic perfectly that
give a thousand remedies for one disease?


Vli How many remedies the mo a physician gives for one sickness, is it not a
sign that he knows the more of the art?


Sna. Clean contrary, for the giving many remedies to one evil, is a token of
not knowing his proper remedy. For even as all effects, have only one proper
occasion, that cause them, although they may be afterward brought forth
accidentally by many other occasions, so every evil has his proper remedy,
and who that know it should heal the same undoubtedly. So that when thou see
one give thee many remedies to one only evil, say that he knows not the
very proper remedy, and goes about to seek it. And then it must be (as they
say) that God must help you.


Vli. Think then if we be not well to chance into your hands.


Sna. Mark it, and therefore there are many that say, that it is better to
take a luckie Physician then a learned.


Vli. What meanest thou by a luckie physician?


Sna. one whose pacientes, for the more part that chance into his hands, may
be seen healed by him. For he is well called fortunate, the more part of whose
business has good end, and that in things doutefull he ever chanseth to take
the best. For as I have told thee, it is so hard a thing in phisycke, to
apply universals, to perticulers, that the pacient has need of good chance,
or else he is in great hasarde.


Vli. We should for this thing complain us of men, and of their covetousness,
sins they set us to do that, that they know not, only because they would gain.


Sna. Ye but much more of nature, who has not so provided for your health, as
she has for ours. First for that she has given you a complexion so weke, and
an appetite so inordinate, and then for that she has taught you physic after
such sort that it is rather to your hurt then profit.


Vli. What has nature done in this better unto you then to us?


Sna. She has first given unto us a complexion so strong, and a desire so
well ruled, that it never provoke us to do any thing that is against our
nature, and besides this, for our diseases, far more perfect phisycke then
to you.


Vli. Nay I will that thou prove this otherwise then with words only.


Sna. Of the godnes and strength of the complexion, because it is a thing of
it self most well known, I will not reason with thee, but of the temperature
of the appetite. Consider first the manner how we feed, and thou shall not see
that any of us have desire, but of those meats that are convenient to his
nature, and to take also of those only that quantity, that is necessary to
his nourishement, where as to you it is all contrary: For you have desire of a.
M. things that hurt you, and yet can you not moderate your selves that you eat
no more of those things that please you, then your need requires?


Vli. Truly herein you are more happy then we.


Sna. What shall I also say of drinking? For we drink only so much as needs
unto our conservation. You suffer your selves very often to be drawn so much
by the delight that you feel in ye wine, that you are not only drunk, but also
you get thereby a thousand sicknesses.


Vlis. I will not that thou speak of this, for nature has showed in this, to
love us far better then you, having given unto us only, so precious a licour.


Sna. Yea, if she had given you therewith an appetite, ruled in such sort,
that you drank not thereof more then you neded: but since she has not done
so, it is even to have given a thing that is of no less hurt then help, into
the hand of one that has no judgment, or else will suffer him self to be
led up and down by desire.


Vli. Thou might speak of this thing of wine a thousand years, and yet
would I never yield unto thee.


Sna. Then in the lusts of the flesh, do not you suffer your selves to be
carried so far therein through pleasure, that you get thereby most oftentimes
your death, the which thing never happens to us. Rather nature has made so
much account of us herein, that she suffers us not to come into such
de^^ers, but at certain times, and those only are, when we have need to cast
forth those superfluities, or when the time is most apt to generation.


Vli. What, is there not then found among you of those who are always
disposed to the like pleasures.


Sna. And who is this? the mare, and like beasts, that practice among you, to
serve you at need, who also perchance shall be by you provoked unto such acts,
for your profyt. But pass further unto other things that are sought, for the
conservation of health. And consider a little as touching the aier, the quality
whereof is of most great importance, for that we must continually in fetting
our breath, fill therewith our inner parts. Whom find thou amongst us, that
is not in the same place and air, that is to most purpose, and most convenient
for him, if they be not driven thence by force, and carried some other where?
Whereas you, very often both for desire to gain, and also for a thousand other
occasyons, go, seking countries, to abide in place, where the air is so
contrary unto you, that you procure your own death before the time.


Vli. This can i^l be denied.


Sna. Of the ^^epe, and of the diet, and of other necessary things for the
conservation of the complexion, and of your health, I will not reason, because
you your selves know, that can not use them in due time. And this comes
because you are brought thereunto, either by art, or else by your own
fantasies, where we, who use them only, when nature requires, nener err, by
the which occasyons, we Ulysses are subject unto many fewer infirmities then
you are* And unto those few, every one of us guided by nature, can find of
him self the remedy.


Vli. And is this true?


Sna. It is most true. And by this thou may plainly know how much nature
has loved us above you, sins she has taught to every kind of us remedies for
those euilles, to which the same kind is subject. And not only unto the kind,
but also unto each one of them severally divided.


Vli. Truly hereof thou makeste me much marvel.


Sna. Sins this seems so great a matter unto the, I will not that thou be
satisfied with words. But begin a little to consider us Snakes, of whom every
one, when the spring of the year comes, perceiuyng our skins roughe on
our back, for that we lay still in winter, and heaped under the earth, goes
to eat of fenell, the which causes us to cast that our so old skin, And
then afterward seeing our sight dyminished, we run again to heal us with
the same thing. Have not all the little Lyzardes, one certain herb that helps
them, when they have benne bitten by any of us? Run not the hearts when they
are wounded unto Dittaunder? And when they perceive them selves bytten by the
Phalange (the which is a kind of a venomous spyder) can they not, all heal
themselves with eatinge of crabbes or crauishes? The swalowes when they see the
eyes of their young hurt, can not al they help them with celidonye? The
Tortoflees help they not our bytinges with hemlocke? The wesell when she goes
to fight with the ratte, does she not first make her self strong and lusty
with eating of rue? helps not the Storke her infirmities with organie? And
the wild swine with Juie? Does not the Elephant defend him from the venun of
the Camal^ont with olive leaves? And bears from the venim of the Mandrake with
pyssemearse? The stock Doves, the Geys, the black birds, and the partriges,
do not they purge their superfluities, with the leaves of baye? And the tame
pigions, the Turtle, and the hens, with chickewede. The cattes and dogs
when they feel their bealy ouercharged, run they not to pourge them selves
with eatinge of grass wet with dew? But what needs that I tell thee any
longer story? take what kind of beast thou will, and thou shalt find, that
for thin firmitie, whereunto the same is subject, nature has taught him the
remedy. And not only to the kind alone (as I have told thee) but to every
one of them severally divided, whereby it follows that we have no need to bye
labor one of another, neither have we any need to put our selves under
doutfull things. And that that is worse, to pay one who may often times give
us our death, as you poor wretches do. And does it not seem unto you, that how
much the more monye you give, to your Physicians, so much the better to do? And
goo you not chosing out the fairest money that you can find?


Vli. Herein we do not al after one fashion. But what will thou? are there not
foles also found among you?


Sna. No Ulysses, and print this well in thy heart* that there is no beast at
all, that lacks of the knowledge, apperteinynge unto his kind. Although
sometimes one may be found some what more easy to be taught, or some what more
ware then an other. But I pray thee tell me a little, if all the fools amongst
you, should were a white cappe on their heddes, should you not seem a fair
flock of gese?


Vli. But the matter is, whether they that thou call foles, be wiser then
thothers, or not. For I remember that one, who was heled of that disease, being
asked by a woman, what physic he had used, because she would heal a child
of hers, said that he would not teach it her, thinking he should do to great
an iniurye to heal one of such a disease, for he thought that he had never a
pleasaunter time then whiles he was taken for a sole.


Sna. And whereof think thou that this came? saving that in that time whiles
he was void of those thoughts, the which cause man to be evil contented, he
knew not the misery of the nature of man.


Vli. I will not dispute with thee hereof now but let us return to our former
matter where I telthe, although you have less sickness then we, this is
because you are of shorter life then we, the which is no small evil, nor no
little infelicitie.


Sna. Ye peradventure unto us that are provided by nature, of all those things
that are necessary for us, and that live always in health, without any sorrow
or grief at all. (So that to dye also is little grief unto us, for we foresee
not our death before hand as you do, and besides that we know not so
perfectly this to lose the being, to be so great a matter. But this great
felicity of yours to live so long is none other thing unto you, then a
painful suffering a longer time, with so many troubles and labors to
preserve your life. And when you have but a grief in the head, the fear of
death tormenteth you so much, that the grief of the mind is far greater unto
you then the pain of the body. So that there have been many, that for this
occasion have said that your life can not be called a life, but a continual
course and thinkinge of death.


Vli. These are but words.


Sna. As though that there has not been among you also of those, who
considering your misery has said it had been better never to have been borne.
And of those that are borne, they may only be called happy, that die in their
swaddling bands. And how many have there also been, who consideringe your
state, to make themselves free of so many evils have killed the^ selves with
their own hands? A thing so wicked, that it never comes only in the
thought of any of us.


Vli. Ye, some weak hearted person, who being afeard for that he knows not
how to overcome some contrary fortune, or to bear out some evil that is
chanced unto him, but for one of these thou shall find thousands, that
would not dye.


Sna. Ye, but thou know not the cause.


Vli. Why what is it? tell it me I pray thee.


Sna. The fearinge to go into a worser state, for the fear that many have put
you in, by writing of the kingedome of Pluto, where so many sharp punishments
are prepared for such of you as has passed the mark of reason, a little to
satisfy sometime his desires, on the which thing we never think. But if men
thought to end their life, and their troubles at one time, thou should see
things that would make thee marvel, there are so many mo of those among you
that painfully suffer, and are in evil case then those that joy and be in
good case.


Vli. Agesimus, I see thou art so obstinate, that thou will never be ^able to
perceive reason: wherefore I will dispute no more with thee, and chiefly
because I have seen in this last, that thou haste altogether lost thy
knowledge, beginning to doubt of religion, things even conuenyente to a
beast as thou art. And truly I am not a little sorye for thee, yet for the
love I bear unto thee, for that thou art a Gretian, if thou will become manne
again, I will cause the so to do, for Cyrces has granted me so, and then
may thou afterward return with me into thy country.


Sna. No not I, for I pray him to keep me from that, that may for ever.


Vli. See thou not what an unhappy state thine is: and a beast of whom men
make little of?


Sna. And this is the thing that I derely love: for the much making of, that
men make unto beasts, is all for their own profyttes, and to be served in
their needs by them.


Vli. Besides this thou consumest the greter part of thy life unhappily and
under the earth without any pleasure.


Sna. And you sleep the half of yours, and far more vnquietlye then we.


Vli. Then what pleasures have thou? thou eatest nothing but earth, or some
foul beast, and thou drinkest nothing but water.


Sna. What matter is this if I have no desire of any other thing?


Vli. Thou have thy knowledge also imperfecte, and this comes because thy
part imaginatiue, and fantasy, are confused.


Sna. And what know thou hereof?


Vli. I see it by experience, for all you beasts that slide with the body on
the ground, stayinge the former part of you with your scales, and afterward
pluckinge and drawing after the hinder part, when the way croketh unto you,
you go unto an other place. And you return not by the way that you first
went. And of whence comes this, but that you have a confused fantasy, and
such a remembrance as the fly also has, whereby you determine no more unto
one place, the^ unto an other but are guyded by chance?


Sna. In deed I should have a confused fantasy to become manne again: for I
should continually be full of humors and of vain thoughts, where as after
this sort I live contented, and without any thought at al. And I should also
have less remembrance, to be willing to return into a state, full of so
many troubles and myseryes. So that labor no more Ulysses, for I will none of
this thy favor, for it will put me under a thousand infirmities, and I should
never be able to enjoy one desire assuredlye, but rather for every little
surfette, I should feel a thousand sorrows: And that yt is worse, I should
have need to keep my self from death, being subject to meyminge me, and to
live ever after myshapen and sick. So that go on thy way, for I will go to
rub my scales a little on yonder gineper, because I may move it the easelier,
where I shall feel so much pleasure, and delight, that perchance I never proved
the like being man, for that it shall be without respect or any displeasure at
all, whereas youres are ever mingled with such bytternes, that many of you,
speaking thereof have said, a thousand pleasures were not worth one trouble
or tormente.


Vli. In the end I have to do with beasts. And although Circes give them power
to speak and answer me, yet (as me thinks) she has not given them their
wits, for they consider only certain of the least things, and not that
that imports. But yet I will not leave so fair an enterprise, for I will
return unto Circes, that she may cause me to speak to the rest that are
here, to do good unto those that are better able to perceive. For as the
proverb says: evil may be done to one by force, but good never.


The third Dialoge. Ulysses, Cyrces, the Hare.
IF I knew not how great the love were that thou bear me most noble Cyrces,
I should doubt in deed that thou would not grant me the favor that I have
asked of thee. And thou not willing to deny it me, have only caused me to
speak with such as thou know had there mind so determined, not to become
men again, that any man could never persuade them, and so I might leave
thenterprise.

Cir. Let never any such thought enter into thy mind of me Ulysses. For this
apperteineth neither to the love that I bear thee, nor yet to the mightines
and noblenes of my mind, ever given to most glorious enterprises: for thou
knoest well, that he, who can not forbear plesures, can not also do them.


Vli. Thou have caused me to speak with one, who is more obstinate then those
others. And whereas I thought to do him a good torn, in making him return man,
and leding him again into his country, his obstinacy blinds him so much,
yt he says he should do far worse to change that state with this.


Cir. If thou Ulysses had also proved their state, thou would
peradventure do the like.


Vli. This fellow whiles he was man says he was a phisitio^ who as thou
know, never see any other thing then hurtes, griefs, filthiness, and
sicknesses of men, they never here any other thing then lamentations, and
wepinges, whereof he now remembering him self, (because the evil is ever better
kept in mind, then the good) he will not I think become man again.


Cir. In all states of men the troubles and miseries are many mo, then the
contentations, and felicities.


Vli. Then had that our wise man done il, if it were so, who among other
things, for the which he gave daily thanks unto the gods, thanked them, for
that they had made him man, and not a beast.


Cir. He did so, because such is thoppinion of the greater part of men, led by
those reasonnes, that may be gathered by reasonable discourse. But more
credit should be given unto those who having proved the one life and the
other, know it by experience, and by the sensitive knowledge, the which
passes not only and excedeth all others in assurednes, but is also the
beginning and foundation of all.


Vli. Yea, but the life of beasts should not be compared to ours, for that it
is much more imperfecte.


Cir. I believe not this: for I see many beasts, that have their senses far
more perfect then you, and that in operation of them, pass you very far.


Vli. Ye truly they pass us in some particular sense, as for example, the Egle
in seeing, the Dog in smelling, and the Gose in hearing: but they are then so
far inferior unto us in judgment of sensible things, because they have not
the common sense so perfect as we, and that they lack altogether the
reasonable discourse, and ablenes in comparing one sense with an other, for our
sensitive knowledges are far perfecter then theirs. But cause me to speak
with some other, ^or I think not that all have so lost the true knowledge of
resonne, as these three have, to whom I have spoken, whom truly thou have not
changed into such an imperfect kind of beasts, without a cause, sins they
like men have so imperfect a discourse.


Cir. I am contented thou shall speak with yonder Hare, that thou see
feadinge at the shadow of yonder Oak: Go thither and call him, for I have
granted him to speak.


Vli. Hare (as God give thee that that thou desired) run not away, but tarry
me, and withsafe to answer me, for Cyrces has told me, that thou can so do.


Ha. Alas, what means this? I have again the understanding of the
signification of the speech of man: Oh my unhappy chance, why haste thou
brought me again into such misery?


Vli. Call thou it then misery to understand the speech of man?


Ha. Mysery, and most great infelicitie, if they have not changed their
nature, since the time that I was a man.


Vli. And what is the occasion Hare?


Ha. Alas, whiles I was man, I never heard other then lamentyng and sorowinge
most bitterlye one with another.


Vli. Surely, I have avoided one mischief, and am run into another. The Other
was a physician, whereby he never practiced but the sick, and evil contented
persons: and this by as much as I can perceive, should never have practiced but
with desperates.


Ha. These things were often unto me occasion of such sorrow, that I would
far rather have abyden in a wood, where I should never have seen the steps
of men, and truly I would have done it, if the nature of man could have borne
it. But thou know that man has need of so many things, that he can not
live alone, but with a thousand incommodities.


Vli. And do thou hear no beast also lament?


Ha. It is true: For when those of mine own kind have any grief, I know it
straight by the voice: for it is natural to every beast, to show with the
variety of the sound of his voice, whether he be merry or sorry. But these such
natural voices show me only their grief in general: the which kind of
sorowinge, is far easier to be borne, then the sorowinge of man, who, besides
the lamentyng with syghtes and malincolie, and sorrowful accentes, increases
with shewinge his myseries, and the occasion of his grief, much more the
compassion, very often to them that hear it. Alas, I never heard besides the
sightes that he naturallye casts, that is malincolie) other thing spoken
of, then manslaughters, treason, theftes, robberies, and so cruel wickedness,
that one man did to another, that most often times the compassion of others
troubled me more, then the pity of my self.


Vli. Tell me (if it please thee) what state was thine, whiles thou lyuedest man?


Ha. I changed so many, that I can not tell which to tell the. But what moves
the, so to desire, to know what my state was?


Vli. The love that one naturallye bears unto those that are of his Country,
and this has caused me to desire of Cyrces, to restore unto all my Grotians,
the shape shape of man. And for that I understood by her, that thou were one of
them, I would do the this pleasure: because I also am a Gretian, and am called
Ulysses.


Ha. To me thou shall not restore it, if I be not enforsed thereunto.


Vli. Why so? Is it not better to be a man, then a brute beast?


Ha. No, for any thing that I know.


Vli. And art thou then utterly determined, that thou will consume thy life in
this body of a beast?


Ha. That I am: For living thus a beast, I live contented and quiet in my
kind: where as being man, I was never contented in any state.


Vli. But the matter is, whether this were through thine own fault, or not,
and for that thou were so insatiable, that thou could not content thy self
with that that was reasonable?


Ha. I should be in doubt hereof, sauinge for that I never found any man, in
what estate so ever it were (and yet I practiced enough) that was perfectly
contented. But tell me I pray thee: what thing has manne, that should cause
him to live contented? For either he is put by fortune in state where he has
to command and to provide for others: or else he is commanded, and ruled by
others.


Vli In both these states (if he be wise) he may be contented.


Ha. Nay rather in none. For if he be a prince, and Lord, and have to govern
others, if he do as he ought to do, he never has one hour of rest, besides
the crafts, and deceiptes, that he should always fear, because they daily
grow, by the envy that is borne him. Know thou not that a prince holds
in his principality, the place that the most high and mighty GOD holds in
the whole world? Who has with his wisdom to care for all things: whereby
it is commonly said, that all his subjects sleep with the eyes of him. What
pleasure will thou then that he have?


Vli. Most great pleasure, saying them to live Ciuillye, and to love well
one another: because hereof he sees a glory, and honor spring, that makes
him immortal.


Ha. Ye, but where are these Subjects. Are they perchance like us beasts,
who follow that thing only, whereunto nature inclyneth us. See thou not, that
by this never being contented, that man has by nature (as I think) so many
tumultes, so many crafts, and so many ill works spring, that thou can find
no realm at al, where there are not so great hatreds that it should be better
to live in a most sharp and abandaned desert, and amongst the most cruel
beasts that may be found, the^m what well governed realm soever it be amongst
men.


Vli. Say not so, for a good Prince can keep his people under the laws, in
such sort, that these troubles that thou speakeste of, take little place there.


Ha. And how may this be done unto so perverse a nature as man's is, but with
most grievous pains, and with so cruel punyshments, for the fearmge of ill
doers, that they give perchance no less grief to the geuer of them, then to
them that suffer the? if you be not crueller then we be, who dare not offend
one an other of us, being of one kind, nor yet to hurt those of another
kind, if we be not constrained thereunto by hunger, or that we do it, for some
gelosie, or some fear, or for our own sauegarde.


Vli. Truly it can not be denied, that in the places of highest
authority, there are not many mo thoughts, and troubles, then pleasures.
And chiefly in those who love the safegarde of their subjects in such sort
as apperteineth. But let us let this pass, for it chaunseth to few to be a
Prince, let us speak of a private person, who has none other to think on,
then him self and his household.


Ha. Of a pryuate person chau^seth the like: for either he is rich, or he is
poor: amongst the rich think not to find any contented, for the nature of
riches is, to bring so great fear for the keeping them, that the possessoures
of them, have never one only hour, a quiet mind. And one while they are in
fear of wars, or of other misfortunes yt time and the world brings, now
they doubt of their wives, and now of their children, now they fear their
servants.

And finally gold has so many enemies, that who that has thereof, stands
ever in doubt. If he be pore I will say nothing to the thereof, sins there is
nothing on earth more hard to suffer then pouertye,


Vli. I will not yet herein believe thee altogether, because I have heard say,
that many of our wise men, have praised it and loved it much. And there have been of those who to be the more freely able to plai the philosophers, have
despised and cast riches away.


Ha. The greater part of them, and perchaunse all, have done it for ambition,
and to the intent they would be accounted great and rare, among men. And there
are also of those, that have cast away an ounce of gold, to get a pound
thereof again. For the common people have ever this custom, that when they se
one dispyse a thing, then they give it him willinglye.


Vli. Then I see thou wylt have thine own words, I tell the, that I have seen
many, that have lived in poverty most contented, and with most great quyetnes
of mind, and chiefly such as were wise.


Ha. And I tell thee, that they have fained it, doing like wise men, because
they would not have both fortune and the world, laugh at them at once. ^ But
rather I will say more unto the hereof, that by how much the more one is of
knowledge by so much the more his grefe is, to be poor.


Vli. And what is the reason hereof?


Ha. The considering the wrong that fortune has done hyin, in making him
pore, and an infinite number of fools rich.


Vli. Thou causest me now to remember a saying of a friend of mine that said,
that goods did most commonly like the rume, who falls ever in the wekest
place.


Ha. The disdain also that they have, tormenteth them continually, seeing, that
of that that nature has made for all men (for she should do against her order,
if she brought not sufficientlye forth for all men of that, that they neded)
there aduaunseth so much unto one that he makes havoc thereof, and unto an
other there lacks. And this comes only, because he who can do most, will
take most. Where as amongst us it is not so: because none desires, or can
possess any thing that nature has made for us, more then an other.


Vli. Thou would then make good the opinion of those that say, that it is
not ill done to rob, because the goods of this world, has been so many
times stolen, that the true masters thereof, have them no more, but let him
that can get them take them.


Ha. This only is sufficient for thee Ulysses, that poverty is a thing so
sharp and heuye, that men to fly it, abase them selves even to become
servants one with an other, the which is a thing so foul, that among us
beasts there is none so vile, that would not rather suffer death then to put
him self wyllyngly to serve an other of his own kind, to amend his
necessaries. But nature has loved us so much better then she has done you.
For amongst us this infelicitie is not known but rather every one of us, has been made by her of such valor, that he can rule him self.


Vli. Yet there must be some other thing then poverty, that causes men to
become servants one with an other, for many that are rich are seen to do
that.


Ha. Rather they are more poor then thothers, if you well consider it, because
they are poor of noblenes of heart, or else of counsel: by the which they can
not refrain their unjust desire, whereby they seek to get a name, or
authority, or immoderatelye to satisfye their covetous desires, by making
them selves servants to others.


Vli. And he that were in a mean state, in the which he might reasonablye
content him self.


Ha. And where is this state? I for my part never found any man, who said not,
that either he lacked something, or yt he had to much, Although these were most
few, who remembered it, when they saw them selves nygh the end of their life^,
lamentyng the^ of the pains that they had suffered in their youth, to get
goods, to have afterward moughe at their death.


Vli. These are fautes that grow, for the man can not refrain, and measure
his desires, and not of his own proper nature.


Ha. It seems to me al one, sins nature has ordained, that he may desire
those things that are after hurtful and troublesome unto him. The which thing
for that she loved us better, she has not done to us. And I remember that in
that age, in the which I began to have some knowledge, my father who was a
great gentle man of Ethalia, and endued with great riches, putting me under the
keeping of a master, who taught me certain things of the mathematicals
(after the custom of the Gretians) I began to consider, that man knew
nothing, except he were taught it. The which thing in that age seems very
hard, not so much for the difficulty of things, and for the keeping under of
the master, as for the childishe desires, that the same time brings with it:
for I lived very evil contented, and yet I lacked nothing


Vli. Of this age there should be little head taken, because it is most
unperfecte.


Ha. Then following farther, the death of my father chanced, whereby I began to
strive with my brethren for the inheritance, always trusting whiles I was in
these travails, that when they were ended, I should live contented, and in
most quiet rest: but it came all contrary unto me. For as I had my part,
whereof part was possessions, and part money, thoughts increased. And being
used to be governed, me thought it then most great pains to do the same my
self, and others I trusted not. For being enforced for the maintening of my
substance, to practice both with husbandmen, and with merchants, I perceived
that ecke of them, stood continually watchinge, to make that that was mine,
his: for to let a farm unto a husbandman, is nothing else then to be
partener with a thief. And to put thy goods unto a merchant, to trade with
one that thinks to deceive thee of them. And notwithstanding, I marked that
neither of them was contented with his state, and they did never other then
lamente continually, the one of the earth that yielded not, for the evil
disposition of the wether, and of the little estimation they were had in. And
the other of evil wyndes, of ill fortune, of the small safety of the sea, and
of the discord of Princes, that let^eth the exercise of marchaundyse.


Vli. Every body must have something to trouble him, even you also have some
things yt trouble you.


Ha. Ye but for every one that we have, you have a thousand. But hear the
rest a little, in this mean seasonne, both for the necessities that chance
to the life of man, and for to defend me that mine own were not taken from me
(for all men are thieves, but their means of robbing are diverse) I had to
practyse with an infinite number of crafts men, of men of law, and procters,
and be thou assured that I never found any one of those craftesmen that lived
contented: for all they holding their eyes on the rich, lamente that they must
get their bread. And among those other advocates, and men of law they
complained of the like, for all they lamented daily, that had to strive and
contend, to procure them the things that were necessary to the life of man.


Vli. Whosoever has to do with the, shall sone repent it: but it is little
trouble to the^, always to strive for other men's gooddes.


Ha. He that troubles others rests not in quiet him self.

Thou considerest not also the hatred they get thereby, and how much they are
abhorred, when they are not neded, and in what sort they are taken.


Vli. This is very true, that I remember, disputinge once in one of our
universities of Grecia, it was in question who should goo before in the first
place, either men of law, or physicians, and it was concluded that the man of
law should go before, only by this example, that when execution is commanded
to be done, the thief goes before, and the hangeman comes after.


Ha. And when I saw the evil contentation of all these states, and desiring
to avoid the same, I thought that if I should find quietness in any state, it
should be in the state of our priests, who taking them selves from the world,
abide in those their congregations to serve the gods, holding all in common,
and suffering them selves to be ruled by one of their own sort. And so
sastening my self to this, I determined to leave the world, and to go live in
one of those congregations. The which purpose I cold not long observe, for even
as I began to lene a little unto the^, I smelt the savors of their discordes,
and infelicities, and how every one of them, seking by all means (although
unjust) to be chief, betrayed and hurted thothers. I perceived also the
displeasures that they took, for that they had to keep those obediences, to
maintain them universally in the estimation of goodness, the which brings
them wherewith to live: the trouble also and werynes that the shetting in is
unto them, the pains they take to persuade men that they are more friends of
the gods, then they who served the world, with those laws only that God
and nature, have given us. So that I fled so far with my mind from them, that
I never remembered them more. Then I thought to live like a gentleman, attending
to braueries, and passinge the time in hawkinge and huntinge, and in such like
pleasures.


Vli. If thou sought this state to have found quietness there, I can tell thee,
that thou wentest far out of the way, and much more also in feats of arms.
For in these two lives, the which I my self have proved, I know very well, there
is none that lives contented.


Ha. For that I thought I should find no quietness in war, I would not prove
it. And besides this, I thought it a folishnes, not fightyng for ones country,
or for his honestye, or for some other lawful cause to fell his own life for
any kind of hyer. For sins we have but once to come into this world, me
thinks that as much gold as ever nature made, or shall make, could not pay
for the life of one man. Then also perseyuing that to live like a gentleman,
there neded a multitude of servants, who are all our enemies, and daily do
things whereby a thousand^ displeasures grow unto us, thinking it a most hard
thing to find contentation there, I changed my mind from that holely. And
finally thinking in serving a Prince, not in handy crafts, but in honorable
affairs, to find some contentation of mind, I determined with the little
lerning I had, to setle me to that practice, where, by and by I found the
contrary of that that I thought. For besides the pains that it is to serve a
Prince, and the troubles that in such service are suffered, not being able
either to sleep or eat in due season, the which are even things that preserve
our life, the envy yt reigns in courts, and thunkindnes that seems to be in
princes toward those that serve them, (who think themselves never justly
rewarded) without they would give them their hole kingdom, suffered me never
to rest my mind, to live one only hour contented. Whereby I was desperate and
gave my self to sailing, and so there where I thought not, I found my
quietness. For being carried by fortune into this Island, I was changed by
Cyrces as thou see, into an hare, the which was as it might be to you, to be
fallen into a most plesaunt sleep. For although I know not so much as I know
when I was a man, so am I not also in so much fear.


Vli. Yea, because thou art a beast that fears not?


Ha. I fear not those of mine own kind, as you do, the which is sufficient
for me. Of other things I have no care, thinkinge that thereunto is no defense,
as you also do, of the anger of the gods.


Vli. It is very true, that in all these states, these troubles are as thou
say, and paraduenture many mo. But then of the pleasures that be there, thou
talkest nothing at all.


Ha. And what pleasures have men, in what state soever it be, that the grief
that they bring at the end, is not greater then the pleasure? Know thou not
that our most ancient Greek Poet said: that the pleasure of this world was
not the true pleasure, but was sorrow, clothed in pleasures garments?


Vli. How showed he this?


Ha. He said, that when the vessel that Pandora brought on earth, was opened,
whereby all the myschiefes and human myseries went forth, that then
pleasure went forth also. And goinge abroad in the world, he began by
means to draw men unto him, who began to follow him in such sort, that
none went any more to heaven. Where* self at the end: For though one win as
much money, as he lad lost at another time, yet makes he not at all times, the
like full sum. And thus all they that use it, do ill.


Vli. I allow not this opinion: for I have seen many that have nothing, live
thereby.


Ha. Yea, when they have bestowed thereat, all that they had: For play
properly does as the wie does, who cleauynge fast to a good wall, never
rests until he have brought it to ruin, and then when it is even fallinge,
he holds it up. So likewise play, when it fastneth on one that has ought,
it does so that it undoes him, and after when he has no more, it sustayneth
him. For practisinge where there is play, fawning and flattering him that
wynneth, he pycketh out a living most vyl^lye there, the best way he may.
But believe me Ulysses: play is one of the greatest infelicities, that is given
unto the misfortune of man. And perchance this wicked cursed plague, has
not takenne all the world in such sort^, that the greater part of men,
settinge aparte all laudable and honest enterpryses, do nothing else but play.
And there are some who drown them selves therein, and there lose the light of
reason in such wise, that they forgette their honesty, their own health, their
goods, their wife, their children, their friends, and finally their own selves,
and consumyng therein the things necessary for their living, bring them selves
into so shameful a poverty, that they fly the sight of men, more then we the
sight of dogs, and chiefly the sight of those that knew the^, when they were
in better state: and yet they never cease to ymagine, how they may get any
little monye, to go play it, and rather suffer the want of things that they
have need of. Therefore mark Ulysses the pleasurs that me^ have. Seem they not
unto the rather to be sorrows?


Vli. Hare, all are not of this sort, and man is no more enforced to this
thing then to another. And besides this, he may by his wisdom remedy all that, that causes his displeasure.


Ha. Ye but how hardelye, since all the world is so corrupt and naught? So
that persuade me no more to change this being with youres: for I will not
return out of a state wherein I never found any thought at all, to go into
an other where I never was contented, and where I shall see that thing that
nature has made commune for every body, to be taken from me, by him that may
do more then I, whereby I must by force become his servant, and must receive
for hyer of my service, that thing nigardlye, that nature has freely given me:
and where all those delytes that I take, must at the end bring me sorrow.


Vli. I will not that thou speak so obstinately. See thou not how vile a
beast thou art? and of so little knowledge, that thou know not whether thou
be male or female.


Ha. Nay you know it not, that think to know al things so well, but we
know it well enough.


Vli. Thou have fear of every thing, and have trust only in runnyng away,
and yet art thou afterward taken by many kinds of beasts.


Ha. And what is that to me, if my kind be of that nature?


Vli. Thou art of so little life, that every most small hurt, kylleth thee.


Ha. Alas no more I pray thee, for thou would so do, that A should think
it most miserable. Whereas for not knowinge so many things as you do, I think
it most happy. But go seek to do this benefyt to some others, for I for my
part will none of it, and following mine own nature without any thought, I
will go feed me on yonder fair grene grass that thou seeste on yonder hill.


Vli. My Hare, me thinks thou do like him, who being put into prison by
certain his creditours, prayed the^ they would not take him out from thence,
saying: that out of prison he had a thousand thoughts, both for him self,
and for others, and there being provided for, by such as were wont to provide,
he had not one thought in the world: so that he thought it a goodlye
habitation for him, and this came all of the weakness of his mind. For if he
had been a man in deed, he would rather have been a poor man abroad, then a
rich man in prison, helping manfullye with his wisdom all that he said.
So also thou by as much as I can perceive by thy words, should be so
insatiable a man, and should so much esteem every little trouble, because
thou could not boldly show thy face against those displeasures that the
world and fortune bring, that thou will rather remain in that vile state of
a beast, then to return man. And knowing thee so, I will even suffer thee so
to remain: for in doing otherwise, I should do that that should dysplese
the, although it were for thy profyt, and that should rather bring shame to
our kind then honor, as all those other men do that are like to thee.


Ha. I would aunsuere this thy dyscoure Ulysses, but like as we can not eat
more then our need requires, being deteyned from it by our own nature: so are
we also enforced when we have neade thereof, and have conueniente feeding
nyghe us.

And therefore syns I have seen the grass yonder on the fair hill against us,
and am hungry, I am enforced to leave thee.


The fourth Dialoge. Ulysses, Circes, the Got.
I Have always thought most noble Circes, that there was a difference between
one man, and an other: as it is daily said by proverb, by the mouths of our
Gretyans: but yet not so great dyfference as I have known syns I spoke with
yonder Hare that thou saw, or to say better with him whom thou haste
transfourmed into a Hare.

Cir. And why so? will he peradventure become man again?


Vli. Nay rather, much less then thothers, and he has it in more hatred.


Cir. See thou then how far thou art deceived to lamente thee unto me,
that I changed them so into beasts?


Vli. And I do yet lamente, because I am still of the selte same opinion, and
this is, for that I know plainly, that his ferefulnes and little courage, will
not suffer him to know the truth. See thou not that he is so weke hearted by
nature, that he has so much fere of every little adversity, that he would
rather choose to live in every most vile bondage without thoughts, the^ in
any honest degree, with those difficulties that the same brings with it.


Cir. Who assures thee hereof?


Vli. He him self, who will rather remain so a beast, then return man, for
the many troubles, that he thinks men have. And yet the confesses,
remaining so, to be in such bondage to nature, and led by her by force that he
is not master of his own operations. Whereby the desire to eat, coming on
him whiles we were reasonyng together, and saying certain grass, yt was
convenient meat for him, he departed from me with a very ill will, for that he
had not yet answered me after his own mind, saying that he could not choose
but go feed, for so his nature enforced him to do. So that se what a week
hearted manne he was, that would rather live in a servitude, and in a like
state, because he thought there were somewhat fewer displeasures: then to
return man, and to be master of his own passions, though he must somewhat
strive with them: as perchance thou have heard say, how many there have been
of our Gretians, who to avoid some bondage, or enforcemente, have not only
not cared to strive with the world, and with fortune, but also not to pardon
even their own lives.


Cir. This that thou call bondage in him, or enforcemente, is unto him
neither the one nor the other.


Vli. And why so?


Cir. Because his nature requires so. Tell me I pray thee, when a stone
falls down, does he it by force?


Vli. I think not.


Cir. Therefore he can do none otherwise.


Vli. It is true: but his nature requires so, and that motion that causethe
him to good toward the center, coming of an inner power, the which is within
the same, called nature, must be natural to him, and not violente: because
the violente motions are those that come be an outward power. And therefore,
although he can do none otherwise: yet it can not be said that he is enforced.


Cir. He is yet drawn down by force of his heauynes.


Vli. No, not by force, but by nature, being natural unto him to be weighty:
for if he were not so weightye, he should not be a stone.


Cir. And so it is also with the affection of beasts, when it is led by
nature: and therefore it can not be called enforcement, since she does always
the best for them, as she does in all other things: and that that is need to
their conservation and perfection.


Vli. And were it not better for them not to be so guyded by her, and ^ble to
do there operations more freely?


Cir. No, for that they have not the knowledge and the dyscourse of reason. For
they should often err, whereas being guyded by her that can not err, they
never or very seldom fail.


Vli. And what certeyntye haste thou thereof?


Cir. Experience that I see daily, being conuersaunte after a certain sort,
with all the kinds of them (for of them al, there is some one in this mine
Iselande (where I see that none eats more, then he neadeth of, nor of any
thing that is not fytte for him, neither does he any other dysorder at all:
whereby all they, that time that nature has appointed them to live, although
it be less then that that she has given to man, live in health and lustye,
the which is not so with you.


Vli. If they do no dysorder at all, whereof then comes it, that they have
shorter life then we?


Cir. Of the complexion, the which was not given by nature to them, so
temperate as to us: and by the moisture, whereof the natural heat is fed,
whereby life is maynteyned: the which moisture was given to them by nature,
more wateryshe, and less ayryshe, then ours, whereby it is more easelye
corrupt. I speak of the greater part, for there are some that live far
longer then man, as the Heart and the Elephante.


Vli. Art^ thou then of the opinion, yt it is better to be a beast then a man?


Cir. I will not determine this matter, nor thou shouldeste not also think,
that I believe it: for then I should have changed my self into a beast. as I
have done them. But if I should say as thou say, our talk were at an end:
it should well suffice the, that I had granted the, to turn into men again,
al those that would. And though thou have not yet chaunsed on any that will,
be not yet abashed, but seek farther, for thou shalt^ well enough find some
one that will.


Vli. I will even do so: For I should think it to much shame, to have
proved this so worthy an enterprise in vain.


Cir. Go then and speak with the Goat that thou seeste yonder feedinge: for
he also (as I well remember) was a Gretian.


Vli. Goat, O Got, harken I pray thee, if thou be a Gretian as Circes has
told me.


Go. A Gretian I was whiles I was man, and my name was Cleomenes of Corinthe:
but now am I not, neither yet would I be.


Vli. What, art thou perchance ashamed of thy contrye?


Go. Not so: For there is none peradventure more honorable then that, in all
the world.


Vli. What is that then, that thou wouldeste not.


Go. Become man again. And of this I have only fear, I live so far better
contented thus then I did whiles I was manne.


Vli. I would even have offered the this benefit, thynkyng to have done thee no
small good turn, to restore thee, the figure of man, and to take the out of
this bondage, and to lead thee again to thine own country.


Go. I thank the of thy good will toward me: but if this should happen to
me, it would follow otherwise then thou thynkest.


Vli. Why, what is the cause Cleomenes? I have ever hard say by your wise men
of Gretia, that man is the most perfect and most noble creature that is in all
the world. Ye, rather he is in certain wise, the end and lord of al others.


Go. Truly they did also like wise men to say so: for one should ever praise
his own, and say that that a man knows.


V. And therefore what state is thine? and what felicity have thou, that thou
will rather live thus a beast, then to return man?


Go. If I should reckon the commodities to the that we beasts have, thou
would not think them commodities, nor yet ever sholdest thou be able to
understand them, even also as you can not comprehend the felicity that you
look after in this life, or in the other: for that the wit of man, is to
curiouse and insatiable. But I will tell thee a part of those euyls that we
avoid, who are such, that if thou taste them all well, thou would bear
such envy toward us, as thou think we should bear toward you.


Vli. Go to then, and tell me this at the least.


Go. There are many myseryes and euyls, that man is subject unto: and that
are occasyons that I will thus remain a beast. But it is not possible that I
should reason of the^ al, for time will not serve: for being somewhat fed, by
mature, who has no respect to any other thing then to my conservation,
provoke me to take my rest: and somewhat to sleep under the shadow of some
of these trees.


Vli. Tell me at the least for the satisfying of my mind. some one of the
principal euylles.


Go.. I am content. Know Ulysses that man among other his infelicities and
miseryes, has four, each one of the which only (when I have it in
remembrance) causes me to desyer rather to be, what vile beast soever it
were, then man.


Vli. And what are those got?


Go. The small assurance that he always has in his mind, of things to
come, the suspicion he has of them of his own kind with whom he is enforced
to be continually conuersaunte, and the fear, and respect of the laws.


Vli. Thou thynkest on to many things.


Go. And the chief thing is, to be able to avoid the not thinking on them.
Tell me a little, beginning at the first: what suertye has man at any time, to
be able peaceably to enjoy one only hour, the things present? spekyng
first of the common sort, who are in the hands of fortune: whom every one
knows, how varyable and slypper she is: and afterward under the power of
Princes, whoo have only their will for law: and the will of man (as thou
know) is most insaciable.


Vli. In this thou say true: yet he that is wise, does accommodate him
self to the will of the one, and to the commandment of the other.


Go. If we will speak then of that, that is our own: who is he that can
promise him self the possession thereof for one only day freely? for that men
are waren so covetous, since thine and mine came into the world, that every man
continually watches, to think in what sort, as well lawful as unlawful, he may
make him self rich, and an other man poor.


Vli. Truly men lay many more snares for them selves, then they do for you.


Go. Of the continual fear ye have, least princes take them from you, either
by wars, or by a thousand other means, I will say no more, but that I have
seen men, who have been in such fear, least the riches they have had, should
have bin taken from them, that they have not used them: but shewinge them
selves poor, and living myserably, have ever kept them hydden, whereby they
have not had any more commoditye by them, having them, then they that had
them not: but have rather had this more, the thought to keep them.


Vli. I will not that thou speak of couetusnes: for this is a vice that
causes men to go so far besides them selves, that they become not only
the enemies of others, but also of them selves.


Go. I will not reason of the fear then that ye have of thieves, of
servants, and of thine own wife, and chefely if she be younger then thou, it
suffiseth that none of these infelicities has any place amongst us, for we
know not fortune, and not having any dyfference between thine and mine, but
possessinge every thing in common, one of us seeks not to rob an other. And
we having among us no superiority at all (because al we of one kind are of
like power) fear less, that our own be taken from us, by him that has more
strength then we, whereby we should be caused to hyde it.


Vli. I know that these things, are occasions of many thoughts to men, but
he that holds his affection under the rule of reason, auoideth the most part
of them.


Go. And how shall he wyllynglye obey it, that always spurneth again?


Vli. Thou know that vyctorie is never gotten without travel.


Go. Ye as you say, that ever feed your selves with fair words. Come then to
the second: what beast is he, besides man, that fears of things that are
not present?


Vli. And what fear has man thereof?


Go. So great, that he always lives in thoughts. For if he see the wether
wax cloudye, he begins to fear, least the harvest should be evil. Then
if he hear thunder or see lightening, he is in such fear of the thunder
stones, that he not only makes vows to the Gods, but there have also been
of those, that have fled into caves under the earth, (because it is said,
that they go but five foot under the earth) or that have covered them selves
with the skin of a Seall, thinkyng that this fyshe only, is never touched
with the thunder stone.


Vli. And how many are there that have any such fear of like things?


Go. They that fear not these, fear other things. How many are there among
you, that fear so much^ to be sick, that it can not be said, they are at any
time in health: not vsyng that liberty that health grants to others in
not byndyng them selves to any law: whereby they never eat of any thing that
pleases them so much as their appetyte requires, neither dare they do any
things out of that order, that they have of long^ time used: and if they see
the seasonne to change any thing from his wonted use, either with heat or
with cold, they are so af^rde, that they alter their humors in such sort,
that afterward they feale them selves very evil.


Vli. These are so fereful men, that every most little thing troubles them.


Go. And they that are bolder, either they live but a while, or else they weaken
their nature so much, that as their youth is paste, there appear^ on them a
thousand euylles: or at the least remembryng the dysorders they hau^ done,
they are in continual suspicion.


Vli. And does not this also happen unto you?


Go, No: for we always live with one self rule, the which nature has given
us. But then come to the suspicion that you have, to be forsaken when you are
sick, and to lack that governance that is necessary for you, because you
have need of so many things: or that your substance peryshe not, whereby
after you should live with pains and hardely, when you were recovered. The
which things are not among us, never being sick in such sort, but that we
can govern our selves though we have nothing yt is in property to any one
of us.


Vli. And yet there are some of those amongst you beasts, who for the
prickinge of a thorn, or for some other chaunses, had need to be helped by us.


Go. There are so few of those, that they can make no number. And then, of the
fear of death that you have, the which fear we have not, what can thou say
to me?


Vli. Have not you also fere of death?


Go. No, if it be not present to us, or begin to feel the torment thereof:
where as to you, the only thinkinge on it, or the knowing the determinate
time, bring you so much sorrow, that there have been of those, who to be
rydde from such passion, have killed them selves with their own hands, but
let us let this pass and come to the care, and thought, that you have of
things to come. Alas what an infelicitie is yours? not only to take thought
for those things whereof you have need from day to day, but also for those
that you shall have need of, a year or two to come, and yet you must provide
them, and take after continual head to the^.


Vli. So that there is not likewise peradventure among you beasts that do the
like?


Go. And who are they?


Vli. The Pysmare whoo lays up in summer, wherewith to live in winter.


Go. It is true, but this is not, for that she has any fear, that she should
lack at that time, whereof to feed her, by scarsitie, or any other such
occasion, as you do when you provide you for the time to comme, but because she
can not suffer the cold of the winter (for then she never comes from under
the ground) she carries her meat thither, where she has to abide: and she is
led to the doing thereof by nature, and not by fear, that she should not
always find ready on the earth, all that that she neded. For how will thou
that we think on that that is to come, who neither know time, nor yet the
parts thereof?


Vli. know not ye the time, and there are so many of you, who every year,
when the spring time comes, or the faule of the leaf, change countries as
the swalewes, and thrus shes: and that hyde them under the earth, as the snakes
and badgers, and so many others?


Go. This is not for knowinge the time, but by feling before, the differences
thereof: rather I will say further to thee, that we not only know the time,
but also not the mouinge of the heaven, which is his subject, but we only feel
ye differences of the seasons, that it causes on earth, sometime bringing heat,
and sometime cold, sometime wind, and sometime rain, and such natural
varieties. And these we know so much before, and better then you, that you
take often occasions by us, to pronosticat: and know thou how this knowledge
comes to us? because we not having our fantasy full of a thousand toys, as
you always have, feel every little change of time, the which is not so with
you.


Vli. But call thou the knowing of time infelicitie?


Go. Most great infelicitie, because he (or to say better) ye moving whereupon
he is founded, is the occasion of every change, and finally that that is
worse, the occasion of your corruption: whereby you that know it, se death
always before you, and you reckon ye owres, one by one, and you ar ever
thinking, on that, yt from time to time you shall have need of: the which is
not so to us, who live by the benefit of nature: but what will thou more? your
folly is so great, yt you take thought also for that that must follow after
your death.


Vli. This is done to leave all things ordained in such sort, that our
children, who are part of us, may after lead their life ye more quietly.


Go. Of these things yt are of weight, it should be a pleasure: but you think
also of those that are of no weight.


Vli. And what are those?


Go. Even of your grave, and as though the earth were not the universal
mother of all men and yt every man had not his part thereof, you bye it of your
prests, and he among you yt had no monye, should be left in pray to us
beasts.


Vli. I will not that we reason of this matter, for these things are ordained
to the benefit of some one of us, and they belong not in general to the kind.


Go. Go to, let us pass to the other, the which is, the fear that ye have
one of an other, the which thing is not among us. For thou see no beast of
one kind, that is naturallye enemy to the other of the same kind, but by
some chance, as by love, hungar, gelosye, and such like, and yet this very
seldom.


Vli. Neither are we enemies naturally one to the other.


Go. No, but the vnsacietie of your desires, has turned it into nature.

For that quantity suffisinge none of you, wherewith nature would be contented,
the one of you seeks to take from the other that that he has. And hereby so
many wars grow among you, so many desolations of cities, so many robbynges
of countries, so many slaughters of people, so many treasons, so many
theftes, and even to poisoning the one the other of you, a thing that never
any of us was seen do.


Vli. He that will, may well remedy all these things.


Go. And after what sort?


Vli. By contenting him self with little, and to live of him self, separate
from others.


Go. The first you may perchance do, but not the other, without your most
great trouble. For you have need of so many things, that there is none, who of
him self can provide all things for him self, wherefore you must of
necessity dwell together with others. For the which thing cities were invented
by you, where you, dwelling comn^odiously together, might provide the one for
the others need: and because you might bring this to the better end, one not
having always need, of those things that an other has, who has need of his,
you also invented money, truly a most goodly means, and very convenient for
the commutation of things. But because he brings so many commodities to your
living, you love it so far out of order, that it is no less occasion of evil
then it is of good, for by your continual seking the one to take it from the other.
so many mischieues grow among you, that you can never practice one hour
together safely, or without some suspicion.


Vli I will not deny, that this making difference between thine, and mine, is
not the occasion of many evils, and of much hatred, the which can not happen to
you, who have all things in common. Notwithstanding, we against this have
frendshippe among us, whereof there can be nothing found in the world, either
more profitable, or more pleasant: by means werof we make common, not only
outward things, but also the thoughts, the griefs, the felicities, and
every other thing.


Go. Is there not also friendship among us, and not only amongst those of one
like kind, but also amongst those of diverse kinds, as the turtle doves and
the popingaye, the pecockes, and the pigion, the red dear and the falow, and
many others?


Vli. No: for true frendshippe comes of the good, and the honest: and you
know neither the one nor the other. And therefore the frendshippes that are among
ill persons, ordained to some noughty pur pose, or that grow by profit, or
beauty, rather are called practices, and co^rations, then frendshippes. So
that yours are rather natural inclinations. And besides this, friendship should
be voluntarye, and by election, the which thing you can not do.


Go. And yet if true friendship be not among us, neither is there flattery,
as there is amongst you: the which perchance hurts no less the^ friendship
helps.


Vli. But we can know that, by the means of the discourse of reason.


Go. And by what means, sins the flatterer is so like to the friend: and
besides this, flattery pleasing you so much, that it will not suffer you to
perceive the truth?


Vli. Truly, both for the pleasure that it is to be praised, and for the self
nature of the thing it is no small difficulty to know who are flatterers,
and who are true friends, being as well the duty of a true friend to please, as
of a flatterer: saving yet that all flatterers in adversity, forsake thee by
and by, and friends not (but it is a great matter to know only that one is thy
friend, when thou have need of him: notwithstanding, be that considers well,
shall easily know him.


Go. And which way, tell me I pray thee?


Vli. There are many things, whereby a friend may be known from a flatterer,
but these are the principal. The flatterer does always accomodate him self,
to the conditions of him that he flattereth: doing as he does, and changing
also as he changes, and saying that, that is the very right way to live:
where as the friend always follows his own purpose, and does not acco^modate
him self to any other thing then to the good. Wherefore the flaterer is likenned
to a shadow, the which al? ways follows the body, ever doing as he does:
and a friend in the light that shines above all things, always without
spotting it self. Besides this also, the flatterer prayseth all that ever thou
do: and the friend only that that is good. The flatterer in all doings that
are, or seem good, does give the chief place and excuses thee in vice, and
bur^eneth him self: and finally, he never seeks any other thing, then to
content others, as well in ill, as in good: the which a friend never does, who
would not please thee, but in as much as honesty requires.


Go. Well, when all that thou say were true, yet there is one other thing,
that does cause me, that I will not in any wise return man, and that is this:
the fear of the laws, and of the punishments ordained by them.


Vli. Then do thou think, that to have laws, is an evil thing to man?


Go. No, but to have need of them is evil: for hereby the imperfection and
weakness of your nature is seen. See thou not that you have so many
immoderate desires, and against your own wealth and profit, and you are so
much ledd by them, that the light of reason is not sufficient to teach you to
avoid them: but you are enforced to make an infinite multitude of laws, to
draw you from them by punishment, and by fear?


Vli. Ye, this is to the ill sort, but the good, doing that that is convenient
for them, for virtues sake, have not only no fear of the laws, but also also
they know them not.


Go. And how many are there of these? could they be reckned without often
repeting the beginning of the number? And if you were all so, what an
unquietness bread in your mind, the continual care and warenes, that you must
have in holding the bridell of reason to your senses, that they carry you not
out of the right path of the same.


Vli This is made a custom: and of accustomed things, (as thou know) there
grow no passions at all.


Go And what pains must you suffer, before you have made it, sins you have
always by nature, greatest desire of that that is most forbidden you? Where as
to us it happens not so, who having no desire inconvenient to our nature, can
avoid them all, where and when it pleases us, without respect, or any fear,
not only of punishment, but also of shame, the which is among you a burden of
no small weight.


Vli. Ye host you then much hereof, for in very deed it is a thing worthy
praise, not only to have no fear of the laws, but also not to fear shame.


Go. And what fault have we of this, sins we know it not? So that let us not
talk of those things that come not under our knowledge. Let this finally
suffice thee, that the liberty that I einoye in this state, is so pleasant to
me (in respect of the multitude of bondages that you have, of the greater part
whereof, your folly, and ambition, are thoccasions, that have bound your hands
to many things whereunto nature had set them at liberty) that not only I
will not return man, but also I will not practice among them. Knowing that
you bynd not your selves only to these your laws, but also all those beasts,
of whom you are served, and that live familierly with you: for you have
ordained that they be kept, to satisfye with their own bodies, those hurtes
that they should do to any other, blaming^ them even for their going to feed
them in other men's fields: for the which thing you your selves ought to be
punished, for that you have made those things particular, by the means of
thine and mine, that nature had given to you in common. The which thing has
caused that you can not company safe togethers, as we do. And you are
continually aferde, to lose that that you have, or to run into some after
myschiefe. So that enjoy thou this your state so unhappily, and full of so many
miseries, for I will spend that little life that auaunceth me, in this state,
without fear of death, or of any other thing.


()

The fifte Dialogue. Ulysses, Circes, the Hynde.
ALthough truth (as the proverb is) most dear Circes, seem often times to
breed some hatred in the minds of those to whom it is spoken: yet I know that
it so much displeases a noble heart, to have one thing in the mouth, and an
other in the breast, that I will take courage to speak frelye, although I
should perchance in some part doubt, to offend thee.

Cir. Speak on freely, all that thou will, most worthy Ulysses, for there is
nothing more friend to gentle minds, then the truth.


Vli. I doubt, that thou have not restored to them with whom I have spoken, the
power holely to discourse, as thou have done the speech, according as thou
promisedst me, I have found them so far distaunt from the truth: and if
this were so, I should think thou had much deceyned me. For there is none
of the that judges it not better, to be a beast then a man, the which I would
never believe they would say, if they could use reason truly.


Cir. Truly thou should have reason to think I had deceived thee, if I
had so done. For those things should never be promised, that one either would
not, or could not do: For the one comes of noughtincs, and the other of
foolyshnes. And therefore know thou Ulysses, that whiles thou spakest with
them, they had the self same knowledge, that they had whiles they were men.


Vli. And how do they then not know so manifest an error, and chiefly sins
I have so told them the truth?


Cir. They have found perchance so many commodities, and so many pleasures in
that life, not known by us: that it is no meruell. But go and follow thine
enterprise, for peradventure all shall not be of this sort, fear no kind of
beast that thou meatest: for every one of them have been men, so that none of
them would hurt thee.


Vli. Our wise men of Gretia are wont to say, that they, who can be
counseled by them selves, to live well and honestly, are put in the first
degree of virtue. And they that can not of them selves, but believe the counsel
of those who are wiser then they, are put in the second degree: but he that can
not of him self, nor yet will take counsel of others, is thought by them not
worthy to be numbered among men. And of this sort are they with whom I have
spoken: So that it is no marvel, though they will not become men again, but
I, that have more knowledge then they, knowinge that it is the very duty of
man to help others, should not yet herefore cease to seek to do this good, to
those that are worthy thereof. Yonder is a fair herd of dear I will se, if
there be any Gretian among the^. Tell me dear, as ye heavens give you that that
you most desire, is there any Gretian here among you?


Hi. O thanked be the gods, that I understand the voice of man: and can
speak as I was wont.


Vli. I have perchaunse happened on one that has not lost the understanding,
as thothers had, with who^ I have reasoned, sins he thus thanketh the goods to
understand the words of man: and to be able to speak as we can.


Hyn. Art thou a Gretian that do ask us this?


Vli. Ye I am, and my name is Ulysses.


Hyn. And I likewise was of Gretia, but I was a woman, before I was thus
changed by Circes into an hynde.


Vli. O* if I have to do with women, whoo as it is wont to be said, take
always the worse part, I shall be even al at one point. Notwithstanding I
shall be far the better satisfied to have spoken with each kind.


Hi. But what is thoccasion Ulysses, that thou go thus sekinge, if here be
any Gretian? and tell me also if thou can (as the gooddes always help
thee) how it chances that I understand thee, and can reason with thee, the
which sins I was an hynde, never chau^sed to me with any other.


Vli. Acknowledge thanks to me for this, for I, by my request, have obtained
of Circes, for the love I dear to my Gretians, license to speak with you all,
and besides this, to make all those that will, to return into their former
state, and to lead them with me to their own country, and thou art one to
whom I will do this benefit, if thou will it. So that tell me thy mind
frelie: but hear thou? Se thou answer me quickly: for you women, when you
bethink you over much on things, you drown your selves therein, by the
means of the little discourse and small understanding that you have, whereby
those aunswers are only praised in you, yt you make quickelye.


Hyn. No: lo there is a quick answer.


Vli. But this shall be none of the praised answers, though it be quick.


Hin. And why so?


Vli. Because it is all out of reason.


Hin. I will not that thou say so Ulysses, for I have very good reason to say
no.


Vlis. Then tell me why, or else I should not think my self satisfied.


Hin. Thynkest thou not that I have reason, that I will not be restored into my
former being, who (as I have told thee) was a woman?


Vli. No, for yet thou should be a reasonable creature: whose state I see
thou much estemest, and thynkest better then the state of any beast, sins thou
thankedst so much the Gods, for that ^thou had power to speak again,
the which is only appropriat to man.


Hyn. Alas the being a reasonable creature is not the cause that I will not
return into my former state: but yt I must become a woman again, as I have
told thee, for that women be so much despised by you, that there have been of
those wise men among you, that have been bold to affirm, that we are not of
your kind, and others have said, that the female is a male occasioned: the
which means nothing else, then a thing made by nature, contrary to her
purpose, either for imperfection of the sede or for defaulte of the matter. The
which thing how far it is contrary to the very order of nature, may well be
manifest to every man, for that we also are as necessary to your generation, as
your selves: and afterward that thing, that is borne of us* is able to
engender the like to it self: the which they that are borne of two divorce
kinds can not do: as may be seen by experience in Mules, who are borne of an
horse and an Ass.


Vli. Have thou so much philosophye?


Hy. Marvel not thereat Ulysses, for my husband was an excellent philosopher,
whereby I also was enforced, keeping conversation with him, to learn somewhat
therof^and besides this thou know, that philosophye is to manne almost
natural.


Vli. And yet have thou not known how to remedy one of the principal
defectes, that the being a woman brings with it?


Hy. Why what is that?


Vli. The desire to chatter, that can do so much in thee, that thou desire
not to return into a woman, but only to have the talking again, thanking, as
thou did even now, the Gods, for that thou had the power a gain to
speak.


Hi. And think thou not that I have reason thereof, sins you keep women for
slaves, and for servants and not for companions (as right requires) a thing
so wicked and so far against the order of nature, that none other be asked but
you, dar do it? Seek a little among what kind of bestes thou will, and you shall
find among none but yt ye femal is a co^panio^ and no servant to the male,
as well in pleasures as in pains, except in the kind of man* who will be called
Lord over all, whereas he is a most evil and an unjust tyrant, to handle his
companion in such sort, only for that he sees she was made by nature
somewhat of less strength and courage then he was.


Vli. And what do we to you, that you have so great cause to complain.


Hy. Hear thou it not? first you keep us for your bound servants.


Vli. Oh, say not so, for thou do us wrong: but say for companions, and
thou shalt say well.


Hy. Is she called a companion, where the one is always bound, and the other
a master: and peradventure (the which is worse) we must not bye this bondage
by weight of gold? sins you have found this goodlye law that when one of us
will company with you, (to say after your own minds) she must give you
money.


Vli. We invented this only for your profitte.


Hy. Judge it thou, whether to pay them that command us, be for our profit,
where others pay them that obey them. But tell me after what sort this custom
was brought in by you for our profit?


Vli. Because knowing that through your little spirit and small wisdom, you
could not keep your substance, it was thought that the same part of riches,
that your fathers or brothers give you, should be given by you to your
husbands, not because they be masters thereof, but as your takers head thereof,
they keep it for you, because you at any time remaininge sole, may have
wherewith to live. And mark how after their deaths, you may always ask it:
the which is clean contrary to that that thou layest, for it is all to the
hurt of your husbands, and of their substance. And it should be rather used,
and so right would, that the husband when he marieth a wife, should on the other
part bring as much money with him, as the wife gives her for his ioynter, and
after they should both spend in common, as long as it lasted, and then every
one provide for him self. For in deed it is not very good for us, that we
attend always to get abroad, and you to consume at home. And then at our
death, destruction and spoil to be made only of our goods


Hi. Our gaynes in the house are far greater Ulysses, then yours abroad: and
to prove this true, thou shall never see any gather together great quantity of
riches, if he have not a woman in the house, that keeps and sees well to
that, that he has gathered together.


Vli. I believe this, and in this I think well that you are much better then
we. For by your small heart, you are by nature much more household servants
then we: but then if you must take care only, of that that we gather, then it
belongs more to you to obey then to command. For in as much as your wit
is occupied, and vigilaunt about small things, in so much is it unmeet to
govern great things. And therefore it is said, that women never deserve so
much to be praised for any thing, as for obedience.


Hi. This is a thing that you say, because it is good for your purpose: but
ask of us a little, and if this suffice you not, ask experience, and you shall
se whether we be mete to govern great things or not. Mark the kingedome of the
Amasones, how long time it was governed by women, and consider if they have
been able to enlarge it without your wit and strength? Of the kingdom of
Babilonia, so much enlarged by Semiramis: and of the deminion of Seithia by
Tomiris, I will speak nothing at all, for that your own stories be full
thereof.


Vli. And how many shall they be, that are able to like things? could they be
reckened with the syngers of one only hand?


Hi. Thanks be to you, who give them none occasion thereof: but always you
keep them fast shette within the walls of your houses, occupied in the most
vile businesses, that are necessary to the servants charge: vsyng to say,
that that woman only deserves to be praised, whose deeds and praises, go not
forth of the walls of her house. Notwithstanding, if you mark well, you
shall know also of them, in these so base and seruyle business, such extreme
diligence, that those houses where women dwell not, and that are not governed by
women, seem in respect of the others, like hog sties, and not a paradise, as
some of you heretofore have had heart to say. I will say nothing at all of the
government of your bodies, because the apparaunce it self, the apparel, and
many other things, cause those men to be manifestlye known, who are governed
by women, from thothers.


Vli. Truly in these things you can do very well.


Hi. We shall also do even as well in greater things, if you would suffer us
to put our hands thereto.


Vli. Well, go no further, least it chance to you, as it did to a certain
shomaker, who fyndinge fault with an image for having the buckle of his shoe
amysse, and being praised therefore, took courage to disprayse him in certain
other places: whereby it was said to him: hold thy peace, for this belongs
not to thee.


Hi. And yet at the least, with all this, I would we might please you. But you
never do any other thing then lament you of us, nor yet can we never have good
word of you.


Vli. I will not that thou say thus: for we always honor you much more then
our own selves.


Hi. Not with geuinge us any rule or authority at all, either in the house,
or abroad: but with settinge us at the highest place of the takle, or with some
loving word, and this only in the flower of our age, by the occasyon of our
beauty, that draw^th your desires to please us: but when the beauty is paste,
God knows how we are handeled at your hands, both with words and deeds.


Vli. Ah, lay not so: for this should be to great unkindness.


Hi. I will not speak of deeds, for not publishinge of that that every man
knows not so well. But how can you excuse your selves of words, sins you
have made for a proverb, that a husband has only two good days of his wife,
that is, the day that she comes to his house, and the other is, when she goes
out thereof, borne to her grave?


Vli. Those are things that men sometimes speak merely one to an other, and
to pass over the troubles of the world, but they think not so in deed. And
that this is true: see how the most part, or rather all men, take wines and I
will say further to thee, that they that take none, are always taken for
strange me^, and of a life of small praise.


Hi. And what, use you not also to say, that he who has had a wife, deserves
a crown of patience, but he that has had twain; deserves a crown of folly.


Vli. This was not said without some occasion. For the second marriages, and
chiefly to them that have children, are for the more part, greater occasions
of evil, then of good. And they seldom time have that knot of love, that ye
first have. And also in keeping you company, patience is very necessary, for
you are all by nature somewhat ungracious, so that one of our wise men was wont
to say, that when a woman went to her husband, she carried one of her hands
before, and therein a little fire brand a light, meaning thereby that she put
fire in^o the house wherein she entered.


Hi. Nay, be not ashamed to say the rest also, how he said that she carried in
the hand behind a hoke, to rob the house, whereof she went out.


Vli. I will not deny that some of these things have not been said by some
of those, whom we have called wise men, and the froward nature of some of you,
has been thoccasion thereof: nor I will not also deny the straungenes that
some of us sometimes uses toward you, they I say that are naught and of little
knowledge: for they know not how profitable you are unto us, and with how
many incommodities, and troubles, we should lead our life without your help:
But I will even confess unto thee, that we are without you a thing
imperfecte: wherefore we ought always to make much of you, and have the same
estimation of you, that we have of our selves. And he that does otherwise,
deserves not to be called a man. And although it appear unto us, that nature
has made you of less valor then us, we should yet consider that she has done
it for our benefit. For yt you were of that valor, and of that wit that we
are, you would not take pains, in those things that you do, in serving us
whereof the profit comes to be ours, of the which we are no less bound unto
you the^ unto nature, for giving us the being. So that let it not grieve you, if
some one have spoken unadvisedly of you, that that thou say, for they are
many moo, that have praised you, and worthily. For there has been no lack of
those, that have said, that we should live so miserably without you, that it
should be better to dye, and that you are our crown: As that most wise king of
Egypt did, who willing to show his riches, to an other king, at the last for
the most noble thing he had, he showed him his wife, saying that there could
not be found by any man, a more precious ^ewell, then a wise woman.


Hi. And if it be so how chaunseth it then, that we be so evil handled by you?


Vli. And what would you in the end that we should do?


Hi. Have I not told thee already, that you should keep us for companions, and
not for servants? Tell me I pray thee what right is this, that you have taken
for a custom, that it is lawful for you, to do as you list, and not for us,
brideling us with the danger of our honesties? why do not you as well also
dishonest a familye, when you give place so losely to your appetites, as you
say that we do, who are much more provoked thereto the^ you are, not so much by
that most burning desire, that the forbydding us a thing causes, as by your
insatiable and cursed importunity? And then if you have taken ons our
honesties from us, do you not think us worthy of all blame?


Vli. Why do ye not keep it then more diligently then you do?


Hi. How should it be possible for us to keep it, when every one of you has
a keye thereof? So that blame your selves and lay the faut one your selves,
when you see any of us lose our honesty. And by so much the more, as you say
you are of greter brain and more wisdom then we,


Vli. If thou did well consider, the cause that moves us to do this, thou
would say it were reasonablye done. But thou measurest your being with
ours, and hereby grows the error. Tell m^ a little, do thou think it
reasonable that a man should leave those goods, and those honors that he has
gotten, with his travail, and his wisdom, to one that is not his child?


Hy. No truly.


Vli. And how should he be by any means assured that the child were his, if
it were lawful for you to do your desires? the which thing makes no matter at
all to you beasts, who make only so much account of them, as is necessary
for them. And when they are brought to that pass, that they live of them
selves, you know them no more.


Hin. And in this thing of children also, what company is youres, and what
right, or what equity is there among you, that whiles they are little, and
of most great trouble (for thou know how great a pain it is to bring up a
man) you leave them holely under our charge, and you will hear of no trouble
at all: the which thing is given to none other beast, then to you?


Vli. And you peradventure can not give them to nurse to avoid your selves
of them, whereby they are very little bound to you, none other creature but you
using the same?


Hi. And whoo is the cause thereof but you, that will not only sometimes not
hear them cry, but also will not take with them any most little troble? And
after when they are bygge, both you and they together agree to make none
account of us at all, and not only in deeds but also in words, sins they are
called only your children, and of you they take their name, their familye, and
all that ever they have without making any mention of us at all.


Vli. This is not done without most great consideration.


Hi. And what is the cause, but your authority, as in all other things, that
for being more able then we, you make your reason as your selves list.


Vli. The cause is for that they have the sensitive substance, and the being
man, only of us.


Hi. And serve we there then for nothing?


Vli. No not in this, because thou must perceive, that the female, of her self
can not give two things, that are engendered by her, but the vegitatiue
substance the which is that ye tres have: nor ca^ bring the^ to any greater
perfection, without the male. And therefore nature that does nothing in vain,
made not the male and female among plants. But if she did make in any, as for
example in the Cor^^oll, (the which bears beries like a haw) the female only
bears fruit, and the male is barren, and it needs not that they join
together, sins that that is engendered by them, shall not have, but the
vegetative substance, the which the female alone may give. And yt this is
true, mark it in hens, who of them selves make the egg, the which has the
vegitatiue substance, after that he waxes to a certain determinate
quantetye: but the beast can not be made by them, the which has the sentitiue
substance if they couple not with the cock, that he may give it them. And
also you women sometimes engender of your selves, in the mattrice, a piece of
flesh, called by Physicians, Mola, the which for that it has the vegitatiue
substance, grows to a certain point, but it perceyueth not for that it has
not the sensitive substance for this (as I have told thee) the male gives.
Then if our children have their animate being of the sensitive substance, and
finally the being men, only by us, they are worthily called ours: and for
this only cause, you are permitted to leave them when you list, and we cannot.


Hi. And what reward shall we have for our painful bringing them up?


Vli. That that women continually have, that is, to be always honored, and
maintained by them, if you forsake them not: for almoost all children do this:
and who that does it not, is unworthy to be called a man. But nature, because
they should not fail hereof, has put into them a certain inclination of
love, toward the mothers, that it seems that the greater part, love them
more tenderly then they do the fathers.


Hi. As though we loved not out of measure, both them, and also our husbands:
ye rather there have been of those among us, who heryng of the death of there
children, have died suddenly, and others who seeing their husbands dye, have
killed them selves with their own hands: judging that it was unto them,
neither lawful to live without a man, nor honest to accompanye them selves
with mo then one.


Vli. These are things, that although they seem at ye first sight to deserve
some praise for yt they seem to proceed of love, or by stoutnes of mind: come
rather even of folishnes, or of weakness of heart, by doutinge not to be able to
live alone: for if nature, who ever does the best in all things, had known,
that it had been best, that the wife and the husband should dye at one time,
she should have caused that it should have been so. But let us let these so
long discourses go: will thou return into thy former being, and come with me
into Gretia?


Hi. No I say, for I will not become a woman again in no case? for thou
myghtest well have perceived, whether the occasions that I have told were
reasonable or not.


Vli. And because they seem not so unto me, I ask thee it again.


Hi. Thou may talk of it at pleasure, for it touches the nothing at all: I
am thus an Hynde, of as much authority at the least as the male, and I go
abroad as he does: Neither yet have I so many sorrows in the delyueraunce of
my young, nor so many troubles in bringing of them up, as I should have of my
children, being a woman.


Vli. Very well said: as though you also have no troubles and griefs at your
deliueraunces: and have you not need also to pourge you as our women have?


Hi. Ye, but nature has given us such strength, that we can do it of our
selves: and so much knowledge, that we eat of a certain herb called Ara, the
which restores us to health at the first.


Vli. And have not you also troubles in bringing up of your young, as well as
we have in bringing up of ours?


Hi. Most few in comparison of you: for they having need of far fewer
things then yours, must needs give us less troubles, and those few being
provoked by a cer? tame natural instinction, that gideth us in all our
doings, seem to us nothing hard at all: whereas to you, who are not guided so
continually by nature, they seem more grenous. So yt labor no more Ulysses in
co^forting me to become a woman again for I live far better contented, and more
frelye thus a Hind, then I did whiles I was a woman. But I say unto thee,
that if I should change my state, I would more willinglye become a human
creature again, then change me into any other beast. And of this thou may
be sure, for when I must faune, I fle more the paths made by beasts, then the
ways beten by men's feet. Go then thy ways on thy vyage, and I likewise
will go to consume the rest of my life, among these woods: for now sins I have
had power to speak again, without returning unto a woman, I bear not only no
envy to the Gods, but also not unto men.


Vli. I will not Hynde that thou stand so much in this thine opinion, but that
thou consider, that men understand more then you, and that I give thee this
counsel only for thine own profit, and for the love that I bear the, for
that thou art of my Gretia, and for no profit of mine at all.


Hy. You say always thus whiles we have conversation with you, and yet
notwithstanding you keep us always under.


Vli. Besides this thou shall understand, that Cyrces has given thee power to
speak, only because thou may say thy mind: for she will not that I cause
any to take their former shape again, sauinge they only that will. So that if
thou will remain thus in an Hind thou shalt have no power to speak any
more, the which thing, as thou did show, thou very much estemedst.


Hi. If I believed that this were true, I can not well tell what I would do.


Vli. Oh should thou doubt hereof, and know that Dear speak not?


Hi. But what matter is that: sins I also must be conuersaunt only with Dear,
and we have other means to show our necessities one to an other, the which
are so few, and so rare, that they trouble us little. So that seek some other
Ulysses for I for my part will remain in this state.


The syxt Dialogue. Ulysses, the Lion.
I Know not what the cause may be, that nature (who men say can not err)
has made the female so far different from the male, only in the human
kind. If I look among fowls, the one is of as much valor as the other, or
else of so little less, that it is almoost not known: and all men may see, that
the female in coueringe the eggs, or in bringing up of the young, will not
take any moore pains at all, then the male. As it is also among the beasts of
the earth, and in those that live in the waters: for that the female (as I
said) is of as great virtue, and of as much force as the male. But in the
humayne kind, the woman is of so much less valor, and of so much less
strength, then the man, that those virtues that are in him, either they are not
in her, or else they are so imperfecte there, that they are scar^ely perceived
to be in her. Let them then complain of nature, that has made them so, and
let them not complain of us, if it seem to them rather to be our servants,
then our companions: for this comes nether by our force, nor by tyranny, but
of their little valor, and spirit. Whereby, fearinge that they could not
know, or be able to live without us, they bring them selves under our
obedience, remayninge willinglye under that yoke: where as if they were of like
nobleness of mind, or of like strength as we are, we should never be able
to keep them by force. Therefore it is not to be marueyled at, if she with whom
I spoke, will not from an Hind, return to an human creature, since she
must becomme a woman again: Because, that where thus an Hynde, she lives in
liberty, a thing so pleasant, as none other thing is more, she should
being a woman, becomme a servant: none other things in all the world more
grievous to him, who is a man in deed. Let me then seek, if I can do this
benefit, to such as it may do good, since it should do hurt to her. And
peradventure there may be some one amongst these Liones that I see come
toward me. But what do I? Who knows, troublinge them, whether they will
hurt me, or not: the which they would not do, if I disturb them not, if they
be not provoked thereunto by hunger? And although Cyrces has told me, that I
should have no fear of any beast, that is within this her Island: I can not
yet but have some fear of these, their countenance is so horrible, and
fearful. Notwithstanding knowing the love that she bears me, I will trust
to her words, and go boldelye toward them. Lions (as nature keep you
without any trouble, in this your kind, or he that can change you into that
that you most desire) tell me is here any of you, who, whiles he was man, was
a Gretian? let him tell it me gentelly. For if he desire (as he should do,)
to become manne again, and to return into his country, he has this day
(thanked be love) chanced on one, that may do for him both the one and the
other.

Li. I was a Gretian, as thou also should be, if the speech that thou
speak be natural to thee.


Vli. Yea, I am also a Gretian, and my name is Ulysses, if thou ever heard
thereof whiles thou were a man.


Li. Yea, very often: and not only whiles I was in Grecia, but afterward
also in many other places as I sailed. But tell me, haste thou left the art
of war, by the which I think thy name be spredde not only thoroughe
Gretia, but thoroughe all the world, that thou art so here arrived? either else
has fortune driven thee hither, as she did me?


Vli. Not fortune, but desire to see the world. For our Gretia having overcome
all those people, who were enemies thereunto, and I, not knowing what thing
more to do, to get me honor, gave my self to saylynge.


Li. And lives yet thy Penelope, whose honestye was an example of all our
Gretia?


Vli. She lives, and the desire that I have to see her again, together with
desire to see my friends, and my country, styrreth me so much, that I have
asked license of Cyrces, (of whom I am peradventure no less beloved then of
her) to return into my country: and for the love that I bear to my Gretians,
to make all those to return men, that will, and to carye them with me. And
this is the occasion that I asked if there were any Gretian amongst you: and I
am glad that I have found thee, to give thee so fair a gift.


Li. Although sometimes it chance, that one desyring to do thee a pleasure,
do offend thee, yet should thou think thy self not a little bound unto
him, having respect to the goodness of his mind, and not to his little
knowledge: for of the one the will should be praised, and of the other nature
blamed. And so do I to the Ulysses, thankinge thee of the good mind that thou
have toward me, but the gift I will not accept: for where thou thynkest it
should be profitable and dear unto me, it should be noisome and to my great
displeasure.


Vli. And why so? is it then better to be a beast then a man?


Li. Ye truly: and that this is true, ask of that our wise Gretian, who was
commonly wont to say: that if man might be seen well within, it should
easelye be known, that he were even a vessel, and a store house, made by
nature, to lay up therein all his euilles.


Vli. He ought herefore to blame him self, much more then nature: for
oftentimes, by ouermuche folowinge his appetite, he destroys his complexion
in such sort, that he him self is the cause of all his hurtes.


Li. I speak not of euyles of the body Ulysses, I speak of them of the mind,
who are far more weighty and more dangerous.


Vli. Nay I will not that thou say this, so resolutely.

For this our body being none other thing, then a wagan that carries our
soul, if he be feable and weak: the soul can not do perfectlye her
operatio^s, or else with very great difficulty.


Li. I will not deny, that the unapt dispositions of the body let not the
operatio^s of the mind: But I say verily, that the infirmities of the mind, do
much more hurt to man, then those of the body do: and that there come many mo
evils, and dangers of the one then of the other. But why labor I in this? who
shall he be that can say, that they are not far worse and more grievous, being
in the best part, and most noble of man?


Vli. I know well that the mind is more noble then the body, notwithstanding,
not being able to work without the body, even so hurts the evil of the one,
as of the other.


Li. Will thou see Ulysses, that the evils of the body are far less
dangerous the^ those of the mind? for man either by the ill color of the
face, or by thinordinate moving of the pulses, or by wekenes, or by a thousand
other means knows the^ all, and seeks straight to be helped thereof: where
as those of the mind, deceive us very often times, so much, that not only we
seek not to be fre thereof, but we accoumpte them good, whereby afterward
grows our misery, and continual unquietness: and often times the loss of our
country, of our friends and children, of goods, and honesty, and a thousand
other mischiefs. Where as by them of the body the worst that can come thereof
is death, the which must come in any wise. But what needs any more? if
among the evils of the body, you reckon those the worse that take from the
patient the sense and knowledge, as the letharge the franzie, the fawlling
sickness, and such like: And if those of the mind do in such sort, that he who
has them, knows them not: are not they then to be accounted most grievous?


Vli. Truly this saying is most true.


Li. Thou know that to be sick sometimes, is granted by the Physicians to
be no great evil, for that nature so requires. But yet not so much, that
manne know not, that he is not in health, and has not need to be helped: for
the knowinge to have need of remedy, is a very good sign in ye paciente, that
he shall recover his health. And this can not be done in the euilles of the
mind: for he who by them is grieved, can make no right judgment of himself,
the evil being in that part, to the which the judgment thereof apperteyneth.
And for this cause, folishnes is the gretest evil that can chance to man. For
as much as he that has it, never knoeth it: and knowing it not, never seeks
also if he may find any remedy to unburden him self thereof.


Vli. This self same thing chaunseth properly to dronkerdes, who till those
fumes of the wine be settled, that let the places where thinner senses must work
their operations, knoing not their dronkennes, whereby they thinkinge to do
well, do a thousand things worthy blame.


Li. Dronkennes is none other thing then a kind of folly: But where as in this,
those organnes, where the knowledge is made, are marred for a time, by the
means of the wine, in that other they are most commonly marred for ever. But
what more greater sign will thou, that the euilles of the mind are more
grievous, then those of ye body, then that you shall never find any, speking of
these of ye body, call an ague health, nor the having ye tisicke, good soundnes,
nor the gout, good disposition of ye wintes: and in those of the mind, thou
shalt find many, that call anger stoutnes, wanton love, friendship: envy,
emulation: and ferefulnes, diligence? Whereby it comes, that those seek and
love the Physician, and these fly and hate the rebuker.


Vli. Of how much evil is this covering of vices with the cloak of virtue,
thoccasion in this world? and with a name worthy of honor, to do those
things, that deserve none other thing then blame and dispraise.


Li. And put also to this, that he who is troubled with any infirmity of the
body, goes most commonly to bed, where he finds, whiles he governs him
self, some rest, and also some time, to avoid the grief of the evil: if he
toss about in the bed, or move to much, he has about him yt covers him
again, and ceseth not to bid him lie as still as he may: But he that is sick in
ye mind, never finds quiet, or any rest at all, but rather he lives in a
continual trouble, and has none that gives him any contentation or help:
whereby even as to them that sail, that tempeste that suffers them not to
take the haven is far worse, then that that lets the sailinge: So also the
evils of the mind, never permitting him to take the haven of reason, and to
anchor in the same, that is troubled with them, are much worse. Finally if thou will plainly know, how far they of the mind are worse, consider that he,
who is subject to those of the body, suffers only the evil: but he that
is subject to those of the mind, suffers not only the evil, but he does it
also.


Vli. How can this be seen, sins all they commonly that do evil, take heed ye
men know it not.


Li. Seek the occasion of all the variaunces, and calamities that chance in
the world, and thou shall see it. For thou shalt know that they come of none
other thing, then of ambition, envy, avarice, anger, or of like infirmities of
the mind of man, the which besides the taking the use of reason from him,
trouble him continuallye so much, that he never suffers either him self, or
others in quiet, and one of this sort only is sufficient to trouble a whole
city, and chiefly if he be of any degree or authority at all.


Vli. Are not these diseases of the mind, the which thou say are so much
more grievous and more daungerouse then those of the body, found also among
you?


Li. No.


Vli. Take heed yet that thou be not so much deceived by them, that thou know
them not: for me thinks, that reason will, that they be far worse in you,
then in us, for that you have not the use of reason, where with you might rule
them.


Li. If we have not the reason as you have, wherewith you could perchance
reframe them: though not all together, yet at the lest in some part: we have
not also an appetite so immoderate, and so insatiable, as you have, for that we
know not of many things that you know. Tell me, what ambition will thou
that there be amongst us, for that all we be equal, whereby the one of us
never dispiseth the other: nor any superiority, or degree of honor is
amongst us, that should stir our minds to obtain it, by any kind of unjust
means, as you do, who are so far blinded by this desire, that you are wont to
say, that if one should violate justice, he should do it only to reygne?
Envy can never be amongst those of one self kind, they all being equal,
and less among those of an other kind, we having no judgment, or knowledge
at all of their felicity. Covetousness for that we have not thine, divided from
mine, has no place also amongst us: and so likewise many other vices, that
cause your life to be most unhappy: whereby there have been amongst our wise
Gretians, which have said: that man among all other creatures, held the
principality only of miseries and euilles.


Vli. Well, admit that it be true, that we have many evils that you have not:
we have also many good things that are not among you.


Li. And what are those?


Vli. Virtues.


Li. And I say further to she Ulysses, that there is no virtue at al in you
that is not far greater and more perfect in us.


Vli. I would gladlye that thou should show me this.


Li. And I desire nothing else, and I will begin with Fortitude: whereof thou
take so much vain glory, that thou causest thy self to be called a taker
of cities, and a tamer of people: and not caryng in thine enterprises, to win
with crastes and deceiptes, so that thou win: thou couerest under the name of
sagacitie, and warenes that that is in thee a most evil vice.


Vli. Oh, do me none iniurye I pray thee.


Li. I say not so, to speak of thee alone, wherefore pardon me if thou think
that I offend thee: for I know well that all you esteem winning to be a
laudable thing, be it in what sort soever it be, the which is not so amongst
us: whereby thou ma^^se ye al those wars yt we make, as well amongst our selves,
as against you, are made without any gyle or deceit of our part at al: and
how every one of us trusting in his own strength, seeks to revenge those
in^uries that are done unto him, not being under any law at all, that
inforceth him to do it, nor fearing any punisheme^t, or dishonestie for the not
doing them.


Vli. And who does show me that this is not anger rather then fortitude?


Li. The manner that we use in fight, where every one of us, never suffering him
self to be overcome by the enemy, making resistaunce with all his force,
even to the uttermost, without any abashmente, or fear, either of punishmente
or of death, seeks rather to dye fyghting then to be taken, and never yeldinge
to the enemy, if with none other thing, at the least with the mind: the
which thing shows plainly that we pray not, or put forth any petition
toward him at the least with signs, or merciful or p^tifull gestures: and
after yet when we lose, (for it is not always given to each part to win)
we suffer our selves most commonly to dye: go then further, and thou shalt
not find that the Lion serves the Lion, or the Heart the Heart, as one man
does an other, without caringe to be reputed fearful and vile. And whereof
comes this, but of our invincible and mighty mind? The which is far more
manifestly seen, when you take us, who abide patiently hunger and thyrst: yea
many of us suffer our selves to dye, then to remain with you: willingly
preferring death before bondage.

Wherefore you are enforced, when you will make any of us tame, to take of our
little younglinges, who not knowinge what they do, suffering you to feed them
familiarly by your vain intisementes, lose at one time, with their liberty,
the same strength of mind, and sustines of body (craftily so taken from them
by you) that appertain unto their kind. But will thou see that nature has
given more strength of heart to us then to you? for she has made us more
pacient to bear pains, and incommodities, then she has done you: and not
only the males, but also the females, making them no less apt then the male
to desende wherein trust should be put: and therefore you become bold to run
into every kind of danger, without any consideration, or else you sear lytte
that, that should be feared: whereby you become timorous, being afeard of every
thing: and secondarely, because you have not the discourse of reason, whereby
you might either know the good or the honest, and by occasion thereof, only
you put your selves in dangers: but you do it either for profit or for
pleasure, or to revenge some injury. And this is not fortitude: for he who
puts him self to great dangers by anger, by delighte, or by ignorance, is
bestiall and ^olishe, and not fortiall. The which thing chaunseth chieflye to
you, for that you know not which those things are, that should reasonably be
feared, and less those, in the which trust should justly be put,


Li. Thou make us of very little knowledge, if thou believe that we know not,
that the ill is that that should be feared.


Vli. It is true that there are euilles, of the which a fortiall man should
be afearde (but yet therefore not of all.) For there are of those, that he, who
would have no fear of them, should be a fool, and should deserve blame: as
for example, infamye, poverty, and such like. Besides this yet, one should
fear nothing (how horrible or evil so ever it appeared to be) for cause of
the good, and the honest. And therefore he is called most fortiall that
fears not death, the which is most horrible of all, for that it is the end
of life. Notwithstanding, this makes not, that every kind of death must not
be feared. Nor the having fear of the natural death, or of that that
chaunseth by fortune in the sea, or by other like occasions, makes not that
man can not be fortiall. Then shall he be fortiall, that shall not fear
such death, as shall be most honorable: as that is that chaunseth in the
wars, for honest occasion, or for defense of the country: the which death
is so fair, that the people have ordained particular honors to all those,
that dye by like death.


Li. Who have less fear of death then we? and this may every man see, that
considers well our wars, and how mightily we defend us, even as long as
ever we can, without fear of any thing.


Vli. Though it seem not that you have fere of death, when you fight, yet you
do it not for occasion of the honest, or of the good, but to repress the
injuries that are done unto you, or for the conservation of your selves, or of
your yonglinges, or of such other things, whereby you deserve not for this, to
be called fortiall, as it also chaunseth among us, to them that put them selves
to suffer it, either for love, or to avoid poverty, or somelike thing: the
which comes not of us by our fault: but rather these such are to be called
fereful. For to avoid things painful, or to choose death to fly some
misery, or some evil, and not for being an honest thing, comes of lack of
heart, and courage, and not of fortitude.


Li. What, fere not we peradventure also, horrible and fearful things but a
little? For we know not in our fyghtinge, and in our other doings, any danger
at all.


Vli. And therefore you are bold and not fortiall. For among horrible things,
there are also of those that he who fears them, can not be said for this that
he is not fortiall, as all those things are that pass the might of man: as
for example, the earth quakes, the thunder belt, and such like: the which are
yet suffered also by the mighty, with a more steadfast mind, then the others
commonly do. But even as the fear of every thing when there is no need, is a
vice called fearefulnes, so also the not having fear of any thing, when, and
as it behooves, the which is the other extremity, is a vice called rash
boldenes: in the mids of the which two extremes (for vices are none other
then extremes, that offend either in to little ^, or to much) fortitude is
put by reason, and therefore thou shalt see that fortiall men will never put
them selves in any danger, without some reason: for it should be to great a
follye to venture the life, the which is the dearest thing that manne has,
but for some honest enterprise: and they ought much more to do it, that are
most wise, as those that are most worthy to line, for that they are most
apt to help others. Wherefore this name of fortitude is not also given among
us, to them that put their lives in dangers of war for money, but only to
him that does it, either to defend his country, or for his own honesty, or
for like honest enterprises: neither are they also called fortiall, but
lecherous, and coueteous, who either for unmoderate desire of plesures, or of
love, or to possess riches, esteem no danger. So also they that do it for
anger, or for ignorance, are called by us ^refull and rash. Finallye he is
only fortiall that fears not death, either for winning of honesty, or for
the avoiding of soon dishonest thing: the which thing can not be in you, for
that you have not reason (as I told thee before) that may give right
judgment thereof.


Li. Call not you also those fortiall, who constrained by the laws, to get
some honor in their city, put them selves to many dangers?


Vli. Ye, but they are not fortiall in deed, though they seem very like. For
the manne that is fortiall in deed, does the deeds of fortitude, first and
principally for the love of virtue, and let it after follow as it will: and
these do it either to get glory, or profit.


Li. And they that are very expert and valiant in wars, do you not also call
the fortiall?


Vli. Ye, but this yet is a fortitude somewhat unaptly named, and much^ worse
then those others, for it comes of art and of experience, the which teaches
thee to hurt others, and to defend thy self, and not of election guyded with
reason as the true fortitude. The which also thou must note, that although it
be exercised both about suertie, and fear, yet it consists more about
terrible and fearful things: for he that in this, governs him self in
such sort as is convenient, deserves more to be called fortiall, then he that
does it about those things, in the which man should trust, being much more
easy to abstain from pleasures, then to bear griefs. And although


The seventh Dialogue. Cirres, Ulysses, the Horse.
WHat do you here thus alone Ulysses? and what think thou on, that thou
stand thus musinge?

Vli. The beauty of the place, and the pleasauntnes of these shadows, were
the things that provoked me first to rest in this place: and then afterward I
stayed here, thynkyng how few those me^ are, that know them selves
perfectlye, or that seek to know, which part of them is the most noble and
best part. The which thing is even so necessary to him, that desires to
obtain the true end (the which every one naturally desires) that without the
same, it is impossible to arryue unto it. For the which cause there has been
written by our wise men in many honorable places of our Gretia, this good
lesson: Know thy self.


Cir. And whereby gatherest thou, that there are few that know them selves?


Vli. By their works: for (as thou know) man is made of two natures, the
one corporal and earthye, and the other heavenly and deuyne: with the one of
the which he is like to brute beasts, and with the other to those immateriall
substaunces yt turn the heavens. This last should be much more set by, by him
then the other, being the better part: notwithstanding, all men almost
forgetting it, attend to the other, which is the body, and they make none
account but of that only, and that they seek to deck, and to make most
happy, and most eternal that they can.


Cir. I have yet heard thee say, that in thy Gretia there are many wise
men, the which seek only sciences and virtues, to make this part perfect,
that thou say is in them the best part.


Vli. It is true, but in respect of those that attend to the wealth, and to
the pleasures of the body, they are most few: and of these also, the most
part, seek virtue for the benefits sake of the body, hoping to be able
afterward therewith, to procure unto them mo commodities, and pleasures, and
these truly deserve not to be called virtuous, not seking virtue for it self
and because it is good, but to get thereby some gain, for the principal desire
of our soul, is the knowing the truth: and the occasion of things, to quiet
it self therein, as in his end, and not to get out thereof commodities to the
body, as they do, who knowing nothing but that in them only, never think on
other thing, then of the benefits of the same: whereby afterward all the
miseries, and al ye human infelicities grow.


Cir. Ulisses I thought that this little time, that thou will remain with me,
thou would have bestowed in those pleasures whereof this my so fair and
pleasant Island abounds: provoked if by none other thing, yet by the
continual spring, the which is ever in this place, and by that suertye, and by
those delyghtes, that thou see so many diverse beasts take the one with the
other, that goo all the day without any suspision, a sporting by these my
fair and grene littell woddes, after the sort of those first times, so much
celebrate by your Poets, in the which, discord, and hatred were not yet
common into ye world: and thou stand all the day musinge, now under the
shadow of some tree, on a stone, now by the waves of the Sea, with thy mind so
far drowned in imaginations, that thou semest unto me almost a body without
a soul: and whereas I would think that thou should be always merry, both
for the quality of the place that requires it, and for the love that I bear
to the, you make me often dout, that thou have some sorrow within the that
continually vexes thee.


Vli. Se also how thou Circes think of nothing but of the body, and of
pleasures, and delights of the same, neither have thou any knowledge of the
pleasure that is gotten in beholding the secrets of most wise nature, kepinge
ever hard to the earth, with the bands of the body, that part that should
be lift up even unto heaven: where as beholdinge those divine substaunces, he
should feel other pleasures, then these earthly pleasures are, that thou
estemest so much, for those pleasures of the mind, are far greater, then
those of the body: and mark what I say, if I could obtain to cause to
return men, four of these Gretians, that have been by the transfourmed into
beasts, and to lead them again with me, I would think to have so much
glory, and honor therefore, with my wise men of Gretia (the which thing
although be slippery and mortal, is put among the welthes of the mind) that I
should have more pleasure thereof, and more contentation, then of all the
plesures of the body that ever I could find, either here or in any other place.


Cir. If these thy wise men of Gretia, be so few as thou say, in respect of
thothers this thy glory should be very small, and not to be much esteemed: for
that others should not know the glorious deeds that thou should do, because
they know not how much manne is more noble then beasts.


Vli. Rather clean contrary: for it is far better to be praised by one
only, who also is praised him self by many, then of an hundred others, of
who^ even the name only is not known.


Cir. And whereof comes it then that thou obteinest not thy desire? haste thou
found none yet that will become manne again?


Vli. No: for all they with whom I have hitherto spoken, ar of those who whiles
they were men, never knew them selves, nor never knew their own valor, but
they attended only to the body, and to the benefits of the same: and because
thus beasts they think to find mo commodities, and benefits, apperteyning
to the conservation and good being of the body: thinking nothing at all of
the divine and celestial part, they rather remain thus beasts.


Cir. If those be so few in number that know this divinity, that thou say
you have within you, it is no marvel that thou have not chanced on any: but
if this desire strain thee so much, forsake not thy enterprise, for it can not
be, that thou find not some one of those, that is of thine opinion: for thou
know how diverse the wits of man are, and I in this mean time (for that
I take no delight in these thy speculations) will go passing the time in these
valleys, according to my wonted custom.


Vli. And I will not fail to follow that that I most mind: For if I find
but one of those that knows the noblenes of man (for the which thing he
deserves to be put in the number of the wise, the knowing him self, being
the first fruit of wisdom) and that I may restore him to the perfect
being, I shall not think to have spent my time in vain: since one benefit
that is done to a wise man, is far better placed, then all those are, that
ever may be done to a thousand fools. Se yonder coming toward me a very
fair Horse: oh what a fair beast it is: truly nature besides man, has put
all her knowledge in this: the beholdinge him has taken me in such sort, yt I
would desire that he, who was changed into him, had been a Gretian, that I
might do him this benefit: Wherefore I will ask him. Horse, tell me I pray
thee, what countrieman were thou, before thou were thus made by Cyrces?


Ho. I was it Gretian whiles I was a man: but why do thou ask me this?


Vli. To make thee return man, if thou be therewith contented: for Cyrces
has granted me power to do it, and after to take thee out of this bondage,
giving the liberty, either to return into thy country, or to go whither thou
list best.


Ho. This will I not that thou do: For, so much as I loved the being man, and
not a beast, whiles I was a man: so much it would grieve me, now that I have
proved this other life, to return from a horse to a man.


Vli. And for what cause? tell it me I may thee, if it please thee: for this is
far contrary to that that human reason gives.


Ho. Because I find in this state many fewer things that might let me to
live quietly, and to obtain that perfection, and that end, that apperteyneth
unto my kind, and to my nature: the which I did not whiles I was man, in
that that belonged unto man.


Vli. I know well that thou art a beast, that cannest do very well without
the governance and nor flies those to much that bring it sorrow. And so
having these passions more moderate in us, we must do far more easlyer that
that apperteyneth unto our nature, then you do that that belongs to yours.


Vli. I would say in deed that thou were fine, if thou could prove unto me,
that these were more perfect in you, then in us.


Ho I will not travail at all in talking of fortitude: For it is so manifest a
thing, that your writers (I speak not of Poets, to whom it is lawful because
of delectation, to say sometimes that that is not, but the historiographers,
whose duty is only to say the truth) when they will say that some man is
most strong, they liken him unto a Lion, or to a bull, or to some like beast:
and when they will speak of our strength, they never liken it to that of a man.
And from whence comes this? but because yt they know that we are far more
strong then you are.


Vli. This is lustines of body and not fortitude it self. O I se well this
fellow is also one of those, who knows nothing, but the benefits of ye body.


Ho. And from whence comes the strength of the body, but from that of the
mind?


Vli. Ye, unto him who has a mind that can perceive it.


Ho. And we are of those who have minds most apt to perceive it: For that we
have it much less trobled, by having fewer passions then you have.


Vli. And what are those passions, that you have not as we have?


Ho. First al those things that grow of things past, or of things to come.
Because we know not that that is present to us, nor foresee that that is to
come.


Vli What passions grow also of these to us?


Ho. What passions? do not thou know it? fear and hope: fear of those
things that displease thee, and hope of those that please thee, and as also
gladness, and sorrow, do by those things that are present unto thee, and that
delight thee, or by those that are against thy mind. And these very often keep
your mind unquiet and thoughtful, in such sort that they suffer you not to do
that that apperteyneth to a fortiall man: and from these four spring after, as
from one head, all the others. But let us pass over further, unto that that
takes away the reason requires, blusteringe abroad to others their shameful
desires, either in prose or in rhyme, or finally that have by this occasiou
run into some foul death: it suffiseth that you persuade your selves that
beauty is a divine thing, and that love being a desire thereof, is a thing
laudable, hiding with that spiritual beauty, that is thought to be in God,
that little grace, the which the well proporcioned bodies have: and covered
with well made colors, and with the name of the desire of that, the which is
one of the first perfections of your soul, you hyde this your human
passion. I say human, because in us, it never falls so imbridledly and so
continually, but far more moderate, and in those times only that nature has
ordained for the maintenance of the kind.


Vli. So that we see not you also do a thousand follies, by the like occasion?


Ho. And what see you us do? but the one of us to become sometime somewhat enemy
to the other: the which comes of gelosye, that is a common passion that grows
always together, with this desire. But I would not reason hereof, fearing least
thou should disdain thereat, the things are so wicked and abominable that
sometimes it leads to do. Read the histories a little, and thou shalt see,
how many deceites, how much hatred, how many treasons, and how many deaths,
as well of sword, as also of poison (the which is a more foul thing) have
grown in the world by this. So that I will lay it a side, and pass ever to
those pleasures that grow by eating, and by drinkinge. Where thou shalt find
that what beast soever thou will, as well wild, as tame, is far more moderate
then you. For thou shall not find any, that at any time eats or drinks
more then he needs, nor that seeks for other meats, then those that were
ordained for him by nature: some sede, some grass, some flesh, and some
fruit. Whereas you not contented with one only, eat of al, and more over you
cause diverse things to be brought from every part of the world to eat. And
not contented herewith, you also seek with art, that they may intemperate, that
takes great pleasure of things that appertain to the sight, as pictures,
images, and like things are: and much less he that takes delighte of those
things that belong to the hearing, as voices and soundes are: and so also he
that delights of savors, if it be not for respect of fode, as it chaunseth
to you beasts, as the dog for an example does, that takes only delyght of
the smell of the Hare, for that he hops to eat her. Then rests that this
virtue be only exercised about the delectations of the taste, and of the
felinge: and also I will say, further unto the, that the pleasure of the
touching is only his obiecte, for that the taste is a kind of touching,
and that this is true, se how he, to whom wine was so pleasant, required the
Gods that they would make him a long neck like the cranes: for that the
pleasure that the wine gave him by touching, thorough a longer space, might
endure the more, and be greater.


Ho. And to what end say thou this?


Vli. Harken a little if it please the, thou must also mark that manne has the
instrument of this sense more perfect then any other beast.


Ho. And how prouest thou this?


Vli. Mark: All the orgaines, and members, wherein the sensations are made,
must be clcane void, and naked of all their obiectes, forasmuch as nothing can
take again, that that it has: and therefore it behooves that the eye have no
color in him self at all, nor the taste likewise sauoure: otherwise the one
should see every thing of that color he had in himself, (as it is to him, who
looks thorough a glass of sum color) and the other should feel every
thing of that sauoure whereof he had altered the taste, as he does who has
made that place bitter, where the taste is made, by some colerike ague, unto
whom every thing seems bitter.


Ho. This is most true, but I see not yet to what end thou ^sayeft it.


Vli. I say it, because the instruments, in the which the touching is made,
whether they be synowes, flesh, or skin, it can not come so to pass,
because their obiectes, are chiefelye the first qualities: that is to say,
heat, drythe, cold, and moisture: and they being made of four elements, can
not be altogether boyde of them.


Ho. How do they then to perceive them, receiving them again into them, if
they have them?


Vli. They feel but only the excess, or the lack of them, that is to say,
only those things, that are more or less, hot, cold, dry, or moiste, then
they: and therefore he that has the flesh and the skin most temperate, shall
have his sense best, for he shall feel the more every most little difference:
and these we men are, (who as it is most sure) have more temperat complexion
then any other beast: whereby it follows that we have this sent more
perfect, and that we feel greater delyghte in the operations of the same, then
you do. So that it should be no maxuaile, we feling greater pleasure, if we
also were less temperate: but I grant thee not this.


Ho. What? will thou deny me, that we suffer not our selves to be less
drawn by these pleasures then you, seeing experience contrary at all times?


Vli. I will grant thee that you abstain more from pleasures, and troble your
selves less by sorrows, then we do, and far more easily: but not yet that it
comes of temperaunce.


Ho. And why?


Vli. Because (as I have told thee) temperaunce is an elective habit, made
with a right discourse of reason: how can you then have this virtue in you?
first not having reason, by the which you should determine what this habit
is, and what that mean is, by the which you should not excede in sorowing,
or in taking delight of those things, without the which the kind should not
be maynteyned: for the which cause so great delectations have been put by
nature, in those things that maynteine the indeuision, as is the eating and
the drinking, and in those that* mainteyne the kind, as the things of Venus
are, you can not afterward also chose frelye, because you be guided in all your
operations by nature, and not of so much liberty as we are.


Ho. Then from whence come these effects of temperance in us, that are such as
thou can not deny them, if we have them not?


Vli. From an instinction that nature has grue you: who knowing that you are
not of so perfect knowledge, that you of your selves can choose that, that is
best for your conservation, has caused that you can neither eat, nor drink,
more then your need requires: nor also, so to use superfluouslye any thing,
whereby your hurt or corruption should grow. And this is not temperaunce,
whereunto belongs freely, neither to be to sorrowful for those things that are
not convenient, nor to take to mutche delyghte of thoose things that are
conueniente, and to do all things with measure, and when time is.


Ho. If we do all those self things that you say, whether it be by nature,
or it be by temperaunce, it is sufficient for us.


Vli. If this were true, it should also follow, that the being led by force, to
some end, should be better, then the going freely and willingly thereunto.
Ah, these are servile, and of vile minds: return then, retourn man, and into
the state that thou were before, and come with me into thy country.


Ho. I will not grant thee this: for although I can not defend my reason as
thou do, yet it makes not that I know not, that this being is so much
better then yours, that I will not remain thus a beast.


Vli. If thou be then fully thus determined, remain thou so a beast still:
for truly thou deseruest none other being then this, since thou suffer thy
self to be so much guided by the sense, that thou remembrest no more the
light of reason.


The eight Dialogue. Ulysses, the Dog.
IF nature (as our wise men of Gretia say) desyer that every thing should
come to his end and perfection: from whence then comes it, that she has
given so great power, to these our senses, that they draw continually unto the
earth, this our mind? and keep it almooste always occupied in these earthlye
things (as it is with this* fellow that was changed into an horse, with whom
I spoke even now) so that we are little different from brute beasts: who, for
that they have their end in the earth, were all made by nature, with their
face turned toward the same, and man only with the face turned toward
heaven, to give him to understand, that he should continually lift up him
self thereunto: and beholdinge the operations of those divine substaunces, to
obtain a felicity that makes him more then a man. But what would this Dog,
that comes thus toward me? and being by little and little commen nigh me,
stands then so still? Truly he should have done it willingly, following his
nature, the which is very friendly to man, and for that he should see them very
seldom in this place. I believe, yea rather I know it for a suertie, because
experience has taught it me, that nature has given us these senses, that are
not necessary to the mainteinaunce of our life, only for our better being, and
to make our knowledge more perfect: and thereby it comes, that they so incline
to the earth, where they have their obiectes this our better part: the which
(if they were not) would by her own nature lift up her self continually to
heaven. Alaslee how this Dog takes pleasure in beholding me, and mark if
it seem not, by the gestures that he makes, whiles I reason thus with my
self, that he understands all that idle, as the more part do, until such
time as one day arriving here, I was transfourmed by Cyrces, as thou see,
into a Dog, of the which being I content my self far better, then I did of
that of man.

Vli. But I look after, or rather most ernestly desyer thee, that thou tell me,
for what cause thou iudgest, that your being is better then ours?


Do. I am contented Ulysses, and I will begin with the virtues, of the which
you never cease to glory your selves, even as though you passed all other
beasts: as of Justice, of fortitude, of temperaunce, and of al other virtues.
But I will first that thou answer me to this. Which ground deserves to be
most praised, either that, ^nhabyted by the Circlopes, the which is said to
bring forth of all kind of corn^, and fruit by her own natural goodness,
without being sown, labored, or lylled by any means by men: or that ground
of our barren and hylly Itaca, scarcely apt to feed gotes: the which though it
be tylled with most diligence is so barren, that ^^ never yeldeth other then a
most pore harvest: nor it never gives to those that labor it, just reward of
their pains? But see that herein thou set aparte the love of thy country.


Vli. How can I say that that land of the Ciclopes is not to be praised more,
being so fertile, (although I guyded by nature love mine own country better)
if I will not say untruly*


Do. And the same thou should confess to me of the soul, who in this is
like to the earth: praising those souls most, who without any study or
labor, bring forth of them selves, the good and perpecte operations.


Vli. And this also I confess to be true.


Do. Then thou grauntest me that the souls of beasts, who of them selves,
without any labor or study, bring forth virtues, are far better, and more
noble then youres.


Vli. Why, what virtues are these that beasts of their own nature are endued
with.


Do. Far greater then those, of the which man is decked with art. And if thou will seek this diligently, let us begin with that that is the first and
principal of them all.


Vli. And which is that?


Do. Wisdom, without the which there can be no virtue at all. For virtue
being none other thing then a mean between two extremities, determined with
just reason, it follows thereby that there can be no virtue without wisdom.

For that mean that is a virtue, is not like the arithmeticall mids, that
consists of like farnes from his extremes, as is (for an example) in the
continual quantity, the centrie of the circle: from the which center as many
lines as thou will, drawn to the circumference ar al equal: or as the six,
is between two and ten in separate quantity, the which is as far
distaunte from the one as from the other. But it is like the geometrical
mids, the which is distaunt from his extremes by a similitude, or else a
reasonable proportion, as for example: the six is between nine and four,
where it contains once and a half the four, and is contained once and a
half likewise by the nine: Whereby it is said to be a mids between the one and
the other, by proportion of reason: so also the mids, in the which virtue
consists, not being put between his extremes by equal distaunce, after the
similitude of the Arithmetricall mids, it behooves that a virtue determine
it, according to a reasonable proportion of extremes, to the similitude of the
geometrical mids: and this virtue to whom it belongs to determine it, is
wisdom. Then there can be no virtue without wisdom, and therefore it is
reasonably taken, for the rule and foundation of al: and this (as I have told
thee) is found far more among us, then among you.


Vli. And who shows me that this is true?


Do. Reason: tell me I pray the, do thou not grant me, that the habites are
known by the means of the operations?


Vli. Ye that I do, for it is true.


Do. Then shalt thou also grant me, that we are more wise then you, sins we
do our operations, far more wisely, then you do yours. And that this is true,
thou shall prove it, by thine own self: considering diligently the operation
of every one of our kinds, beginning at the lesser beasts: where first thou
shall see the ant to be so wise, that he lays up in summer, all that that he
needs in winter: and the spiders lay their snares with very great
consideration, to take certain little beasts to feed them on: and the Waspes,
and many other like, to hide the^ selves under the earth, at those times that
are hurtful to them, I will say nothing to thee, of the most wise governance
of the bees, for that there are so many among you, whoo have consumed their
best years in discribinge their life, and the manoure how they govern them
selves. Then go to the birds, and thou shall see them all to change their
place time by time, as it is fit for their nature: thou shall see of those, who
knowing them selves unapt to bring up their young, cause them to be covered
and nourished by an other, as the Cockow, thou shall see of those, who douting
that the young the which they have bred, should be none of theirs, have with
most great wisdom found the means to be assured thereof, as the Egle, who
turns their eyes to the rays of the son. I will also pass over with
scylence, the wisdom of the Cranes, that rule them selves so ordinately
under the principality of ye one of them, and how when the others take their
rest, he only stands with his head alofte, to take heed to the others,
holding a stone with the one of his fete, for that he would not sleep, and
hearing any thing, he shows them straighte thereof. The Partridges, what
wisdom use they in defe^ding their young from the fowlers? the old set them
selves before, till the other have time to escape. The Swallows, when they can
find no durte to fasten together those little splintars of wood, or of straw,
whereof they make their nestes, (for they wale them in such sort as you do
your houses) have not they so much wisdom that they wash them in water, and
tumblinge them afterward in the duste, they make it eue^ as you make mortar:
then in bringing up of their young, how great wisdom do they use, in
causinge that every one may have his part of the meat, and in getting forth of
all the filthe of the neast for that they should lie clean: nor how they can
govern them selves, and defend them from such as would take them, in
troubling the water with their phines or with casting certain black water like
ink, and some by one menes, and some by an other: it suffiseth me that you
have learned of them, the making of ships, and the art of sailing, the which
bring so many commodities to the human kind, making the ores after the
fashion of some of their fete, and the sails in likeness of certain wings
that some fishes have, who coming to the top of the water, and spreading
them forth, are by the help of the wind, carried by them: So that finally, if
thou shall well consider the operations of al beasts, thou shall be enforced to
confess that we have more wisdom then you, and consequently, that our being
is far better then yours: for that we have had all these benefits frelye of
nature: even as thou have also confessed, that the ground of the Cicsopes* the
which brings forth her fruit by her own proper nature, is better then our
Itaca, the which would bring for the nothing at all, if it were not labered,
and tylled by you.


Vli. Truly Cleantos, when thou begannest to talk of wisdom, I believed that
whiles thou were man, thou had studied moral things: but thou dyddest
proceed very little further, that I perceived it to be nothing so: since thou
art not able to tell what wisdom properly is, and besides this, confoundinge
it often times with art.


Do. Wylt thou deny unto me, that wisdom is the knowing to govern her
operations well? and to dispose them well about those things that are good for
us?


Vli. No, but this suffiseth not: for he is not called wise, who provides, and
ordeyneth well one thing only: as he (for example) should be, that could
govern him self well about the health of the body, or in the exercising him
self in the wars, but he that does this about all those things that
appertain to good and quiet living: and this can not you do, and therefore
wisdom can not be in you: and that this is true, harken to me and I will
prove it. Wisdom is a virtue that ^^ a diche, wherein he has heretofore
fallen, will not (as it is said for a proverb) pass. And this comes of
nothing else, but for that the imaginatiue represents unto him only the
falling into that dyche indistinctlye, and without any time: wherefore, he
not being hable to discuss, whether such a thing has been in the time
passed, or it be in the time present, or it has to be in the time to come, the
which are parts of the time, he flies, and will not pass it. It is very
true, that those kinds, who have this power of the imaginatiue, a little moore
perfect, whereby they know things somewhat more distinctlye, seem to have
the memory: among the which kinds, thine has the chief place. And
therefore it seems that you remember things more, and know them better, and
perticulerly the master, then any other beast does. And those other kinds,
who have it moore imperfecte, seem to remember less (as the flies, whoo
driven from a place, forget it by and by, and return thither again. See then
how man only, for that he knows the time, is he that has memory, whereby
he only, amongst all other beasts, may be called wise. For he that has not
knowledge of the time, can not judge, when it is good to do a thing, and
when it is not, the which properlye apperteyneth to wisdom.


Do. If we have not wisdom, what is that that leads us so, to do only
that, that belongs to our nature?


Vli. An instinction, and a propriety, that nature has given you for your
benefit, that directs you to your end. Wherefore, if thou (for example)
should ask those antes that were bred the spryng tide past, for what cause
they lay up in their nestes, whereof to eat, who having no knowledge of the
winter paste, can not do it by wisdom, as thou say: it is sure that they
would answer, either for that we see those which begat us do so, or by an
inclination that nature has given us, the which causes us so to do.


Do. Is not this the self same in us, that you call wisdom in you?


Vli. No: rather the one thing is very far thing in vain, has given you
neither the one nor the other, since you having not to govern any others then your
selves, (except your young, for the small time that they could not live without
you) the which chaunseth not to us, to whom the governance of a household, and
of public matters belongs: in the which, wisdom perchaunse is far more
necessary, then in those of our own causes (and you having no need of any
thing, besides of that, that nature of her self brings forth unto you, have
no need to supply with art.


Do. Ulysses thine eloquence is such, and has so great force, that he who
should hear thee, and know not somewhat beyond, would believe that all that
thou have said, were true: notwithstanding as thou beganst to speak, thou
did fail (as it is said for a proverb) at the gates.


Vli. And I pray the tell me, what error have I made?


Do. Thou did not number among the knowing habites of your under standing,
the opinion, when thou did reckon them, and yet thou know that by the
means thereof you know many things.


Vli. Nay, thou thy self have failed: for thou perceyuedst not, that I would
not speak thereof, when I said, speking of things chauncyng, that I would
reason only of those things that depend of us, about the which, wisdom is
exercised: and I would let those pass, that depend on nature, about the
knowledge of the which the opinion is excercised: whereby it is no marvel if
it be sometimes deceived, the things that nature bringeth^ forth, being so
many and so diverse.


Do. And what was the occasion that moved thee to do this?


Vli. Because that is not worthy to be numbered amongst these virtues, or
intellectual habits, for as much as that brings no perfection at al to the
understanding, as these do. For man is never called wise for having opinion of
a thing, as he is for knowing it. And besides this, the opinion may be
deceued, and none of the rest of them can.


Do. What none? Can not the other habites also be deceived?


Vli. Not these first three that are in the speculatiue understanding, for that
their obiectes are vnuature. The which if it be more ryghtlye guided thereby
in us, then it is in you, it is a sign that it is better, and that we be more
perfect then you. So that giving now an end to our commoning, enjoy thou the
kind that thou think better: for I thinking this better wherein I am, will so
remain.


()

The ninth Dialogue. Ulysses, the Calfe.
IWill now say verily, that the proverb is true, which says, that there is
nothing in this world that has been by nature more justly divided the^ the
brain: sins it seems even to every one of these beasts, with whom I have
spoken, to have so much thereof in that state wherein they are, that there is not
one of them that will give place to the reason of man, who yet discorseth and
works with reason: esteming their chance far better, then ou^s, the which
yet I can never think that they had heart to say whiles they were men: but
this also may rise of the great love, that each thing bears to his being,
of the which it is so jealous, that there is none that altogether would
change it, with any kind of other, for fear at that change to be put in
danger of loss thereby, and these perchance happen more also to man, then to
any other thing. I speak of the substaunciall being, and not of the
accide^tal: for I know very well, that an old manne would change his age,
with the age of a young man, and one sick, his disposition with that of a
hole, and every poor man his state with that of a rich. But to change them
selves substancially, and to become an other, there are few that will do it:
for that there is none, or most few, that believe that an other is better then
theirs. So that it is no marvel, if none of these beasts would be persuaded
by me to become manne again. But alas see what a fair Calfe this is that
comes so safelye feding toward me: O, what fiercenes shows this beast in
his forehead? and notwithstanding how gentle yet he is, and how he suffers
man to handle him: surely we are not little bound to nature, that she has made
this beast, for it is plainly seen, that she has made him for that he should
take from man a great part of his pains, he being of such strength, and
therewith so easy to be handled. I will see, if he, who was changed into him,
was by chance a Gretian, the which should happily be: for sins he has drawn
so nigh me, that he might hear me reason, he has stand still to harken unto
me, even as though he understood me. Calfe, tell me, (as he who may do it,
give thee that thou most^ desire) who were thou, and of what place, before
thou had this shape?

Call. Even of the self same country that thou also art, if that that thou
speak be thine own proper language.


Vli. Then thou should desire alsoo to return to see Gretia thy country
again, as well as I do,


Call. No truly. For where one is well there is his country: but this comes
of the being that I now have, that though I might well, I would in no wise
become manne again, and having to remain thus as I am, this is so fruitful
and would destroy his being: but it might well be possible that in one only
man, all virtues might be found, if he had so long life, that he might get
them, having an apt wit to do all things.


Ca. And how so?


Vli. Because vices being contrary the one to the other, as for example, fear
is unto boldness, and covetousness to prodigality, they can not stand
togethers: where as unto virtues, not being contrary, but the one rather
helper of the other, it follows not so.


Ca. And are there not virtues also among us?


Vli. Not so perfect as in man: and when it were even as thou say, one, or
few mo only for a kind, where (as I have told thee) man only may have them
all.


Ca. Yea, so say you, but we are of a contrary opinion: Rather I say to thee,
that there are many moo virtues among us, then among you.


Vli. And whoo shall be judge hereof?


Ca. Thou thy self: for if thou harken unto me, I will prove it so plainly,
that thou shalt give sentence against thy self. Tell me a little: Say not
your wise men, that Justice is an assemble of all virtues, and that she
conteyneth them all in her, geuyng to every thing the rightnesse, and rule,
with the which they should use them selves? For what other is there but she,
that commands the fortiall that he fear not, and that he fly not those
dangers, that bring him renown: and to the temperate, that he give not him
self overmuch unto pleasures, or that he do not any thing inconueniente, to
avoid displeasures: and unto the meke, that he do none injury unto others?
Who is there besides this, but Justice, that ordeyneth all the doings of man,
measuring, and reducinge into a conueniente means all their doings: as well
those that they do willinglye and freely, as to ^ell, to lend, to gage, and
like things: as also those that they do, as enforced, either by disdain, or
by their evil custom, or secretly, as theft, kyllinge by treason, poysones,
treasones, and false witness bearing are, or openly, or without any respect at
all, as are villanyes, strypes, meyming of the members, and manslaughters, and
other such like outrages.


Vli. Truly, this that thou say is true: and for this cause there are some,
that call justice the hole virtue: addinge besides this, that she is more
perfect then any other. For as much, as the others make him good, that
possesses them only, as touching them selves: and she governs man, not
only as touching her self, but as touching others: and wayeth not only the
particular benefit, but the vniuer^all.


Ca. Then that that I say being true, if I shall prove unto the, that among
you there is no Justice, or most little, and not justice truly: it shall be
proved by consequence, that among you there is no virtue at all, or most
little and not virtue truly. Also if I shall prove unto thee afterward, that
there is more justice among us, then among you, it shall be likewise proved by
consequence, that we have many moo virtues then you, and that our being is
far better then yours.


Vli. Thy conclution is most true: but the difficulty is in prouyng it.


Ca. Shall it not always be proved, when the propositions are proved that
bring it in?


Vli. Know thou so much logike?


Ca. Why, what miracle is that, I being a Gretian? For thou know that all we
labor therein, whiles we be children.


Vli. Go to, follow then.


Ca. The greater of the two propositions, the which is, where there is no
justice, there is no virtue at all, I have already proved to thee, since thou
haste granted me, that she contained all virtues in her: for the which cause
she has been called, as thou saydest, the hole virtue.


Vli. Go to, I am content: now to the lesser.


Ca. And this also is most evident, if that so famous a proposition of your
wise men be true, saying: that every thing is known by his operations. And I
will have hereof none other witness then thine: for I think my self most
sure, that if thou shalt diligently consider the operations of men, thou shall
say as I say.


Vli. Ye, peradventure if they did all after one forte.


Ca. It suffiseth that thou shall see the more part do unjustly, by whom the
occasion should always be taken, to make judgment of things. But tell me I
pray thee: if there were justice among you naturally, as there is amongst us:
or if you lived according to that law that is written by nature in the heart of
each of you, what need should you have of so many laws, as you have made?
although as it is used to be said for a proverb: they are like spiders webbes,
for the great beasts break them, and the flies remain there.


Vli. It is true, that if each one would do unto others, as he would be done
unto, as the law of nature wills, there should then need none other laws:
notwithstanding the greater part of them, are made by the declaration of the
natural law, and if they should swerve from that, they should not be accounted
just. For as thou should know, like as in speculatiue things, there are
sum as principles that are known to every man by their own nature, and by
the light of the understanding: wherefore they need not be proved, as it should
be for an example, that one only thing can be, and can not be in one time.
And some other* things as conclusions that proceed from those first points,
and are grounded in them: So are there also in active things certain
lights, and natural principles, known by a commune notyce, and by the proper
nature to eueryman, as for example it should be, not to do that unto others,
that thou would not should be done unto thee. And then by these principles,
come these laws written, and are grounded on them.


Ca. It seems to me, that they are made, for that you may be able to
interpret this natural reason after your own fashion, and to pluck it this
way and that way, as it pleases you, showing that very often to be just
with words, that is most unjust in deeds: and if thou take good head to yt
that I have said unto the, with experience thou shall se, that he who can best
wrest a law unto his desire, is taken for the best doctor.


Vli. Speak to me of the laws as touching them selves, and led by Princes, as
those, that are governed by the chief men, or by the public governance, and
thou shalt se what place the evil have there: and how little the good are
esteemed, by the only faut of the proper inordinat love of those, to who^ the
distribution both of rewards and punishments belongs: who very often suffer
them selves to be so much corrupted by profit, or by pleasure, or by some other
unreasonable passion, that it is sometimes seen, for one like virtuous
operation, one to be rewarded, and no estimation at all to be made of an other.
And likewise also for one like offense, to punish one grievously, and one other
not only not to be punished, but to be rewarded and set in some degree.


Vli. And when that that thou say were true, that there is no distributive
justice among us: how is it then found among you? for thou haste told me that
you are far more just then we.


Ca. Even as much as is required for our state and nature. And if thou observe
our operations, thou shalt know it of thy self, and perticulerly when the one of
us, fights with an other: where thou shall see all us reioise and make mirth
to h^n that is the winner. And that they that are unprofitable are by us
continuallye despised.


Vli. These you should know of your own selves whether it be true or not.
Nor I will dispute no more with thee thereof. But what will thou say to me of
the comutatiue part, how much is that among you?


Ca. Even as much as is amongst you, who have not one most little part thereof:
but this difference there is, that among us it is not found, for we have no
need thereof, having every thing in common: and among you, for having separate
thine from mine you cannot live freely without it, for that covetousness, and
that your wicked hungar of riches, has driven it away, whereby you never do
any other thing the^ the one to think, to possess ye, yt is the others,
without having any respect at al unto the good and the right in your
bargains and commutations of things that the one of you makes with the other:
but rather he is accounted amongst you the most valiante, who in his
travailing can make the that carye burdens for hier, or to the beutie of
harlottes, that give them selves for every vile thing.


Vli. Go no farther in numbering the wrongs, that are in humain operations: for
I also know well that there are many men, who drawn by their proper love, do
very often, not only that that they should not do: but that that after when
they are not appassioned, would they had never done. But this makes not that
there is no justice amongst us: for there are many, as well in the distributive,
as also in the co^mutatiue, who would never do any thing against the law
thereof. The examples of whom, for not to be tedious unto thee, and for that
books are full thereof, I will not show the. And those your operations that
thou have rekened unto me, show also that there is less justice among you,
though they ^eme ordained, or disposed after the order of justice.


Call. And why so, sins every thing is known by his operations?


Vli. Because in you they are customs and properties, that you have had by
nature who knowing that you have not the knowledge, nor can gyde you of your
selves, in the path that is best for you, has so directed you for your best
commodity. But tell me, can thou show me properlye what thing justice is?


Call. It is a constant and perpetual will, the which gives ^^ every one that
that is his, and that that belongs to him, as I have hard say of your wise
men of Gretia: and so I think it is: what say thou, am I deceyned?


Vli. No, if for the will, thou understand therein an habit caused by
frequented acts: for he is not just, who once or twice works iustlye, but he
that always, or at the least most commonly, works according to the same.


Call. I also understand it so, for I know well that those powers that never
come to effect, are vain things and impossible.


Vli. Then if it so be, what justice will thou that there be in you, since you
^aue not the will, the which is the subject, on the which justice is first
grounded? For that this as thou knoweste, is a reasonable power. And none but
reasonable creatures can have it.


Ca. And why can it not be in the sensitive appetite, the which we also have
as well as you?


Vli. Because justice ordeineth and rules that part called appetite, the
which follows the knowledge: and this is the will, the which follows the
understanding, who knows not only the things (as it might be said) that
the sense also does, but also knows the proportion that is between them:
whereby it may judge that that belongs both to the one, and to the other, the
which thing the sense can not do.


Ca. If we have not justice, what is that then that brideleth our appetite, and
that makes it just toward others? for as I have told thee before, we live
far more justly the one with the other then you do.


Vli. Have I not told it thee? it is a law put therein by nature for your
benefit: by the means of the which law, you work necessarilye according to
the same: and for those operations that come by nature, there is neither praise
nor dispraise at all deserved. As a stone for fallinge down is neither praised
nor dispraysed, nor the fire for going upward. And when thou would say to
me that you work freely, (for I think it seems unto you that you have a free
appetite) I would a^nswere thee, that when this also were so, you know not
perfectlye and distinctlye that that you do: whereby it follows, that your
operations can not be truly called good. For, to will that an act be virtuous
and perfect, it chiefly behooves that he, who works, work knowingly and
wittingly.


Ca. These are sub^^^ties, and crafts, that you of your selves find, to be
accounted superiors of others: but he that shall well note your operations,
shall say, that if Justice be found among you, it is only in words. The
which thing is not so with us, for we neither know, nor can by any means,
give notice contrary to that that we have within us, as you do.


Vli. Let us goo over somewhat more distinctlye the operations that proceed
from justice: according that diff^nition that thou haste given me of her, the
which in very deed is true toward them, who know them not, saving so long
as you have need to remain under their custody.


Ca. Are there not also among us of those that use that pit? Consider the
storcke a little who when he sees his father and mother not being able to fly
any more, for age to remain in the nest, nourishes, and susteineth them even
with his own blood: and seeing them to lack feathers, plucketh him self, and
covers them, for that they should not be hurt either with cold, or with
the air.


Vli. And what matter is this, fynding it in one kind only? for thou shalt
find none other but the Storcke that does this: of the which it may be also
said, that he does it more for his own commodity, then to restore his
father and mother: for he being very cold by nature, after that he has gotten
his fode, remains also together in the neste with them, to warm him self.
Go then further to those duties that should be given to the superioures, or
unto those, who by some virtue deserve to be more honored the^ the others,
called by us obedience, or reverence, what step or token of them is there
found among you?


Ca This needs not to us, we being all equal: though yet among those
kinds, who have need of a guide, as the cranes, or the bees, thou shalt see a
most great obedience, and reverence to their superioures.


Vli. Call it rather a natural inclination, and thou shall say true. Go then
to that that should be yielded to such as do thee a benefit, called by us
thankefulnes, or kyndnes, what part thereof shalt thou find among you?


Ca. Is there not many of us seen, not only to be kind one toward an other,
but to serve man, for that he gives them whereof to eat, or some other
necessary thing for them?


Vli. Yea, as long as your selves list: but it is afterward seen, as the
toye comes in your head, you flyinge at us with your heels, and do us a
thousand other outrages, forgettinge all the benefits that you have received
of us. I will not speak of frendshyp, for that it can not be among you: I
speak of that frendeshippe that has virtue for a foundation: by the which the
free election of the mind is after moved, and not of the natural frendshyppe:
for in this there consists no part of justice at all. And so likewise the
care and discretion that should be had of those that are our inferiors. All
the which things having the discourse of reason for a foundation, can not be
found among you. So that speak no more so folishlye, that your state,
because there are many moo virtues among you, then amongst us, should be
better then ours: For thou art deceived by thy little knowledge.


Ca. I will dispute it no moore with thee. For* although thou should, have
the better hand of me with words, I not being able to make thee answer,
for being much less exercised in this art then thou; this opinion would
always rest in my mind, as most true, because the same grows in me by
experience, and by the sensitive knowledge, the which (as I think) passes in
certentye all others. And therefore thanking thee of thy good will toward
me, I will take my leave at thee, for I will live thus. ()


The tenth Dialogue. Ulysses, the Elephant.
Truly it is a marvelous thing, that among so many Gretians as I have spoken
with, transfourmed by Circes into diverse beasts, there has been none that
would become man again. And if the proverb, the which is common through our
Gretia, saying: that it is impossible, that that, the which many say, can be
altogether false, were true in all things, I might make by this judgment,
that the being of beasts, who are void of reason, were far better then ours.
But it should only be true, in things that appertain to the active life of
man: for when one speaks of the knowledge of our understanding, about the
truth and the nature of things: I have heard most commonly one other
proverb used, clean contrary to this: the which says, that one should know
as the fewest. And besides this I have always herd our wile men give many
Epithetes to the common people of erring, of unstableness, of wavering, and of
many other qualities, all the which betaken, little knowledge and imperfecte
judgment, where by we can not maintain them both to be true (and yet the
nature of proverbs is, by long experience to be true) except we understand
the one for things practical, and th^ther for speculatiue. Then since the
knowledge of the noblenes of the human nature, and how much the same
knowledge passes in perfection, the knowledge of other beasts, who lack of
the understanding, and of the ablenes to discourse with reason, appertains to
the contemplative part, whose office is the seking the truth, it is no
marvel though the most part err: it shall then be best since Circes has
already restored my companions and ships, and they tarry only for me, that
I return home, and lose no more time, where I can not see that I might do any
profit at all. For I will not therefore that their little knowledge hurt me, as
it does them: because remaining here, among them beasts, though I be a man, I
should live after the imagination, and the memory, as they do: where as
among men I should live according to art, and reason: by whose menes, drawing
nere continually to my perfection, ye rather getting from day to day part
thereof, I shall come to live with a more quiet, and better contented mind. Let
us then go toward the ships, and let us not take more care for others, the^
for our selves, for this should be a most great folly. But what beast do I see
of such unmeasurable gretnes walking on the se stro^d? it is an Elephant, if I
through the far distaunce, that is between us, be not deceived. O how great
is the variety of nature, in the production of beasts: and how glad I would
be, that he who was turned into him, had been a Gretian, his countenance has
caused me to love him so much by beholdynge him: I will therefore ask him it:
for if I could find but even one only who would by my means become man
again, I should not think to have spente these my travails in vain. Tell me
Elephaunt, if thou were a man, (as I think thou were) before thou had this
shape, what thou were.

Ele. I was a Gretian, and of the most famous city of Athenes, where I studied
philolophye a very long time, and my name was Aglafemos. But tell me now why
thou ask me this? for thou knoest that Philosophers seek none other thing
then to know the occasion of all things, to quiet and satisfye that desire of
knowing, that every one has by nature.


Vli. Oh thanked be the gods infinitely, that at the last I have found one
lover of the truth: and one that may truly call him self manne: Know thou
Aglafemos, that Circes has granted me, thorough her gentleness, that I may
restore the human shape to al those Gretians, that I find in this her I
stand, who have been by her transformed into beasts in so an Elephante, of the
which being I am not yet fully resolved, whether it be better then yours or
not. And there fore I will not believe the thus at the first: but following the
custo^e of true philosophers, who although they believe nothing without the
reason thereof, neither do they set any thing at naught, that is said unto
them, though they understand it not: if it be not so far contrary to the
order of nature that it appear manifestly faulse of it self. For he, who
thought not that there were any thing, but that that he understood, should be
counted a fool: I will therefore harken by what reason thou thoughtest to do me
a most great benefitte in restoring me the human being: and if it shall
be such as may prove unto me, that your being is better then ours, (as it
seems that thou think them,) this nature lest, and I becomen man again, I
will gladly return with thee into my country.


Vli. And I on the other part promise thee, if thou shall prove unto me, that
your being is better then ours, that then I will pray Circes, she will
transfourme me also into one of these beasts, yea and I will live afterward
here with thee: thy speech has pleased me so much, and thy so modest
proceeding, such as in deed belongs to a right Philosopher.


Ele. I will not bind my self hereunto, for though it seem that I much care
not to become man again, I felt so great an alteration and travail in my
transmutation, (an occasion that I now agree not so easelye to change this
state again) I find not yet in deed in this state so many commodities, that I
may judge it better then yours. But what reason have thou, that judging your
being so much better then ours, do comfort me so earnestlye to become man
again?


Vli. I will tell thee it, and because thou art a Philosopher, I will proceed
with thee philosophically. Thou know that though there be in this world
almost an infinite number, of kinds of creatures, that yet there can none
be found who has not some proper and particular operation, the which
grows in the same kind by that form, that gives it that being that it
has, whereby till it lacks of the being, it can not also lack of the
workinge.


Ele. Yea and if it were otherwise, nature should have made them in vain, the
which is impossible.


Vli. Thou know also that the nature, and the being of things, is known,
by their operations. And they say that we have most noble, and best being,
the which have best, and most noble operations: for man is not able to know
the causes, but by their effects.


Ele. Yea, for the knowing the causes of them selves, and then by the mean of
the knowledge of them to know their effects, appertains only to the first
cause, the which is occasion of all.


Vli. And by these two foundations, thou may manifestly perceive, yt the
being of man is far more perfect, then the being of beasts. For what is the
proper operations of beasts?


Ele. The perceiving, I think: for the nourishing, growing, and the
ingendering, they have in common together with the plants: but for having the
sense only, they are beasts animate.


Vli And what meanest thou by the perceauinge?


Ele. To know the nature of things, by the means of the senses.


Vli. And what is the operation of man?


Ele. The same I think, though the knoweledge of man be called intellectiue:
and that of beasts sensitive. For this your understanding, can know nothing
at all, without the senses,


Vli. Nay, say not that they be one thing, for so thou should err:
neither say thou also, that the intelligence of man, can understand
nothing without the senses: for it may form and bring forth within it
self, many intelligible things, and many conceytes, ingenderinge one thing
by the other, without the help of the senses. But it is very true that the
beginning of them, have preceded from the senses: for there can be no thing
at all understood, that the first beginning thereof has not sprounge from
the sensytiue knowledge: and in this sort, this proposition should be
understood.


Ele Those are inventions, and vain fantasies, the which not being necessary
to the conservation of the being, seem rather to unquiet, and keep some
thoughtefull, then to any thing else. It suffiseth us, to be able to know the
nature of things, that are profitable for us, or necessary or delectable, with
our sensitive knowledge: the which I think to be no less inferior then this
your intellectiue, that you so call.


Vli. Say not so, of that that thou know not: for thou know that it
apperteyneth not to the blind, to give judgment of colors.


Ele. I will prove it thee. Tell me a little: how much the more a knowledge is
certain, is it not so much the more perfect?


Vli. Yea.


Ele. And that of the sense is most sure above all others.


Vli. And who assures thee of this?


Ele. Who? I my self: Do not I see that the leaves of yonder baye tree, the
which is over against us, are grene? and I am sure thereof, in such sort,
that if all the world would agree to say the contrary, I would never believe
it.


Vli. And what assurance should thou have that thou were not deceived, and
that they said not true?


Ele. Of what other assurance should I have need, if I see it?


Vli. To know that thine eye were not deceived: and this thou myghtest have,
having the understanding, whereby thou should be more certain then thou
art, having only the sense: and that this is true, harken unto me, and I will
make the most sure thereof. Tell me: secst thou the son yonder? think thou
that he goes, or not?


Ele. It seems to me that he stands still.


Vli. And how big think thou that he is, and of what color?


Ele. I think him about thy greatness, if thou were one round body as he is:
and he seems unto me of the color of these orenges.


Vli. See how much thou deceauest thy self to say, that the sensitive
knowledge, is most true of it self, and without the light of the
understanding: For of three things that thou say, two are most false,
and yet thou thynkest to see the truth thereof.


Ele And what are they.


Vli. That the Son moves not, and that he is of so small bigness: for he
moves so swiftely, that he has no comparison at all, either with shafte, or
with any other thing of the world, having every day once (being drawn by the
first moving) to compass the earth, so far distaunt from him, whereby be
must make a far greater circumference, then that of the earthen globe, the
which they say is more the^ twentye and two thousand miles in compass. And
besides this, it is greter then the earth about a hundred threscore and five
times, as thou myghtest plainly know, if thou were practiced in mathemeticall
things. The which are no less sure to our understanding, then it is to thee
to know that the color of the leaves of yonder bay tree are grene, whereof
thou deceiuest not thy self: but thou have not the suerty thereof, as thou
should have, if thou had the understanding.


Ele. And why so?


Vli. Because thou should be able to discern, which are the proper
sensibles, of one sense, and which are the common, and are known by more
senses: and thou should know, how no sense can be deceived in the
knowledge of his proper sensibles: a due distaunce being between the one and
the other, and the mids proporcionate: and certain other conditions
necessary to like operations. And thou should know also, how it might be
easelye deceived by the common sensibles: whereby thou should see, that thou
could not be deceived in iudginge that those leaves are grene, the due
dystaunce being between thine eye and them, and the air lyghtsome, and the
color, being the proper obiecte of the eye: as thou art deceived of the
moving, and of the greatness of the son, both the one and the other being common
sensibles. So that praise no more so much the knowledge of the senses, the
which is the weakest of all, if it be not helpen by the understanding.


El. And what are the other?


Vli. There are three powers, or knowing virtues: the first of the which, are
the understandings of those separated substaunces that continually turn the
heavens, the object of to consider it, and so thou can not have of it any
surenes, or certentie of any judgment. Where our understanding withdrawing
the things from the matter, and considering their proper being, and deuidinge
there being in his parts, or composing their predicates, substantialles and
accidentalles, with their subjects, has most certain knowledge of their
nature.


Ele. What perfect knowledge can he have (for example) of man, if he consider
him without matter: for that there is no man, but he is of flesh and bones?


Vli. The matter of things is of two sorts: the one of the which is called
comune, and the other particular. The comune matter of man is the flesh, the
bones, the sinoes and other things: and the particular matter is this flesh,
these bones, and these synoes. And this particular is that, that going
continually unto breking, always varieth. And without this the understanding
consydereth it: but not yet without the flesh and bones: whereby consider man
as a reasonable creature of boones, and flesh, and mortal: and in this sort
universally, and without particular matter, he comes to be unvariable: and
assured knowledge may be had of him.


Ele. Have not we also the fantasy that does the self same? for it receives
the Images of things by the senses immateriallye, and besides this deuideth
and makes all that it lists, and at all times when it will.


Vli. It is true that the fantasy is a power so noble, that some heretofore
have douted, that it is the self same thing in us, that the understanding is.
And they that have not thought thus, have said that the understanding at the
least, could not work without the fantasy, the which is most true. But
this makes not yet that it is not far more inferior then the understanding:
and that this is true, the fantasye is a minister of the understanding, and
serves it continuallye in his operations, and those powers that are made by
nature for the service of others, are less parfect, then the others: as thou
may manifestly see in thy self, that the outer senses, as are the sight, the
hearing and others, for that they serve to our common sense (the which has not
for object one only sensible, as they have, but al) are less noble then he.
And he then that serves unto the estimatiue, or fantasy, is also far less
noble then that. But if thou will be more sure hereof, consider the operations
of your fantasy, and those of our understanding, and thou shall see how
far the fantasy is inferior unto the understanding. For though your
fantasy take the semblaunces, and representations of things immateriallye, it
can not yet take them, without the properties of the matter that are, the being
in quantity, the being in place, and in time, and such like: whereby you can
never imagine any thing at all without these conditions. The which happens
not unto our understanding that can perceive the nature of things, without
considering quantity, or place, time, or variety, and such like appertaining
to ye matter: it is true that he gets these his knoledges, from the images
that are in the fa^tasy, immaterially: for he could not get them of the things
it self, for being so spiritual. Besides this, although your fantasy, can
make also, and divide as it should be, to make of a horse, and a man, a
centaur: and to feine a man without fete and without hands, it can not yet
divide the matter from the form^, nor the accidents from the substance: or
make them together as our understanding does. And this is, for that the
fantasy comprehends both the one and the other, with one only se^sation, and in
one only subject. Besides this it can never imagine any thing, that it has
not seen to fore: and if not altogether, yet at the least his parts.


Ele. Nay I will not grant the this yet. For we also do cogitate and think of
many things that we never saw. Tell me a little, the sheep when he flies the
wolf, does he fly him for that his color displeases him, or because he
hates his shape?


Vli. No.


Ele. Why does he then fly him?


Vli. Because he thinks him to be his enemy.


Ele. And yet notwithstanding he never saw, what thing hatred was: see then,
how we can think on things that we never saw.


Vli. It is true that you have hunger, fiercely running, conferring all these
things together, he will judge he comes to hurt him: wherefore he will chose
to run away. So that thou may see how much all these powers are more
perfect in us then in you.


Ele. I understand some of those things that thou show me, and some I
understand not.


Vli. This comes of thy nature, the which can c^yme no higher: wherefore
become man again, who is the most noble of all creatures, and thou shall
understand all together.


Ele. And what is the principal cause of his noblenes?


Vli. Two powers that he properly has, the which none other beast has, that
make him most excellent of all others. The one of the which is called
understanding, and the other is called will.


Ele. And what operations grow of these powers, that make him superior to us?


Vli. From the understanding the knowledge of things, and from the will, the
willinge and not willinge.


Ele. Do not the sense and appetite the self same thing in us?


Vli. Yea, but so much as is only necessary unto your life, and far more
imperfectly: for they work not only in man, for the conservation of the being,
but of the good and happy being. For the understanding (beginning with him,
for that a thing is first understood before it is willed or refused) perceives
not only the singular things, as the sense does (for this is the most base
operacion, because, as I told the before, for that they varye continually, one
can not get of them any true certainty of any thing at all) but understands
the vniuersalles, forming in him self a knowledge representative of mo
indiuisibles, of one only kind, in the which mo perticulers do equallye
agree, the which knowledge he makes in this manner. The phantasye represents
a semblaunce unto the understanding, and the kind of one only man: with
those conditions, that make him to be one only indivisible, that is to say,
that he is in one particular place, and that he is now, and of such shape, and
such: and for that such one is not found as has these such conditions, other
then that indivisible only: the understanding in this knowledge, knows none
other thing then that particular manne. But if he turn after into that
resemblaunce, and upon that kind, and begin to dispoile him of those
particular conditions, taking all that away that is particular, in that
indivisible: and beholding only the human nature, the which is in him,
forms in him self an intellectiue kind, bringing forth this universal
knowledge: the which is, that human nature is a corporal substance,
mortal, and able to perceive reason: and that in this, all men equally agree.


Ele. And what more perfection in it self has this universal knowledge of this
your understanding, then the particular knowledge of our sense has?


Vli. A greater suerty of knowing, then that, that thou know is so, and none
otherwise: and that thou can not be deceived: the which thing the sensitive
knowledge can never have. For he that sees this man, and that other man,
reasonable, knows not yet herefore assuredlye that every man is reasonable.
And so he that sees that a Dog perceyueth, and a Horse perceives, he shall
not know by this that all Dogs, and all Horses perceive. But he who knows
that man is none other thing, then a reasonable creature, knows that every
man is reasonable: and he who knows that a beast is none other then a
corporal substance, animate of a sensitive soul: knows that every Dog,
and every Horse being a beast perceives. And besides this he is sure, that
that, that he knows, is so: and he can not be deceived: for he knows it by
his proper cause, forasmuch as the being man is cause, that this and the other
particular man understands: and the being a beast is occasion that this
Dog and that Horse perceives.


Ele. Surely I begin to know, that this your intellectiue knowledge, is far
more noble, for the certeyntie thereof, then our sensitive knowledge is.


Vli. Our understanding can also perceive, things not only holely and set all
togethes, as your sense does: but can consider seperatelye, all the
intentions, and all the properties that are in them particulerlye: whereby for
an example, when he sees a whyt^ thing, he can of him self understand what
thing whytenes is, and how it is a color seperatiue of the seeing virtue ^^
and what body that is, in whose superfyciall it is grounded, where as your
sense can not know white, but in knowing a white thing, and comprehendinge
with one like knowledge, the subject, with the form and accidents. For the
seeing virtue can not take the color of him self, but the thing colored. And
that this is true, mark how you never make judgment of colors, but only of
things colored: as also all those men do, who follow only the knowledge of
the sense.


Ele. Truly this way of knowinge, is very plain and distinct.


Vli. Our understanding can also, by knowing perfectly the nature of things,
affyrminge and denying, set them together, and likewise deuyde them: the which
the sense can not do. For knowing that the substance receives and ^^ steyneth
the accidents, and that the bodies sustain the colors, the which are
accidents he puts these two natures togethers^ saying affirmatiuelye, the
body is a substance: and so knowing that the substance is governed of it
self, and that the color can not be but in others, he will deuyde, and
separate these two natures, with denyinge the one not to be the other, saying
the color is no substance. And besides this, he can with many of these
affy^mations, and of these negations, bring forth many diverse conclusions,
that the sense could never have known: the which thing you can not do. For
though you fly some thing that is noisome unto you, you do it not affyrminge,
or denying by way of discourse, for this operation passes your power: but
guided by the appetite that draws you, without any thought at al so to do.


^l. And this also I understand very well.


Vli. Our understanding climeth yet higher: for he loking on the semblaunces,
and upon the images of those things that the senses have reposed in the
fantasy, draws out of them that knoledge of many mo things, then those yt the
senses have known, as well the inner senses, as outer. For by the means of
the^ he knows the universal natures, and the fourmes separate from the
matter, and the intelligences that move the heavens. And finally, the first
cause of all things, unto the which knowledge, neither the fantasy, nor the
estimatiue, nor any other of your powers can ariue.


^^. And after what sort can he arrive unto the knowledge of the first
causes?


Vli. Not only by negation, as many have said: but ymagininge a first cause,
and then after denyinge all the predicates of the same, the which have in them
any imperfection at all, as all the material conditions are, the which we see
to be in these corporal creatures, saying: that this first cause can not be
engendered, is incorruptible, and not variable, by accident, or by any
alteration, not taken from any place, not made, not subject to any point of
continuau^ce, and such other things: nor also only by that other means of
passing excellency, as certain others say, affyrming that it passes in
goodness, in beautye, in amiablenes, and in all other perfections, al good
things, fair, loving, and perfect, that we see in this universal world. But
he can know it loking in him self. For he considering the nobility of his
nature, the which consysteth only in this, that understanding all things, as
well such as are inferior unto him, as those that are above him, can after a
certain sort make him self like unto them all, and become all. And
consideringe afterward that imperfection, the which he finds in him self,
that is so say: that he is in power unto all things, but not yet in act, and
therefore understands not always, but sometime ye, and sometime no: he can
form within him self a kind of an understanding more high, and more perfect
then him self, the which may be always in act, and may always understand
all things, and has so understood them from the beginning, and can not be in
power to receive any intelligence again, having the kinds in him self of al
things that have been, or ever shall be. And this is the first cause, who
having governed, and always goueror as signifying of some comune passion, as
joy, sorrow, fear and such like are, as you do: but we also understand the
signification thereof, by the means of the words determined by us, to declare
our meanynges, in such sort as we best list: whereby it is that man only
among all other creatures, is able to take learning. By reason whereof they
who know little, may be made better learned and more wise by them that know
more: and although the master can not form in the scoller, an intelligible
kind of that that he teaches him, he notwithstanding ministereth to him the
way and means, that he may of him self form it. Certain most wise
Egiptians being heretofore moved by this so great virtue and / property of the
understanding, called man, earthly god, divine, and celestial creature:
messenger of the gods, Lord of the inferioure things, and famylier of the
superioure: and finally a miracle of nature.


Ele. Truly this understanding makes him so excellent, and so noble, that it
is no meruell, that they have called him by so worthy and honorable names.


Vli. The will also makes him no less excellent, then that his other
particular power that he has: by the mean of the which he will or will not
frelye, that that he judges good or ill, with the understanding: as you also
follow, or fly, that you judge convenient, or inconvenient with the sense.


Ele. Could not the appetite do the self same office, without ioining other
power in man?


Vli. No: for folowinge the appetite, the sense covers or hates only those
things, that the sense knows: and notwithstanding we see that man loves
many virtues, and hates many vices, the which chance not under the sensitive
knowledge. And this power (as I have told thee) makes man very noble: for it
makes him free, and master of all his operations. And this is for that the
will is free, and has not been determined by nature, more unto one contrary,
then unto an other. For although the good be her obiecte, she is not therefore
determined more unto that, then unto the contrary. Wherefore it is not with it
as with the natural elements, who being nere their obiectes and having due
distaunce between them, can not chose but work: as it is manifestly seen in
the fire, the which having a matter by it apt to burn, can not stay to not
burn it. But our will, having a good thing set before it, and though it be
somewhat enclyned by nature to follow it, is not yet constrained by any
necessity to love it: whereby she may love it and not love it. Then all the
other powers that man has as a creature, are subject unto this power, not
always in such sort that they can not be moved by their obiectes, without the
commandment of the same will, but for that they are dispoled and ordained,
to move at all times that it pleases her. Where by all though the sight, when
a visible obiecte is presented unto it, is moved naturally by that: the will
may command it that it turn it unto an other obiecte, and so may she do to
all the other sensitive powers. And there is no obiecte, nor force at all,
either of earthly, or celestial things, that can command her that she will,
but that that she list: the which is not so with your sensitive appetite, For
an obiecte offered unto it, that it desires, moves of necessity the beast to
follow it naturally, and without any election, as every body may well know, who
will diligently observe your operations.


Ele. And what worthiness gives unto man this his free will?


Vli. A worthiness so marvelous, that those chief wise men of Egipte (as I
have told thee) called him for this only, the great miracle of nature.


Ele. For what cause?


Vli. For that al other creatures, have had a certain law, by the which
they can comme to none other end, then that the which was ordained unto them
by nature, nor can in no wise goo forth of those bonds that she has
appointed unto them. And man, by having this will free, may obtain a more
woorthye, or less worthy end, at his pleasure: either in bindinge him self
toward those things, that are inferioure unto him, or turninge him self
toward those that are superior unto him. For if he will give him self wholly
unto the belly: holding his countenance, and face continually fixed on the
earth, he shall become as one that perceives nothing, and like to the
plants: and if he shall drown him self to much in the sensitive pleasure, he
shall become like the brute beasts: but if he lifting his face toward
heaven, playing the philosopher, shall consider the beauty of the heavens, and
the marvelous order of nature, he shall change him self from an erthly beast,
unto an heavenly creature: and if he, dispising all the impedimentes of the
body, shall attend to behold the divine things, he shall make him self
almost a god. Who shall there then be that maruaileth not at this man? who is
not only most noble and lord of al other beasts, but he has also this
particular condition, given by nature, that he can do, all that he will


Ele. And what is then the cause, that this his will having the good for an
object, and working freely, you most commonly chosing that that is not good:
follow vices, and leave virtue aparte?


Vli. For that the will is so maruelouslye united and knytte unto the senses,
and that our understanding must take (unto the knowledge of the which
understanding, the election of the will follows) all his knowledges by the
sense: who most commonly shows unto him, in change of the true good, a good
disguised. Whereby the will being drawn and set loose by the knowledge of that,
and by the intisementes of the senses, though she chose not that that is not
good, at the least she flies it not: and she does not severely the office,
that she should, to command the sensitive appetite: and so all our errors,
depend finally, by those parts of nature: that we have without reason,
together and in common with you: and not by those by the which we are men.


Ele. No more, no more Ulysses, cause me now to leave this beastyshe nature,
and to become man again, ^or my loss was to great, to have been so long time
converted by Gyrces into an Elephante.


Vli. And I grant it thee by the authority


And of that, that the waters sweet, does sprinkle on her face.
To nourish all that mortal is, and of the same also,
That has so many sundry kinds, of creatures high and low,
Made for the service al of man: and of that, that to him
Has given an understanding clear, to the end that he should climme.
And have thereby the knoledge true, of that first cause of might,
And then a will in him well set, to love the same aryght.
O ye my powers every one, praise ye that cause with me,
And let the gladness of my spirit, thereto with you agree.
O al ye gifts then of my soul, with me se that ye sing,
Of thuniuersall and first cause, of all and every thing.
Of mine understanding thou light, and fredome of my will,
Agree in one of that same cause, the heavens with praise to fill.
O everlasting mouer great, that no beginning had,
Nor shall have end, thy creature manne, that thereto is most glad,
Is he that syngs this day thy praise, and prays with all his powers,
That honor high, and glory great, to thee be years and hours.
Vli. Thou had not this knowledge of the first cause of this hole world,
whiles thou liuedst in that body of a beast.


Agla. No: but as soon as I was become man again I felt it spring in my mind,
almost as my natural property: or rather to say better, I felt it return
into me again. For before I was transformed by Circes into an Elephante, I
remember that I had it (but now I have this more, that having much more
perfectly known the noblenes of man, then I did before, I begin to think that
this first cause having loved him, above all other things, as the making him
more noble then any other beast does plainly declare, that his end, shall not
be like unto thend of other beasts* ^^^ not having the understanding



