THE DOLEFVLL Euen-Song, OR A TRVE, PARTICVLAR AND IMPARTIAL narration of that
fearful and sudden calamity, which befell the Preacher Mr. DRVRY a Jesuit,
and the greater part of his Auditory, by the downfall of the floor at an
assembly in the Blackfriars on Sunday the 26. of October. last, in the after
noone.

TOGETHER WITH THE Rehearsal of Master DRVRIE his Text, and the division
thereof, as also an exact Catalogue of the names of such as perished by this
lamentable accident: And a brief application thereupon.

MATTHEW. 7. 1. Judge not, that ye be not judged. LONDON, Printed by John
Hauiland, for William Barret, and Richard Whitaker, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Kings head, 1623.

To the Christian moderate Reader.
Upon Judden accidents men commonly pass sudden censures, and for want of
deliberate and steady aim, under or ouershoot the mark: especially that kind
of mark, which the most skillful hand, guided by the sharpest eye, can never
certainly hit, scarce distinctly discern. Of Gods judgments iudiciously Saint
Augustine, and modestly, Iudicia Dei nemo potest comprehendere, nemo certe
reprehendere. No man can comprehend them, no man may reprehend them. Boldly
therefore may a moderate spirit undertake to reprehend those encroachers upon
Gods prerogative, who take upon them to comprehend in the small vessel of
their shallow understanding the boundless Ocean of Gods secret judgments:
having no other conduit thereunto, then the ouert act of a corporal stroke,
and outward chastisement.

Jn the sounding the depth of this late dismal accident, it is not hard to
discern what tongues and pens have, out of partial obliquitie, or precipitate
judgment, cast too short, or lost their plummet in the deep.

To avoid which inconveniences, the chief care and endeavor, taken in this
ensuing Tract, has been partly by a more certain information to strengthen
the line, and partly to lengthen the same by a more particular and fuller
relation: that so the indifferent reader, taking the plummet into his own
hand, may cast with the better aim, for the shunning all rocks and quicksands,
either of stupid neglect, in not considering at all, or of ouer-curious prying,
in the personal application, of Gods extraordinary works in this kind.

So judge well, and Farewell.

Thine in Christ, T. Goad.

BLACKFRIARS LONDON, 1623.
October. 26. Nouemb. 5. stilo veteri nouo, being Sunday.




ABout three of the clock in the afternoon of the aforesaid Sunday, in a
large Garret, being the uppermost, and from the ground the third story of an
high building of Stone and Brick, were assembled a multitude of people, Men
and Women, of diverse ages and conditions, amounting to the number of two or
three hundred persons, to hear a Sermon there to be preached by one Master
Drury, a Romish Priest, and Jesuit of name, and special note. To this Garret
or Gallery, (being situated over the Gate House of the French Ambassadors
house) there is a leading passage by a door close to the utter gate of the
said house, but without it, open to that street: By which passage many men and
women used to have daily recourse to the English Priests chambers there.

There is also out of the said Lord Ambassadors withdrawing Chamber, another
passage meeting with this, and both leading into the said Garret. Which Garret
was within the side walls, about seventeen foot wide, and forty foot long: at
the upper end whereof was a new partition of slit Deal, set up to make a
private room for one of the Priests, which abated twelve foot of the length.
About the midst of the Gallery, and near to the wall, was set, for the
Preacher, a Chair, raised up somewhat higher then the rest of the floare, and
a small table before it. In this place the Auditorie being assembled, and some
of the better sort having chaires and stools to sit on, the many standing in
throng, and filling the room to the door and stairs, all expecting the
Preacher, he came forth out of an inner room, clad in a Surplice, which was
girt about his waste with a linen girdle, and a Stole of Scarlet color
hanging down before him from both his shoulders. Whom a man attended, carrying
in one hand a Book, and in the other an Houre-glasse. An Emblem not unfit to
suggest to him, his Auditorie, and us all, that their, and our lives, not only
pass away continually with the defluxion of that descending motion of the
Sand; but also, even in such times and places, may possibly fore-runne the
same, and be ouerturned before that short hourly Calendar should come to
recourse.

Master Drury the Priest, as soon as he came to the Chair, kneeled down at
the foot of it, making by himself in private some eiaculation of a short
prayer, as it seemed, about the length of an Aue Marie. Then standing up, and
turning his face toward the people, he crossed himself formally: premising no
vocal audible prayer at all, (neither before his Text, nor upon the division
of it) wherein the people might join with him, for the blessing and
sanctifying an action of that Nature. Which omission, whether it were a lapse
of memory in him, or a privilege of custom belonging to those supereminent
instructors, I dispute not; but leave it to the conscionable judgment of every
Christian.

Immediately he took the Book, being the Rhemists Testament, and in it read
his Text, which was the Gospel appointed for that Sunday, according to the
institution of the Church of Rome; which day now fell upon the fifth of November
by the Gregorian Calendar, current ten days before ours, and accounted by the
Romanists the only true Computation. Whereupon some go so far as to make a
numerall inference of a second reflecting Tragedy. But, for my part, I
surrender all such iudiciarie calculation into the hands of the Highest, who
according to his providence disposes of times and seasons, and of all events
befalling in them.

The said Gospel in the Rhemists translation, is as follows in these words:
Therefore is the Kingdom of Heaven likened to a man being a King, The Gospel
upon the 21. Sunday after Pentecost.
that would make an account with his servants. And when he began to make the
account, there was one presented unto him that owed him ten thousand Talents.
And having not whence to repay it, his Lord commanded that he should be sold,
and his wife and children, and all that he had, and it to be repaied. But that
servant falling down, besought him, saying, Have patience toward me, and I
will repay thee all. And the Lord of that servant moved with pity, dismissed
him, and the debt he forgave him. And when that servant was gone forth, he
found one of his fellow-seruants that did owe him an hundred pence: and laying
hands upon him thratled him, saying, Repay that thou owe. And his
fellow-seruant falling down, besought him, saying, Have patience toward me,
and I will repay thee all. And he would not: but went his way and cast him into
prison, till he repayed the debt. And his fellow-seruants seeing what was done,
were very sorry, and they came, and told their Lord all that was done. Then his
Lord called him: and he said unto him, Thou ungracious servant, I forgave thee
all the debt because thou besoughtest me: ought not thou therefore also to
have mercy upon thy fellow-seruant, even as I had mercy upon thee? And his Lord
being angry, delivered him to the tormenters, until he repayed all the debt.
So also shall my heavenly Father do to you, if you forgive not every one his
brother from your hearts.

Which when he had read, he sat down in the chair, and put upon his head a
red quilt cap, having a linen white one under it turned up about the brimmes:
and so undertook his Text; first showing in plain and familiar style the
occasion of our Saviors delivering this parable, then distributing the whole
into parts, as they depended one on the other; out of which he chose three
principal points of doctrine, which he propounded to insist upon in that
Sermon, viz.

1 The debt which man owes to God: and the account which he is to make unto
him of that debt.

2 Gods mercy in remitting this great debt.

3 Man's hardness of heart, and frowardness, both toward God and toward his
brethren: together with the remedies, which man may use for the procuring of
Gods mercy, and curing himself from this contagious disease of ingratitude.

Man's debt he amplified in regard of our creation, and redemption, the
spiritual and temporal benefits, which we enjoy in this world, and in Gods
Church, etc.

Upon the following parts he discoursed with much vehemence, insisting
especially upon those words, I forgave thee all thy debt, should not thou
also have had compassion on thy fellow, even as I had pity on thee? And thence
extolling the infinite mercy and goodness of God, whereby he does not only
give us all that we have, but forgiues us all our trespasses and offenses, be
they net uer so deeply stained with the scarle* dye and tincture of our
guiltiness Which merciful bounty of our heavenly Father is here parabolized
unto us by a certain man that was a king, etc.

Two or three of that auditory auow with joint testimony, that, in the process
of the latter part, which he handled, he earnestly laid open the terrors and
burden of the heavy debt of punishment, which we are to pay at the last
judgment, if the debt of sin be not acquitted before. Declaring withal the
mercy of God in providing means to cancel this debt, by the Sacraments
ordained in the Catholic Church, in special by the Sacrament of Penance; and
therein by Contrition, Confession, and Satisfaction. And thence inferring in
what miserable case Heretics are, who want all such means to come out of
this debt, because they are not members of the Catholic Church.

But whatsoever the matter, or manner of his last speech was, I do not
curiously enquire, as making interpretation of Gods judgment in stopping the
current of his speech at that instant. Lest in over forward censuring the same,
we should be deemed as uncharitable, as our Adversaries, especially the
Jesuits, are against those Churches and persons that admit not the Papacy.

Most certain it is, and over manifest by lamentable evidence, that, when the
said Jesuit had proceeded about half an hour in this his Sermon, there
befell that Preacher and Auditorie the most unexpected and sudden calamity,
that this age has heard of to come from the hand, not of Man, but God, in the
midst of a sacred exercise, of what kind or religion soever. The floare,
whereon that assembly stood or sat, not sinking by degrees, but at one instant
failing and falling, by the breaking asunder of a maine Sommier or Dormer of
that floare; which beam, together with the Ioyces and Plancher thereto
adjoined, with the people thereon, rushed down with such violence, that the
weight and fall thereof, brake in sunder another far stronger and thicker
Sommier of the Chamber situated directly underneath: and so both the ruined
floares, with the people ouerlapped and crushed under, or between them, fell,
(without any time of stay) upon a lower third floare, being the floare of the
said Lord Ambassadors withdrawing Chamber; which was supported underneath with
Arch-work of stone, (yet visible in the Gate House there) and so became the
bundarie or term of that confused and doleful heap of ruins, which
otherwise had sunk yet deeper by the own weight and height of the downfall:
the distance from the highest floare, whence the people fell, to the lowest,
where they lay, being about two and twenty foot in depth.

Of the Gallery floare only so much fell, as was directly over a Chamber of 20.
foot square, called Father Redyates Chamber, and being the usual Massing room
for the English resorting thither. The rest of the Gallery floare, being not so
full thronged, stood firm, and so was a refuge and safeguard to those of the
Auditorie that had planted themselves at that end. From whence they beheld that
most Tragical Scene of their brethrens ruin; themselves also being not only
surprised with the stupifying passions of affright, and apprehension of that
danger, which as yet they could not think themselves to have escaped, but also,
for the time, imprisoned in the place it self; from whence there was no
passage by door, or otherwise, unless they should adventure to leap down
into the gulf of their fellows woeful estate. In this perplexity, dismay it
self not bereauing them of counsel, but rather administering strength to
their trembling hands, they with their Knives opened the Loame-wall next unto
them, and so making their passage thence into another Chamber, escaped that
danger.

As for the rest (being the far greater part of this Assembly) who in a
moment all sunk down to the lowest floare, their case, as it can scarce be
paralleled with a like example of calamity, so hardly be described with the
due and true circumstances. Who can to the life express the face of Death,
presenting it self in so ruefull and different shapes?

Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis?
What ear, without tingling, can hear the doleful and confused cries of such
a troop, men, women, children, all falling suddenly in the same pit, and
apprehending with one horror the same ruin? What eye can behold, without
inundation of tears, such a spectacle of men overwhelmed with breaches of
weighty timber, buried in rubbish, and smothered in the dust? What heart,
without euaporating into sighs, can ponder the burden of deepest sorrows and
lamentations of parents, children, husbands, wives, kinsmen, friends, for their
dearest pledges, and chiefest comforts in this world, all bereft and swept away
with one blast of the same dismal tempest?

Such was the noise of this dreadful and unexpected downfall, that the whole
city of London presently rang of it, and forthwith the Officers of the city (to
whom the care of good order chiefly appertains) and in special Sergeant
Finch the Recorder, repaired thither the same evening, carefully providing for
the safety of the said Ambassadors house and family, and, for preventing all
disorders in such a confusion, that might arise by the confluence of the
multitude, shut up the gates and set guards upon the passages. With all speed
possible some were employed for the releeuing and saving such as yet struggled
for life under this heavy load: Which could not so soon be effected, as they
in charity desired; for that the ruins, which oppressed the sufferers, did
also stop up entrance to the helpers: who thereupon were feign to make a breach
in through an upper window of stone. From hence they hasted down with pickaxes
and other instruments, to force asunder, and take of, by peecemeale, the
oppressing load of beams, ioyces, and bords. At the opening whereof, what a
Chaos? what fearful objects? what lamentable representations? Here some
bruised, some dismembered, some only parts of men: there some wounded, and
weltering in their own and others blood, othersome putting forth their
fainting hands and crying out for help. Here some gasping and panting for
breath, others stifled for want of breath. To the most of them being thus
covered with dust, this their death was a kind of burial.

Have the gates of death been opened unto thee? Job. 38. 17.
or have thou seen the doares of the shadow of death? Verily if any man could
look in at those gates, and return, he would report such a pourtrait as was
this spectacle.

In this doleful task of withdrawing those impediments, laying forth the dead
bodies, and transporting the maimed, all that night, and part of the next day
was spent, though charity and skill did whet their endeavors with all
dexterity and expedition.

The next morning, according to the Laws of our Land, which provide that the
Kings Majesty should have an account of his Subjects dying Per infortunium,
the Coroners Inquest was there impanelled upon the dead corpses, that after
their view of them, they might be buried with convenient speed.

By the said Coroner, and Jury, especial care was taken to survey the place,
and materials of the ruins with all diligence, for the finding out the
immediate cause and manner thereof: the rather for that it was given out by
some presently upon the mischance, that some Protestants, knowing this to be a
chief place of their meetings, had secretly drawn out the pins, or sawed
half a sunder some of the supporting Timber of that building. Which was found
to be a calumny no less ridiculous, then malicious.

The most probable apparent cause of the sudden failing of that floare,
charged with such a weight of people, was judged to be in the maine Sommier
thereof, which being not above ten inches square, had in the very place, where
it brake, on each side a mortaise hole directly opposite the one against the
other, into which were let the Tenants of two great pieces of Timber, called
Girders: so that between those Mortaises, there was left not above three
inches of Timber. This Sommier was also somewhat knottie about that place,
which, in the opinion of Architects, might make it more brittle, and ready to
knap in sunder. The maine Sommier of the lower room, was about thirteen
inches square, without any such Mortaise; and brake, not (as the former) in the
midst, but within five foot of one end, and more obliquely and shiuering then
the other. No foundation, nor wall failed. The roof of the Gallery with the
seeling upon it remain yet entire; as also a small filling wall, fastened to
the rafters, which yet hangs where the floare is gone.

This downfall was not to al deadly: to some only frightfull, or in part
hurtful: who being thus taken up out of the pit of horrible danger, nay
plucked out of the very jaws of Death, as also those other of this Assembly,
who (as before said) fell not at all, but yet stood in the very brinke of this
mortal ieopardie, have all great cause never to forget this day, but to enter
it into their Calendar for a merciful and miraculous deliverance. Neither is
it enough for them to lift up their hearts in thanksgiving to God (as I make no
doubt they do) for this unexpected rescue from so great an unsuspected death,
but they are also to lay it to their hearts, whether this sudden stroke and
crack be not the hand, and voice of God, to call them home from wandering after
foreign Teachers, that lead the ignorant people captive and carry them
hood-winked into the snares of danger, corporal, civil, and spiritual: that
hereupon they may seriously consider what ground they have to forbear, or
forsake our Church Assemblies, and to refrain from hearing so much as our
divine service, against which they have no other exception, but this, that in
hearing it they may hear, and understand, whereas in the Romish Service, even
in the Euen-song then intended in this conuenticle, audientes audirent, and non
intelligerent, videntes viderent, and non cernerent. The women, and common
people might understand as much as they do this sentence in Latin, taken out
of the Prophet Isay, too truly prophesying of such.

Of those that fell, and escaped without any notable hurt, I hear of by name
some persons of note, as Mistress Lucie Penruddock of a worthy family, who fell
between two that then perished, the Lady Webb and her own maid servant, yet
was herself preserved alive by the happy situation of a chair, which falling
with her, rested hollow over her, and so became to her a shelter, or penthouse
to bear off other ruins: also the Lady Webbs daughter, though falling near
unto her mother, and Eleanor Saunders, who was covered with others that fell
upon her, yet by Gods mercy, recovered out of those bloody ruins.

There was also a Scholar, (whom my self since saw and had speech withal)
who was the easier drawn to that Assembly, because he formerly was inclining
and warping to that side, as has appeared by public evidence. He was also
inuolued in this common downfall, whereout he escaped beyond expectation:
being one of the undermost in that heap, and lying upon the very floare, and
overwhelmed with the boards and timber, which lay upon him, yet not so flat,
and sad, as upon others, but somewhat hollow and sheluing, by the leaning of
some of the timber against the wall. Out of this den of death he, with maine
strength and much difficulty, wrought himself, by tearing the laths of the
seeling, and creeping between two ioyces, from under the timber to an hole
where he espied light: and then one of the Ambas. family opening a door
relieved him being yet so astonished that he scarce was apprehensiue of the
courtesy done to him. Who thus refreshed, presently returned and used his best
strength to draw others out of that snare, which he himself had newly broken,
without any other detriment than of his clothes; of which fair escape I hope,
he will make good use, and often call to mind our Saviors caveat, (which
since in my hearing has been rung in his ears) Vade and ne pecca amplius, ne
deterius conting at tibi.

There was also (as he reports) a young girl of the age of ten years, or
thereabout, who then crying said unto him, O my Mother, O my sister, which are
down under the timber and rubbish. But he wishing her to be patient, and
telling her that by Gods grace they should get forth quickly, the child
replied, that this would prove a great scandal to their Religion. A strange
speech proceeding from a child of so tender years, who, even in that
perplexity, seemed to have a deeper apprehension of public scandal, then of
private loss. A lesson fit for far elder to learn, ex ore infantium, and
lactentium, etc. Out of the mouth of babes and sucklings thou have ordained
strength.

Moreover, one of the men that fell, then saying, O what advantage will our
adversaries take at this; another of them replied thereto, If it be Gods will
this should befall us, what can we say to it? A pious answer, and Christian
resolution, borrowed, as it seems, from the patience of the Prophet David,
Tacui, Domine, quia tu fecisti. I held my peace, because thou, Lord, have done
it.

An hard task it were to undertake the giving a particular account of the
number and quality of those that any ways suffered in this fall, the diversity
of reports, according to men's private inclinations, enlarging or contracting
the same. In general most evident it is that of the people that fell, those
that escaped best for bodily hurt, were, at (...) howsoever deeply stricken in
their minds with affright and fear: others were bruised or wounded, but not
mortally, receiving only a gentle stripe from the merciful hand of a
chastizing father; others for the present came forth, or rather were carried
out, with life, but enjoyed it for a short time, yielding up the same in their
several homes within a few days, yea some not many hours, as by
after-enformation to the Coroners Jury, yet depending, may appear. But the
greater number of those that fell never rose again, nor shall, till the
Elements shall melt with heat, and the ruins of a far greater fabrique than
that house, (even of the whole earth with the works thereof) shall awake them,
and us all, out of the bed of death, to give account of what we have done in
the body.

Of these, whom it pleased God thus to call out of this world, the number is
most currently estimated to be between 90. and 100. If any man, out of
affection to them, or curiosity, enquire more exactly, of the Ambassadors
house, was dug a great pit, (eighteen foot long, and twelve foot broad) in
which were laid four and forty corpses in order, piled one upon the other,
partners in the same bed, as a little before they were in the same passage to
it. Upon this common Grave, was set up in the earth, a black Cross of wood,
about four foot high, which on Tuesday in the afternoon, was by one of the
Ambassadors servants taken up and carried into the house, lest (as it seems)
any scandal should be taken thereat by the people, that then, and after, came
to that house to view the Stage of this mournful Tragedy.

There was also another pit, (long twelve foot, broad eight foot) made in the
said Ambassadors Garden near adjoining, wherein fifteen other were interred.

Beside these dispersedly here above numbered, there are heard of upon diligent
inquiry of the said Jury and others, diverse more increasing the list of this
funeral troop, whose names follow in the Catalogue.

As for interpretation and application of this so remarkable and doleful an
accident, our duty is first to entertain a Christian and charitable opinion of
their persons whose lot it was to become an example unto others: and secondly
to make a profitable use thereof unto our selves.

Too well known it is to the world, how hardly our adversaries conceive,
speak, and write, not only of our Religion, but also of our persons, damning
and tumbling down all of us without difference into the bottomless pit of
destruction, and throwing upon our heads, not the ruins of one loft or house,
but the whole mountains of Gods wrath and heauiest judgments. Such curses and
edicts of damnation against us their pulpits thunder out, their printing
presses groan under, their pamphlets and libells proclaim; all we are given
gone for Cast-awaies, Miscreants, damned Heretics; With us no Church, no
Faith, no Religion, no God.

If such a calamity had befallen any flock of ours in our Common prayer, or
Sermons, all must have gone quick to hell: there would have been more
inuectiue several censures and books against us than were here persons
suffering. What exclamation of the downfall of heresy, of the passing away of
novelties with a crack, of receiving a terrible blow, of the very beams in
the wall crying out against us, of the ruin of old wormeaten heresies, of the
trash and rubbish of the new Gospel demolished. In such sort upon less
occasions, are we and our profession traduced and slandered publicly beyond
the seas, and privately in corners at home. Nor is it marvel that such flashes
to scorch us in our good names, are cast forth out of that fiery Aetna of
Romish zeal, which has sent forth material flames to consume many of our
living bodies, and some also of our dead. Hic liuor nec post fata quiescit. And
though this fire has been covered with ashes in these parts, for many happy
years, yet of late a spark thereof brake forth, even in the midst of the
bonfires kindled in London at the happy return of our Prince; when as a
certain Roman Zelote, This party was one of the assembly, yet living, and
received a mark of remembrance there, by a piece of wood, who thus a little
before took care for saving wood.
repining at the excessive expense of fuel therein, said openly in the hearing
of many that if such waste of wood were made, there would shortly be never a
faggot left to burn heretics.

But we have otherwise learned Christ, who being reviled, did not revile
again, but committed his cause to him that judges righteously; Et preces
effudit pro ijs etiam, qui sanguinem eius effuderu^t; and powered out prayers
for those, that shed and powered forth his blood, (as says an ancient Father.)
From him we learn not to insult over our enemies, or to rejoice at their
ruin, but to weep at their calamity: not to enter into Gods secrets, but to
tremble at his judgments.

And therefore our duty, in regard of their persons, is first to be tender and
careful how so much as in our inward thoughts we pass any particular
judgment upon them. For though the event it self may seem to offer a
topicall inference from the fall of both the floores; namely, of the preaching
and the Massing room, that both their Doctrine and Sacrifice are weakly and
slenderly supported, and that God was displeased as well with their Pulpits, as
Altars; yet for the particular estate of those who were combined in that
action, and enueloped in the same passion, it were most uncharitable and
groundless from their temporal destruction in this time and place, to collect
their eternal confusion.

And howsoever our Adversaries for the truth of their Church draw an Argument
no less unnatural than uncharitable, from the supposed, sudden, and unhappy
ends, of some of those whom they call Heretics, and to that end forge hideous
fables of the death of Luther, Calvin, etc. and in particular, very lately some
of them have passed an heavy censure upon Doctor Sutton, a learned and
painful Preacher, and solid Refuter of their errors, whom to the great loss
of our Church,

Abstulit vnda vorax and funere mersit acerbo, Over whom they triumph, as if
the deep therefore swallowed him, because he was unworthy to tread upon the
earth, or breathe in the air; Yet we ought to be, and are far from saying
that the Plancher of that building would not bear these Romanists, because
they were more laden with the weight of sin, then others. We are taught by
the Chapter appointed in the Calendar to be read in our Churches the very next
morning after this doleful accident, to judge otherwise. Luke 13. There were
present at that season, some that told him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate
had mingled with their sacrifices. And Jesus answered, and said unto them,
Suppose ye that these Galileans were greater sinners then all the other
Galileans, because they have suffered such things? I tell you nay.

Secondly, we are to condole for them, and that in three respects. First, out
of natural humanity, as they are men, of the same mould with us, subject all
to the same passions, and liable to the same outward calamities, and dangers of
this mortal life. In this consideration every of us is to say to himself, of
himself and others.

Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto. Secondly, out of moral civility,
as fellow-borne Countrymen, and natural Subjects unto the same most gracious
King, in whose eyes the death of his meanest Subjects is precious. In this
respect every of us, either presently viewing that Tragical spectacle of so
many bruised and battered carkases, so many smothered corpses, which yesterday
breathed the same English air with us: Or shortly after hearing of so woeful
an History, is, with tears in the eye, and melting grief in the heart, to
deplore at least with some such Epitaph, or funeral Elegy, as was used by a
Lacedemonian.

(...). Thirdly and principally, out of Christian charity, as toward those
who profess the name of Christ, and devotion in his worship, howsoever tainted
with many errors and superstitions, of which their Leaders and Guides are more
guilty than the simple obedient flock misled by them. In this duty we are
every of us to grieve for those that are gone, and to commiserate with the holy
Apostle, the present estate of such other as remain captiuated in the same
blindness of Ignorance, Romans 9. and 10. I have great heaviness, and
continual sorrow in my heart, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to the
flesh. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for Israel, is that they
might be saved. For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God, but
not according to knowledge.

This for our construction hereof, as we look down upon others in their fall.
Now for our instruction as this example reflecteth upward upon our selves.
Wherein first our ingratitude is checked, and thankfulness awaked which we
owe unto God for our manifold preseruations, as in other kinds perpetually, so
not seldom in this. Surely if our heavenly Father should cease his care of
preserving us, as we too often give over our due care of serving him, nor field,
nor house, nor Church it self should be safe unto us: carnal security and
forgetfulness of God creeping into not only our chambers, halls, and
receptacles of mirth and iollity, but too often even into the house of God it
self: the Temple of our spiritual sacrifices being not so reverently
frequented as our duty and profession require. And yet, howsoever we may
observe Gods hand sometimes to have overtaken diverse of our brethren by
downfalls upon the earth, or into the water, and of late by the fearful dint
of fire darted from heaven with thunder, and other humane casualties, at home
or abroad, yet have our sacred assemblies (for ought I can remember) been free
from mortality by ruin. And whereas we have many examples of the decay and
sudden lapse of diverse our material Temples made with hands, yet has God so
disposed of the time or manner of such ruins, that none of the living Temples
of the Holy Ghost have been demolished thereby. Witness in London the
Churches of Lothbury, of St. Butolfs, of St. Giles in the fields, and the
Church it self of the Blackfriars: in all which the stones forbear their
downward motion, till the peoples absence. And most lately in the Town of
Netesherd in Norffolk, the beams of the Church roof being by the fall of the
steeple beaten down among the people in time of Prayer, yet not one perished
thereby. To these perhaps many reading and pondering this, can add other
examples of the like preseruations in other places of this land. The memory
whereof must revive our hearty thanks to God, with prayer for our future
protection, especially in the houses of prayer, wherein he is worshipped in
spirit and truth by us, and his word preached soundly and faithfully unto us.

Secondly, forasmuch as some few of this Assembly were not in opinion
Romanists, nor came thither out of affection to the Popish party, but rather
out of curiosity, to observe their rites and manner of Preaching, especially
upon the ^ame given out, and expectation of then and there hearing a rare man,
an admirable Jesuit, a Preacher Nonpareil, in comparison of whom the greatest
Lights of the Protestant Ministry are but Glowormes; this may be a special
Caveat to such roauing wanderers as only tasted of that Cup whereof others
drank the Dregs: they were some of them justly stricken in body, though not
mortally, but all in mind, with terror, amazement, and horrible consternation.
And one, as is said, felt the utmost of that stroke, and for company took part
with those in death, with whom he consented not in life and opinion. Pliny the
elder (as his Nephew reports of him) paid dear for the satisfaction of his
curiosity, when, not content with Contemplation, and Relation from others, he
would needs in person approach near, to behold with his eyes the very flames
of the burning hill Vesuuius in Italy, the sulphurous smoke and vapor
whereof, presently stifled him. To come nearer to our selves, those Christians
escaped not much better, who (as both Tertullian and Cyprian observe) when they
were present at the Theaters and shows, instituted to the honor of the
Heathen gods, were suddenly surprised and vexed by the Devil, who was nimble
enough to maintain his claim to them, by pleading Inueni in meo, I took them
as I found them, upon mine own ground. What though the Romanists presume far
without warrant, and dare outface our Laws, which wholesomly provide against
such conuenticles, yet let every obedient subject and child of our Church,
beware how he put his foot into such snares: resolving rather with the holy
Patriarch, and saying in his heart, O my soul, enter not thou into their
secret: Genesis 49. 6
unto their assembly mine honor be not thou yoaked. In such cases the Prophets
have used and enforced from exorbitant examples argument, not of imitation, but
auersation, and opposition. Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah sin.

Thirdly, for us all, these dead corpses ought to be a lively mirror, wherein
we are to behold what we may expect in that kind, or some other, even far
worse, if we do not prevent and auert Gods judgments by judging our selves,
and unfeignedly repenting of our sinful courses. Out of such examples our
Savior reads us a double Lecture, not only of charity, in not censuring
others, but also of repentance, in censuring and condemning our selves, that we
be not condemned of the Lord. Unless ye repent, Luke 13. 4.
ye shall all likewise perish. A vain plea it will be, That we have cast out
of our Churches Romish superstitions, if we still retain in our souls and
bodies our predominant corruptions; that our faith and doctrine is most pure,
if our lives remain impure; that we have fair leaves and blossoms in our
outward profession, if we bring forth no fruit in our practice and
conversation. Reatus impij pium nomen, says the most religious Bishop Saluian.
An holy Title and profession, if the life be not suitable, is, not a plea, but
a guilt, not a diminution of offense, but an improuement. Well said Tertullian
of himself that, whereto every of us is to subscribe his own name, Ego omnium
notatoru^ peccator, nulli rei, nisi poenitentiae, natus. A sinner I am, marked
with spots of all kinds, and born to no other end, the^ to make my life a task
of repentance. We are all by profession bound apprentises to this Christian
trade, nay borne unto a kind of interest and propriety to it. Of all
intelligent natures only man is capable of that. God cannot repent, because he
cannot sin, nor err: an Angel, though mutable in his own nature, (and so
liable to sin) yet once falling by sin, can never rise by repentance. Only
man, falling, both in the universal ruinous estate of all his kind, and daily
in his actual lapses, has by the hand of Gods grace and mercy in Christ, the
cords of love reached forth, and let down into the pit unto him, whereof by
repentance and faith he takes hold, thence to be raised to newness of life,
and so forward to eternal life, through the merits and passion of our blessed
Redeemer, who came, not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.

LAMENT. 3. 22. It is of the Lords mercies that we are not consumed: because
his compassions fail not.
A Catalogue of the Names of such persons as were slain by the fall of the
room wherein they were in the Blacke-fryers, at Master Druries Sermon, the 26.
of October. 1623. Taken by information of the Coroners Jury.
MAster Drurie the Priest that preached. Mr. Ready are the Priest, whose lodging
was under the Garret that fell: the floor of which lodging fell too. Lady
Web in Southwarke. Lady Blackstones daughter, in Scroops Court. Thomas Web
her man. William Robinson Tailor, in Fetter lane. Robert Smith, Master (...)
Anne Dauison, Mr. Dauisons daughter, of the Middle-row in Holburne, Tailor.
Anthony Hall his man. Anne Hobdin. Marie Hobdin. lodging in Mr. Dauisons
house. John Galloway Vintener, in Clarkenwell Close. Mr. Peirson, Jane his
wife, Thom. and James, his two sons. in Robbinhood Court in Shoe lane.
Mistress Vdall. Katharine Pindar, a Gentle woman in Mrs. Vdals house. in
gunpowder alley. Abigal her maid. John Netlan a Tailor of Bassingborne in
Cambridge shiere. Nathaniel Coals, lying at one Shortoes in Barbican, Tailor.
John Halifaxe, sometimes a Waterbearer. Mary Rygbie, wife to John Rygbie in
Holburne, Confectioner. John Worralls son in Holburne. Thomas Brisket, his
wife, and his son, and maid, in Mountague close. Mistress Summers, wife to
Captain Summers in the Kings Bench. Marie her maid. Mistress Walsted in
Milkestreet. John Raines, an Attorney in Westminster. Robert Sutton, son to
Mr. Worral a Potter in Holburne. Edward Warren, lying at one Adams a Butcher,
in Saint Clement Danes. A son of Mr. Flood in Holborne, Scriuener* Elizabeth
White, Andrew Whites daughter in Holburne, Chandler. Mr. Stoker Tailor, in
Salisburie Court. Elizabeth Summers in Graies-Inne lane. Mr. Westwood. Iudeth
Bellows, wife of Mr. William Bellows in Fetter lane. A man of Sir Lues
Pembertons. Elizabeth Moore widow. John James. Morris Beucresse Apothecarie.
Dauie Vaughan, at Jacob Coldriches, Tailor in Graies Inn lane. Francis Man,
brother to William Man in Theeuing lane in Westminster. Richard Fitzgarrat, of
Graies Inn, Gent. Robert Heifime. Mr. Maufeild. Mr. Simons. Dorothy Simons.
Thomas Simons a boy. In Fesant Court in Cow lane. Robert Parker, near Land
stone, Merchant. Mistress Morton, at White-fryers. Mistress Norton, Marrian her
maid. at Mr. Babingtons in Bloomesburie. Francis Downs, sometimes in
Southampton house, Tailor. Edmond Shey, servant to Robert Euan of Graies Inn,
Gent. Iosilin Percy, servant to Sr. Henry Caruile, lying at Mistress Ploidons
house in high Holburne. John Tullye, servant to Mr. Ashborn, lying at Mr.
Barbers house in Fleetstreeet. John Sturges, the Lord Peter's man. Thomas Elis,
Sr. Lewis Treshams man. Michael Butler in Woodstreet, Grocer. John Button,
Coachman to Mistress Garret in Bloomesberry. Mistress Ettonet, lying at
Clearkenwellgreene. Edward Revel, servant to Master Nicholas Stone the Kings
Purueyor. Edmund Welsh, lying with Mr. Sherlock in high Holborne, Tailer.
Bartholomew Bauin, in White Lion Court in Fleetstreet, Clarke, Dauie an Irish
man, in Angel Alley in Graies Inn Gent. Thomas Wood, at Mr. Woodfalls over
against Graies Innegate. Christopher Hopper, Tailer lying there. George
Cranston, in Kings street in Westminster, Tailer. John Blitten. Jane Turner,
lying at one Gees in the old Baily. Frithwith Anne. Mistress Elton. Mr.
Walsteed. Marie Berrom. Henry Becket, lying at Mistress Clearks house in
Northumberland Alley in Fetter lane. Sarah Watsonne, daughter to Master
Watsonne a Chirurgian. John Beuans, at the seven Stars in Drury lane. Master
Harris. Mistress Tompson, at Saint Martins within Aldersgate, Habberdasher.
Richard F^^guift. George Ceaustour. Master Grimes, near the Hors-shooe tavern
in Drury lane. Mr. Knuckle a Painter dwelling in Cambridge. Master Fowell, a
Warwickshire Gent. Master Gascoine. Francis Buckland and Robert Hutten, both
servants to Master Saul Confectioner in Holburne. John Lochey, a Scriueners
son in Holburne. One William servant to Master Eirkum. John Brabant, a
Painter in Little-Brittaine. William Knockell, A man-seruant of Mr. Buckets a
Painter in Aldersgate street. One Barbaret, Walter Ward, Richard Garret,
enquired after, but not found.
The particulars concerning those that suffered in this lamentable accident,
has been so obscured that no exact account could be had of them, no marvel
then that diligence of enquiry could not prevent some mistake in the catalogue
formerly printed with this Relation; which catalogue is now renewed and
rectified, by more certain intelligence than heretofore has been related.

FINIS.

