NICHOLAS FLAMMEL, His Exposition of the Hieroglyphicall Figures which he
caused to be painted upon an Arch in St. Innocents Churchyard, in PARIS.

Together with The secret Book of ARTEPHIVS, And The Epistle of John Pontanus:
Concerning both the Theoricke and the Practicke of the PHILOSOPHERS STONE.

Faithfully, and (as the Majesty of the thing requires) religiously done into
English out of the French and Latin Copies.

BY EIRENaeVS ORANDVS, qui est, Vera veris enodans.

-- (...).

Imprinted at London by T. S. for Thomas Walkley, and are to be sold at his
Shop, at the Eagle and Child in Britans Bursse. 1624.

TO THE MOST excellently accomplished LADY, the C. D. of E.
MADAME:
BEcause there are not many worthy such Epithets, therefore amongst so few, and
those so dispersed, it is not hard for any man to know you, as well by your
just titles as by your Name. Pardon my boldness, who owing my best service
unto your virtues, though not knowing your person, nor known unto you, unless
peradventure the report of my disasters have come unto your ares; do humbly
offer unto you, what I am assured, when you understand, (if ever God incline
your heart to the search, and open your eyes to the sight thereof) you will
esteem as the greatest and most invaluable secret, which amongst all
vnder-Moone things, was ever imparted and communicated to man. Your Piety and
Alms deeds, proceeding from that boundless fountain of burning Charity,
which disperseth it self in all forms, according to the necessities of the
poor, have enforced me to tell the world, that for you, and such as you are,
I have caused these little Books to be published in our vulgar English,
custom excusing the most of your sex from the knowledge of the learned
Tongues, in which Cabinets, these secrets are ordinarily locked up, though
there want not examples of many women, who, by the impartial grace of God,
have attained to the thing it self. But it is not my purpose to flatter any
body with the hope of that, which I well know how rare and reserved a blessing
of the Almighty it is: Only, if you will be but pleased, by this occasion, to
cast your eyes upon that triumphant Chariot, wherein Nature rides through her
Mineral and vnder-earth kingdom, you will easily see what difference there
is, between the plenteous virtues of heaven, there thrust and crowded up
together, (as lines though far distant in their first setting forth from the
Circumference, yet touching one another when they come near the Center) and
the loose and weak composition of Vegetables, which being of another
imposition of Nature, are not able either to receive or to hold such plenty of
those heavenly Spirits, which are the life of every Elementary body, no where
idle, and there most abounding where it seems most to be hidden. For the
rest, if any of my busy vnletter'd Countrymen, who are in great numbers, as
bold pretenders to this blessed Science, as they are blind practitioners
therein, shall by the reading of these Treatises be persuaded (as I wish they
may) to forbear the loss of their time, and the expense of their monyes,
until they be taught by the one of them, the true matter to work on, and by
the other, the true manner of proceeding therewith; let them in their hearts
bless God for you, to whose noble deserts (that challenge a due acknowledgement
from all good men) I have paid this small tribute of my labors. For mine own
part, the help and comfort which I have so plenteously reaped from these
studies, in the midst of many pressures, which without the extra-ordinary
assistance of God, had been insupportable, has already made light and easy
in my resolution, whatsoever I shall either do, or suffer, for God, or
goodmen, or the truth. The father of the fatherless, the Judge of the
widows, and the hope of the help less, be to you and yours ALL THINGS. So
prays,

Your humble servant Eirenaeus Orandus.

ET sit splendour Domini Dei nostri super nos, and opera manuum nostrarum dirige
super nos; and opus manuum nostrarum dirige. Psalm 90. 19.

And let the bright beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; and guide thou the
works of our hands upon us, and the work of our hands guide thou it. Psalm. 90.
19.

QVis enim despexit dies paruos? and laetabuntur, and videbunt lapidem stanneum
in manu Zorobabel. Septemisti, Oculi sunt Domini, qui discurrunt in vniuersam
terram. Zech. 4. 10.

For who has despised the day of little things? for they shall rejoice, and
shall see the stone of Tin in the hand of Zerubbabel, with those seven; they
are the Eyes of the Lord, which run too and fro through the whole earth. Zech.
4. 10.

READER.
-- (...),
(...). --
Haec partim ipse tuo perpendes pectore tecum,
Partem Diuum aliquis tibi suggeret. --
Part of these things thy mind shall prompt thee to,
And part, some God shall teach thee how to do.
Again.
Si te fata vocant, aliter non viribus vllis
Vincere, nec duro poteris conuellere ferro.
If Fates thee call, else with no violence,
Nor hardest Iron can thou dig them thence.
Once again, and so farewell.
(...),
(...),
(...):
(...).
(...).
Fortuna vices lubrica versat
Varias docilis sum^re formas.
Inopina Dei plurima peragunt;
Non succedunt quae fore speras,
Quae fore nemo posse putaret,
Saepe expediunt numina. Qualem
Haec sortita est res mihi finem.
Many shapes of Fate there be
Much done beyond our hope, we see:
What we think sure, God often stays,
And finds, for things vndream't* of, ways.
For so did this succeed to me,
And so I wish it may to thee.
Eirenaeus Orandus.

Place this Arch (...)

NICOLAS FLAMEL, ET PERCOMMENT LES INNOCENS FVRENELLE SA FEMME RENT OCCIS PAR
LE COMMANDMENT DV ROY HERODES.



THE BOOK of the HIEROGLYPHICALL Figures of Nicholas Flammel.
ETernally praised be the Lord my God, which lifts the humble from the base
dust, and makes the hearts of such as hope in him to rejoice: which of his
grace opens to them that believe, the Springs of his bounty, and puts
under their feet the worldly Sphaeres (or circles) of all earthly happinesses:
In him be always our trust; in his fear, our felicity; in his mercy, the
glory of the reparation of our nature; and in our prayers, our unshaken
assurance. And thou, o God Almighty, as thy benignity has vouchsafed to open
upon earth before me (thy unworthy servant) all the treasures of the riches of
the world; so may it please thy great Clemency, then when I shall be no more
in the number of the living, to open unto me the treasures of heaven, and to
let me behold thy Divine face, the Majesty whereof, is a delight unspeakable,
and the rauishing joy whereof, never ascended into the heart of living man. I
ask it of thee, for our Lord Jesus Christ they well-beloved Son his sake, who in
the unity of the holy Spirit, lives with thee world without end. Amen.

The Explication of the Hieroglyphicke Figures, placed by me Nicholas Flammel,
Scriuener, in the Churchyard of the Innocents, in the fourth Arch, entering by
the great gate of St. Dennis street, and taking the way on the right hand.

The Introduction.
ALthough that I Nicholas Flammel, NOTARY, and abiding in Paris, in this year
one thousand three hundred fourscore and nineteen, and dwelling in my house
in the street of Notaries, near unto the Chapel of St. James of the
Bouchery; although, I say, that I learned but a little Latin, because of the
small means of my Parents, which nevertheless were by them that envy me the
most, accounted honest people; yet by the grace of God, and the intercession of
the blessed Saints in Paradise of both sexes, and principally of Saint James of
Gallicia, I have not wanted the understanding of the Books of the
Philosophers, and in them learned their so hidden secrets. And for this cause,
there shall never be any moment of my life, when I remember this high good,
wherein upon my knees (if the place will give me leave) or otherwise, in my
heart with all my affection, I shall not render thanks to this most benign
God, which never suffers the child of the Just to beg from door to door,
and deceives not them which wholly trust in his blessing.

Whilst therefore, I Nicholas Flammel, Notary, after the decease of my
Parents, got my living in our Art of Writing, by making Inuentories, dressing
accounts, and summing up the Expenses of Tutors and Pupils, there fell into my
hands, for the sum of two Florens, a gilded Book, very old and large; It was
not of Paper, nor Parchment, as other Books be, but was only made of
delicate Rindes (as it seemed unto me) of tender young trees: The cover of it
was of brass, well bound, all engraven with letters, or strange figures; and
for my part, I think they might well be Greek Characters, or some such like
ancient language: Sure I am, I could not read them, and I know well they were
not notes nor letters of the Latin nor of the Gaul, for of them we
understand a little. As for that which was within it, the leaves of bark or
rind, were engraven, and with admirable diligence written, with a point of
Iron, in fair and neat Latin letters colored. It contained thrice seven
leaves, for so were they counted in the top of the leaves, and always every
seventh leaf was without any writing, but in stead thereof, upon the first
seventh leaf, there was painted a Virgin, and Serpents swallowing her up; In
the second seventh, a Cross where a Serpent was crucified; and in the last
seventh there were painted Deserts, or Wildernesses, in the midst whereof ran
many fair fountains, from whence there issued out a number of Serpents, which
ran up and down here and there. Upon the first of the leaves, was written in
great Capital Letters of gold, ABRAHAM THE JEW, PRINCE, PRIEST, LEVITE,
ASTROLOGER, AND PHILOSOPHER, TO THE NATION OF THE JEWS, BY THE WRATH OF GOD
DISPERSED AMONG THE GAVLES, SENDS HEALTH. After this it was filled with great
execrations and curses (with this word MARANATHA, which was often repeated
there) against every person that should cast his eyes upon it, if he were not
Sacrificer or Scribe.

He that sold me this Book, knew not what it was worth, no more than I when
I bought it; I believe it had been stolen or taken from the miserable Jews;
or found hid in some part of the ancient place of their abode. Within the
Book, in the second leaf, he comforted his Nation, councelling them to fly
vices, and above all, Idolatry, attending with sweet patience the coming of
the Messiah, which should vanquish all the Kings of the Earth, and should
reign with his people in glory eternally. Without doubt this had been some
very wise and understanding man. In the third leaf, and in all the other
writings that followed, to help his Captive nation to pay their tributes unto
the Roman Emperors, and to do other things, which I will not speak of, he
taught them in common words the transmutation of Mettalls; he painted the
Vessels by the sides, and he advertised them of the colors, and of all the
rest, saving of the first Agent, of the which he spoke not a word, but only
(as he said) in the fourth and fifth leaves entire he painted it, and figured
it with very great cunning and workmanship: for although it was well and
intelligibly figured and painted, yet no man could ever have been able to
understand it, without being well skilled in their Cabala, which goes by
tradition, and without having well studied their books The fourth and fifth
leaf therefore, was without any writing, all full of fair figures
enlightened, or as it were enlightened, for the work was very exquisite. First
he painted a young man, with wings at his anckles, having in his hand a
Caducaean rod, writhen about with two Serpents, wherewith he struck upon a
helmet which covered his head; he seemed to my small judgment, to be the God
Mercury of the Pagans: against him there came running and flying with open
wings, a great old man, who upon his head had an houre-glasse fastened, and in
his hands a hook (or sith) like Death, with the which, in terrible and
furious manner, he would have cut off the feet of Mercury. On the other side
of the fourth leaf, he painted a fair flower on the top of a very high
mountain, which was sore shaken with the North wind; it had the foot blew, the
flowers white and red, the leaves shining like fine gold: And round about it
the Dragons and Griffons of the North made their nests and abode. On the fifth
leaf there was a fair Rose-tree flowred in the midst of a sweet Garden,
climbing up against a hollow Oak; at the foot whereof boiled a fountain of
most white water, which ran headlong down into the depths, notwithstanding
it first passed among the hands of infinite people, which dug in the Earth
seeking for it; but because they were blind, none of them knew it, except here
and there one which considered the weight.

On the last side of the fifth leaf, there was a King with a great Fauchion,
who made to be killed in his presenc^ by some Soldiers a great multitude of
little Infants, whose Mothers wept at the feet of the vnpittifull Soldiers:
the blood of which Infants was afterward by other Soldiers gathered up, and
put in a great vessel, wherein the Sun and the Moon came to bathe
themselves. And because that this History did represent the more part of that
of the Innocents slain by Herod, and that in this Book I learned the greatest
part of the Art, this was one of the causes, why I placed in their Churchyard
these Hieroglyphick Symbols of this secret science. And thus you see that which
was in the first five leaves: I will not represent unto you that which was
written in good and intelligible Latin in all the other written leaves, for
God would punish me, because I should commit a greater wickedness, then he who
(as it is said) wished that all the men of the World had but one head that he
might cut it off at one blow. Having with me therefore this fair Book, I did
nothing else day nor night, but study upon it, understanding very well all the
operations that it showed, but not knowing with what matter I should begin,
which made me very heavy and sollitary, and caused me to fetch many a sigh. My
wife Perrenelle, whom I loved as my self, and had lately married, was much
astonished at this, comforting me, and earnestly demanding, if she could by
any means deliver me from this trouble: I could not possibly hold my tongue,
but told her all, and showed her this fair Book, whereof at the same instant
that she saw it, she became as much enamored as my self, taking extreme
pleasure to behold the fair cover, grauings, images, and portraicts, whereof
notwithstanding she understood as little as I: yet it was a great comfort to
me to talk with her, and to entertain my self, what we should do to have
the interpretation of them. In the end I caused to be painted within my
Lodging, as naturally as I could, all the figures and portraicts of the fourth
and fifth leaf, which I showed to the greatest Clerks in Paris, who
understood thereof no more then my self; I told them they were found in a
Book that taught the Philosophers stone, but the greatest part of them made a
mock both of me, and of that blessed Stone, excepting one called Master
Anselme, which was a Licentiate in Physic, and studied hard in this Science:
He had a great desire to have seen my Book, and there was nothing in the
world, which he would not have done for a sight of it: but I always told him,
that I had it not; only I made him a large description of the Method. He told
me that the first portraict represented Time, which devoured all; and that
according to the number of the six written leaves, there was required the
space of six years, to perfect the stone; and then he said, we must turn
the glass, and sees it no more. And when I told him that this was not
painted, but only to show and teach the first Agent, (as was said in the
Book) he answered me, that this decoction for six years space, was, as it
were, a second Agent; and that certainly the first Agent was there painted,
which was the white and heavy water, which without doubt was Argent viue, which
they could not fix, nor cut off his feet, that is to say, take away his
volatility save by that long decoction in the purest blood of young Infants;
for in that, this Argent viue being joined with gold and silver, was first
turned with them into an herb like that which was there painted, and afterward
by corruption, into Serpents; which Serpents being then wholly dried, and
decocted by fire, were reduced into powder of gold, which should be the stone.
This was the cause, that during the space of one and twenty years, I tried a
thousand broulleryes, yet never with blood, for that was wicked and villainous:
for I found in my Book, that the Philosophers called Blood, the mineral
spirit, which is in the Metals, principally in the Sun, Moon, and Mercury,
to the assembling whereof, I always tended; yet these interpretations for the
most part were more subtle then true. Not seeing therefore in my works the
signs, at the time written in my Book, I was always to begin again. In
the end having lost all hope of ever understanding those figures, for my last
refuge, I made a vow to God, and St James of Gallicia, to demand the
interpretation of them, at some Jewish Priest, in some Synagogue of Spain:
whereupon with the consent of Perrenelle, carrying with me the Extract of the
Pictures, having taken the Pilgrims habit and staff, in the same fashion as
you may see me, without this same Arch in the Churchyard, in the which I put
these hyeroglyphicall figures, where I have also set against the wall, on the
one and the other side, a Procession, in which are represented by order all the
colors of the stone, so as they come and go, with this writing in French.
Moult plaist a Dieu procession,
S' elle est faicte en devotion: that is,
Much pleases God procession,
If It be done in devotion.
which is as it wete the beginning of King Hercules his Book, which entreats
of the colors of the stone, entitled Iris, or the Rainebow, in these terms,
Operis processio multum naturae placet, that is, The procession of the work is
very pleasant unto Nature: the which I have put there expressly for the great
Clerks, who shall understand the Allusion. In this same fashion, I say, I put
my self upon my way; and so much I did, that I arrived at Montioy, and
afterward at Saint James, where with great devotion I accomplished my vow.
This done, in Leon at my return I met with a Merchant of Boloyn, which made me
known to a Physician, a Jew by Nation, and as then a Christian, dwelling in
Leon aforesaid, who was very skillful in sublime Sciences, called Master
Canches. As Soon as I had showen him the figures of my Extraict, he being
ravished with great astonishment and joy, demanded of me incontinently, if I
could tell him any news of the Book, from whence they were drawn? I answered
him in Latin (wherein he asked me the question) that I hoped to have some
good news of the Book, if any body could decipher unto me the Enigmaes: All at
that instant transported with great Ardor and joy, he began to decipher unto
me the bening: But to be short, he well content to learn news where this Book
should be, and I to hear him speak; and certainly he had heard much discourse
of the Book, but (as he said) as of a thing which was believed to be utterly
lost, we resolved of our voyage, and from Leon we passed to Ouiedo, and from
thence to Sanson, where we put our selves to Sea to come into France: Our
voyage had been fortunate enough, and all ready, since we were entered into
this Kingdom, he had most truly interpreted unto me the greatest part of my
figures, where even unto the very points and pricks, he found great mysteries,
which seemed unto me wonderful, when arriving at Orleans, this learned man
fell extremely sick, being afflicted with excessive vomitings, which remained
still with him of those he had suffered at Sea, and he was in such a continual
fear of my forsaking him, that he could imagine nothing like unto it. And
although I was always by his side, yet would he incessantly call for me, but
in sum he dyed, at the end of the seventh day of his sickness, by reason
whereof I was much grieved, yet as well as I could, I caused him to be buried
in the Church of the holy Cross at Orleans, where he yet rests; God have
his soul, for he dyed a good Christian: And surely, if I be not hindered by
death, I will give unto that Church some reuenew, to cause some Masses to be
said for his soul every day. He that would see the manner of my arrival, and
the joy of Perenelle, let him look upon us two, in this City of Paris, upon
the door of the Chapel of St James of the Bouchery, close by the one side of
my house, where we are both painted, my self giving thanks at the feet of
Saint James of Gallicia, and Perrenelle at the feet of St John, whom she had
so often called upon. So it was, that by the grace of God, and the intercession
of the happy and holy Virgin, and the blessed Saints, James and John, I knew
all that I desired, that is to say, The first Principles, yet not their first
preparation, which is a thing most difficult, above all the things in the
world: But in the end I had that also, after long errors of three years, or
thereabouts; during which time, I did nothing but study and labor, so as you
may see me without this Arch, where I have placed my Processions against the
two Pillars of it, under the feet of St. James and St. John, praying always to
God, with my Beads in my hand, reading attentively within a Book, and poysing
the words of the Philosophers: and afterward trying and proouing the diverse
operations, which I imagined to my self, by their only words. Finally, I
found that which I desired, which I also soon knew by the strong sent and
odor thereof. Having this, I easily accomplished the Mastery, for knowing the
preparation of the first Agents, and after following my Book according to the
letter, I could not have missed it, though I would. Then the first time that I
made proiection, was upon Mercury, whereof I turned half a pound, or
thereabouts, into pure Silver, better than that of the Mine, as I my self
assayed, and made others assay many times. This was upon a Monday, the 17. of
January about noone, in my house, Perrenelle only being present; in the year
of the restoring of mankind, 1382. And afterward, following always my Book,
from word to word, I made proiection of the Red stone upon the like quantity of
Mercury, in the presence likewise of Perrenelle only, in the same house, the
five and twentieth day of April following, the same year, about five a clock
in the Evening; which I transmuted truly into almost as much pure Gold, better
assuredly than common Gold, more soft, and more pliable. I may speak it with
truth, I have made it three times, with the help of Perrenelle, who understood
it as well as I, because she helped me in my operations, and without doubt, if
she would have enterprised to have done it alone, she had attained to the end
and perfection thereof. I had indeed enough when I had once done it, but I
found exceeding great pleasure and delight, in seeing and contemplating the
Admirable works of Nature, within the Vessels. To signify unto thee then, how
I have done it three times, thou shall see in this Arch, if thou have any skill
to know them, three furnaces, like unto them which serve for our opperations:
was afraid a long time, that Perrenelle could not hide the extreme joy of her
felicity, which I measured by mine own, and lest she should let fall some
word amongst her kindred, of the great treasures which we possessed: for
extreme joy takes away the understanding, as well as great heaviness; but the
goodness of the most great God, had not only filled me with this blessing,
to give me a wife chaste and sage, for she was moreover, not only capeable of
reason, but also to do all that was reasonable, and more discreet and secret,
than ordinarily other women are. Above all, she was exceeding devout, and
therefore seeing her self without hope of children, and now well stricken in
years, she began as I did, to think of God, and to give or selves to the
works of mercy. At that time when I wrote this Commentary, in the year one
thousand four hundred and thirteen, in the end of the year, after the
decease of my faithful companion, which I shall lament all the days of my
life: she and I had already founded, and endued with revenues 14. Hospitals in
this City of Paris, we had new built from the ground three Chapels, we had
enriched with great gifts and good rents, seven Churches, with many reparations
in their Churchyards, besides that which we have done at Boloigne, which is
not much less than that which we have done here. I will not speak of the
good which both of us have done to particular poor folks, principally to
widows and poor Orphans, whose names if I should tell, and how I did it,
besides that my reward should be given me in this World, I should likewise do
displeasure to those good persons, whom I pray God bless, which I would not
do for any thing in the World. Building therefore these Churches, Churchyards,
and Hospitals in this City, I resolved my self, to cause to be painted in the
fourth Arch of the Churchyard of the Innocents, as you enter in by the great
gate in St. Dennis street, and taking the way on the right hand, the most true
and essential marks of the Art, yet under vailes, and Hieroglyphicall
couertures, in imitation of those which are in the gilded Book of Abraham the
Jew, which may represent two things, according to the capacity and
understanding of them that behold them: First, the mysteries of our future and
undoubted Resurrection, at the day of Judgment, and coming of good Jesus,
(whom may it please to have mercy upon us) a History which is well agreeing to
a Churchyard. And secondly, they may signify to them, which are skilled in
Natural Philosophy, all the principal and necessary operations of the
Maistery. These Hieroglyphicke figures shall serve as two ways to lead unto
the heavenly life: the first and most open sense, teaching the sacred Mysteries
of our salvation; (as I will show hereafter) the other teaching every man,
that has any small understanding in the Stone, the lineary way of the work;
which being perfected by any one, the change of evil into good, takes away
from him the root of all sin (which is covetousness) making him liberal,
gentle, pious religious, and fearing God, how evil soever he was before, for
from thence forward, he is continually ravished, with the great grace and
mercy which he has obtained from God, and with the profoundnesse of his
Divine and admirable works. These are the reasons which have moved me to set
these forms in this fashion, and in this place which is a Churchyard, to the
end that if any man obtain this inestimable good, to conquer this rich golden
Fleece, he may think with himself (as I did) not to keep the talent of God
dug in the Earth, buying Lands and Possessions, which are the vanities of
this world: but rather to work charitably toward his brethren, remembering
himself that he learned this secret amongst the bones of the dead, in whose
number he shall shortly be found; and that after this life, he must render an
account, before a just and redoubtable Judge, which will censure even to an
idle and vain word. Let him therefore, which having well weighed my words, and
well known and understood my figures, has first gotten elsewhere the
knowledge of the first beginnings and Agents, (for certainly in these Figures
and Commentaries, he shall not find any step or information thereof) perfect
to the glory of God the Maistery of Hermes, remembering himself of the Church
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman; and of all other Churches, Churchyards, and
Hospitals; and above all, of the Church of the Innocents in this City, (in the
Churchyard whereof he shall have contemplated these true demonstrations)
opening bounteously his purse, to them that are secretly poor, honest people
desolate, weak women, widows, and forlorn orphans. So be it.

CHAP. I.
Of the Theological Interpretations, which may be given to these
Hieroglyphickes, according to the sense of me the Author.
I Have given to this Churchyard, a Charnell-house, which is right over against
this fourth Arch, in the midst of the Churchyard, and against one of the
Pillars of this Charnell house, I have made be drawn with a coal, and
grosely painted, a man all black, which looks straight upon these
Hieroglyphickes, about whom there is written in French; Ie voy merueille done
moult Ie m'esbahi: that is, I see a marvel, whereat I am much amazed: This,
as also three plates of Iron and Copper gilt, on the East, West, and South of
the Arch, where these Hieroglyphickes are, in the midst of the Churchyard,
representing the holy Passion and Resurrection of the Son of God; this ought
not to be otherwise interpreted, than according to the common Theological
sense, saving that this black man, may as well proclaim it a wonder to see the
admirable works of God in the transmutation of Metals, which is figured in
these Hieroglyphics, which he so attentively looks upon, as to see buried so
many bodies, which shall rise again out of their Tombs at the fearful day of
judgment. On the other part I do not think it needful to interpret in a
Theological sense, that vessel of Earth on the right hand of these figures,
within the which there is a Pen and Inkhorne, or rather a vessel of
Philosophy, if thou take away the strings, and join the Penner to the
Inkhorne: nor the other two like it, which are on the two sides of the figures
of Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, within one of the which, there is an N. which
signifies Nicholas, and within the other an F. which signifies Flammell. For
these vessels signify nothing else, but that in the like of them, I have done
the Maistery three times. Moreover, he that will also believe, that I have put
these vessels in form of Scutchions, to represent this Pen and Inkhorne, and
the capital letters of my name, let him believe it if he will, because both
these interpretations are true.

Neither must you interpret in a Theological sense, that writing which
follows, in these terms, NICHOLAS FLAMMEL, ET PERRENELLE SA FEMME, that is,
Nicholas Flammel, and Perrenelle his wife, in as much as that signifies
nothing, but that I and my wife have given that Arche.

As to the third, fourth, and fifth Tables following, by the sides whereof is
written, COMMENT LES INNOCENTS FVRENT OCCIS PAR LE COMMANDMENT DV ROY HERODES,
that is, How the Innocents were killed by the commandment of King Herod. The
theological sense is well enough understood by the writing, we must only
speak of the rest, which is above.

The two Dragons united together the one within the other, of color black and
blew, in a field sable, that is to say, black, whereof the one has the wings
gilded, and the other has none at all, are the sins which naturally are
enterchayned, for the one has his original and birth from another: Of them
some may be easily chased away, as they come easily, for they fly toward us
every hour; and those which have no wings, can never be chased away, such as
is the sin against the holy Ghost. The gold which is in the wings, signifies
that the greatest part of sins comes from the unholy hunger after gold;
which makes so many people diligently to hearken from whence they may have it:
and the color black and blew, shows that these are the desires that come out
of the dark pits of hell, which we ought wholly to fly from. These two
Dragons may also morally represent unto us the Legions of evil spirits which
are always about us, and which will accuse us before the just Judge, at the
fearful day of judgment, which do ask, nor seek nothing else but to sift
us.

The man and the woman which are next them, of an orange color, upon a field
azure and blew, signify that men and women ought not to have their hope in
this World, for the orange color intimates despair, or the letting go of
hope, as here; and the color azure and blew, upon the which they are painted,
shows us that we must think of heavenly things to come, and say as the roll
of the man does, HOMO VENIET AD IVDICIVM DEI, that is, Man must come to the
judgment of God, or as that of the woman, VERE ILLA DIES TERRIBILIS ERIT, that
is, That day will be terrible indeed, to the end that keeping our selves from
the Dragons, which are sins, God may show mercy unto us.

Next after this, in a field of Synople, that is green, are painted two men
and one woman rising again, of the which one comes out of a Sepulcher, the
other two out of the Earth, all three of color exceeding white and pure,
lifting their hands toward their eyes, and their eyes toward Heaven on high:
Above these three bodies there are two Angels sounding musical Instruments, as
if they had called these dead to the day of judgment; for over these two
Angels is the figure of our Lord Jesus Christ, holding the world in his hand,
upon whose head an Angel sets a Crown, assisted by two others, which say
in their roules, O pater Omnipotens, o Jesus bone, that is, O Father Almighty, o
good Jesus. On the right side of this Savior is painted St Paul, clothed with
white and yellow, with a Sword, at whose feet there is a man clothed in a
gown of orange color, in which there appeared pleights or folds of black and
white, (which picture resembles me to the life) and demands pardon of his
sins, holding his hands joined together, from between which proceed these
words written in a roll, DELE MALA QVAE FECI, that is to say, Blot out the
evils that I have done: On the other side on the left hand, is Saint Peter with
his Key, clothed in reddish yellow, holding his hand upon a woman clad in a
gown of orange color, which is on her knees, representing to the life
Perrenelle, which holds her hands joined together, having a roll where is
written, CHRIST PRECOR ESTO PIUS, that is, Christ I beseech thee be pitiful:
Behind whom there is an Angel on his knees, with a roll, that says, SALVE
DOMINE ANGELORVM, that is, All hail thou Lord of Angels. There is also another
Angel on his knees, behind my Image, on the same side that S. Paul is on, which
likewise holds a roll, saying, O REX SEMPITERNE, that is, O King
everlasting. All this is so clear, according to the explication of the
Resurrection and future judgment, that it may easi^y be fitted thereto. So it
seems this Arch was not painted for any other purpose, but to represent this.
And therefore we need not stay any longer upon it, considering that the least
and most ignorant, may well know how to give it this interpretation.

Next after the three that are rising again, come two Angels more of an Orange
color upon a blew field, saying in their rowles, SVRGITE MORTVI, VENITE AD
IVDICIVM DOMINI MEI, that is, Arise you dead, come to the Judgment of my Lord.
This also serves to the interpretation of the Resurrection: As also the last
Figures following, which are, A man red vermillion, upon a field of Violet
color, who holds the foot of a winged Lion, painted of red vermillion also,
opening his throat, as it were to denoure the man: For one may say that this
is the Figure of an unhappy sinner, who sleeping in a Lethargy of his
corruption and vices, dies without repentance and confession; who without
doubt, in this terrible Day shall be delivered to the Devil, here painted in
form of a red roaring Lion, which will swallow and devour him.

CHAP. II.
The interpretations Philosophical, according to the Maistery of Hermes.
I Desire with all my heart, that he who searches the secrets of the Sages,
having in his Spirit passed over these Idaea's of the life and resurrection to
come, should first make his profit of them: And in the second place, that he
be more advised than before, that he sound and search the depth of my
Figures, colors, and rowles; principally of my rowles, because that in this
Art they speak not vulgarly. Afterward let him ask of himself, why the
Figure of Saint Paul is on the right hand, in the place where the custom is to
paint S. Peter? And on the other side that of Saint Peter, in the place of the
figure of Saint Paul? Why the Figure of Saint Paul is clothed in colors white
and yellow, and that of S. Peter in yellow and red? Why also the man and the
woman which are at the feet of these two Saints, praying to God, as if it were
at the Day of Judgment, are apparrelled in diverse colors, and not naked, or
else nothing but bones, like them that are rising again? Why in this Day of
Judgment they have painted this man and this woman at the feet of the Saints?
for they ought to have been more low on earth, and not in heaven. Why also the
two Angels in Orange color, which say in their rowles, SVR GITE MORTVI, VENITE
AD IVDICIVM DOMINI MEI, that is, Arise you dead, come unto the Judgment of my
Lord, are clad in this color, and out of their place, for they ought to be on
high in heaven, with the two other which play upon the Instruments? Why they
have a field Violet and blew? but principally why their roll, which speaks to
the dead, ends in the open throat of the red and flying Lion? I would then,
that after these, and many other questions which may justly be made, opening
wide the eyes of his spirit, he come to conclude, that all this, not having
been done without cause, there must be represented under this bark, some
great secrets, which he ought to pray God to discover unto him. Having then
brought his belief by degrees to this pass, I wish also that he would further
believe, that these figures and explications are not made for them that have
never seen the Books of the Philosophers, and who not knowing the Mettallicke
principles, cannot be named Children of this Science; for if they think to
understand perfectly these figures, being ignorant of the first Agent, they
will undoubtedly deceive themselves, and never be able to know any thing at
all. Let no man therefore blame me, if he do not easily understand me, for
he will be more blameworthy than I, inasmuch as not being initiated into
these sacred and secret interpretations of the first Agent, (which is the key
opening the gates of all Sciences) he would notwithstanding, comprehend the
most subtle conceptions of the envious Philosophers, which are not written but
for them who already know these principles, which are never found in any book,
because they leave them unto God, who reuealeth them to whom he please, or else
causes them to be taught by the living voice of a Master, by Cabalisticall
tradition, which happens very seldom. Now then, my Son, let me so call
thee, both because I am now come to a great age, and also for that, it may be,
thou art otherwise a child of this knowledge, (God enable thee to learn, and
after to work to his glory) Hearken unto me then attentively, but pass no
further if thou be ignorant of the foresaid Principles.



This Vessel of earth, in this form, is called by the Philosophers, their
triple Vessel, for within it, there is in the midst a Stage, or a floor,
and upon that a dish or a platter full of luewarme ashes, within the which is
set the Philosophical Egg, that is, a vial of glass full of confections of
Art (as of the scumme of the red Sea, and the fat of the Mercuriall wind:)
which thou see painted in form of a Penner and Inkehorne. Now this Vessel
of earth is open above, to put in the dish and the vial, under which by the
open gate, is put in the Philosophical fire, as thou know. So thou have
three vessels; and the threefold vessel: The envious have called an Athanor, a
sieve, dung, Balneum Mariae, a Furnace, a Spaere, the green Lion, a prison, a
grave, a vrinall, a phioll, and a Bolts-head: I my self in my Summarie or
Abridgement of Philosophy, which I composed four years and two months past,
in the end thereof named it the house and habitation of the Poulet, and the
ashes of the Platter, the chafe of the Poulet; The common name is an Oven,
which I should never have found, if Abraham the Jew had not painted it,
together with the fire proportionable, wherein consists a great part of the
secret. For it is as it were the belly, or the womb, containing the true
natural heat to animate our young King: If this fire be not measured
Clibanically, says Calid the Persian, son of Iasichus; If it be kindled with
a sword, says Pithagoras: If thou fire thy Vessel, says Morien, and make
it feel the heat of the fire, it will give thee a box on the ear, and burn
his flowers before they be risen from the depth of his Marrow, making them come
out red, rather than white, and then thy work is spoiled; as also if thou make
too little fire, for then thou shall never see the end, because of the
coldness of the natures, which shall not have had motion sufficient to digest
them together.

The heat then of thy fire in this vessel, shall be (as says Hermes and
Rosinus) according to the Winter; or rather, as says Diomedes, according to
the heat of a Bird, which begins to fly so softly from the sign of Aries
to that of Cancer: for know that the Infant at the beginning is full of cold
phlegm* and of milk, and that too vehement heat is an enemy of the cold and
moisture of our Embrion, and that the two enemies, that is to say, our two
elements of cold and heat will never perfectly embrace one another, but by
little and little, having first long dwelt together, in the midst of the
temperate heat of their bath, and being changed by long decoction, into
Sulphur incombustible. Govern therefore sweetly with equality and proportion,
thy proud and haughty natures, for fear lest if thou favor one more then
another, they which naturally are enemies, do grow angry against thee through
Ielousy, and dry Choler, and make thee sigh for it a long time after: Besides
this, thou must entertain them in this temperate heat perpetually, that is to
say, night and day, until the time that Winter, the time of the moisture of
the matters, be passed, because they make their peace, and join hands in being
heated together, whereas should these natures find themselves but one only
half hour without fire, they would become for ever irreconcilable. See
therefore the reason why it is said in the Book of the seventy precepts, Look
that their heat continue indefatigably without ceasing, and that none of their
days be forgotten. And Rasis, the haste, says he, that brings with it too
much fire, is always followed by the Devil, and Error. When the golden Bird,
says Diomedes, shall be come just to Cancer, and that from thence it shall
run toward Libra, then thou may augment the fire a little: And in like
manner, when this fair Bird, shall fly from Libra toward Capricorn, which is
the desired Autumn, the time of harvest, and of the fruits that are now ripe.

CHAP. III.
The two Dragons of color yellowish, blew, and black like the field.


Look well upon these two Dragons, for they are the true principles or
beginnings of this Philosophy, which the Sages have not dared to show to their
own Children. He which is undermost, without wings, he is the fixed, or the
male; that which is uppermost, is the volatile, or the female, black and
obscure, which goes about to get the domination for many months. The first is
called Sulphur, or heat and dryness, and the latter Argent viue, or cold, and
moisture. These are the Sun and Moon of the Mercurial source, and sulphurous
original, which by continual fire are adorned with royal habiliments, that
being united, and afterward changed into a quintessence, they may overcome
every thing Mettallick, how solid hard and strong soever it be. These are the
Serpents and Dragons which the ancient Egyptians have painted in a Circle, the
head biting the tail, to signify that they proceeded from one and the same
thing, and that it alone was sufficient, and that in the turning and
circulation thereof, it made it self perfect: These are the Dragons which the
ancient Poets have fained did without sleeping keep and watch the golden
Apples of the Gardens of the Virgins Hesperides. These are they upon whom Jason
in his adventure for the Golden Fleece, powered the brothe or liquor prepared by
the fair Medea, of the discourse of whom the Books of the Philosophers are so
full, that there is no Philosopher that ever was, but he has written of it,
from the time of the truth-telling Hermes Trismegistus, Orpheus, Pythagoras,
Artephius, Morienus, and the other following, even unto my self. These are the
two Serpents, given and sent by Juno, (that is, the nature Mettallicke) the
which the strong Hercules, that is to say, the sage and wise man must strangle
in his cradle, that is, overcome and kill them, to make them putrify, corrupt,
and engender, at the beginning of his work. These are the two Serpents,
wrapped and twisted round about the Caduceus or rod of Mercury, with the which
he exercises his great power, and transformeth himself as he lists. He,
says Haly, that shall kill the one, shall also kill the other, because the one
cannot die but with his brother. These two then, (which Auicen calls the
Corassene bitch and the Armenian dog) these two I say, being put together in
the vessel of the Sepulcher, do bite one another cruelly, and by their great
poison, and furious rage, they never leave one another, from the moment that
they have seized on one another (if the cold hinder them not) till both of them
by their slauering venom, and mortal hurts, be all of a goarebloud, over all
the parts of their bodies; and finally, killing one another, be stewed in their
proper venom, which after their death, changes them into living and permanent
water; before which time, they loose in their corruption and putrefaction,
their first natural forms, to take afterward one only new, more noble, and
better form. These are the two Spermes, masculine and saeminine, described at
the beginning of my Abridgement of Philosophy, which are engendered (say Rasis,
Auicen, and Abraham the Jew) within the Reins, and entrails, and of the
operations of the four Elements. These are the radical moisture of mettalls,
Sulphur, and Argent viue, not vulgar, and such as are sold by the Merchants and
Apothecaries, but those which give us those two fair and dear bodies which
we love so much. These two spermes, says Democritus, are not found upon the
earth of the living: The same, says Auicen, but he adds, that they gather
them from the dung, ordure, and rottenness of the Sun and Moon. O happy are
they that know how to gather them; for of them they afterward make a triacle,
which has power over all griefs, maladies, sorrows, infirmities, and
weaknesses, and which sighteth puissantly against death, lengthening the life,
according to the permission of God, even to the time determined, triumphing
over the miseries of this world, and filling a man with the riches thereof. Of
these two Dragons or Principles Mettallicke, I have said in my fore-alledged
Summarie, that the Enemy would by his heat inflame his enemy, and that then if
they take not heed, they should see in the air a venomous fume and a stinking,
worse in flame, and in poison, than the enuenomed head of a Serpent, and
Babylonian Dragon. The cause why I have painted these two Spermes in the form
of Dragons, is because their stinch is exceeding great, and like the stinch of
them, and the exhalations which arise within the glass, are dark, black,
blew, and yellowish, (like as these two Dragons are painted) the force of
which, and of the bodies dissolved, is so venomous, that truly there is not in
the world a ranker poison; for it is able by the force and stench thereof, to
mortify and kill every thing living: The Philosopher never feels this stinch,
if he break not his vessels, but only he judges it to be such, by the sight,
and the changing of colo^rs, proceeding from the rottenness of his confections.

These colors then signify the putrefaction and generation which is given us,
by the biting and dissolution of our perfect bodies, which dissolution
proceeds from external heat ayding, and from the Pontique fierienesse, and
admirable sharp virtue of the poison of our Mercury, which makes and
resolves into a pure cloud, that is, into impalpable powder, all that which it
finds to resist it: So the heat working upon and against the radical,
mettallicke, viscous, or oily moisture, ingendereth upon the subject,
blackenesse. For at the same time, the Matter is dissolved, is corrupted,
grows black, and conceiueth to engender; for all corruption is generation,
and therefore ought blackness to be much desired; for that is the black sail
with the which the Ship of Theseus came back victorious from Crete, which was
the cause of the death of his Father; so must this father die, to the intent,
that from the ashes of this Phoenix another may spring, and that the son may
be King. Assuredly he that sees not this blackenesse at the beginning of his
operations, during the days of the Stone; what other color soever he see, he
shall altogether fail in the Maisterie, and can do no more with that Chaos:
for he works not well, if he putrify not; because if he do not putrify,
he does not corrupt, nor engender, and by consequent, the Stone cannot take
vegetative life to increase and multiply. And in all truth, I tell thee again,
that though thou work upon the true matter, if at the beginning, after thou
have put thy Confections in the Philosophers Egg, that is to say, sometime
after the fire have stirred them up, if then, I say, thou see not this head
of the Crow, the black of the blackest black, thou must begin again, for
this fault is irreparable, and not to be amended; especially the Orange color,
or half red, is to be feared, for if at the beg^nning thou see that in thine
Egg, without doubt, thou burnest, or have burnt the verdure and iuelinesse of
thy Stone. The color which thou must have, ought to be entirely perfected in
Blackness, like to that of these Dragons in the space of forty days: Let
them therefore which shall not have these essential marks, retire themselves
betimes from their operations, that they may redeem themselves from assured
loss. Know also, and note it well, that in this Art it is but nothing to have
this blackness, there is nothing more easy to come by: for from almost all
things in the world, mixed with moisture, thou may have a blackness, by the
fire: but thou must have a blackness which comes of the perfect Mettallicke
bodies, which lasts a long space of time, and is not destroyed in less than
five months, after the which follows immediately the desired whiteness. If
thou have this, thou have enough, but not all. As for the color bluish and
yellowish, that signifies that Solution and Putrefaction is not yet finished,
and that the colors of our Mercury are not as yet well mingled, and rotten
with the rest. Then this blackness, and these colors, teach plainly, that in
this beginning the matter, and compound begins to rotte and dissolve into
powder, less than the Atoms of the Sun, the which afterward are changed
into coator permanent. And this dissolution is by the envious Philosophers
called Death, Destruction, and Perdition, because that the natures change their
form, and from hence are proceeded so many Allegories of dead men, tombs, and
sepulchers. Others have called it Calcination, Denudation, Separation,
Erituration, and Assation, because the Confections are changed and reduced into
most small pieces and parts. Others have called it Reduction into the first
matter, Mollification, Extraction, Commixtion, Liquefaction, Conversion of
Elements, Subtiliation, Division, Humation, Impastation, and Distillation,
because that the Confections, are melted, brought back into s^ed, softened, and
circulated within the glass. Others have called it Xir, or Iris, Putrefaction,
Corruption, Cymmerian darkness, a gulf, Hell, Dragons, Generation,
Ingression, Submersion, Complexion, Conjunction, and impregnation, because
that the matter is black and waterish, and that the natures are perfectly
mingled, and hold one of another. For when the heat of the Sun works upon
them, they are changed, first into powder, or fat and glutinous water, which
feeling the heat, flies on high to the Poulets head, with the smoke, that is
to say, with the wind and air; from thence this water melted, and drawn out
of the confections, goes down again, and in descending reduces, and
resolves, as much as it can, the rest of the Aromatical confections, always
doing so, until the whole be like a black broth somewhat fat. Now you see,
why they call this sublimation, and volatization, because it flies on high,
and Ascension and Descension, because it mounteth, and descends within the
glass. A while after, the water begins to thicken and coagulate somewhat
more, growing very black, like unto pitch, and finally comes the Body and
earth, which the envious have called Terra foetida, that is, stinking earth:
for then because of the perfect putrefaction, which is as natural as any other
can be; this earth stincks, and gives a smell like the odor of graves filled
with rottenness, and with bodies as yet charged with their natural moisture.
This earth was by Hermes called Terra foliata, or the Earth of leaves, yet his
true and proper name is Leton, which must afterward be whitened. The Ancient
Sages that were Cabalists, have described it in their Metamorphoses, under the
History of the Serpent of Mars, which had devoured the companions of Cadmus,
who show him, percing him with his lance against a hollow Oak. Note this Oak.

CHAP. IIII.
Of the man and the woman clothed in a gown of Orange color upon a field
azure and blew, and of their rowles.


THe man painted here does expressly resemble my self to the natural, as the
woman does lively figure Perrenelle: The cause why we are painted to the life,
is not particular to this purpose, for it needed but to represent a male and a
female, to the which our two particular resemblance was not necessarily
required, but it pleased the Painter to put us there, just as he has done
higher in this Arch, at the feet of the Figure of Saint Paul and Saint Peter,
according to that we were in our youth; as he has likewise done in other
places, as over the door of the Chapel of Saint James in the Bouchery near
to my house, (although that for this last there is a particular cause) as also
over the door of Saint Geneuiefue de's Ardans, where thou may see me. I
ma^e then to be painted here two bodies, one of a Male, and another of a
Female, to teach thee, that in this second operation, thou have truly, but yet
not perfectly, two natures conjoined and married together, the Masculine and
the Foeminine; or rather the four Elements; and that the four natural
enemies, the hot and cold, dry and moist, begin to approach amiably one
toward another, and by means of the Mediators and Peacemakers, lay down by
little and little, the ancient enmity of the old Chaos. Thou know well
enough who these Mediators and Peacemakers are, between the hot and the cold
there is moisture, for he is kinsman and allied to them both; to hot by his
heat, and to cold by his moisture: And this is the reason, why to begin to
make this peace, thou have already in the precedent operation, converted all
the confections into water by dissolution. And afterward thou have made to
coagulate the water, which is turned into this Earth, black of the black most
black, wholly to accomplish this peace; for the Earth, which is cold and dry,
finding himself of kindred and alliance with the dry and moist, which are
enemies, will wholly appease and ac^ord them. Do thou not then consider a
most perfect mixture of all the four Elements, having first turned them into
water, and now into Earth? I will also teach thee hereafter the other
conuersions, into air when it shall be all white, and into fire, when it shall
be of a most perfect purple. Then thou have here two natures marri^d
together, whereof the one has conceived by the other, and by this conception
it is turned into the body of the Male, and the Male into that of the Female;
that is to say, they are made one only body, which is the Androgyne, or
Hermaphrodite of the Ancients, which they have also called otherwise, the head
of the Crow, or natures converted. In this fashion I paint them here, because
thou have two natures reconciled, which (if they be gu^ded and governed wisely)
can form an Embrion in the womb of the Vessel, and afterward bring forth a
most puissant King, invincible and incorruptible, because it will be an
admirable quintessence. Thus thou see the principal and most necessary
reason of this representation: The second cause (which is also well to be
noted) was because I must of necessity paint two bodies, because in this
operation it behooves that thou divide that which has been coagulated, to
give afterward* nourishment, which is milk of life, to the little Infant when
it is borne, which is endued (by the living God) with a vegetable soul.

This is a secret most admirable and secret, which for want of understanding,
it has made fools of all those that have sought it without finding it, and
has made every man wise, that beholds it with the eyes of his body, or of his
spirit.

Thou must then make two parts and portions of this Coagulated body, the one of
which shall serve for Azoth, to wash and cleanse the other, which is called
Leton, which must be whitened: He which is washed, is the Serpent Python, which
(having taken his being from the corruption of the slime of the Earth gathered
together by the waters of the deluge, when all the confections were water) must
be killed and overcome by the arrows of the God Apollo, by the yellow Sun,
that is to say, by our fire, equal to that of the Sun.

He which washes, or rather the washings, which must be continued with the
other moity; these are the teeth of that Serpent, which the sage workman, the
valiant Theseus, will sow in the same Earth, from whence there shall spring up
armed Soldiers, which shall in the end discomsit themselves, suffering
themselves by opposition to resolve into the same nature of the Earth, and the
workman to bear away his deserved conquests. It is of this, that the
Philosophers have written so often, and so often repeated it, It dissolues it
self, it congeales it self, it makes it self black, it makes it self
white, it kills it self, and it quickens it self. I have made their field be
painted azure and blew, to show that I do but now begin to get out from the
most black blackness; for the azure and blew, is one of the first colors,
that the dark woman lets us see, that is to say, moisture giving place a
little to heat and dryness: The man and woman are almost all orange-coloured,
to show that our Bodies, (or our body, which the wise men here call Rebis) has
not as yet digestion enough, and that the moisture from whence comes the black
blew and azure, is but half vanquished by the dryness.

For when dryness bears rule, all will be white, and when it fights with,
or is equal to the moisture, all will be in part according to these present
colors. The envious have also called these confections in this operation,
Nummus, Ethelia, Arena, Boritis, Co^sufle, Cambar, Albar aeris, Duenech,
Randeric, Kukul, Thabricis, Ebisemech, Ixir, etc. which they have commanded to
make white.

The woman has a white circle in form of a roll round about her body, to
show thee, that Rebis will begin to become white in that very fashion,
beginning first at the extremities, round about this white circle. Scala
Phylosophoru^, that is the Book entitled, The Philosophers Ladder, says
thus; The sign of the first perfect whiteness, is the manifestation of a
certain little circle of hair, that is passing over the head, which will
appear on the sides of the vessels round about the matter, in a kind of a
cierine or yellowish color.

There is written in their Rowles, Homo veniet ad iudicium Dei, that is, Man
shall come to the Judgment of God: Vere (says the woman) illa dies terribilis
erit, that is, Truly that will be a terrible day. These are not passages of
holy Scripture, but only sayings which speak according to the Theological
sense, of the Judgment to come, I have put them there, to serve my self of
them toward him, that beholds only the gross outward, and most natural
Artifice, taking the interpretation th^reof to concern only the Resurrection;
and also it may serve for them, that gathering together the Parables of the
Science, take to them the eyes of Lynceus, to pierce deeper then the visible
objects. There is then, Man shall come to the judgment of God: Certainly that
day shall be terrible. That is as if I should have said; It behoues that this
come to the color of perfection, to be judged and cleansed from all his
blackness and filth, and to be spiritualized and whitened. Surely that day
will be terrible, yet certainly, as you shall find in the Allegory of Aristeus.
Horror holds us in prison by the space of fourscore days, in the darkness of
the waters, in the extreme heat of the Summer, and in the troubles of the Sea.
All which things ought first to pass, before our King can become white,
coming from death to life, to overcome afterward all his enemies. To make
thee understand yet somewhat better this Albification, which is harder and more
difficult then all the rest, (for till that time thou may err at every
step, but afterward thou can not, except thou break thy vessels) I have
also made for thee this Table following.

CHAP. V.
The figure of a man, like that of Saint Paul, clothed with a robe white and
yellow, bordered with gold, holding a naked Sword, having at his feet a man on
his knees, clad in a robe of orange color, black and white, holding a roll.


Mark well this man in the form of Saint Paul, clothed in a robe entirely of
a yellowish white. If thou consider him well, he turns his body in such a
posture, as shows that he would take the naked Sword, either to cut off the
head, or to do some other thing, to that man which is on his knees at his
feet, clothed in a robe of orange color, white and black, which says in
his roll, DELE MALA QVAE FECI, that is, Blot out all the evil which I have
done; as if he should say, TOLL NIGREDINEM, Take away from me my blackness;
A term of Art: for Evil signifies in the Allegory, Blackness, as it is often
found in Turba Phylosophorum: Seethe it until it come to blackenesse, which
will be thought Evil. But would thou know what is meant by this man, that
takes the Sword? It signifies that thou must cut off the head of the Crow,
that is to say, of the man clothed in diverse Colors, which is on his knees. I
have taken this pourtraict and figure out of Hermes Trismegistus, in his Book
of the Secret Art, where he says, Take away the head of this black man, cut
off the head of the Crow, that is to say, Whiten our black. Lambspringk that
noble Germane, has also used it in the Commentary of his Hieroglyphics,
saying, In this wood there is a Beast all covered with black, if any man cut
off his head, he will loose his blackness, and put on a most white color.
Will you understand what that is? The blackness is called the head of the
Crow, the which being taken away, at the instant comes the white color: Then
that is to say, when the Cloud appears no more, this body is said to be
without an head. These are his proper words. In the same sense, the Sages have
also said in other places, Take the Viper which is called, De rexa, cut off his
head, etc. that is to say, Take away from him his blackness. They have also
used this Periphrasis, when to signify the multiplication of the Stone, they
have fained a Serpent Hydra, whereof, if one cur off one head, there will
spring in the place thereof ten; for the stone augments tenfold, every time
that they cut off this head of the Crow, that they make it black, and
afterward white; that is to say, that they dissolve it anew, and afterward
coagulate it again.

Mark how this naked Sword is wreathed about with a black girdle, and that
the ends thereof are not so wreathed at all. This naked shining Sword, is the
stone for the white, or the white stone, so often by the Philosophers described
under this form. To come then to this perfect and sparkling whiteness, thou
must understand the wreathings of this black girdle, and follow that which
they teach, which is the quantity of the imbitions. The two ends which are not
wreathed about at all, represent the beginning and the ending: for the
beginning it teaches that you must imbibe it at the first time gently and
scarcely, giving it then a little milk, as to a little Child newborn, to the
intent that Isir, (as the Authors say) be not drowned: The like must we do at
the end, when we see that our King is full, and will have no more. The middle
of these operations is painted by the five whole wreathes, or rounds, of the
black girdle, at what time (because our Salamander lives of the fire, and in
the midst of the fire, and ind^ed is a fire, and an Argent viue, or
quicksiluer, that runs in the midst of the fire, fearing nothing) thou must
give him abundantly, in such sort that the Virgins milk compass all the
matter round about.

I have made to be painted black all these wreaths or rounds of the girdle,
because these are the imbibitions, and by consequent, blacknesses: for the fire
with the moisture (as it has been often said) causes blackenesse. And as
these five whole wreathes or rounds show that you must do this five times
wholly, so likewise they let you know, that you must do this in five whole
months, a month to every imbibition: See here the reason why Haly Abenragel
said, The Coction or boiling of the things is done in three times fifty days:
It is true, that if thou count these little imbibitions at the beginning and at
the end, there are seven. Whereupon one of the most envious has said, Our head
of the Crow is leprous, and therefore he that would cleanse it, he must make it
go down seven times into the River of regeneration of Jordan, as the Prophet
commanded the leprous Naaman the Syrian. Comprehending herein the beginning,
which is, but of a few days, the middle and the end, which is also very short.
I have then given thee this Table, to tell thee that thou must whiten my body,
which is upon the (...) World is deceived. This operation is indeed a
Labyrinth, for here there present themselves a thousand ways at the same
instant, besides that, thou must go to the end of it, directly contrary to the
beginning, in coagulating that which before thou dissoluedst, and in making
earth that which before thou made water. When thou have made it white, then
have thou overcome the enchanted Bulls, that cast fire and smoke out of their
nostrils. Hercules has cleansed the stable full of ordure, of rottenness, and
of blackenesse. Jason has powered the decoction or broth, upon the Dragons of
Colchos, and thou have in thy power the horn of Amalthaea, which (although it
be white) may fill thee all the rest of thy life with glory, honor, and
riches. To have the which, it has behooued thee to fight valiantly, and in
manner of an Hercules; for this Achelous, this moist river, is indewed with a
most mighty force, besides that he often transfigures himself from one form
to another: Thus have thou done all, because the rest is without difficulty:
These transfigurations are particularly described in the Book of the seven
Egyptian seals, where it is said (as also by all Authors) that the Stone,
before it will wholly forsake his blackenesse, and become white in the fashion
of a most shining marble, and of a naked flaming sword, will put on all the
colors that thou can possibly imagine, often will it melt, and often
coagulate it self, and amidst these diverse and contrary operations, (which the
vegetable soul which is in it makes it perform at one and the same time) it
will grow Citrine, green, red, (but not of a true red) it will become yellow,
blew, and orange color, until that being wholly overcome by dryness and
heat, all these infinite colors will end in this admirable Citrine
whiteness, of the color of Saint Paul's garments, which in a short time will
become like the color of the naked sword; afterward by the means of a more
strong and long decoction; it will take in the end a red Citrine color, and
afterward the perfect read of the vermillion, where it will repose it self
for ever. I will not forget, by the way, to advertise thee, that the milk of
the Moon, is not as the Virgins milk of the Sun; think then that the
inbibitions of whiteness, require a more white milk, than those of a golden
redness; for in this passage I had thought I should have missed, and so I had
done indeed had it not been for Abraham the Jew; for this reason I have made
to be painted for thee, the Figure which takes the naked sword, in the color
which is necessary for thee; for it is the Figure of that which whiteneth.

CHAP. VI.
Upon a green field, three resuscitants, or which rise again, two men and one
woman, altogether white: Two Angels beneath, and over the Angels the figure of
our Savior coming to judge the world, clothed with a robe which is perfectly
Citrine white.


I Have so made to be painted for thee a field vert, because that in this
decoction the confections become green, and keep this color longer than any
other after the black. This greenenesse shows particularly that our Stone
has a vegetable soul, and that by the Industry of Art it is turned into a
true and pure tree, to bud abundantly, and afterward to bring forth infinite
little sprigs and branches. O happy green (says the Rosary) which do
produce all things, without thee nothing can increase, vegetate, nor multiply.
The three folk rising again, clothed in sparkling white, represent the Body,
Soul, and Spirit, of our white Stone. The Philosophers do ordinarily use
these terms of Art to hide the secret from evil men. They call the Body that
black earth, obscure and dark, which we make white: They call the Soul the
other half divided from the Body, which by the will of God, and power of
nature, gives to the body by his inbibitions and fermentations a vegetable
soul, that is to say, power and virtue to bud increase, multiply, and to
become white, as a naked shining sword: They call the Spirit, the tincture and
dryness; which as a Spirit has power to pierce all Mettallick things; I
should be too tedious, if I should show thee how good reason they had to say
always and in all places, Our Stone has semblably to a man, a Body, Soul,
and Spirit: I would only that thou note well, that as a man endued with a
Body, Soul, and Spirit, is notwithstanding but one; so likewise thou have now,
but one only white confection, in the which nevertheless there are a Body, a
Soul, and a Spirit, which are inseparably united. I could easily give very
clear comparisons and expositions of this Body, Soul, and Spirit; but to
explicate them, I must of necessity, speak things, which God reserues to
reveal unto them that fear and love him, and consequently ought not to be
written. I have then made to be painted here, a Body, a Soul, and a Spirit,
all white, as if they were rising again, to show thee, that the Sun, and
Moon, and Mercury, are raised again in this operation, that is to say, are
made Elements of air, and whitened: for we have heretofore called the
Blackness, Death; and so continuing the Metaphor, we may call Whiteness,
Life; which comes not, but with, and by a Resurrection: The Body, to show
this more plainly, I have made to be painted lifting up the stone of his
tomb, wherein it was enclosed: The Soul, because it cannot be put into the
earth, it comes not out of a tomb, but only I have made it be painted
amongst the Tombs, seeking its body, in form of a woman, having her hair
discheuelled; The Spirit which likewise cannot be put in a grave, I have made
to be painted in fashion of a man coming out of the earth, not from a Tomb.
They are all white; so the blackness, that is, death is vanquished, and they
being whitened, are from henceforward incorruptible. Now lift up thine eyes on
high, and see our King coming, crowned and raised again, which has overcome
Death, the darkenesses, and moistures; behold him in the form wherein our
Savior shall come, who shall eternally unite unto him all pure and clean
souls, and will drive away all impurity and uncleanness, as being unworthy to
be united to his divine Body. So by comparison (but first asking leave of the
Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church, to speak in this manner, and
praying every debonaire soul to permit me to use this similitude) see here
our white Elixir, which from henceforward will inseparably unite unto himself
every pure Mettallicke nature, changing it into his own most sine siluery
nature, rejecting all that is impure, strange, and Heterogeneall, or of another
kind. Blessed be God, which of his goodness gives us grace to be able to
consider this sparckling white, more perfect and shining than any compound
nature, and more noble next after the immortal soul, than any substance
having life, or not having life; for it is a quintessence, a most pure silver,
that has passed the Coppell, and is seven times refined, says the royal
Prophet David.

It is not needful to interpret what the two Angels signify, that play on
Instruments over the heads of them which are raised again: These are rather
divine spirits, singing the meruailes of God in this miraculous operation, than
Angels that call to judgment: To make an express difference between these
and them, I have given the one of them a Lute, the other a haultboy, but none
of them trumpets, which yet are wont to be given to them that are to call us to
Judgment. The like may be said of the three Angels, which are over the head of
our Savior, whereof the one crowns him, and the other two assisting, say in
their Rowles, O PATER OMNIPOTENS, O IESV BONE, that is, O Almighty Father, O
good Jesus, in rendering unto him eternal thanks.

CHAP. VII.
Upon a field violet and blew, two Angels of an Orange color, and their Rowles.


THis violet and blew field shows, that being to pass from the white Stone
to the red, thou must inbibe it with a little virgins milk of the Sun, and
that these colors come out of the Mercuriall moisture which thou have dried
upon the Stone. In this operation of rubifying, although thou do imbibe, thou
shall not have much black, but of violet, blew, and of the color of the
Peacocks tail: For our Stone is so triumphant in dryness, that as soon as thy
Mercury touches it, the nature thereof rejoicing in his like nature, it is
joined unto it, and drinks it greedily, and therefore the black that comes
of moisture, can show it self but a little, and that under these colors
violet and blew, because that dryness (as is said) does by and by govern
absolutely. I have also made to be painted for thee, these two Angels with
wings, to represent unto thee, that the two substances of thy confections, the
Mercuriall, and the sulphurous substance, the fixed as well as the volatile,
being perfectly fixed together, do also fly together within thy vessel: for
in this operation, the fixed body will gently mount to heaven, being all
spiritual, and from thence it will descend unto the earth, and whethersoeuer
thou will, following every where the Spirit, which is always moved upon the
fire: Inasmuch as they are made one selfsame nature, and the compound is all
spiritual, and the spiritual all corporal, so much has it been subtilized
upon our Marble, by the precedent operations. The natures then are here
transmuted into Angels, that is to say, are made spiritual and most subtle, so
are they now the true tinctures. Now remember thee to begin the rubifying, by
the apposition of Mercury Citrine red, but thou must not power on much, and
only once or twice, according as thou shall see occasion; for this operation
ought to be done by a dry fire, and by a dry sublimation and calcination. And
truly I tell thee here a secret which thou shall very seldom find written,
so far am I from being envious, that would to God every man knew how to make
gold to his own will, that they might live, and lead forth to pasture their
fair flocks, without Usury or going to Law, in imitation of the holy
Patriarchs, using only (as our first Fathers did) to exchange one thing for
another; and yet to have that, they must labor as well as now. Howbeit for
fear to offend God, and to be the instrument of such a change, which
peradventure would prove evil, I must take heed to represent or write where
it is that we hide the keys, which can open all the doors of the secrets of
nature, or to open or cast up the earth in that place contenting my self to
show the things which will teach every one to whom God shall give permission to
know, what property the sign of the Balance or Libra has, when it is
enlightened by the Sun and Mercury in the month of October. These Angels are
painted of an orange color, to let thee know, that thy white confections have
been a little more digested, or boiled, and that the black of the violet and
blew has been already chased away by the fire: for this orange color is
compounded of the fair golden Citrine red (which thou have so long waited for)
and of the remainder of this violet and blew, which thou have already in part,
banished and undone. Furthermore this orange color shows, that the natures
are digested, and by little and little perfected by the grace of God. As for
their Roll, which says, SVRGITE MORTVI, VENITE AD IVDICIVM DOMINI MEI, that
is, Arise you dead, and come unto the judgment of God my Lord; I have made it
be put there, only for the Theological sense, rather than any other: It ends
in the throat of a Lion which is all red, to teach that this operation must
not be discontinued until they see the true red purple, wholly like unto the
Poppey of the Hermitage, and the vermillion of the painted Lion, saving for
multiplying.

CHAP. VIII.
The figure of a man, like unto Saint Peter, clothed in a robe Citrine red,
holding a key in his right hand, and laying his left hand upon a woman, in an
orange colored robe, which is on her knees at his feet, holding a Roll.


Look upon this woman clothed in a robe of orange color, which does so
naturally resemble Pe^^enelle as she was in her youth; She is painted in the
fashion of a suppliant upon her knees, her hands joined together, at the feet
of a man which has a key in his right hand, which hears her graciously, and
afterward stretches out his left hand upon her. Would thou know what this
means? This is the Stone, which in this operation demands two things, of
the Mercury of the Sun, of the Philosophers, (painted under the form of a
man) that is to say Multiplication, and a more rich Accoustrement; which at
this time it is needful for her to obtain, and therefore the man so laying
his hand upon her shoulder accords and grants it unto her. But why have I made
to be painted a woman? I could as well have made to be painted a man, as a
woman, or an Angel rather, (for the whole natures are now spiritual and
corporal, masculine and foeminine:) But I have rather chosen to cause paint a
woman, to the end that thou may judge, that she demands rather this, than
any other thing, because these are the most natural and proper desires of a
woman. To show further unto thee, that she demands Multiplication, I have
made paint the man, unto whom she addresseth her prayers in the form of Saint
Peter, holding a key, having power to open and to shut, to bind and to loose;
because the envious Philosophers have never spoken of Multiplication, but under
these common terms of Art, APERI, CLAVDE, SOLVE, = LIGA, that is, Open, shut,
bind, loose; opening and loosing, they have called the making of the Body
(which is always hard and fixed) soft fluid* and running like water: To shut
and to bind, is with them afterward by a more strong decoction to coagulate
it, and to bring it back again into the form of a body.

It behooved me then, in this place to represent a man with a key, to teach
thee that thou must now open and shut, that is to say, Multiply the budding and
increasing natures: for look how often thou shall dissolve and fix, so often
will these natures multiply, in quantity, quality, and virtue, according to the
multiplication of ten; coming from this number to an hundred, from an hundred
to a thousand, from a thousand to ten thousand, from ten thousand to an hundred
thousand, from an hundred thousand to a million, and from thence by the same
operation to Infinity, as I have done three times, praised be God. And when thy
Elixir is so brought unto Infinity, one grain thereof falling upon a quantity
of molten metal as deep and vaste as the Ocean, it will teine it, and
convert it into most perfect metal, that is to say, into silver or gold,
according as it shall have been imbibed and fermented, expelling and driving
out far from himself all the impure and strange matter, which was joined with
the metal in the first coagulation: for this reason therefore have I made to
be painted a Key in the hand of the man, which is in the form of Saint Peter,
to signify that the stone desires to be opened and shut for multiplication;
and likewise to show thee with what Mercury thou ought to do this, and
when; I have given the man a garment Citrine red, and the woman one of orange
color. Let this suffice, lest I transgress the silence of Pythagoras, to
teach thee that the woman, that is, our stone, asks to have the rich
Accoustrements and color of Saint Peter. She has written in her Roll,
CHRIST PRECOR ESTOPIVS, that is, Jesus Christ be pitiful unto me, as if she
said, Lord be good unto me, and suffer not that he that shall become thus
far, should spoil all with too much fire: It is true, that from henceforward
I shall no more fear mine enemies, and that all fire shall be alike unto me,
yet the vessel that contains me, is always brittle and easy to be broken:
for if they exalt the fire overmuch, it will crack, and flying a pieces, will
carry me, and sow me unfortunately amongst the ashes. Take heed therefore to
thy fire in this place, and govern sweetly with patience, this admirable
quintessence, for the fire must be augmented unto it, but not too much. And
pray the sovereign Goodness, that it will not suffer the evil spirits, which
keep the Mines and Treasures, to destroy thy work, or to bewitch thy sight,
when thou co^siderest these incomprehensible motions of this Quintessence
within thy vessel.

CHAP. IX.
Upon a dark violet field, a man red purple, holding the foot of a Lion red
as vermillion, which has wings, and it seems would ravish and carry away the
man.


THis field violet and dark, tells us that the stone has obtained by her full
decoction, the fair Garments, that are wholly Citrine and red, which she
demanded of Saint Peter, who was clothed therewith, and that her complete and
perfect digestion (signified by the entire Citrinity) has made her leave her
old robe of orange color. The vermilion red color of this flying Lion, like
the pure and clear skarlet in grain, which is of the true Granadored,
demonstrates that it is now accomplished in all right and equality. And that
she is now like a Lion, devouring every pure mettallicke nature, and changing
it into her true substance, into true and pure gold, more fine then that of the
best mines. Also she now carries this man out of this vale of miseries, that
is to say, out of the discommodities of poverty and infirmity, and with her
wings gloriously lifts him up, out of the dead and standing waters of Egypt,
(which are the ordinary thoughts of mortal men) making him despise this life
and the riches thereof, and causing him night and day to meditate on God, and
his Saints, to dwell in the Imperial Heaven, and to drink the sweet springs
of the Fountains of everlasting hope. Praised be God eternally, which has
given us grace to see this most fair and all-perfect purple color; this
pleasant color of the wild poppy of the Rock, this Tyrian, sparkling and
flaming color, which is incapable of Alteration or change, over which the
heaven it self, nor his Zodiac can have no more domination nor power, whose
bright shining rays, that dazzle the eyes, seem as though they did communicate
unto a man some supercoelestiall thing, making him (when he beholds and knows
it) to be astonished, to tremble, and to be afraid at the same time. O Lord,
give us grace to use it well, to the augmentation of the Faith, to the profit
of our Souls, and to the increase of the glory of this noble REALM. Amen.

FINIS.
ARTEPHIVS HIS SECRET BOOK, Concerning the PHILOSOPHERS STONE.

LONDON Printed by T. S. for Tho. Walkley, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the Eagle and Child in Britans Bursse. 1624.

THE PREFACE to the READER, in the French and Latin Copies.
AMongst all the other Philosophers (loving Reader) only our Artephius is not
envious, as himself affirms of himself in many places, and therefore he
lays down the whole Art in most open words in this Treatise, interpreting as
far as he may, the doubtful speeches and Sophismes of others; Nevertheless
least he should give unto the wicked, ignorant, and evil men, occasion and
means to do hurt, he has a little veiled the truth in the Principalls of
the Science under an Arteficiall Method, sometimes affirming, sometimes
denying, and making as though he often repeated one and the same thing,
whereas in those repetitions he always changes some words, seeming often to
say the contrary of what he had said before, willing to leave unto the
judgment of the Reader, the way of Truth, Virtue, and true Working, which if
any man find, let him give immortal thanks to God alone; but if he see that
he walks not in the right way, let him read over this Author again and
again, until he understand his meaning. So did the learned John Pontanus,
which says in his Epistle Printed in Theatrum Chimicum: They err (says he,
speaking of them that labor in this Art) they have erred, and they will
always err, because the Philosophers in their books have never set down the
proper Agent, except only one, which is called Artephius, but he speaks for
himself; and if I had not read Artephius, and understood whereof he spoke, I
had never come to the Complement of the work: Therefore read this Book, and
read it again, until thou understand his speech, and so obtain thy desired
end. It shall be needless to speak any more concerning our Author; It
suffices that by the grace of God, and the use of this wonderful
Quintessence, he lived a thousand years, as witnesses Roger Bacon, in his
Book of the wonderful works of nature, and also the most learned
Theophrastus Baracelsus, in his Book of long life: Which term of a thousand
years, none of the other Philosophers, no nor the Father of them, Hermes
himself, was able to attain unto. Look therefore, whether peradventure this
man have not understood the virtues of our Stone, and the manner how to use it,
better than the rest. Howsoever it be, use thou it and our labors, to the
glory of God, and the profit of this Kingdom.

Farewell.
ARTEPHIVS HIS SECRET BOOK.
ANtimony is of the parts of Saturn, and has in every respect the nature
thereof: so this Saturnine Antimonie agrees with the Sun, having in it self
Argent viue, wherein no metal is drowned but gold; that is to say; Gold only
is drowned in Antimoniall Saturnine Argent viue, and without that Argent viue,
no metal can be whitened: It whiteneth therefore Leton, that is, Gold, and
it reduces a perfect Body into its first matter, that is, into Sulphur and
Argent viue of a white color, and shining more than glass. It dissolues I
say, the perfect Body which is of his nature; for this water is friendly, and
pleasant to the Mettalls, whitening the Sun, because it contains a white
Argent viue. And from hence thou may draw a great secret, to wit, that the
water of Saturnine Antimony ought to be Mercuriall and white, to the end that
it may whiten the Gold, not burning it, but dissoluing and afterward
congealing it to the form of white Cream. Therefore, says the Philosopher,
that this water makes the Body to be volatile, because after it has been
dissolved in this water, and cooled again, it mounts aloft upon the surface of
the water; Take (says he) gold crude, foliated, laminated, or calcined with
Mercury, and put it into our Vinegre Antimoniall, Saturnine, Mercuriall, and
drawn from Sal Ammoniack (as is said) in a broad vessel of glass, four
fingers high or more, and leave it there in a temperate heat; and in short
time thou will see lifted up, as it were a liquor of oil swimming aloft, in
manner of a thin skin: That gather with a spoone, or with a feather,
dipping it in, and so doing many times in a day, until there do nothing more
arise; afterward make the water vapor away by the fire, that is to say, the
superfluous humor of the vinegre, and there will remain unto thee a fifth
essence of Gold, in form of a white oil incombustible, wherein the
Philosophers have placed their greatest secrets; and this oil is exceeding
sweet, and is of great power to mitigate the pain and grief of wounds. All
the secret then of this secret Antimoniall, is that by virtue thereof we know
how to extract and draw out of the body of the Magnesia, Argent viue, not
burning, (and this is Antimony and Mercuriall sublimate) that is, we must draw
a water living, incombustible, and then congeale it with the perfect Body of
the Sun, which is dissolved therein, into a nature and substance white,
congealed as if it were cream, which makes it all to become white:
Nevertheless, first of all this Sun in his putrefaction and resolution in
this water, in the beginning will loose his light, be darkened, and become
black, and afterward will lift himself upon the water, and there will swim
upon it by little and little a white color i^ a white substance. And this is
called to whiten the red Leton, to sublime it Phylosophically, and to reduce it
into his first matter, that is to say, into white Sulphur incombustible, and
into Argent viue fixed; and so the terminated moisture, that is to say, Gold,
our Body, by the reiteration of liquefaction in this our dissoluing water, is
turned and reduced into Sulphur, and Argent viue fixed: And so the perfect Body
of the Sun takes life in this water, is revived, inspired, increased, and
multiplied in his kind, as all other things are; for in this water it comes
to pass, that the Body compounded of two bodies, of the Sun and of the
Moon, puffs up, swells, putrisieth as a grain of Corn, becomes great
with young, is lifted up, and increases, taking the substance and nature,
living and vegetable.

Also our water, or our foresaid vinegre, is the vinegre of Mountains, that is
to say, of the Sun and Moon, and therefore it is mixed with the Sun and
Moon, and cleaves to them perpetually: to wit, the Body takes from this water
the tincture of whiteness, and with it (the water) shines with inestimable
brightness. He therefore that knows how to turn the Body into white silver
medicinal, he may afterward by this white gold, easily turn all imperfect
metals into very good and fine silver. And this white gold, is by the
Philosophers called, their white Moon, the white Argent viue fixed, the Gold
of Alchimy, and the white smoke. Therefore without that our Antimoniall
vinegre, the white gold of Alchimy, cannot be made. And because in our vinegre
there is a double substance of Argent viue, one of Antimony, and another of
Mercury sublimed; it does therefore give a double weight and substance of
Argent viue fixed, and also augments therein (in the gold) the natural color,
weight, substance, and tincture thereof.

Therefore our dissoluing water, carries a great tincture and great fusion,
because that when it feels the common fire, if there be in it the perfect Body
of the Sun or of the Moon, it suddenly makes it to be melted, and to be
turned into his substance, white as it is, and adds color, weight, and
tincture to the Body. It has also power to dissolve all things that may be
melted, and it is a ponderous body, viscous, precious, and honorable,
resolving all crude bodies into their first matter, that is, into Earth, and a
viscous powder, that is to say, into Sulphur and Argent viue. If therefore thou
put into this water any metal, filed, or attenuated, and leauest it for a
time in a gentle heat, it will be all dissolved, and changed into a viscous
water, or a white oil, as is said. And so it molifies the Body, and prepares
it to fusion and liquefaction, nay, it makes all things fusible, that is,
stones and metals, and afterward gives them spirit and life. Therefore it
dissolues all things with a wonderful solution, turning the perfect Body into a
fusible medicine, melting, penetrating, and more fixed, increasing the weight
and color.

Work therefore with it, and thou shall obtain from it that which thou
desire; for it is the spirit and the soul of the Sun and the Moon, it is
the oil, the dissoluing water, the fountain, the Balneum Mariae, the fire
against Nature, the moist fire, the secret, hidden, and invisible fire, and the
most sharp vinegre, of which a certain ancient Philosopher said, I besought
the Lord, and he showed me a certain clean water, which I knew to be the pure
vinegre, altering, piercing, and digesting. The vinegre I say penetratiue, and
the instrument moving the gold or the silver, to putrify, resolve, and to be
reduced into his first matter, and it is the only Agent in the whole World for
this Art, that can resolve and reincrudate, or make raw again the Mettallicke
Bodies, with the conservation of their species. It is therefore the only fit
and natural mean, by which we ought to resolve the perfect Bodies of the Sun
and Moon, by an admirable and solemn dissolution, under the conservation of
their species, and without any destruction, unless it be to a new, more noble,
and better form, or generation, that is to say, into the perfect Stone of the
Philosophers, which is their wonderful, and hidden secret.

Now this water is a certain middle substance, clear as pure silver, which
ought to receive the tinctures of the Sun and Moon, to the end that it may
be congealed and converted into white and living Earth; for this water has
need of the perfect bodies, that with them after dissolution, it may be
congealed, fixed, and coagulated into white Earth; and their solution is also
their congelation, for they have one and the same operation, for the one is not
dissolved, but that the other is congealed; neither is there any other water
which can dissolve the Bodies, but that which abides with them in matter and
form; nay, it cannot be permanent, except it be of the nature of the other
body, that they may be made one together. Therefore when thou see the water
coagulate it self with the Bodies that be dissolved therein, rest assured
that thy Science, Method, and operations, are true and Phylosophicall, and
that thou proceedest aright in the Art.

Nature then is amended in its like nature; that is, Gold and Silver are
amended in our water, as our water also with the Bodies; which water is called
the mean of the Soul, without the which we can do nothing in this Art; and
it is the vegetable, animal, and mineral fire, preserving the fixed spirits
of the Sun and Moon, the destroyer and the Conqueror of Bodies, because it
destroys, dissolues, and changes Bodies, and mettallick forms, and makes
them to be no Bodies, but a fixed spirit, and turns them into a moist, soft,
and fluid substance, which has ingression and power to enter into other
imperfect Bodies, and to be mixed with them by the smallest parts, and to
color them and make them perfect; which they could not do when they were
Mettallicke bodies dry and hard, which have no entrance, nor power to color
and make perfect imperfect Bodies. And therefore to good purpose do we turn
the bodies into a fluid substance, because every tincture will color a
thousand times more, when it is in a soft and liquid substance, then when it is
in a dry one, as appears by Saffron: and consequently the transmutation of
imperfect Bodies, is impossible to be done by perfect Bodies, while they are
dry, except they be first brought back into their first matter, soft and
fluid: from hence we conclude, that we must make the Moisture return, and so
reveal that which is hidden; which is called the reincrudation, or the making
raw again of the Bodies, that is, the boiling and the softening them, until
they be deprived of their hard and dry corporality, or bodilynesse; because
that which is dry, does not enter, nor color any more then it self. Therefore
the dry Earthly Body does not teine, except it be teined, because as is
aboue-said, that which is thick and Earthy, enters not, nor colors; and
because it enters not, therefore it alters not; wherefore Gold colors not,
until the hidden spirit be drawn from the belly thereof by our white water,
and that it be made altogether a spiritual and white fume, the white spirit,
and the wonderful soul.

Wherefore we ought by our water, to attenuate, alter, and soften the perfect
Bodies, that they may afterward be mixed with the other imperfect Bodies: And
therefore if we had no other profit by that Antimoniall water, then this, that
it makes the Bodies subtle, soft, and fluid, according to his own nature, yet
it were sufficient for us: for it brings back the Bodies to their first
original of Sulphur and Mercury, that of these, we may afterward in a short
time, in less then one hour of the day, do that above ground, which Nature
wrought under ground in the mines of the Earth in a thousand years, which is
as it were miraculous. And therefore our final secret, is by our water to make
the Bodies volatile, spiritual, and a teining water, which has ingression or
entrance into the other Bodies: for it makes the Bodies to be a very spirit,
because it does incerate, (that is, bring to the temper and consistence of
wax) the hard and dry Bodies, and prepares them to fusion, that is, turns
them into a permanent or abiding water. It makes then of the Bodies a most
precious blessed Oil, which is the true tincture, and the white permanent
water, of nature hot and moist, temperate, subtle, and fusible as wax, which
pierces, reaches to the bottom, colors, and makes perfect. Therefore our
water does incontinently dissolve gold and silver, and makes them an
incombustible Oil, which may then be mixed with other imperfect Bodies: for
our water turns the Bodies into the nature of a fusible salt, which is by the
Philosophers called, Sal Albroe, which is the best and the noblest of all
salts, being in the regiment thereof fixed, and not flying the fire, and it is
indeed an oil, of a nature hot, subtle, penetrating, reaching to the depth
and entering, called the complete Elixir, and it is the hidden secret of the
wise Alchimists. He therefore that knows this salt of the Sun and Moon,
and the generation, or preparation thereof, and afterward how to mix it, and
make it friendly to the other imperfect bodies; he in truth knows one of the
greatest secrets of Nature, and one way of perfection.

These Bodies thus dissolved by our water, are called Argent viue, which is not
without Sulphur, nor Sulphur without the nature of the Luminaries (or lights)
because that the Lights (the Sun and Moon) are the principal means, or
middle things, in the form, by which Nature passes in the perfecting and
accomplishing the generation thereof: And this Quicksilver, is called the Salt
honored, and animated and pregnant, (or great with Child) and fire, seeing
that it is nothing but fire, nor fire, but Sulphur, nor Sulphur, but
quicke-siluer, drawn from the Sun and Moon by our water, and reduced to a
stone of great price; that is to say, it is the matter of the Lights, altered
from baseness unto nobleness. Note that this white Sulphur is the Father of
Metals, and their Mother together, it is our Mercury; and the Minera of Gold,
and the Soul, and the ferment, and the mineral virtue, and the living Body,
and the perfect Medicine, our Sulphur, and our Quicksilver, that is, Sulphur
of Sulphur, and Quicksilver of Quicksilver, and Mercury of Mercury. The
property therefore of our water is that it melts gold and silver, and
augments in them their native color; for it turns the Bodies from
Corporality, into Spirituality, and this water it is which sends into the Body
a white fume, which is the white soul, subtle, hot, and of much fierinesse.
This water is also called the bloody stone, and it is the virtue of the
spiritual blood, without which nothing is done, and the subject of all
liquable things, and of liquefaction, which agrees very well, and cleaves to
the Sun and the Moon, neither is it ever separated from them, for it is of
kin to the Sun and to the Moon, but more to the Sun then to the Moon;
Note this well: It is also called the mean of conioyning the tinctures of the
Sun and Moon with imperfect Metals; for it turns the Bodies into a true
tincture to teine the other imperfect Metals, and it is the water which
whiteneth, as it is white, which quickens as it is a soul; and therefore (as
the Philosopher says) soon enters into its body. For it is a living water,
which comes to moisten its earth, that it may budde, and bring forth fruit in
his time, as all things springing from the Earth, are engendered by the dew or
moisture. The Earth therefore buddeth not without watring and moisture: It is
the water of May-dew, that cleanses the Bodies, that pierces them like rain
water, whiteneth them, and makes one new Body of two Bodies. This water of
life being rightly ordered with his Body, whiteneth it, and turns it into his
white color; for the water is a white fume, and therefore the Body is whitened
by it: whiten the Body then, and burn thy Books. And between these two, that
is, between the Body and the water, there is friendship, desire, and lust, as
between the male and the foemale, because of the neerenesse of their like
natures: for our second living water is called Azot, washing the Leton, that
is, the Body, compounded of the Sun and Moon by our first water. This second
water is also called the soul of our dissolved Bodies, of which Bodies we
have already tied the souls together, to the end that they may serve the wise
Philosophers. O how perfect and magnificent is this water, for without it the
work could never be brought to pass! It is also called the vessel of
Nature, the belly, the womb, the receptacle of the tincture, the Earth, and
the Nurse. It is the Fountain in which the King and Queen wash themselves,
and the Mother which must be put and sealed in the belly of her Infant, that
is, the Sun which proceeded from her, and which she brought forth: and
therefore they love one another as a Mother and a Son, and are easily joined
together, because they came from one and the same root, and are of the same
substance and nature. And because this water is the water of the vegetable
life, therefore it gives life, and makes the dead body to vegetate, increase,
and spring forth, and to rise from death to life, by solution and sublimation;
and in so doing, the Body is turned into a spirit, and the spirit into a body,
and then is made amity, peace, concord, and union between the contraries, that
is, between the Body and the spirit, which reciprocally change their natures,
which they receive and communicate to one another by the least parts, so that
the hot is mixed with the cold, the dry with the moist, and the hard with the
soft; and thus is there a mixture made of contrary natures, that is, of cold
with hot, and of moist with dry, an admirable connection and conjunction of
enemies. Then our dissolution of bodies, which is made in this first water, is
no other thing then a killing of the moist with the dry, because the moist is
coagulated with the dry, for the moisture is contained, terminated, and
coagulated into a Body, or into Earth, only by dryness. Let therefore the
hard and dry bodies be put in our first water in a vessel well shut, where
they may abide until they be dissolved, and ascend on high, and then they may
be called a new Body, the white gold of Alchimy, the white stone, the white
Sulphur, not burning, and the stone of Paradise, that is, the stone which
conuerts imperfect Metals into fine white silver: Having this, we have also
the Body, Soul, and Spirit, all together, of the which spirit and soul it is
said, that they cannot be drawn from the perfect Bodies, but by the conjunction
of our dissoluing water, because it is certain that the thing fixed, cannot
belifted up, but by the conjunction of the thing volatile. The spirit then by
the mediation of water and the soul, is drawn from the Bodies, and the Body
is made no Body, because at the same instant the spirit with the soul of the
Bodies mounteth on high into the upper part, which is the perfection of the
stone, and is called sublimation. This sublimation (says Florentius Catalanus)
is done by things sharp, spiritual, and volatile, which are of a sulphurous
and viscous nature, which dissolve the Bodies, and make them to be lifted up
into the Air in the spirit. And in this sublimation a certain part and
portion of our said first water ascends with the Bodies, joining it self to
them, ascending and subliming into a middle substance, which holds of the
nature of the two, that is, of the Bodies, and of the water; and therefore it
is called the Corporal and spiritual compound, Corsufle, Cambdr, Ethelia,
Zandarach, the good Duenech, but properly it is only called the water
permanent, because it flies not in the fire, always adhering to the commixed
Bodies, that is, to the Sun and Moon, and communicating unto them a living
tincture, incombustible, and most firm, more noble and precious then the
former which these bodies had, because from hence-forward this tincture can run
as oil upon the bodies, perforating and piercing with a wonderful fixion,
because this Tincture is the spirit, and the spirit is the soul, and the soul
is the body, because in this operation the body is made a spirit of a most
subtle nature, and likewise the spirit is incorporated, and is made of the
nature of a body with bodies, and so our stone contains a body, a soul, and a
spirit. O Nature how thou changest the body into a spirit, which thou could
not do, if the spirit were not incorporated with the bodies, and the bodies
with the spirits made volatile, or flying, and afterward permanent or abiding.
Therefore they have passed into one another, and are turned the one into the
other by wisdom. O wisdom, how thou make Gold to be volatile and fugitive,
although by nature it be most fixed. It behooves therefore to dissolve and melt
these Bodies by our water, and to make them a permanent water, a golden water
sublimed, leaving in the bottom the gross, earthly, and superfluous dry. And
in this sublimation the fire ought to be soft, and gentle; for if in this
sublimation the Bodies be not purified in a lent or slow fire, and the grosser
earthly parts (note well) separated from the uncleanness of the dead, thou
shall be hindered from ever making thy work perfect; for thou need only
this subtle and light nature of the dissolved Bodies, which our water will
easily give thee, if thou proceed with a slow fire, for it will separate the
Heterogeneall (or that which is of another kind) from the Homogeneall, (or
that which is all of one kind.)

Our compound therefore receives mundification or clensing by our moist fire,
that is to say, dissoluing and subliming that which is pure and white, and
casting aside the foeces, like a voluntary vomit (says Azinaban.) For in such
a dissolution, and natural sublimation, there is made a loosing, or an untying
of the Elements, a clensing and a separation of the pure from the impure, so
that the pure and white ascends upward, and the impure and earthly fixed
remains in the bottom of the water, or the vessel, which must be taken a way
and removed, because it is of no value, taking only the middle white
substance, flowing and melting, and leaving the foeculent earth, which remained
below in the bottom, which came principally from the water, and is the dross,
and the damned earth, which is nothing worth, nor can ever do any good, as
does the pure, clear, white and clean matter, which we ought only to take.
And against this Capharaean rock, the ship and knowledge of the Scholars and
students in Philosophy, is often (as it happened also unto me sometimes) most
improuidently dashed and beaten, because the Philosophers do very often
affirm the contrary, namely, that nothing must be removed or taken away, but
the moisture, that is, the Blackness, which notwithstanding they say and
write, only to deceive the unwise, gross, and ignorant, which of themselves
without a Master, unwearied reading, or Prayer unto God Almighty, would like
conquerours carry away this golden fleece.

Note therefore, that this separation, division, and sublimation, is without
doubt the key of the whole work. After the putrefaction then, and dissolution
of these Bodies, our Bodies do lift themselves up to the surface of the
dissoluing water, in the color of whiteness, and this whiteness is life; for
in this whiteness, the Antimoniall and Mercuriall soul, is by the appointment
of nature, infused with the Spirits of the Sun and Moon, which separateth
the subtle from the thick, and the pure from the impure, lifting up by little
and little, the subtle part of the Body, from the dregs, until all the pure
be separated and lifted up: And in this is our Philosophical and natural
sublimation fulfilled: And in this whiteness is the soul infused into the
Body, that is, the mineral virtue, which is more subtle than fire, being
indeed the true quintessence and life, which desires to be borne, and to put
off the gross earthly foeces, which it has taken from the Menstruous and
corrupt place of his Original. And in this is our Philosophical sublimation,
not in the naughty common Mercury, which has no qualities like unto them,
wherewith our Mercury drawn from his vitriolate cauernes, is adorned. But let
us return to our sublimation. It is therefore most certain in this Art, that
this soul drawn from the Bodies, cannot be lifted up, but by the putting to
of a volatile thing, which is of his own kind; by the which the Bodies are
made volatile and spiritual, lifting up, subtiliating, and subliming
themselves, against their own proper nature, which is bodily, heavy and
ponderous; and by this means they are made no Bodies, but incorporeall, and a
fifth essence, of the nature of the Spirit, which is called Hermes his Bird,
and Mercury drawn from the red servant; and so the earthy parts remain below,
or rather the grosser parts of the Bodies, which cannot by any wit or device of
man be perfectly dissolved. And this white fume, this white gold, that is, this
quintessence, is also called the compound Magnesia, which as a man, contains,
or like a man is compounded of a Body, a Soul, and a Spirit: For the Body is
the fixed earth of the Sun, which is more than most fine, ponderously lifted
up, by the force of our divine water; The soul is the tincture of the Sun
and of the Moon, proceeding from the conjunction or communication of these
two: But the spirit is the mineral virtue of the two Bodies, and of the water,
which carries the soul, or the white tincture upon the Bodies, and out of the
Bodies, as the tincture of Diers, is carried by water upon the cloth. And that
Mercuriall spirit is the Bond or tyall of the soul of the Sun; And the Body of
the Sun is the Body of fiction, containing with the Moon the spirit and
soul. The spirit therefore pierces, the body fixes, the soul coupleth,
colors and whiteneth. Of these three united together, is our Stone made,
that is, of the Sun, and Moon, and Mercury. Then with our gilded (or golden)
water, is extracted a nature surpassing all nature, and therefore except the
bodies be by this our water dissolved, imbibed, ground, softened, and
sparingly and diligently governed, until they leave their grossness and
thickness; and be turned into a thin and impalpable spirit, our labor will
always be in vain, for unless the bodies be changed into no bodies, that
is, into the Philosophers Mercury, the rule of Art is not yet found, and the
reason is, because it is impossible to draw out of the bodies that most thin
or subtle soul, which has in it all tincture, if the bodies be not first
dissolved in our water. Dissolve therefore the bodies in the golden water, and
boil them, until by the water all the tincture come out into a white color,
or a white oil, and when thou shall see this whiteness upon the water, then
know that the bodies are dissolved or melted, and continue the decoction,
until they bring forth the cloud which they have conceived, dark, black,
and white. Put therefore the perfect bodies in our water, in a vessel
Hermetically sealed, upon a soft fire, and boil them continually, until they
be perfectly resolved into a most precious oil: Boil them (says Adfar) with
a gentle fire, as it were for the hatching of chickens, until the bodies be
dissolved, and their tincture most nearly conjoined, (mark well) be wholly
drawn out: for it is not drawn out all at once, but it comes forth by
little and little, every day and every hour, until after a long time this
dissolution be complete, and that which is dissolved do always arise uppermost
upon the water. And in this dissolution let the fire be soft and continual,
until the bodies be loosed into a viscous impalpable water, and that the
whole tincture come forth, first in the color of blackenesse, which is a sign
of true solution: Then continue the decoction, until it become a white
permanent water, for governing it in its bath, it will afterward be clear, and
in the end become like common argent viue, climing through the air upon the
first water. And therefore when thou see the bodies dissolved into a viscous
water, then know that they are turned into a vapor, and that thou have the
souls separated from the dead bodies, and by sublimation brought into the
order and estate of spirits, whereupon both of them with a part of our water,
are made spirits, flying and clyming into the air, and that there the body
compounded of the male and female, of the Sun and Moon, and of that most
subtle nature, cleansed by sublimation, takes life, is inspired by his
moisture, that is, by his water, as a man by the Air, and therefore from
henceforth it will multiply, and increase in his kind, like all other things.
And therefore in such an elevation and Philosophical sublimation, they are all
joined one with another, and the new body, inspired by the Air, lives
vegetably, which is a wonder. Wherefore unless the Bodies be subtilized and
made thin by fire and water, until they do arise like spirits, and be made
like water and fume, or like Mercury, there is nothing done in this Art. But
when they ascend, they are borne in the air, and changed in the air, and are
made life with life, in such sort that they can never be separated, as water
mixed with water. And therefore it is wisely said that the Stone is borne in the
Air, because it is altogether spiritual; for the vulture flying without
wings, cries upon the top of the mountain, saying, I am the white of the
black, and the red of the white, and the Citrine son of the red, I tell
truth, and lie not.

It suffices thee therefore to put the Bodies in the vessel, and in the water
once for all, and to shut the vessel diligently, until a true separation be
made, which by the envious is called conjunction, sublimation, assation,
extraction, putrefaction, ligation, despousation, subtiliation, generation,
etc. and that the whole Maistery be done. Do therefore as in the generation
of a man, and every vegetable, put the seed once into the womb, and shut it
well. By this means thou see that thou need not many things, and that our
work requires no great charges, because there is but one Stone, one Medicine,
one Vessel, one Regiment, and one successiue disposition to the white, and to
the red. And although we say in many places take this, and take that, yet we
understand that it behooves to take but one thing, and put it once in the
vessel, and to shut the vessel until the work be perfected; for these
things are so set down by the envious Philosophers, to deceive the unwary, as
is aforesaid. For is not this Art Cabalisticall, and full of secrets? And do
thou, fool, believe that we do openly teach the secrets of secrets? and
do thou take our words according to the literal sound? Know assuredly, (I
am no whit envious as others are) he that takes the words of the other
Philosophers, according to the ordinary signification and sound of them, he
does already, having lost Ariadnes thread, wander in the midst of the
Laberinth, and has as good as appointed his money to perdition. But I,
Artephius, after I had learned all the Art and perfect Science in the Books of
the true-speaking Hermes, was sometimes envious, as all the rest, but when I
had by the space of a thousand years, or thereabouts (which are now passed
over me since my nativity, by the only grace of God Almighty, and the use of
this wonderful fifth essence) when, I say, for so long time I had seen no man
that could work the Maistery of Hermes, by reason of the obscurity of the
Philosophers words, moved with pity, and with the goodness becoming an
honest man, I have determined in these last times of my life to write all
things truly and sincerely that thou may want or desire nothing to the
perfecting of the Philosophers Stone, (excepting a certain thing, which it is
not lawful for any person to say or to write, because it is always revealed
by God, or by a Master, and yet in this Book, he that is not stiffenecked,
shall with a little experience, easily learn it.) I have therefore in this
Book written the naked truth, although clothed with a few colors, that
every good and wise man, may from this Philosophical Tree happily gather the
admirable Apples of the Hesperides. Wherefore praised be the most high God,
which has put this benignity into our soul, and with a wonderful long old
age, has given us a true dilection of heart, wherewithal it seems unto me,
that I do truly love, cherish, and embrace all men. But let us return unto
the Art. Surely our work is quickly dispatched, for that which the heat of
the Sun does in a hundred years in the Mines of the Earth for the
generation of a Metal, (as I have often seen) our secret fire, that is, our
fiery sulphurous water, which is called Balneum Mariae, works in short time.

And this work is no great labor to him that knows and understands it,
neither is the matter so dear, (considering a small quantity suffices) that
it ought to cause any man to pluck back his hand, because it is so short and
easy, that it may well be called the work of Women, and the play of
Children* Work then cheerfully (my son) pray to God, read Books
continually, for one Book opens another, think of it profoundly; fly all
things that vanish in the fire, for thou have not thine intent in these
combustible and consuming things, but only in the decoction of thy water,
drawn from thy lights. For by this water is color and weight given
infinitely, and this water is a white fume, which as a soul flows in the
perfect bodies, taking wholly from them their blackness and uncleanness, and
consoledating the two Bodies into one, and multiplying their water: And there
is no other thing that can take away their true color from the perfect Bodies,
that is, from the Sun and Moon; but Azoth, that is, this our water, which
colors and makes white the red Body, according to the regiments thereof.

But let us speak of fires. Our fire therefore is mineral, equal,
continual, it vapors not, unless it be too much stirred up, it partakes of
sulphur, it is taken otherwhere then from the matter, it pulls down all
things, it dissolueth, congealeth, and calcineth, it is artificial to find,
it is a short way (or an expense) without cost, at the least, without any great
cost, it is moist, vaporous, digestive, altering, piercing, subtle, ayery, not
violent, not burning, compassing or enuironing, containing but one, and it is
the Fountain of living water, which goes about, and contains the place
where the King and Queen bathe themselves. In all the work this moist fire is
sufficient for thee, at the beginning, midst, and end; for in it consists
the whole Art: This is the fire natural, against nature, unnatural, and
without burning; and finally, this fire is hot, dry, moist, and cold, think
upon this, and work aright, taking nothing that is of a strange nature: And if
thou do not well understand these fires, hearken further to what I shall
give thee, never as yet written in any Book, from out of the abstruse and
hidden cauilation of the Ancients, concerning fires.

We have properly three fires, without the which the Art cannot be done, and
he that works without them, takes a great deal of care in vain. The first
is the fire of the Lamp, which is continual, moist, vaporous, ayery, and
artificial to find; for the Lamp ought to be proportioned to the closure
(or enclosure) and herein we must use great judgment, which comes not to
the knowledge of a workman of a stiff neck: for if the fire of the Lamp be
not geometrically and duly proportioned and fitted to the Furnace, either for
lack of heat thou will not see the expected signs in their times, and so
thou will loose thy hope by too long expectation, or else with too much heat
thou will burn the flowers of the Gold, and so sadly bewail thy lost labor.
The second fire is the fire of ashes, in which the vessel hermetically sealed
is shut up; or rather it is that most gentle heat, which proceeding from the
temperate vapor of the lamp, goes equally round about the vessel: This fire
is not violent, if it be not too much stirred up, it is digesting, a tering, it
is taken from another Body then the matter, it is but one, or alone, it is
moist and innaturall, etc. The third is the natural fire of our water, which
for this cause is also called fire against nature, because it is water; and yet
nevertheless it makes a mere spirit of Gold, which common fire cannot do;
this fire is mineral, equal, and partakes of Sulphur, it breaks, congeales,
dissolues, and calcines all, this is piercing, subtle, not burning, and it is
the Fountain of living water, wherein the King and Queen bathe themselves,
whereof we have need in the whole work, in the beginning, middle, and
ending, but the other two abouesaid, we do not always need, but only
sometimes: Join therefore in the reading the Books of Philosophers these
three sorts of fire, and without doubt thou shall understand all their
cauillations concerning their fires.

As touching the Colors, he that does not make black, cannot make white,
because blackness is the beginning of whiteness, and a sign of putrefaction
and alteration, and that the Body is now pierced and mortified. Therefore in
the putrefaction in this water, there first appears blackenesse, like unto the
broth wherein blood, or some bloody thing is boiled. Secondly, the black Earth
by continual decoction is whitened, because the soul of the two bodies
swimmes aloft upon the water like white cream; and in this only whiteness,
all the spirits are so united, that they can never fly from one another. And
therefore the Leton must be whitened, and tear the Books, least our hearts be
broken, for this entire whiteness is the true stone to the white, and the body
ennobled by the necessity of his end, and the tincture of whiteness, of a most
exuberant reflection, and shining brightness, which being mixed with a Body,
never ^^parteth from it. Here then note, that the spirits are not fixed, but in
the white color, which by consequent is more noble then the other colors, and
ought more earnestly to be desired, considering it is, as it were, the
complement and perfection of the whole work. For our Earth is first putrified
in blackness, then it is cleansed in the elevation or lifting up, afterward
being dried, the blackness departs, and then it is whitened, and the dark
moist dominion of the woman perishes, and then the white fume pierces into
the new Body, and the spirits are shut up, or bound together, in dryness, and
that which is corrupting, deformed and black with moisture vanishes, and then
the new Body rises again, clear, white, and immortal, getting the victory
oueral his enemies. And as heat working upon that which is moist, causes or
engenders blackenesse, which is the first color, so by decoction ever more
and more, heat working upon that which is dry, begets whiteness, which is
the second color; and afterward working upon that which is purely and
perfectly dry, it causes citrinity and redness; and so much concerning the
Colors.

We must therefore understand, that the thing which has the head red and
white, the feet white, and afterward red, and yet before that, the eyes
black, this only thing is our maistery: dissolve then the Sun and the Moon
in our dissoluing water, which is familiar, friendly, and of the next nature
unto them, which is likewise to them sweet and pleasant, and as it were a
womb, a mother, an Original, the beginning and the end of life, and that is
the reason why they are amended in this water, because Nature rejoices in
Nature, and Nature contains Nature, and in true Marriage they are joined
together, and made one nature, one new body, raised up, and immortal. And thus
we must join consanguinity with Consanguinity, and then these natures will
meet, and follow one another, putrify themselves, engender themselves, and
make one another rejoice, because Nature is governed by Nature, which is
nearest and most friendly to it. Our water then (says Danthin) is the most
pleasant, fair, and clear Fountain, prepared only for the King and Queen,
whom it knows very well, and they know it; for it draws them to it self,
and they abide therein to wash themselves two or three days, that is, two or
three months; and it makes them young again, and fair. And because the
Sun and Moon have their Original from this water their Mother, therefore it
behooves that they enter again into their Mothers womb, that they may be
borne again, and be made more strong, more noble, and more valiant. And
therefore if these do not die, and be not turned into water, they remain
alone, and without fruit; but if they die, and be resolved in our water, they
bring fruit an hundredth fold; and from that very place, where it seemed they
had lost what they were, from thence shall they appear that which they were
not before. Let therefore the spirit of our living water, be with great wit and
subtilty fixed with the Sun and the Moon* because they being turned into the
nature of water, do dye, and seem like unto the dead; yet afterward being
inspired from thence, they live, increase, and multiply like all other
vegetable things. It is enough then to dispose the matter sufficiently from
without, for from within, it self does work sufficiently to its own
perfection. For it has in it self a certain and inhaerent motion, according
to the true way, better then any order that can be imagined by man. And
therefore do thou only prepare, and Nature will perfect; for if she be not
hindered by the contrary, she will not pass her own certain motion, as well
to conceive, as to bring forth. Wherefore after the preparation of the matter,
take heed only least by too much fire thou make the bath too hot: Secondly,
take heed least the spirit* do exhale, because it would hurt him that works,
that is to say, it would destroy the work, and cause many infirmities, that
is, much sadness and anger. From this that has been spoken, is drawn this
Axiom, to wit, that by the course of nature, he does not know the making of
Metals, that knows not the destruction of them. It behooves then, to join
together them that are of kindred, for Natures do find their like natures,
and being* putrified, are mixed together, and mortify themselves. It is
necessary therefore to know this corruption and generation, and how the Natures
do embrace one another, and are pacified in a slow fire, how Nature rejoices
in Nature, and nature retains nature, and turns it into a white nature. After
this, if thou will make it red, thou must boil this white, in a dry continual
fire, until it be as red as blood, which will be nothing else but fire and a
true tincture: And so by a continual dry fire, the whiteness is changed,
amended, perfected, made Citrine, and acquireth redness, a true fixed color.
And consequently by how much more this red is boiled, so much the more is it
colored, and made a tincture of perfect redness; Wherefore thou must with a
dry fire, and a dry calcination, without any moisture, boil this compound,
until it be clothed with a most red color, and then it will be a perfect
Elixir.

If afterward thou will multiply it, thou must again resolve that red in a
new dissoluing water, and after by decoction whiten and rubifie it by the
degrees of fire, reiterating the first regiment. Dissolve, congeale, reiterate,
shutting, opening, and multiplying in quantity and quality at thine own
pleasure: for by a new corruption and generation, there is again brought in a
new motion, and so we could never find an end, if we would always work by
reiteration of solution and coagulation, by the means of our dissoluing water,
that is to say, dissoluing and congealing, as is said in the first regiment.
And so the virtue thereof is increased and multiplied in quantity and
quality, so that if in the first work, one part of thy Stone, will teyne an
hundred, in the second it will teyne a thousand, in the third ten thousand, and
so by pursuing thy work, thy proiection will come into infinity, teyning
truly, and perfectly, and fixedly, every quantity, how great soever it be,
and so by a thing of an easy price, is added color, and virtue, and weight.
Therefore our fire and Azoth are sufficient for thee; boil, boil, reiterate,
dissolve, congeale, and so continue according to thy will, multiplying it as
much as thou will, and until thy Medicine be made fusible as wax, and that
it have the quantity and virtue which thou desire. Therefore all the
accomplishment of the work, or of our second Stone, (note it well) consists
in this, that thou take the perfect Body, which thou must put in our water, in
a house of glass, well shut and stopped with Cement, lest the air get in, or
the moisture enclosed get out; and there hold it in the digestion of a gentle
heat, as if it were of a bathe, or the most temperate heat of dung, upon the
which with the fire thou shall continue the perfection of decoction, until it
be putrified and resolved into black, and afterward be lifted up, and
sublimed by the water, that it may thereby be cleansed from all blackness and
darkness, and that it may be whitened and made subtle, until it come to the
utmost purity of sublimation, and at the last be made volatile, and white,
within and without: for the vulture flying in the Air without wings, cries
that it might get upon the Mountain, that is, upon the water, upon the which
the white Spirit is carried. Then continue a convenient fire, and that Spirit,
that is, the subtle substance of the Body and of Mercury will ascend upon the
water, which quintessence is whiter than the snow; continue still, and in the
end strengthen thy fire, until all which is spiritual mount on high: for know
well, that all that is clear, pure, and spiritual, ascends on high in the
air, in the form of a white fume, which the Philosophers call, the Virgins
milk.

It behooves therefore, that (as Sibill said) the Son of the Virgin be
exalted from the Earth, and that the white quintessence after his resurrection
be lifted up toward the heavens, and that the gross and thick remain in
the bottom of the vessel and of the water; for afterward when the vessel is
cold, thou shall find in the bottom thereof, the foeces, black, burnt, and
combust, separate from the spirit and white quintessence, which dregs thou must
cast away. In these times the Argent viue raineth from our air upon our new
earth, which is called Argent viue, sublimed from the air, whereof is made a
water viscous, clean and white, which is the true tincture separated from all
black foeces, and so our brass or Leton, is with our water governed,
purified, and adorned with a white color, which white color is not gotten,
but by decoction and coagulation of the water. Boil it then continually, wash
away the blackness from the Leton, not with thy hand, but with the Stone, or
the fire, or our second Mercuriall water, which is the true tincture. For this
separation of the pure from the impure, is not done with hands, but nature her
self alone, by working it circularly to perfection, brings it to pass. It
appears then that this composition is not a manual work, but only a change
of the natures, because nature dissolues and conioynes it self, it sublimes
and lifts up it self, and having separated the foeces, it grows white: and
in such a sublimation the parts are always joined together, more subtle, more
pure and essential, because that when the fiery nature lifts up the subtle
parts, it lifts up always the more pure, and by consequent leaves the
grosser in the bottom. And therefore it behooves by an indifferent fire, to
sublime in a continual vapor, that the Stone may be inspired in the air,
and live. For the nature of all things takes life of the inspiration of air,
and so also all our Maistery consists in vapor, and in the sublimation of
water. And therefore our brass or Leton must by degrees of fire be lifted up,
and freely without violence, of himself, ascend on high, wherefore unless the
Body be by fire and water dissolved, attenuated, and subtilized, until it
ascend as a spirit, or climb like Argent viue, or as the white soul separated
from the Body, and carried in the sublimation of the Spirits, there is nothing
at all done in this Art: But when it ascends on high, it is borne in the air,
and changed in the air, and is made life with life, being altogether
spiritual and incorruptible: And so in such a regiment the Body is made a
spirit of a subtle nature, and the spirit is incorporated with the Body, and
is made one with it, and in such a sublimation, conjunction, and elevation, all
things are made white.

And therefore this Phylosophicall and natural sublimation is necessary, for
that it makes peace between the body and the spirit, which is impossible
otherwise to be done, otherwise then by this separation of the parts: wherefore
it behooves to sublime them both, to the end, that in the troubles of this
stormy Sea, the pure may ascend, and the impure and earthly may descend: And
for this cause it must be boiled continually, that it may be brought to a
subtle nature, and that the body may assume and draw to it self the white
Mercuriall soul, which it naturally retains, and suffers it not to be
separated from it, because it is like unto it, in the neerenesse of the first,
pure, and simple nature. From hence it appears, that this separation must be
made by decoction, until there remain no more of the fat of the soul, which
is not lifted up, and exalted into the upper part, for so they shall be both
reduced unto a simple equality, and unto a simple whiteness. The vulture
therefore flying in the air, and the Toade going upon the Earth, is our
Maistery* And therefore when thou shall gently, and with great discretion,
separate the Earth from the water, that is, from the fire, and the subtle from
the thick, then that which is pure, will ascend from Earrh into Heaven, and
that which is impure, will go down to the Earth, and the more subtle part
will in the upper place take the nature of a spirit, and in the lower place the
nature of an Earthly Body; wherefore let the while nature with the more subtle
part of the Body, be by this operation lifted up, leaving the foeces, which is
done in a short time: for the soul is aided by her associate and fellow, and
perfected by it. My Mother (says the Body) has begotten me, and by me she
her self is begotten; and after she has taken her slight, (or I have taken
from her her flying) she after the best manner she can, becomes a pious
Mother, nourishing and cherishing the son whom she has begotten, until he
come to perfect state. Hear this secret: Keep the Body in this our Mercuriall
water, until it ascend on high with the white soul, and the Earthly descend
to the bottom, which is called, the Earth that remains: then shall thou see
the water coagulate it self with its body, and shall be assured that the
Science is true, because the Body coagulateth his moisture into dryness, as
the rennet of a Lamb coagulateth milk into Cheese. In the same fashion the
spirit will pierce the body, and there will be a perfect mixture made by the
least parts, and the Body will draw unto himself his moisture, that is to say,
his white soul, even as the Lodestone draws the Iron, because of the
likeness and neerenesse of his nature, and his greediness, and then the one
will hold the other, and this is our sublimation and coagulation, which
retains every thing volatile, and makes that it can fly no more. Therefore
this compositio^ is not a manual operation, but (as I said) a changing of
natures, and a wonderful connection of their cold with hot, and their moist
with dry: for the hot is mixed with cold, and the dry with moist, and so by
this means is made the mixture and conjunction of the body with the spirit,
which is called the changing of contrary natures; because that in such a
solution and sublimation, the spirit is turned into a body, and the body into a
spirit; so that the natures being mingled together, and reduced into one, do
change one another, in as much as the body makes the spirit a body, and the
spirit turns the body into a teyned and white spirit.

And therefore (this is the last time that I will tell thee) boil it in our
white water, that is, in Mercury, until it be dissolved into blackness, and
then by continual decoction, it will be deprived of his blackenesse, and the
body so dissolved, will at length arise with the white soul, and then one will
be mingled with the other, and they will embrace one another, so that they
shall no more be divided asunder, and then the spirit is united to the body
with a real accord, and are made one permanent thing; and this is the solution
of the body, and the Coagulation of the spirit, which have one and the self
same operation.

He therefore that knows how to mary, to make with child, to mortify, to
putrify, to engender, to quicken the species, to bring in the white light, and
to cleanse the vulture from his blackness and darkness, until he be purged by
fire, colored and purified from all his spots, shall be the owner of so great
dignity, that Kings shall reverence him, and do him honor.

Wherefore let our body abide in the water, until such time as it be loosed
into a new powder in the bottom of the vessel and of the water, which is
called the black ashes, and this is the corruption of the body, which is by
wise men called Saturn, Leton, or Brass, the Philosophers Lead, and the
discontinued powder. And in this putrefaction and resolution of the Body, there
appear three signs, to wit, the black color, the discontinuity of the
parts, and a stinking smell, which is likened to the smell of sepulchers or
graves. This ashes then is that of which the Philosophers have said so much,
which remained in the lower part of the vessel, which we ought not to
despise, for in it is the Diadem of our King, and the Argent viue, black and
unclean, from whence the blackness must be purged by continual decoction in
our water, until it be lifted up in a white color, which is called the Goose,
and the Poulet of Hermogenes. He therefore that makes the red Earth black,
and then white, has the Maistery, as also he that kills the living, and
quickens the dead: therefore make the black white, and the white red, that
thou may make the work perfect; and when thou see the true whiteness
appear, which shines like a naked Sword, know that in that whiteness, is
redness hidden; and then thou must not take out of the vessel that
whiteness, but only boil it, to the end, that with dryness and heat, there
may come upon it a Citrine color, and in the end, a most shining and sparkling
red; which when thou see, with great fear and trembling, praise the most
good, and most great God, which gives wisdom, and by consequence, riches
unto whom he pleases; and according to the iniquity of the Persons, takes
them away again, and depriueth them of them for ever, plunging them in the
servitude and slavery of their enemies. To him be praise and glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.
THE EPISTLE Of JOHN PONTANVS, (mentioned in the Preface to the Reader of
ARTEPHIVS his secret Book) wherein he bears witness of the BOOK:
Translated out of the Latin Copy: Extant in the third Volume of Theatrum
Chymicum, at the 775. Page.
I John Pontanus, have traueiled through many Countries, that I might know some
certainty of the Philosophers Stone; and going through as it were all the world,
I found many false deceivers, but no true Philosophers, yet continually
studying, and making many doubts, at the length I found the truth: But when I
knew the matter in general, I yet erred two hundred times, before I could
attain to the true matter, with the operation and practice thereof. First I
begun to work with the matter, by putrefaction nine months together, and I
found nothing: Then I put it into Balneum Mariae for a certain time, and
therein I likewise erred: Afterward I put it in the fire of calcination for
three months space, and I wrought amiss. I tried all kinds of distillations
and sublimations, (as the Philosophers, Giber, Archelaus, and all the rest,
either say or seem to say) and I found nothing. In sum, I assayed to perfect
the Subject of the whole Art of Alchimy, by all means possible to be devised,
as by Dung, Bathes, Ashes, and other fires of diverse kinds, which yet are all
found in the Philosophers Books, but I found no good in them. Wherefore I
studied three whole years in the Books of the Philosophers, especially in
Hermes alone, whose briefer words do comprehend the whole Stone, though he
speak obscurely of the superior, and inferior, (or that which is above, and
that which is below) of heaven and earth. Therefore our Instrument which
brings the matter into being in the beginning, second, and third work, is
not the fire of a Bath, nor of Dung, nor of Ashes, nor of the other fires which
the Philosophers have put in their Books: What fire is it then which perfects
the whole work from the beginning to the ending? Surely the Philosophers have
concealed it: But I being moved with pity, will declare it unto you, together
with the complement of the whole work. The Philosophers Stone therefore is
one, but it has many names, and before thou know it, it will be very
difficult; for it is watery, aerie, fiery, earthy, flegmaticke, choleric and
melancholy; for it is sulphurous, and it is likewise Argent viue, and it has
many superfluities, which by the living God are turned into the true essence,
our fire being the means: And he that separates any thing from the subject,
thinking it to be necessary, he truly knows nothing at all in Philosophy;
for that which is superfluous, unclean, filthy, foeculent, and in sum, the
whole substance of the Subject, is perfected into a fixed spiritual body, by
the means of our fire. And this the wise men never revealed, and therefore few
do come unto the Art, thinking that there is some such superfluous and
unclean thing. Now we must seek out the properties of our fire, and whether
it agree to our matter, after the manner that I have said, to wit, that it may
be transmuted, when as that fire does not burn the matter, it separateth
nothing from the matter, it divides not the pure parts from the impure, as all
the Philosophers say, but it turns the whole Subject into purity. It does
not sublime, as Geber makes his sublimations; Arnold likewise and others
speaking of sublimations and distillations, to be done in a short time. It is
mineral, equal, continual, it vapors not, except it be too much stirred
up: it partaketh of Sulphur, it is taken from elsewhere then from the matter;
it pulls down all things, it dissolueth and congealeth, likewise it both
congeales and calcines, and it is artificial to find out, and is a
compendious and near way, without any cost, at least with small cost: and that
fire is it, with a mean firing, for with a soft fire all the whole work is
perfected, and it performs withal, all the due sublimations. They that
should read Geber, and all the other Philosophers, though they should live an
hundred thousand years, could not comprehend it, because that fire is found by
deep and profound Meditation only, and then it may be gathered out of Books,
and not before. And therefore the error of this Art is, not to find the
fire, which turns the whole matter into the true Stone of the Philosophers.
And therefore study upon it, for if I had found that first, I had never erred
two hundred times, in my practice upon the matter: wherefore I do not
marvel, if so many and great men have not attained unto the work. They do
err, they have erred, they will err, because the Philosophers have not put
the proper Agent, save only one, which is named Artephius, but he speaks for
himself, or by himself; And unless I had read Artephius, and felt him
speak, I had never come to the complement of the work. But the practique is
this. Let it be taken; and ground with a physical contrition, as diligently
as may be, and let it be set upon the fire, and let the proportion of the
fire be known, to wit, that it only stir up the matter, and in a short
time, that fire, without any other laying on of hands, will accomplish the
whole work, because ii will putrify, corrupt, engender, and perfect, and make
to appear the three principal colors, black, white, and red. And by the
means of our fire the Medicine will be multiplied, if it be joined with the
crude matter, not only in quantity, but also in virtue. With all thy strength
therefore, search out this fire, and thou shall attain thy wish, because it
does the whole work, and is the Key of the Philosophers, which they never
revealed: But if thou muse well and profoundly upon those things that have
been spoken concerning the properties of the fire, thou may know it;
otherwise not. I being moved with pity, have written these things, but that
I may satisfy thee fully, this fire is not transmuted with the matter, because
(as I said above) it is not of the matter. These things therefore I thought fit
to say, and to warn the prudent, that they spend not their moneys
unprofitably, but know what they ought to look after. For by this means they
may come to the truth of the Art, and not otherwise.

Farewell.
FINIS.

