An Epistell exhortatorye, admonishing an warning all faithful Christians to
beware of the false fained God of the altar, and only to trust in the only
living God.
Ihon. iiii. O Ye worship ye wot not what we know what we worship.


THat same spirit (dear brethere^) which moved S. Paul to reprove the Cytezens
of Athens for their ydolatrye, Act. xvii.
Act. 17. c. has also moved us to warn you by the Scriptures of the same
offense specially in worshippyng that unknown God on ye altar, which thing
you do ignorauntlye, and therefore we certifye and assure you by this present.
iii. To. 8. d i. par. vi. c E^ay. ^6. a Act. xii. f He. br. ix. c
That God which made ye world, and all that therein is, dwells not in temples
made with hands: neither is he daily offered upon your coniured aulters. Hebr.
9. c
For than should he often have suffered syns the world began. Hebr. 9. e
But that did he ones for all, wha^ he offered up him self. and with that
only sacrifyce has he made parfet for ever al the^ yt are sanctified. Hebr
vii d
Hebr 10 e
But now to our purpose, seeing, Christ is not in your Churches made with hands
(as these forsaid scriptures will witness unto you) how can you avoid ydolatry
in geui^g that worship to an earthly thing, which is only due unto god? is not
bread a^ erthli thing? and has not the hands of sinners made and fashioned it
for your purpose? why do you tha^ worship it? And if you say it is no
substance of bread. But the lykenes thereof after ye consecratyon (which is a
blasphemouselye) what win you by that? For God said you shall not worship the
lykenes of any thing in heaven or earth. Exo 10 a Deuteronomy. v a
But here parauenture some wilier then his fellows, will say, we neither
worship the substance of bread nor ye likeness of bread, but we worship Christ
contained in ye bread. To answer this vipers whelp, we say yt the natural
body of Christ is neither contained in the bread, in the church nor in ye hole
earth as we have proved before, neither wills he to be worshyped i^ bread nor
wine, but in spyrite and treuth, Ihon iiii c
Neither can ye worship Christ where he is not, but where he is, that is in
Heaven. For that same natural body which Christ took of the virgin mary, which
suffered death, which rose again which ascended into heaven, sits now on the
right hand of his father, and if you will not believe us herin, search these
scriptures following.

Psalm x. c. xiiii. b Eccle. v. a. Job. xv. d Esaias. lxiiii. a lxvi a. John.
^^ii. c. vii. e. viii. c. xl^. xiii. d. x^iii. a. xvi. xvii. v x^. d. 1 Col
iiii. d. ^Heb. ^. a. ix. c. x. c. Mat. xiii. x^^^^. c. xv^^. b. Mat. x^^ii. c.
xxvi. f. 2. ii. xxiii. c. i. Tim ii. a. v^ c. Act^ ^. b. Phil. iii. d. Col.
iii. a. Romans viii. Ephe. i. d. iii. b.

Might not these if you were men and not beasts, persuade you to the treuth
and cause your co^scious to confess the abominable ydolatry with earnest
repentance for the same: Oh ye foles and slow of heart to believe the
scripturs. Luc 24 c
If we say the treuth why do you not believe us? Ihon viii
Oh ye children of the deuel will you never cease to pervert the straight ways
of the lord? Act ^ b
Will you still say yt you have Christ, Ihon 1^ a
and he says you have me not? Will you still say yt Christ is daily offered
among you, Hebr vii d
and Saint Paul says he was offered but ones for all? will you still say he
is in the box and the holyghost says he is in heaven? Will you still worship
ye dead works of your hands in stead of the living God? Oh ye foolyshe
Samaritanes will you still worship ye wot not what, and seek Christ ye wot not
where? did not christ himself reprove your country woman for this vain
worshipping, saying: Ihon iiii a
Neither on this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem the true worshippers worship my
father, for the hour is come and now is, that the true worshippers shall
worship only in spirit and verity? And therefore says Paul. ^ama ^ a ii Tit a
I thank God whom I worship and serve in my spirit and in a pure conscience
Loo, S. Paul says not that he worshypped God in bread, wine, or in any other
creature but in spyryte and treuthe, as his master had taught him before. Now
will we show you the effect and fruit of your wise worshypping and so
conclude. The effect is vain. The fruit sin and dampnatyon: vain is the
effect. Because it is but only the vain doctrine and tradicyon of men,
which thing Christ him self confyrmeth. saing: In vain do ye worship me
teaching the doctrines and tradycyons of men. Math 15 a
The fruit that follows ye doing is si^ne, as thus. J^^ 10 b
S. Paul proves the only word of God to be the ground of faith. But this
false worshypping is not grounded ^n the word of God. Ergo it cannot be don of
faith wherefore we conclude with Paul that it is si^ne, Rom 14
for whatsoev is not done of faith is sin. And without faith it is impossible
to please God. Alas says Esaias, Hebr ii
Esaias 46
that me^ should cry unto him which gives none answer, Sapi 13. d
or pray for life unto a dead thing. Is not your God a dead thing? or tell us
what answer gives he when you cry unto him? does not the owls and swalowes,
cats, rats and mise, fly and run over and about your God, like as they do
with other ydolles? Baen vi c
By this might you know says Jeremy yt it is no God. Yea, do not rats and mise
devour and eat your God? and time co^sum and putrify your God? But what you do
with hi^ after, few men may know. Shall ye natural body of Christ which was
ye only price of our redemption be eaten of rats or myse? Or may time consume
ye high pressed which remains for ever Oh ye priests of Bell, Hebre (...)
be ones ashamed of your lie^g, for truly if Daniel may ones speak freely with ye
king, he will bewray your false iuggling. That it may be so and yt shortly we
pray. Let no man judge us yt we any thing herin derogate ye holy supper of
Christ, for that we most highly esteem as the perfyght memoryall of our
redemptyon and most necessary food of our souls. Cor xii 10
Eating and drinking theri^ ye very body and blood of Christ eue^ as our
fathers did. But we only warn and reach you yt there should be no strange God
among you. Esa. xiiii c
And that you should turn from these vain things unto ye living God. Act 14. c
To whom alone be all honor and glory. Ame^.

Sent from verbo dei whose aucthour is in cela
Flee from worshipping of ydolles i. Cor. x.
Believe the Scriptures. Marc. i.v. And require no more then is commanded you.
Luc. iii c

