PROVERBES OR adagies with new addicions gathered out of the Chiliades of
Erasmus by Richard Tauerner.

Hereunto be also added Mimi Publiani.

Imprinted at London in Fletstrete at the sign of the white Heart.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

1539.



The prologe of the author
FOrasmoche as I think it wol be no les pleasant then profitable unto you
(good readers) to hear some of the most net and handsome proverbs which the
incomparable learned man Erasmus Roterodam has in his book of Chiliades
gathered together out of the most approved authors: although it be a matter of
great importance to handle them in their kind, and a province far
surmountyng the sklender capacity of my wit: yet for your sakes and for the
love I bear to the furtherau^ce and adourment of my native country, I will
not stycke after mine accustomed manner, which is rudiori ac crassiori minerua,
to make here a brefe collection of some of them. If ye shall like my study and
industry taken in this behalf, I wolbe glad: If not, yet my honest heart is
not be blamed.

Fare ye well.
ADAGIES.
NEmo been imperat, nisi qui patuerit imperio. No man can be a good ruler,
onles he has been first ruled Certes, nothing is truer, tha^ this proverb,
both because no prince, no ruler, no master can well do his office: oneles he
first were a subject and under the correction either of his pare^tes,
tutours, governors, or teachers. And also because that a man must first rule
his own lusts, and be him self obedient to right reason, ere he can well
govern other.

Qui quae uult dicit, quae non uult audiet. Ieren.
He that speaks what he woll, shall hear what he woll not. Let men beware
how they rail.

Sero sapiunt phryges. The Troyans are wise to late. When the sege of Troy had
endured for the space of ten years, then at last the Troyans which now had
suffered innumerable mischiefs, began to take counsel whether it were best to
send home again fair Helene the occasion of al their misery. But when their
country was now with contynuall wars wsted and destroyed it was to late to
be wise. Even so it is of many at this day. They be wise, but to late.

Piscator ictus sapiet. The fysher stryken woll be wise. A certain fisherman,
when he had drawn up his net, and began now to take in his hands ye fishes
which he had caught, chanced to take up also a Scorpion, which forthwith
struck him. Well quod he, now that I am stryken I woll beware.

Factum stultus cognoscit. A thing done, the fool knows. But a wise man
forseeth and considers things before they come to pass.

Malo accepto* stultus sapit. The fool, when he has taken hurt, waxes wise.
The wise man sees the danger and mischief of things before hand.

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum. He is happy, whom other men's
perilles makes ware.

Bos lassus fortius figit pedem. An old beaten ox fastenethe his foot the
stronger. Hierome used this proverb writing to S. Austyne to fear him that he
a young man should not provoke S. Hierom at that time old, Forasmuch as though
sage and ancient persons be not sone sturred to revenge themselves, sithe they
be now as it were weery for age, yet if there be no remedy but they must needs
meddle, they woll give much tougher and more ernest strokes.

Malu^ been co^ditu^ ne moueris. Move not an evil that is well laid. An
inco^moditie well couched is not to be sturred.

Stultus stulta loquitur. A fool speaks foolysh things

Oculis magis habenda fides, q^ auribus. Credit is rather to be given to the
eyes then to the ears, that is, the things that be seen are more certain,
than that be hard.

Multae regum aures, atque oculi. Kings have many ears and many eyes, as who
should say, no thing can be spoken, nothing done so secretly against kings
and Rulers, but by one means or other at length it wol come to their knowledge.
They have ears yt lysten an hundredth miles from the^, they have eyes that
espy out more things, then men would think. Wherefore it is wisdom for
subjects, not only to keep their princes laws and ordinances in the face of
the world, but also preuely: Romans 7. 13.
namely sith Paul would have rulers obeyed even for conscience sake.

Longae regum manus. Kings have long hands. They can bring in men, they can
pluck in things, though they be a great weye of.

Malo no do malus quaerendus cuneus. To a crabbed knot must be sought a
crabbed wedge. A strong disease requires a strong medicine. A shrewed wife a
shrewed husband to tame her. A boysteous horse, a boysteous snaffell.

Malum consilium consultori pessimum. Evil counsel is worst to the
counsaylour. Counsel is a certain holy thing. And as it ought gladly to be
taken, when occasion requires: so it ought aduysedly, purely, and without
fraud to be given when one needs it. Otherwise without doubt Gods hand woll
appear to take punyshmente of him that with falshod and gyle has foiled a
thing both holy and divine. To this agrees Ecclesiasticus. Cap. 27.
Who so ever (says he) gives a leude counsel: it shall turn upon him
self, and he shall not know from whens it comes. Here I think it not
amysse to make report of a certain pleasant fable written in Greek, not much
dyssentynge from this purpose, which is this.

The Lion for weakness of age being sick and keeping him self his den, A
pleasant fable of the Lion.
all the other beasts according to their duetye and allegeaunce come to look
how their king does.

Only the fox absenteth her self. Wherefore the wolf now espyeng a good
occasion, accuses yt Fox of treason unto the Lio^s majesty, as one that
dyspyseth the king and governor of all beasts and which of frowardnes and
traytorous heart woll not with other beasts vysite majesty, as their
allegiaunce required.

While the Wolf was thus accusynge the Fox, the Fox preuelye cu^meth in and
hears the end of the Wolfes complaynte. Now when the Lion looked up and
espied ye Fox, forthwith he gnassheth with his teeth against her. But she, after
she had obtained a space to pourge her self, thus begins to make her
defense. I beseech you sir king, quod she, what one beast of all that be here
assembled to visit your majesty, is so careful, and busye to do you good,
and to help you, as I am, which have run about ever sythens ye sykened, to
seek counsel for your maladye, and now at last I have serched out a
souerayngne medicyne of the phisiciens. The Lion hearing this, straight
charged her to tell the met dicine. Truly, quod ye Fox, if ye woll flee the
wolf and wrap your self in his skin, ye shall find (say they) ease of
your pain, The Lion light of credit, fortwith ra^ne upon the Wolf and slew
him, who thus killed, the crafty Fox laughed that the sklaunderous and evil
counsel of the Wolf lyghted upon his own pate. Let all counsaylours bear
this exemple well in mind, If they be nothing moved with fables: Let them at
lest be admonyshed with the history of Aman in the book of Hester, which is in
the Bible.

Suum cuique pulchrum. Every man thinks his own thing fair. Man's mind is
so infected with the blind love of it self: that thou shalt find no man so
sobre, so ware, so lokynge about him: but in estemynge his own things dooteth.

Patriae fumus, igni alieno luculencior. The smoke of a man's own country, is
much clearer than the fire in a strange country. The country wherein we be
borne, pleases naturally every man best, and he longs continuallye to se
it, yea be his own country never so unkind unto him, let his own
countrymen banyshe him, exclude him, thurst him out never so spytefully, yet
he can not so harden his heart, but he must needs love it, desire to hear of
it, be glad to be at one with it again.

Which thing thexemples of most renoumed persons have well declared.

Frons occipitio prior. The forehed is before the hinder part of the heed. As
who should say, the thing a man sees done before his face and in his own
presence is for most part better done, than yt is done behind his back.

A certain man (as Aristole tells) was asked what thing best fedeth a
horse, he answers ye masters eye, The masters eye.
Hitherto pertayneth also the storye that Gelly tells. Aulus Gellius.
A certain man well fed had a very lean horse. Now wha^ he was asked what
was the cause that his horse was so lean: He answered yt this ought not to
seem any maruayle at all, if he were in better liking than his horse, for
as much as he him self fed him self, but his servant fed his horse.
These things tend all to this end, that every man should as much as may
be, execute his busynes, his calling, his office by him self and not by
vycares or deputies, as now we se done, well nere of all degrees of men.

There be Kings, there be Cardinals, there be Bishops, Prelates and sundry
other officers and magistrates in Christendom, which do all by vycares and
deputies, but them selves live in most ydelnes and in all kinds of pleasure
like popes. Would god these would take exemple of our most vigila^t prince and
soueraygne lord king Henry the eight, who not only sets vigilant deputies
and ministers under him, but also looks him self right busely upon his charge
committed unto him of god

Aequalis aequalem delectat. Like delyteth the like. Lykenes of manners, egaltie
of age, similitude in all things wonderfullye knytteth persons together and
gendreth frendshyp. We se young persons keep company with young persons, aged
with the aged, we se learned men resort to learned, unthriftiness do gather
together with unthriftiness, and good fellows with such as be good fellows, and
so forth.

Simile gaudet simili. The like delyteth in the like. Similitude (as Aristotle
says) is mother of love. Similitudo matter amoris.
Wherefore where a full lykenes in all points is between persons, there no doubt
is most vehement and ardent love.

Semper similem ducit Deus ad similem. God always draws the like to the like.

Semper graculus assidet graculo Always the Iay sytteth with the Iay. These
proverbs be of one sense and meaning.

Figulus figulo inuidet, faber fabro. The potter enuyeth the potter, ye smythe
ye smythe. Assuredly where men exercise one science, there commonly the lykenes
of the science does rather gender heart bre^nyng then it does love or
benevolence.

Cretensis Cretensem One false merchaunte deceyueth an other. The men of Crete
were in old time much reproved for their falshode and deceit.

Cretiza cum Cretensi. Practyse craft with ye crafty. Of the vanity and
dissimulation of ye Cretians thapostle Paul also speaks. Tit. i.
This proverb byddeth us otherwhiles to dissemble with dissemblers, namelye
where singilnes woll take no place.

Principium dimidium totius. The beginning is half ye hole. There be many
great dilaiers. Long they be ere they can be persuaded to set upon an honest
act, so many peryls they cast. To morrow to morrow they say we wol begin, but
this to morrow is ever coming but never present.

Wherefore who so with good courage ventureth upon his matters, has already
half done.

Satius est initijs mederi, q^ fini Better it is to remedy the begynnynges then
the ends, Venienti occurrite morbo.
Stop a disease (says the poet Ouide) while it is in the coming.
Medicine is sought for to late, when by long continuau^ce of time the disease
catches ones strength.

Audaces fortuna iuuat. Fortune helps men of good courage. He that fears
that his matters shall not have good success: shall never bring his matters to
pass.

Fratrum inter se irae sunt acerbissimae. The discord of brethren between
themselves is most bitter. This to be true we have many exe^ples out of
hystories, of Caym and Abel, of Rhomulus and Remus, of Jacob and Esau and of
infinite other.

Taurum tollet, qui uitulum sustulerit. He that has borne a calfe, shall also
bear a bull, he that accustometh him self to little things, by little and
little shall be hable to go away with greater things. One named Milo was wont
every day to bear a certain way on his shoulders a calfe, Milo.
At length the calfe grew to a great ox, his daily exercise made him still able
to bear ye ox, when the ox was now of an exceeding great quantity: ye se
what maystries use works.

Viuorum oportet meminisse. We ought to remember the living There be many that
love to talk of dead men, yea and with dead men as much as in them lies.

And if they go about to extend their lyberalitie and to do any good deeds,
they had lever lashe out their wicked Mammon on the dead, than on the
quycke. So lyttel regard they have to the lively images of God, whom god never
theles so te^dereth, that what so ever we bestow upon them, he cou^teth
bestowed even upon himself.

Mature fias senex, si diu uelis esse senex. Become an old man betyme if thou
wylt be an old man long.

By this we be monyshed, that while we be strong and lusty, we cease from over
much labors, and also from such riottes, daliau^ce, and surfettyng, as
commonly youth desires. For who so contynueth in them, shall fall into age,
that is to say, into weakness of nature or ever he be ware. Wherefore if he
entende to live long and to live many wynters an old man, let him forsake
the fond ragies of youth by times.

Oportet remum ducere qui didicit. He ought to hold ye oore yt has learned
it. That is to say: Every man must practyse that science and faculty, yt
has been before taught him. Let not the shomaker meddle further then his shoes.
Let the ploughm an talk of his plough.

Ex vno omnia specta. By one consider al, that is to say, of the proof of one
thing, conjecture the rest. Of a piece of men's procedynges, guess the residue.

Ex aspectu nascitur amor. Of sight is love gendred. No man loves ye thing he
knows not, of companyenge and resorting together spryngeth mutual love. And
namelye the eyes be lures and baytes of love. Wherefore if thou woll not love
the thing yt is unlawful for the to love, absteyne from beholdynge. Math. 5.
He that beholds a woman (says Christ) with a lust unto her, has alredye
played an aduowterers part with her in his heart. If thyn eye therefore be an
impediment and let unto ye, pluck it out. Better it were for the to enter into
heaven without an eye, then with both eyes to be cast into hell fire. Now we
read that certain philosophers even for this cause (and among them
Democritus) plucked out their own eyes, Democritus
because they were the occasioners and prouokers of all evil affections and
lusts. But albeit Christ meant not, that we should so deforme our bodies and
spoil our selves of a membre of ye same, which otherwise is very profitable
unto us, yet we christen men be so inhibited by this commandment of christ
that we ought not to fasten our eyes where it is not lawful. For better it
were to lack the operacion of the eyes and never to behold things delectable
to the eye, the^ by ye same to be in danger of da^nacion.

Candidae musarum ianuae. The doors of the muses be without envy, that is to
say, learned persons ought freely, gentylly and without envy admytte other
unto them that desire to be taught or informed of them.

Ad consilium ne accesseris ante, quam uoceris. Come not to counsel before
thou be called.

Iucundissima nauigatio iuxta terram, ambulatio iuxta mare. It is most
pleasant rowing nere the land, and walking nere the sea. Man is much
delyted with variety.

Non est eiusdem and multa et oportuna dicere. It is not for one man to speak
both many words and apt words. This proverb teaches us to eschew much
talk, for as much as for most part, he must needs fail in his speech that
loves to have many words. To this agrees the wise man in his proverbs,
where he says, yt unto much speaking is sin annexed.

Quot homines, tot sentenciae. So many men, so many wits. So many heads, so
many judgments. Thapostle Paul not forgetful hereof aduertyseth us, Roma. 9.
that for the excludynge of contencion we suffer every man to abunde in his
own sense, whose counsel if our divines in Christendom would follow,
there should not be at this day so great dissensio^ in ye church in matters of
small weight. For there be many things which without danger of the christen
relygyon may be unknown well enough.

Emere malo quam rogare. I had lever bye, then beg Herby is signified that a
thing obtained with much suit and prayer, is i^dede derely bought. For
assuredly to an honest heart it is death to beg, onles it be of his special
friend, of whom he might be as bold, as upon him self, in so much that he
had rather bye the thing very dear for his money, then to get it by petition
at an other man's hand.

Vbi amici, ibi opes. Where friends be, there be goods. By this is meant that
friends be better tha^ money, and that unto the sustentacion of man's life,
friends be more auaylable with out money, than money without friends. And for
this cause among the Scythians (as Lucian declares) he was counted the
rychest man, The manner of the Scythians
which had the surest and best friends. But now if a man woll have respect to
ye manners of these days: we had need to turn ye proverb and say, where
goods be, there be friends.

Durum est contra stimulum. calcitrare. Actu. 10.
It is hard kyckynge against the good. It is evil stryuyng against the
streme, that is to say, It is great folly to struggle against such things as
thou can not overcome, or to provoke them, who if they be sturred may do the
displeasures, or to wrestle with gods providence, and the inco^moditie which
thou cannest not avoid, by thy impacient bearing not only not to eschew it,
but also to double the same.

Pecuniae obediunt omnia. Eccle. 10.
Unto money be all things obedient. This proverb was never better verifyed
than at this day among Christen me^, which nevertheless by their profession,
ought to despise worldly goods.

Veritas simplex oration. Trouthes tale is simple, he that means good faith,
goes not about to gloss his communicacio^ with painted words. Plain and
homely me^ call a fygge, a fygge, and a spade a spade. Rhetorike and colorynge
of spech proves many times a ma^s matter to be naught

Tunica pallio propior est. My cote is nerer me tha^ my robe or gown. By this
is signified that one friend is nerer unto a man than an other is.

Omnes sibi melius esse malu^t, quam alteri. Terence.
Every man loves him self better than he loves another. Whether this saying
may stand with Christ's doctrine, which byddeth us love our neighbor as our
self: let the doctors and professors of divinity discuss. For some there
be that put degrees of charity, and woll that charity should begin first at a
man's own self.

Multa cadunt inter calicem su premaque labra. Many things fall between the
cup and the mouth. Thoccasion of this proverb was this.

There was a certain person called Anceus, Anceus.
which was son to Neptune. This Anceus i^ sowyng time of vynes, called sore
upon his servants for to apply their work, with which importune calling on,
one of his servants being even for werines of the labor moved against his
master: Well master, quod he, as hastelye as ye now call upon us, it shall
not be your chance ever to taste wine of this vine. After, when the vine tree
did spring up happily, and the grapes were now ripe, the master triumphynge
and much reioysyng, calls for the servant and commands him to press wine
into his cup. Now when he had the cup full of wine in his hand, ready to set
it to his mouth, he puts his said servant in mind of his words,
vpbraydynge him of his false prophecienge. The servant tha^ brings forth
this sentence to his master. Between the cup and the lyppes may come many
casualties. While the servant was thus speaking, and even as the master was
lyftynge up ye cup to his mouth, behold the chance, suddenly comes
runnynge in, an other servant and tells how a great wild bore is
destroyenge the vyneyarde. Which tidings as soon as Anceus hears, forthwyth
he sets down his cup and runs upon the wild bore, of whom (while he
was chasyng of him) he was grievously wounded and so dyed.

Let this exemple teach men not to trust on the slyppernesse of fortune.
For it commonly comes to pass, that when men think them selves most sure,
they be so neste deceived.

Bis pueri senes. Old folk are twyse children, or double children. Aristotle
in his politykes writes, The opinion of Aristotle.
that after two and fyfty years, the sharpnes of wit waxes blounte and dull,
wherefore commonly from that time men and women grow every day more chyldyshe
and more, so that when they come ones to extreme age as to four scoore or
there about, they dyffer in wit and fascyons very little from children. I
say commonly, for all be not so, but such as exercise not their memory, and wol
not retain their minds occupied in the practyse and continual exercise of
honest and comely busynesses.

Ne Hercules quidem contra duos. Not Hercules against two, that is to say:
Though a man never so much excels other in strength, yet it woll be hard
for him to match two or mo at ones. And one man may lawfully give place to a
multitude.

Vnus uir nullus uir. One man no man. One man left alone and forsaken of all
the rest, can do little good.

Ne suitor ultra crepidam. Let not the shoemaker go beyond his shoe. Apelles the
co^ning paynter.
Plinye reherseth this history. When the most kunnynge and excellent painter
Apelles had made any goodlye and excellent piece of work, Apelles the co^ning
peynter.
he was wont to set it out toward the streets side, yt men might look upon it
and talk their fancies of it, and he him selue would also lie lurkyng in a
corner to hear men's judgments what faults were found in his work, to
thinte^t if there were any thing amys, he might amend it. Among other there
came to the stall where his work stood out to be seen a shomaker, which
vewynge well the picture, anon espied a fault in the shoes that there lacked
a latchet. Apelles against ye next day amendeth the fault. The next day the
shomaker comes, again, and taking a little pride that he had found a fault,
in so ku^nynge a man's work, begins to find an other fault in ye leg.
Apelles not sufferyng his sawcynes, cried out unto him, Let the shomaker not
pass the shoe. Certes every man ought to meddle no further then he can skyll
of. Every man (says Aristotle) is a mete judge of that himself is learned in.
For he says a blind man ought not to dispute of colors. And therefore
Quintilian writes, that sciences should be happy, if only artificers might
judge of them.

Nequicquam sapit qui sibi non sapit. He is in vain wise yt is not wise for
him self. This proverb how true it is, I woll not dispute, but sure I am,
that men of our time keep this saying so iompe, yt he is not counted worthy to
be called a man which by any means can not seek his own auantage.

Dicendo dicere discunt. By speaking me^ learn to speak, by writing men
learn to write, by singing to sing, briefly every science is gotten by
learning of the same.

Nunquam ex malo patre bonus. filius. Of an evil father comes never a good
child.

Mali corui malum ouum Of an evil rauyn an evil egg. These two proverbs be
of one meaynge. Of evil is engendered evil. The child for ye most part
follows the fathers steps. An evil tree (says Christ) can bring forth no
good fruit. Math 7.
Our forepare^tes Ada^ and Eve were for their tra^sgression deprived of
original justice, of the true fear of God, of the true and pure love of God,
of the true and perfyte knowledge of God. etc. Wherefore all we that be spro^ge
of them, cannot but be likewise spotted and naturally corrupted with the same
vices.

Qualis uir talis oration. As the man is, so is his talk. The talk of honest
men is honesty, the talk of knaves is knauerye.

Facile cum ualemus, recta con silia aegrotis damus. Wha^ we be hayle, we
easily give good cou^sayles to the sick. This sentence of Terence is not much
unlike the wise answer of Thales the sage, The answer of Thales.
who being demanded what is ye most hard thing to do: answered, to know
thy self. Again when the same Thales was demanded, what is the easest thing
of all: he answered, to give good counsel to other.

Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos. The things that be above us, belong nothing
unto us. This was the sayng of Socrates. But we may also turn it the
contrary way. The things that be underneath us, perteyne nothing unto us. For
as we ought not curiouslye to enserche what things be done in heaven: so is it
no little folly narowly to seek what is done under the earth. And as it
becomes not Jack Straw to reason of princes matters, so again it is not
semyng for persons of honest hauour to be ever busye in every tryflynge matter.

Horace
Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus. The slow ox wysheth for ye
sadle and the geldynge to ear ye ground. No man is contented with his lotte,
the courtier would dwell in ye country, the dweller in the country would be a
courtier, the bachiller wysheth him self married, again when he is married he
would be unmarried.

Nosce teipsum. Know thy self. Plato ascribes this divine sentence unto
Apollo. But whose saying so ever it was, certes it is both true and godly, and
worthy of christen men to be continually borne in mind.

Ne quid nimis. Nothing to much. There is (says Horace) a measure in
things and certain lystes over which and on this side which, the right can
not stand. Measure no doubt is an high treasure. Some can not do but they over
do, either in the redress of the abuses in the church they will run to far
and quyte and clean take away al honest ceremonies, tradicions, and laws, or
else in the mayntenynge of that is honest, they woll without choice styffely
defend yea and keep still in their churches al customs, ceremonies, and
traditions be they never so detestably abused and gone from the first
institucio^ So hard it is to keep the golden mediocritie which the said Poet
Horace full wyttely describes. Auream* quisque mediocritate^. etc


Sponde, noxa praesto est. Be surety for an other and harm is at hand. What
loss, what utter undoing, comes by suretyshyp who knows not? Albeit, I
grant, a man must bear with his friend, and in case of necessity also with
the poor and nedye.

Non omnes qui habent Citharam, sunt Citharcoedi. All that have harpes be no
harpers. Outward signs many times deceive men. All that have the gospel
hanging at their gyrdels be no gospellers. Nor again all that disprayse the
leude fascio^s of the Papists be not forthwyth Heritiques. We ought not to
judge according to the outward apperaunce of things.

Simia simia est, etiam si aurea gestet insignia. An ape is an ape although she
wear badges of gold. This proverb aduertyseth us that the orname^tes of
fortune do not change tha nature of man. The occasion of this proverb (as
tells Lucia^) came hereof. A certain king of Egypt kept up a nu^bre of
Apes and caused them to be taught the form and way of daunsynge. The mask of
Apes.


For like as no beast approaches nerer to the figure of man, then the Ape: so
is there none other beast yt either better or more wyllyngly counterfayteth
man's acts, gestures and fashions, than this beast. Being therefore anon taught
the feate of daunsynge: they began to mask, clad in purple robes, with visours
on their faces. Thus of long time this gorgious syghte delyted excedyngly the
king and his lords and ladies, till at last a merry fellow bringing preuily in
his bosom a good sort of nuttes did cast them in the floor among the
maskers. Here forthwyth the apes so soon as they saw the nuttes, forgetting
their daunsynge began to show what they were and of dau^sers returned in to
apes, and tearing asunder their visours and maskynge apparel skambled and
went together by ye ears for the nuttes not without great laughing of the
lokers on. It is to be feared lest at this day there be in Christendom many
apes (that is to say counterfayters which by a Greek word we commonly call
hypocrites) decked in purple badges and cognisaunces, that is to wit, which
bear outward signs and badges of great holiness as though they were lambs,
but inwardly they be ravenous wolves.

Artem quaeuis alit regio. Art or kunnynge every country nourysheth, yt is to
say, kunnyge me^ and such as have any faculty or science, whether so ever they
goo: shall lack no living. Cunning (they say) is no burden. It neither can
be taken from the by thieves, and into what part of ye world so ever thou go,
it follows ye. Suetonius writes yt it was showed before unto the emperor Nero
by his astronomers yt the time should come when he should be put out of his
empire, Nero.
by reason whereof he gave him selue much the more egerly unto the study of
Music, in so much that he became very excellent, and then he was wont to
have often in his mouth ye said proverb. And esteemed it the fowlest reproach
that could be laid unto him to be called an evil harper or player upon
instruments. The same thing also (as in an other place is mentioned) did happen
unto Dionisius king of the Syracusans, which after he was thrust out of his
kingdom, came to Corynthe and there did set up a schole and taught children
letters and music. For this cause among the Greakes is art or kunnynge
called the port or haven of necessite unto men mortal, that is to say,
Science the port of need.
ye only refuge in poverty. Wherefore so many as be wise, though they have
abundaunce of worldly goods for the time, yet let them not despise honest
arts, neither yet be recheles in bringing up their children, and puttyng them
to learning or some faculty, whereby if fortune fail they may yet get them a
living.

Terence.
Omnium rerum uicissitudo est. There is an alteracio^ of al things This
sentence of Tere^ce signifies that in men's things nothing is perpetual,
nothing stable, but all pass and repasse even like to the ebbynge and
flowynge of ye Ocean see.

Iucunda uicissitudo rerum. Change of things is pleasant.

Where shyft of things is not, ma^s mind anon shall wax weary and dull. For
assuredly such is the nature of things, so great lothsomnes there is of ma^s
appetyte, that nothing can be so sweet, but shall be abhorred, if it be any
long whyl used. Nothing is so galau^t, so excellent, that can long content
the mind. And therefore the poet Iuuenal writes very handsomely.

A seldom use of pleasures makes the same the more pleasant. Voluptates
co^mendat rarior usus.
Shift and variete has so great force in every thing yt by reason of ye newnes,
otherwhiles things yt be not al of ye best do please me^ very well.

Nosce tempus. Know time. Opportunity is of such force that of honest it
makes dishonest, of damage auau^tage, of pleasure greuaunce, of a good turn a
shrewed turn, and contrary wise of dishonest honest, of auau^tage damage, and
brefly to conclude it clean changes ye nature of things. This opportunity
or occasion (for so also ye may call it) in auenturynge and finishynge a
busynes: doubtless bears ye chief stroke, so that not without good skyll the
paynyms of old time counted it a divine thing.

And in this wise they painted her They made her a goddess standing with
fethered feet upon a whele and turnynge her self about the circle thereof
most swyftly, being on the former part of her head all heary and on the hinder
part balde, so that by the fore part she may easily be caughte, but by the
hinder part, not so.

Male parta male dilabuntur. Evil gotten good go evil away It is commonly
seen by the high providence of God that goods unlawfully gotten vanysh away,
no man knows how.

Occultae musices nullus respectus. Of musyke hyd is no regard. Have a man
never so excellent learning or knowledge in any feate, yet, if he be not known,
he is had in no price. A like thing is rad in Ecclesiastico. Of wisdom hydd,
Cap. 20
and of treasure cast in a corner, comes no profit.

Vna hirundo non facit ver. It is not one swalowe that brings in somer. It is
not one good quality that makes a man good. Swalowes be a token of the
beginning of somer, yet one swalowe is no sure token. So of al other things.

Aequalem tibi vxorem quaere. Seek the an egal wife, that is to wit, one that
is not above thyn estate.

Altera manu fert lapidem, panem ostentat altera. Plaut.
He bears a stone in ye one hand and bread in the other. Such persons be
in England not a few.

Bis dat, qui cito dat. He gives twyse, yt gives quyckely. He that does a
man a good turn spedely and without delay, does him a double benefit.

Honos alit arts. Honor mayteineth kunnynge. Be a man never so excellent in
any science or feate, if he be nothing promoted or set by, anon he is
discouraged, yea and al they that be students of the same, be in like wise
dyscouraged. On ye contrary part, let cunning persons be had in honest
reputation and be worthyly preferred, anon ye shall se both the^ and other by
their exemple strive who may excelle other.

Verecundia inutilis uiro egenti. Shamefastnes is unprofitable to a nedy
person. This proverb admonishes us, to cast away bashfulnes where need
constrayneth. For shamefastnes is very unprofitable unto many things, but in
especyall when the matter requires to attempt al ways possible.

Munerum animus optimus. The mind of gifts is best, that is to say, In ye
gifts of prese^tes of friends the price or value of the thing that is sent is
not to be considered, but the mind rather of the se^der, as ye renoumed king
Xerxes received tha^kefully of an vplandish man an ha^dful of water. King
Xerxes.
Luce. 21.
And Christ also preferred the wydowes two fardynges before all the rich men's
offerynges.

Multis ictibus deiicitur quercus With many strokes is an oak overthrown.
Nothing is so stron^ge but by little and little may be brought down.
Wherefore young men ought not to be discouraged by the greatness of an
enterprise, so it be honest, for by continuau^ce, seem it never so hard, it
may be reclaymed and overcome.

Dives aut iniquus est, aut iniqui haeres. A rych man is either wicked, or a
wicked man's executour or heir. This proverb S. Hierome him self uses. How
true it is not only experience teaches, but our leader and captain Christ
also in his doctrine declares unto us which because he would fraye us from the
wicked Mammon, says a camel shall Math. 19.
sooner pass through a nedles eye, than a rych man enter into heaven. Meaning
that it is excedyng hard for such as flow in worldly goods to have a mind
vntangled with the same, and to bear them selves upright toward god and man.
Yet I woll not gaynsay but a man may be rych and not put his confidence in his
riches, as David Job, Abraham and many other Patriarchs were.

Satius est recurrere, quam currere male. Better it is to run back again,
than to run forth amysse Many be either so shamefast, or else so styffe in
their own opinion that they had lever ru^ne forth still in error and out of
the way, tha^ to apply them selves to better and more wholesome counsayles.

Merx ultronea putet. Proffered ware stynketh. Service yt is wyllyngly offered
is for most part to be suspected.

Annosa uulpes haud capitur laqueo. An old fox is not taken in a snare. Long
experience and practice of wylye and subtyle fellows makes that though indede
they be great iuggelers, dissemblers, and privy workers of falshod yet they
can not easily be taken in a trap.

Terence.
Summum ius, summa iniutia. Extreme law is extreme wrong. This is to say,
then most of all men swerve from right and equity: when they most
supersticiously stycke to the letters of laws not regardyng thinte^t of the
makers. For this is called summum ius, Summu^ ius.
that is to say, the extremity or rigor of the law, wha^ all ye strife and
contention is upon the words of the law without any resspecte to the meaning
and purpose of the law makers. This fondnes of some supersticiouse lawyers
does Mark Tully copiously and pleasau^tly illude in his oration for Murena.
Cicero.


Vir fugiens and denuo pugnabit. A man that flees woll also fight again. By
this we be taught that we should not be forthwith discouraged for a little
mysfortune.

Bonae leges ex malis moribus procreantur. Good laws be gendred of evil
manners. Laws (as testifyeth thapostle Paul) be not made for the ryghtuous
persons, 1. Timo. 1.
but for horemongers, aduouterers, thieves, traitors, mansleers and such
other. If al were good we should need no laws.

Menander
Corrumpunt mores bonos colloquia praua. Naughtye communications spyl good
manners. This proverb declares, that commonly we prove such as they be with
whom we be conuersaunt.

Magistratus virum indicat. Authority declares a man. The meaning of this
proverb is this yt in a private life, where no rule is borne, a man's
disposition and manners be not espied. But let him ones be put in office and
authority, so that in manner he may do what him lusts: anon he shows
himself what he is. Epaminondas properlye turned the proverb the contrary
way. Epamino^das
For when the Thebanes eue^ of spyt had put him to a very vile office in the
city, he despised it not, but with such diligence executed the rowine, that
where before, it was counted an office skace honest, now it was had in high
reputacion. And to such as meruayled why he would take so vile and
disworshypfull an office upon him, he answered in this wise. Not only a rowine
or office declares the man, but a man declares the office.

Conscientia mill testes. The conscience is a thousand witnesses. Nothing so
much accuses a man as his own conscience

Festina lent. Make slow have, or have the slowly. This is as much to say
as temper thy have with sloth. If ye list to know more of this proverb
most worthy continuallye to be borne in mind, read the Chiliades of Erasmus,
who ha^dleth this matter at large.

Difficilia, qu pulchra. Solon.
Hard or difficile be those things yt be goodly or honest. This sentence of
the wise man Solon declarethe unto us that the way of honesty, of virtue, of
renowm, is uneasy, paynful, ieopardouse, hard. which thing also teachethe us
our Guide and savior Christ sayng ye narowe is the way which leads to life.
Math. 7.
Wherefore let not the difficulty or hardness of the thing withdraw us from
honest enterpryses.

Nemini fidas, nisi cum quo prius modium salis absumpseris. Trust no man, onles
thou have first eaten a bushel of salt with him. Without fail it is hard at
this day to mete with one whom thou may trust in all things.

Multas amicitias silentiu^ dirimit. Silence breaks many fre^dships

This adage monysheth us that with often accompanyenge, and frequent speakinges
unto, fre^dships be both gotten and meynteyned, and again with absence and
leaving of, they be commonly broken.

Quod in animo sobrij est, id est in lingua ebrij. The thing that lies in a
sobre man's heart, is in the tongue of the dronkarde. Dronken folk can keep no
counsel. Wherefore it is wisdom both to keep thy self from that vice,
lest thou vtterest in thy dronkenes the thing, that afterward shall repent
the, and also not to keep company with such nor to disclose thy heart to them
yt be subject to this foul vice, lest they happen to turn the to
displeasure.

Occasion duntaxat opus improbitati. Leudnes lacks but occasion. Wicked and
ungodly persons may well for a time dissemble, but wha^ any occasion is given
them: forth with they appear in their lykenes and show them selves what they
be.

Ama tanquam osurus, oderis tanquam amaturus. Love as in time to come thou
should hate, and hate as thou should in time to come love. There is no man,
be he never so much thine enemy, but here after may chance to be thy
friend. It is therefore the property of a prudent and wise man, so to temper
his effection as well in love as in hatred, as he sustain no inco^moditie by
the same. Now though christianity requires of us a perfect love of our
neighbor and forbyddeth al suspicion: yet we are not by the same commanded
to communicate our secret counsayles and thaffectio^s of our heart, to all
men alyke. And again though we ought to hate no person no not our most bitter
enemies, yet the frayltie of man's nature is so great, and thoccasio^s be so
many on both parties to be given, that a man ought in this case to distrust
him self, And as he ought in things no procedynge according to his desire
look and hope for better, so it is wisdom in prosperity when all is as thou
would have it, to fear and suspecte the worst.

Ignis, mare, mulier, tria mala. Fire, See, Woman, three euyls. What thing is
more dangerous then fire? What more perilous the^ the sea? and what more
comberous then a shrewed wife?

Exercitatio potest omnia. Exercise can bring to pass al things. Nothing
(says Seneca) is so hard but ma^s mind can overcome it, Seneca.
and continual practisynge bring it into a acquayntaunce. There be no
affections so wild, so unruly, but discipline and awe may tame them. What
thing so ever the mind commands she obteyneth. Some have accustomed
themselves never to laugh Some have forbidden them selves wine, some bodily
lust. etc.

Fallacia alia aliam trudit. One disceyt dryueth out an other. As we se one
nail dryue^ out with an other nail, so does many times one craft and gyle
expel an other.

Sera in fundo parsimonia. It is to late sparinge at the botome. This sentence
of Seneca is worthy to be written upon ye doors of all stoore houses, Seneca.
of all cou^tyng houses, upon all kaskettes, al vessels of wine or such like
things. It monysheth us to spare bytymes and not to follow the common sort of
prodigal yongkers, which when their lands and goods be ones fallen into
their hands, think there is no botome of their fathers bags and cofers nor
no bounds of their lands.

Amicus magis necessarius, quam ignis and aqua. A friend is more necessary than
either fire or water. Assuredly how necessary trustye, and faithful fre^des be:
is tha^ at last known, wha^ a man has need of them. There is no person, be he
never so rich, never so mighty, never so much in his princes favor, yea
though he be himself a prince, a king, a kesar, but needs the aid of
fre^des. For as without fire and water man's life can not consyste, so neither
can it stand without the use, familiarity, and service of familiars, whom
the Latynes even for Necessarij.
this self cause do call necessarios, and amity or frendshyppe they call
necessitudinem. Wherefore the proverb meanethe that two of the gretteste
commodities that can be are gathered of frendshyp, that is to wit, pleasure and
profit. For there is nothing neither more delectable or cherefull then is
fire, neither more profitable then is water.

Quam quisque norit artem, in hac se exerceat. Let every man exercise him
self in the faculty that he knows. Let the kobler meddle with clowtyng his
neighbors shoes, and not be a captain in field, or meddel with matters
concerning a common wealth. Let them judge of controversies in the christen
religion, yt be learned in the same, and not every Jack plowman.

Iniquum petendum, vt quu^ feras. Ask that is unreasonable yt thou may bear
away that is reasonable. If thou will beg an ooke of thy friend, ask
twenty or an hundredth ookes. This craft our merchau^t men and other that sell
what so ever ware it be, know well enough. For if thou cheapest any thing of
them, forthwith they woll not be ashamed to ask double or treble the price of
it. If they do it (says Erasmus) because ye cheaper should be ye more willing
to give the reasonable and due price, Erasmus.
it may perchance be suffered, but if they do ye thing of a mind to circumuent
and deceive the ignorant and simple persons and to make the^ believe the thing
is of much more value the^ indede it is, surely the craft is deuelysh,
intolerable, and far unmeet for christen persons

Quot seruos habemus, totidem habemus hosts. Look how many bo^dme^ we have and
so many enemies we have. Every man naturally desires to be at liberty, and
therefore he can not but hate in his heart, those yt keep him in bondage. And
this is the cause why also tyrannes that wol of their subgiettes make bondme^
be so abhorred, so detested, and cursed of them, that at the last they
conspyre all together to expulse the^, as infinite exe^ples in Crhonicles do
testify.

Optimum est aliena insania frui. It is best to use an others man's madness. We
use, enjoy, or take the commodity of other men's madness, when the thing
that other men do rasshelye or folishlye, we apply to our profytte, pleasure
and commodity.

Ingens telum necessitas. Necessity is a sore weapon. This proverb is diverse
ways to be verefyed.

Iucundi, acti labores. Labors ones done, be sweet. Assuredlye this is
naturally engraven in the mind of every mortal person, that after paynful
labors and peryls the remembrance of them is to him right pleasant.

Homo bulla. Man is but a bubble, or bladder of ye water, As who should say
nothing is more frail, more fugitive, more slyght tha^ ye life of man

Furem fur cognoscit, and lupum lupus. The thief knows the thief, and the
wolf ye wolf, One false harlot sonest knows an other.

Antequam incipias consulto, vbi co^sulueris, mature facto opus est. Before thou
begin, it is necessary for the to take counsel, and when thou have taken
counsel, to do ye thing spedyly.

Quod factum est, infectum fieri non potest. The thing that is done can not be
undone. For only this one thing (says a certain Poet) is denied unto god
himself to make that things should be undone which ones were done. Now great
folly than is it for a mortal creature to call again (as they say) yesterdaye.

Iustitia in se uirtutem complectitur omnem. Justice compriseth in it al
virtue. He that is perfect righteous or just man, without question lacks no
virtue.

Mendacem memorem esse oportet. A liar ought not to be forgetful. It is very
hard for him yt lies, always to agree in one tale, onles he has a right good
memory, for as much as the remembrance of things feined, is far more hard
than the memory of true things By reason whereof for the most part the
deuysours and forgers of lies are by this means taken, while forgettyng what
they spoke before, they speak things contrary and repugnaunte to their former
tale.

Non omnia possumus omnes. All men can not do all things. This is the saying
of the poet Vergill.

Multae manus onus leuius reddunt. Many hands make a light burden.

Sine Cerere and baccho friget venus. Terence.
Without meat and drink the lust of the body is cold. The best way to tame
carnal lust, is to keep abstinence of meats and drynkes. Ceres among the
Panyms was taken for the Goddess of corn, Bacchus for the god of wine, and
Venus for the goddess of love.

Egroto dum anima est, spes est. The sick person while he has life, has
hope. So sweet a thing is life, that he that is brought never so low, yet
hops to live.

Plautus.
Hostimentum est opera pro pecunia. Service is a recompense for money. He that
for my service or travel gives me money, is acquyted, I owe him nothing. His
money is not better, then my service.

Nec omnia, nec passim, nec ab omnibus. Nether all things, nor in all places,
nor of al men. This proverb teaches us, that in taking of rewards, we show
our selves not only shamefast, but also wax and circumspecte. For there be
some things, which is not semyng for a man to take. There is also a place and
time, that it were much better for one to refuse the gift that is offered than
to take it. And again there be some, of whom it is no honestye, to receive any
gift.

Tempus omnia reuelat. Time discloseth all things. Nothing is covered, but
shall be reveled, nothing is hyd, that shall not be known, says Christ.

Quo semel est imbuta recens, seruabit odorem, Testa diu. Horace.
A vessel woll keep long the savor wherewyth it is first seasoned. For this
cause Quintilian cou^sayleth us forthwyth even from our youth to learn ye best
things, sith nothing stycketh more fastly, than that, that is received and
taken of pure youth not yet infected with perverse and crooked manners or
opinions.

Nemo mortalium omnibus horis sapit. No man in the world is wise at all
hours. It is only belonging to God and properly due unto him, never to commyt
folly. There is (I say) no man, but otherwhyles doteth, but is deceived, but
plays the fool, though he seem never so wise. When I say man I except not
the woman.

Sui cuique mores fingunt fortuna^. A man's own manners do shape him his
fortune. Men commonly when any adversity chance, accuse fortune, or when they
se other men to prospere well in their matters, they say it is their fortune.
So they lay all together upon fortune, thinking there is such a thing
called fortune that rules all. But surely they are hyghly deceived. It is
their own manners, their own qualities, tetches, conditions, and procedynges
yt shape them this fortune, that is to say, that cause them either to be set
forward or backwarde, either to prosper or not to prospere.

Dies adimit aegritudinem. Time takes away greuau^ce.

There is no dyspleasure so great, no hatred so impotent, no sorrow so
immoderate, but time asswageth it.

Ne puero gladium. Commytte not a swearde to a child. Who so ever puts a
child, or a foolyshe and ignorant person (which indede differs nothing
from a child) in authority and office, commytteth a sword to a child. All be
it I study in these proverbs to be short, yet it becomes not me an Englysh
man and the kings servant to pass over with syle^ce the thing, that Erasmus
being a stranger unto us vouchsaued here to record of the most prudent and
excellent prince king Henry the. vij. father to our most drad soueraygne
lord that now is. The saying of the most excellent price king Henry the
seventh.
This excellent king (says Erasmus) being a prince of a very sharp
judgment, and also one that had a wonderful grace in gyuynge of wyttye and
quycke answers, when on a time he had herd a certain doctoure of divinity
preach which was one of the sect of those yt were called mendicant friars,
and the friar had spente his hole sermon in ragynge out with open mouth like
a mad man against the life of princes (for there be some yt by this way
seek to get them a name) and was asked how he liked the friars preaching:
Truly, quod the king, me thought that a naked sword was committed to the
hands of a mad man.

Vulpes non iterum capitur laqueo. The fox is not eftsoon taken in a snare.
He that wise is, woll not the second time stomble at the same stone.

Mendici pera non impletur. A beggars scryppe is never filled They that have a
beggars heart, the more thou gyueste them, the more woll they crave.

Simiarum pulcherrima deformis est. The fayreste of Apes is foul. That yt of
the own kind is dishonest, can not be made honest. To be a bawd, to be a
harlot, is dishonest of the self nature, wherefore in what so ever person it be
or after what sort, it can not be made honest. Semblably it is to be judged of
all other things.

Exiguum malu^ ingens bonum. A little evil, a great good. Of a little
inco^moditie and labor otherwhyles is gathered most great and high
commodity. To this agrees the excellent sentence of Musonius yt Aulus Gellius
Aulus Gel. lib. 16.
reme^breth in his. vi. book which is this: If thou do any honest thing with
labor, the labor goes away, the honesty remains. But if thou do any
dishonest thing with pleasure, the pleasure goes away the dishonestie remains.

Mores amici noueris, non oderis. Know the fascions of thy friend, but hate
them not. In ye manners of friends some vices ought to be dissimuled and wynked
at.

Ignauis semper feriae sunt. With sluggers or vnhardy persons, it is always
holydaye.

They that flee labor, wysh for holidays wherein they may loyter and give them
selves to good chere and pleasures. The institucion of holidays.
For among the old Panymes (as full eloquentlye declares Erasmus) certain
holidays were therefore given to the vplandish folk and craftesme^ that in ye
same they might with honest disporte and play refreshe them of their werynes
and travail. And to the intent the pastyme should be the more moderate, they
mengled therwyth religion, that is to wit, Abuse of holidays
service of gods. But at this day (says Erasmus) the co^mone sort of
christians do fowlye abuse holidays (which in times past were instituted and
ordained for a godly use) spending them upon bankettynges, upon reuellynges,
stues, dies, cards, frayes, byckerynges and upon all naughtynes, neither is
there at any time more leudnes and myschiefe done the^ on holy days, when me^
ought most of all to absteyne from leudnes. Neither do we ever follow more ye
Panyms, the^ when cheiflye we should play the christians. And where as it is
evident and plain, that the thing which was invented for the mayntenaunce of
relygion or devotion, is now grown to the utter destruction and subversion of
relygion: yet (says this excellent clerk) I can not know for what
consyderatio^ and purp^se the bysshoppes of Rome do daily multiply the
holidays, and do continually increase them) into an infinite nombre, where as
it had been much more convenient in this behalf to follow wise phisiciens,
which according to the quality of ye deseases, do change their medicines
and remedies, having this only as a mark before their eyes, yt they prescribe
such things unto their pacientes, as be profitable to the restorynge and
preseruacion of health. Wherefore, sith now it is apparent, that the thing ones
well institute, having regard to those times, is now by the change of men's
manners become a decay of devotion I pray you, what matter were it, to change
the co^stitucion, moved of the same consyderation that the elders did first
constitute it. That I say of holidays, the same is to be judged of many other
things, not (says he) yt I condemn ye christen men's holidays, but that I
would not have them thus increase into such innumerable a nombre, and that I
would wysh rather, that those few holidays which the authority of the
ancient fathers have ordined, might be converted to that use, whereunto they
were first invented. For with true christian folk every day (to say ye troth)
is the Sabbath day and is feastfull. But again, to evil disposed persons and
unthriftiness, the very feastfull and holy days, be less feastfull, then be ye
workyng days Nytherto have I translated ye words of that renowned clerk
Erasmus. But now in England thanked be god through the high been fyte of our
incomparable prince Henry the. viij. diverse superfluouse holidays be already
abrogate. Neither do we tarry the bishop of Romes redress in matters of
religion, which as it seems forces no more of Christ's church (over which
nevertheless he pretends to have ye charge) the^ the hyre lynge passes upon
the flock of sheep, Ioh. 10*
as Christ himself declares

Vino vendibili suspensa hedera nihil opus. Wine that is saleable and good
needs no bushe or garland of yuye to be hanged before. Like as men woll seek
out good wine, though there be no sign at all to direct and appoynte them
where it is to be sold: so all good things need no commendation of any
outward badge or toke^. Good merchaundyse and also pure and substa^ciall
things of what kind so ever they be, do praise them selves.

Timidi nunquam statueru^t trophu^. Cowardes yet never wanne a fylde, or never
had ye victory. In old time they that had gotten ye victory in batel were
wont to erecte and set up some great stone, pyller or other thing for a sign
of victory, which mark they called Trophaeum. Now such as be cowardes and
which cast many perils and doubts, shall never come to this glory,
forasmoch as such excedyng renown and glory, can not happen without great
perils and dangers. And as it is to be thought of the euentes and chances
in wars, so it is of al other valyaunte and hardye enterpryses.

Ne quaere mollia, ne tibi contingant duria. Seek not soft things, lest hard
things happen unto the. It is commonly seen, that they which vnmeasurably
seek pleasures, do fall, ere they be ware, into bitter and hard greuaunces.

Pluris est oculatus testis vnus, quam auriti december. One eye witness, is of
more value, then ten ear witnesses, yt is to say, Far more credit is to
be given to such as reaporte the thing they saw with their eyes, tha^ to
such as speak but by hear say.

Multitudo imparatorum Cariam perdidit. The multitude of rulers destroyed the
country of Caria. This country was sumtyme a very floryshynge realm and by
the discord and dissension of the citizens among the^ selves, while every
man strove to be a lord, it was brought at last to a thing of naught.
Wherefore this proverb aduertiseth us that nothing is more noisome nor more
pestiferous to a commonweal, then the ouermoche liberty of a multitude,
where no man chieflye is obeyed, but every man does as him lusts. This
unlawful liberty or license of the multitude is called an Anarchie, Anarchie.
A mischief surely in manner worse the^ any Tyra^nye.

Coeno puram aquam turbans nunquam inuenies potum. If thou trouble the pure
water with the myer thou shalt never find drink. This proverb is wont to be
said, when the things which of themselves be very good, a man marreth with the
medley of things that be naught. As if a man would deprave the most excellent
faculty of Divinity with heretical opinions, or with fylthynes of words, or
fynallye with any profane and strange doctrines.

Sustine and abstine. Sustain and absteyne. This sentence is worthy to be
written upon all doors, posts, walls, yea and in every corner where so ever a
man casts his eye. The author of it is Epictetus a noble Philosopher,
Epictetus.
by which two words, he has comprised all that perteyne to the felicity of
ma^s life, and that that other philosophers could skarse declare in so many
great volumes has he declared by these two words, sustain and absteyne. By
the first word we be taught, strongly to bear adversity, and by the second
to absteyne from all unlawful pleasures and pastymes.

Horace
Naturam expellas furca, tame^ vsque recurret. Thurst out nature with a croche,
yet woll she still run back again. It is an hard thing doutles, to strive
against nature. A crooked bough of a tree, be it never so much driven an other
way with a forke, or crotch, yet if thou ones take away the forke, anon it
returns to ye own nature and course again. So in like wise, if man contrary
to his nature and bringing up take upon him an other person either for fear, or
for shame, or for some other cause, let an occasion be offered, and anon he
returns to his own manners and nature Sisperat fore dam rur sum ad ingenium
redit.


If he hope that he shall not be espied (says Terence) again he comes to
his own disposicion and inclination: as he that fears to commytte offenses
not for any love he has to virtue, but for fear of the staff or sword, take
me away the staff or sword, and forth with ye shall se him return to his old
kind. For assuredlye their kind and natural inclinacion (says Pindarus) can
nether the craftye fox, Pindarus.
neither the wild Lion change. For tame thou never so much the lion, he wol
still return to his native fyernes, neither wol the fox by any means forget
her natural wylynes, be she never so much mekened and made tame.

Ouium nullus vsus, si pastor absit. There is no goodness of sheep, if the
shepherde be away. Servants do nothing well, where ye master is absente.
Scholars do no good, when the teacher is gone.

That commonaltie is nothing worth, yt is not governed by thauthoritie of a
prince. In su^ma, where is an anarchie and no monarchy, I mean, where one
hedde and ruler is not, but every man as a lord does what him lusts, there
is nothing well done.

Parit puella, etiam si male adsit viro. A young woman or wenche brings
lyghtlye forth children, although she be not half well known of man. The
cause hereof is, that youth is much more ready to conceive then age. Semblably,
a fine wit yt is redye to take any thing is taught anon, though he has
but an evil master. And so of all other things.

Non decet principem solidam dormire noctem. It is not semynge for a captain
or ruler to sleep all the hole night. This proverb monysheth that vigilancie
and busye reuoluynge of mind does most of all become capitaynes, princes,
magistrates, and rulers, which sustain so great a burden of busynesses upon
their shoulders.

Foelix, qui nihil debet. Happy is he, that owes nothing. This proverb he
shall find true and true again, which ones has tasted what it is to be
indebted. He that has not tasted, let him read Plutarch, Plutarche de vitandis
Vsuris.
and how wretched a thing it is to owe, he shall easily epsy. For what is
more miserable, then so often to be ashamed, so often to flee thy creditours
sight, to hyde thy self, to lie, to dissemble, now lame^tably to submyt thy
self, now to fall to entreatye, now openly to be called upon in courts, to
be shunned, to be gased upon, to be marked with the finger as thou passest by,
and shortly to conclude, not to be thyn own man, nor under thine own power.
For all these and with these many other inco^modities does debt bring with it.

In magnis and uoluisse sat est. In great matters it even suffices that a man
has wylled. Will otherwhyles namelye in things that pass a ma^s power,
deserves great praise and commendacion, although his enterprise take not
effect.

Viri infortunati procul amici. The friends of an unfortunate person be far
of. When fortune ones begins to fail the, anon thy friends are gone.

Venture auribus caret. The belly has no ears. When the belyes matter is in
hand, honest reasons be not admitted, ne herd.

Praesentem fortunam boni consule. Take in good worth thy present fortune.

Plautus.
Qui e nuce nucleum esse vult, frangit nucem. He that woll eat the carnell out
of ye nutte, breaks the nutte. He that look for profit, may not flee
labors.

Obsequium amicos, veritas odium parit. Flatery and following of men's minds
gets fre^des, where speaking of troth gendreth hatred. Such is now and
ever has been the fascion of the world, that who tells the truth, is for
most part hated, and he that can flatter and say as I say, shall be mine own
white son.

Omnia sapientibus facilia All things be easy unto wise men. There is nothing
so hard, but with prudent counsel, may be brought to pass.

Nota res mala, optima. An evil thing known is best It is good keeping of a
shrew that a man knows. For when one is ones accustomed to a shrew or any
other incommoditie what so ever it be, it is no grefe.

Multi te oderint, si te ipsum amas Many shall hate the, if thou love thy
self. Undoubtedly, nothing is more hurtful to a man, the^ self love is,
nether is it possible, but that he must needs displease many, that pleases
himself and stands best in his own conceyte.

Qui nimium properat, serius absoluit. He that hastes over fast, makes an
end the later. Over much in nothing is commendable.

Terence.
Quando id fieri non potest quod vis, id velis quod possis. When that thing can
not be done that thou would, woll that thou cannest.

Boni pastoris est tondere pecus non deglubere. It is the parts of a good
shepherde or pastor to sheare the sheep and not to pluck of their skins This
proverb did Tiberius Caesar an Emperor of Rome answer to certain of his
friends, Tiberius
which counsayled him to inhau^ce the rentes and exactions of such as held of
him. Also Alexander king of Macedonie surnamed the great, Alexander.
when one aduertysed him yt he might take far greater tributes of the cities
that he had conquered, answered again on this wise. I hate that gardener
which cut of the herbs by the hard rotes: meaning ye same thing that
Tiberius meaned.

This proverb agrees as well upon kings and other magistrates as upon
bisshoppes curates and all other ecclesiastical ministres.

Canes timidi veheme^tius latrant Fearful dogs do bark the sorer. Great
braggers commonly be least fyghters, and most cowardes, eue^ as the most
barkyng dogs be for ye most part lest byters.

Dulce bellum inexpertis. Batell is a sweet thing to them that never assayed
it. He that lysteth to know more of this proverb, let him go to Erasmus which
ha^dleth in his Chiliades this proverb both right copiously and also
eloquently.

Donum quodcunque dat aliquis proba. What gift so ever one gives the, allow
it, and take it in worth. A given horse (we say) may not be looked in the
mouth.

Horace
Cura esse, quod audis. Se thou be that thou art reported and borne in hand to
be. Rych men for the most part are praised of the poor and called wise,
just, honest, learned, godly and all that good is. Now Horace byddeth the^ look
and put their diligence, yt they become such persons indede, as they hear
them selves bruted and borne in hand.

Mulierem ornat silentium. Silence garnysheth a woman. Assuredlye there is no
tire, no apparayl that better becomes a woman then silence. Which thing also
the Apostle Paul requires, while he forbyddeth women in the church or
congregation to speak, but wylleth them to ask their husbands at home, if
they be in doubt of any thing.

Quod opus non est, ass charum est. That needs not, is to dear of a fardyng.
Cato (which is thauctour of this proverb) among his other precepts and
lessons of husbandry teaches the husband man to be a seller and no byer, Cato
and to bye only such things as he must needs use. For such things (quod
he) as thou nedeste not, be over dear of a farthynge, as who should say, be a
thing never so chepely bought, yet it is dear, if it be not necessary.

Grata breuitas. Shortness is acceptable. Unto lyttel things is a certain
grace annexed. The grate of briefnes.
Some things do please me^ by reason of the greatness and quantity. Again
there be other things which even for that very cause be acceptable and had in
price because they be little.

Non est beatus, esse qui se nescit. He is not happy, that knows not
himself happy.

Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. Ennius
A freende certain is espied in a thing incertayne, that is to say, in
adversity, where a ma^s matters are inconstant, doubtful, and full of danger.

Auarus nisi cum moritur, nil rette facit, Terence.
A couetouse man does no man good but wha^ he dies. They that give themselfes
only to the hourdyng up of money be, profitable to no body while they live.
Only their death brings pleasure and profit to their heirs and executours.

Sapiens sua bona secum fert. The wise man caryeth about with him his goods.
By this is sygnifyed that those only be indede and truly ours which be
within us as learning and virtue.

Nihil ad parmenonis suem. Nothing to Parmenoes sow, Of Parmenoes sow.
occasion of this proverb was this: There was a certain man called Parmeno
who was of that sort of men which also in our times be wont so featlye to
counterfayte and represent sundry voices as well of men as of beasts, that they
that herd him and saw him not, would have thought them true voices and not
cou^terfayted. In which kind of pastyme there be many that delight excedyngly
much. This Parmeno then as he was by this feate and quality very acceptable
and pleasant to the people: so his fame and brute for his excellency in this
behalf did not a little florysh above the rest. Wherefore when diverse other for
gains sake studied to counterfayte the same, and to represente the gruntynge
of the sow, as did Parmeno, anon ye people were wont to cry: Well done, but
nothing to Parmenos sow. Now a certain wytty fellow, espyenge, that the
judgment of the people proceeded rather of ymaginacion tha^ of troth, and
caryenge under his clothes a very pygge indede, hyd himself from ye peoples
sight as ye manner was. Forthwith ye pygge cries, The people thynkyng it to be
but a counterfayt voice, began according to their manner to cry. Tush, what is
this to Parmenos pygge? Here the fellow bryngyng forth out of his clothes the
very pygge indede, and openly showing it to them all, dasheth their foolysh
judgment. Assuredly such a fond beast is the people, that ye thing yt they
ones take into their heads, be the contrary never so apparent, they styffely
uphold.

Amicorum omnia sunt communia. Among friends al things be common. The
author of this proverb is Pythagoras an ancient Philosopher. Phythagoras.
Neither did he only speak it, but also brought in, such a certain communion
of life and goods, as Christ would have used among al Christians. For as
many as were admitted of him into the fellowship and company of his doctrine,
all the money and substance they had: they laid it together, which thing not
only in word, but also indede was called coenobiu^. Certes, this communion of
those Hethen Pythagoria^s rese^bled much better that communion used in the
primative church among the Apostles, than does either our Monkry at this
day, or the wicked Anabaptistical sect, which woll have no Rulers, no order,
but which go about to disturb the hole world with horrible confusion.

Amicitia aequalitas. Amicus alter ipse. Pythagoras
Friendship (says pythagors) is equality, and al one mind or will, and my
friend is as who should say an other I. He pronounced also many Enygmata or
Symboles, of which, I inte^d of some to make here a brief rehersall.

SYMBOLA ALIQVOT Pythagorae.
Ne gustaris quibus nigra est cauda. Taste not (said Pythagoras) of things
that have black tails, that is to say, meddle not with naughtye fellows and such
as have black and diffamed manners.

Stateram ne transgrediaris. Ouergo not the beam or balaunce. That is to say,
do nothing beside right and equity.

Coenici ne insides. Sit not upon the measure. Erasmus thinks that by this
dark sentence is meant we should not live upon ye measure or dyete given us at
other men's hands but that every man by his own industry and labor ought to
seek him goods where by he may lead a clean and honest life, and not by
slouthfulnes to haunte ydelnes and other men's meat. For it is the fascion of a
flatterer and parasyte to live of an other man's trencher, and to have no
honest faculty where by thou may live of thine own.

Ne cuiuis porrigas dexteram. Hold not forth thy hand to every man. He
means we should not unadvisedly admyt every body into our frendshyp and
familiarity.

Arctum anulum ne gestato. Wear no straight ring. As who should say, cave
not thy self into bondage or into such a kind of life from whence thou
cannest not afterward wind out thy self.

For who so ever wears on his finger a narow and straight ring, in manner
lays bands on him self, and imprisoneth him self.

Ignem gladio ne fo dito. Dygge not fire with a swerd Here Pythagoras means
(as Plato expouneth) yt we should not labor in vain to go about the thing,
yt in no wise ca^ be brought to pass.

Cor ne edito. Eat not thy heart (that is to say) consume not thy self with
cares and thoughts of worldly things, for that eats and knaweth a man's
heart.

A fabis abstineto. Absteyne from beans. There be sundry interpretacions of
this symbol. But Plutarche and Cicero think beans to be forbydde^ of
Pythagoras, because they be wyndye and do engender impure humors and for that
cause provoke bodily lust.

Cibum in matellam ne immittas. Put not meat into a pyspot. Plutarche
expouneth this sayng thus. Cast not good sentencies into the mind of a wicked
person, So that it is al one in effect with that saying of Christ. Cast not
perles before swyne. For spech is ye meat of the mind. Math. 7.
But this meat is corrupted and does putrify, if it fall into an vnsou^de mind
Unto this looked ye Poet Horace where he says.

Onles the vessel be pure, what so ever thou powreste into it, it waxes sour.

Ad finem vbi perueneris, ne velis reuerti. When thou come to the end, turn
not back again, He monysheth us, that when our time is come, and when we
have run our course, so that we must now depart this wretched world, we
then draw not back again desyrouse to begyne our life a new.

Tollenti onus auxiliare, deponenti nequaquam. Help the taker of a burden,
but not the layer down. As who should say. Further such as labor to atteyne
to virtue, but such as be slowthfull and lay down all honest labors, help
not.

Per publicam viam ne ambules. Walk not by ye high weye. That is to say as S.
Hierom expouneth it, Hierome
Follow not the errors of the people. For it is not possible, that those
things which be best: can please ye most part of folk. This precepte of
Pythagoras is not much disagreyng from the Eua^gelical doctrine of Christ,
Math. 7.
which monysheth us to flee the broad and wide wey, that the most part of
men walk in, and to enter into the narowe and straight wey which is little
beaten but leads to immortality and lyef everlasting.

Aduersus solemn ne loquitor. Speak not ayenste the son: that is to say. Strive
not against manifest and euidente things. For the thing that is apparent,
and which no man denies: we call as clear as the son.

Hirundines sub eodem tecto ne habeas. Keep no swalowes under the same roufe of
thy house. That is, Bring not up, neither keep thou company with such as in
thy prosperity seek thy friendship, but in adversity or when they have their
desire, forsake the. The swalowes properte is, The property of a swalow.
in the spring time of the year to repare to a man's house, and under his roufe
to nestle, but so sone as she ones has brought up her young, when it is
toward winter: anon she forsakes his company without any thankesgyuyng or
good turn doing for harbroughynge and lodging of her. Such unkind birds or
rather beasts there be not a few in ye world, which nevertheless till they have
obtained their pray yt they hunt for, pretend to bear most hearty and entier
love unto the. But the end declares all.

Panem ne frangito. Break not bread. Here he admonysheth us (says Erasmus)
that we break not amity or friendship which thing is signified by bread For in
old time it was the manner to join friendship by eating together of bread.
Erasmus.
And therefore also Christ our captain and savior by distributinge of bread
did stablysh and as it were consecrate perpetual amity between his disciples
and folowers. Wherefore when Pythagoras commanded his disciples not to break
bread: he meant not that they should not break ye bread which they did eat,
but ye thing which by breaking of bread in those days was understand that
is to wit, a sure and perpetual amity and love between the^ selves* what shall
I say? Christen men be in deed breakers, but no eaters of this bread that
Pythagoras speaks of. What discord, what contention, what mortal hatred, is
between Christians, it would make a true Christen man's heart blede to se. And
yet Christ with a far greater sole^nitie taught his disciples this concord,
the^ ever pythagoras did. At a solemn souper the night before his departure
out of this world from us, Math. 26. Mar. 14 Luc. 22 ^ Cor. 11.
he took bread, and thanks yeuen, brake it and said to his disciples, take,
eat, this is my body, which is betrayed and broken for you. This do ye, in
remembrance of me etc. Lo with how express and lively a sacrament he has
incorporate us into him self. He makes us all one with him, yea and all one
together with in our selves. And yet setting this most sacred Symbol and
sacrament at naught, by malice and discord we disseuer our selves one of us
from an other, yea and co^seque^tly from him that thus in his own body has
knytte us together.

Is not the bread (says S. Paul) which we break the partakynge of the
lords body? 1. Cor. 10.
For we being many be one bread and one body. We be all partakers of one bread
and of one cup. Christ himself speaking of Judas who vngentlye betrayed him
said, He that eats bread with me has lifted up his hele ayenste me. I pray
you do not we Christian me^ (at lest wey which will so be called) express and
resemble Judas? yearlye by this solemn sacrament we be incorporate in Christ,
we be partakers of his body, we eat ye mistical bread, This in outward
apparaunce is a symbol and argument of an excedyng unity and brennyng
charity. But inwardly very Iudasses yea and outwardly to, we lift up our
heles, we kyck, we spurn, ayenste Christ. Wherefore to return to my purpose
we be breakers and not eaters or (to speak more truly) we be unworthy eters of
this mystical bread not discernynge the lords body. And for this cause I
mean for the prophanacion of this sacrament no doubt the terrible
thretenynges that Paul speaks of, be come upon us. Many of us be weak and
many sleep. 1. Cor. 11.


FINIS.
THE TABLE OF THE Proverbs contained in this present book.
A.
Audaces fortuna iuuat. Fol. ix. Aequalis aequalem delectat fo. viii Ad
consilium ne accesseris fol. xii. Artem quaeuis alit regio fo. xxii. Aequalem
tibi vxorem quaere. fo. xxv. Altera manu fert lapidem fol. xxv. Annosa vulpes
haud capitur fo. xxviii Ama tanquam osurus oderis tanquam. fo. xxx. Amicus
magis necessarius quam. fo. xxxiii. Antequam incipias consulto fo. xxxv. Amicus
certus in re incerta fo. li. Auarus nisi cum moritur nil f.o. li. Amicorum oi^a
sunt co^munia. fo. lii. Amicitia aequalitas, amicus. fo. liii. Arctum annulum
ne gestato. fo. liiii. A fabis abstineto. fo. liiii. Ad finem vbi perueneris ne
fo. lv. Aduersus solemn ne loquitor fo. lvi.
B.
Bos lassus fortius figit pedem, fo, iij. Bis pueri senes, fo. xvi, Bis dat qui
cito dat. fo. xxvi. Bonae leges ex malis mori, fo. xxix. Boni pastoris est
tondere fol. xlviii.
C.
Cretensis cretensem fo. ix. Cretiza cum cretensi eodem. Candidae musarum
ianuae fo. xii. Conscientia mill testes fo. xxix. Corrumpunt mores bonos fo.
xxviii. Coeno puram aquam fo. xliiii. Canes timidi vehementius fo. xlix. Cura
esse quod audis. fo. xlix. Coenici ne insideas. fo. liii. Cor ne edito. fo.
liiii. Cibum in matellam ne immittas. fol. lv
D.
Durum est contra stimulum fo. xiiii. Dives aut ini quus est, aut fo. xxvii.
Dies adimit aegritudinem, fo, xxxviii, Dulce bellum inexpertis fol. xlix. Donu^
quodcunque dat aliquis fo. xlix.
E.
Ex vno omnia specta. fol. xi. Ex aspectu nascitur amor fol. xi. Emere malo
quam rogare fo. xiii. Egroto dum ai^a est spes est fo. xxxvi. Exiguum malu^
ingens bonu^ fo. xxxix. Exercitatio potest omnia. fo. xxxii.
F.
Factum stultus cognoscit. fol. iii. Foelix quem faciunt aliena fo. iii.
Fratrum inter se irae sunt fo, ix. Figulas figulo inuidet. fo. viii. Facile cum
valemus, recta con. fo. ix. Furem fur cognoscit fol. xxxv. Festina lent fo.
xxix. Fallacia alia aliam trudit fo. xxxiii. Foelix qui nihil debet fo. xlix.
G.
Grata breuitas. fol. l.
H.
Homo bulla fol xxvi. Honos alit arts fo. xxvi. Hostimentum est opera. fo.
xxxvi. Hirundines sub eodem fo. lvi.
I.
Iucundissima nauigatio iuxta. fo. xii. Iucunda vicissitudo rerum. fo. xxiii.
Iniquum petendum vt fo. xxxiii. Ingens telum necessitas fo. xxxiiii. Iucundi
acti labores fo. xxxiiii. Iustitia in se virtutem. fo. xxxv Ignis, mare,
mulier, tria mala fo. xxxii Ignauis semper feriae sunt fo. xl In magnis and
voluisse sat est fo. xlvii Ignem gladio ne fodito fo. liiii
L.
Longae regum manus fol. iiii.
M.
Malo accepto, stultus sapit fol. iii. Malum been conditum ne. fo. iii Multae
regu^ manus atque oculi fo. iiii Malo nodo malus quaerendus fo. iiii Malum
consilium consultori fo. iiii Mature fias senex, si diu velis fo. x. Mali corui
malum ouum fo. xviii Multa cadunt inter calicem. fo. xv. Male parta male
dilabuntur fo. xxiiii Munerum animus optimus fo. xxvii Multis ictibus
de^icitur. fo. xxvii. Magistratus virum indicat fo. xxix Mendacem memorem esse.
fo. xxxv. Multae manus onus leuius fo. xxxvi Mendici pera non impletur fo.
xxxix Mores amici noueris non oderis fo. xl Merx vltronea putet fo. xxviii
Multas amicitias silentium fo. xxxi Multitudo imperatorum, fo, xlii, Multi te
oderint si teipsum, fo, xlviijj, Mulierem ornat silentium. fo, l,
N
Nemo been imperat, nisi qui pa, fo, ii, Ne Hercules contra duos, fo, xvij, Ne
suter vltra crepidam, fo, xvij, Nequicquam sapit qui sibi non, fo, xviij,
Nunquam ex malo patre bonus fi, fo xviij, Nosce teipsum, fo, Ne quid nimis, fo,
xx, Non omnes qui habent citha, fo, xxi, Nosce tempus, fo, xxiiij, Non omnia
possumus om, fo, xxxvi, Nec omnia nec passim nec, fo xxxvi, Nemo mortalium
omnibus, fo, xxxvij, Ne puero gladium, fo, xxxvij, Ne quaere mollia ne tibi
con, fo, xxiij, Naturam expellas furca, ta, fo, xliiij, Non decet principem
solidam, fo, xlvi, Nota res mala optima, fo, xlvi, Non est beatus, qui se
nescit, fo, xxx, Nihil ad Parmenonis suem, fo, xxxi, Ne gustaris quibus est
nigra, fo, xxxiij, Ne cuiuis porrigas dexte, fo, xxxiiij, Oculis magis habenda
fides quam, fo, iij, Oportet remum ducere qui didi, fo, ij, Omnes sibi melius
esse malunt, fo, xv, Optat ephippia bos piger, fo, xix, Omnium rerum
vicissitudo est, fo, xxiij, Occultae musices nullus re, fo, xxiiij, Optimum est
aliena insania, fo, xxxiiij, Occasion duntaxat opus im, fo, xxxi, Ouium nullus
vsus si pastor, fo, xlv, Obsequium amicos, veritas, fo, xlvij, Omnia
sapientibus facilia, fo, xlviij, Piscatori ictus sapiet, fo, iij, Principium
dimidium totius, fo, ix, Patri ^ fumus igni alieno lucu, fo, vi, Pecuniae
obediunt omnia, fo, xiiij, Pluris est oculatus testis vnus, fo, xliij, Parit
puella etiamsi male adsit, fo, xlvi, Praesentem fortunam boni, fo, xlvij, Per
publicam viam ne ambules, fo, lvi, Panem ne frangito, fo, lvij,
Q
Qui quae vult dicit quae non vult, fo, ij, Quot homnies tot sententiae, fo,
xiij, Qualis vit talis oration, fo, xix, Quae supra nos, nihil ad nos, fo, xix,
Quam quisque norit artem. xxxiii. Quot seruos habemus toti. fo, xxxiiii, Quod
factum est infectum, fo, xxxv Quo semel est imbuta, fo, xxxvii, Qui e nuce
nucleum esse, fo, xlvii, Qui nimium properat serius fo, xlviii, Quando id fieri
non potest, fo, xlviii, Quod opus non est, ass caru^ est fo. l,
S
Sero sapiunt phryges fo, ii. Satius est initiis mederi, quam fini fo, ix,
Stultus stulta loquitur fo, iii, Suum cuique pulchrum fo, ix, Simile gaudet
simili fo, viii, Semper simile^ ducit Deus ad, fo, viii, Semper graculus
assidet gra, fo, viii, Sponde noxa praesto est, fo, xx, Simia simia est etiam
si aurea, fo, xxi, Sine Cerere and Baccho, fo, xxxvi, Satius est recurrere quam
currere, fo, xxvii, Summu^ ius summa iniuria fo, xxvi, Sera in fundo parcimonia
fo, xxxiii, Sui cuique mores fingunt for, fo, xxxvii, Simiarum pulcherrima de,
fo, xxxix, Sustine et abstine fo, xliiii, Sapiens sua bona secum fert fo, li,
Stateram ne transgrediaris, fo, liii, Tollenti onus auxiliare, fo, lv,
T
Taurum tollet, qui vitulum sust, fo, x, Tunica pallio propio est fo, xv,
Tempus omnia reuelat fo, xxxvii, Timidi nunquam statuere trophu^, fo, xliii
V
Viuorum oportet meminisse fo, x, Vnus vir nullus vir fo, xvii Vbi amici, ibi
opes fo, xiii, Veritatis simplex oration fo, xiiii, Vna hirundo non facit ver
fo, xxv, Verecu^dia inutilis viro egenti fo, xxv, Vir fugiens et denuo pug, fo,
xxix, Vulpes non iteru^ capitur la, fo, xxxix, Vino vendibili suspensa, fo,
xlii, Viri infortunati procul amici fo, xlvii, Venture auribus caret, fa, xlvii,
FINIS.
Faults escaped in printynge.
Faults, leaf. page. line. quam ix ij xxij veritatis xiiij ij xxij citharoedi
xxi i v optimum xxxiiij i xxi aegritudinem xxxviij i xiiij carum l ij i recte
li i xv insideas liij ij ix

Imprinted at London in Fleet street at the sign of the white Heart. 1539.

Cum priuilegio ad impremendum solum.

MIMI PVBLIANI, that is to say, quick and sentenciouse verses or meters of
PVBLIVS. With the interpretacion and brief scholyes of Richard Tauerner.
ALienum est omne quicquid optando euenit. All that happens by wysshynge, is
none of thine. As who should say What so ever comes unto the by thine own
traueile and industry that only count thine own.

Ab alio expectes, alteri quoth feceris. Look to have the same at an other. man's
hand that thou thy self have done to other. With what measure (says Christ)
ye measure, with the same shall other measure unto you again.

Animus vereri qui scit, scit tuto aggred. A mind that knows to fear, the
same knows also sausly to enterprise. He that understands the danger and
peril of things, can skyll also to eschew peril. On the contrary side
temeritie and fool hardynes sets upon things daungerosly, because it has
not the wit to fear.

Auxilia humilia, firma consensus facit. Co^sente makes small souccours sure.
Though in wars a man has but pore and small helps yet if they agree together
they shall be strong, and shall be hable to beat a greater company, among whom
is no order nor concord. Discord enfebleth the greatest powers.

Amor animi arbitrio sumitur, non ponitur. Love is take with choice of mind but
is not laid down again. It is in our power not to begin to love But when
thou art ones in, thou art now servant unto it, and can not pluck out
thy head when thou wylt,

Aut amat aut odit mulier, nihil est tertium. A woman either loves or hates,
there is no third. Woman kind for most part is extremes and to vehement upon
either part. She has no mean. For (as Erasmus says) she is animal
affectibus obnoxium, that is to wete, without moderacion or stey of her
appetite, all full of affections, and in manner void of reason.

Ad triste^ parte^ stre^nua est suspicio Suspicion is vehement and strong to
the unfortunate or heavy part. They that ones be fallen into heavy Fortune, be
most suspected in their doings, and moreover be commonly most ready to
suspecte the worst in all things.

Ames parentem, si aequus est, si alter, feras. If thy parente be gentle and
indifferent unto the, love him, if he be not such but unequal and iniuriouse,
yet because he is thy parente, bear him.

A spicere oportet, quod possis deperdere. Thou must look upon the thing that
thou may lose. The best keeper of a thing is ye owners eye, that is to say,
his presence.

Amici vitia si feras, facis tua. If thou suffer thy friends faults, thou
make them thine, as who should say, it shall be imputed unto the what soever
thing thy friend offends in, when thou do not admonyshe him thereof.

Aliena, homini ingenuo, acerba est seruitus. Bitter bondage is to a gentle
man, strange. Nothing is dearer to a gentle heart then is liberty.

Absente^ ldit, cu^ ebrio qui litigat. Who brauleth with a dronkerd, hurts
him yt is absent. The mind of a drunkerd is away, wherewith he should speak.
And therefore it is all one as if he were not there him self

Amans iratus multa mentitur sibi. A lover when he is angry makes many lies to
him self. The angrye lover purposes much in his mind which he performs not
afterward

Auarus ipse miseriae causa est suae. The couetouse person is cause of his own
misery. For willingly and wittyngly he is continually nedy and filthy.
Forasmuch as he is afraid to spend one half penny upon him self.

Ama^s quid cupiat scit, quid sapiat non videt. The lover knows what to
covet, but sees not what to be wise in. He coueteth without judgment, not
weyeng whether the thing be profitable or hurtefull which he so coueteth.

Amans quod suspicatur vigilans, somniat. The lover dreameth the thing yt he
suspecteth waking. Lovers commonly feign to them selves dreams and with vain
hope flatter themselves.

Ad calamitate^ quilibet rumor valet. Every rumor serves unto calamity, that
is to say, sad and heavy tidings be easly blown abroad be they never so vain
and false and they be also sone believed. But such things as be good, right,
and honest, are hardly believed.

Amor extorqueri haud potest, elabi potest. Love can not be wroung out, but
fall away it may. Such a vehement thing is love, that suddenly and perforce
thou can not expelle it, but by little and little it may slide away.

Ab amante lachrymis redimas iracundiam. With tears may thou redeem anger
from the lover. If thy lover be never so angry with the, weep, and he is
appeased. This art is not unknown to women

Aperte cum est mala mulier, tum demum est bona. When a woman is openly evil
then is she good. As who should say, if there be any goodness in a woman, it is
then, when she openly utters her malice. Counterfeyted holiness (they say) is
double wickedness. A woman for most part (says my author Erasmus) is a
crooked and disceitfull beast, and therefore she is least hurtefull, when she
is openly naught. This is not so spoken of women, but it agrees upon some men
also.

Auaru^ facile capias, vbi no^ sis ide^. Thou may easly take a couetouse
man, if you be not the same thy self. One couetouse person can not bear
another.

Amare et sapere vix deo conceditur. To be in love and to be wise is scase
granted to god. It is not one man's property both to love and also to be of a
sound mind.

Auarus nisi cum moritur, nil recte facit. The couetouse person but when he
dies does nothing well. For when he departs ye world, tha^ at last he
suffers other men to spend and use his goods which he had hurded up

Astute dum celatur, se aetas indicat Age bewreyeth it self, be it never so
craftily hid and conceled.

Auarus damno potius, quam sapiens dolet. The couetouse person soroweth for
loss of goods rather then the wise man. A wise man vexes not him self with
losyng of wordly things. But he mourns that makes money his god.

Auaro quid mali optes? ni, vt viuat diu. What evil can thou wysshe to the
couetouse man, but that he should long live, forasmuch as he lives most
miserably.

Animo dolenti nil oportet credere Unto a sorrowful mind ye ought to give no
credit. So long as thou art grieved trust nothing thy self. For greuaunce of
mind entiseth nothing a right.

Alienu^ nobis, nr^m plus aliis placet. Other men's fortune pleases us, and
ours pleases other men more. No man is contented with his own allotment and
things.

Amare iuueni fructus est, crime^ seni Love to a young person is fruit or
pleasure, but to an old person it is a foul vice.

Anus cu^ lu dit, morti delitias facit. An old woman when she uses dalyaunce,
she does nothing else in effect but delyteth death.

Amoris volnus ide^ qui sanat, facit The same self person makes the wound of
love, which heals the wound, that is to were if the person loved assenteth
to the lover.

Ad poenitendum properat, cito qui iudicat. He hasteneth to repent him self
which judges lygtly. Be not to quick in judgment. Of heady sentence gyuing,
oftentimes follows repentance.

Aleator quanto in art est melior, tanto est nequior. A dyser the more conyng
and better he is in his feate, so much he is the worse. The more a person
excels in a thing disco^mendable, the worse he is.

Arcum intensio frangit, animum remissio. Bendyng breaks the bow, but
flackyng breaks ye mind, that is to wete, a bow if it be bent to much, it
breaks. But contrary wise the powers of the mind be increased be bendyng and
continual exercise whereas with slackenes and ydlenes they be broken.

BIs est gratum, quod opus est, vltro si offeras. If thou offer thy friend the
thing that he needs, unasked, it is worth double thank. A benefit extorted
by craving has lost a great part of the thank.

Beneficium dare qui nescit, inuiste petit. He that can no skyll to do a good
turn, vnryghtly claymeth a good turn. He ought not to enjoy any benefit of
other men, that does good him self to none.

Bonu^ est fugienda aspicere alieno in malo. It is good espyeng in another man's
evil what things are to be fled. Learn what is to be eschued not with thine
own harm, but take example at other men's euylles.

Beneficium accipere, libertatem vendere est. To take a benefit is to sell thy
liberty. He is not his own man, that uses another man's benefit.

Bona nemini hora est, vt non alicui sit mala There is a good hour to no man
but that the same to another is evil.

Bis enim mori est, alterius arbitrio mori. To dye at another man's will is a
double death. Natural death is nothing so paynefull, as is violent death.

Bn^ficia plura recipit, qui scit reddere He receives more benefits that
knows to requite. Unthankful persons ons known, have no more any benefits
given them.

Bis peccas, cum peccanti obsequiu^ acco^modas. Thou do twyse naught, when
to him yt does naught, thou appliest thy service and obeysaunce.

Bonus animus laesus, grauius multo irascitur. A good and gentle heart ons
offended is much more grievously displeased and angry.

Bona mors est homini, vitae quae extinguit mala. Death is good to man which
quenches the euyls and inco^modities of life.

Bn^ficium da^do accipit, qui digno dedit. He by geuyng takes a benefyte,
which gives a benefit to him that is worthy to have it.

Blanditia, non imperio, fit dulcis Venus. By fair speech and gentle fashyons
is Venus that is to say love as well in matrimony as otherwise made pleasant,
and not by force, by compulsion and commandment.

Bonus animus nunquam erranti obsequium acco^modat. A good mind never
assenteth or lends his service to him yt erreth from the path way of good
manners

Beneficiu^ se dedisse qui dicit, petit He yt tells he has done a good
turn asks a good turn. The rehersall of a benefit bestowed, is a demand
or askyng of acquytayle and recompensacion.

Co^iunctio animi maxima est cognatio. The knyttyng together of mind is the
greatest aliaunce or kyndred that can be. Erasmus reads it also this wise.

Bn^uolus ai^us maxima est cognatio A frendfull mind is the chiefest aliaunce.
Doubtless, mutual benevolence byndeth strayter, then any affinity of blood
can bind.

Beneficium saepe date, docere est reddere. Often to give a benefit, is to
teach to render again.

Bonitatis verba imitari, mayor malicia est. To counterfeyte the words of
goodness is the greater wickedness. He that is naught and speaks well is more
the^ naught, says Erasmus the flower of eloquence.

Bona opinio ho^i tutior pecunia est A good opinion is surer to a man then
money. It is better to have a good fame, then any riches.

Bonum tametsi supprimitur, non extinguitur. The thing that good is (as troth
and justice) though it be suppressed and kept and under for a time, yet is it
not quenched utterly, but at length will break out again.

Bis vincit qui se vincit in victoria. He that can overcome himself in
victory, that is to say, use moderatly the victory, overcomes twyse, first
his enemy, second his own mind.

Benignus etia^ dandi causa^ cogitat. He that is liberal and fre hearted looks
not to be desired but of himself seeks occasion and cause, to give and
bestow his benefits.

Bis interimitur, qui suis armis perit He is twyse slain, that perishes with
his own weapons.

Been dormit qui non sentit quam male dormiat. He sleapeth well yt fealeth not
how evil he slepeth. When the felyng of evil is awey, there is no evil.

Bonoru^ crime^ est officiosus miser. A virtuous person being in misery is the
crime of good things, as who should say, virtue is blamed when the virtuous
men be afflicted and troubled. If he that lives well fall into mysery, ah will
they say ye may se how these gear speade.

Bona fama in tenebris proprium splendorem obtinet. A good fame even in
darckenes loses not her due beuty and renoume

Bn^ cogitata, si excidu^t, no^ occidu^t Good devises or things well devised
though for a time they be forgotten and fall out of memory yet they pass not
clean away for ever.

Been perdit nu^mos, iudici cum dat nocens. He loses well money, which when he
is taken in a tryppe gives to the judge or ruler some reward for his
indemnitie.

Bonis nocet, quisquis pepercerit malis. He hurts the good, whosoever spares
the badde.

Bono iustici, proxima est seueritas To the good thing of justice rigor is
next, that is to say, the rigor of the law which is an evil thing is so
nere unto justice which is a good thing that ofte^tymes the one is taken for
the other.

Bonum apud virum cito moritur iracundia. With a good man anger sone dies

Bona turpitudo est, quae periculum indicat. It is a good dyshonesty that
bewreyeth danger.

Bona comparat praesidia misericordia. Mercy gets good defenses or
garrisons. Who so has a petifull eye, can not but prosper.

Bonarum rerum consuetudo pessima est. Accustomablenes of pleasant things is
worst of all. Nothing is sweet but waxes loathsome if it be continually used.

Beneficium dignis vbi das, omnes obligas. When thou gyuest a benefit to the
worthy thou byndest al. For it is bestowed not upon the person, but upon virtue.

CRudelis is re aduersa est obiurgatio. In adversity it is a cruel thing to
chyde thy friend, when he should rather be comforted.

Caue^di nulla est dimitte^da occasio No occasion of taking head is to be let
pass.

Cui semper dederis, vbi neges, rapere imperas. Ones deny one to whom thou
haste always given, and thou inforcest that person to pluck from the

Crudelem medicum intemperans aeger facit. The intemperate sick person makes
ye phisicien to excercyse cruel medicynes.

Cuius mortem amici expectant, vitam oderant. Whose death a man's friends do
look for, his life they hate. Wherefore committee not thy self to such friends.

Cum inimico nemo in gratiam cito redit. With his enemy no man that wise is
retourneth lightly without good deliberacion into frendshyp and familiarity
again.

Citius venit periculum, cum contemnitur. Danger comes the sooner, when it is
not past on.

Casta ad virum matrona parendo imperat. A chaste woman with her husband, by
obeyeng, rules.

Cito ignominia fit, superbi gloria. The glory of the proud person anon
becomes his reproach. Infamye always insueth arrogancy.

Consilio melius vincas, quam iracu^dia Thou shalt better ouercom by wysdom
then by fury.

Cuiuis dolori remediu^ est patie^tia. To all manner sorrow patience is a remedy.

Cum vitia prosu^t, peccat qui recte facit. When vices be unpunished yea and
also rewarded, tha^ he that does well is taken for an offendour.

Comes facu^dus i^ via pro vehiculo est. A pleasount fellow to talk with by
the way is as good as a chariot.

Cito improborum laeta in pernicie^ cadunt. The myrthes of wicked persons do
sone fall unto destruction.

Crimen relinquit vitae, qui mortem appetit. He that coueteth death, accuses
life, and so leaves a blame unto it, which is not to be blamed.

Cui plus licet quam par est, plus vult quam licet. The person that has more
authority then he ought to have, will also do more then he has authority to
do. This sentence is very praty, and it agrees (says Erasmus) upon tyrauntes
and women.

Cui nusquam domus est, sine sepulchro est mortuus. He that nowhere has an
abiding place (as a banished man or such other) is as a dead man without a
grave. Banyshement is in effect a civil death.

Cito ad naturam ficta redierint sua^ Cou^terfeited things will sone return
again to their own nature

DIscipulus est prioris posterior dies. The day following is the scholar of the
day yt goes before, By daily experience of things we must grow wyser and
wyser.

Damnare est obiurgare, cum auxilio est opus. When thy friend needs healpe,
then to chyde him is to hurt him. First therefore help him out of his misery.

Diu apparandum est bellu^, vt vincas celerius. War is long to be prepared
that thou may overcome the sooner Such as be over hasty in setting on, come
the sloulier to the end.

Dixeris maledicta cuncta, cum ingratum hominem dixeris. Thou shalt have
spoken all reproaches, wha^ you call a man a chorle. Ingratitude or
chorlyshnes conteyneth in it all vices, versus est trochaicus.

De inimico ne loquare, malum si cogites. Of thine enemy speak not evil if
thou thynkest it. If thou cast to do him a displeasure speak it not.

Deliberate vtilia, mora est tutissima To take deliberacion and aduisement upon
things profitable, is a most sure delay.

Dolor decrescit, vbi quo crescat non habet. Sorrow abateth when it has not
whether to increase. When the evil is at the highest, then must it needs wax
more easy and more.

Dediscere flere foeminam, est mendacium. A woman to unlearn or to forget to
weep is a leasyng or a thing feyned, that is to say, impossible.

Discordia fit charior concordia. By dyscorde is concord made the dearer and
surer. For as Terence says. The falling out of lovers, is a renuaunce of love.

Deliberandum est diu, quo statuendum est semel. The thing whereof thou must
but ones determyne, as of marriage or any other earnest and wayghtye matter, thou
ought to take a good and long deliberacion, ere thou adventure upon it.

Difficilem oportet aurem habere ad crimina. Thou ought to have an hard
ear to accusacions or appeachementes. Believe not every man that accuses
another.

Dum vita grata est, mortis condicio optima est. While life is pleasant, the
bargayne of death is best, that is to say, it is then best meddling with death.

Damnum appellandum est, cum mala fama lucrum. Gaynes with an evil name is
damage and loss.

Ducis in consilio posita est virtus militum. In the wisdom of the captain
rests the strength of the soldiers

Dies quod donat, timeas, cito raptum venit. A day the thing it gives (beware)
it comes anon to pluck it away again. A man may sometime have a day to be
auaunced in, but again it is good to fear least a day come and swepe all
away again.

Dimissum quod nescitur, no^ amittitur. A thing let gone yt is not known, is
not lost. It is no loss that thou fealest not.

ETiam innocents cogit mentiri dolor. Pain compels even the gyltles to lie.

Etia^ peccato recte praestatur fides. Even unto sin fidelity and troth is
well performed. Faith is so hyghly to be kept that even in evil things
otherwhiles it ought to be observed

Etia^ celeritas in desiderio mora est In desire that is to say in a thing that
a man coueteth, even speed is counted a taryaunce.

Exvitio alterius, sapiens emendat suum. By the fault of another man the wise
man mendeth his.

Et deest et supest miseris cogitatio. To the miserable and wretched persons
consideracion both lacks (because they espy no remedy) and also abou^deth,
because they perceive what they should have done but it is to late.

Etiam obliuisci quod scis, interdu^ expedit. Even to forget the thing thou
know, otherwhyles is expedient.

Ex hominu^ quaestu, facta fortuna est dea. By reason of men's gaynes was
fortune made a goddess. The inordinate desire of lucre caused that fortune
among the panyms was thought to have been a goddess in that she favored
their desires.

Effugere cupiditatem, regnum est vincere. To escape and tame thine own lust
is to conquer and win a kingdom.

Etiam qui faciunt, o dio habent iniuriam. Even the very wrong doers, hate
wrong.

Eripere telum, non dare irato decet It becomes to pluck away, and not to
give weapon to the angrye body. Anger (says Horace) is a short frensy.

Etiam capillus vnus habet vmbram suam. Even one hear of the head has his
shadow, that is to wete, there is nothing so simple and vile, but can do
sumwhat.

Eheu quam miserum est, fieri metue^do senem? Alack how wretched a thing is
it with fearyng to wax aged.

Etiam hosti est aequus, qui habet in consilio fidem. He is even indifferent
and just to his foe, that in his counsel and advise taking has faith and
troth in his heart and before his eyes.

Est honesta turpitudo pro bona causa mori. It is an honest shame to dye for a
good quarrel. Versus est Trochaicus.

Excelsis multo facilius casus nocet Unto them that be alofte and in high
place does a fall hurt much sooner.

FIdem qui perdit, quo se seruet in reliquum? He that loses his credit,
whereby shall he afterward help him self?

Fortuna cum blanditur, captatum venit. When fortune flattereth, she comes to
catch the. Fortune is then chiefly to be suspected when she most laugheth.

Fortuna^ citius reperias, quam retineas. Thou may sooner find fortune tha^
reteyne her. It is a greater maistry to keep that thou haste gotten than to
get.

Formosa facies muta co^mendatio est. A beutifull and fair face is a do^be or
speachles setting out. Fair persons be favored without speaking

Frustra rogatur, qui misereri non potest. He is besought in vain, which can
have no compassion. What needs to entreat him, that with no prayer can be
vowed?

Fraus est accipere, quod non possis reddere. It is deceipte to take that thou
can not requite, namely one ways or other, as by service, by geuyng of as
good a thing, by counseyle and so forth.

Fortuna nimium quem fouet, stultum facit. Whom fortune ouermuche cockereth,
she makes a fool. Unto great felicity is for most part annexed folly and
arrogance.

Fatetur facinus is, qui iudiciu^ fugit Who flees judgment, confesses his
wickedness.

Foelix improbitas optimorum est calamitas. Happy leudnes is the miserye of
good men, that is to say, when so ever fortune favors leude persons, then
be the most virtuous and best men in evil case.

Feras non culpes, quod vitari non potest. Suffer, blame not, that can not be
eschued.

Futura pugnant, vt se superari sina^t The euilles to come do strive to the
intent they might suffer them selves to be overcome. As who should say, the
euylles to come do so hang over our head, that yet they may with wisdom be
vaynquished and eschued.

Furor fit laesa saepius patientia. Patience often hurt becomes a fury.
Pacient bodies if they be often styred, at last they rage much the sorer,
because it is long, ere they be moved.

Fidem qui perdit, nil potest vltra perdere. Who loses his credence, can lose
naught beyond it.

Facilitas animi ad partem stulticiae rapit. Easynes of mind plucketh a man to
the part of folly. Gentle and pliable minds be sone entysed to folly.

Fides vt anima, vnde abijt, nunquam eo redit. Credit, even as a man's life,
does never return thither again from whens it departed. As life ones lost
never retourneth, so if a man ones lose his fidelity or credit he shall never
get it again.

Fidem nemo vnquam perdit, nisi qui non habet. Faith no man ever loses, but he
which in deed never had it, though to the world he appeared never so faithful.

Fortuna obesse nulli contenta est semel. Fortune is not contented to hurt a
man ones. When fortune begyneth ons to loure upon one, she is not satisfied to
do him one displeasure but heapeth displeasure upon displeasure

Fulmen est vbi cum potestate habitat iracundia. Anger where it lodges with
power, it is even a lyghtnyng and thundering, as who says, when ye mighty man
is angry, he plays ye devil. trochaicus.

Frustra, cum ad senectam ventum est, repetes adolescentiam. When thou co^mest
ones to age, thou shalt claim again youth in vain. Let therefore age meddle
with matters mete for age. Trochaicus.

Falsum maledictum, maleuolum mendacium est. A false reproach and vpbraydyng,
is a maliciouse leasyng.

Foeminae natural regere, desperare est ominum. To rule a woman's nature is the
despair of all men, that is to wete, every man despair to do it, it is a
thing so hard.

Fer difficilia, vt facilia leuius feras Bear hard things that thou may
bear easy things ye lyghter.

Fortuna nulli plus quam consiliu^ valet Fortune is to no man more of strength
then counsel, that is to say Wisdom does more then riches.

Fortuna vitrea est, quae cum splendet, frangitur. Fortune is brykle as glass,
when she glystereth, she breaks.

Feras quod laedit, vt quod prodest perferas. Bear inco^modie, to the intent
you may carry away commodity.

Facit gratum fortuna quam nemo videt. Fortune (that is to say wealth,
riches, prosperity) which no man sees makes the owner acceptable and
beloved. As who should say, if thy wealth be espied, thou shalt be envied.
Disse^ble therefore thy felicity

Frugalitas miseria est rumoris boni Frugalitie, that is to wete, homly and
temperate living is a misery of a good rumor, as who should say, though it
be (namely to the world) a mis^ry, yet is the name good and honest.

Grave praeiudiciu^ est, quod iudicium non habet. That is a greuouse prejudice
or fore judgment, which has no judgment. He calls here a fore judgment,
when a man of power suppresseth and dampueth a man before he be judged by the
law.

Grauissima est probi hominis iracundia. The wrath of a good man is most heavy.

Grauis animi poena est, quem post factum poenitet. The punishment and pain of
mind is great of that person which repe^teth him after he has done a mys.

Grauis animus dubiam non habet sententiam. A grave and sad mind has no
waueryng sentence.

Grave est malum omne, quod sub aspectu latet. Every evil is greuouse and
sore, which lies hyd under a vysour, yt is to say, which is cloked under the
outward apparaunce of goodness.

Grauius nocet, quodcunque inexpertum accidit. What so ever happens unassayed
greueth the sorer.

Grauior inimicus, qui latet sub pectore. More grievous is the enemy that
lurketh under thy breast, which is, thy viciouse affection and lust.

Grauissimum est imperium co^suetudinis. Most greuouse is the empire or rule
of custom. Custom practices even a certain tyranny among us, in so much
that the most folysh things of al, if they ones grow in to an use, can not be
plucked away.

Grave crimen etiam cum dictum est leuiter, nocet. A greuouse and heynouse
crime (as for example to be called a traitor or heretic) though it be but
lightly spoken, yet it hurts and is dau^gerouse to him that is so called,
even because of the odyousnes of the crime.

HEu quam difficile est gloriae custodia? Ah, how hard a thing is the keeping
and reteining of a man's glory or fame?

Homo extra corpus est suum, cum irascitur. A man is out of his own body, when
he is angry.

Heu quam est timendus, qui mori tutum putat? Oh, how much is he to be feared
that count it a sure thing to dye? He that despyseth death is much to be
feared, forasmuch as, who so ever is a despiser of his own life, is as it were
lord of another man's.

Homo qui in homine calamito so est misericors, meminit sui. The man yt is
pytiful upon a miserable person, remembers him self. For he understands yt
he him self may have need of help. Trochaicus.

Habet in aduersis auxilia, qui in secundis co^modat. He has helps in
adversity, which lends in prosperity. Versus est trochai.

Heu quam miserum est laedi ab illo, de quo non possis queri. Oh how miserable
a thing is it, to be hurt of him, one whom you canste not complain. Versus est
Trochaicus.

Hominem experiri multa, paupertas iubet. Poverty forseth a man to assaye many
thyngys.

Heu dolor quam miser est, qui in tormento vocem non habet. Oh how miserable
is yt sorrow, which in turment, dare not utter his voice. Men, which, while
they are racked, beaten, and tourme^ted, dare not, or can not be suffered to
speak the truth, are in most miserable state. Versus est Trochaicus.

Heu quam poenitenda incurrunt homines, viuendo diu. Oh into how miserable
things and full of repentance do men run by living long? In a long life, do
many things happen, that a man would not have. Versus est Trochaicus.

Habet suum venenum blanda oration. A fair speech has his venyme Eloquence
lies in awayte of men and is as it were a sugared poison.

Homo toties moritur, quoties amittit suos. A man so often dies, as he loses
his children. Orbitie, that is to say the loss of a man's children is even a
spyce of death unto him.

Homo semper in sese aliud fert, in alterum aliud cogitat. A man ever bears
one thing toward him self, and thinks another toward another man. There
is no man but dissembleth otherwhiles. Versus est Iambicus tetrameter.

Honestus rumor alterum est patrimonium. An honest fame to a man, is as good as
patrimony or inheritance.

Homo nescit, si dolor fortunam inuenit. A man knows not if he fyndeth
fortune with sorrow and pain.

Honest seruit, qui succumbit tempori. He honestly serves that stoupeth to
the time, that is to say, it is honesty for a man to fashyon him self to the
time and to give place unto fortune for a season.

Homo vitae co^modatus, non donatus est. Man is lent unto life and not given.
As who should say, life is granted but for a time, and in such wise, as he
that lent it, may laufully require it again when him lusts.

Haerede^ scire, vtilius est quam quaerere Better it is for a man to know his
heir, then to seek his heir. He knows his heir, that gets him children
of his own, to inherit after him, But he seeks him an heir, yt despyseth to
be married, or which regards not his own children, but prefers strangers.

Haeredis fletus sub persona risus est. The heirs mournyng is under a vysour a
laughyng. He bewayleth the death of his testatour or auncesiour in outward
semblaunce but inwardly he laugheth.

Habent locum maledicti crebrae nuptiae. Often maryages be not commended.

INferior horret, quicquid peccat superior. What so ever the ruler does
amysse, the subject shrynketh for it and feleth the smarte.

Inimicum vlcisci, vitam accipere est alteram. A man to revenge him of his
enemy is even life unto him and meat and drink.

Id agas, ne quis tuo te merito oderit Do so, that no man hate the rightly and
for thine own descruyng.

Inuitum cum retineas, exire incitas When thou reteynest an euylwyllyng body,
you allurest him to depart

Ingenuitatem laedis, cum indignu^ rogas Thou hurtest generositie, when you
prayest or intreatest the unworthy

In nullum auarus bonus est, in se pessimus. The couetouse body is good to
none, and worste to him self.

Inopi beneficium bis dat, qui dat celeriter. To the nedy he gives a double
benefit, that gives it quickly.

Instructa inopia est, in diuitijs cupiditas. Covetousness in riches and
abundance of gooddes, is as who should say, a furnished or well stored
poverty.

Inuitat culpam, qui peccatum praeterit. He provoke syn, that wynketh at
sin. He that passes over sin and will not punyshe it, allureth me^ to
noughtynes.

Iucundum nihil est, nisi quod reficit varietas. Nothing is sweet, onles it be
interlased with variety and sundrynes. Shyfte of things refreshes
wounderfully the loathsome appetite of man.

Ingenuitas non recipit co^tumelia^. A gentle nature can abide no reproach.

Impune peccat, cum quis peccat rarius. When a man offends but very seldom,
he escapes punishment.

Ingratus vnus, miseris oibus nocet One chourle or unthankful person makes al
other pore fellows to fare the worse.

In miseri vita nulla contumelia est. In the life of a wretch is no sclau^der.
Wretches and evil persons be not sclaundered.

Inopiae desunt parua, auaritiae oia. Poverty lacks small things but
couetise lacks al things. The poor man is helped with a little, but nothing
will satisfy the couetouse body.

Ita amicu^ habeas, posse vt fieri inimicum putes. So take thy friend yt thou
think he may be made thine enemy. Love as you should in time coming hate. So
trust thy friend, that if he become thine enemy, he shall be hable to do the no
great displeasure.

Inuidiam far, aut fortis aut felix potest. Either the wealthy, or the hardye
is hable to sustain envy. The wealthy and fortunate persons regard not the
disdain of other, and the hardy and couragyouse mind despise it.

In amore mendax semper iracu^dia In love anger is a liar. The angry lover
performs nothing that he thretneth. For one false tear of his lady will
quench all his proud words.

Inuidia tacit, sed minute irascitur Envy, that is to say, the enuiouse person
chafeth and is angry closely without vtteryng his mind, warely and stylly, but
yet lightly that is to say for light and tryflyng matters.

Iratu^ breuiter vites, inimicum diu. Shon the angry person a little, but shon
thine enemy long.

Iniuriarum remedium est obliuio. The remedy of wrongs is forgetfulness.

Iracundiam qui vincit, hostem superat maximum. He yt vaynquisheth anger
vaynquisheth the greatest enemy. Trochaicus.

In malis sperare bonum, nisi innocens nemo solet. In trouble to hope well, no
man uses but ye vngyltie person. Trochaicus.

In vindicando criminosa est celeritas. In reuengyng, quickenes is full of
blame. Some read in iudicando in iudgyng. Doubtless to be heady either in
iudgyng or in reuengyng is not commendable.

Inimicum quamuis humilem docti est metuere. It is the property of a wise and
well taught man to fear his enemy though he be but of a low degree and
estate.

In calamitoso risus etia^ iniuria est. In a deiecte and unfortunate person
even laughing is an injury, that is to say, he thinks him self touched and
mocked, if he sees one but laughe.

Iudex damnatur, cum nocens absoluitur. The judge is condemned, when the gyltie
is acquit. The judge that acquyteth the offendour, damneth him self of
iniquity.

Ignoscere humanum, vbi pudet cui ignoscitur. It is the duty of man and a
point of humanity to forgive, where the party that is forgyuen, repents,
and is a shamed of his fault.

In rebus dubijs plurimi est audacia In things doubtful, boldness is very
much worth.

Illo noce^s se da^nat, quo peccat die The same day that the gyltie offe^deth,
he damneth him self. There is no sorer judge then a man's own conscience.

Ita creed amico, ne sit inimico locus. So trust thy friend that thou be not
in danger of him neither that he have place being thine enemy.

Iratus etiam facinus consiliu^ putat. The angry man counts myschief
counsel. When a body is angry he judges a leude deed to be well and wisely
done. Or ye may interpret it also this ways. The angry man counts counsel
myschief, that is to say, when he is well counseled of his friend he thinks
him self harmed.

Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui iterum naufragium facit. He that the second
time suffers shypwrake, wyckedly blames god. Neptune was of ye panyms
supposed to be the god of ye see. Trochaicus tetrameter

LOco ignominiae est apud indig number dignitas. Worthynes in an unworthy person
is in place of a reproach. Worship or honor committed to him that is not
worthy to have it, does not commend him, but rather does disworshyp him.

Laus vbi noua oritur, etiam vetus admittitur. Where new praise spryngeth,
there also the old is allowed. When a man does again ye second time well, he
brings to pas that men believe his format name and praise the better.

Laeso, doloris remedium, inimici dolor. To a person grieved the grefe of his
enemy is a remedy of his greuaunce. He that can bewreake him self of his
enemy, fealeth his own harm the less.

Leuis est fortuna, cito reposcit quae dedit. Light and inconstant is fortune,
she anon claymeth again yt she gave.

Lex vniuersi est, quae iubet nasci et mori. The law is general that
commands to be borne and to dye.

Lucrum sine damno alterius fieri non potest. Gaynes without the loss of an
other can not be had.

Lasciuia et laus nunquam habent concordiam. Ryotteouse living and praise, can
not be coupled together.

Legem nocens veretur, fortunam innocens. The gylty fears the law, the
unguilty fortune. The innocent and harmeles person, although he fears not the
laws, as the evil doer and gyltie does, yet he fears fortune which
otherwhyles oppresses the gyltles.

Luxuriae desunt multa, auaritiae oi^a Ryottouse living or prodigality wants
much, but the couetouse mind lacks all things.

MAlignos fieri maxim ingrati docent. Unthankful persons teach men most of
all to be unkind hard and vnlyberall. Churlyshe natures and ingrate, make
liberal and kind persons to be the harder.

Multis minatur, qui vni facit iniuriam. He threteneth many that does wrong
to one. All look for injury at his hand, that does injury to one.

Mora omnis odio est, sed facit sapientiam. Every taryaunce is hateful, but
yet it makes wisdom. Leyser and tracte of time gendereth prudence. Leyser
makes that we do nothing rashly.

Mala causa est quae requirit misericordiam. It is an evil cause that asks
pytie. Innocence needs not mercy.

Mori est felicis, antequam mortem inuocet. It is an happy man's lot, to dye
before he desire death. They yt wyshe them selves dead be in misery.

Miserum est tacere cogi, quod cupias loqui. It is a pain to be compelled not
to speak that thing that thou would covet to utter.

Miserrima est fortuna qu inimico caret. Most miserable is that fortune which
lacks an enemy. Wealth and felicity sturreth hatredes and enuies. Wherefore
whom no man enuieth, he must needs be most miserable.

Malus est vocandus qui sua causa est bonus. He is to be called an evil person,
that is good for his own cause and advantage only.

Malus vbi bonum se simulat, tune est pessimus. The naughty body, when he
feineth him self good, is then worste.

Metus cum venit, raru^ habet somnus locum. When fear comes, sleep has
seldom place.

Mori necesse est, sed non quoties volueris. Thou must dye, but not as often as
thou will.

Male geritur, quicquid geritur fortunae fide. It is evil done, what so ever
is done through trust of fortune.

Mortuo qui mittit munus, nil dat illi, adimit sibi. He yt sends a gift to
the dead gives nothing to him, but takes from him self. Among the Panyms
they made sacrifices for the dead. Versus est Trochaicus.

Minus est quam seruus, dominus qui seruos timet. The master that fears his
servants, is les then a servant.

Magis haeres fidus nascitur quam scribitur. A trusty executour or heir is
rather borne tha^ wryte^. There is more fidelity in a man's own blood, tha^
in a stranger unto him. The stranger that is not of thy blood flattereth
the, that thou may write him thine heir after the of yt thou have. This is
meant against them which defraudynge their own natural kynsfolke for every
tryfling displeasure, transfer their gooddes unto strangers.

Malo in consilio foeminae vincunt viros. In a shrewde counsel women overcome
men.

Mala est voluptas alienis assuescere It is an evil pleasure a man to accustom
him self with other men's things.

Magno cum periculo custoditur, quod multis placet. With great peril is that
kept, which pleases many. est Versus trochaicus.

Mala est medicina, vbi aliquid naturae perit. It is an evil medicine, where
any thing of nature perysheth.

Malae naturae nunquam doctrina indigent. Evil natures need never any
teaching. Naughtynes is learned without a scholemayster.

Miseriam nescire, est sine periculo viuere. To live without danger is not to
know misery. Who so lives without peril, lives happily. A sure and saufe
life, though it be but low and base is most happy.

Male viuunt, qui se semper victuros putant. They live naught, that think they
shall ever live.

Maledictum interpretando facies acrius. By interpretyng an evil tale or
sklaunder, thou shalt make it more greuouse.

Male secum agit aeger, medicum qui haeredem facit. That syeke body does
naught for him self, that makes his phisician his executour. For he provoke
him to kill him.

Minus decipitur, cui negatur celetiter. He is les deceived, yt is quickly
denied. When a man is quickly denied of his suit, he loses the less labor.

Mutat se bonitas, quu^irites iniuria Goodness changes it self when thou
sturrest it with injury. As who should say good men be made evil and ungentle
when they be provoked

Mulier quum sola cogitat, male cogitat. The woman when she thinks and
studyeth alone, thinks evil. Women for most part study shreudnes when they
be alone.

Malefacere qui vult, nusquam non causam inuenit. He that will do myschief
fyndeth every where occasion thereunto. Evil disposed persons can sone deuyse
matter to work upon and to show their malice.

Maleuolus semper sua natura vescitur. The euylwylled and myscheuouse person
feadeth upon his own nature, that is to wete, though he be not hired of other
to do mischief, yet loves he to do it for the satisfyeng and fedyng of his
own nature. So that he delyteth and feadeth his own nature when he is
occupied about unhappiness.

Multos timere debet, quem multi timent. He ought to fear many, whom many does
fear.

Male imperando summum imperium amittitur. By evil rulyng, the highest rule or
empire is lost.

Mulier quae nubit multis, multis non placet. The woman yt weddeth her self to
many, can not please many.

Malum consilium est, quod mutari non potest. An evil counsel is that which
can not be changed.

NIhil agere, semper infelici est optimum. It is ever best for an unfortunate
person, to do nothing.

Nil peccent oculi, si animus oculis imperet. The eyes can nothing offend, if
the mind would rule the eyes. We accuse our eyes, as though they ministered the
occasion of evil lusts. But the mind is in blame, which rules not the eyes.

Nil pro prium ducas, quod mutari possiet. Count nothing thine own, that may
be changed.

Non cito perit ruina, qui ruinam praetimet. He perysheth not sone by fall, that
before fears a fall. Versus est Trochaicus

Nescis quid optes aut quid fugias, ita ludit dies. Thou know not what thou
may desire or what thou may flee, the time so mocketh and dalieth with
us. Such is the change and alteracio^ of the world that oftymes that a man
thought best, he shall find worste for him, contrary wise the worste, best.
Versus est Iambicus tetrameter.

Nunquam periclum sine periculo vincitur. Peril is never ouercom without peril.

Nulla tam bona est fortuna, de qua nil possis queri. There is no fortune so
good, whereof a man can not complain. trochaicus

Nusquam melius morimus homines, quam vbi libenter viximus. We nowhere do dye
better, then where we have lived gladly. Trochaicus

Negandi causa auaro nusquam deficit The couetouse wretch never wants a
cause to deny a man. He that gives not gladly, ever fyndeth some cause or
pretense why he should not give.

Nimium altercando veritas amittitur With ouermuche stryuyng the troth is
lost. By moderate disputaci (...) will not be co^uersaunt in the common weal is
wyllingly a banished man.

TImidus vocat se cautum, parcum sordidus. The cowarde calls him self a ware
fellow, and the niggard a sparer.

Tam deest auaro quoth habet quam quod non habet. The couetouse man as well wants
that he has, as that he has not He uses no more his own then he does other
men's goods. So he lacks them both a like.

VEterem ferendo iniuriam, inuitas nouam. By sufferyng old wrong, thou
prouokest new.

FINIS.
Londini per Picardum Bonces. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


