A WORLD OF WONDERS: OR AN INTRODVCTION TO A Treatise touching the Conformity
of ancient and modern wonders: OR A Preparatiue Treatise to the Apology for
HERODOTVS.

The Argument whereof is taken from the Apology for HERODOTVS written in
Latin by HENRY STEPHEN, and continued here by the Author himself.

Translated out of the best corrected French copy.

Plutarch. in Sympos. (...).

^ANCHORA SPEI^
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted for JOHN NORTON. 1607.

Non iuuat assidue libros tractare seueros,
Bartole sieve tuos, sieve Galene tuos.
Sed libet ad dulces etiam descendere lusus,
Atque animum doctis exhilarare iocis.
Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE LORDS, WILLIAM Earl of PEMBROKE: PHILIP Earl of
MONTGOMERIE: Patrons of learning: patterns of Honor.
RIGHT noble Lords:
La^rtius tells us, that in old time there were but seven wise men to be
found in the world: but now it seems there are hardly seven ignorant. For a
man can no sooner set a fair mark, but every bungler will out with his bolt
(as though he could cornicum oculos configere) and like a Roman Censor will
give his censure, though (often) no more to the purpose then Magnificat for
Matins, as it is in the French proverb. We are now fallen into that critical
age, wherein Censores liberorum are become Censores librorum; Lectores,
Lictores: and every man's works and writings (both prime inventions, and second
hand-translations) are arraigned at the tribunal of each ped^ntical
Aristarches understanding. For if a man follow the point orderly and well, he
is curious: if he digress never so little, he is frivolous: if the style be
elaborate, it smells of the socket: if somewhat neglected and incult, it is
good for nothing, but to be paper for his pocket. If the work swell with
quotations and carry a large margent, it is nothing but a rhapsodie. If it be
naked, without all allegations, it is plain Dunstable, and a mere fopperie. If
the author write in praise of any, they fine him for a flatterer: if of none,
for a maligner. Our ancestors called HERODOTVS Patrem Historia: these
censorious Sirs, Patrem Fabularum. They thought him worthy to be read at the
games of Olympus* these men read him but as a Canterbury tale, to hold
children from play, and old folks from the chimney corner. Notwithstanding, if
the Readers were only censorious, the matter were the less; but they are also
humorous: For men's faces are not more differing then their fancies and
affections. ZENO has still two sorts of scholars in every school, (...) and
(...); some affecting nothing but subiectam scientiam, soliditie of matter:
others respecting nothing but subiectam sententiam, quaintness in regard of
the manner. The former being (like unto CATO) heluones librorum (men of steel
stomachs) can digest any discourse (though never so course) that comes to hand.
The later (like our dainty dames) can away with nothing, except they have
finer bread then can be made of wheat. Some are like SOCRATES, whom nothing can
please but Ethics, some discourse of moral Philosophy. Others (like
EPICVRVS) can relish nothing but Physics, some subtle disputation of natural
Philosophy. Some take pleasure in nothing, except it be full of plainness and
perspicuitie. Others (of a more refined and sublimate temper) can savor
nothing but that which exceeds the vulgar capacity. Some with PLVTARCH cannot
fancy ARISTOTLE'S Metaphysics. Others with CAPELLA and POLLIO find Soloecismes
in TVLLY, and I know not what Patauinitie in LIVIE. So that it may be truly
said, Vt rerum omnium, sic literarum quoque intemperantia laboramus: As we are
sick of a surfeit of all other things, so of learning also. Therefore
considering there are so many thieves lying in the way, and so many pirates in
this our paper-sea (as well sea-dogs as land critickes) it cannot be that any
man's writings should safely travail into any country without safe conduct, nor
ariue at any coast without a conuoy.

Vouchsafe therefore (Right honorable Lords, and by right most worthy to be
honored, because deserts have made you truly honorable) to give your pass to
this Apology, now that it is to pass the file of so many and so diverse
judgments: and to let the Sun of your favorable aspects give shine to this
new world: the Author whereof being a man so well known to the learned, and so
dear to your renowned Uncle (that worthy Knight of famous memory Sir PHILIP
SIDNEY) cannot be unknown nor vnwelcom to your Lordships. Of whom albeit I
cannot say as NAZIANZEN does of BASIL, that there is no more comparison
between him and his fellows, then between the pillars in the Church and
their shadows: Yet thus much I hope I may speak without offense, that as he
was a man of the rarest skill in the Greek tongue; so of the finest conceit in
pleasant discourse that ever this age affoorded. I appeal no further then to
this Apology, wherein (to parallele those histories in HERODOTVS, which seem
to some so incredible, and so to stop the mouths of those Didymists, who will
believe nothing except their senses say Amen) he has so artificially couched
diverse Centuries of our strangest modern histories (as an abridgement of the
wonders of former Ages) and that with such festiuitie, variety, brevity and
perspicuitie, as the like (I persuade my self) is not to be found in the
French, and I dare boldly say was never in the English tongue before. Here your
Lordships shall see the rusticitie of former times, and the fashions of foreign
countries: as also the cheating cunnicatcher, the quacksaluing mountebanke, the
kind cuckold, the rigging huswife, the merciless murderer, the griping
usurer, the lawless Lawyer, the ignorant, covetous, and fantastical
Physician, etc. so lively described and laid forth in their colors, as if
APELLES had been here with his pensill. But especially (as a garland to all the
rest) the gluttony, lechery, cruelty, felony, blasphemy, stupiditie, and
the like cardinal virtues of our good Catholics of the Romish Hierarchy: and
that (how ever they bear it out with a Roman resolution, in arrogating to
themselves the glorious name of Catholics, and branding their opposites with
the odious term of Heretics, as certain Heathen in old time called
themselves Deists, and all men else Atheists; and the Turk at this day, who
will needs be the true Musulman, and all the world besides Pagan;) that (I say)
their Catholic religion is nothing but catholic corruption, and Catholic
Papists, catholic heretics.

Seeing therefore (most noble and my most honored Lords) the qualities of the
mind (as Philosophy teaches) do commonly run on a blood, (as in Rome the Lelij
were wise, the Publicolae courteous, the Pisoes frugall, the Metelli religious,
etc.) I am in good hope that as your honorable Uncle highly esteemed the
Author of this Apology in regard of his excellent parts, and incomparable
knowledge in the Greek tongue, and kindly entertained him in his travail, and
that at sundry times; as first at Heidelbergh, after that at Strasburgh, and
last of all at Vienna in Austria: and courteously accepted the two books which
he dedicated unto him, the one Graec. Test. An. 1576.
coming out of his press, the Gnomolog. Graec. M.S.
other only from his pen: so you (who forerunne all as far in courtesy as in
pedigree) will as kindly entertain this his poor Orphane newly come into a
strange country, and having lately learned the language of the place. And were
it but only that your renowned Uncle (I can never name him too often whom I
can never sufficiently honor) and your honorable Mother (the virtuous Lady,
and thrice renowned Countess of Pembroke) have travailed in this kind, De
veritat. Christ. relig. by Sir Philip Sidney. His discourse of life and death
by the Countess of Pembroke.
in translating some of the works of that Phoenix of France, the Lord du
Plessis, into our English tongue; I persuade my self, it would not be
ungrateful to your Lordships: especially being dedicated by him who has
dedicated and devoted himself, to employ his pen and pains, and what service
he can else perform for the honor of your house. In confidence therefore of
your accustomed clemency, as the Author dedicated his WORLD OF WORDS (I
mean his treasury of the Greek tongue) to the greatest Princes of Europe; that
under their names it might pass with greater applause to their Universities:
So I do here humbly commend this his WORLD OF WONDERS (a work of far less
volume, but no less value) to your honorable protection, that under your
patronage it may pass to the universe of our British nation. And verily among
those many radiant Diamonds which do so beautify his Highness Crown and
Diadem, I could see none more resplendent, and consequently fitter to be
placed in the Frontispice of this work (like two great lights to shine in the
heaven of this new world) then your two Lordships. For who more fit to
patronage so conceited a work, then they who for their sufficiency are best
able to judge of conceits? and by their excellent discourse (as it is said of
ASHER) to afford pleasures for a King? Genesis 49.20.
And to whom should students have recourse, but to those who are amici
studiorum and studiosorum, both lovers of learning and of learned men? (whose
recompense in this barren Age, were it not for such bountiful benefactors,
would be but small; their bed might be upon the straw at the sign of the Star,
and they get nothing but their labor for their pains.) And if it be a true
saying, Temples are to be dedicated to the Gods, and books to good men; to
who^ may I better dedicate this Apology, then to your good Lordships, in whom
those eminent parts and almost heroical virtues of your dearest Uncle (whose
untimely death has been so infinitely regretted) are now (as out of the ashes
of the Phoenix) quickened and revived again? and in whom the blossoms of many
rare virtues putting forth so timely in this April of your age, do promise
more then ordinary fruit of great good in time to come?

But lest I should seem to guild gold: and for that you are not wont to feed
upon the wind of men's words; I cease to be further troublesome: though never
ceasing in my best wishes and desires to pray to the highest Majesty, that
great God of heaven and earth (who is great without quantity, good without
quality, infinite without place, eternal without time; whose providence
reaches from the Center to the Circumference; from the silliest Scyniph, to
the highest S^raphin,) to bless your Lordships with health of body, peace of
conscience, increase of honor, and length of days: that his most excellent
Majesty may long enjoy such faithful ACHATESES, and learning such bountiful
MECAENATES: and that in the end of mortality (after the revolution of many
happy years) you may attain to that happiness that never shall have end.

Your Lordships most humbly devoted in all duty and service, R. C.

THE TRANSLATOR to the Reader.
THere offer to thy view and censure (gentle Reader) the Translation of
Stephens Apology, written in defense of Herodotus his (strongly conceited, but
falsely supposed fabulous) History* which I present unto thee under the name of
A World of Wonders. When I call it a World of Wonders, think not that I go
about to gull thee with an happelourde some counterfeit work, having only a
glorious title, and performing nothing less then that which the title does
promise and pretend; like Lucians Verae historiae, or our pedling pamphlets,
which have plus salis quam sumptus, More conceit then cost, cosening the world
with copper for gold, with glass for pearl, and seeming for substance. And
when I say Stephens Apology, imagine not that thou have either Palaephatus his
(...) in hand, or Goularts Admiranda, or Wolfius his Memorabilia, or
Torquemeda's Mandeuile of miracles; or any such rhapsodie of an indigested
history, whose authors are at cost to print us new Almanacks of the last year:
but a learned, pithy, and pleasant Apology, whose title does neither belly the
text, nor the text shame the title. For as it is called A World of Wonders: so
it contains a world of matter, and that beyond all marvel. So that if Poets
do rightly call Iride^ Thaumantis filia^, the rainbow, the daughter of wonder;
we may well call this Apology A World of wonders, considering the rainbow
has not half the variety of colors, that this Apology of strange and
pleasant histories. And though a wonder last but nine days, as the common
saying is: yet a World of wonders will last to all posterity. And verily, if we
may conjecture of future events by former presidents, I see not but that it
will remain (more durable then the seven wonders of the world) even to many
generations: since it has already passed the press (if I have counted right)
well near fourteen times within these forty years. And now this Mart (if the
Catalogue deceive us not) we are to receive a new impression. So that if it
have but half that kind entertainment here, that it has had, and still has,
in it own country, the Printer will be no loser by the bargain.

But it is not my purpose (gentle Reader) to detain thee with impertinent
discourse about terms and titles, nor yet to abuse thy patience with a second
Apology for Herodotus, (for that were but to defloure the time, and to write
Iliada post Homerum, considering it has been sufficiently performed by
Manutius, Camerarius, and this our Author.) Howbeit something of necessity
must be spoken in way of Apology for this Apology, to clear it of those many
imputations and aspersions that are cast upon it; as well upon the matter of
the book, as the manner of writing: the truth of the history, as the modesty
of the historian. And first to begin with crimen falsi: Our good Catholics
abroad and corner-creepers at home, stick not to cast out such speeches as
these; That it is an easy matter to make the tale run which way shall please
the teller; that as under the fairest face lies the foulest heart, so (often)
in the smoothest tale the smallest truth. In a word, that Stephens Apology is
nothing but a rhapsodie of fables of Friars, devised of his fingers, and
therefore the Translator had need to look to his proofs. But what writer
should be innocent, if such senseless prating might pass for proof? They are
therefore to know, that the greatest sticklers are not always the greatest
strikers, nor the loudest barkers the sorest biters; We have lived too long to
be scared with such bugs. And I doubt not, but (for all these crackes and
brauadoes) they will take counsel of their pillow, and (perhaps) stroke their
beards five times (as the Doctors of Sorbonne that disputed with Erasmus did,
ere they could bring out one wise word) before they will disprove it. For had
it bin so easy a pil to have been swallowed, we should have heard of them long
ere this, considering they have had it lying by them full forty years and
more. But this is the matter: if Stephen or any other orthodoxe writer trip
never so little, and mistake but the least circumstance, they cry out by and by
that they do nothing but belie them, that they misreport their actions, and
falsify their positions, etc. Wherein they deal like certain thieves, who
robbing a true man, and finding more money about him then he would be known
of, cried out of the falsehood of the world, that there was no truth to be found
among men. They may do well to look a little nearer home; Walsing. in Rich. 2.
page 281.
where Walsingham (one of their own writers) will tell them that Friars in the
reign of King Richard the second, were so famous (or rather infamous) for there
lying, that it was held as good an argument to reason thus, Hic est Frater,
ergo mendax: He is a Friar, ergo a liar: as, Hoc est album, ergo coloratu^:
This is white, therefore colored. And that they have not yet lost the
whetstone, nor left their old wont, may appear by those infinite lewd lies
which they have published in their Legends, Festiuals, Breuiaries, Specula
Histor. Vitae Patrum, Hours, Offices, Pies, Portifories, Portuises, etc. For
whereas Zigaben. in Saracen.
Mahomet left but 113. fables in his Alcoran: they have left more then so many
thousand. For hardly shall a man find a leaf (I had almost said a line)
without a lie. To give a taste of some few: What more common in their writings
then such fables as these? That Breu. Romans Pij 5. Fest. October. Lect. 6.
Saint Denis the Areopagite took up his head after it was stricken off, and
carried it in his hand two miles. That Nou. Legen. Angl. fol. 90. col. 1.
Saint Dunstane took the devil by the nose with a pair of pincers as he
looked in at a window, and made him cry most pitifully. That Ibid. fol 37.
Saint Bernac turned oak leaves into loaves, viz. by changing one letter,
stones into fishes, water into wine: and that he sailed over the sea upon a
stone; as Ibid. fol. 197 col 3.
an hundred and fifty of Joseph of Arimath. company did upon his sons shirt,
and Alcora^ Fra^c. l. 1. page 144. and Sedul Apol. aduers. Alcor. li. 3 c. 28..
11.
Friar Herueus upon his mantle. That Engl. Fest. de S. Nicol. fol. 61. col. 3.
Saint Nicholas while he lay in his cradle fasted Wednesdayes and Fridayes, on
which days he would never suck above once. That Jacob. de Vorag.. 95. lit. C.
Saint Christopher pitched his staff in the ground, and forthwith it budded
and brought forth leaves: at the sight whereof eight thousand Pagans became
Christians. That Nou. Legen. Angl. fol. 261. col. 4.
Bishop Trian having killed his cow and his calfe to entertain Saint Patricke
and his company, the next morning both of them were seen feeding in the
meadow. That a Lomb. hist. de S. Patric. sect 49. lit. A.
sheep being stolen, and not restored to the owner as Saint Patricke had
commanded, he caused it to bleate in the belly of him that had eaten it. That
Discip. de Temp. in Promp. Exempl. lit. E. Exemp. 16.
Saint Briccius being but a boy, saw the Devil behind the Altar, noting the
misdemeanour of the people in a piece of parchment: and that when he wanted
parchment to write on, he pulled it so hard with his teeth, that the parchment
rent, and he knocked his head against the wall. And that Saint Martin coniured
him so, that he caused him to blot out what he had written. That when the Iac.
de Votag. in vita Georg. lit. A.
Kings daughter of Silena cast her girdle about the Dragons neck (as Saint
George had commanded her,) he followed her up and down like a gentle dog.
That Ibid. lit. B.
S. George being cast into a copperful of boiling lead, by making the sign of
the cross was refreshed therein, as if he had bin in a bath. That Legen. nou.
Angl. sol. 161. col. 3.
Saint Goodrick (that good Norfolk Saint) ten years before his death saw
clearly whatsoever was done within ten miles of him round about: and that he
often saw what ever was done in all the world. That Legen. aur. de S. Dominico.
lit D.
Saint Dominicks books being fallen into the river, and lying there three
days, were found by a fisherman, and taken up as dry as a feather. That Capgr.
in Romualdo.
Saint Romuald delivered high points of divinity as soon as he was borne; and
presently after he was baptized made a learned Sermon. That Lomb. hist. de S.
Christina lit B.
Saint Christina spoke when her tongue was cut out. That Ibid. de S. Margareta
lit. 8.
Saint Margaret being swallowed by a Dragon, had no sooner made the sign of the
cross, but the Dragon burst asunder, and out she came as sound as a trout.
That Engl. Festiu. in die Corp. Christi. fol. 55 col. 3.4.
Sire Ambright Earl of Venice (or of Vtopia, whether you will) desirous to
receive the Sacrament, and being not able to take it by reason of continual
casting, laid it on his side, upon the place next his heart, saying, Lord thou
know that I love thee with all my heart, I would feign receive thee with my
mouth if I durst; but because I may not, I lay thee on the place that is next
my heart: and having so said, his side opened, and when the host was gone in,
it closed again. That Capgr. Leg. fol 35. col. 4.
Beda's boy (who led him up and down to preach because he was blind) being
disposed to play the knave with him, brought him into a valley full of great
stones, telling him that there were many there assembled to hear him: and that
when he had made his sermon, and concluded with per omnia saecula saeculorum,
the stones answered aloud, Amen venerabilis Pater; which was one special
reason why he was ever after called Venerable Bede. That when Rogerus Hou^d.
hist. part. 2.
Thomas Becket (who never drank any thing but water) sat at table with Pope
Alexander, and that his Holiness would needs taste of his cup; lest his
abstemiousnesse should be known, God turned the water into wine: so that the
Pope found nothing but wine in the cup. But when Becket pledged him, it was
turned into water again. For it were half heresy to think (notwithstanding
the Pope found it to be wine) that Thomas drank any thing but water. With
these and infinite the like fables (which a man would think should come rather
from the wise men of Gotham, of the posterity of them that drowned the Eele,
then from any in their right wits) do their pulpits daily sound, and their
writings swell again. And therefore if you do not believe them, take heed you
be not burnt for an heretic.

Now it would be tedious to give but a light touch to those manifold fables
which they have broched of their lying Saints, as of Saint Christopher, Saint
George, Saint Catherine: which never saw the light, nor ever had being, save
only in picture and imagination. And which they shame not to tell us in their
lying Traditions, as namely of the bodily assumption of the virgin Mary into
heaven, etc. In their lying revelations, as of the deliverance of Traians soul
out of hell, etc. And which they daily broach in their lying reports, as that
Maffae. in vita Ignat. lib. 1. cap. 7 Et Ribad. l. 2. c. 7.
Ignatius Loiola was rapt up into heaven, and saw the holy Trinity in three
persons and one essence: and that God showed him the pattern which he laid
before him when he made the world. And lastly in their lying letters, of the
miracles done by the holy Fathers of their society in the West Indies: as that
Tursil. lib. 1. cap. 16.
a burning taper of a cubit length being set before Xauiers tomb, burnt above
three weeks day and night, without wasting. That Jesuit. Catec. lib. 1. cap.
17.
a man (who never saw further then the length of his nose) opening Xauiers
tomb, and rubbing his eyes with his hand, recovered his sight. That Ibid.
a piece of his whip and girdle cured all sorts of diseases: and a thousand
such like: which our holy Mother calls Marnix. Alueat. lib. 5. c. 1.
Pias frauds, godly cosinages: and the milk which Saint Paul gave the
Corinthians to drink, being unable to digest stronger meat, as a Friar at
Gaunt was wont to say. And no marvel they should send us over so many Legends
(or rather legions) of lies, and such a fardle of fooleries out of foreign
countries, when they are not ashamed to feed us at home with as fine fables:
and that not only in print, but also in picture; as namely* that Theater of
Cruelties in Engl. printed in the English College cum Priuil. Greg. 13. Ann.
1584.
some for the Catholic cause have bin here in England put into Bears skins
and baited with mastiues. That Coster. orth. fid. demon. in prin.
others have had boots full of boiling grease pulled on their legs. And that
others have bin shod with hot iron shoes, etc. That Cochlaeus Staph. etc.
Luther was begotten by an Incubus, and strangled by the devil. That Bolsec. in
vita C^luini.
Calvin was a stigmatick, and banished for a Sodomite. That Coster. Co^pend.
orth. fid. demonst. co^cl gener. cap. 4.
Bucer renounced Christian religion at his death, and died a Jew. That Putean.
de morte Bezae. ^t Catech. Jesuit. lib. 1. c. 17.
Beza reconciled himself to the Church of Rome, and died a Catholic. That
Coster. co^p. orth. fid. demonst. genesis concl. cap. 5.
Jewel after his challenge at Paul's Cross, being requested by a Catholic to
show his opinions out of the Fathers, should answer, that he spoke not as he
thought, but ad faciendum populum, as they say. That Ide^. ibidem de matrim.
Sacra^. cap. 30.
Doctor Sands Archbishop of York should entice his hostess to unlawful lust:
when as the world knows she was brought to his bed, as Lais the famous
strumpet was to Xenocrates. That D List. ex ^um. Ital.
Queen Elizabeth had a black beard. That when Canoniz. Camp Aquipont. etc.
Campion was drawn to the place of execution, the water in Thames stood still.
That a Jesuit. Belg. pro conc. Ex fam. mere. Land. praesent.
Preacher in London speaking against the holy virgin Hallensis, was suddenly
twicht out of the pulpit, and carried away by the devil. These few examples I
have here alleged out of their old Legends, and late worthy writers, as
Cochlaeus, Staphylus, Bolsec, Surius, Coster, Puteanus, and such like, the
Popes parasites: partly to show their diffidence in defense of a bad cause:
that as foul gamesters when they cannot make their part good by fair play,
begin to quarrel with their fellows, or to cog with a di^: so they, not able
to maintain their Catholic cause by plain dealing, are driven to defend it
with a trick of a false finger: namely with one of these three figures of
Roman Rhetoric (to which they are so much beholding,) Auxesis, in advancing
their favorites: Meiosis, in debasing their opposites: and Pseudologia, which
in Latin is termed mendacium; we Englishmen call it a lie. Partly to show that
they have small reason to lay lies in other men's dishes, seeing all the pack
of them, from the proudest Pope, to the poorest hedge-priests, are but a lying
generation. 2 Thessalonians. 2.9.
For as lying wonders are his part (as the Apostle says:) so wondrous lies are
theirs, as the former examples do sufficiently declare. And lastly, to let the
Reader see what a spirit of giddiness, what strong delusions, what efficacy of
error, God in his just judgment sends upon them to believe lies, because they
receive not the love of the truth. Verse. 10.
We were in good hope they would at the last have been ashamed of these
Legendary lies, when as their own writers began to distaste them. For Cap. de
ref. Praelat. Fascic. ret. expetend. fol 206.
Petrus de Alliaco exclameth against them in his book de Reformatione
Ecclesiae. And it was one of the Crauam. 21.
hundred grieuances which the Germans complained of, that their Friars fed the
people with fables, and told them nothing but tales out of the pulpit. And De
cause. corrup. art. lib. 2.
Viues writing of the Lombardica historia, says, that it is not fit to be read
by any Christian; and that he cannot imagine why it should be called the Golden
Legend, considering it was written by a man ferrei oris, plumbei cordis. And
Motiu. 5.
Bristow himself reiects certain of their miracles, which (says he) we read
in I know not what Legenda aurea. And as for that execrable book of
Conformities, written by Bartlemew de Pisis (for that of Johannes Capella one
of Saint Francis his scholars, and that other of Jeremy Bucchius, are not
altogether so notorious) even the Friars themselves after the light of the
Gospel began to dispell the darkness of Popery, were so ashamed of it, that
they called it in again, and labored to suppress it by buying up all the
copies they could hear of: that the world might never (for shame) know, how
shamefully they had abused our forefathers. But behold the malice of the devil,
who of late is grown far more impudent; as he who knowing his time to be but
short, means to use it to the full proof. For that which our good Catholics
in former ages were ashamed once to hear of: his impes at this day stick not
to defend. For now if a man do but once call the counterfeit history of Saint
George, Saint Christopher, or Saint Catherine into question, Balae. Act. Romans
Pontif. lib. 7. in Marcello 2.
he shall straight with Virgerius be suspected of heresy, and expelled their
society. And it is no longer since then the other Mart, that we received an
Apology in defense of this worthy work of Conformities, written by one Henry
Sedulius a Minorite Friar, against the Alcoran of the Franciscans; yet so
performed, as that it does not only call his modesty, but his wits also into
question. Therefore seeing they are not ashamed to thrust upon us such rotten
wares, and to rake up such rusty stuff out of the dead dust and darkness,
wherein time and shame have suffered them to rest. Necessary it is we should
(...), cast some of their filth in their faces again, and answer fools
according to their follies; that so they may have a qui pro quo, a Rowland for
an Oliver; at leastwise, oil for their vinegar.

But lest they should say (as their manner is) that our loading of them with
lies, does nothing lessen the fardle of our own faults and fables; and that to
make long inuectiues (how truly soever) against the old Legends, does make
little for justifying of this Apology: I would have them to know that there is
no one history in the whole Apology (excepting those which the Author had by
credible information, Read the Epist: to his friend. sect 2. and Chap. 36.
sect 7.
or his own private observation, which are but very few, and wherein there is
no indifferent man (I think) but will rather credit him, protesting to deliver
nothing but the plain truth, then the Popes prentises, who are bound to a
lying occupation) which may not be proved by good authority; and most what out
of their own writers: as namely out of Boccace, Petrarch, Pontanus, Fulgosius,
Poggius, Menard, Benno, and the like: especially out of the Queen of Nauarres
Heptameron, which she writ in imitation of Boccace his Decameron. A book which
(besides that it was penned by one of their own profession, for Lady Margaret
author thereof, was the Duke of Angoulesmes daughter, sister to King Francis
the first, aunt to King Henry the second, and grandmother to King Henry the
fourth that now reigns) is authorized by King Henry the second, Mount.
Essay. lib. 2. cap. 11.
with a large privilege: and highly commended by your deuoutest Papists: and
was so generally applauded at the Court in the reign of King Francis the
first, that such as spoke against it were severely punished. Witness Friar
Tossan, Vit Fran. Iun. page 3, 4.
Warden of the Franciscans Covent at Vlixodunum, who for preaching against her,
and saying that she was a Lutheran, and that she deserved to be sewed in a
sack, and cast into the river (for that she had discovered the knaueries of
his fellow-Friers,) was banished France by the King, and sent to be a gally
slave in the Mediterranean sea, for the space of two years. Now against that
which Stephen has here delivered touching the lewdness of their lives, I hope
they will not greatly except. For though our new Apologist Epist. Dedic.
Praelat. Apol. advers. Alcor. Francisc.
Sedulius (the great Proctour for the Franciscans) stick not to say, that
there is no more comparison between their Friars and us in regard of holiness
of life, then between light and darkness, Christ and Belial: yet if the
matter once come to curious scanning, it will be found that they have no such
cause to insult over their neighbors; they being such a viperous brood, whose
venom lies not only in their tongues, but also in their tails, that is to
say, as well in their lewd lives, as in their devilish doctrine: and that if
the life of our Ministers be compared with that of their Friars, it will be
found to exceed theirs as far as York does foul Sutton, to use a Northern
phrase. And that if holiness of life be a true note of the Church, ours will
be found Apostolical, theirs Apostatical. For if they put their hands into
their own bosoms, oh how leaprous shall they pull the^ forth again? They are
indeed often praying, yet where less devotion? vowing obedience, yet where
more contention? chastity, yet who more luxurious? poverty, yet who so
covetous? It were infinite to recount what we find in their own writers of
their Popes. Ioannes Salisb. says, De nug. curial. lib. ^.
that the reason (in Gods providence) why Popes die so fast, is, lest if they
should live any long time they should corrupt the whole Church. Bude says,
that in gluttony and lechery, De ass.
pessimum quemque superant. Warnerus author Fascic. Temp. Heu, heu, Domine
Deus, quomodo obscuratum est aurum? mutatus est color optimus. Qualia
contigisse circa haec tempora etiam in sancta sede Apost. quam vsque huc tanto
zelo custodisti, scandala? quales contentiones, sectae, inuidiae, ambitiones,
intrusiones, persecutiones? O tempus pessimum, in quo deficit sanctus and
diminutae sunt veritates a filijs hominum. Eia quis conuentus? quae
congregatio? quis homo iam securus erit, Epist. sine Tit. Ep. 12.
si sic deficit sanctitas Apostolica? Petrarch wishing his friend not to come
at the Popes Court (which lay then at Auinion in France) has these words: Loco
te si mouere volueris, ad nos veni: vide Romam, vide Mediolanum, vide Venetias,
vide Florentiam, vide Patauium tuum, vide Bononiam: postremo quidlibet vide,
Indos quoque, modo ne videas Babilonem, neque descendas in Infernum vinus. If
thou will travail, come to me: or go to Rome, or Millan, Venice, or Florence,
or to thine own city Padua, or to Bononia: in a word, go whither thou will
(though it be to the Indies) so thou come not at Babylon, and so quick to the
devil. And he gives a reason of this his disswasion in another place, where
he says: Epist. 7.
Quicquid de Assiria vel Aegyptia Babylone, quicquid de quatuor Labyrinthis,
quicquid denique de Auerm limine, deque tartareis syluis, sulphureisque
paludibus legisti: huic Tartaro admotum, fabula est. Hic turrificus simul atque
terrificus Nemroth, hic pharetra Semiramis, hic inexorabilis Minos, hic
Rhadamanthus, hic Cerberus vniuersa consumens, hic Tauro supposita Pasiphae,
mixtumque genus (quod Maro ait) prolesque biformis Minotaurus inest, Veneris
monimenta nefandae: hic postremo quicquid confusum, quicquid atrum, quicquid
horribile vsquam est aut fingitur, aspicias, etc. That is, That which thou
read of Babylon in Assiria, or of that in Egypt, or of the four
Labyrinths, or of the gate that leads down to hell, or of those tartarean
woods, and sulphurean lakes, is nothing in comparison of this hell. Here dwells
that towering and terrible Nimrod, that hu^ting rigsby Semiramis, that
inexorable Minos and Radamanthus, that all-deuouring Cerberus: here is Pasiphae
who prostituted her self to a bull, that mongrell and monstrous kind, of which
Virgil speaks of: that two formed misshapen Minotaurus: the monuments of
lawless lust not to be named. In a word, nothing is or can be imagined so
confused and out of order; so ugly, horrible, and hideous which is not here to
be seen. But to leave their Popes, and come to their Priests: what says Innoc.
3. in die Ciner. Sermon. 2.
one of their holy Fathers of them in general? Noctu filium Veneris agitant in
cubili,
Mane filium Virginis sacrificant in Altari.
Nocte Venerem amplexantur:
Mane Virginem venerantur.
And what says In Sagitt.
Palingenius? Proh dolor! hos tolerare potest Ecclesia porcos,
Duntaxat ventri, veneri, somnoque vacantes?
Sup. lib. Sap. Lect. 182.
Holcot calls the Priests in his time Sacerdotes Priapi: and says moreover
that they are Angeli Sathanae per discordiam; Angeli Apostatici per superbiam;
Angeli incubi per luxuriam; Angeli abyssi per auaritiam. Hence it is that
Erasmus being demanded what charity was; answered, that it was a Friars
cowle, because it covers a multitude of sins. And that it does so, hear
what Walter Mapes says: Est nullum Monacho maius Daemonium,
Nihil auarius, nil magis varium;
Cui si quid datur, est possessor omnium,
Si quicquam petitur, nihil habet proprium.
Si prandet, competit, vt loqui nesciat,
Ne lingua dentium opus impediat.
Si bibit, expedit, vt sedens hauriat,
Ne pes sub pondere ventris deficiat.
Die deuotus adorat dolia,
Nocte cum bipede laborat bestia:
Tali discrimine, tali molestia,
Meretur vir Dei regna coelestia.
And what honest men these Jesuits are, may appear by the late Gunne-powder.
Treason against his Majesty and the State; Wats. Quodl. Jesuit Catech. in
French. Sparing Disc^^ etc.
and by that which Watson and other secular Priests as well without as within
the land have written to their great commendation. But though men were silent,
yet the very stones would speak (as Christ says in another case) and show the
lewdness of their lives. Witness (among the rest) a picture in a stone wall in
the Library of the Monastery at Fulda (which remains as a monument to the
world of their everlasting reproach and ignominy) of a Wolf in a Monks cowle,
Catal. Test. vent lib. 16.
with a shaven crown, leaning on a staff, and preaching to a company of
geese, and saying, Testis est mihi Deus quam cupiam vos omnes in visceribus
meis. And that of a Cat with a myter on her head, and a crosier staff in her
foot, preaching to the mice. To whom one of them answers in this sort:
Charius est mihi vt moriar Paganus, quam sub vestra manu fiam Christianus. The
Cat replies, Quod fueram non sum, frater, caput aspice tonsum. She answers
again, Cor tibi restat idem, vix tibi praesto fidem. Which pictures being
above 200. years old at the least (though Wicelius call them Lutheranissimas)
do notably set forth the fraud and felony, the covetousness and treachery of the
Popish prelacy. For never did greedy Wolf so raven for his prey, nor the cat
so narrowly watch the mouse, as these false Friars have done to prey upon the
poor people. Witness the Romant of the Rose, Coster. Compend. demon. orthodox.
sid. Praef. ad Lect.
Mapes his Goliath, Chaucers Jack Vpland, Taxa Apostolica, etc. And whereas
they say that the loose life of Catholics proceeds only from humane frailty:
and that in us heretics it flows from the principles of our new divinity;
which permits usury, dispenses with polygamy, and grants liberty to a man to
company with his maid when her mistress is too coy: They keep their old wont of
lying and slaundering: For none of all these can be deduced by just consequence
out of the principles of our doctrine: the first being a mere mistaking of
Calvin: the second, the singular opinion of Ochinus: the third, a shameful
slander and wilful wresting of Luther. The sins rather of the Popish Clergy
and Laity do flow from the principles of their divinity, and are as well
praedicationis as conuersationis, as well Cathedral as Personal. For venial
sins (to use their own distinction) are easily done away with a short
shrift, an Aue Mary, or a holy water sprinkle. Witness their own verses here
ensuing: Confiteor, tundo, conspergor, conteror, oro,
Signor, edo, dono: per haec venialia pono.
That is, I am confessed unto the Priest,
I knock mine heart and breast with fist;
With holy water I am besprent:
And with contrition all yrent.
I pray to God and heavenly host,
I cross my self at every post.
I eat my Savior in the bread:
I deal my dole when I am dead.
And doing so, I know I may,
My venial sins soon do away.
And as for mortal sins, any man that has money may have a warrant dormant,
to do what he list, even to commit sins against nature, to mary his Aunt with
Ferdinand, his brothers wife with Henry the eight, his niece with Philip the
second: nay to mary his own sister: Pineda lib. 23 cap. 20.. 4.
for Martin the fifth (of whom the boys at Florence were wont to sing as they
went in the streets, El Papa Martino non vale un A farthing.
quatrino:
Martin the Pope is not worth a rope:)
dispensed with one to mary his own sister, as their own Anton. sum. p. 3.
tit. 1. cap. 11.

Angel. de Clau. and Sylv. in verb. Papa. Fumus in verbo Dispens.


writers do record. Et quid (to use Saxon. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Crantzius his words) hodie per dispensationem Apostolica^ non obtinetur? What
may not a man do now a days by warrant from the Apostolic Sea? Now whereas
some are wont to object, that in speaking against the cunning and sleight of
merchants, cheaters, mountebanks, the covetous practice of usurers, the
knaueries of Friars, etc. he does nothing but teach them, and therefore might
have done better to have concealed them: I answer, that herein he has but
followed the example of Aristotle and the Lacedaemonians: of Aristotle who
delivers the doctrine of Fallacies, or Sophistical Syllogismes, not to teach
men how they may play the Sophisters, but how they may espy and avoid their
sophismes. (And verily if the Translation had bin out but one half year
before, a friend of mine might have had more money in his purse.) Of the
Lacedaemonians, who were wont to bring forth their servants being drunk, and to
show them to their children, that seeing their beastly behavior they might
grow to a greater loathing and detestation of their drunkenness. And thus much
for the matter of the Book.

Touching the manner of writing: because the most do fancy and affect nothing
but that which is canded with pleasure and de^^ght; he has of purpose penned
this Apology both pithily like a Logician, and pleasantly like a Rhetorician:
yet not following the example of the Lord of Saint Aldegonde, who uses ieasts
and pleasant conceits as saoule, and not as sauce, and can never take manum de
tabula: but rather the precept of Aristotle, In Alvear. and au Tableau des
differens.
who would have matter of meriment (as it were) sprinkled in a discourse, and
used (...), not (...), only as a condiment, and not as nourishment: purposely
shunning all filthy, rotten, and unsavory speeches, as being not only
condemned by the Apostle, but by the very light of nature i^selfe. But does not
the Apostle (may some say) condemn as well (...) as (...), jesting as filthy
speaking? No verily: Ephesians. 5. v. 4.
For Paul's (...) is nothing else but Aristotle's (...). And therefore it is not
so well translated jesting in the English, nor plaisanterie in the French: it
should rather be turned scurrilitie, as it is in the old Latin Interpreter. For
so the Syrian Metaphrast understands it, when he expresses it by (...) and
(...), lusus and fabulae, as a man would say, toys and trifles, fables and
fooleries. And Bruciolus by le ciancie, that is, idle iergon and vain babbling.
And Luther by leichtsertiger schimpff, light talk, and prittle prattle.
Therefore Theodoret says, that the Apostle condemns not all manner of jesting
and meriment, but only immoderatum risum, immoderate mirth: such (says
Primasius) as cannot stand with Christian gravity: (such as was the scoffing
and scurrilous vain of that famous should I say, or rather infamous lewd
libeller Martin as well marre-Church and mar-Prince as Mar-Prelate.) We must
therefore distinguish inter salem Mercurij, and salem Momi, between festiuity
and scurrility, vrbanity and ribaldry: Inter iocos cruentos and eruditos,
between such jests as will suffundere sanguinem, and those that will effundere,
that is, between such as will make our adversaries blush, and those that will
make them bleed. So that jesting being rightly leueled in regard of his object
(for it is no new saying, Non patitur lusum, fama, fides, oculus:) and rightly
bounded, I mean kept within the banks of Charity and Sobriety, may well be
used, and that in two cases: either in way of honest recreatio^: or in dealing
with obstinate heretics and enemies of the truth, who having bin confronted
and confuted a thousand times over, persist still in their former follies,
albeit they bring nothing but the painted face of Iezabel, rotten stuff newly
varnished over, and old cole-worts in a new dish: that so they may be (as the
Lord threatens the obstinate Jews) a byword and a proverb, Ier. 24.9. and
25.9.
a hissing and a derision to all that are round about them. For proof whereof
(to pass over profane writers, as De Orat. l. 2.
Cicero, Sermon. l. 1. sat. 10.
Horace, Instit Orat. lib. ^ cap 4.
Quintilian, and the like; who in some cases prefer a pleasant conceit before
a sound argument: as when Horace says, -- ridiculum acri
Fortius, Sermon. l. 1. sat. 10.
and melius magnas plerumque secat res.)
The current of the ancient Fathers is in this point concurrent: some teaching
the lawfulnes of it by precept; Adv. haeres. lib. 1. cap. 5.
others by practice. Irenaeus derides the Valentinians, calling them pepones
sophistas; and their Aeones, cucumeres and cucurbitas. The like does Cleme^s
Alexandrinus, Adv. Valent. cap. 6.
Strom. lib. 7. And Ignatius epist. ad Tral. Tertullian says that if he laugh
them to scorn, and deride their dreams and dotages, he serves them but right:
Nam multa (says he) sunt sic digna reuinci, ne grauitate adorentur. And
Hermias (a Christian Philosopher) has written a book which he calls Gentilium
Philosophorum irrisio; Biblioth. sanc. Tom. 4.
wherein he finely stouts the folly of the heathen Philosophers. Why then shall
it not be lawful for us to do the like in jesting at those who jest at God and
his holy truth? Experience teaches, that an Ironicall speech does often pierce
deeper and stick closer to a man then a sound argument. It is the Physicians
(...): for as that serves to cure the diseases of the body; so this the
maladies of the mind. It is the corrasiue which Elias applied to the gangreine
of Baals Priests that had so dangerously infected the people of the Jews; 1.
King. 18.27.
Cry aloud for he is a God: either he ^alketh or pursues his enemies, or is in
his journey, or (it may be) he sleeps and must be awaked. It is the salt
which Elizaeus cast into the barren waters of Jericho: 2. Kin. ^.21.22
For as they could not be cured but by the salt which he cast into the
fountain: so neither can the waters, upon which the Scarlet strumpet sits
(being people, Apoc. 17.15.
and multitudes, and nations, and languages) be cured of their spiritual
barrenness, or of the Romish pock and Egyptian scab, except the salt of the
Sanctuary (as I may say) be applied to their sores. What more frequent in
Scripture then such kind of Ironies? Cen 3.22.
Behold man is become as one of us, to know good and evil: Now therefore (we
must look to it) lest he put forth his hand, and take of the tree of life, and
eat thereof, 1. Kin. 22.15.
and so live for ever. Go up and prosper, for the Lord will deliver the city
into the hands of the King. The Prophet Isaiah is commanded to take up a
parable (or a taunting speech as the word signifies) against the King of
Babel, and to say, Isa 14.1^.
How art thou fallen from heaven o Lucifer, son of the morning? And he derideth
the brutishnes of Idolaters, Isa. 44.15.16.17.
who of the same wood whereof they make a fire to warm themselves, to bake
their bread, and roast their flesh: make a God to worship. And how does the holy
Ghost play upon the very places of Idolatry, as namely upon mount Oliuet, when
he nicknameth it (as I may say) calling it no more Mons mishchae, the mount of
Olives or of unction, 2. Kin 23.13.
but (by an excellent Antonomasy) Mons mashchith, the mount of corruption: Hos.
4.15.
And Bethel is no more called Beth-el, the house of God, but Beth-aven, the
house of iniquity.

Now if any modest mind shall (happily) take offense at some of his broad
speeches, or shall think that they might have bin better spared: I shall
desire him to consider that it is not so easy a matter to find modest words to
express immodest things: as himself says Chap. 34.. 2. that he has but laid
forth the lives of Popish Prelates, as Suetonius is said to have written the
lives of the Emperors, E^dem liberate qua ipsi vixerunt: and that there is no
reason that some should commit their villainy with impunity; and that no man may
speak against it with modesty: or that writers should be counted baudy Bales
(that is, knaves) for publishing it, they honest men who practice it. As for
those wit-foundred and letter-stricken students, I mean those cloudy spirits
that are so wedded to the Muses, that they become enemies to the Graces, and
can relish no discourse except it be full fraught and farced with Ob. and Sol.
Videtur quod sic: probatur quod non, etc. Let them (a Gods name) enjoy their
Dunses and Dorbels, their Ban^es and Bambres, their Royards and blind bayards*
so they measure us not by their own meatwand (making their minds the model
for all men) but give us leave to use our liberty, and to imitate the practice
of prudent Physicians, who apply the medicine to the malady, with particular
respect of the patients temper; not giving the same potion to a queasie and a
steel stomach. For every plummet is not for every sound, nor every line for
every leuel. Al meats are not for every man's mouth: nor all liquors for every
man's liking. The ignorant multitude and profound Clarks are not to be persuaded
with the same arguments. For popular persuasion the learned prise not: and
deep demonstration the simple pierce not. They must also remember what Saint
Augustine says, Vtile est plures libros a pluribus fieri, diuerso stylo, non
diuersa fide, etiam de quaestionibus ijsdem, De Trinit. lib. 1. cap. 3.
vt ad plurimos res ipsa perueniat, ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic. That is,
It is good that many books should be written by many men, and that of the same
argument, in a different style, but not of a different faith: that so the same
truth may be conveyed to many: to some after this manner, to some after that.

Touching the Translation, I have not much to say: for I do not profess my
self a Translator, neither do I arrogate any extraordinary skill in the French
tongue. (I leave both to the skillful Linguists of our modern languages, as
stately Sauile, flourishing Florio, grave Grimeston, facile and painful
Holland, etc.) Yet this I hope I may truly say, that I have expressed the
meaning of my Author both truly and fully: and that I have not lost either the
life or the grace of any conceit, where it was possible to be kept. Which I
speak not as doting upon mine own doings: for I am not so in love either with
the work or workmanship, with the matter of the book, or the manner of
handling, nor the gay coat that I have put upon it, as Heliodorus was of his
amorous discourse of Chariclea (called the Ethiopian history) who chose rather
to leave his Bishopric, then to call in his book. I am rather of Marcilius
Ficinus his mind, who having translated Plato into Latin, Niceph. Callist.
Eccle. hist. lib. 12. ca. 34.
came to his learned friend Musutus Candiot to know his opinion of it: where
Candiot after he had perused some few leaves, perceiving that it would not
satisfy the expectation of the learned, considering it was but slubbered over,
and that it resembled the original (as Cicero the younger did his father) in
nothing but in name: takes a sponge, and having dipped it in an ink-pot, blots
out the first page: then turning him to Ficinus; Thou see (quoth he) how I
have corrected the first page: if thou will, I will correct the rest in like
sort. To whom Ficinus very mildly answered: No reason that Plato should be
disgraced through my default: and so refined it again. (Who notwithstanding
having done the best he could, by his rusticall simplicity resembles the
majesty of Plato's style (if we may believe Scaliger) no otherwise then as if
an Owl should represent an Eagle.) If therefore any candide Candiot (for I
appeal only to such as have skill in the French tongue) shall show me that I
have done the like in translating this Apology, and that I have not attained
to the Venus of the French, the finenesse, fitness, and featnesse of the
phrase; I refuse not the sponge: so that he will correct me, and not control
me. As for the rest, I shall desire them to spare their censure till they have
learned their Littleton. But lest any carping companion should brag that he had
found a hole in my coat, and that he could show where I have missed the
cushion: I do here correct my self and confess a fault in the translation,
Chap. 15.. 1. which as (in my necessary absence) it passed the press before I
was aware: so if it come to a second reuiew, shall have his due correction. As
for other scapes (saving such as have escaped the Correctors care) I know none:
except some sciolus shall judge it a fault to translate a pain and a pot, at bed
and board: a pot and a cueillier, at rack and manger: Enter Paris and Lion,
betwixt York and London. Chien de S. Roch: Tobies dog, etc. As though it were
never lawful to translate sexcenta, five hundred? And albeit it be bootlesse
to complain of those infinite rubs that lay in my way, and those many
difficulties which encountered me in my course: yet he that shall duly consider
the Authors intricate notions, his obscure allusions, his manifold (though not
impertinent) excursions, his continual repetitions of the same phrase in
diverse senses, (for Homers (...) noted by Epigram. l. 1* sect. 46.
Martial, and Tullies esse videatur by Essay. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Mountaigne, are not so frequent as Stephens a se propos) and last of all his
infinite parentheses, which were enough to exercise the patience of a Saint:
will no doubt (if he have but a grain of candor) as well with conniuency pass
over such faults as are triuiall, as tax those with some easy censure which
he shall find to be material. As for the rigide censurer (who is crudelis in
animaduertendo) I shall desire him but to make trial himself in translating
of two or three paragraphs, and then I doubt not, Quin fuerit studijs aequior
ille meis. Touching the phrase, I desire the less favor: for albeit I am not
ignorant that tailers and writers are now in like esteem; that if they have
not new fashions, they are not fancied; and if the style be not of the new
stamp, the author is but a simple fellow, and may put up his pipes: yet I have
of purpose so tempered my style, as that it might content the judicious:
nothing respecting the judgment or censure of our finical affecters, who are
so humorous: leaving inkhorne phrases and tapsterlike terms for the tavern;
and affected strains of Oratory for the stage: and avoiding especially the
French fripperie, because I would not have it seem to be a translation.

Now before I conclude, I am to advertise thee (courteous Reader) that of two
editions of this Apology, I have here followed the latter, (viz. that of
Rigauds Anno 1592.) the rather because I was given to understand, that the
Author himself not long before his death, did reuiew the former edition of
Mareses, and left it corrected as here thou have it. I have also observed the
several sections in every Chapter as they are in that Edition, and have added
the figures, for thy ease, and for more distinct reference in the quotatio^ of
places: which notwithstanding through the Printers oversight has not bin
observed till the 12. Chapter. And whereas thou may (happily) expect another
book to second this, because the Author calls it The first book of the
Apology, (for as Demonax says in Lucian, (...)) Thou art to know that as
Francis de l'Isle intending to write three books of the life of Charles
Cardinal of Lorraine, and the house of Guise, concluded all in one: so our
author purposing to have added a second (and it may be a third) unto this
first; by reason of his great emploiments and manifold distractions, has shut
up all in one, making the Preface to the Reader serve not only as a specimen
but as a supplement in stead thereof: as thou may better understand, if it
please thee to read the Preface to the second part,. 2. The material faults
which corrupt the sense, I have corrected according to the page and line; as
thou may see in the end of the book, where I shall desire thee to begin to
correct before thou begin to read. In the Preface to the Reader page 12. lin.
1^. thou may (if thou please) for The cudgel marres love, The cudgel made
love, read The cudgel kills love, The cudgel kindled love. Other literal and
less faults, which have escaped either my pen in writing, or the Printer in
correcting, I leave to thy judicious candor. And thus much (if it be not too
much) shall suffice for the present; till this world being ended, I bring thee
further news out of another world. London, Nouemb. 6. Anno 1607. This very day
just one and forty years since the first Edition of this Apology: and the day
after the gunpowder Treason.

HENRY STEPHEN TO THE READER.
THVCYDIDES in the Preface to his history, has an excellent saying worthy our
serious consideration, teaching us to condemn that in our selves, which he
condemns in the ancient Grecians, for speaking vainly of sundry accidents
which fell out before their time, grounding their belief upon an uncertain
brute blazed abroad without taking further pains to search thereinto: which
was the cause they so often entertained falsehood in stead of the truth. Which
should teach us to bridle our leuitie, as often as we are drawn to credit any
report, especially in matters of importance. But this evil has made so deep
impression in many men's minds, that before it can be beaten out of them, I
fear me, they must be cast in a new mould. Notwithstanding, the reasons hereof
are different, for the cause of some men's ouer-great incredulity, is
weakness, and want of judgment, in that they are not able to discuss what
they hear. The ouer-light belief of others proceeds from hence, in that
they neglect, at leastwise do not seriously consider what is said, but rely
more upon the authority of the speaker, then the truth of that which is
spoken, according to that of Euripides: In rich men's mouths the sentence of
the poor,
Sounds alike (perhaps) but weighs more.
Which common experience proves true in those who are wont to say, I believe
it, for I heard it of such a Gentleman, or such a Lord, or (to express
Euripides his own term) of such a man of credit and account. Seeing then
this ouer-great credulity entertaineth all reports alike without judgment or
discretion, to exemplify every branch in particular, would be a thing not
only tedious, but even endless, and such as would neither be pleasant nor
profitable to the Reader. I will therefore content my self with the relation
of one of them, which may serve as an introduction to the argument I have here
undertaken to entreat of.

First therefore I will begin with the rashness of certain critickes in
censuring the writings of ancient authors, which as it is now grown far
greater then ever it was in former time, so the leuitie of others in believing
their censures, was never so great. Indeed some of these selfe-conceited
censurers, who have not lost all modesty, shoot their bolts in private only
among their friends: others suffering themselves to be transported with
presumption and vaineglory, not herewith content, publish them in print, to the
view of the world. Whereof we have an example in an Italian, whose judgment (or
censure) of certain Latin Poets, if it were true, he only among all the
students of Poets and Poetry for these diverse hundred years, was sharp
sighted and Eagle eyed, the rest as blind as Moles and Beetles. And what (I
beseech you) say these credulous men herupon? Such and such a one (as I take
it) is no such good Poet. And why Sir, I bseech you? Because (forsooth) such a
learned and famous writer says so. In like manner, we have heard of some
within these few years, who have held strange opinions of Latin authors: some
giving the pre-eminence (for a pure and elegant style) to three; others to one
only. For some make a triumuirate of Terence, Cicero and Caesar. Others make
Cicero the Prince or rather monarch and sovereign Lord of all the Latinists.
And then God knows how finely they who allege no other reason then the
authority of such jolly judges come in with their I believe. In spite of all
which, there was a bold Brittan who proscribed Cicero with all his eloquence to
perpetual banishment. Howbeit, he was straight recalled by another of greater
account. See here (gentle Reader) how these learned Latin authors have been
trounced by these dangerously conceited and proud presumptuous censurers. But
what shall we say of Greek Authors? Are they exempt from the sharp censure of
such critickes? No verily. For this worshipful writer of whom I have spoken,
spares the Greek writers no more then the Latin. And who knows not, how that
famous and thrice renowned Aristotle, with all his Philosophy, has been
scourged by a pedant of Paris?

But to come somewhat nearer to Herodotus (the author of whom I am to speak) I
will here enter discourse as well of Greek as of Latin Historiographers,
seeing they are the men who are most read and perused by all sorts of
censurers, by reason of their translations. What historian then is there extant
at this day, on whom these hasty hot-spurres spend not some by-words and
taunting quips? As when they say, Herodotus does nothing but lie. Thucydides
can pen an oration pretily well, and that is all. Xenophon is not like himself
in his history. And some show themselves yet more ridiculous in giving
peremptory judgment of the style of the historian by the translation; as when
they say, Thucydides has no such grave and exquisite style as some affirm him
to have: for a man can see no such thing neither in the Latin, French, nor any
other translation. These men (me thinks) speak to as great purpose, and with
as good reason, as if a man should guess at the beauty of one long before
departed, by his skull taken out of the charnel-house: or as if one seeing a
sick man, reported to have been very fair and beautiful, of a vermilion hue,
and ruddie as a rose (as we commonly speak when we would express a fair
complexion) should call the truth of that report into question, or should
affirm it to be as false as contradiction can make it only upon a silly
supposall and mere imagination, that if there had bin any such thing, either
the lineaments of his fine feature, or some rays and relikes of that vermilion
tincture would remain to be seen. If any shall here ask me, why I make
choice of this comparison, and deliver my notion rather in this then in any
other allusion: I answer, because I find none so fit nor pertinent to my
purpose: for I dare confidently affirm, that the greatest part of Greek
writers, who in their own language are sound and succulent, and of such
excellent form and feature, color and tincture, that the beams of their
beauty do draw us into an admiration of them, and are (as it were) an allectiue
to make us in love with them: look very sickly, as being much shrunk, and
almost disfigured in French, Italian, Spanish, and other languages, by reason
of the bad entertainment they have found by the way. That is (to speak
plainly without allegorizing) that the greatest part (especially of Greek
authors) who being read in their own language by such as understand them, have
excellent good grace, and do not only please the ear, but even ravish the
mind with delight, are so poorly and pitifully translated into French, Spanish
and Italian, that a man shall find as great difference between the original
Greek and their translations, as between a body in perfect health, and the
same when after a long and lingering sickness it is ready to give up the ghost.
And from whence (I beseech you) comes this, but only from hence, that they
which translated them into their mother tongue have been translators of
translators, that is to say, have translated them out of the Latin translation;
and having no knowledge in the Greek, have not only retained the errors of
these translations, but often mistaking even them also, have fallen into sundry
other more gross and palpable. Whereof I have given some few examples in my
Thucydides, showing how Laurentius Valla has guessed, and (as it were) deuined
at Thucydides his meaning: as also how the French translator Claudius de
Seyssel bishop of Marse^le has guessed at Vallas translation. But as Valla did
much mistake the meaning of Thucydides, so Claudius de Seyssel did guess
amiss at Laurentius his meaning. So that look how much the number of those is
greater, which have been wronged in this kind (which is more truly verified of
Thucydides and Herodotus then of any other,) so much is Plutarch the more
beholding to two learned translators, who to array him in French, have only
changed his garment and attire. Whereas these tinkerly translators (of whom I
have spoken) change not only the authors attire, but put him also into another
fashion.

But to return to those who judge not of authors by their translations, but by
a certain notion which they have of their phrase and idiome. Verily such
censurers are rather to be regarded, as not being so impudent as the former:
nor yet like Rabbi Beda, who to the end he might auert king Francis the first
from his most noble and princely resolution touching the establishing of
professors of the languages, alleged in the presence of the now deceassed M.
Bude against the Greek, that it was the fountain of all heresies; whereas he
(on the contrary) encouraged the King by all possible means to go forward with
that so worthy a work. But after it was once known that Beda condemned a
language whereof he scarce knew the first letter, he was condemned of all for a
very bedlem. Those (I say) which rely upon some smattering knowledge they have
of the language, are not in the same degree of impudency with the former;
notwithstanding they show that they have eaten too much of the critical
cream, when they censure a whole work because they understand some part
thereof. But that we may the less wonder at this rashness, we must remember
an excellent saying of the foresaid Thucydides, There are none so bold as these
blind bayards. The reason is plain, because they cannot so well foresee the
difficulties which they are to encounter with, as those who have waded through
them. And verily this prouerbiall sentence is verified at this day in all bold
and rash adventurers, but especially in such as take upon them to censure
classike authors, a thing as well dangerous as odious. How ever it be, certain
it is that they who for their sufficiency might best play the Aristarchi, and
thereby purchase to themselves immortal fame, do least of all others
intermeddle therewith.

But to descend to particulars: if the common proverb, A fools bolt is soon
shot, was ever verified in Greek or Latin writer, it may be truly said of
Herodotus above the rest: for he (poor author) is ever brought upon the stage,
no^ only by such as have read him rather in a strange language then in his
own; but even by those who have not read so much as one line or letter in him,
but are altogether ignorant of the very inscription and title of his history.
How then (may some say) do they sentence and censure him? Verily by following
the example of others, who (it may be) know nothing but by hearesay neither.
But leaving such censorious Sirs, I come to those who ground not their opinion
upon so sandy a foundation, but seem to be able to justify what they
affirm. I demand then, what reason they have to condemn his histories as
false and fabulous? Will they say, they know them better then the author
himself? They are not (I hope) so deuoid of shame. Why then do they suspect
them? Because (forsooth) they have no show nor semblance of truth. Consider
here (gentle Reader) how Logically they reason, when they infer, that
therefore they are not true, because they seem to be false.

But this is not all I have to say: for I further deny that to be true which
they take as granted and already proved, viz. that these histories have neither
substance nor shadow of truth in them. Yet admit it were so: whereon (I beseech
you) do they ground their opinion? Verily upon these two reasons. First, the
exceeding great impiety which is to be seen in some particulars described by
Herodotus, and the extreme folly which bewrays it self in othersome seem to
them altogether incredible. Secondly considering that most of that which we
read in his history, has no correspondence to the customs and fashions of
these times, they suppose ancient stories to be as dissonant from truth, as
they are from that which they daily hear and see. The former of which two
reasons, branching forth into two stemmes or heads, I have encountered before:
for doubtless we shall find some as notorious facts as any mentioned in
Herodotus, which we cannot but believe as having been eyewitnesses thereof. The
like I affirm of the sottishness of those times. For though it may seem
incredible to some, yet I doubt not but if it be compared with the simplicity
of our late forefathers, it will be found but as a molehill in comparison of a
mountain, or a dwarf of a giant. I am not ignorant how the poor Egyptians
in Herodotus are derided and laughed to scorn for their religion (if it may be
so called) and deservedly I confess, as may appear by their exceeding
trifling ceremonies. But if we come to the superstitious Mass Priests, which
have been within these threescore years, and narrowly search all their trash
and trinkets, we shall be (in a manner) enforced to confess, that the Egyptians
might (in comparison) even glory and boast of their religion. I say in
comparison, as willing of two evils to point at the less. Notwithstanding lest
any man should say that I speak of the last years snow, I will come to that
which is plain and manifest to all that have their eyes in their heads. O
(will some say) what great fools were these Egyptians to worship brute
beasts! I confess they were great fools indeed; yet so, as that they also
confess, that worshippers of liuelesse creatures are greater fools then those
that worship living creatures. Which being granted, the Mass Priests cake is
all dough. For they worship both dead and liuelesse things. And of those things
which never had life or sense, not only creatures of account, but even vile and
base things, as not only silver and gold, but wood and stone also. For if they
did prostrate themselves only before gold or silver, their worship would be
somewhat more honorable: (as the heathen when they would have a god carrying
some majesty with him, framed him of one of these two metals.) And they might
allege that Jupiter transformed himself into a shower of gold. As also that
in all ages (even in those countries where Images were not in use) covetous men
have worshipped these metals as their gods: which cannot be said of wood and
stone. Howbeit we have a story in this author, which shows what disgrace may
befall the worshippers of gold and silver, as well as of wood and stone. For we
read how that Amasis of a golden basin (wherein he was accustomed to wash his
feet) made a god. And why might he not as well make a basin or chamber pot of
his god, as a god of his basin? But I leave it to the Readers consideration,
what a grief and shame it ought to be to a man to see that, before which he
has prostrated himself, converted to so base and sordide uses as cannot once
be named with modesty. And here doubtless the Egyptians would allege for
themselves, that their worship being directed to, and terminated in living
creatures (though they had pictures also and graven images) was not liable to
such disgrace and infamy. I omit such reasons as common sense leads us unto,
to prefer a living thing (whatsoever it be) before that which is void of
life, or which never had life, and come to the other point, viz. that as the
Egyptians were not so sottish in their worship, neither were they so foolish
in defending it. And therefore that which Diodorus Siculus reports of the
Alexandrians, who would not pardon a Roman for killing one of their cats, is
more excusable and tolerable then the dealings of our Masse-mongers (whereof
we have been eyewitnesses) when they cruelly massacred those that maimed their
Images. For a living creature maimed in some member, is hindered of the natural
motion whereof that member is an instrument. But does he (I beseech you) that
cutteth off the legs of an Image, deprive it of walking? or does he that puts
out the eyes of it (if I may so speak) bereave it of sight? And yet the
Egyptians never took such cruel revenge upon any for killing their cats, as
they have done of late time in wrecking their malice upon such as maimed any of
their marmousets or puppets.

But since the comparison stands between these two follies, whether should be
the greater, and that all Masse-mongers do not worship Images, we will come to
that which all the professors of that religion generally worship, which is
their great goddess Diana, the pillar (as it were) of Popery, and the
foundation of all their foolery, which they maintain with fire and sword: let
us therefore weigh without partiality or passion, what we would think or say if
Herodotus or some other ancient historian should tell us, that men in certain
countries were Theophages (that is, God-eaters) as they report of
Anthropophages, Elephantophages, Acridophages, Phthirophages, and such like;
would we not straight say, that this Theophagie were incredible, and that these
fablers devised it of their fingers, and fathered it upon them, though
otherwise most barbarous? Notwithstanding we daily hear certain report of
these Theophages; nay (which is more) of Theochezes. What say I, report? seeing
we dwell in the same countries, towns, and houses with them? Concerning other
mysteries as well Morological as Hyperbadinomorological, which accompany this
Theophagie, I leave them to the discretion of the Reader, from whose eyes God
of his goodness has removed the veil of superstition: not doubting but that
when he has well weighed them, he will confess with me, that in comparison of
them, there is nothing base in the religion of the Egyptians, I mean in their
superstitious ceremonies, which they otherwise call Religion.

The second thing that crackes the credit of Herodotus, is, in that we read
sundry particulars in his history, which suit not with the fashions of these
times. For some there be (as has been said) who never observing the great
alteration that is to be seen almost in all things since those days, would
have the disposition, customs and manners of our ancesters so to suit and
iumpe with ours point-deuice, that nothing could please^^ them but what
pleases us. And not so only, but would find a correspondence between the
States of commonwealths, kingdoms and governments of those times with these
of ours. Nay, some in reading of ancient histories go yet a step further, in
measuring the climats of foreign and far remote regions by their own, such
simple souls they are. And for conclusion they allege diverse reasons, for
which sundry things related by Herodotus seem improbable at the least. Well,
be it so: yet what Logic teaches us such a consequent? It is not probable,
therefore it is false. If this were a good argument, nothing would seem either
strange or wonderful. For what do we use to wonder at, but at that which
falls out against our expectation or opinion? that is, at that which we find
to be true, and yet seems to be false, because it is not usual, or above our
reach, or against reason; I mean our mental discourse grounded upon such or
such reasons. In the mean time consider whether this be not to tyrannize over
historians, to subject them (as it were) to this servitude and slavery, that
they report nothing but what we shall think probable, for fear of being
accounted lying, fabulous, and dreaming fellows.

But it will be more expedient (in my judgment) to instance this by examples.
Herodotus therefore reports very strange things I confess: and moreover
affirm, that they are of two sorts. For in some of his histories we admire the
works of nature: in other some we wonder at the actions of men; and not so
only, but hold them altogether incredible. First then we may not think any
thing incredible in nature, if we consider the almighty power of the author
and governor of nature. It were enough to make us all at our wits end, if we
should see the Sun stay his course and stand still in the firmament: and who
would not say that it were clean against the order of nature? Notwithstanding
we have such authentical proof hereof, that we cannot once call it into
question. True it is, nature now a days produces neither Giants nor Pigmes:
does it therefore follow, that it never brought forth such? Touching Giants,
the Scripture gives sufficient testimony: and dead men's bones may well induce
us to believe there have been such. And Pigmes (as authors have described them)
were not much differing from the dwarfes and elfes we daily see. Men at this
day live not ordinarily above 80. or 90. years: and yet we dare not deny but
that some (not to speak of Methuselah) have lived six or seven ages longer.
And besides those mentioned in the holy writ, we find that many (long since
their time) have lived so exceeding long (though not so long as those mentioned
in Scripture) that there is no comparison between their years and ours. Women
at this day go but nine months for the most part: and therefore Herodotus must
be sent packing with his ten months. See how easy a matter it is for those
who credit the common report (which has often a blister on her tongue) to
condemn Herodotus as a fabulous fellow and lying Legendary. But let us see how
many authors they here encounter. For if Herodotus must not be heard with his
ten months, neither must Hippocrates, Galen, Plutarch, Pliny, sundry lawyers,
nor the greatest part of Poets, as Theocritus, Plautus, Cecilius, Virgil and
Propertius, who affirm as much. But certain it is, that they which condemn
Herodotus in this particular, either have not read him, or do not remember that
they have read as much in these writers; and being forestalled with this
preiudicate opinion, that he makes no conscience of a lie, they scorn any
further information; to which if they would but lend a patient ear, they
should (without forraging so far) find the like, nay some far greater and
more wonderful things in the extraordinary works of nature then any mentioned
by him. For clearing of which point, I will add an objection of another kind.
That which he reports of the fertility of the territory of Babylon, that one
grain yields for the most part two hundred and oftentimes three hundred,
far surpasses the fruitfulness of our soil, and therefore (say they) it is
out of question he here lied for the whetstone. But let these horned Logicians
which frame such crooked arguments, answer whether nature can bring forth
fruit any more of her self, then the knife can cut of it self? They will
answer (I am sure) that it cannot. I demand then, what is that ouer-ruling
hand which guides and disposes all these things? They dare not deny but that
it is Omnipotent* which if they grant, why should they think that to be
impossible to him, which is here affirmed by Herodotus? If they shall further
say, that he and other historians tell us strange tales of the fertility of
certain countries, whose plenty consists at this day only in scarcity,
want and penury, and hereupon shall accuse him of forgerie; let them beware
lest they inuolue the holy scriptures in the same accusation. For they make
some places fertile, which are now in a manner barren. But if we consider the
hand, which sometimes stretches forth it self, and sometimes draws it self in
again, which now sends forth a blessing, and now a curse upon one and the
same country. In brief, if we call to mind the saying of David, Psalm. 104. and
refer the reason of such alterations to that supreme and sovereign cause, we
shall find the true answer to such objections. Moreover, those who for the
former reason will not believe Herodotus his report of the fruitfulness of
Babylon, will never beeleue that the city Babylon was so great as he reports
it to have been, viz. that those which dwelt in the suburbs were surprised and
taken before they in the heart of the city had knowledge thereof. For if we
measure the largeness of it by the greatness of our cities, it cannot choose
but seem false and fabulous.

I proceed now to prosecute the second part, touching the actions of men. First
then as Herodotus is suspected of falsehood and forgery, for reporting that
Babylon was so beautiful, great and rich, and situate in so fertile a soil: so
is he also for the large report which he makes of the puissance of the Persian
Kings, Lords of that city. For who can believe that a King of Persia ever led
such an army as drunk rivers dry? I mean such small rivers as he speaks
of. True it is (I confess) if the Reader shall consider the power of our
modern Kings, and thereby judge of the puissance and power of the Persian
Monarchs, he cannot but hold Herodotus for the fondest fabler that ever writ.
But to make this comparison, were to demand (as one did) whether the Sea were
greater then the Lake of New Castle: and it were to speak with as good
judgment as he that said (as it is reported) Se le Rey de Franse se fousse bin
gouuerna, e fousse maitre d'houta de n^utron seigna^. It were (I say) to
measure the power of Princes with his mete-wand, who said, Mo, l'e pur
matto'sto re, a ^olerse ^uffar con san Marco. L'e person, che i signori ha
deliberato di mettere in terra cinquecenti cauai fottili. For look how much
these fond fools debased the King of France by such ignorant and doltish
speeches: so much do they decase the King of Persia, who compare him with our
modern Kings. But as he which asked whether the Sea were greater then the Lake
of Newcastle, would never have demanded this question if he had seen Danubius
or Nilus, but would (at least should) have gathered, that if these rivers do
incomparably exceed this Lake in bigness, the Sea (into which all rivers do
run) must needs be of a huge and spacious greatness: so he that has but read
what forces Tamberlaine levied of late years in comparison (being at the first
but a Neatheard) will (no doubt) if he have but a dram of judgment thereby
gather, that the power of the Persian Kings did infinitely surpass the forces
of our modern Kings. For Tamberlaine had six hundred thousand footmen and
four hundred thousand horsemen when he encountered Bajazet the Turkish
Emperor; and having discomfited two hundred thousand of his men, led him away
prisoner in fetters of gold. Now then if Tamberlaine of a neatheard became so
puissant a Prince, to what height (may we think) mounted the Kings of Persia,
considering that even from their cradles they were men of matchless might,
which at their dying day they left much more increased? For confirmation
whereof, though many pregnant proofs might be produced, yet I will content my
self with such as historians do afford, as namely how Xerxes (one of these
Emperors) gave to Themistocles five great cities, the first for his pantry,
the second for his celler, the third for his kitchen, the fourth for his
wardrobe, and the fifth for his bedchamber. And what great thing was this for
the King of Persia to give? Verily no more then for a King at this day to give
one or two small villages.

They further affirm, that it is not probable that ever any King should play
such prankes as Herodotus reports, not only not beseeming their places and
persons (being Princes) but any simple swains or corridons of the country.
Whereunto I answer, that if it were a new thing to see Kings commit facts
unbeseeming their places and persons, we might well suspect his report in this
behalf. But if it be common and ordinary in every child's mouth, why should we
not believe it? What (may some say) is it credible that a King should so far
forget himself, as to expose his naked wife to the view of his servant, as
Herodotus affirms of King Candaules? To which I answer, that if Candaules
were the only King that played so shameful a part, we were in some sort to be
pardoned, if we did not subscribe hereto; (though other as vile parts and
practices of theirs might induce us to believe it) but when we find in other
undoubted histories that Kings have done the like, why should not his
testimony go for current with us? Nay, we read of some who have not only
committed the self same fact, but others also far worse. Albeit my memory
furnishes me only with two examples at this present. The first is of one who
committed the very same: The second, of another who did well worse. For the
first, consider what Suetonius writes in the life of Caligula, where he
discourses of that which this King (or Emperor as the Romans speak) did to
his wife Cesonia, Vt sape chlamyde, peltaque and galea armatam, and iuxta
adequitantem, militibus ostenderit, amicis vero etiam nudam. Yea but Caligula
was a man given over to all kind of villainy. And what then? as though
Candaules was not as very a villain as he? For the second, consider how a King
(not registered among the rest as famous, or rather infamous for his villainies)
has committed a far more shameful fact then the showing of his naked wife.
For Baptista Fulgosius reports how that Henry King of Castile, son to king
John, being frigide and unable to get children, had one by the help of a
goodly young man of the country, one Beltramus Cueua. As who so will not
credit my report, may read in the third chapter of the ninth book of the
said Fulgosius. And it is further to be noted, that he did not this in heat of
affection, in some sudden mood or passion, but after long and mature
deliberation, having advanced him from the bottom of baseness to the height
of honor, from the dunghill even to a Dukedom, to the end he might the last
draw from* him this service in recompense of so many benefits. And if I were
disposed to speak of private men, I could allege examples of sundry sages,
possessed with this Kings humor, cosingermans to that wittall, who is so
famous by these verses of Iuuenal, -- doctus spectare lacunar,
Doctus and ad calicem vigilanti stertere naso.
But among other stories impugned by many, and reckoned in the number of
ridiculous tales, that is not to be forgotten which is recorded in his first
book, of certain that came to King Cresus, requesting him they might have his
sons company to assist them in taking a great wild Boar which wasted the
country. See (say they) a sine fable, and easy to be believed, that a Kings
son should be entreated to perform such an exploit. Verily if this history
were to be examined by the custom at this day, I grant they had reason thus to
except. For example, in the year 1548. when a cat of mount which came out of
the forest of Orleans did infinitely endamage the country of Berry (as another
beast had done elsewhere in the year 1546.) the inhabitants were far from
requesting the King of France his son (though he had been of years) to help
them. But if we consider (as we ought) that Kings in those days were exceeding
jealous of their honor in performing brauer exploits in hunting (especially in
striking fierce and furious beasts) then any of their subjects, we shall have
no cause to think this history strange. Now that they were indeed jealous
hereof, in such sort as has been said, may appear by that which Ctesias,
Xenophon, and Herodotus also (as I remember) report hereof, viz. how they put
some of their huntsmen to death for striking the beast they had in chase, and
so depriving them of that honor which (as they thought) was due to none but to
themselves. But leaving the further prosecuting of this point, we understand by
this story what great desire they had to become famous and renowned for their
prowess and actiuitie.

I have likewise heard the story of the Magician who fained himself King of
Persia, and for seven months was reputed for no less, accounted fabulous. For
is it likely (say they) that this counterfeit should not have been discovered
in so long time? To which I answer, that we have sundry examples of this kind
of cosinage (as I have showed in my Latin Apology) where I have alleged two
notable examples of the like imposture, viz. of such as have enjoyed the name
and room of those who^ they counterfeited, as though they had been the parties
themselves, which in all reason ought not so easily to be credited: and yet are
so authentically verified, that we cannot doubt thereof. One is of dame Ioane
(the she Pope) who was held for Pope John, till that a butterfly came out of
her belly. The other is of one Arnold du Tilh, who played the cunning
counterfeit so well, that he was acknowledged and received as husband to the
wife of one Martin Guerre, who was then absent, keeping her company both at
bed and board as though he had been her true husband, for the space of three
years and more, during which time he had certain children by her: neither she
nor any of her kindred and friends ever dreaming that she had companied with any
save her own husband. But in the end her true husband returning home (but not
known) commenced suit in the court of Parliament at Thoulouse against this
Arnold, who disturbed him so grievously in his possession in the year 1559. as
is to be seen in that strange manner of proceeding afterward published in
print.

Touching the different dispositions and behauiours of men in sundry countries
described by Herodotus, it is strange they should be found so strange as not to
be believed; especially considering the difference and dissimilitude which is
to be seen between us and our near neighbors, as also the continual strange
alterations of customs and fashions in one and the same country. For as for
the difference betwixt us and our next neighbors, who sees not, how in their
manner of life, attire, and ordinary affairs, they have nothing common with
us? If we should see a a man of worth in France, apparelled in green, we would
surely think he were somewhat fantastical: whereas in many places of Germany
this attire is generally approved of all as decent and seemly. Again, if we
should see a woman in France wear a gown of diverse colors with broad
guards, we would think she meant to come upon the stage, or that she did it
for a wager: whereas in that country they hold this kind of attire very
civil. Further, we in France (and others also in other countries) would have a
hard conceit of a woman that should go up and down the streets with her breast
laid open, showing half her dugges: whereas in some places of Italy
(especially at Venice) not so much as old filthy hanging dugs but are set out
(as it were) to show and sale. Moreover, in France and elsewhere women go to
market to buy their provision: whereas in Italy their husbands go themselves,
keeping their wives mewed up as it were in a cage. Furthermore, kissing in
France between gentlemen and gentlewomen, etc. is permitted and held as
honest, be they kinsmen or others: whereas such a kiss in Italy would not
only be scandalous, but also dangerous. In recompense whereof, Italian dames
make no conscience to paint themselves as French Ladies do, those at leastwise
that are not Italianized. These few examples (which may serve us as a pattern
of that which hereafter (God willing) shall be handled more at large) shall
suffice for this present: and herewith I will conclude, that if in so near
neighboring nations, and in the same age, the manners of men are so dissonant
and disagreeing one from another, we may not imagine the difference between us
and those of whom Herodotus speaks so incredible, they being so far remote
from us, not only in distance of place, but also of time. But because the
difference between our customs and those of our predecessors may easily be
discerned, I spare examples.

Yet one thing further is to be noted, viz. that some which at the first blush
may happily seem foolish and ridiculous (and are therefore thought forged and
fabulous) if they be thoroughly considered, will be found to be grounded upon
good reason. Among the rest, that of the Babylonians recorded in the first
book may well be numbered. In every market town (says he) once a year they
assemble all the mariageable maids, and lead them to a certain place
appointed for the purpose, where a multitude of men come flocking about them:
and there they are sold by an officer to him that offers most, the fairest of
all being cried first, and she being sold at a high rate, the next to her in
beauty, and so the rest in order; yet upon condition that they marry them and
take them for their wives. Whereupon the richest Babylonians intending to
marry, but the fairest and most beautiful virgins in the company, one
out-bidding another in the bargain. The country swains contenting themselves
though they have not the fairest, take the woodden-fac'd wenches, and the
ill-fauourd-foule-fustilugs for a small sum. For when the officer has sold
all the handsomest, he comes to the foulest of them all (her especially that is
lame, or has but one eye, or some such deformity) and cries aloud, Who will
have her for such a price? In the end she is delivered to him that will be
content to marry her for the smallest sum. The money which is given for the
marriage of the foulest, acrewing of the sale of the fairest. And thus the fair
marry the foul, and such as have any bodily blemish or imperfection. Neither
is it lawful for any to give his daughter to whom he thinks good; nor for him
which has bought her, to carry her away before he has given his word that he
will marry her. This story at the first sight seems not only strange, but
also ridiculous: howbeit if we consider the causes and inducements which moved
the Babilonians to marry their daughters in this sort, we shall find that there
is more reason and less sin in this custom, then in sundry laws devised by
those great Philosophers Plato and Aristotle.

Now as it cannot be denied but that there are in Herodotus sundry customs and
fashions, both wild and wicked, which for this cause carry small credit with
them: so must it needs be granted that he records many noble enterprises,
famous acts and valiant exploits, undertaken, managed and achieved with such
courage, prowess and valor, as may well deserve admiration. And that there is
nothing in ^his history so abhorring from truth or so incredible, but may win
credence if we compare it with that which other historians have written in the
like kind. For they report far stranger facts, I mean such as were
achieved with infinite greater prowess and valor. And verily since the first
invention of guns it was necessary men should (as it were) double and treble
their valor, in exposing themselves against their merciless fury and rage.
And we have daily events and occurrences which do in a manner compel us to
believe that to be true, which before we held to be false. The fact of Cocles
always thought so strange and incredible, was confirmed Anno 1562. by a Scot,
who being pursued by certain Reisters (from whom he could not wind himself)
leapt with his horse from the top of the mountain Caux (near to Havre de
Grace, called Hable) into the Sea, and so escaped safe to land: which is a
story confirmed by innumerable testimonies.

I am further to advertise thee (gentle Reader) that some stories recorded by
Herodotus, which seem very strange, and which a man would think were written
for the whetstone, are confirmed not only by the testimonies of approved later
writers, but of our modern historians, as I have showed in my Latin Apology.
Of which number that of the women of Thrace may well be reckoned, who contended
when their husband was dead (for one man had many wives) which of them should
die with him for company. For each of them affirmed that they were best
beloved: and thereupon great suite was made by their kinsfolks and friends,
that they might have the honor to accompany him at his death. For she that
was thus graced, was accounted happy, the rest going away with shame enough
all their lives after. Verily this history cannot be sampled nor paralelled by
any example of women in these countries: for even those kind hearts which love
their husbands best, would look strangely upon him that should ask them
whether they could not be contented to lay down their lives for their
husbands* as Alcestis did, (a fact grounded upon better reason then that of the
Thracians.) And I persuade my self they would ask so many three days
respite, and so many terms to answer in one after another, that there would be
no end. But shall we therefore say it is a fiction? For my part, though there
were none but only Herodotus that affirmed it, I would not hold it incredible,
considering what Caesar and other ancient historians write of those which
suffered voluntary death with the Kings of Aquitane. For the King of that
country (says he) had six hundred men with him, whom he entertained in his
Court, permitting them to have a hand in managing the affairs of the State,
upon condition they should bear him company at his death: which (without
further entreaty) they were ready to perform. This history (I say) makes
the other much more credible. But to omit this known example, we find this very
thing which Herodotus reports of these Thracians, recorded by other
historiographers, who (as we know) never took it out of him: and testified
also by others who were eyewitnesses thereof: albeit they report it of the
Indians and not of the Thracians.

I further affirm that our modern historians report some stranger things then
any is to be found in Herodotus, which has purchased him so ill a name; which
notwithstanding go for current from hand to hand, because the authors thereof
are men of credit and account. Those especially which write of barbarous
countries, tell us certain strange stories, far surpassing any in Herodotus.
I mean such strange wonders as are to be seen in the works of nature, and
the actions of men's lives, as well in their manners as dispositions. Whereof we
have examples in those who have written of Muscouy (in ancient time called
Scythia) especially in Sigismundus Liber; who discoursing of strange humors
and dispositions, has one thing amongst the rest which is more then
incredible. And though all men should subscribe unto it, yet I see not how any
woman could be brought to credit it: and yet he speaks nothing but upon good
evidence. It is of a woman borne in a country bordering upon Muscouy, who
though her husband entertained her in the kindest melting manner that might be,
yet persuaded her self he cared not for her. Whereupon he demanding on a time
what reason she had to think so? she answered, because he showed not the true
tokens of his love. He then requesting her to expound her meaning: How (quoth
she) can you say you love me, since since the time we came first together you
did never beat me? He wondering at this so strange a humor and extraordinary
desire, promised to give her her belly full. Which when he had done, both
parties took greater contentment then ever before: for she found her self
well by being beaten, and he by beating of her. For where as it is said, that
the cudgel marres love, the cudgel made love. And thus he kindly entertained
her for a long time. Howbeit in the end he entertained her so exceeding kindly
with blows, that he killed her with kindness, causing love and life to give
their last farewell.

There remain yet other things to be spoken concerning Herodotus; but it shall
suffice that they have bin discussed in my Latin Apology. And here I will take
my leave of thee (gentle Reader) only desiring thee to hold me excused if
happily thou find any thing slubbered up or posted over. For as touching my rude
and unpolished style, and abuse of certain terms, besides that the great
variety of matter might excuse me (the bare contriuing whereof would have
required greater leisure) I hope my profession will plead for me: for it
distracted my mind, and constrained me to divide the same half hour to the
study of the Greek, Latin and French. But I will confess mine ignorance,
that I know not where a man may furnish himself with such a French phrase as
may go for current in all places, seeing the best French words are daily
rejected and cried down by our new mint-masters, who though they think they
use a fine filed phrase, and speak in print after the Court fashion, yet
speak harshly and barbarously in the judgment of the sager and soberer sort
who retain the ancient phrase of speech. True it is (I confess) I have here
coined some new words, howbeit very sparingly, there only where the ancient
failed, and such as any man may perceive I have forged of pleasure, that I
might speak ridiculously of ridiculous things, which notwithstanding through
the simplicity of some silly souls are accounted very serious. And albeit
(gentle Reader) I am not ignorant that it will be thought that I am very
forgetful and much wanting to my self, in that I make no other excuse nor
Apology touching this edition: yet I hope I shall not need to entreat further
hereof by the grace of God, to the which I heartily commend thee.

HENRY STEPHEN to his friend.
WHen I first took pensill in hand to draw the lineaments of this present
Apology, wherein I have shadowed out a world of wonders, I persuaded my self
that such as were acquainted with my daily emploiments (whereof the
weale-publike, I mean such as love and like good literature may reap less
pleasure, but more profit, then by this discourse) would reckon this work for
none of the least wonders. And nothing doubting but that you (Sir) were one of
that number, I was the more willing to ease you of that pain, (pain I say,
seeing admiration is counted a passion by Philosophers) and to satisfy you
touching the inducements which moved me to undertake this present business.
Mark then in what terms it stands. Having set forth Herodotus translated by
Laurentius Valla, and corrected by my self, and prefixed an Apology in
behalf of his history, I had intelligence not long after of one who was
minded to translate it into French: which I did the rather believe, and the
more fear, for that I remembered a like pranke which had been played me about
eight years before. For I had no sooner published a little Pamphlet, but it
met with a tinkerly translator, who Pigmalion-like doted upon his own doings,
thinking he had put out the Popes eye; whereas to my thinking he roued at
randon, and erred the whole heaven; in such sort that I could neither conceive
what I had written, nor yet perceive any footsteps of my wonted style. So that
I may well say with the Italian, that he performed not the office of a
traduttore, but of a traditore, that is, that he played not the part of a
translator, but of a traitor. Which notwithstanding I pardoned in that
namelesse author, not doubting but that in doing amiss he did his best
endeavor. Fearing therefore lest the like inconvenience would befall this mine
Apology, I thought good to take order for it betime. And after a short summons
of my thoughts, I soon perceived that it was my only course to prevent these
turkishers, by being mine own interpreter; as knowing I could not only
understand mine own meaning better then another, but also take that liberty
to my self, which would neither be permitted them, nor yet beseem them.
Notwithstanding all fell out cross and contrary to my expectation. For the
translation which I had begun, disliked me so much, that I gave it over in the
plain field, and in stead thereof (for mine own satisfaction) began to
prosecute this present work, or rather some shadow or semblance thereof. For
certes it was not my purpose to lanch so far into the deep; but going about
to sail by the shore, I straight found that I was floting in the maine. And
then I remembered the Greek proverb, that a man ought to be well advised
before he take ship, but when he has once hoised up the sails, it is too late
to entreat the winds. Notwithstanding I am arrived (God be thanked) at the
last, if not at the wished haven, yet where I rest content. But to leave these
flourishes of Rhetoric, and to speak plain English, whereas my purpose was
not to exceed the particulars handled in the Latin Apology, I fell by little
and little into other discourses, the prosecuting whereof I found to be more
tedious then I had thought, and such as you here see. Howbeit I am in good hope
that this work (once come to perfection) will be both pleasant and profitable;
so as the Reader may not only reap benefit by every particular here recorded,
but further learn to parallele ancient stories with modern, by observing
their conformity and Analogy (if this word sound not too harshly in English
ears;) and consequently to speak with greater reverence and respect of
ancient historians: as also to omit no remarkable thing (which may stand him
in stead when occasion shall serve) without due observation. I say, this work
once come to perfection, because this is but an Introduction or Preparatiue
treatise, as the title purporteth: albeit a man may here take a taste of that
which has been said, which is the cause why I call it A preparatiue Treatise,
or The first book of the Apology. But you may here happily demand the reason
that moved me first to pen the Latin Apology, which was my first Essay? Verily
(to deal plainly with you) the great pleasure which I took in reading the
Greek story, made me not only forget my pains in correcting infinite scapes
in the Latin translation: but further so obliged me unto it by the great
content it gave me, that I could do no less then plead for it in these my
Apologeticall discourses, against the Philippicks and sharp inuectiues of such
severe and rigide censurers as cease not to accuse it of falsehood, forgerie and
fabulositie: and that the great desire I had to testify my good will and
affection toward this author, should banish all fear of mine own
insufficiency to undertake the penning of such an Apology, til some other,
better able to furnish out this argument, should take it in hand. Moreover I
confess (for I can conceal nothing from my friend) that one reason among the
rest which moved me to affect this story (being common to me with all
Frenchmen who are seen in the Greek tongue) was not only the great
affinity the French has with the Greek above any other language (as I have
showed at large in a treatise which I published touching the conformity of
these two languages) but for that there is not a Greek author extant at this
day, nor any to be found in the best Libraries in France or Italy, which
agrees so well with the French phrase, and to the understanding whereof the
knowledge of the French is so necessary and available, as Herodotus is.

Now as I have taken upon me to be Herodotus his advocate: so I am to entreat
you to be mine, in pleading for me, against such supersilious censurers as not
content to lash me for my faults (for I fear me I have given them just cause
in many places) shall strain themselves to go a note above Ela, and to correct
Magnificat, in calumniating that which their consciences tell them cannot be
bettered. And albeit it may be thought that I have stretched every story upon
the tainters, and made mountains of mole-hils, in enlarging each other
narration, thereby to win the greater applause and admiration: yet you (who
know me so well) can witness with me, that I make conscience of enhancing the
meanest history. And verily I was so far from taking this liberty to my
self, that where I found my authors (who are for the most part classique
writers, or historians of note) iarring and at discord, I left all
circumstances doubtful and uncertain, contenting my self with the substance
of the story fully resolved and agreed upon. You may also boldly speak it
upon my word, that if I have brought in any like mummers in a mask, concealing
their names, it was not because I was ignorant of them, but for that I knew it
would be more odious to some, and less profitable to others. How profitable?
(may some say) Verily the examples in the first part of the Apology serve in
stead of crystals, wherein we may see the waiwardnesse and untowardness, the
peevishness and perverseness of our nature, how backward it is to any thing
that is good, and how prone and propense to that which is evil; as also what
we are of our selves when we are destitute of the fear of God, which as a
bridle should curb and keep us in; which point is handled more at large Chap.
11. sect. 4. Again, they serve in stead of aduertisements or warning-peeces,
to admonish us of sundry subtle sleights and deceits, so common and rife in
the world. Those in the second part show how far one age exceeds another in
clownisme and rusticitie: more especially they serve us in stead of so many
mirrours, wherein we may behold the natural blindness of the multitude in the
maine matter concerning their salvation, and consequently in what great need
they stand of divine illumination. True it is indeed, I have there also
blazoned the virtues of our good Catholics of the Popish Clergy, who feed
themselves fat by famishing of others, in debarring them of the food of their
souls, and wickedly profaning that which they bear the world in hand, and
urge upon others as the only true religion. Whose indictment I have so hotly
pursued, and trauersed every point thereof, that (I fear me) I have somewhat
ouershot my self in setting down some of their sweet sayings and doings in
the dark, not worthy to be heard but by their own ears: which, I persuade
my self, not you only, but all that know me, will interpret no otherwise.
Notwithstanding let me entreat you to do the part of a faithful friend, in
informing those with whom you shall converse, of the sincerity of my meaning
herein: lest happily they stretch my words beyond the level of my thoughts, or
make some other construction of my meaning then indeed was meant. And thus Sir,
accordingly I recommend my suite unto you, and my self to your favor,
desiring the Lord you may rest in his.

From our Helicon the sixth of November. 1566.
AN INTRODVCTION TO A TREATISE, TOUCHING THE CONFORMITY OF ANCIENT AND
MODERN WONDERS: OR A Preparatiue Treatise in defense of HERODOTVS. Which may
also be called, The first book of the Apology for Herodotus.
The Preface to the first Part.
AS there are many who do highly esteem of Antiquity, and have it in great
admiration, and are (if I may so speak) so zealously affected toward it, that
the reverence they bear it, is in the nearest degree to superstition: so there
are others (on the contrary) who are so far from giving it that which of due
belongs unto it, that they do not only disgrace it what they can, but even
tread it under foot. Now that these two opinions (be they fancies or humors)
have borne sway among the ancient, shall appear hereafter by pregnant
proofs. But for the better manifestation of the reasons whereon they ground
their opinions, I thought it not impertinent to treat in general of the
virtues and vices of ancient times, searching out the first source and spring
thereof: that so in the sequel of this discourse I may come to examine and try
the truth of the old prouerbiall sentence, which says by way of aequiuocation,
Le monde va tousiours a l'empire, The world grows daily worse and worse. And
so descending (as it were) by steps and degeees, may note and observe the
examples of alterations which have happened in this age or somewhat before, as
an Introduction to the Preparatiue treatise of the Apology for Herodotus.

And first I will begin with the description of the first Age, not as it is
recorded in Canonical Scripture, which cannot lie; but in the Apocryphal
writings of Poets, who cannot speak the truth; being as false, fond and
fabulous, as it is true, certain and infallible. And I begin with Poets the
rather, because most men have ever been addicted to the reading of Poemes,
being thereunto allured by their pleasant fictions, which insinuating
themselves by little and little into their ears, have in process of time so
settled in their minds, that they have taken deep rooting therein. Whereby we
perceive, how men in old time by entertaining of fables, and suffering them to
lodge and harbor in their minds, have been brought to believe many fond
fooleries, which have been conveyed from hand to hand, and delivered by
tradition from father to son. Whereas the Scripture has been locked up (as
it were) in an unknown tongue, as well from these great admirers and scorners
of antiquity, as from those of whom I am about to speak. Nay, many who have
had some smattering knowledge therein, have rejected them as more fabulous then
mere devised fables. For some poetical fictions taken originally from the
sacred fountain of verity (as a true story may be disguised sundry ways)
seem more probable in some men's corrupt judgment then the truth it self, as
shall be exemplified in the Chapter following.

CHAP. I. A description of the first Age of the world, called by Poets
Saturnes, and the golden Age: and how they have depraved it with their foolish
fictions, as they have done other histories in the Bible.
IF we will give any credit to Greek and Latin Poets, we must confess that
the first age (called by them the golden age) was as happy as a man could wish.
For the ground without tilling or manuring plentifully affoorded all
commodities for the life of man; which were common to all, seeing no man knew
what mine and thine meant: and consequently were not acquainted with hatred,
envy and stealth, much less with war; and therefore needed not to bear
arms against any, save only (as some are of opinion) against wild beasts,
which they were not greatly to fear neither, considering their walls were so
high that they could not spring them, and so strong that they could not
demolish them. I say as some are of opinion: for others make no exception at
all, but affirm that wild beasts were then more gentle and tractable then
tame ones are at this day: and that those which are now poisonfull and venomous
(as experience shows) were then nothing dangerous. But to leave this dispute,
and to prosecute my former description touching the particular, wherein all
generally accord; we shall further believe (I say) that as there were then no
laws, so neither was there need of any, seeing no man wished the hurt or
hinderance of his neighbor, neither was solicited thereto by any means.
Besides, they knew not what sickness meant: and as they were of a strong and
sound constitution, so did they abound with all things necessary for the
sustentation of man's life, albeit they knew not of what color gold, silver,
copper, or other metals were. For men were not then so curious to dig the
earth to know what nature had hid in the bowels thereof. Besides, they minded
not the sea, neither took they trial in what sort the winds did toss the
waves; for every man abode at his own home, like the snaile in her shel, or
the Monk in his cell, nothing curious nor careful to know what his next
neighbors did; no more then the old man in Claudian, who though he dwelt
within a quarter of a mile of Verona (or thereabout) yet never went thither in
all his life: nor then the Venetian gentleman, who being almost four score and
ten years old, never desired to go out of Venice until he was confined
therein as in a prison. This (to omit the honey and milken rivers with such like
toys) is the sum of that which Poets have delivered touching the felicity of
that age, and of that plain, honest, and upright dealing which was then in
use, notwithstanding the great plenty and abundance of all things, contrary to
the old Greek proverb, which has been found too true of other ages, A good
land, a bad people.

Now that this Poetical description of the felicity of the first age is true
in general (if we consider the state of man before the fall) we may not deny,
except we will call the Scripture into question: I say in general, not
insisting upon particulars, though Poets like wire-drawers extend it further
then they are warranted by holy writ, which shows how that immediately after
the fall of our first parents man did eat his bread in the swe^te of his
brows, of which Poets also speak, though turkishing the story, or (to speak
more properly) turning it into a mere fable: affirming that the great God
Jupiter created the world of a huge confused mass, which they call Chaos
(wherein the elements were mingled pel-mell) and that Prometheus afterward
formed men of earth tempered with water, in the likeness and similitude of the
Gods. They add moreover, that he stole fire from heaven, and conveyed it down
to the earth; wherea^ this great God was so highly offended (in that men by
this means found out mechanical arts and sciences) that for a punishment he
sent them a young damsel framed by all the Gods, (each of them having bestowed
something upon her, some to perfect her in beauty, others to make her wanton,
subtle, crafty, and full of alluring freights; Vulcan having formerly framed
the body of clay, and after infused the soul into it) and directed her first
to Prometheus, who being wary and wise* would not receive her, mistrusting some
treachery: but his unwise brother Epimetheus willingly accepted of her, and gave
her entertainment. Howbeit he felt the smart of it shortly after, and not he
only, but all his posterity after him. For this Minion forthwith opened a
box, whereout issued all manner of evils, mischiefs and miseries, which have
ever since harbored in the world. Now under these fables and fictions lay the
true story of the creation of our first parents, and of their Apostasy (as it
were) masked and disguised. For by the first man framed by Prometheus, we are
to understand Adam; and by the young damsel called Pandora, Eve, (who being
brought to Adam, was the cause of his fall:) and by the fire which was stolen
from heaven (by means whereof men came to the knowledge of mechanical arts)
the forbidden fruit, whereby they had experimental knowledge of good and
evil.

True it is, all Poets stay not here; but (as it is the custom to amplify and
enlarge men's reports) add that Prometheus fashioning the first man of earth,
infused into him somewhat of the nature of every beast (for all of them were
then created) as namely part of the Lions fury, which he instilled into his
breast. Howbeit poor Prometheus could not escape their sharp censures, for
not having duly considered of all things appertaining to the constitution of a
humane body: as for not making windows in his breast, whereby we might see
what was in his heart; seeing most men's hearts and tongues agree no better then
harp and harrow. Again, whereas some say, that this Pandora was the first
woman that was made: others affirm that Prometheus framed a certain (...)
number of women, immediately after the creation of man, and they blame him more
for this second work then for the first: for he ought (say they) to have
considered sundry things in the framing of this sex, which it seems he did
not; alleging this among the rest, that he gave unto them as large a tongue as
unto men; whereas if they had had but half a tongue, they would have pratled
more then enough. But if Prometheus would make me his Proctour to plead his
cause, me thinks I should not be unprovided of an answer: and though he give
me not my fee, nor request me to speak in his behalf, yet I will answer in a
word, that he knew not that women would prattle more then men; neither could he
imagine how their ton^ues could utter one thing, and their hearts conceive
another. No marvel therefore if he did not prevent the inconveniences which he
did not foresee.

But to return to the arguments which all Poets have handled with one accord,
borowing them from the Scripture, they tell us strange tales of god-gastering
Giants, who heaped mighty mountains one upon another, which might serve them
in stead of ladders to scale the heavens: whereas the Scripture speaks only
of such as would needs build a Tower whose top might reach to heaven: neither
does it call them Giants, though elsewhere it make mention of such. The flood
likewise was a common argument with Poets, who agree with the Scripture in the
cause wherefore it was sent, viz. as a punishment for the sin of man.

Now in speaking of the golden Age, I thought it not amiss to proceed a little
further, to treat of these Poetical fictions, to the end I may show (as
occasion shall serve) that if these narratio^s, being no better then well
qualified fictions (for as they are termed fables, so are they acknowledged to
be no other) have notwithstanding some hidden truth in them, when they are
diligently sought into, and sounded to the bottom: we ought not lightly to
condemn ancient histories, those especially whereunto ancient writers have
subscribed, as not having the least show or semblance of truth. In the mean
time I confess, that as Poets have disguised, yea falsified sundry histories
in the Scripture: so have sundry historiographers likewise done, as namely
Josephus, and Eusebius in his Evangelical preparation. I remember also, that
when I was in Italy I read in one of their Libraries a fragment of Diodorus
Siculus, where he speaks of Moses, turning him like Proteus into every form
and fashion. And what (I beseech you) have some historians written of the
original and religion of the Jews? What have they also spoken of our blessed
Savior? And though I should grant all these to be fictions in historians, yet
they shall pardon me (if they please) if I do not grant that a man transported
with a preiudicate opinion may condemn any history upon his mere (and it may
be foolish) fancy. For as there is no reason that the good should suffer for
the bad: so neither that true stories should bear part of the punishment due
to the false. Thus then I return to the golden Age.

CHAP. II. Another description of the first Age of the world (called by Poets
Saturnes, and the golden Age) as it is recorded in Scripture, after the fall of
our first parents. And in what sense those two Epithets may be given to the Age
wherein we live.
POets (as I have showed a little before) confine not the felicity of the
first age of the world (described in the former Chapter) in so straight and
narrow bounds as the Scripture does, but give it a far longer time and term
of years. For the murder committed by Cain, is much more ancient then that
committed by Romulus, or any mentioned in profane story. Notwithstanding if we
make the Scripture Judge and Vmpire of this controversy (as Christians ought)
we must needs confess that simple and plain dealing continued long after the
fall of our first parents, in as great and ample measure, if not in greater
then ever it did since; and that men were not so loose and licentious, so
woluish and malicious in the golden Age, as in the ages following: in harmless
innocence and simplicity, resembling the russet-coates of the country, in
comparison of subtle citizens. So that the murder committed by Cain, may
seem as strange (considering the time) as a murder committed at this day by a
country Coridon, in comparison of one committed by a citizen or Courtier. But
howsoever the mystery of that secret stand, certain it is that such dissolute
demeanor and looseness of life, such riot and excess, such swearing and
swaggering, was never heard of in the prime and infancy of the world as
afterward toward the middle Age, and as now in the decrepit Age thereof; in
the decrepite Age (I say) if we may believe our eyes, or judge by the course
and carriage of things, or credit such as are better able to judge of such
questions then our selves. Nevertheless (under correction of better judgment)
I am of opinion that it fares with the universe or great world, as with man
the little world; in that The older it waxes, the more it doteth. For he that
shall seriously consider the guise of the world at this day, cannot but say
that it doteth extremely, and that it resembles the age of our good grandsire,
gray-bearded Saturn, whose old and ancient name it may justly challenge to it
self: though on the other side, it may well be called the golden Age, in the
sense that Ovid applied it to his own, when he says, Aurea nunc vere sunt
saecula: plurimus auro
Venit honos: auro conciliatur amor.
That is, Golden is our latest worlds age most justly reported:
Gold alone our love buys: gold only purchases honor.


CHAP. III. How some have ascribed too much to Antiquity, and others derogated
too much from it.
LEt us now consider, whether by our former description of the first Age, it
may appear whereon these great admirers and contemners of antiquity rest and
rely themselves. And let us in the first place examine the reasons which they
allege for confirmation of their opinions. First then we are to observe, that
the ouer-great reverence which some have borne to antiquity, is sufficiently
testified by certain Latin phrases, as when we say, Nihil antiquius habui
(that is, word for word, I esteemed nothing more ancient) in stead of this,
There was nothing in the world so near or dear unto me; or, I had greater
care of it then of any thing in the world besides. And, Nihil mihi est
antiquius illa re, that is, I account nothing more dear, I hold nothing more
precious. So Plautus, when he would commend a young man to be well qualified,
says he was endued antiquis moribus. Again, the Latins call that prisca fides
which the French call La bonne foy, that is, plain meaning, simple and honest
dealing. And Cicero seems to call those men antiquos, who used old and ancient
simplicity, and were (as a man would say) plain Dunstable. But the question
is, what ground they have for their opinion, who by such phrases do so highly
honor and magnify antiquity? To which I answer, that they who call good
manners antiquos mores, and plain dealing priscam fidem, allude (no doubt) to
the golden Age, and the plain simple dealing used in those days, as we have
described it in the second chapter. Whereas it is certain that they which used
this phrase, Nihil antiquius habui, I esteemed nothing more ancient, in stead
of, I had nothing in greater account, etc. had an eye to a further matter. Some
say they respected the honor which was given to aged persons, which seems to
be more probable in that the Greek word (...) is all one with the Latin, both
for sound and signification: for it is applied to old men, whereas the Latin
word antiquus is never used in that sense. Wherefore (under correction) I am of
opinion that it is a phrase borrowed from the great account and estimation which
was had of antique works in former time, especially of painters and caruers.
For when they spoke of a picture or ancient statue, they meant a rare and
exquisite piece of work, which was much set by, and of great price: which they
understood not only of the pictures of Apelles and Zeuxis, or of the statues
of Scopas, Myron, Praxiteles, and like cunning artisans of those times (whose
works were then in far greater request then those of Durer, Raphael, and
Michael Angelo are at this day) but of sundry other workmen of meaner note and
later times. About which toys some have been exceeding curious. For Horace
reports that one Damasippus was so carried away with curiosity in this kind,
that it bereft him of his wits. And I leave it to thy consideration (gentle
Reader) what the Poet (if he were now living) would say of these buyers,
engrossers, and inhancers of Antikes, with whom the world is so pestered at
this day, and at whose cost so many cheaters make such good cheer; who (poor
souls) are so far from discerning between antique and modern, that they
scarce understand the meaning of the word^, (which, such as it is, was lately
brought hither into France by some fidling Italian) and this it is which makes
them put their hand so often to their purses, and pay for the pins. And verily
the Sauoyard did featly and finely, who going about to catch a sottish
Antiquary, foolishly fond of such toys, after that the fantastic had courted
him a long time, in the end for a goodly ancient monument showed him his wife
who was four score years of age. But to return to the argument in hand. Many
men in times past were strangely possessed and besotted with this humorous and
itching desire of antiquity in matters of Poems and Poetry: a fault complained
of in the second book of the Greek Epigrams, but much more by Horace, when he
says, Si meliora dies, vt vina, Poemata reddit,
Scire velim pretium chartis quotus arroget annus.
Scriptor ab hinc annos centum qui decidit, inter
Perfectos, veteresque referri debet, an inter
Viles atque nouos?
That is, If Poems wont as wine receive their praise
From longer days: feign would I know what year
Our writings mote in dear? If he that wrate
About the date of hundred years agone,
Be deemed one of writers ripe and sage,
Or of the modern age?
He further alleges sundry other arguments to this purpose, Lib. 2. Epist. 1.
Well, be it so (may some say) that this phrase, Ie n'ay rien eu plus antique,
that is, I esteemed nothing more ancient, had his original from the great
opinion which was had of antiques, whether building or pictures; but why were
they had in so great account? To which (omitting Poets) I answer, that for as
much as they had such exquisite and perfect workmen in old time, it seems they
were of opinion, that the nearer their successors followed them, the more they
retained of their perfection. Another argument of our auncesters faithful and
plain dealing, in doing the works they took in hand more substantially then
workmen are wont to do at this day, may be taken from the old and ancient
manner of building, which seems to be of iron or of steel in respect of ours.
I mean such buildings as were wroght with ciment. It will here (I know) be
answered, that cyment is not now in use. And I answer again, that the small
care which men have had to work soundly and substantially, never respecting
how slight and slender their buildings be, has marred all. Howbeit if any man
shall think this reason weak or insufficient, he may hold him to the former;
which notwithstanding I durst not allege of Poems, since it holds not true in
general, but only in particular. For though it may be truly said, that Homers
great fame made other ancient Greek Poets generally better thought of, by
reason that this opinion possessed most men's minds, that the nearer they were
unto him in time, the perfecter they were in Poetry. Yet the same cannot be
said of the Latin Poets. For it cannot be denied but that Virgil excelled all
the Epickes: that Tibullus and Ovid won the garland from all the Elegiacks:
that Horace was the chief of choice among the Lyricks. And (if I may be so
bold as to interpose an example of the Poets of our time) would it not be
injurious (trow we) to our modern French Poets de la pleiade, if their
ancestors should be preferred before them? Verily I am of opinion, that he that
should prefer them before them, should do them as great wrong as they do sundry
other Poets (their equals at least in time) in pearking before them, only
because their Muse is too maidenly, as being nothing so wanton and lascivious
as theirs, but resembling rather that of Ioachim du Bellay. But be this spoken
as it were under Benedicite, and by way of parenthesis, and let this be the
conclusion, that the reason formerly alleged, why ancient workmanship was so
highly esteemed, and in such request, is not generally true of Poems and
Poetry: the reasons whereof I should here set down, but that my occasions will
not permit me to trifle away the time with such toys; I will therefore leave
it to those that have more spare time and idle hours then my self.

Now as we begun to speak of the extollers of Antiquity by the Latin phrase,
so will we begin with the contemners of it by the Greek: for as there are
certain Latin phrases which give testimony of the reverent opinion men were
wont to have of Antiquity; so are there Greek words which show the contempt
and disgrace wherein it was. For the professors of the Greek tongue cannot, at
leastwise ought not to be ignorant, that by (...) and (...) (which in proper
terms is as much as old and ancient) is meant a simple soul, or a nouice who
is but newly crept (as it were) out of the shell. The reason of this their
opinion is very apparent and plain: for they called those (...) (that is
ancients) which were very simple, sottish, gross and blockish, as being
persuaded that men in old time (especially in the golden Age) were but simple
swains in comparison of those that came after. Thus then we see how Antiquity
has been admired by some, and contemned by others, for diverse reasons, as
hereafter shall be declared more at large.

But here it shall not be amiss (for the winding up of this Chapter) to
examine a few ordinary French phrases appertaining to this argument. First then
when we speak of antique works (that is, of works made after the old fashion)
we do it for the most part in scorn and contempt, contrary to the Latins, as
if we should say Fait lourdement, rudely done; and (as our critical coiners of
new French words speak at this day) goffement, grossly or absurdly; the common
people at Paris say grosso modo. Contrarily, we honor Antiquity much, in
calling it Le bon temps, the good time. For when we say, those that were du bon
temps saw not the vanities which we see; we mean the men of old time. The like
honor we give to aged persons, when we call an old man Bon homme, and an old
woman Bonne femme; for a man shall hear them now and then (when they are
called Bons hommes, bonnes femmes) reply and say (alluding to this second
acception of the word) that they go not yet with a staff. I observed before,
that that which the Latins call Prisca fides, we Frenchmen call La bonne foy.
To which let me add, that the Grecians signify the same by (...), which
properly signifies a man of good behavior, and (...), that is, ancient. For by
both these words they are wont to express and signify a simple soul. And the
Greek word (...) agrees very fitly with our French phrase, Qui va a la bonne
foy, or Qui va trop a la bonne foy, that is, one that is plain Dunstable, who
has neither welt nor guard, but is as plain as a pack-staffe, without fraud,
couen or deceit. Whereof we have examples in Coridons of the country, in whom
we may see the simplicity of ancient times in some sort shadowed out unto us.
Albeit a man might find (if need were) enough such swains even in your chiefest
cities. Witness the Ambassador sent to the Pope by a German Prince, who
taking his leave of his Holiness speaking unto him in Latin, and saying, Tell
our beloved son, etc. was in such a chafe, that he had almost given him the
lie, telling him that his Master was no Priests son, meaning that he was not
a bastard. He likewise was plain simplicity, who being sent with a letter to
the Queen of Navarre, and commanded to kiss it before he delivered it.
Because his Lord told him in words of doubtful construction, Carry this letter
to her Highness, and before you present her with it, Kiss her, or, kiss it.
Baisez-la; (which may be understood either of the Queen or of the letter.) He
was no sooner come into the presence, but he went to the Queen and kissed her
(not doubting but that he had courted it bravely) and having so done, delivered
her the letter without further complement. We say also Aller a la bonne foy,
when a man speaks any thing in simplicity, which would be harsh or hardly
taken being spoken by another: as when a gentle Gillian told king Francis the
first, that when she saw him in such a suit, she thought she saw one of the
nine lepreux (that is, lepers) as they are usually painted; whereas she would
have said, One of the nine Preux, that is, worthies. To these I may add the
example of the silly Sauoyard, who taking the sentence of condemnation which
passed upon him (whereby he was adjudged to be hanged) very unkindly, said,
Hela messiau, ie vo priou per la pareille, fade me pletou copa la test, that
is, O good sirs, I beseech you, if you will have me requite it, let me be
beheaded. For in saying, if you will have me requite it, he meant simply. It
were easy to allege sundry other examples of like simplicity. But we are to
consider, that though a sot and a swain be very near of kin, even
cosingermans at the least, yet we must distinguish them, especially if we will
follow the Grecians, who call the one (...), and the other (...). For though
every sot be a simple soul, yet every simple fellow deserves not the name of a
sot. For example, inciuilitie and rusticitie is not sottishness, except it be
accompanied with lurden-like loutishnesse: although it come far short of
hers, who being chid by her mother because she did not thank her affianced
lover when he drank to her; she telling her roundly of her fault, and saying,
Can thou not say the next time that he drinks to thee, I pledge you, you
great fool? Thinking surely she had learned her lesson better, forgot not the
next time he drank to her, to say, I pledge you, you great fool. He also
meant not only simply, but played the fool in grain, who ate the Physicians
prescript, (I mean the paper wherein it was written) because he had bidden him
take it. And I doubt not but the Reader will give me good leave to enrole a
certain Switzar in this register (for I hope I shall do his worship no wrong)
who with great importunity asked requital and satisfaction for the French
pockes which he had gotten in the Kings service. And if I durst be so bold as
to speak of the Scots (who are all cosins to their King, as they say) I would
here bring in a F. of this fraternity, who having heard none in his own good
country but gentlemen of the better sort speak French, wondered not a little to
hear the poor people in France beg their alms in French, and little children
speak it so readily. But lest any man should say that I spare mine own
countri-men, and spend my spirits upon others, I will here bring the silly
Limosin upon the stage, who having seen a Spaniel gentle sold at Lions for
four French crowns, highed him straight home again, for certain great
mastiues which he had left behind him, casting with himself what a dog of such
a bigness would afford, if such a little puppet were sold at so high a rate.
But a man had need to put on his considering cap, if he would find fit terms
to express such fooleries. For we daily hear of sundry accidents, which at
the first a man would think were sottish, whereas they are rather to be counted
foolish, as being in a higher degree. For though every fool be a sot, yet
every sot is not a fool: which I might exemplify in the Bishop (who was not
only a sot but also a fool;) who after he had trounced his Chanons in a
tedious and troublesome suite, and tossed them from post to pillar, took order
by his will that his tomb should not lie along, but stand upright in the
Church, fearing lest after his death they should piss on his head in way of
revenge. As foolish was he, who put out the candle that the fleas might not see
him, and so might not bite him. He likewise deserved this name (what
countryman soever he was) who burning his shins before a great fire, had not
the wit to go back, but sent for masons to remove the chimney. Who also having
seen some spit upon iron to try whether it were hot, spit in his pottage to
know whether they were hot or not. The same sot being hit on the back with a
stone as he rode upon his mule, blamed the poor beast for kicking of him. It
were easy to allege sundry like examples of such silly sots (they being mo
then a good many, and in such plenty that they are not dainty.) But these
shall suffice to exemplify the former distinction, which has been and ought
to be made between a sot and a simple swain: which I was enforced, to make
easy passage for that which follows, the better to prosecute my intended
discourse. Howbeit there are certain particulars which will puzzle a man
shrewdly to tell to which of these three heads (or common places) they ought to
be referred, those especially which seem equally to participate of
sottishness and simplicity (I always take simplicity in the sense that we
use it when we say, He means simply.) Wherefore leaving it to the Readers
judgment, I will only add this one thing, that it is held in France a greater
indignity to be called sot then fool, notwithstanding my former discourse.
The reason is, because that when we call a man a sot, we do it for the most
part in earnest: whereas when we call him fool, we do it ironically and in
jest; and therefore it is not taken in so ill part.

And now that I am speaking of the French phrase, let me add one thing
further, which I shall desire the Reader to consider, viz. that (if my memory
fail me not) we cannot call a man fool in French, but by the word fol;
whereas we have sundry synonimes for a sot. For Niais (in old French Nice) that
is a nouice; Fat, that is, a fool; Badaut (called in sundry places Badlori) a
cockneigh; Nigaud, a noddie; Badin, a boobie; and such like, are all sworn
brethren (at least cosingermans) to a sot. We also use proper names in the same
sense, as when we say C'est un Benest, He is a simple cockscomb (for in this
phrase it is pronounced Benest, and not as it is commonly Benoist.) Ioannes is
used somewhat otherwise; for when we say, C'est un Ioannes, it is as much as if
we should say, He is a Pedant, or a quaint Quanqua^ for Epistles. And when we
say, Un bon Iannin (the vulgar sort says Genin) we understand a wittald, who
takes it patiently when his wife makes him a horned beast. We further use the
word Grue, that is, Crane, to signify a sot: for C'est un grue, is as much as
Ce'st un sot, C'est un niais; He is a simple sot, or a noddie. True it is, that
a merry companion being sued for an action of trespass, and brought into the
Court for calling one Bell oiseau, that is, fair bird, and then telling a tale
of a Crane, was not so mad as to expound his meaning* but left it to the
discretion of the Judges. For the plaintiff accusing him for calling (...) Bell
oiseau, said that he had called him cuckold by craft, in calling him gosling.
My Lords (quoth the defendant) I confess indeed I called him Bell oiseau, that
is, fair bird, but I deny that I meant a gosling, neither is it probable I
should so mean, seeing there are (as himself confesses) many birds fairer
then a Gosling, were it but a Crane. Whereupon the Judges (hearing him fetch
over his adversary so finely, and nettle him worse then before, the simple
noddie never perceiving it) brake forth into such a fit of laughter, that they
were glad to rise from the bench, not knowing whether of them had won the day.
And thus much of a Sot. If any shall here object, that we call a man fool in
French, and yet never use the word, and therefore that fol has his fellow, as
well as sot his synonime; I answer that it follows not; for my meaning was not
that it could not be expressed by a periphrasis or circu^locution, but that it
could not be expressed in one word; for I grant indeed, that when we would delay
the harshnes of this phrase, Il tient du fol, He is but a fool, we say, Il a
le cerueau gaillard, He is light headed, or, Il a le cerueau un peu gaillard,
He is somewhat giddie headed: whereas others say, Il n'a pas le cerueaubien
fait, He is somewhat brainsick; or Il n'a pas la test bien faite, He has a
cracked cranny; or, Il y a de la Lune, He is lunatik; or, Il y a de l'heumeur,
he is humorous. The word Innocent, as when we say, C'est un pour innocent, He
is a poor innocent, imports not so much: and Transporte, incense, bestraught
of his wits, mad, and such like, imply more, as coming nearer to the
signification of fury. Now the reason hereof, viz. why we should have such
variety of words to express a sot, and but one (if we speak properly) to
express a fool, I leave to be discussed by others, (except this perhaps be
the reason, that there are mo sots then fools:) and will here add one thing
more touching those phrases of which we spoke in the first place, viz. that (if
I have rightly observed) we use the word Mouto^, that is sheep, tropically,
not so much to signify a sot, as a simple ^oule, who suffers himself to be led
by the nose, as we say. Which is common to us with the Grecians, as with Lucian
among the rest, save that he uses the word drawing and not leading. He has
also another proverb to the same effect, the meaning whereof is, as if one should
say, He follows him as a sheep does a green bough: which may serve to confirm
the use of this metaphor in our tongue. Howbeit we have no need of Lucians
authority in this case, seeing Aeschylus (one of the ancientest Greek Poets)
uses it in the same sense.

But to omit the phrases formerly spoken of (which are so many pregnant proofs
of the contempt of Antiquity) we will in the sequel of this discourse allege
others when we come to speak of those Poets who (contrary to the current and
common received opinion) thought it a far happier thing for them that they
lived in their own age, then if they had lived in any other. And verily my
purpose was here to have spoken of them at large, and to have added them as a
supplement to this Chapter, but that I perceive I have already passed my
bounds. Howbeit I have an excuse at hand, viz. that he which has any dealing
with fools can never have done.

CHAP. IIII. How and wherefore certain Poets so earnestly desired the golden
Age.
WHen Poets (whose writings serve us in stead of mirrours, wherein we may
behold men's turbulent passions) compared the fashions and customs of their own
age with those of the golden Age, they could not but wish that it had bin their
hap they had bin borne and lived in those days. We have an example hereof in
Tibullus, who having recounted the happiness of those times (which, to omit
other particulars, were not harried nor rent in sunder with wars and
garboiles*) breaks out into this patheticall wish: Tunc mihi vita foret, vulgi
nec tristia nossem
Arma, nec audissem, cord micante, tubam.
That is, Lived I again, I never more would wear
No deadly arms, nor never more would hear
The trumpets warlike sound.
Neither are we to wonder at this his wish, seeing that Hesiod (who lived many
hundred years before) sigheth and says: (...)
(...).
That is, Would I might live in this lewd Age no more,
But or had since been borne, or did before.
But he greatly deceived himself (good man) in thinking he should not have bin
so unfortunate if he had lived in the Age following. For this is no new saying,
which is commonly spoken by way of aequiuocation, Le monde va tousiours a
l'empire: The world grows daily worse and worse: witness Aratus another
Greek Poet, who in the Poem out of which Saint Paul took an hemestichion,
has these words: (...)
(...).
That is, Our golden Sires left as their last bequest,
An age some deal impaired from the best:
And you shall framen for your future heirs,
A worse then theirs.
In imitation whereof Horace says, Aetas parentum peior auis, tulit
Nos nequiores, mox daturos
Progeniem vitiosiorem.
That is, Our parents age, worse then our ancestors,
Has borne us worse then they, and we shall breed
A far more vicious seed.
But how comes it to pass (may some say) that our parents should be more
vicious then their fathers and grandfathers, and they likewise then their
forefathers, and that we (in like sort) should exceed not only them, but all
our ancestors, and our children us? The reason hereof (me thinks) is evident.
For as he which is sole heir to many rich men, having besides the inheritance
left him by his father, much more wealth accrewing unto him otherwise, must
needs be richer then they whose heir he is: In like manner, it cannot be, but
that they who are left heirs de Ass of all their ancestors vices, and by
their good husbandry improve the old, and daily purchase new, should in the end
be more vicious then they whose heirs and successors they are. Seeing then it
is plain and apparent by undoubted stories, that even those sins among the
rest, against which God has thundered out such fearful curses in his law, have
been so rife in the world since the golden Age, and ever since running upon the
score; can we wonder to see them now innumerable? When I say from the first
age, I speak according to the Scripture, which confineth man's happy estate in
far less compass then profane writers are wont to do, namely, during that
short time that our first parents continued in the estate of Innocence. And
some among them confine it in far shorter bounds and limits then others; as
Iuuenal by name, when he says, Antiquum and vetus est alienum Posthume lectuns
Concutere, atque sacri genium contemnere fulcri.
Omne aliud crimen mox ferrea protulit aetas,
Viderunt primos argentea saecula moechos.
That is, Of ancient standing is that pleasing sin,
By wanton stealth of warming others bed:
Each other crime the iron Age did gin,
The silver world it self some letch^^s bred.
But who would ever believe that Adultery should have been so common in the
silver Age, and other vices not once known nor heard of til the iron Age?
Verily though the Scripture were silent in this particular, and did not affirm
the contrary in the story of Cains murder, yet I see not how any man should
give entertainment to this conceit. His meaning therefore (I take it) was to
show, that whoredom and adultery were the vices whereunto men in all Ages were
most addicted. And how should the heathen and profane Pagans make conscience
of such sins, when as Christians (eue^ those that are otherwise unspotted of
the world) account them but works of nature, and tricks of youth.

Howsoever the case stand, certain it is, that the first Age was not wished
for without cause. For whatsoever corruption was in those days, it was but
small (in all probability) in comparison of that of later times, which like
bad weed has ever grown with speed. True it is, that as we (considering the
corruption of these times, and the wickedness of man's nature) can hardly
believe it should be greater: so did our ancestors judge of the corruptions of
their own. Iuuenal speaking of his own Age, says that it did so degenerate,
and was so debased from the purity of the golden Age, that it deserved no
longer to be called by the name of any metal; thereby signifying that he
should grace it much that should call it the iron Age, considering it did so
far outstrip it in all excess of riot. And Ovid speaking of the
unconscionable covetousness of the men of his time, says, he could not
imagine how it should be greater. But if Ovid were deceived, in thinking that
the wickedness of his time was then in the ruff, much more was Hesiod, who
lived so many Ages before. But sin and impiety did then so abound, and like
a great deluge did so master the banks and ouerflow all, that he thought it a
thousand times better to have lived either before or after the first Age,
persuading himself that it was so unlikely there should come a worse, that he
thought it not possible that any should match it. And therefore as we may not
think that the golden Age was without all corruption (albeit Poets extol it
to the skies, and sing forth a thousand praises in commendation thereof:) so
neither are we to doubt but that the Ages ensuing retained some seeds and
sparks (as it were) of the first, notwithstanding the clamorous complaints
they make against (...). For that which Iuuenal says in commendation of the
golden Age, viz. that they accounted it a capital crime if a young man (were he
never so rich) had not risen from his seat, and done reverence to an old man,
though never so poor, was practiced long after by the Lacedaemonians, who
punished such an offense, either with death, or with some grievous punishment.
And what great reverence the ancient Romans bare to old age, we may read in
Valerius Maximus.

CHAP. V. How that whatsoever Poets have written of the wickedness of their
times, might have been affirmed of the Age last past.
ALbeit it be a usual thing with Poets, so to amplify the matter they
entreat of, as that they make mountains of mole-hils, and therefore their
testimony may well be suspected, notwithstanding I dare be bold to say, that
they have written nothing of the lewdness of their times which can justly be
challenged, especially if we compare it with the practice at this day. And
surely if Poets ought not to be suspected, much less Historiographers, who
take not so great liberty to themselves, notwithstanding they make relation of
such detestable facts as seem past all belief: Thucydides by name, who
discoursed at large of the plague which swept away an infinite number of people
at Athens; in whom we find the raging and furious lusts of some (miscreants
rather then men) to have been such and so great, that they took occasion by
that so terrible a scourge, to practice their villainies. If there be any that
cannot subscribe to this his report, let him but inquire what was done in the
year 1564. the plague being at Lions (a Christian city, not heathenish as
Athens was) especially by the soldiers of the citadell, and he will no doubt,
not only believe them to be most true, but will further judge them excusable
and tolerable in comparison. To be short, to what outrage (may we think)
would not they let loose the reins of their headstrong affections, who made
it an ordinary thing (...) defloure maids, and to force matrons even then when
they were infected with the noisome and contagious disease of the plague and
pestilence, and now ready to give up the ghost? What language is there under
the cope of heaven (I except not the Greek it self, the most flowing and
copious of all that are or have been) that can afford us a word sufficiently
emphaticall to express so brutish, so desperate and furious a fact.
Questionless if the Turks had heard of such villainy they would have abhorred
it as hell it self: and not so only, but would have doubled and trebled the
hatred they bear us for our religion.

But it shall not be impertinent before we proceed to a further and more ample
discourse of the guise and fashion of this Age, to enquire how euenly our
ancestors (which lived some three or fourscore years ago) carried themselves
(where I confine this word Age within somewhat straighter bounds then others
commonly do) considering the world waxes daily worse and worse. ^o whom then
may we have recourse to make inquiry hereof? Verily to the Preachers which
lived in those days, and amongst others, for France, to Friar Oliver Maillard,
and Friar Michael Menot: for Italy, to Friar Michael Barelete (alias de
Bareleta:) who though they have infinitely corrupted Christian Religion with
their doting dreams and foolish fancies, and with sundry wicked speeches,
proceeding partly from blockish ignorance, partly from mere malice;
notwithstanding they quit themselves like valiant champions, in encountering the
vices which reigned in those times, as shall appear in the sequel of this
discourse. I will then (as occasion shall be offered) begin each several
argument with Oliver Maillard (as being Menots ancient) and after I will come
to Barelete, one of another country. And first (because it suteth so well with
that which has been said) I will show how all of them in general, and every
of them in particular, find the wickedness of their times so intolerable and
superlatiue, that they judge it infinitely to surpass the lewdness of all
former Ages. Mark then the words of Oliver Maillard, fol. 96. col. 3. Audeo
tamen asserere quod multi sunt peiores in quarto anno nunc, quam alias in
septimo: and nunc in septimo, quam alias in aetate perfecta. And a little
before, viz. fol. 81. col. 2. Et quum nunquam fuerint maiores luxuriae,
iniustitiae and rapinae, qua^ nunc, ideo, etc. Likewise fol. 217. O Deus meus,
credo quod ab incarnatione Domini nostri Jesus Christi, non regnauerunt tot
luxuriosi in toto mundo, sicut nunc Parhisius. Menot (who lived certain years
after) says as much in these words: Legatis historias, and non inuenietis quod
mundus fuerit ita deprauatus, sicut nunc est. To which (besides the former
sentences already alleged out of Maillard, iumping with it in sense and
meaning) he has one which suits it both in sense and words. In another place
he twits his auditors not so much for their non-proficiencie in that they did
not amend, as for their deficiency, in that they waxed daily worse and worse.
Let us now come to Barelete. Nunquam (says he fol. 261. col. 1.) mundus fuit
tam malus vt nunc, neque tam separatus a Dei amore and proximi, vt nunc est.
Thus we see how all three (though living in several countries) iumpe and
accord in one, in taking up the same complaint against the wickedness of their
times, as far surpassing all the outrages and enormities of former ages. Let
us in the next place consider how they vpbraide Christians with the same vice,
affirming that Turks and other Infidels lead not so loose a life by many
degrees. Maillard having reported how at Tours in the reign of King Lewis the
eight, the Jews reproved Christians for saying that Christ died for them, and
yet blasphemed and cursed him, has these words: Audeo dicere quod plures
insolentiae fiunt in Ecclesia Christianorum quam Iudaeorum. And fol. 147. col.
2. he says he had conuersed with (...) Moors, and found them far honester
men then the Christians then living in France. Friar Michael Menot says no
less: Sunt Iudaei in Auinione, and sunt Pagani in patria sua: sed firmiter
credo, quod secluso lumine fidei perfectius, moraliusque viuunt quam hodie
plures Christiani, nec tantae miseriae fiunt inter eos sicut inter nos. Nescio
de quo vobis seruiat nomen Christianitatis, and fides Christi, quam recepistis
in Baptismo. Let us now hear what Barelete tells his Italians, fol. 24. col.
1. Non est plus erubescentia tenere public concubinas, accipere sacramenta
falsa, and omnia illicita perpetrare: A Saracenis, ab Agarenis, ab Arabis, ab
Idumaeis, a Mahometanis, a Barbaris, a Iudaeis, ab infidelibus, o false
Christian haec accepisti.

CHAP. VI. How the former Age has been reproved by the aforesaid Preachers for
all sorts of vices.
LEt us now consider how the aforesaid Preachers declaiming thus in general
against the wickedness of their times, do in particular also reprove and
censure men for all sorts of vices. And that I may proceed in order, I will
begin with that which (as Iuuenal would make us believe) is of all other vices
the most ancient, and so much the more ancient, by how much the silver Age is
more ancient then the iron Age. What is this vice, may some say? Surely
whoredom, otherwise called carnalitie, sensuality or lechery. (For that which
Iuuenal says of adultery, ought rather to be understood of simple
fornication.) But for brevity sake I will allege their own words (where they
reprove whoredom in general, calling it Luxuriam;) yet so, as I will not make
a medley or mixture of Church-mens lubricitie with laymens lechery, which
method I will also observe in discoursing of their other virtues, lest it should
be said that I did confound the spirituality with the temporaltie, or that I
did miscere sacra profanis, mix sacred things with profane, (as it is in the
Latin proverb.) I am therefore to entreat our holy mother the Church to have
patience a while, till I have got our three good Latinists dispatch the
temporaltitie: and then I will do her this honor, to place her apart by her
self.

Let us then hear Oliver Maillard, who (to omit other particulars concerning
this sweet sin) is much offended with gentle-women for making their husbands
wear the horns. fol. 81. col. 2. Et vos domicellae quae habetis tunicas
apertas, numquid mariti vestri sunt cornuti, and ducunt vos ad banqueta? And
thereupon says, that the King of England consulting on a time with his
Council, whether he should wage war against the French or not, it was
concluded he should, because the English were appointed by God, to be as it
were his scourge, wherewith he would punish the sins of the French. Whereupon
he adds, Et cum nunquam fuerint maiores luxuriae, iniustitiae, and rapinae,
quam nunc: ideo decretum fuit vt venirent. We have already heard how he says
in his brave Latin: O good God, I am fully persuaded that there was never such
riot in the world since the incarnation of Christ, as there is now at Paris.
Further, he complains ( fol. 136. col. 4.) of the Parisians, which let their
houses to panders, whores, and bawds. And that whereas good King S. Lewis
caused a brothel-house to be built without the city, there were then stews in
every corner. And in the page following directing his speech to Lawyers, Ego
non habeo nisi linguam: ego facio appellationem, nisi deposueritis ribaldas and
meretrices a locis secretis; habetis lupanar fere in omnibus locis ciuitatis.
Likewise fol. 84. col. 4. where are the statutes of holy King Lewis? He
commanded that stews should be removed far from Colleges: but now the
first place that scholars run unto when they step out of a College, is a
bawdy house. Again, the foresaid King Lewis would have swept all whores clean
out of ^his Realm, (...) (to avoid a greater inconvenience) he was counseled
to let them make their abode in the suburbs, or in some remote place without
the city. And he shows elsewhere, that himself was iumpe of the same
opinion. So that he, who as a preacher of the word ought to have reformed
others, had need himself to be reformed, as hereafter shall be declared more
at large. But to proceed on in my discourse, this jolly preacher complains,
that bawdes made their bargains with strumpets in the very Church, and
thereupon he calls them sacrilegious persons. Moreover, he maruelleth (which
is a ridiculous conceit, albeit he spoke it in great simplicity) that the
Saints there interred did not rise again and pluck out their eyes. Neither
does he spare those mothers that are bawds to their own daughters: as fol. 24.
Suntne hic matres illae maquerellae siliarum suaru^, quae dederunt eas
hominibus de curia, ad lucrandum matrimoniu^ suum? And fol. 35. col. 4. after
he has said, Where are you my masters, ye Justices of Peace and Quorum? Why do
you not punish the whore-mongers, bawds, and ruffians of this city? and showed
how they let such thieves as these go Scot-free, whereas they severely punished
common felons: he comes to speak of bawdie bargaining, (a fact far more
detestable then the former) viz. how they made their daughters get their
dowries with the sweat of their bodies: and faciunt eis (says he) lucrari
matrimonium suum ad poenam and sudorem corporis sui. And fol. 125. col. 2. Were
it so hard a matter (think you) to find some in this town who in their younger
years were arrant whores, and now being old crones are become common bawds? I
charge you with it you Magistrates, for leaving such persons unpunished. If a
man steal but twelve pence, he shall surely be punished for the first offense:
and if he steal the second time, he shall leave his ears on the pillorie, or
otherwise be punished with the loss of limb (for he says, esset mutilatus in
corpore:) if the third time, he shall regaine the loss of his ears by
stretching of his neck. Now tell me ye Justices of Oyer and Terminer, whether
it be worse to steal a hundred crowns, or to sell a maids virginity?

But let us hear what Menot says ( fol. 15. col. 3. of the second impression,
which I follow) Nunc aetas iuuenum ita dedita est luxuriae, quod non est nec
pratu^, nec vinea, nec domus, quae non sordibus little inficiatur. Likewise fol.
148. col. 1. Nunc aqua luxuriae transit per monasteria, and habetis vsque ad
os, loquendo de ea. And a little after: In suburbijs, and per totam villam non
videtur alia mercatura, other ware. In cameris exercentur luxuriae, in senibus,
iuuenibus, viduis, vxoratis, filiabus, ancillis, in tabernis, and consequenter
in omni statu. True it is indeed, he is somewhat troubled in assoyling a
question which he propounds in the behalf of young married men, who by reason
of their affairs and business abroad, are often enforced to go from home.
Fol. 139. col. 4. Cognoscitis quod non possumus, etc. You know we cannot
always have our wives tied at our girdles, nor carry them in our pockets: in
the mean time our young gallants cannot live without borrowing of their
neighbors. Let a man come into Tauernes, Innes, hot-houses, and such like
places, and he shall find wenches for the purpose, common as the high way, that
will serve his turn for a small price. I demand whether it be not lawful for
a man to use them as his wife? Lo here a question which he propounds in the
person of certain good fellows: whence we may gather, what small conscience
they made of such things in those days. For whereas he should have sharply
censured the mouers of such questions, and have cut them off in a word, he
answers as one who thought it a very serious matter, which required deep and
mature deliberation before he gave his final resolution. Notwithstanding he
shifteth his fingers very finely of all, without disparaging his reputation.
Moreover he cries out (as well as Friar Maillard) against bawdie bargaining,
wicked wenching, and villainous plotting used in Churches. Fol. 94. col. 2. Si
sit quaestio facere and tractare mercatum de aliqua filia rapienda, aut alio
malo faciendo, oportet quarere mag^as Ecclesias, etc. And he shows elsewhere,
how the Church was made the rende-vous for all their merry-mad-meetings. Yet
one thing there is which makes him shed tears, viz. that mothers sell their
daughters to bawds. Fol. 97. col. 4. Et quod plus est (quod and flens dico)
numquid non sunt quae proprias filias venundant lenonibus?

Barelete likewise complains hereof: fol. 28. col. 1. Non est amplius
verecundia public tenere concubinas: sinitur vxor, and nutritur putana cum
manicis rubeis. And in sundry other places he takes up the same complaint,
especially against whoredom committed by Nuns (whereof I find nothing in
Maillard or Menot) as fol. 42. col. 1. Ad moniales conuentuales, quae habent
filios spurios.

But to proceed to other villainies, as incests, sodomies, and the like sins
against nature: I do not remember that I have read much of them in Menot;
howbeit Maillard says in general, fol. 278. col. 3. Taceo de adulterijs,
stupris, and incestibus, and peccatis contra naturam. And fol. 300. col. 1. Si
credant fures, falsarij, fallaces, adulteri, and incestuosi, etc. And he
inueigheth in particular against Sodomie, fol. 262. col. 2. Howbeit he speaks
not of it as of a thing whereof men made a trade and occupation, but only
(having showed what the Scripture says of such villainy) adds that many
Christians are so blinded and besotted therewith, that they are not ashamed to
defend it. But Barelete (having to deal with Italians) cries out often
against it, as fol. 58. col. 2. O quot sodomitae, o quot ribaldi! And fol. 72.
col. 1. he adds another mischief which follows in the neck of the former:
Hoc impedimento impedit Diabolus linguam sodomitae, qui cum pueris rem turpem
agit. O naturae destructor. Impeditur ille qui cum vxore non agit per rectam
lineam. Impeditur qui ^um bestijs rem turpem agit. O bestia deterior. Likewise
fol. 24. col. 1. he joins Sodomias with Cardinalitates, under which word
lies hid (no doubt) some great mystery: but I leave it to some Delius or
Oedipus: his words are these: Quis te conducit ad inhonestates, and ad
libidines, and cardinalitates, and ad sodomias? Howsoever it be taken, certain
it is, his meaning was to express some great cardinal virtue by
cardinalitates, in placing it betwixt whoredom and sodomie.

Thefts also are sharply censured by these three preachers, as also rapine and
extorsion. Howbeit they insist longer (and not without cause) upon such thefts
as are not accounted thefts, but go scotfree and unpunished, then upon others;
and chiefly upon usury. First then Maillard having alleged this distinction
out of Thomas of Aquin between theft and rapine; that rapine is when he that
is spoiled of his goods does not know it; yet afterward he shows another
acception of the word, saying that rapine is committed openly, and theft (which
he calls furtum) secretly. He accounts then that to be rapine or robbery,
when a man having power and authority in his hands, does deprive another (who
is not able to withstand him) of his goods, as when a Prince or a gentleman
takes his subjects or tenants goods by force and violence. Further he says,
that the manner of stealing used by soldiers, is robbery. That is also called
robbery (says he) which ought rather to be called concussion, as when the
master withholdeth his man's wages, the mistress her maids, etc. Of all which
thefts he speaks as one that wanted not store of examples. But let us proceed
to greater polling, stealth and rapine, and first, that which is practiced by
usurers. Besides gross and palpable usury (says he) there is cloaked usury,
whereof he brings these examples. This cloaked usury is when one standing in
need of money, comes to a treasurer (to whom he is directed) to receive a
thousand crowns; the Treasurer tells him, he cannot have it till after a
fortnight, at which time he is to receive a certain sum of money. The poor
man answers, that he stands in great need of it, and cannot stay. Well then
(says the Treasurer) since it must needs be so, you shall have the one half of
it in money, and the other half in wares: and so delivers him wares for two
hundred crowns which are scarce worth an hundred. He further alleges this
example. An usurer lends a merchant-venturer an hundred pounds, upon
condition that if the merchandise prosper and come to good, besides the
principal he shall give him half of his gain; if not, he shall restore the
principal again. Whereupon he adds, Et sic quotiens ponitur capitale in
lucro, and lucrum sub dubio, ibi est (...) palliata. He further alleges
another example which I here omit, and come to treasurers, at whom he girdeth
in sundry places, as fol. 83. col. 4. As for you Clerks of the Exchequer, and
you Treasurers, do not Captains give you ten crowns to hasten their pay? This
I tell you is usury. You say, your office is little worth of it self, but that
your vailes, practice, and dealing is good. The devil take such dealing: Ad
omnes diabolos tales practicae. You say moreover your offices cost you much,
and therefore you must help your selves one way or another, and fill your
bags again. All this is not worth a blew button; nay all such dealing (I can
tell you) is very dangerous. And ye gentle-women, do ye not wear rich furs
and girdles of gold by this means? You must either make restitution for this
gear, or be damned to the devil, choose you whether. Again, fol. 87. col. 3.
speaking of filthy lucre, This (says he) concerns receivers and treasurers
wives, etc. For when a man is to receive a sum of money, before he can get a
farthing from them, he must present their wives with some fair ring, girdle,
or gown. And fol. 83. col. 4. he twits Churchmen for giving their tithe corn
upon usury: and he vpbraideth common bankers with their lending of ten crowns
upon a piece of land, that in the mean time they may have the possession of
it: and merchants also, who lending their merchandise in stead of money, value
them at twice so much as they be worth; which he formerly laid in the
Treasurers dish, as we have heard.

Menot in like sort cries out as well against close and cloaked usury (to use
his own words) as open and manifest: when he says, Hodie sunt publicae vsura,
non coopertae vel palliatae, sed omnino manifestae, ita vt videamur esse sine
lege. And in another place, Poor men are pilled and polled with greater
vsuries at this day then ever were practiced by the Lombards or Jews, for
which notwithstanding they were banished France. Fol. 100. col. 3. Fuerunt
alias Longobardi and Iudaei expulsi a regno Franciae, quod totam terram
inficiebant vsuris: sed nunc permittuntur crassiores Diaboli vsurarij quam
vnquam fuerint Longobardi sieve Iudaei. (Suitable whereunto we may observe how
Maillard says, Vos dicitis quod illi qui tenent banquos ad vsuram sunt de
Lombardia.) He adds, Et adhuc quod fortius and vehementius ladit cor meum,
sunt illi qui dicu^tur sapientiores. So that his opinion concerning usurers is
this, that if devils should come down from heaven by thousands upon the earth,
they would not so endammage and spoil poor people as one great devilish
usurer does in one only parish. Fol. 17. col. 3. Credit mihi, si mill
Diaboli descenderent de aere in terram ad perdendum bona pauperum, non tot mala
facerent quanta vnus grossus diabolus vsurarius in vna parochia. Et tales sunt
fugiendi sicut Diaboli. Further, in discoursing and laying open their
wickedness to the world, fol. 196. col. 1. he says, that if these wicked
wretches chance to read a prognostication which foretells a dearth of corn
or wine, they buy up all that comes to the market, or can be got for money; and
having boorded it up, will not part with it, no not for the relief of the
poor people, except they pay double the price. By which cruel and tyrannical
dealing, they being so pinched with poverty, even yell for hunger, and die
without mercy. And fol. 110. col. 4. These gross devilish usurers have so
gnawed the poor people during the dearth, that they have nothing left whereon
to live, except they should flea themselves and sell their skins. Where note
the phrase which he uses, alluding to the place which he had before alleged,
Pelli mea consumptis carnibus adhaesit os meum. Thereby showing that the poorer
sort have just cause to take up this complaint. Likewise fol. 8. col. 2. and 3.
O vos miseri vsurarij, per vestras vsuras destruitis pauperes, and ponitis eos
nudos in magna miseria: homines sine misericordia and ratione. Vos habetis hoc
anno vestrum Paradisum, quod videtis hoc anno esse magnam indigentiam bladi;
ideo vestrum pauperibus venditis in duplo plusquam emistis. Vestra horrea plena
sunt, and populus fame oruciatur. And fol. 23. col. 3. Sic faciunt isti grossi
vsurarij, qui volunt decipere pauperem, dando ei bladum, vt tandem possint
habere suam haereditatem. But he discourses of this more largely elsewhere,
showing how in a cheap year they would say to the poor farmers that brought
them their rent corn, Sell it, sell it, and keep the money to your selves, for
we need it not yet: and so would watch these poor souls (as it were) by the
way, and in the end would call for all the arrerages when it was dear; so that
they being not able to pay their rent, were constrained to leave them their
lands, and to give them for full payment in stead of corn. For these gallants
(as we may gather by the writings of this Preacher) put their confidence in
that which many now a days rely upon, viz. the founding of some Church,
Chapel, or some religious house, or otherwise upon the virtue of their alms,
in being beneficial to the Church at their death. Fol. 5. col. 1. Vos vsurarij
putatis e^adere, dicentes, Ego committam vsuras, sed hoc est cum intention
fundandi vnam capellam. Barelete likewise does now and then lay load upon
these usurers, especially in the former particular mentioned by Menot, viz;
that Jews were banished out of France by reason of their vsuries: and yet more
villainous usurers were to be found among Christians then ever were among them.
Men now adays (says he) are nothing ashamed to put out their money to usury,
no not to have dealing and traffic with the Jews. Moreover he makes a sermon
of purpose De vsuris and restitutione rei alien^, alleging sundry reasons why
usury should not be tolerated: where (to omit other particulars) he cries out
in this sort: O what a number are there, who in few years of very poor, are
grown exceeding rich per fas and nefas? Such a poor man has bought a cheese,
which he never tasted of; another has bought cloth, wherewith he was never
clothed. O ye usurers wives, if your gowns were put in a press, the blood of
the poor would drop from them. And fol. 63. col. 4. he tells us of certain
usurers, who for ten measures which they lend, cause sixteen or a greater
number to be set down in the bill. And herupon he shows what punishment was
inflicted upon an usurer at Creme in his time, who lending ten bushels of
corn, caused fifteen to be set down in his book, viz. that the notary was
punished with the loss of his hand, and the usurer with the loss of all his
goods. And they could not choose (I suppose) but he even hoarse again with
exclaiming against the thefts and polling practices of our lawless Lawyers, as
Proctors, Advocates, Judges and such like. Of Advocates Maillard says, that
they take a dextris and a sinistri^: and he relates a very pleasant story of a
suite canuassed between two Lawyers in a certain city of France, in the
reign of king Lewis the twelfth. A rich husband man (says he) entreated one
of these good fellows to be of his counsel, and to follow a suit which he had
in the court; which thing he undertook. About 2. hours after came the adverse
party (who was a very rich man) and entreated him in like manner to plead his
cause against a certain husbandman: which he also took in hand. The day being
come wherein the cause should be heard, the husbandman came to put his Proctor
in mind of his suit; who answered him, My friend when you came to me the other
day, I gave you no answer, because I was otherwise employed: and now I give you
to understand that I cannot deal for you, having undertaken your adversaries
cause; notwithstanding I will direct you by my letter to an honest man.
Whereupon he wrote to another Lawyer as follows: Two fat capons are fallen
into my hands; having chosen the fatter, I send you the other; I will pluck
the one, pluck you the other. And fol. 75. col. 1. Ye Counselors, do ye not
allege the laws to overthrow right judgment? Do ye not corrupt and falsify
depositions as much as lies in you? Do ye not frame appeals against God and
your conscience to overthrow the adverse part? Do ye not require the Judge to
give sentence against equity? Do ye not take money on both hands? And a little
after: As for you Gentle-women (Counselors wives) do ye not wear girdles of
gold and silver, chains and ribbands with beads of gold and of Ieat, which ye
have got by the cosining conueyance of these devils your husbands? It had been
better for you to have married clownes. And fol. 185. col. 3. Ye wives of such
Counselors, Atturneys, and Masters of requests, it were better for you to be
hangmens wives. Again, fol. 42. col. 3. O Domini de Parlamento qui datis
sententiam per Antiphrasin, melius esset vos esse mortuos in vteris matrum
vestrarum. And fol. 59. col. 1. he lays open another notable piece of
knavery. Ye Proctors (says he) do ye not go to men in prison, and use such or
the like speeches: My friend you have a house and two akers of vines; if you
will give them to such a Judge, you shall be set free. Menot likewise
discourses at large in sundry places of thefts committed by Proctors and
Counselors, those especially that sell to the rich the poor man's right; I
mean, which draw from the poor what possibly they can, and in the mean time
betray them to their adversaries, which come off roundly in paying their fees,
and fill their purses better. When (says he fol. 95. col. 3.) a cause has
hung in suspense four or five years, an Attorney will come to a rich man (who
has a poor man in suit, and has the better end of the staff) and will say
unto him; Sir, you must agree with your adversary, for in the end you will be
cast. After that, he will say to the poor man, My friend, you overthrow your
self, it is not for you to go to law with such a great man; it is your best
course to agree with him, and give him the land for a hundred crowns,
otherwise he will beggar you, and strip you of all. Whereupon he (poor soul)
fearing the worst, is glad to give the land for a hundred crowns, which is
worth a thousand. And fol. 204. col. 1. hear what counsel an Attorney gives a
silly fellow, O amice, oportet quod tu accordes cum isto, quia aliter nunquam
habebis pacem: nam tu vides that he is not worth a groate, and that he has a
shrewd head, and is like to trouble thee much. Dicam tibi tu non perdes totum;
tu dicis, quod ipse debet tibi centum scuta; habebis dece^, and eris contentus,
si placet. Tunc dicet ille bonus homo, O quomodo possem facere istud? Nescirem:
quia ego perdam rem meam nimis miserabiliter: ego non possem facere. O (dicet
ille) my friend melius est quod tu hoc habeas quam tu perdas totum: quia
dicitur communiter: When a man has lost his cow, and can but recover her
tail, it will serve to make a handle for a door. Neither may we wonder at the
matter, considering the report which goes of the Court of Parliament which was
in those days. For he says that the Parliament was wont to be the fairest
flower in France: but since that time it has been died in the blood of the
poor, who run weeping and wailing after them. And lest any should think that
I add any one syllable of mine own, these are his words: fol. 104. col. 1.
Dico quod est pulchrior rosa quae sit in Francia quam Parlamentum: id est, quod
habet videre and super Ecclesiam, and super brachium saeculare. Sed ista rosa
versa est in sanguinem: sic quod est omnino tincta sanguine pauperum clamantium
and plorantium hodie post eos. Non mentior. Afterward he says, A poor man
may be in Paris ten years following his suite, and yet still hang in the
briers, and get nothing but his labor for his pains: whereas they might have
dispatched him in a week. And a little before he inueyeth against all Lawyers
in general, for that they make a number of poor people to trot after their
mules tails, not once vouchsafing them audience, though it concern their
utter undoing: whereby it comes to pass, that these silly souls dying in
the mean while in following their suites, leave their children beggars, and
their daughters in stead of being well married are constrained to become
Catholics. Likewise fol. 17. col. 2. we see rich men who having spent six or
seven years in following their suites, and their goods also, yet could not
wind themselves out of this endless and inextricable labyrinth, but have been
constrained in the end to go naked with a white stick in their hand (for those
are his words, Et exierunt omnino nudi cum baculo albo in manu.) Or having lost
their cause, have been sentenced by the Court to pay the whole charges of the
suite, and so in a manner forced to fly the country. And fol. 90. col. 1. Sic
hodie vos Procuratores, Iudicet, and Aduocati, facitis currere pauperes cum
processibus vestris post caudas mularum vestrarum; manutenetis eos in his
diabolicis processibus, vt semper possitis arripere pecunias, finger some
money. And straight after, he mentions certain suites that had hung f^ll
twenty or thirty years; so that two or three wranglers having spent both
their lives and livings in following the law, and leaving their heirs nothing
wherewith to follow it any longer, have hung them up at a hook or a nail. And
fol. 114. col. 4. Domini de iustitia, qui tenetis homines at a bay, clamantes,
Sunt tres menses, vel tres anni, quibus habetis sententiam iam in capite
vestro, quam potestis vno die far: sed semper ad augendum lucrum vestrum,
facitis eos siccare post vos, vt incantatos sortilegi; and currere post caudas
mularum vestraru^, cum suis sacculis. Which agrees well with that which
Maillard casts Judges and Atturneys in the teeth withal: who
(notwithstanding all their wrangling, bawling, and outcries one against another
in open Court) prolong a suite full four years for one only dinner. I
return to Menot, who vpbraideth Atturneys ( fol. 125. col. 1.) for keeping
children in suite against their mothers, being widows: and who cries out
against pettifogging Proctors, for counselling debtors to stand stoutly upon
the denial of the debt, when the creditor has neither writ nor witness. The
same preacher (speaking of such as enrich themselves at the poor peoples cost)
complains of Princes who ouercharge their subjects with taxes and subsidies,
as fol. 170. col. 1. Quantum ad populum, miseria in qua est, talis est: Moritur
fame, quod nunc patitur tallias, gabellas, rosiones, excoriationes; and nisi
dimittat pellem non poterit amplius aliquid pati. Item fol. 108. col. 1. O
vtinam illud attenderent domini iusticiarij, qui fauore Principum, vt eis
obtemperent, obediunt nefandis eorum praeceptis, pauperem populum rodentes,
excoriantes pupillos and viduas, nouas quotidie exactiones suscitantes.
Nothwithstanding (says he) Lawyers do more impouerish a poor man in a
three-penie suite, then all tolles, impositions and customs, yea then all the
soldiers that could come to his house in a year. For these Lawyers (whom he
calls the Kings officers) appointed for protection of the poor people, are
like the Cat which keeps the Mice from the cheese, who if she once fall of
eating her self, will do more hurt at one bit, then a mouse can do at twenty.
He also exclaimes against Judges for tollerating usury and the stews: and he
vpbraideth certain Lords of the Parliament, for making no conscience to let
their houses to panders, whore mongers, and bawds. He records also sundry
other knaueries committed by other officers; as namely fol. 128. And directing
his speech generally against all such as enrich themselves by unlawful means,
he says, Ye gentlemen and gentlewomen, that have all things according to your
hearts desire, and wear Scarlet gowns, I verily think that if a man should
press them hard, the blood of the poor (wherein they have been died) would
drop out of them. Which Hyperbolicall and lofty kind of speech, is almost word
for word the same with that of Barelets (whereof we have already spoken) who
forgets not Lawyers (especially Atturneys) no more then his fellows; albeit he
speak but little of them in comparison. Fol. 109. col. 3. O persequutores
viduarum, o lupi rapaces, o crudeles aduocati. See what he also says, fol. 262.

I proceed to other thefts and pilferings committed by other tradesmen, and
men of other callings, and reproved by these preachers, especially by
Maillard, committed (I say) deceitfully either in false wares, or in false
weights and measures, or otherwise by cunning conueyance. First then, fol. 70.
col. 2. he says, Vos domini notarij, fecistisne deceptiones in literis? Vnde
dicitur communiter in communi prouerbio, From three things good Lord deliver
us, from a Notaries and caetera, from an Apothecaries Qui pro quo, and from an
Italian fig: (where note by the way, that he keeps a foul ado in sundry
places with the Apothecaries qui pro quo.) And fol. 27. col. 2. as also fol.
66. col. 3. he is offended with diverse of them for mingling ginger with
cinnamon, to make spices, and with such as lay bags and bundles of ginger,
pepper, saffron, cinnamon, etc. in a celler or vault under the earth to make
them weigh the heavier. Moreover, he inueyeth against Apothecaries for mingling
oil with saffron, to give it a fairer color, and better weight. Fol. 68. col.
3. Not forgetting merchants among the rest, who power water into their wools
that they may weigh the heavier: nor Clothiers, who wet their clothes to make
rhem stretch the better. He further reproves infinite deceits in sundry other
kinds, till he come even to Vintners, who sophisticate their wine in mingling
water therewith: and to Butchers who blow up their flesh, and mingle swines
grease with other suet. But he chafeth extremely against the hucksters, who buy
with a great measure or weight, and sell with a less: and he is horn mad at
those which help the balance with their finger, to make it fall. Et quando
ponderatis aliquid (says he) datis de digito super stateram, vt descendat. He
speaks also against Merchants who forswear themselves, to the end they may
sell the dearer, Merces suas plus periurijs onerando quam pretijs: and against
such as cut the poor peoples throats with their Monopolies: where we are to
take Monopolies (according to the proper signification of the word) for that
which is usually practiced by the engrossers who get into their hands any
commodity the country will afford, and afterward sell it at their own
price; which I do the rather insinuate, because the word Monopoly is commonly
taken in another sense. But to return to the periuries of Merchants. He
vpbraideth them ( page 331. col. 2.) for that they make no bones to forswear
themselves, and to damn their souls to the devil for an half penny. Estis
hic (says he) qui pro vno albo estis contenti damnari? But Menot tells us of
certain merchants who made no conscience to forswear themselves for a
farthing. And he further shows, that their manner was (in those days) to
ouerprise their wares, and to sell that for a shilling, for which they were not
ashamed to ask ten. He is also much offended with those merchants, who not
contented to know cunning knacks of knavery, and to practice them daily for
their own advantage, do also teach them their children, scarce crept out of
the cradle, fearing lest they should want wit to devise them themselves: and
how they teach them the trick of the balance ( mensuram parui ponderis)
threatening them that their children thus taught and trained up by them, shall
one day serve in stead of fagots and firebrarnds in hell to burn them; as fol.
115. col. 3. and elsewhere. Barelete is as busy as his fellows in blazoning
the knaueries committed by these covetous caitiues in wares and merchandises:
where he brings in one of them alleging this proverb, I will (as the
Florentine says) have an iron arm, an Ants belly, a dogs soul: that is, to
the end that I may become rich, I will take as much pains as I am able to
endure: I will shift with as little cost as possibly I can: as for conscience,
I will respect it no more then a dog. The last of which, agrees well with this
other prouerbiall saying, He that would quickly be rich, must turn his back
on God. Both which are true and infallible testimonies of the profaneness and
impiety which has long since seized and taken possession of most men's minds,
though especially applied to Merchants.

They censure blasphemies as sharply as other vices (which come in here very
fitly after perjury, whereunto many are egged on by covetousness.) First
therefore to begin with Maillard, fol. 271. col. 1. O wicked wretches (says he)
which never cease swearing by Gods flesh, by Gods blood, by the body of God, by
Gods head, by Gods wounds, by Gods death. He elsewhere mentions other
blasphemies, as I will have it in despite of God: I renounce God, etc. And
gamesters (says he) are wont to say, In spite of God, which he expresses in
these words, In mala gratia sit hoc factu^: Ie desauoue Dieu, Gallice; I care
not a blew button for God. Moreover, he twits women with these their modest
speeches and interpretations, The devil take me; I would I might never come in
heaven; I would I might be damned if ever I did or said this or that. And that
when their husbands took them tardie, as in talking with their paramours, or
any whom they suspected, and had in jealousy (for which he gives them one or
two Items) their manner was to say, The devil take me if ever he spoke to me
of any such thing. And he cries out against their hellish blasphemies, as
swelling again not only with the venime and poison of impiety, but even of
plain Atheism, as when they say, Let God keep his heaven to himself, and
let us alone, and follow our pleasures, Fol. 125. col. 3. And coming afterward
to speak of blasphemous oaths (much like the former) he says, And you base
Christians which swear by Gods wounds, by the body of God, and Gods blood; is
not this the language of the infernal lake? And fol. 140. col. 1. he reports
that it was enacted by holy King Lewis, that blasphemers for the first offense
should endure a months imprisonment, and after to be set on the pillorie, (for
he says, ponerentur in pilario: whereas Menot says, Au carquan, or au
collier:) for the second, that their tongues should be pierced through with a
hot iron: for the third, that their under lip should be boared through: for
the fourth, that their tongues and lips should be cut off. And we may not
forget the place formerly alleged, where he reports how certain Jews at
Tours (in the reign of King Lewis the eight) hearing Christians swearing in
most fearful manner, as if they meant to have pulled Christ out of heaven, said,
they wondered they would ^o outrage him, if they did believe that he died for
them. Menot also is hot against the blasphemers of those times, telling them
that it is all one as if they should spit in Gods face: alleging out of Saint
Chrysostom, that Christians sin as grievously which blaspheme Christ now
being in heaven, as the Jews did who crucified him when he was upon earth. He
further alleges sundry reasons why this sin of all others is most to be
detested, where he says, O miseri, nunquam Diaboli ausi fuerunt facere quod
facitis. And shows what a shame it is, that blasphemies should be punished by
Turks and Saracens, and should remain unpunished among Christians. And a
little after, In times past (says he) they were set in the stocks, or on the
pillorie, or cast in prison, or had some great fine set upon their heads: and
in the reign of holy King Lewis their tongues were pierced through according
to the Law which he had made in that behalf. But the contrary is practiced at
this day: for they that should punish blasphemies, are of all others the
greatest blasphemers, glorying therein, and saying that it is not for a paisant
to renounce God, Quod non pertinet ad rurales rennuciare Deum. Et ego dico tibi
quod ad te non pertinet intrare Paradisum: and I tell thee, thou shall never
come into heaven for this gear. In another place he makes mention of a
notorious swearer, whose tongue King Lewis caused to be cut out, fol. 183. col.
1. Sic S. Ludouicus de vno blasphematore Parisius, qui fecit ei abscindere
linguam. But Barelete is more hot and vehement against his countrymen the
Italians, then they against their country men the French, when he says fol.
120. col. 2. O Italy infected with such a vice, O people polluted with such
wickedness: I fear me Gods vengeance will utterly ouerwhelme you in a moment.
Neither is he to learn how to apply King Lewis his decree against blasphemers,
alleged by the two former preachers. He says moreover, that the Saracens had
a law, that whosoever blasphemed Christ or the blessed virgin (his mother)
should be famished to death between two boords. He tells us also of another
ancient law, which punished blasphemy and buggery with the same punishment.
And is it not a lamentable thing (says he) that Duke Galeace should hang a man
only for murmuring against him? and that the Duke of Mantua should put another
to death for the like offense: and that blasphemers should go scotfree and
unpunished? He further shows that it is less excusable then any other vice,
in that whereas men are drawn to commit sin through delight and pleasure
which they take therein, (as the whoremonger by the pleasure he takes in
whoredom and daliance; the glutton by the delight he has in his full furnished
table, in dainty morcels, and the laughter of his wine, etc.) the blasphemer
can have no delight in swearing at all: adding moreover that it has this
proper and peculiar unto it, in that whereas all other sins cease after
death, this only continues. For proof whereof he alleges Apoc. 16. And men
blasphemed God which has power over these plagues. And a little after, And
blasphemed the God of heaven for their pains and for their sores. And to the
same effect also in the end of the Chapter. Lastly he labors with tooth and
nail (at leastwise in show) to withdraw them from this sin, as by
propounding sundry examples of Gods fearful judgments which have befallen
swearers and blasphemers; as that when certain gamesters at Mantua brake forth
into blasphemy against our blessed Savior, their eyes fell on the table. That
at Rome a child (but five years old) blaspheming the name of God, was carried
away by the devil from between his parents arms. That a mariner at Ragouse,
most fearfully tearing and rending God asunder with his bloody oaths, fell
into the sea, and was not seen till certain days after that he was found on
the shore, where his body was taken up entire and whole, the tongue only
excepted. He further speaks of certain oaths proper to Italians, as when
they call God traitor, and the virgin Marie whore, fol. 118. col. 1. Clamant
Deum traditorem, virginem, putanam. Which I remember only for their sakes who
have not been in Italy. For they who have continued there any time, and have
traveled through the country (as my self have done) may by these two
remember others far more horrible; except God have been more merciful unto
them herein, then unto me, in giving them grace to forget them. And I persuade
my self, that since Barelets time blasphemies have much more increased both in
number and nature, I mean as well in quantity as quality. For I remember
that in the last year of my abode in Italy, I heard certain oaths which I
had not heard bebefore, as at Bononia which I had not heard at Venice, Padua
nor Vincentia; and at Florence, which I had not heard at Bononia nor at Luke:
and so of other places, as at Rome, Naples, etc. But the most horrible terrible
oath that ever I heard belched out in all my life, or ever heard of, was
uttered by a Priest at Rome, who had been angered by a courtizan, which I will
conceal for this present, and return to Barelete, who mentions a merry oath
which a good fellow (an Italian) was wont to use, viz. A bots on the ass that
carried Christ to Jerusalem: a merry one I say, if any oath may be called merry.
Howbeit it is rather to be termed a jest, then an oath. And yet if it be
spoken with an intent to swear, it is work enough for Divines: as when
Italians say in their fustian fumes Per la Potta of such or such a one; whereas
they are otherwise wont to say, Per la Potta de la virgin Maria; or by way of
exclamation, Potta de la virgin Maria; or leaving out Maria, as being easily
understood; and when Frenchmen say in heat and have vertubieu: as also when
Germans in their curses and imprecations corruptly pronounce the word Got,
for which we call them dastipoteurs, because we do not understand them. But to
close up this point, were it not for my former promise, I would here relate
what I have read in the Sermons of Barelete, of a Bishop, who had taken up such
a bad custom of swearing, that when Barelete came to admonish him thereof,
saying, Reverend father, I have often heard that you cannot speak a word
without an oath, or naming the Devil: he presently (to clear himself of that
imputation, and to show that it was but a false slander and malicious
defamation) said, And who reported that of me in the devils name? By G. body it
is false. Then said he, Reverend father, I take your self for witness. But if
any desire to hear his pure Ciceronian Latin, thus it is word for word:
Exemplum Praelati, quem noui Ianuae, qui loqui nesciebat, nisi per corpus and
nomen Diaboli. Quum nemo auderet mouere, ego Gabriel officium suscepi, dicens,
Pater reverend, plures de vestris nobis dicunt, quod nescitis loqui sine
iuramento, and nomine Diaboli. At Episcopus in impatientiam versus, ait, In
nomine Diaboli, and quis de me ita dicit? Per corpus Christi non est verum. Cui
respondi, Reverend Domine, a vobis testimonium capio: sicque cum rubore
discessit. Which hot bickering between Barelete and the Bishop I had no
sooner related to a virtuous gentleman of good credit and account, but he
paralleled it with another very like it, which he gave me in exchange, albeit
his was new, and mine somewhat state. How that he having told a gentleman (his
very good friend) that the wound he had received, ought to be a warning unto
him to beware of swearing, (a sin to which he was much addicted) he should
answer and say, By G. body I will never swear more.

Moreover, they complain much of murders and man-slaughters. And their manner
is in speaking of the sins of their time, to range whoredom, theft and
murder in the first rank: and they seem to be grieved to the very soul that
they are not punished. Menot says, if a man go to the magistrate, and inform
him of a murder committed the last night in such a place, he will not stir a
foot, nor move a finger, except he first know the accuser, and who will
discharge the Court by paying the fees: of which neglect of justice, he
speaks in sundry other places. He complains also that men are no more
moved then stocks or stone walls, when they see a man of worth slain in the
open streets. And Barelete says, Occiditur homo, and adhuc malefactor stat in
terminis patriae sine pauore, quia non est iustitia.

But there are other murders, for which they weep water and snot: as those
which women commit in causing an abortion: and (which is worse) for that
Priests (as Maillard says) persuade them that in so doing they commit no
mortal sin. Fol. 74. col. 2. Suntne ibi mulieres, and sacerdotes qui dicunt
quod mulieres comedentes venenum ad expellendum materiam de matrice sua, ne
foetus veniat ad portam, antequam anima rationalis introducatur, non peccant
mortaliter? Where he also tells us of children cast into rivers, and priuies.
Vtinam haberemus aures apertas, and andiremus voces puerorum in latrinis
proiectorum and in stuminibus. Barelete also cries out against this sin,
fol. 262. col. 2. O quot luxuriae, O quot Sodomiae, O quot fornicationes,
clamant latrinae, latibula vbi sunt pueri suffocati. Pontanus also alleges an
example of this currish cruelty, affirming it to be more usual with Nuns then
with others.

These I hope may suffice to show the estate of the Age last past. For (if
according to the old saying, A word be enough to the wise) by these the learned
Reader may conceive of the rest. For albeit we have spoken nothing of the
gluttony and drunkenness of those times, yet we may not think that whoredom
was without these two companions, especially considering what the old proverb
says, Sine Cerere and Baccho friget Venus. And the Greek verse says
prouerbially, that when the belly is full, the mind is among the maids. Which
agrees well with the French proverb, Apres la panse, vient la danse: After
banqueting follows chambering. Ovid also says, Non habet vnde suum paupertas
pascat amorem. And we may assure our selves, that there was no manner of costly
or sumptuous attire, no fond, fantastical, gaudie, or garish fashion, which
the wit of man or the wickedness of the time could invent, but was then in
use. For Oliver Maillard is at hot as a tossed with Atturneys wives, who
(notwithstanding their husbands poor estate, having not after they have paid
for their offices so much as twenty shillings a year left them) are as
stately as Princesses. Menot also is round with them, telling them that there
need no other flags to display their folly, but their fans and verdingales: but
especially for that they did not hide that which modesty would have covered.
Fol. 61. col. 2. Vos iuuenes mulieres que aperitis pectora vestra ad
ostendendum mamillas. Menot also takes on like an oister-wife, for that they
wore their gowns so open before, that a man might have almost seen their
bellies. And he reproves them sharply for sundry like unseemly and uncivil
behauiours: especially for this: If my mistress (says he) be at Church, and
there come in some gentleman-like man; to keep the custom of gentilitie, she
must rise up amongst them all, and give him a lick on the lips, though it be
in the Sermon or prayer time, when every man is deep in his devotion. The
devil (says he) take such fashions. Ad omnes diabolos talis modus faciendi.
But it is now high time we should hear how these preachers say Churchmen
their lessons, or rather how they reprove them and give them the gentle
correction: if the reproof of the mean may take place with the mighty: and
if their loud cries and shrill voices lifted up like so many trumpets, may
pierce the ears of these deaf adders, better stopped then ever were
Vlysseses, least he should hear the melodious harmony, or harmonious melody
of the Sirens song, to use the phrase of our descanting and Pindarizing Poets.

CHAP. VII. Of certain vices reproved in our good Catholics by the aforesaid
Preachers.
THat I may perform my late promise, I must bestow this Chapter upon my
Masters of the Popish Clergy: beginning according to my former method, with
their whoredom; yet not forgetting their secret thefts and cunning conueyance,
whereby they were wont to maintain themselves in their dissolute demeanor and
loose life, as they do at this day. First then let us hear Oliver Maillard
(doing him this honor, as always heretofore, to give him first audience.)
Fol. 327. col. 1. Have you any of those great men here, whose wives make them
wear horns? Yes, there is store of such: so that we may well say, the Cuckoes
song is now come into the Popes Court. But before we come to Prelates, let us
hear how he lays out the knavery of poor Priests and simple Sir John's. They
hear (says he) women's confessions, and knowing who they be that use the
occupation, they run after them. Which puts me in mind of that which I have
read of certain Priests who would gladly have brought up this custom, that
the poor penitents which came unto them for absolution, should show them those
parts of their bodies wherewith they had offended. I return to Maillard, who
has these words usually in his mouth: Sacerdotes concubinarij, or fornicarij;
as also, religiosi concubinarij. He further speaks against such as keep them
in their chambers At bed and board.
a pain and a pot: as fol. 61. col. 3. Suntne hic sacerdotes tenentes
concubinas a pain and a pot. In stead whereof Menot says At rack and manger.
a pot and a cueillier. To reture to Prelates, against whom Maillard inueyeth,
fol. 22. col. 4. O ye infamous damned fat gotbellies, written in the devils
book, thieves, and Church-robbers, (as Saint Bernard says) do ye think that
your founders gave you your livings to do nothing but to hunt whores, and to
shoot at short buts? And fol. 107. col. 1. And ye my Masters of the Clergy,
that spend your benefices upon horses, hounds and whores. He adds also
Histriones. Likewise page 84. col. 2. Ask S. Stephen if he went to heaven by
leading such a life as you do, making great cheer, ever feasting and
banqueting, giving the goods of the Church and Crucifixe to harlots; keeping
hounds and hawks with the goods of the poor? It had been better you had never
been borne, then that you should lead this loose, lazy, and licentious life.
Where he likewise adds Histriones after meretices. All men know the
signification of this Latin word; but because both he and his fellows deal
with the Latin as they think good, using words arsie-versie and kim-kam, I
doubt whether by Histriones he meant not moriones, which will appear to be
more probable, if we consider the practice usual at this day. In another place
he says that Prelates have no table talk but of obscenitie and ribaldrie. And
he is the man (if my memory fail me not) who says, that whereas Prelates in
times past gave money toward the marriage of young maids (which were monilesse
and friendlesse) they contrarily suffer them to play the strumpets under their
noses, making them get their dowries by the sweat of their bodies. But let us
hear what goodman Menot says (who currieth the cockscombs of those gallants
as well as the best of them.) Fol. 144. col. 2. I say the like de ancillis
sacerdotum, quibus non licet dare hoc sacramentum Eucharistiae; quod certe non
sunt de grege Dei, sed Diaboli. And fol. 82. col. 3. Est filia seducta, quae
fuit per annum inclusa cum sacerdote cum poto and cochleari, at bed and board,
hodie venit, etc. And in another place he says, that when soldiers entered any
town, the first thing they sought for was the Curates (or Parsons) Lemman. And
they might have done well (as far as we may gather by his words) to have
given warning from one end of the town to the other: Look to your plackard
Madame (or Mistress) for fear of these Prelates. For over and besides those
which they kept at home, they had customers in every corner of the town.
Albeit they took greatest sport in making Counselors wear the horns. But
here was the jest, that great rich men had ever one Prelate or other for their
gossips: the goodman taking him for his sons godfather, who (unknown to him)
was his father. Where note how in his copper Latin he calls the committing of
whoredom with a Bishop, facere placitum Domini Episcopi: to do my Lord Bishop a
pleasure: as fol. 18. O Domina quae facitis placitum Domini Episcopi. And fol.
110. col. 2. If you shall ask how this child being but ten years old, got
such a living: they will answer you straight, that his mother was very familiar
with the Bishop, and for kind acquaintance dedit ei. He further mentions a
cunning slight practiced by these sir John's, to have their pleasure of those
with whom they were in love, that their manner was (if no other occasion were
offered) to inuit them to a feast among other modest maids and matrons. Last
of all he shows that Prelates in his time had both maids and matrons, both
wives and widows, at command. We have already heard how Maillard (after Saint
Bernard) calls them thieves, and Church-robbers. Let us now hear what Menot
says of their thefts and simonies (though men now a days make but a jest of
such sins.) First then, fol. 70. col. 1. he says, O Domini Ecclesiastici,
qui roditis ossa mortuorum, and bibitis sanguinem Crucisixi, audite. And fol.
5. col. 3. Non est cauda Praelatorum, qui hodie post se ducunt canes, and
mangones indutos ad modum armigerorum, sicut Suytenses: qui nullo modo curant
de grege sibi credito. And straight after, Quid dicetis, Domini Ecclesiastici
and Praelati, qui comeditis bona buius pauperis qui pendit in cruce, ducendo
vestras vanitates? And fol. 132. col. 1. O si non viderentur magniluxus, great
bravery, simoniae, magna vsura patentes, notoriae luxuriae, quae sunt in
Ecclesia, populus non esset scandaliza^us, nec vos imitaretur. O qualis rumor!
dico secundum puram veritatem: O what a notorious shame it is! I say the plain
truth of it: Mill Praelati sunt causa quod pauper and simplex populus peccat,
and quarit infernum: that the poor people sin, and are damned ad omnes
diabolos. And fol. 118. col. 1. he sends the dealing of all those Prelates
packing to the devil, in the sense that men are wont to praise them for good
husbandry. Nunc (says he) si aliquem eorum vis laudare, hoc modo lauds, Est
bonus pater-familiae, he is a good husband: been aliter facit quam suus
praedecessor. Ad omnes Diabolos tale menagium. Menagium pro animabus est magis
necessarium, and principale. And speaking of their election, fol. 93. col. 1.
Videmus quod hodie intrant Ecclesiam vt boues stabulum, cornibus eleuatis: vt
multi qui intrant non per Spiritum sanctum, sed vi armorum, and strepitu
armigerorum and militum: by force of arms and dint of sword. Likewise fol.
110. col. 1. Sed vnde prouenit hoc? quia certe Spiritus sanctus est hodie
expulsus de concilio, synagoga, and capitulis Episcoporum, and electionibus
Praelatorum. Quia, vt videtur, hodie puero december annorum datur parochia in qua
sunt quingenti ignes: and pro custodia assignatur quandoque a Courtier, vnus
nobilis curiae, qui post Deum nil odit nisi Ecclesiam. Heu, Deus scit quomodo
hodie dantur beneficia Ecclesiastica. Si quaritis quomodo puer iste habuit
beneficium: sciunt responsionem, Matter suae erat familiaris cum Episcopo, his
mother was very familiar with the Bishop, and for acquaintance sake dedit ei.
Nam hodie verificatur and completur Prophetia Esayae 3. Populum meum exactores
sui spoliauerunt, and mulieres dominatae sunt eorum. Videmus hodie super mulas,
habentes duas Abbatias, duos Episcopatus (Anglice two crosses, two myters) and
adhuc non sunt contenti. As also in another place, And you gentlewomen (says
he) that do my Lord Bishop the pleasure you wot of, and then you say, Oh, oh,
he will do my son a good turn, he shall be the better provided for by some
benefice or Ecclesiastical dignity. Also fol. 111. col. 2. Quod hodie non
dantur beneficia, non, non, sed venduntur. Non est meum dare vobis. Antiquitus
dicebantur Praebendae, a Praebeo, praebes: sed hodie dici debent Emenda, ab
Emo, emis; quod non est meum dare vobis. Which conceited allusion puts me in
mind of that which he has, fol. 100. col. 4. Secundo erit Prior, Abbas,
Comendatarius, and potius comedatarius qui omnia comedit. Moreover, he often
reproues and censures them for simony (to which we may refer certain
particulars spoken of before) as fol. 94. col. 1. Nonne reputatis simoniam
quando pro Episcopatu valente nouem millia, facitis fasciculum plurium
beneficiorum ascendentium vsque ad summa^ nouem millium, and datis hoc pro
recompensa? Ad omnes diabolos tales recompensa. Likewise fol. 8. col. 3. Sic
isti Protonotarij qui habent illas dispensas ad tria, imo ad quindecim
beneficia, and sunt simoniaci and sacrilegi: and non cessant arripere
beneficia, incompatibilia: idem est eis. Si vacet Episcopatus, pro eo habendo
dabitur vnus grossus fasciculus alioru^ beneficioru^. Primo accumulabuntur
archidiaconatus, abbatiae, duo prioratus, quatuor aut quinque praebendae, and
dabuntur haec omnia pro recompensatione. And fol. 100. col. 2. Dic de abusibus
qui fiunt quando isti qui habent beneficia, dant illa fratri vxoris, vt illa
portionem haereditatum fratris habeat. I may not here forget what he says (
fol. 124. col. 3.) concerning Monks, viz. how they are ever following one
suite or other in the palace at Paris: so that of four you meet with, it is a
wonder if one be not a Monk. And if you ask them, what business they have
there? One Clericus will answer, Our Chapter is in suite with the Deane, the
Bishop, etc. and I dance attendance upon these Counselors for this end. And
thou master Monk, what do thou here? I plead for an Abbey of eight
hundred pound rent for my Lord Abbot. And thou white Monk? I plead for a
small Priory for my self. And you beggarly Monks, that have neither land nor
living, what do you sneaking here? The King has granted us salt, wood, and the
like, but his officers deny to give them: or such a covetous or envious Curate
denies us burial, and will not suffer us to perform the will of one lately
deceased: so that we are enforced to repair to the Court to seek a redress.

Barelete indeed does not so often inueigh against these two vices of
Cleargie-men, as his fellows. But elsewhere he tells us a very merry tale of
a Venetian doctor, who being taken with a filthy drab at unawares in the very
fact, and that by her mistress, and Barelete (then preacher in Venice) whom she
had sent for to see this sport, and being admonished of this so heinous and
scandalous a sin, made no other answer, but that he was so deep in love with
this dirtie droile, that he knew not what to think or say of himself, whether
he were a man or a beast. He further cries out against Nuns for pestering the
world with a brood of bastard brats, whereof his fellows speak nothing to my
remembrance. Howbeit Pontanus tells us in plain terms of certain Monasteries
of Nuns at Valentia in Spain, which differ nothing from stews. And least
any should suspect me of falsification or forgery, I will allege his own
words, as they are to be found in his treatise De Immanitate, cap. 17. Valentia
in Hispania citeriore, aedes quadam sacra, Vestaliumque Monasteria, ita quidem
patent amatoribus, vt instar lupanariorum sint. Moreover, discoursing in
general of Nuns, he says, that they either kill their children in the womb
by certain potions, or else strangle them as soon as they are borne, and
after cast them into priuies.

CHAP. VIII. How the foresaid Preachers have discovered certain abuses in
Popish doctrine; and of the covetousness of the Popish Clergy.
But (to omit the loose lives of our good Catholics) the foresaid Preachers
discover certain errors in doctrine (though themselves were greatly ouerseene
in sundry things, so that we may well judge of them according to the proverb,
He that has but one eye is king among the blind:) where note, that they are
such errors and abuses, as help to keep their kitchins hot. First then
Maillard is full of inuectiues against pedlers of relickes, as fol. 25. col. 3.
Estis hic Domini bullatores and portatores reliquiarum? And fol. 25. col. 3.
Dixi hodie mane de lingua fraudulatoria, and credo quod iugling Gypsies
Anglice, portatores reliquiarum, caphardi, and mensuratores vultuum imaginum
saepe comedunt de isto pastillo. Also fol. 3^. col. 3. Estis hic portatores
bullarum? numquid linitis auditores vestros ad capiendas bursas eorum? Likewise
fol. 45. col. 1. Et vos portatores reliquiarum and indulgentiarum, numquid
iactatis vos de malis quae facitis in villagijs? But before I proceed to a
further point, I will give a short exposition of this word pastillo, that is
pastie; and that out of the author himself. We are therefore to know, that it
has relation to a tale that he told fol. 24. col. 4. It is reported (says he)
that the devil being very sick upon a time, his Physicians asked him to what
his stomach would best serve him, to fresh water fish, or to seafish? He
answered to neither. Whereupon they asked him if he had a mind to porke, biefe,
or veale? He answered, No. Well then (said the Physicians) have you a stomach
to chickens, partridges, or venison? He answered, that his stomach could not
away with them no more then with the rest: but that he would gladly eat of
that meat which women eat of when they lie in childbed, to wit, of a pastie
of tongues. Whereupon they asked him with what sauce he would eat it. I would
have them (said he) first fried, and then baked. I leave the deduction and
application hereof to those that have the book, seeing I have quoted the place
where it is to be found. But those that have heard the chat and prattling of
these gossiping houswiues when they sit by a warm fire, may easily guess how
their tongues wag when they are bathing themselves in a warm bath of a woman
in childbed: which is a circumstance worthy the noting. For verily it is not
probable, that their tongues should then be frozen, at leastwise I dare give my
word for the good wives of Paris, who call their seats cacquetoires, that is,
tatling benches; where sitting together after they have finely fetched over
their husbands, brethren, sisters, kinsmen and friends (yea and their lovers
also who are now called servants) at last fall foul among themselves, giving
each other such privy nips and cross blows over the thombes, that their
husbands are hornified thereby. But now to the matter again (lest it be said
that women make me forget my self) yet so as I will not give them a final
farewell: for the fact whereof I am about to speak (reproved by Maillard)
concerns them very nearely, viz. that notwithstanding the gloss affirm, that
if a priest be found kissing a woman, we must suppose he did it to print a
blessing upon her lips: yet we may in charity judge that it is a preparatiue
to initiate them in some other mystery, especially if they be alone, and in a
suspected place. He speaks also very boldly (for those times) against
Indulgences and pardons: yet so as a man may well perceive he speaks not all
he thinks. In the mean time he flatly condemns these pedlers of pardons
(whom he calls in another place bullatores) for saying, that if they were
persuaded that their ancestors had not bought Popes pardons (meaning such
pedlary ware as they had in their packes) they would never pray for them. Among
other things he says, An creditis quod vnus magnus vsurarius, plenus vitijs,
qui habebit mill millia peccata, dando sex albos trunco, habeat remissionem
omnium peccatorum suorum? Certe durum est mihi credere, and durius praedicare.
He further reproves such as preached only for gain. Are you here my masters
(says he) you Lent preachers, who preach only in hope of gain: and when you
have gotten a round sum, say on Easter day, that you have had a good Lent?
Where he compares them to adulterers for this reason: Adulteri enim de malo
concubitu recipient prolem: ita and vos pecuniam. And Fol. 331. col. 1. Videte
magistri venerandi, habuistis bonum quadragesimale, lucrati estis centum
francos, congregastis multum; vos reddetis computum. He complains also that
the Churchmen sell the devil and all, in refusing to bury one in the Church
under a franc. I return to Menot, who calls those pedlers of relickes
portatores rogationum, whom Maillard calls portatores reliquiarum, and
indulgentiarum, and bullatores. It is (says Menot fol. 131.) the practice of
these pedlers to make poor widows believe, that they and their family ought
rather to starve for hunger, then to want their pardons. In like manner Fol.
174. col. 3. Shall I speak a word for all? Divines never meddled with these
pardons, or very little. And presently after, None preach them but these false
Friars, who add infinite thereto, to deceive the people: and being in
tauernes, keep revel rout, as though they were young devils, talking of
nothing but of dallying and whoredom. Further, the said preacher ( fol. 12.
col. 4.) makes mention of certain cheaters, who having pawned their reliks in
a tavern, showed the people a brand, and made them worship it, as being one of
those wherewith Saint Laurence was broyled. But of this more hereafter.
Barelete also (as I remember) reproves certain abuses, though very briefly,
rather pointing at them, then dwelling long upon any point. Neither are we to
wonder that he and his fellows should let so many abuses go scotfree,
untouched, and uncensured. It is a wonder rather they could discover any,
considering the course they took. Howbeit we are to observe this one thing,
that whatsoever the ignorance of former times has been, the doctrine, which
tended directly to keep the kitching hot, has ever been suspected. Whence it
is that some (even of our good Catholics) could never be brought to put any
confidence in such pardons: for that they considered (albeit they should have
ascended higher, and sought peremptory proofs) that if they took place, men
should buy out the pardon of their sins at too easy a rate. Thus we see what
the doctrine is, which tends directly to keep their kitchins hot. And in very
truth there is no one conclusion in the Romish religion which points not this
way, though some more directly, others more obscurely. How ever it be, our old
proverbs do sufficiently blazon the covetousness of our good Catholics. But
this ensuing best of all: Trois chooses sont tout d'vn accord,
L'Eglise, la Cour, and la mort.
L'Eglise prend du vif, du mort:
La Cour prend le droict and le tort:
La mort prend le foible and le sort.
That is, There be things three do well agree,
The Church, the Court, and destiny.
For none will ought to other leave:
The Church from live and dead does reaue:
The Court takes both the right and wrong:
And death takes both the weak and strong.
There is also another proverb which says, that three things are insatiable,
Priests, Monks, and the sea: whereof Barelete puts me in mind when he says,
Presbyteri, and fratres, and mare nunquam satiantur. Howbeit I have heard old
folks name these threee, Priests, women, and the sea. And verily Monks may
well be comprised under Priests.

CHAP. IX. Wherein is declared, that by how much the wickedness of the last
Age does exceed the former, by so much ours does surpass the last:
notwithstanding that vices are better detected, more sharply censured, and
severely punished then ever they were.
WE may perceive by the complaints taken up by the foresaid Preachers, that
they saw the world in the wane, waxing daily worse and worse. For it is not to
be thought but that they omitted sundry gross and heinous sins which reigned
in those days, either because they knew them not, or remembered them not. For
we may well think, that men in those days were not only good guardians, in
keeping the vices whereof their ancestors left them inheritors, but improuers
also in increasing their stock by adding of new. And verily I must confess
that I have not reaped so great a harvest, nor gathered so plentiful a vintage
out of their works and writings, but that many gleanings and after-gatherings
remain behind for such as have more idle hours then my self. For who so shall
diligently peruse the Sermons of these three Doctors, shall find that I have
omitted a number of notorious and prodigious facts, which have been discovered
in part by ancient Poets. For proof hereof, consider what Menot says: The
son would pluck out his fathers eyes to enjoy his goods. And I persuade my
self that the book in which children study least, and which grieueth them
most, is the life of their fathers (where he alludes to a book called Vitae
Patrum, written of certain Ancients who were thought to have led a strict and
holy life.) And a little before, Alas, how is it possible to find friendship
among enemies, when love is not to be found among kinsmen? no not between
parents and children, brethren and sisters? Now that this sin is of great
standing, may appear by Hesiod, whom Ovid has thus expressed: Viuitur ex
rapto, non hospes ab hospite tutus,
Non socer a genero, fratrum quoque gratia rara est.
Imminet exitio vir coniugis, illa mariti.
Lurida terribiles miscent aconita nouerca.
Which Marrot has thus turned: On vit desia de ce q^'on emble and oste.
Chez l'hostelier n'est point asseure l'hoste:
Ne le beaupere auecques le sien gendre.
Petite amor enter freres s'engendre.
Le mari s'offre a la mort de sa femme.
Femme au mary f^^t semblable diffame.
Per mal-talent les marastres terribles
Meslent souuent venins froids and horribles.
That is, All live on spoil. One where the wary guest
Suspects his falser host. Elsewhere the son
His second father fears. Nor can one breast,
One womb, shield brothers from dissension.
The faithless wife conspires her husbands bane,
And he in fell revenge seeks hers again.
The cruel step-dame deadly poison brues. etc.
He afterward speaks of children, who abhor to study or read in the book
called Vitae Patrum. Filius ante diem patrios inquirit in annos. That is, The
son for raising of his own estate,
Wishes his father dead ere natures date.
True it is indeed, these words For raising of his own estate, are not in the
Latin: howbeit they are added very fitly to make up the sense, as any man may
perceive: and they accord with that of Menot, that children would pluck out
their fathers eyes to enjoy their goods. And as they complained in old time of
other vices, so of the neglect and want of justice. For this is an ancient
proverb (if we regard the sense rather then the words) Greater thieves hang
the less: agreeable to that of Iuuenal: Dat veniam Coruis, vexat censura
columbas. That is, Poor Doves are paid, whilst Ravens s^^pen free. And it
suteth well with the saying of that famous Lawgiver Zaleucus, that laws are
like to cobwebs: for as small flies (...) caught in them, when as the greater
break through them: so poor people, or such as cannot prattle apace, are
ensnared in them; whereas the rich, or such as have glib tongues, break through
them by force: not unlike to that in Terence: -- quia non rete Accipitri
tenditur neque Miluio,
Qui male faciunt nobis, illis qui nihil faciunt, tenditur.
Quia enim illis fructus est, in illis opera luditur.
Which is spoken by a smell-feast (or good trencher-man) called by this Poet a
Parasite, who having boasted that he did strike and beat whom he listed, and
played the pike in a pond, and that none durst once quinch or speak a word
against him; being demanded the reason of this so great boldness, answered,
Because the net is not spread for the Al Sake^.
Sacre or Kite which annoy us, but for those harmless birds that do not hurt
us: for there is some profit in these, as for the rest it is but labor lost.
The Poet indeed (which I speak only by the way) uses a Accipit^^.
word, which (as some are of opinion) signifies all kind of hawks, whether
sparrow^ hawks, faulkons, or others. But I rather use the word sacre,
considering the common phrase in every man's mouth used in way of a proverb,
C'est un sacre, as if a man should say, he is a spend thrift, or a devouring
gulf. It is also taken for a glutton, or a wine-bibber. And good father Menot
fol. 138. col. 1. forgets not those that exclaim against the poor, and have
nothing to say against the rich. For examining the history of the woman who was
taken in adultery, and brought before our Savior Christ, he demands the
reason why (...) brought not the adulterer also? To which he presently
answers, It may be (says he) he was a rich man. This is the common practice
at this day: they accuse poor men, but have not a word to say against a gros
goddon. Which word I (...) of purpose, as being an excellent good French word
(though now almost worn out of use) used also by Oliver Maillard his ancient:
fol. 22. col. 4. O gros goddons, damnati, infames, and scripti in libro
Diaboli, fures and sacrilegi. But to return to our former argument touching
great and small flies. Some there be who make the Philosopher Anacharsis author
of this comparison, affirming that his meaning was, thereby to let Solon (a
lawgiver as well as Zaleucus) understand, that the pains he took in making
laws, was but in vain. Now whereas they who father it upon Zaleucus, report he
should say, that as the fly and the gnat falling into a cobweb are there
entangled, whereas the Be and the waspe break through and fly away: so the
poor, etc. They who father it upon the Philosopher Anacharsis, in stead of
great and small flies (signifying the poor and the rich) use a comparison
between light and weighty bodies, which (in my conceit) has not so good a
grace. But the Fly is used fitly in another comparison, which will not be
amiss here to relate. It is that by which Metrodorus counseled those that
would live in any state or common wealth, or under any government, that they
should be careful to avoid two extremes, viz. the bottom of baseness and
the height of honor: that they be neither like gnats nor Lions; seeing gnats
are quashed at the very first, and men ever watch to take the Lion at advantage.

Further, we hear how these Preachers exclaim against the pomp and bravery
of women; and how Maillard for his part calls them femmes a la grand' gorre,
and femmes gorrieres, that is, women gorgeously apparelled, finicall and fine
as fippence: and how he finds fault with their long trains, their furs of
sable, their gold wherewith they all to bespangle their heads, and which they
wear about their necks, and on their girdles: and how Menot says, The poor
starve for cold in the street, whilst thou stately Lady; and thou delicate
Dame have seven or eight gowns in thy trunk, which thou wearest not thrice in
a year: and do thou not think thou shall be called to account for this
vain superfluity before Gods judgment seat? I know not what excuse a Lady
can make, who seeing a poor man naked and crying for cold, trayleth two or
three else of velvet after her. But how women in all ages have desired to
excel in bravery, (I should say in pomp and pride) Poets do sufficiently
declare, who like heralds have proclaimed the folly of their sumptuous
superfluities in this kind, whose testimonies (if happily they shall not satisfy
any) they may have recourse to sundry others, recorded by historians, as namely
by Liuie, who reports that certain Roman Ladies and Gentlewomen (nobly
descended, and otherwise accounted grave and chaste matrons) did murmr and
mutine against such as would not suffer them to return to their braueries
again, and that in such turbulent and furious manner, as though they had bin
besides themselves. And wherefore (I beseech you) were laws enacted of old, to
cut off the excess and riot of women, but because there was need of such
bridles to restrain them, and curbes to keep them in? Menot also uses a
word, which puts me in mind of a place in Terence, where he shows what pains
women took in tricking and trimming of themselves. For whereas he says
hyperbolically, that a man might sooner make a stable clean where forty
horses had stood, then a woman will have pinned all her pins, and settled her
attire; Terence said long ago, Dum comuntur annus est. The same Preacher does
often fume and fret against those huswiues who attired themselves so modestly,
that a man might see even to their nauels. His words are these, fol. 25. col.
1. Habebit magnas manicas, caput dissolutum, and pectus discoopertum vsque ad
ventrem, cum pectorali albo, per quod quis clare potest videre. Which put me in
mind of that which Horace says: Altera nil obstat Cois tibi: pene videre est
Vt nudam.
But some may happily say, As for this light, loose, and lascivious kind of
apparel, I hold it to be a wicked thing indeed: but why should bravery and
sumptuous attire undergo so sharp a censure? To which I answer, that in some
persons it cannot be reproved: notwithstanding such costly array has ever been
condemned, because that for one that maintains it at her own cost, there are
an hundred which maintain it at their cost that cannot do withal (as Barelete
and Menot testify) though the money come out of their husbands purses, or
accrue to them by cutting asunder the true loves knot. For proof whereof,
consider the place formerly quoted out of Barelete, O ye such and such men's
wives, I tell you, if your garments were put in a press, the blood of the
poor would drop from them. And Menot also, who iumpeth with him, not only in
judgment, but almost in words: Ye my Lords and Ladies, who are so addicted to
your pleasures, and wear scarlet gowns, I verily think that if they were well
pressed, a man might see the blood of the poor (wherein they were died) run
out of them. Which prouerbiall phrases, though they may not be taken strictly
according to the letter, but hyperbolically, the better to set out such
impiety (as it were) in orient colors: yet Barelete not content to houer thus
in generalities, brings for instance that which befell an usurer, no less
strange then the former: for he says that blood came out of the bread which he
ate. As for those huswiues that maintain their pomp and state by false play
at the tables, in bearing a man too many, contrary to duty and promise,
Maillard and Menot say them their lessons. But I will content my self with the
testimony of Maillard, who having said, Tell me whether it be a goodly sight
to see an Atturneys wife, who has not twenty shillings a year left him after
he has paid for his ffice, to go like a Princess? to have her head
bespangled with gold, a gold chain about her neck, and a golden girdle? You
say your places will maintain it. The devil take your places and you also
^^^ddeth afterward, It may be you will say, Our husbands give us no such
gowns, but we get them with the pain of our bodies. All the devils in hell go
with such pains. For these are his words: Dicetis forte, Maritus noster non
dat nobis tales vestes, sed nos lucramur ad poenam nostri corporis. Ad trigenta
mill Diabolos talis poena. Now it is easy to understand without further
explication what this pain is: nevertheless if it seem so obscure to any,
that it need a gloss, a man may fetch it out of Maillard, where he exclaimeth
against such as are their daughters bawds, and who make them get their dowry
with the pain and sweat of their bodies. Faciunt ei lucrari matrimonium suum
ad poenam and sudorem sui corporis, fol. 35. col. 4.

But to apply these testimonies to the particulars which I have here undertaken
to entreat of. If in Hesiods time there was small fidelity to be found among
men, no not among brethren, nor yet in children toward their parents:
doubtless there was less in Ouids time, and much less in the ages following;
and least of all in this wherein we live. And if charity did wax cold in
former times, it is now altogether frozen: if justice did then halt of one
foot, she now halteth downeright of both. If she had then but one eye, she is
now stark blind. If she was deaf but of one ear, she is now as deaf as a
door nail (I speak according to the old proverb, There is none so deaf as
he that will not hear: to which we may add this, There is none so blind as he
that will not see.) And whereas she then took only with her hands, she now
takes both with hands and feet: and whereas bravery and effeminatenesse in
attire, lasciviousness in speech and behavior, and all such vices as are
forerunners of greater mischiefs, went but on foot and slowly, now they go
on horseback and in post. All which notorious and gross sins we may assure
our selves are now in the ruff, and (as it were) in the April of their age,
(whereas the former were but in their winter:) having so much more vigor and
strength now then they had in former time, as trees and plants have in the
spring time, then in the winter season. The truth of all which shall be
demonstrated hereafter in particular.

Now we have so little cause to complain of the want of Christian reproves,
instructions, reprehensions and admonitions, or to judge it to be the reason of
the looseness and lewdness of our times, that if we consider the great mercy
and favor of God toward us in this behalf, we cannot but wonder how the
impiety of men at this day should any way come near that of our ancestors.
For where is the preacher now to be found (though many do nothing but flatter
and bolster men up in their sins) who if he should say in open pulpit with
Oliver Maillard (fol. 323. col. 2.) that whores ought to be tolerated, would
not be afraid least little children would spit in his face? Or where is the man
to be found, that dare maintain that damnable paradoxe, which Priests (as he
says) defended in his time, That a woman killing the child in her womb, did
not commit a mortal sin? And albeit it has ever been an odious, and so
consequently a dangerous thing, to reprove sin (as we may see in Menot, who
complains that Preachers in his time were threatened with a red hat, and that
they should be made Cardinals without going to Rome, for preaching the truth;
like John Baptist, who for bringing the truth to Herod's Court, left his head
behind him) yet it was never half so dangerous as at this day. And though
flatterers, who are naturally carried with a hellish hatred against such as
reprove and censure sin, swarm in greater multitudes then ever they did; and
though the number of such as dare not speak the truth (for fear of hard
measure, loss of goods, or future hopes) be as great as ever it was:
notwithstanding vices are better detected and more sharply censured by
preaching and writing, then they were in the days of our forefathers; which as
it serves to aggrauate our sins the more, so it will make us culpable of
greater damnation when we shall give up our account at the general audite.

Touching the last point which I propounded to entreat of in this Chapter (to
wit, that God punishes sin more severely at this day then he did in former
time) because it deserves a larger discourse, I will here only add this one
thing, that he which has no sense nor feeling thereof, is neither Frenchman,
Italian, Spaniard, nor German, but in the shape of a man, a very beast.

CHAP. X. How that the foresaid Preachers have left sundry vices untouched and
uncensured.
BEfore I make a comparatiue estimate of the lewdness of former times with the
looseness of our own, it will not be amiss to consider whether the foresaid
Preachers (whose testimonies I have alleged) have omitted any particular,
through oblivion, or otherwise. First then albeit Oliver Maillard and Menot
(his punay) say little or nothing of incests, sodomies, and other prodigious
vices, as murdering of father and mother, of wives murdering their husbands,
and husbands their wives, parents their children, one brother another, and one
kinsman another; we may not therefore think but that those times were stained
with these sins: or (to speak more properly) that such infection which had
continued festering so long, did then cease. I say which had continued so long,
considering what we read, not only in profane Antiquity, but especially in
the Sacred history, of these and the like vices. For it fares not with God as
it did with the lawgiver Solon, who being told that he had not prescribed what
punishment should be inflicted upon parricides (there being then a malefactor
taken who had murdered his father,) answered, he could not enact a law for the
punishment of such a fact, as he could not imagine any man would so much forget
himself as once to commit. The case I say is far otherwise with this great
lawgiver, who sees the most secret and hidden thoughts of men's hearts, and
the motions of their minds more clearly then we see the feature of their faces.
Neither may we think that any age has been free from such prodigious vices,
but that they were ever extraordinary in respect of other sins, as also more
rare in some countries and ages then in others. And I here protest, it much
misliketh me to enter discourse of such an argument. But as he who undertakes
to extol the prowess of Achilles above that of Hector or Ajax, is not to omit
any of their heroical exploits if he would have Achilles more renowned and
extolled to the skies: so considering the end of this discourse is to show that
the viciousness of our time is a perfect pattern thereof, being compared with
that of the age last past (which notwithstanding surpasses I suppose all
former generations) I should not escape the sharp censure of just
reprehension, if I should discharge one of these ages of some vices, the more
to load the other: or if I should go about to keep the credit of the one
entire and inviolable, by cracking the credit of the other. For as for the
rest, I grant that though it was the will of God such prodigious sins should
be recorded in holy Scripture; yet it is so much the better, by how much we
speak or think the less thereof. And as for sodomie, I am easily drawn to
believe, that the former Preachers were very sparing in speaking thereof, lest
they should open a gap to men's curiosity which is naturally exorbitant in this
kind. The more knaves are the Priests, who in their auricular confession (as
they call it) stir the minds and awake the spirits of their confessionists by
their interrogatories, occasioning them to muse upon such matters, and to feed
their fancies with such facts, as otherwise they would never have dreamed of.
For mine own part I confess, that for this very reason I have had much ado to
persuade my self, that swinish Sodomites and beastly buggerers should be
executed publicly. True it is, sundry weighty reasons may be alleged on both
sides: but I hold me to that which I see practiced in well ordered cities.
Furthermore, the reason which moves me to think that sodomie was not then (in
all probability) so common as at this day, is, for that there was not such
resort into those countries where it is made a trade and occupation as at this
present. For proof hereof if we consider who those Frenchmen be that give
themselves to such horrible and hellish sins, we shall find that most of them
have been in Italy or Turkey, or (not to go out of France to seek them) have
frequented their company, at leastwise have familiarly conuersed with their
scholars. For albeit Athenaeus tell us in his thirteenth book (which I
remember I have read elsewhere under the name of Hermippus) that the Celtes in
his time, notwithstanding they had fairer women then other Barbarians, were
addicted to this sin: yet (God be thanked) before we could speak so good
Italian in France, there was (almost) no speech of this villainy, as I have
heard of diverse old folks. And verily it is more pardonable in Italians then
in Frenchmen (if pardonable in any,) seeing that they (who for the most part
call it but peccatillo) are nearer their sanctities who do not only give a
license for it by way of permission, but a president also by way of example, as
hereafter shall be showed. Notwithstanding the words wherewith we express such
devilish and damnable dealing, being borrowed from the Italian tongue, are a
pregnant proof that France learned all the villainy it has of them, though it
were hard to say from what particular place. For this is a common song in
Italy, current in every man's mouth: Siena si vanta di quatro cose,
Di torri, and di campane,
Di bardasse, and di puttane.
Or thus, Siena di quatro cose e piena,
Di torri, etc.
That is, For these four things Siena looks so hie,
For towers, for bells, for whores, for buggerie.
But Master Pasquin shows plainly in sundry of his Satyrs, that
notwithstanding that proverb, Rome in regard of the third particular ought to
go before Siena, as where he says, Sed Romae puero non licet esse mihi. And
were it but only for the reason I have now alleged, he cannot endure (and
surely not without cause) that Rome should be deprived of this honor.

Touching incests, Italy (no doubt) will afford us better store of examples
then any other country; whether we speak of this age, or of that of the
former preachers: which we shall the better perceive, if we shall consider the
devilish proverb which is there so common of fathers who have mariageable
daughters. But if I have well observed, there are more incests committed by
Lords or men of note, then by meaner persons: which puts me in mind of that
which is recorded by Pontanus, how that Sigismondus Malatesta Lord of
Romagniola, had a child by his own daughter. True it is that other prodigious
villainies committed by the same man (if he may be called a man) and registered
by the foresaid author, will make us less to wonder hereat. For he reports
how that he would have abused his own son Robert, and that he had made a
buggering boy of him, if he had not drawn his dagger at him, and so escaped.
As also how that being desirous to have his pleasure of a virtuous German
Lady that traveled through his country to Rome, and perceiving that he could
not work her to his will, he cut her throat, and afterward satisfied his lust.
What can a man now find in Herodotus, I say not incredible, but hard to be
believed? But it shall not be amiss to pause here a little, and to listen to
that which Pontanus adds after the narration of the incest committed by this
wicked wretch. For he alleges two examples well worthy the noting, of a
certain natural honesty which is to be found even among beasts, which
condemns such prodigious practices among men. The first is of a little bitch
he had, which would never suffer her whelp to line her. Nunquam (says he)
passa est matter a filio suo iniri, and quamuis meis a pueris comprehensa
teneretur, nihilominus ea mordicus pueros a se reiecit, and in filium illata,
illum dentibus male habuit. The second is more strange; of a Mare that would
not suffer her colt to cover her; but having been at the last covered by him
(being disguised with a skin of another color, and by other devises,) after
she once perceived it, forsook her meat for very grief, and died shortly
after: which (as he says) was told him by one John Vingtmille an Italian
Marquess, whose the Mare and colt were. These be the two examples alleged by
Pontanus, a man of so great credit, that I did not stick to relate them upon
his word, albeit I am not ignorant they should be accounted of many but fond
and fabulous: which (it seems) himself foresaw, and therefore uses this
preface in the narration of the first example, Referam quae ego ipse ex aduerso
and vidi, and testor, and persancte etiam iuro: and for the second, he
alleges his author of whom he heard it. But seeing that incests are
extraordinary sins, why should we not think that God would oppose the
extraordinary honesty which is to be found in certain brute beasts, to such
villainy practiced by men, to condemn the reasonable creatures by the
unreasonable? Nevertheless I report my self to the thing as it is, especially
considering the French proverb does not account him a good dog that keeps
his kind. There is yet another kind of incest, according to those who have been
of opinion, and are even at this day, that Nuns are holier then other women:
and verily it may seem, that since they keep the same place the Vestal virgins
did in old time (in the judgment of such as call them by no other name in Latin
but Vestales) we should call the whoredom committed with them, incest; and
that he which defloureth them after they have once vowed virginity to God (or
to such or such a Saint) were a sacrilegious person; I grant the one, but not
the other. I grant (I say) that forasmuch as this doughtie devotion is borrowed
from the heathen, the word incest, whereby they were wont to express such a
slippery trick committed with a holy Nun, may be kept, and that (to speak
as heathen do) it may be called incest: but I deny that he that defiles a
Nun is a sacrilegious person, to speak as Christians do. For hereupon it
would follow, that such virginity should be a holy consecrated thing; and to
the end it might be holy and consecrate, necessary it is, that either God or
the Saint to whom it was vowed, consecrated or dedicated, should declare by
solemn covenant and stipulation that he did accept thereof: But how can they
accept of that at the hands of a Nun, which she cannot give? Or what reason
is there she should offer that, to which she has no right? And if continency
be a special gift of God, how can any votary vow perpetual virginity either
to God or the Saints, without a warrant from him so to do? To conclude then,
certain it is that he that knows such a vow of virginity and single life to
be but an abuse, and consequently that a Nun is no more holy then another
woman, if he defloure her, he commits neither sacrilege nor incest: whereas
being otherwise persuaded he commits both, in regard of conscience. And
therefore the tyrant Dionysius was a sacrilegious person for robbing and
spoiling of his Idols; which he was bound (according to his religion) to have
holden for gods; whereas one of another religion holding them to be but Idols,
should have been but a simple thief. And doubtless the folly which is
committed with a Nun, after she has once lost her virginity, because that
of holy (according to her religion) she is made profane, is neither incest nor
sacrilege in regard of either party. Another difficulty remains to be
discussed, viz. whether a holy Monk having defloured a holy Nun, ought to be
accused thereof or not? But leaving the deciding of this question to the next
Council, I will only add this one thing, that our kind Catholics are not
(it seems) of this opinion, considering what small conscience they make
hereof. The like I may say of those who were wont to lodge Nuns near unto
Monks, that (as good fellows speak) the barn might be near the thrashers.
How ever it be, it appears plainly by that which has been alleged out of
Pontanus, that Nunneries were little better then stews in the time of the
former Preachers.

Touching the sin against nature (of which I speak remembering my former
protestation) we have examples even of those times. For the foresaid Pontanus
writes of a Brittan who had the company of an Ass, whilst the French King
Charles the eight held Naples.

It were also easy to allege modern examples of wives murdering their
husbands, and husbands there wives: as also of brethren and nearest kinsmen
embrewing their hands in one another blood: and of children murdering their
parents, and parents their children, though this be more rare then the former.
When husbands murder their wives, or wives their husbands, they do it (for the
most part) of spite or rather rage and madness caused by breach of wedlock.
For as histories make mention of diverse men who at the very instant, and in
ipso facto (as we say) have taken revenge of their wives who had played false
with them: So they make report of women, who for the same reason have wreaked
their malice upon their husbands, some by poison, others by other means; as we
read in Baptista Fulgosius, of a woman near to Narbonne who in the night cut
off her husbands priuities because he had defiled the marriage bed.
Notwithstanding the occasion of some murders proceeds from both parties,
desiring to enjoy their unlawful lusts with greater liberty. The cause of
fratricide, or murders committed by one brother upon another, arise for the
most part from hence, in that they cannot agree whether of them should remain
absolute Lord; and so are enforced to decide their right by dint of sword,
whereof we have very ancient examples in the two Theban brethren, Eteocles and
Polynices, in Rhemus and Romulus, in Artaxerxes and Cyrus: and in the age last
past (wherewith I compare the present) there was such hot bickering at Tunis in
Africa between two brethren for the crown, that they did not only kill one
another in the quarrel, but also massacred their children and offspring, as
Pontanus testifies. But histories afford us more examples of such as have
murdered their brethren upon light occasions, by treason or otherwise, when
once they had them on the hip, especially of Italians, as Volaterran reports
of Anthony C^^signore, who slew Bartholmew his brother, to the end he might
enjoy the Dukedom of Verona, which was divided between them by their fathers
will. In like manner how one Pinus Ordelaphus upon the like occasion slew his
brother Francis, and banished his children. As also how Francis and Lewis son
of Guido Gonzagua Duke of Mantua slew their brother Vgolin (pretending to make
good cheer at a supper, to which they had invited him) because their father
had left him sole heir of the Dukedom. Moreover we read of one Perinus
Fregosa Duke of Genoua, who slew his brother Nicholas, having him in jealousy
that he aspired to the Dukedom. In like sort Lewis Marie put Galeace his
brothers son to death, to the end he might the more quietly enjoy the
Dukedom of Millaine.

Touching murdering of parents (properly called parricide, though the
signification of the word be somewhat more large) we find in ancient histories
that it was more ordinary with Kings, Princes, and great Lords, then with
meaner men: and so it continues even to this day. For the Emperor Frederick
the third was slain by his own son Manfred (his base son as some affirm)
at leastwise he was the plotter and procurer of his death. And one Frisque
murdered his father the duke of Ferrara, to the end he might come to the
Dukedom, as indeed he did, though he enjoyed it not long; for his subjects
shortly after, executing Gods just judgment upon him, cut his throat. And
doubtless the age last part can never wash it hands of this wickedness,
albeit I produce no examples for confirmation hereof, hastening to end such
discourses as should not only be offensive to Christian ears, but also make
their very hairs stand upright on their heads. What say I Christians? Nay the
very heathen also; yea the most barbarous and savage among them.

CHAP. XI. That the notorious and incredible lewdness of these times does
justify that which has been spoken of the wickedness and impiety of the Age
last past.
ALbeit there go strange reports of the heinous and horrible sins which
reigned in the former Age; yet if we shall but a little consider the course of
the world, and listen to the common complaints, we shall find (would to God it
were not so) far fouler facts, which will not only induce us to subscribe to
the truth of that report, but further to confess that the sins of those
times were but sugar (as it is in the French proverb) in comparison of the
villainies of these wherein we live. I have heretofore given a reason why sin
like a river, the further it goes, the greater it grows, and still increases
till it come to be a great sea. But we may give one more special touching
these times. For besides that we have trod in the steps of our ancestors, and
followed their examples, as well in the careful keeping of the vices whereof
they left us their heirs and successors, as in improuing the old and
purchasing of the new by our good husbandry, we have further increased the
number of them by our traffic and commerce with other countries, a thing more
common at this day then ever it was in former times; to whom an hundred miles
seemed longer then five hundred to us: and for one that was curious to know the
fashions of foreign countries, there are now a days ten, whom this gadding
humor of rouing and ranging abroad, and coasting countries, carries away;
causing them to give a farewell to their friends, and to forsake their dearest
country, kinsmen and acquaintance. But what fruit reap they by such travel?
at leastwise what do the most reap? It was Horace his old song, Coelum non
animum mutant, qui trans mare currunt. That is, They change the air that seas
do pass,
But mind remains the same that was.
But if in crossing the sea they happily change their mind, it is but as the
weathercocke does with the wind; for they are so far from being bettered by
their travel, that they are made much worse, mending their manners no
otherwise then sower Ale does in summer. The reason whereof is man's inbred
corruption, which has an attractiue faculty to draw vice unto it, as Amber
does a straw, or the loadstone iron. Whence it is, that as ill weed (according
to the old proverb) grows with speed: so vice has his continual (though
insensible) growth in us, and not virtue. Which the ancient Poet Hesiod
seems to insinuate, when he says, that Dame Wickedness is easy to be
found, as dwelling near unto us; whereas Lady Virtue is inaccessible, and not
to be spoken with, without great labor and pain, in that the way unto her
house and honor is not only long and tedious, but also steep and cragged.
And have we not daily experience hereof in the most of our great travelers?
What shall we say of our Rome-rouers among the rest? Verily the old proverb
has long since concluded them in Bocardo: Iamais ni cheual, ni homme
N'amenda d'aller a Romme.
That is, Nor horse, nor man, ere turned home,
Ought betterd by the sight of Rome.
Which though it be spoken of Rome in particular, yet it may well be understood
of other countries also, seeing there is not one traveler among twenty
(especially of the younger sort) who returns home again, no not from his
Holiness or the holy land, but seems to have frequented the devils rather
then the divinity schools. And as Italy is the only country in the world,
so Rome is the only city wherein an Abel may learn to become a Cain, where a
lamb may be transformed into a Lion, and a man into a monster. And yet
notwithstanding it is accounted a greater grace to a man to have been student
in such a school, then it was in times past to have been trained up in Athens,
stored with so many learned Philosophers. Nay, the more a Frenchman is
Romanized or Italianized, the sooner he shall be promoted by great Lords, as
having bestowed his time well, and as being a man fit for employment by means
of the temper and mixture of two several dispositions. As though a Frenchman
taken in his pure naturals were not bad enough to be employed in their sweet
dealings, except he have learned the trick of the Italian trade.

Now that men in these days must needs exceed their ancestors in wickedness,
may hence appear, in that they are bound prentises to the trade, and practice
it sooner. And whence comes this, but partly from hence, in that youth is set
at liberty, and have the reine laid in their necks to run at randon at
their pleasure, before they come to be of age; and partly for that Iuuenals
rule was never worse kept: Maxima debetur puero reuerentia, si quid,
Turpe paras. --
And it is the common complaint of old men almost in all places, that young
children who cannot speak readily, can swear roundly, and rap out oaths
thick and threefold, in such sort, that men of years in time past were not
able to vie with them. And therefore we are not so much to wonder to hear some
of all sorts, as tailers and tinkers, carters and cobblers, and the rest of the
rascalitie, swear, blaspheme, and renounce God (according to the French
proverb, Apertient il a un vilain de renier Dieu?) as some of all ages, as
well young as old. And yet it makes old folks wonder, and that not a little, to
see young children who are scarce crept out of their cradles, to be sent to
school, and to have some smacke of learning: whereupon they judge us more
fortunate then themselves, in that scholars at this day leave the school
almost at the same age that they were wont to be sent thither in time past.
Whence they are induced to believe, that children are far more ripe and
pregnant now then they were in their younger years. But all things duly
considered, it will appear that that which should be a help and furtherance
to the greatest part of youth, is a let and hinderance unto them. I grant
indeed that children at this day can conceive more at six or seven years of
age (as experience shows) then they could in old time at nine or ten: which is
not to be ascribed to the quickness of their wit in understanding, but to the
more easy and facile method of teaching; whence it is, that they profit more
in one year, then our ancestors did in two. But pity it is to see many, who
having discontinued but three or four days from school, have need to return
to their horne-booke again: so that as they are more happy and fortunate then
their ancestors in learning quickly; so are they more unfortunate in
forgetting it as fast. The reason whereof is, for that they give over the
school before they come to strength of memory, capacity and judgment.

But this is far worse (for it redounds to the great contempt and derision of
learning) in that many send not their children to school to learn, but only
to sharpen their wits and to quicken their spirits, by means of continual
company (youths being as it were a whetstone to sharpen one another:) and in a
word to let them like untamed colts, have a little more scope and liberty to
run at large, and to give them the first fleshing in wickedness; which some
call liveliness, others finenesse and featnesse, or gallantnesse, or
pleasantness, or sharpness of wit, or civility, etc. For many now a days
send their children to school only till such time as they be fit to be made
pages, where they are sure to lose that little learning they had formerly
gotten, if happily they had any beaten into their heads: being (in the mean
time) so far from loosing their first seasoning, that they add thereto a
second and a third. Some send their children to school to learn three or
four words of Latin, till they be of years to travel into Italy, where like
restie colts they may be broken, and like haggar hawks learned to the lure,
and absolutely accomplished in courtlike complements. Howbeit some gentlemen
send not their sons into Italy to learn fashions and gallant behavior only,
proper to the country; but in hope that when they are weary with visiting
curtizans, they will find some spare time to visit Bartol. And I persuade my
self that he who writing to his son at Padua, superscribed his letter (for
fear he should belie him) studenti Patauij, aut studendi causa misso,
mistrusted some such dealing, though it grieved him (poor man) not a little.
Howbeit it were a wonder if one almost among twenty, returning home from
travel, should remember any other laws then such as begin with La signora
Lucretia, La signora Angela, La signora Camilla, or the like. Though I am not
ignorant that in old time also (as Menot witnesses) our young gallants left
Bartol bawling in his chair, and went to the dancing school, and to court
Ladies. But not to speak how those which travel into Italy are in danger to
be infected with far worse vices (as daily experience shows) this mischief
also follows in the neck of it, that they are not only restrained by the
fear of God, but also by the fear of man, as being in foreign and far
remote countries out of their sight who might control them. For I remember
that whilst Odet de Selue was Ambassador for the French King at Venice (about
thirteen years ago) there was a young gentleman some fourteen or fifteen
years of age, sent into Italy by his father (then Counselor of the high Court
of Parliament at Paris) under the tuition of his old Tutor: who at his
departure from his fathers house, was of as meek, gentle and tractable a
disposition as could be wished: but after he had continued certain days at
Venice, and some few of Padua, he grew so stubburne and stout, that whereas his
Tutor was wont to hold a high hand over him, and to keep him short, he was
then glad not only to let loose the reins to his headstrong affections, but
even to lay the bridle in his neck, and suffer him to run at large, and
become a Tutor to himself. To wind up all in a word, certain it is, that
whether it be for the reasons formerly alleged, or for some other, the
impiety of these times far surpasses all former ages: being grown to that
height within these five and twenty years, that men make no bones to commit
that, which they would then have loathed once to have spoken, or entertained in
their secretest thoughts. As for the vices wherewith our ancestors were
infected, there is as great difference between their dissoluteness and ours,
as between those who are displeased with themselves for their slips and sins
of infirmity, and such ^s glory in their wickedness. For what should we say
of this age, when young Princes and noble men's sons have tutors and
instructors for blasphemies and worse matters which for shame I cannot name?
But this shall suffice to have spoken in general: I will now descend unto
particulars.

And here some may happily demand, what benefit a man may reap by such a
discourse? To which I answer, that the benefit is greater then we may perchance
imagine, if we consider that God lays a more heavy hand upon us now, then he
did in former time (as shall be declared hereafter in a several Chapter) that
we remembering his boundless mercy in the midst of his just judgments, might
the more be moved to repentance. For here we shall perceive (if we will not
sooth and flatter our selves) that for one plague and punishment inflicted upon
us, we deserve an hundred: and that whereas he corrects us but with rods of
men, he might shiuer us in pieces with his rod of Iron. Besides, we are to hold
this as a most undoubted truth, that it is not without cause that so many
fearful examples and prodigious sins even of the Saints are registered in holy
Scripture. For whence do we learn the frowardness and corruption of our
nature, or the sleights of Satan, and his implacable hatred against mankind, or
how he lies in ambush for us at every corner, and watches us at every turn,
but by such accidents as have befalne them who without all hope of recovery
have entangled themselves in his snares? And whence can we better know in what
need we stand of all Gods helping hand, then by the daily dangers wherewith we
are beset on every side, being so many warning pieces to admonish us to stand
upon our guard? And seeing we cannot be ignorant, that all our help comes
only from above, and that there is none safely guarded but he that is guarded
by the heavenly guard of Gods holy Angels, every rumor and report of such
heinous and horrible crimes* should be so many alarmes (as it were) to rouse us
from our security, and to stir us up to recommend our selves more earnestly
into his hands, and to plie him more effectually by humble and hearty prayer,
that he would not leave us to our selves, nor let loose the reins to our
unruly and disordered affections, but bridle and keep them in compass, and
ever take us into his holy protection: like little children, who the more they
are afraid, the more carefully they hide themselves, and the further they
creep into their mothers lap. For if seeing a man that has any bodily blemish
or imperfection, we have just cause offered us to lift up our hearts by
thankfulness unto God for preserving us from the like, and to acknowledge
withal that we are liable to as great, if not greater dangers. How much more
when we see any that has foully forgotten himself, and fallen into any
fearful sin, to give him thanks for keeping us from falling into the like:
and withal to acknowledge that we are made of the same mould, and that we have
no pattent to be exempted from such dangers, but so long as it shall please him
to assist us by his grace, and keep us in his holy fear, restraining the rage
of the devil our deadly enemy; that though he assail us, yet he may not
prevail against us. Now then if this present discourse show evidently that
this deadly enemy of mankind has doubled his forces in these latter days,
ought it not stir us up to greater vigilancie and watchfulness over our
hearts and lives, to stand upon our guard, and to arm our selves at all points
with the complete armor of the Spirit? Vice (we know) was ever punished in all
ages and religions. But where the heathen respected only exemplary punishment,
in doing open execution upon malefactors, that others might hear and fear,
and deal no more presumptuously: Christians have gone a step further, and have
had a deeper insight thereinto, viz. that those that would not be kept in
compass by the fear of God, should be kept in order and awe by the fear of
man; I mean by fear of punishment which the law has appointed to be
inflicted upon them according to the nature and quality of their offense. For
the heathen Poet said long ago, Oderunt peccare boni virtutis amore,
Oderunt peccare mali formidine poena.
That is, The good for virtues love from ill refrain,
The ill refrain from ill for fear of pain.
Whereunto Christians also accord, save that they deliver it in other terms,
when they say, that the reason why the godly do not power themselves forth into
pleasure, and let loose the reins to their lusts, is because they have the
fear of God continually before their eyes. Fear (I say) proceeding from a
love truly filial, and no way servile; as the good child fears to offend his
father for the love he bears him. Moreover, this benefit we may reap by
this discourse, that it will serve us in stead of a monitor, to give us warning
of those many sleights and deceits so common and rife in the world.

CHAP. XII. Wherein is declared by how much Whoredom is greater, and more
notorious at this day, then ever it was.
TO begin then where formerly I began (yet not tying my self precisely to the
same method) we hear how mightily Menot exclaimeth against whoredom committed
in his time. But if he were now living, neither his exclamations, nor the
outcries of his fellows (though made with open mouth) would be sufficient.
For since it was notoriously known, that the place where the Popes Holiness
makes his abode, is the chief harbor and hospital for whores (I should have
said Curtizans) of all countries: he that kept a whore before with some remorse
of conscience, thought he should then surely do a meritorious work, if he
entertained one; and that if he kept many, he should perform works of
supererogation: so that many began to keep whole droues of whores, as of
horses. In a word, the new and strange punishments inflicted upon men for such
filthiness, may sufficiently show how that since that time, the most have even
plunged themselves over head and ears into this pit of whoredom. For as
Physicians use new and desperate remedies, for desperate and incurable
diseases: so God has sent these displeing dames, the French-poxe and the
Knaue-bald disease, and all their train, as a just punishment upon the Age
wilfully given over to all wantonness and villainy, without hope of recovery,
to execute his just judgments. The which does better discover the surpassing
wickedness of these times: for as wicked children are hardened by the rod; so
men are now so hardened against these diseases, which not long since were held
so prodigious, that a man would have thought even wild and savage beasts would
have been tamed thereby; that in stead of standing in fear of them, they even
seek them out, and dare them in their dens. Albeit we daily see the most
frolic youths and brauest gallants soonest rot away by peece-meale; and many
a Captain who has been another Roland in sundry battles, at length to give up
his last breath in their paws, having long encountered them with many potions:
and yet for all this in diverse companies, he is accounted but a dastard, a
milk-sop, and a white liuerd soldier that has not traveled five or six
times into Sweatland, till he have been in danger to leave his skin behind him.
To conclude, men are now so hardened with stripes, and do so eagerly pursue
their pleasures in a brutish kind of sensuality, that they are nothing afraid
of the French pox which has been in former times, but only of the
quintessence of the pockes, which is said to have begun within these few
years. Indeed, I well remember, I was once at Padua at Michael Falopp^o's
lecture, where he promised to show his scholars the next day, how they might
have their bellies full of whoredom and lechery, without any fear of Madame
the French pockes, or any of her train.

2 But if we compare this age with the age last past, we shall (no doubt) find
that in those times, only simple fornication and adultery were known and
talked of; such (I mean) as were not incestuous: and that men made as great
conscience to defloure a Nun, as the heathen did to defloure a Vestall virgin,
putting as great difference between the defiling of Vestals and other virgins,
as between simple theft and sacrilege: whereas now even those who account of
Nuns as the heathen did of their Vestals, and think it incest to defloure
them, cease not to make common stews of Nunneries. Touching the second kind of
incest which Popish superstition suffered not to be accounted incest (albeit
Gods word has condemned it) who sees not how common it is grown? Is there
not an Italian proverb which makes but a jest at the incest of the father
with his affianced daughter? Whereof I will give examples when I come to speak
of Cleargie-men: and will here only add this one thing, how that some in
these days have committed strange incests, and almost incredible. We read in
the Queen of N^^^rres narrations of one who lying with his mother (thinking he
had lain (...) gentlewoman) had a child by her, which was his sister and
daughter, and afterward his wife; and so from one simple incest fell into two
other, though as ignorant thereof as he was of the former: which happened
through his mothers default, presuming too much of her constancy; for she not
crediting her gentlewomans report, that her son did entice and solicit her
to folly* to the end she might know the truth, went at the time appointed in
her room* where in stead of preventing a less evil, by this means, she kept
her room so well (not making her self known) that she caused her son to
fall into that so horrible and detestable a sin: who afterward (not knowing
nor once suspecting any such thing) married her whom he had begotten in such
incest. But to omit incests committed of ignorance, we daily hear of others no
less abominable, committed of set purpose, and that not by Clergymen only
(as shall be showed hereafter) but by Lay men also. Nay, great men's houses
(though otherwise honorable) are generally stained with incestuous marriages.
Further, what shall we say to those of our time, who to go beyond their
predecessors in all villainy, are come to this pass, to keep schools of
whoredom, and by lascivious pictures (printed even at Rome) to read men a
lecture, teaching them (as it were) by ocular demonstration? If the very
heathen did detest and abhor that villain Elephantis for such pictures, what
shall we say of our age, wherein men professing themselves Christians, have
taken pleasure in such abominations?

3 As for such as sold their daughters in former time, what strange thing did
they in comparison of those who at this day sell not only their daughters, but
themselves also? And what shall we say of those wittals, who lend, or pawn, or
sell their wives for ready money? Verily such women are greatly to be pitted:
but some of them (I warrant you) know well enough how to cry quittance with
their husbands: as she did who was lent to a young Cardinal at the Council of
Trent. For though at the first she was as nice as a Nuns hen, and needed
great entreaty to pleasure this young Prelate; saying, it went against her
conscience to impart that unto him, which of right was due to none but to her
husband: yet her kind heart being persuaded, at the last she gave her consent,
and found such comfort in this Prelates first visitation, that the next morning
she brought her husband the money which was promised him; saying, Here is the
money which was promised you for the lone of me, but assure your self it is a
plain and simple sale, therefore you may do well to provide your self of
another wife; for whereas you would but lend me, I had rather be sold outright,
that I may not change so often: and so it was concluded. Now as there are some
women, whose case is to be pitied: so on the other side it is great pity to
see some wittals wear horns to their great grief, and yet dare not for their
ears complain to those that might redress it. For what have the most of them
gotten, who have so long sued to be divorced from their adulterous wives, but
to be flouted, laughed to scorn, and pointed at even by little children, who
could say that such and such caused themselves to be canonized for cuckolds.
Indeed I remember that a man of worth, after a tedious and importunate suit,
was divorced from his light huswife: but by this means she had that which she
desired, for she was put into a monastery, where in stead of punishment, she
had opportunity to follow her occupation with greater liberty. I have also
heard of one, who complaining of the wrong which his wife offered him, received
this answer: Why sir, would you be more privileged then such a great Lord, a
man of such valor, who knows full well that his wife makes him cuckold, as
well when he is in the Court present with her, as when he is in the country
absent from her, and yet dare not speak a word for fear of cracking his
credit? Thus we see how long custom in sin has so bereft many at this day of
all sense of civil honesty, that they make but a jest at that, which their
ancestors counted the greatest cross and corrasiue in the world: I say their
ancestors, including the heathen as well as Christians. For the Grecians and
Romans (we know) punished adultery most severely, following the law of God
therein. But not to seek far back nor far off for examples, we may judge
by that which befell the high Stuards wife of Normandy (in the reign of king
Lewis the eleventh) whether at that time they made but a jest of adultery, as
they do at this day. For he having taken his Lady upon the sudden playing the
whore with his steward, first slew the adulterer before her face, and after put
her to the sword likewise (notwithstanding their children which she held in her
arms:) and yet was never troubled by the King, nor called coram for the
matter, albeit she was descended of a noble house, and of the blood royal, as
some affirm. Would not such a fact seem strange at this day? No doubt it
would, considering that the world is clean changed from that it was in former
time, and (as it were) turned up side down. For they are now grown to this
height of impudency, to make wanton songs of purpose to embolden and flesh
Venus white liuerd soldiers, to violate their faith plight to their husbands;
one of which begins thus: Ne void on pas les hommes
Fair virtue d'aimer?
Et sottes que nous sommes,
Nous le voulons blasmer.
Ce que leur est louable,
Nous turn a deshonneur,
Et fault inexcusable.
O dure loy d'honneur.
Pourquoy nature sage, etc.
That is, See we not men so honor wanton love
With virtues style, which we fond fools reprove?
That which in them deserves so fair a name,
To us why should it turn to mickle blame?
Hard law of honor, why did nature sage? etc.
This song likewise (which was common in every man's mouth at the Court) was
made upon a Vandeuille, beginning thus: Ne void on pas les hommes se iouer ca
and la?
Et sottes que nous sommes, n'osons fair cela.
That is, How do our gallants swagger to and fro?
But fools that we are, we dare not do so.
And there was another in as great request: the argument whereof was the
licencious liberty and impunitie of adultery, a sin so rife at this day:
one strain of the song is this: Ami cocu, veux-tu que ie te die,
Si tu m'en crois, ne di ta malady.
Car si ta femme un coup est descouuerte,
Elle voudra le fair a port ouuerte.
Estre cocu n'est pas mauuaise chose,
Si autre mal on ne luy presuppose.
That is, Cuckold my friend, if thou will me believe,
Never express the thing that gars thee grieve.
For if thy wife be known once for a whore,
She then will jade thee at thine open door.
It matters not so much to wear an horn,
And if it might be free from others scorn.
The conclusion of the song is this: Ou si tu crois cocu estre vne tache,
Guard toi bien au moins qu'on ne le sache.
Le remede est a qui les corns port,
De les planter ailleurs de mesme sort.
That is, If horns thou deemst a blemish to thy brow,
See well that never man thy sorrow know.
Horns have no cure, but when thy self is sped,
To plant thy horns upon another head,
I am not ignorant that this sweet song was made in imitation of Ovid; but the
question is, whether he being a profane Pagan, be a sufficient warrant for
Christians to oppose such notorious vile villainies to Gods holy commandments?
And which is yet more, he was then accounted no body that could not sing this
song; whereas if a man had sung the ten commandments, or one of David's
Psalms, they would have sung him a song of frying a faggot, and committed him
to the Lords of the burning chamber. My self being in the Court, had mine
ears often beaten with a like song coming out of some such shop, in which
mention is made of a certain Lady, who perceiving her self to wrinkle and
wax old, greatly lamented her former course of life, viz. that she had been
honest, and kept touch with her husband: the song begins thus: Ie plain le
temps de mon florissant aage, etc. That is, I wail the time of my once
flouring age, etc. Thus thou see (gentle Reader) how they incite women to
wantonness and dalliance, as if they were slack and backward of themselves,
when they are entreated to play such pageants: those I mean especially who are
brought up in all idleness, delicacie and wantonness; for whose good, these
songs (containing such goodly instructions) were purposely made. I omit other
triuiall songs, many proverbs, as also sundry wanton and effeminate speeches
and gestures, which aim at nothing else but the corrupting of maids and
matrons. For (to wind up all in a word) there is no device so devilish or
damnable, but has been found out in these days, to make vices virtues: which
I understand especially of whoredom. And to the end they might thoroughly
corrupt us, they have erected Priapus his images again with all their train,
in their pleasant gardens; witness that of Saint Germain des Prez at Paris, so
finely trimmed by an Italian who was owner thereof, and who kept a brothell
house in it for all comers. What remains there then to make the vices of this
Age so superlatiue, but that it may outstrip and go beyond not only the age
last past, but all others since the world began? Verily nothing but the modest
pictures of Philaenis and Elephantis. But has not Italy (I speak it with
grief) furnished us with as bad, or rather with worse then they? Yea, and with
some such as were not heard of before: wherein that is lively presented to the
eye, which whosoever has but a spark of the fear of God in his heart, cannot
so much as name with our horror. So that we may well say, Venimus ad summu^: and
yet all too little to set forth the exceeding great wickedness, and
supersuperlatiue knavery of these times in this particular. For who of all the
heathen are more lascivious, more loosly licencious and dissolute in speech, or
(in a word) more deadly enemies to chastity, then the Poets, especially the
Latin Elegiacks? And yet Propertius a captain among them co^plaines of the like
wickedness (though not altogether so notorious) when he says: Quae manus
obscoenas depinxit prima tabellas,
Et posuit casta turpia visa domo,
Illa puellarum ingenuos corrupit ocellos,
Nequitiaeque suae noluit esse rudes.
Ah gemat in terris ista qui protulit art,
Iurgia sub tacita condita laetitia.
Non istis olim variabant tecta figuris,
Quum paries nullo crimine pictus erat.
And as concerning the last distich, with what else I beseech you are walls
painted at this day (being always in the view of children, and those of the
younger sort, who are yet under the rod) save with such pictures? Or with what
pictures are halles and chambers garnished, save with these? I had thought I
had bin at an end, but I perceive I am yet to begin, in that sundry other offer
themselves to my pen, which have been devised (at leastwise practiced) by
Christians (...) these days. Notwithstanding I will content my self with one
other, in comparison whereof these statues of Priapus erected in gardens and
others, resembling those of Philanis and Elephantis, may seem to be but toys,
not to be spoken of. It is a fine pageant which was played at Bloys, when King
Henry the second made his entrance into that city, in which they caused a
company of whores (those especially whom the Italians call Sfaciate) to be
stripped naked, and to ride upon oxen in this modest manner; making this goodly
show wheresoever these gallants which followed them (performing the office of
pique-boeufs) thought good. Moreover, we hear how Menot (poor soul)
exclaimeth against certain for making their baudie bargains in Churches. But
what would he say to those that commit whoredom in Chapels, taking all their
Saints of both sexes there present for witnesses? Which wanton and wicked
dealing, the Lord (no doubt) suffers in judgment, to the end that those
places which have been so long time spiritual brothel houses for men to commit
spiritual fornication in, should be also real brothell houses, even stews
and sties of sin, where they might defile themselves by bodily pollution. And
what would he say (trow we) of another profane practice, yet more strange, viz.
of such as apply the holy Scripture, and sentences of the ancient Doctors to
their baudy and beastly songs? as we see in these verses: Saint Augustine
instruisant vne Dame,
Dit que l'amour est l'ame de nostre ame:
Et que la foy, tant soit constante and forte,
Sans ferme amor est inutile and morte.
Saint Bernard fait vne longue homely,
Ou il benit tous les coeurs qu'amour lie.
Et saint Ambroise en fait vne autre express,
Ou il maudit ceux qui sont sans maistresse.
Et de Lyra la dessus nous reconte
Que qui plus aim, and plus haut au ciel monte.
Celui qui sceut les secrets de son maistre,
Dit que l'aimant damn ne sauroit estre.
Et dit bien plus le Docteur Seraphique,
Que qui point n'aime, est pire qu'heretique.
Pource qu'amour est feu pur and celeste,
Qui ne craint point qu'autre feu le moleste.
Et c'est pour quoi (comme dit saint Gregoire)
Un aimant fait ici son Purgatoire.
That is, Austine instructing a deuouter Dame,
Says, Love the soul is of our living soul,
And faith how ever firm and resolute,
Withouten love, all bootlesse is and dead.
And Bernard writes a longsome homily,
Blessing all hearts y bound with chains of love.
And Ambrose writes another not unlike,
Censuring all that do a mistress want.
Whereon Lyranus in his learned gloss,
Says, more we love, the nearer we aspir^
To heavens height. And he that in lie knew
His mistress secret thewes, could boldly say,
The man that loves, can never damned be.
And that Seraphique Doctor well defines
Who loves not's worse then an heretic.
And for love is a pure celestial fire,
That cannot be by other fires annoyd:
Wisely concludes hence Saint Gregory,
That lovers here do fry in Purgatory.
The conclusion is this: Nulle de nous ne soit donques si dure
Qu'elle resist a la saint Escriture:
Puis qu'on la void de ce propos remplie,
Que pour aimer, la Loi est accomplie.
That is, Let non so hardy be to dare oppose
The sacred writ; whose every page auowes
The law by love fulfild.
See here the brazen faced impudency of these miserable miscreants, thus
shamefully profaning the holy Scripture, in making it serve them as their
bawd. A far fouler fact then that whereof Menot complains, when he exclaimeth
against certain letchers for making their baudie bargains in Churches. It is
true indeed (may some say) but it happily never came to their ears that had
either wit in their heads to perceive the impiety that lay masked under this
vizard, or authority in their hands to punish those that sung it. To which I
answer, that there was never song in such request, or which better pleased,
especially those kind of men. Others there are who have used sentences of
Scripture, as namely certain verses taken out of the Psalms, in their wanton
ballads and lascivious songs. For it is not of late time (as we know) that they
took this liberty to make themselves merry, by using the Scripture phrase to
grace a conceit or a jest. But we shall have fitter occasion to speak hereof
in the Chapter of blasphemies. Let this now suffice for Menots complaint.

4 Moreover, these Preachers cry out with might and maine against the bawds of
their time: and Menot has a bout with the Lords of the Parliament for letting
them their houses; being horn mad with them for giving their helping hand, or
showing any countenance to such wicked wretches. But what would he say (may we
think) of those, who for their good and faithful service in making baudy
bargains, have been in such favor with Princes, that they have not stuck to
bestow castles, benefices, offices, and great dignities upon them? Witness a
Bishop, who bragged in my hearing, that whereas men in times past came to great
preferment by their learning, and by being good Latinists, he for his part
understood not a word of Latin, but only passelatine, by means whereof he
was advanced to that dignity. This his passelatine was (as most would
confess, if I should name him) the office of a bawd, although he made no brags
thereof.

CHAP. XIII. Of Sodomie, and the sin against nature, committed at this day.
Moreover, if there were nothing else but such swinish Sodomie as is committed
at this day, might we not justly term this age the paragon of abominable
wickedness? The heathen (I confess) were much addicted to this vice: but can
it be showed that it was ever accounted among Christians as a virtue? Yet some
in these days have not only accounted it a virtue, but also written in
commendation of it, and published their writings in print, to the view of the
world. For we may not forget how that John de la Case a Florentine and
Archbishop of Beneuent writ a book in Italian rhyme, wherein he sings forth a
thousand praises in commendation of this sin; which good Christians cannot so
much as think of without horror: calling it (among other epithets which he
gives it) a heavenly work. This book was printed at Venice by one Troianus
Nanus, as they who copied it out do testify. The author of which worthy work,
was the man to whom I dedicated certain of my Latin verses, whilst I was at
Venice. But I protest, I committed that fault before I knew him to be such a
monster. And when I was advertised thereof, it was past recall and recovery.
But to return to this so foul and infamous a sin: Is it not great pity
that gentlemen, who before they traveled into Italy abhorred the very naming
of it, should after they have continued there a time, delight themselves not
only in talking and discoursing, but in practicing and professing it, as a
thing which they have learned in a happy time? As for those who through bad
custom have only kept the Italian phrase there commonly spoken (though
borrowed from such wicked villainy) they have (I grant) some colorable excuse.
But what can the rest allege for themselves? Yet I dare not affirm that all
who are tainted with this sin, learned it in Italy or Turkey: for our M.
Maillard was never there, and yet he made profession of it. So that he, who
like a great Sorbonical doctor caused so many silly souls to fry a faggot
against all right and reason, equity and conscience, was the man whom the
Judges might justly have burned, not as a Lutheran (as they then called them)
or an obstinate Gospeller, but as a Sodomiticall buggerer.

2 But I were much to blame if I should forget Peter Lewis (or rather Aloisius,
for he was called in Italian Pietro Aloisio) son to Pope Paul the third.
This Prince of Sodom, Duke of Parma and Placentia, that he might not
degenerate from the Popish progeny (whence he was descended) was so addicted to
this horrible and hellish sin, and so carried away with the burning thereof,
that he did not only forget the judgments of God, and the provident care he
should have had of his good name (at least with such as make no conscience to
give themselves to such villainy.) Nay (which is more) he did not only forget
that he was a man, but even the daily danger of death it self, whereof brute
beasts do stand in fear. For not content to satiate his lawless lust with
innumerable persons of all sorts, sexes and degrees, he went a wooing at the
last to a young man, called Cosmus Cherius then Bishop of Fano: and perceiving
that he could not otherwise have his pleasure of him, and work him to his
will, he caused his men to hold him. Shortly after which fact, he received the
reward due to such monsters: and as he had led a wicked and shameful life, so
they made for him so infamous and villainous an Epitaph, that the Reader had
need of a pomander in his pocket, or some preservative, least his stomach
should rise at the reading thereof.

3 Concerning bestialitie, or the sin against nature (which was ever more
common among shepherds then others) who so list to make inquiry into the
examples of later times, shall find as great store of them as of the rest. But
if any desire examples of fresher memory, let him go to the Italian soldiers
of the camp that would have beleaguered Lions, during the civil wars, and
ask them what they did with their goats. Notwithstanding an accident happened
in our time far more strange then any that can be alleged in this kind, of a
woman burned at Thoulouse (about seven and twenty years ago) for prostituting
her self to a dog, which was also burned with her for company: which I account
a most strange fact, considering her sex. Now this sin I call the sin
against nature, having respect rather to the common use and phrase of speech,
then to the proper signification of the word, according to which, Sodomie is as
well a sin against nature as bestialitie. But not to enter into a warfare of
words, let this suffice, that brute beasts do condemn us herein.

4 Now albeit the former example be very strange, yet we have here another
far more strange (though not altogether so wicked) committed about thirty
years ago by a maid borne at Fountains (between Blois and Ro^morantin) who
having disguised her self like a man, served as an hostler at an Inn in the
suburbs of Foy for the space of seven years, and afterward married a maid of
the town, with whom she accompanied for the space of two years or thereabout,
attempting much, but effecting nothing: after which time her cosinage and
knavery in counterfeiting the office of a husband being discovered, she was
apprehended, and having confessed the fact, was burned. By which examples we
see that our Age may well boast, that (notwithstanding the vices of former
times) it has some proper and peculiar to it self. For this fact of hers,
has nothing common with that which was practiced by those famous strumpets,
who in old time were called Tribades. (...).


CHAP. XIIII. Of blasphemies and execrations used at this day.
I Come now to entreat of blasphemies; in handling whereof, I will observe no
other method then that which offers it self to my memory, as it shall
furnish me with examples. First then, what would the jolly Preachers, Oliver
Maillard, Menot and Barelete say (may we think) if they should return back
into their countries again, to see the devilish demeanor of these wicked
wretches, and to hear them blaspheme, renounce, and reneigue God in such
fearful manner? Or what would holy King Lewis say, if he were now living?
Where might he find tormentors enough to pierce and cut out blasphemous tongues,
except blasphemers should butcher one another? And what would they say (trow
we) if they should hear this proverb, or prouerbiall comparison from the
mouth of every paisant, He swears like a gentleman? (suitable to that we
mentioned before, It is not for a villain to renounce God): or if they should
hear the common sort say, He swears like an Abbot: or He swears like a
carter: would they not wonder to hear so many of these likes? I make no
question but they would. Yet I persuade my self they would wonder much more, if
they should see how gentlemen and noblemen (be it spoken without disparagement
to true gentry and nobility, which makes civility and piety the two moulds
wherein they frame their actions) rather teach their children to say, I
renounce God, then I believe in God. Doubtless if good King Lewis had heard
such blasphemies, he would have thought himself among the infernal fiends in
the very bottom of hell. And he would (no doubt) much more have abhorred it,
if he should have seen young Princes have tutors for blasphemies (as for some
good and commendable science) to teach them to vary, change, and diuersifie
them every way, to pronounce them with their right accents, and to animate them
with like audacitie, without either hicke or hem.

2 I might here show how we outstrip and go beyond our ancestors, as well in
this as in other vices: I mean not only in blaspheming, but in the form and
manner of blasphemy, or rather forms and manners, they being almost infinite.
But it shall suffice to give a taste hereof in a word or two, and to show how
besides old and new blasphemies, bred and borne (as I may say) in our native
soil, they have made a hotchpotch of them with those of foreign countries: as
though they alone were not sufficient to incense the majesty of God, and to
pull upon us his fearful judgments. But not to insist upon these, there are
some blasphemies in the Italian tongue so fearful, horrible and hideous, that
they may seem to proceed rather from devils then from men. Of which number,
that is one which I heard out of a Priests mouth at Rome, which shall not be
forgotten in his proper place. And it may well go hand in hand with this which
was uttered by an Italian at Venice (no Priest, but a secular man) as he was
playing at cards in the French Ambassadors house, Venga'l cancaro al lupo; what
hurt in this? may some say. Verily his notable villainy herein appears, in
that he spoke it (as appeared afterward) by a figure called Aposiopesis, or
Reticentia, in stead of Venga'l cancaro al lupo, che non mangio Christo quando
era agnello: calling Christ Agnello, by allusion to that of S. John, Ecce Agnus
Dei qui tollit peccata mundi: Behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world. Likewise the blasphemy of the Italian who was wont to
say, A bots on the Ass that carried Christ to Jerusalem, was very wild, but not
so wicked. I omit Putana di Christo, and sundry others of the like strain: for
though they be very horrible, yet they are very frequent and usual.

3 But for as much as the greatest blasphemies are commonly belched out at
cards and dice, I will here allege a late strange example of a good fellow, who
to recompense his loss with cursing and swearing (as the manner is) played such
a trick, as the like (I persuade my self) has not been heard of. For being
weary with cursing, renouncing, and reneiguing of God, and swearing by all the
oaths he could devise; he commanded his man to help him, and to hold on this
gracious talk, till he had better luck. This one example (if there were no
other) were sufficient to condemn our Age of greater outrage then all the
former. Howbeit they are so plenty, that they are nothing dainty: for as some
devised this new knacke of knavery; so others invented others, as hereafter
shall be showed.

4 First then whereas our Ancestors did only impart the honor of God to their
men and women Saints (as they term them,) such has been the audacious
impiety of the Gnathonicall flatterers of this Age, that they have made no
conscience to style Princes with the titles of Gods divine Attributes, as
namely with that of Most sacred Majesty. And as the heathen styled their
Emperor Diuus Caesar: so have they styled Emperors and Kings in these days.
Nay, some are come to this pass, to call a mortal man not only Our holy
Father, but Our God on earth. And (as one vice draws on another) they have
further applied sundry things spoken of the eternal God in holy writ, to
mortal men, and have honored them with like titles: whereof I could allege
manifold examples, if my occasions would permit: but I will content my self
for the present with these two, Sub vmbra alarm tuarum protege me, or sperabo.
And, Non est abbre^iata manus Domini: which I remember I have often heard thus
applied. The last time I heard them, was from a Lawyers mouth, pleading at the
bar.

5 Yet they rest not here: for they are come now at the last to apply sundry
texts of Scripture to the praise of Jack and Gill, men and women of all sorts
and conditions, tag and rag. And as they have applied some Scriptures in
commendation of those whom they honored; so have they applied others to the
disgrace and defamation of those whom they maligned: wherein M. Pasquin had a
notable faculty. And verily it is not unlike, but that this invention came
first from him: and that those who in the reign of King Francis the first,
girded at the Lords and Ladies of the Court, with quips and taunts borrowed
from Scripture, were trained up in his school.

6 But the wickedness of the damned crew has been far greater: of which
sort, this Age has had and has many even at this day. For not so much as
po^companions, but can apply the Scripture to their drunkenness, and bealch
them out of their filthy mouths. It is too well known how they were wont to
say for every glass of wine they rippled off* C^r mundum crea in the (...),
and spiritum rectum i^^o^a in viscerib^^ meis. And when they would signify in
their drunken guibbridg^, that some wine was better then other some, and that
it was the right; they would say, Hic est, tenete eum. And when there is no
more liquor in the pot, your meale-mouthed Monks use this Allegorical speech
as well as their fellows, Dat^ ^^bis de oleo vestro, quia lamp^des nostrae
extinguuntur. And now that I am speaking of Monks, the Abbot of Iosaphat by
Chartres comes to my mind, who was one of the greatest ^pholders of god
B^cchus: This Prelate being asked on a time how he could drink so much, and in
what school he had learned that liberal science: to show that he had read, at
leastwise had heard some thing of the Scripture, alleged these words out of
the Psalmist, P^tr^s ^ostri (...) ^^erunt nobis. But what speak I of
drunkards? Not so much as po^kie villains* but would (as they were swearing
out the pockes) apply the Scripture to their disease, in saying, (...). But
this is yet applied more absurdly* ^labit spiritus ^ius* and (...). I remember
also what one at Paris said* when his mother was dead, and he had gotten all
her goods into his hands, Quasi nubes pluuiae in tempore siccitatis: which he
learned (I take it) of some scoffing Skoggins, as honest men as himself. And
do not good fellows ever and anon make themselves sport with these words of S.
Paul, Si quis Episcopatum desiderat, bonum opus desiderat, in saying, Si quis
Episcopatum desiderat bonum, opus desiderat? To be short, they think that a
jest is not worth a rush, except it be seasoned with the salt of the
sanctuary: as the Abbot who speaking of the dry summer, when the grapes were
dried up, and (as it were) roasted with the heat of the Sun, said, Spiritus
vitae erat in rotis. Nay, these wicked blasphemers, and profane abusers of
Scripture, have not spared their own Mass. For when one is hanged, they say,
Sursum corda: when a man takes the cup to drink, Quia pius est.

7 Hitherto I have said nothing of those varlets who so notoriously abuse this
Scripture, Coelum coeli Domino, terram aute^ dedit filijs hominu^: The heavens
of heavens are the Lords, but the earth has he given to the children of men;
alleging it to infringe Gods providence, whereby he rules all things
according to his good pleasure: which I omitted not through forgetfulness, but
for that the abuse and profanation thereof, is more ancient then this Age; yet
questionless the contemners of God, blasphemers of his Son, villanizers of
his Saints, scorners of his service, who do now (as it were) shield and shroud
themselves and their Atheism under these words, as under Ajax his buckler, are
cosin-germaines to those of the damned crew, who in the time of the foresaid
Preachers were wont to say, Let God keep his heaven to himself, and let us
alone, and follow our pleasures. Ignorance perhaps gave the first occasion of
this false interpretation, which scoffing Atheists applied afterward to their
own purpose: as our ancestors, who erroniously expounding this place in the
Psalmist, Cum peruerso peruerteris; through ignorance joined with malice, would
have paralleled it with the French proverb, Il faut hurler auec les loups. But
to return to those who maliciously profane the holy word of God, I have not
(I confess) mentioned the places of Scripture, applied by some to whoredom and
lechery, as having spoken of it sufficiently before: where I have showed that
whereas Menot complained only of the profanation of Churches by panders who
made their bawdie bagaines in them; we might now take up a far more just and
grievous complaint, in that they make the Scripture their bawd; a thing as full
of wickedness and prodigious devilish abomination, as ever was heard and
tolerated among Christians: and if I should say ten times more, I should not
pass the bounds of truth. But I will leave it to thy consideration (gentle
Reader) how much honester men they were, who during the last civil garboiles
in France, to anger the adversaries of the Romish religion, began their play at
dice with the saying of the Psalmist, Our help stands in the name of the
Lord, who has made heaven and earth: abusing it of purpose to spite and anger
them the more, for that Protestant Preachers were wont to call upon God in this
manner, in the beginning of their Sermons.

8 And this puts me in mind of another blasphemy somewhat differing from the
former, in all points suiting that of the Jews in the Gospel, when in
scoffing manner they mocked our Savior, and said, He trusts in God, let him
now deliver him, seeing he loves him. For the adversaries of the adversaries
of the Roman religion gnashing their teeth, as often as they heard the
Protestants sing the 50. Psalm: The mighty God, the eternal has thus spoke,
etc. When they thought they had them on the hip, could not contain, but would
vpbraid them and say, Where is now this mighty God? Ha sirs, we will make you
sing a new song; we will make you sing, O Lord consider my distress. We also
find this kind of blasphemy in the Prophet David, where he says: For why,
they pierce my inward parts
with pangs to be abhord:
When they cry out with stubburne hearts,
where is thy God thy Lord?
And in another place: Why should the heathen scorners say,
where is their God become?
Both which blasphemies are much more tolerable then the former, and that for
sundry reasons.

9 Moreover, we shall find the blasphemies whereby they scoff and scorn,
deride and mock at the worship of God and true religion far more abominable
then the wickedest blasphemies of the prophanest Pagans in the earth. And
verily I doubt whether the infernal fiends can add any thing thereto. And yet
there are none more welcome to most courtiers then such companions, as being
desirous to be instructed by them, thinking it necessary thus to be qualified,
that they may be thought thoroughly accomplished in court-like behavior: as if
the way for a man to brave it out with flouts and frumpes, were to begin with
God? Now blasphemers are of two sorts: some are flat Atheists, who by an
Antiphrasis will needs be called Deists (forsooth) in spite of all that speak
against it: and verily I dare give my word for them, that they are no
hypocrites, but speak as they think. Others, notwithstanding the gnawing
worm of an accusing conscience, cou^terfet themselves to be Atheists. And
whereas some Atheists confess that they are much grieved, because they cannot
believe that there is a God; these contrarily are half mad at themselves,
because they cannot obliterate this principle and persuasion out of their
minds: and for that their conscience does check them when they deny his holy
providence. The Italian Lord, who leaving his country to dwell in France, and
died in the wars of a pistel shot, may well be the ringleader of the dance:
for whereas others (now ready to give up the ghost) commended themselves to
God; he desired his friends that came to visit him, that they would commend him
to the King, and tell him that he had lost a good servant. He often
acknowledged (as I heard it reported by his own familiars) that he desired to
believe in God, as others did, but that he could not. And yet for all this his
great desire, it was his only delight to belch out such fearful blasphemies
against God and his holy truth, that those of Julian the Apostate may (in
comparison) seem to be but small. For (to omit sundry of his other gracious
speeches) he was not ashamed to say, that God dealt unjustly when he condemned
mankind for a piece of an apple: and that he had learned nothing in the new
Testament, but that Joseph was a simple fellow in that he was not jealous of
his wife, himself being so old, and she so young. Thus much for the first kind.
Of the second sort of Atheists, who by reason of the sting of conscience
wherewith they are so disquieted, are constrained to acknowledge a divine power
and providence, we have sundry examples: for those Courtiers, who in the reign
of the French King Henry the second, said, They believed in God, as the King
believed; but if he believed not in him, neither would they: are by their own
confession to be registered in this roll. But where shall we place those vile
varlets who shame not to say, They believe in the King and the Queen mother,
and know none other belief? Verily it puts me to a plunge to invent a name
answerable to their nature: I mean a word sufficiently emphatical to express
their wickedness. But for want of a better they may not unfitly be called thrice
accursed damned Atheists.

10 I come now to those hel-hounds of the damned crew, who not content to belch
out their blasphemies among their mates (companions like themselves) or in
presence of those whom they would gladly anger, by swearing and blaspheming;
nor to furnish the table at great feasts and merry meetings with them, (where
they pass for current under the name of ieasts and pleasant conceits) do
further set them forth in print, that all the world may take notice of them.
Who knows not that this age has revived Lucian again, in the person of
Francis Rabelais, making a mock of all religion in his devilish discourses? or
what a profane Scoggin Bonauenture des Perriers was in deriding of God? and
what pregnant proofs he has given hereof in his worthy work. The mark (we
know) which these varlets aimed at, was outwardly indeed to make as though they
would but drive away melancholic dumps, and pass away the time with pleasant
discourse. But indeed and truth to insinuate themselves by variety of ieasts
and quips, which they cast forth against the ignorance of our forefathers
(which was the cause they suffered themselves to be abused, and as it were led
by the nose by superstitious Priests) and by this means A ietter des pierres
en nostre iardin (as it is in the French proverb) that is, to mock and gird
even at Christian religion it self. For after diligent perusing of their
discourses, it will easily appear, that it was their maine drift, the only
mark and scope which they aimed at, to teach the Readers of their books, to
become as honest men as themselves: that is, to believe in God, and to be
persuaded of his providence no otherwise then wicked Lucretius was: that
whatsoever a man believes, he believes in vain: that whatsoever we read in
Scripture of eternal life, is written for no other end but to busy simple
idiots, and to feed them with vain hope: that all threatenings concerning hell
and the last judgment denounced in the word, are nothing but mere bugs, like
those wherewith we terrify young children, making them afraid of the fayry, hob
gobling, or bul-begger: in a word, that all religions were forged and framed by
the brain of man. And I fear me such masters have but too many scholars at
this day, ready to listen to such instructions. For some there be who are not
as yet plain Atheists, but only inclining that way, who deal with the
knowledge they have of God, as sick men do with the license of Physicians. For
as sick patients, notwithstanding they have resolved to eat and drink what
themselves think good, and not what the Physician shall prescribe, importune
him to dispense with them against his prescript, for such and such meats, as
though it would do them more good or less hurt when they have once obtained
such a license: so is there a generation of monsters rather then of men, who
notwithstanding they have resolved to go on in their wicked courses, though
their consciences check them never so much, yet could wish with all their
hearts, they might follow them with consent thereof: and therefore labor by
all means to extinguish and obliterate all sense and knowledge of God out of
their minds, the light whereof does show them the leudnes of their lives. And
they can make no shorter a cut, nor take an easier course to come to the period
of their intended purpose, then to go to school to the foresaid Doctors. To
conclude, the books which have been written by these two worthy writers, and
their pue-fellowes, are so many snares or baited hooks laid to catch such
simple souls as are not well guarded with the fear of God: being so much the
more hard to be espied, by how much they are better sugered over with merry
conceits, delighting and tickling the ear. And therefore all those that fear
to go astray out of the right way wherein God has set them, must be admonished
to beware of such hunters. As for professed Atheists, they are the less to be
pitied, considering they fall not into such snares at unawares, but voluntarily
entangle themselves therein.

11 But what shall we say of Postel and such like scribbling companions? Verily
I know not what conceit others may have of them; for mine own part (to speak
that which I have often said) since I was acquainted with Postels braine-sicke
blasphemies, partly from his own mouth, and partly by his writings, and had
seen so many silly souls deluded and bewitched by them: I have not a little
wondered why any man should marvel that Mahomet could win so many countries
and kingdoms to his fond fancies, and doting dreams. For is it not much more
strange that Will^* Postel preaching in the face of the University of Paris
(about thirteen years ago) that an old beldame (whom he called his mother
Ioane) should save all women, as Christ did all men, should find so many
disciples* then that Mahomet should make the world believe that men only went
to heaven, and not women? If Postel had preached such fooleries, I say not to
the citizens of Paris, but to the simplest sots of Auuergne or the rudest
Normans: not to learned men, but to silly idiots, which could scarce tell their
fingers: not since the trash and trinkets of Popish trumperies were discovered,
but whilst the darkness of ignorance and superstition was more gross and
palpable then that of Egypt (which a man might have felt (as it were) with his
finger) yet might we well wonder how ever it was possible that such devilish
doctrine should find entertainment. How much more then, that it should not
only be entertained, but highly esteemed, especially in that city which has
this long time bragged, and does even at this present, to be the flower of all
France, and the only paragon for matter of true riches, such as arts and
sciences are. But some may here happily reply and say, that though many went to
hear him in such multitudes, that for the very throng and press of people
they were in danger to be smothered: yet is it not probable he should have any
disciples or followers, except some of the simpler sort. To which I answer (and
that confidently, as knowing it to be a most certain truth) that he gave such
a relish to his words, that he made many men otherwise learned and wise, to
savor them, who before they had heard him, scorned and derided them as the
fondest impiety and foolishest foppery in the world. Further, this wicked
wretch not content to utter these his monstrous blasphemies in private to such
as resorted to him, has set them forth in print, and therefore is in the
number of those of whom we now speak. Howbeit I cannot well tell whether a man
may find in any of his books certain speeches which he uttered in the Realte
at Venice in my hearing, and in the hearing of sundry others, viz. that if a
man would have a perfect and absolute religion indeed, he must compound it of
Christian religion, Iudaizme, and Turcizme: and that there were many excellent
points of doctrine in the Alcoran, if they were well considered. Who will not
now confess that our age surpasses all the former* as well in blasphemies as
in other villainies? ( blasphemies I say, not proceeding of ignorance, as in
former time, but of a cankred malicious mind against the known truth.) How can
this be, may some say? Though the argument in hand will not permit me to give a
reason hereof* yet thus much I will say by the way, that it is, because the
devil seeing himself more hotly and furiously assaulted now then before,
provides himself of more furious soldiers to give the repulse. For whilst
blindness and ignorance reigned far and wide in the world, and that his former
forces were sufficient, he needed no such succor and supply as now he does,
being daily weakened by the loss of his strongest holds.

12 I proceed to another worshipful writer, who thinking his penny as good
silver, and his blasphemies as worthy to be registered as the best, has set
them forth in print: and I shall desire him not to take offense if I presume to
name him, seeing himself thought it not amiss to set his name to his book,
though full fraught with such fearful blasphemies: the title whereof is this,
The invincible tower of women's chastity, written by Francis de Billon,
Secretary; printed at Paris Anno 1555. cum priuilegio Regio. And not content
with this flourishing title, he has set his hand and mark to every copy, as
his verses to the Reader in the beginning of his book may testify: a thing (I
take it) never done by any before. Howbeit his blasphemies are not once to be
compared with these last spoken of, but with those rather mentioned in the
beginning of this Chapter, where I have showed how the audacious impiety of
fawning flatterers and pestilent parasites was come to this, to apply the
divine attributes and sundry sentences, spoken of God in holy Scripture, to
mortal men. But I will here set down his blasphemous words, leaving them to
the Readers discretion to place them as they deserve. He therefore intending to
show that there is an absolute conformity in all points between the Prophets
of God (who were penmen of holy Scripture) and the French Kings Secretaries,
says fol. 239. At and before the coming of the Son of God, he appointed
other Secretaries (which may be called his Clearkes, as being chosen by him, or
registered in the book of his divine providence) which in special manner were
called Prophets, under which the name Secretary is comprehended: all of them
depending upon him and his beloved Chancellor, who was then to come, but now is
come. And in that roll thus framed in the heavenly mind, they were enrolled and
registered under the highest majesty, in the same manner that other Secretaries
are registered in the French Kings roll, himself being first, and his
Chancellor next. And a little after, as Moses is placed in the divine register
in the third place, as penman and great Audiancier of Gods word: so my Lord
Huraut Secretary and great Audiancier of France is the third in the Kings. And
somewhat after; like unto Ioshuah who succeeded Moses, is the Secretary Orne,
who being Lord chief Baron of the Exchequer, resembles the Prophet Ioshuah in
sundry things. Again, to Ioshuah succeeded the Prophet and Secretary Samuel,
borne of an old and barren woman, long before his nativity consecrated unto
God; an honest, upright, and sincere good man, most content with his own
estate, who lived till he was very old: like unto whom Longuet principal
Secretary to the King, and ancientest of them all, is registered in the Kings
records, in a higher rank then any of the rest, as Samuel was in Gods, who as,
etc. And beginning afterward to discourse of seven other Prophets, he says,
As Esdras was visited by the special grace of God: so the mighty Florimond
Robertet, alias d'Alluye, was visited in his bed by Francis the French King his
Lord and master. And straight after he adds, among the Prophets and penmen
of Scripture, the four great Prophets are to be numbered, by whom those famous
notaries the four Evangelists are figured, viz. Esaias or Matthew, Jeremy or
Mark, Ezechiel or Luke, Daniel or John, as Gods Secretaries, who seem to have
had greater employment then the rest; in resemblance of the four secretaries
or notaries of the Kings house otherwise called Masters of the Requests,
surnamed (if I tell them in order) Bourdin, Sassi, etc. Afterward he
descends to the small Prophets, with whom he compares the Lords, Neuuille,
Courlay, Bohier, etc. And last of all he comes to those who in comparison may
be termed Prophets or Secretary gager^, that is, hired Secretaries, as Semeya,
Virdei, Elizeus, Ahias, Iehn, etc. to the number of 59. comparing them to the
59. honorable Lords, viz. Babou, Picard, Forget, Gaudart, etc. And winding up
his discourse, he breaks forth into this patheticall exclamation, O most
certain and worthy correspondence, never known of any mortal man unto this
day. This is the goodly invention of our architect of the invincible tower, by
which he thinks he has played the man, and won the field as we say. Now let
the Reader judge, whether I accused him wrongfully of blasphemy or not. And
verily if he would take any counsel, I would advise him to leave this devilish
discourse out of his book in the next impression, lest he wrong and shame many
honest men, whom he (perhaps) thinks he does greatly grace, and honor
thereby. I would further let his mastership understand against the second
impression, that there is no such Prophet in the Bible as Virdei: but that vir
Dei is (as I may say) the Epithete or surname of Semeia: as when we say Francis
the fool, we mean not two distinct persons, but one and the same man, the
word fool serving only to describe the said Francis by his proper Epithete.

13 Another kind of blasphemy published in print by these goodly authors,
remains yet behind; far stranger then the former* so that he which will not
grant any of them to be proper and peculiar to this age, cannot but confess
that this agrees unto it quarto modo (as Logicians speak) I mean the manner
of translating used by Sebastian Castalion in turning the Bible into French.
For whereas he should have sought out the grauest words and phrases fitting so
worthy a subject; it is plain that he studied for absurd, base and beggarly
words, at leastwise such as would rather stir the spleen, and provoke the
Readers to laughter, then give them light to understand the meaning of the holy
Ghost. For example, where S. James says, chap. 2. v. 13. Gloriatur
misericordia aduersus iudicium, in stead of translating it word for word (as
others have done) Mercy glories (or insults) over judgment, he turns it
thus, Misericorde fait la figue a judgment, that is, Mercy bids judgment kiss
her tail. Give me that grave Cato, or sower Heraclytus, who in stead of
weighing o^ pondering this text of so great importance, can keep his
countenance at the first view of this so trim a translation: and considering
the mere malice of the translator (who hunted after triuiall words taken from
the tavern, of purpose to expose such sacred mysteries to scorn and derision)
will not be offended with such a profane fellow, if he have but the least
dram of devotion or spark of zeal in his heart. The like he has done in
other places, as who so list to trifle away the time in perusing that worthy
work, shall easily perceive. Neither has he only made his worship merry in
using tapsterlike terms and phrases, but has taken to himself more then
Poetical license in calling her arriere femme, that is, a back-wife (as we say
arriere boutique, a back-shop) whom the husband keeps under his wives nose,
whom the Latins call pellex (borrowing it from the Greek tongue, as the
Grecians have done from the Hebrew) and for Prepuce using this fine compound
Castalions Auant-peau is as absurd in French, as the Remists prepuce is in
English.
Auant-peau, foreskin: for circumcised, ^ongne, that is chipped or pared off.
For Incircumcised, Empelle, whole skinned: and making God all one with my Lord
of Rocheford. In a word, there is not so much as Fair carous, to drink a
carouse, which he has not used in this translation. Now this new devise has
the devil invented in these days, to infringe the authority of the
Scripture: but that God of his goodness took order for it betime, in causing
this trim translator (of whom there was once great hope) to condemn himself
with his own mouth, and to let the world see with what spirit he was
transported. Now before I come to the second thing that I propounded to speak
of in this Chapter, I will briefly satisfy such as may happily think it strange,
I should so far stretch and strain the word blasphemy: the which I did, for
that the Greek word (...) (according to his true Etymology) signifies to blast
or blemish hinder or hurt a man's good name (as if a man should say (...) being
the word which I have translated to hurt) and so is commonly taken in profane
authors: albeit in holy Scripture, and the commentaries of the ancient
Fathers, to blaspheme, is to speak any thing derogatory to the honor and
glory of the highest Majesty. Now, if treason committed against a King (who is
but a mortal man, and whose breath is in his nostrils) deserve death:
doubtless blasphemy and treason committed against the King of Kings and Lord
of Lords, the immortal and the eternal God, must needs deserve eternal death.

14 The next thing that we are to entreat of, is of cursing or imprecations.
And as I have not trifled away the time in reckoning up the sundry sorts of
imprecations and curses used at this day (a thing both tedious and odious to
those that have but the least grain of grace or godliness:) so neither will I
busy my self in numbering up those triuiall and common imprecations which
have no tacke in them, to satisfy the fury and rage of many ruffians, except
they be ever coining of new. It shall suffice to show, that as Frenchmen have
borrowed certain set forms of brauing and bearding their betters from
Italians (thinking (belike) their own country too barren of this herb grace:)
so have they not been ashamed to borrow of them forms of cursing and
imprecations, as when they say, Te vienne le chancre. Albeit in most places of
Italy, Te venga'l cancaro: and at Venice, Te venga la ghiandussa; Te venga'l
mal di San Lazaro, are accounted but small and petty imprecations. And these
put me in mind of a very pleasant story serving fitly to exemplify the matter
in hand. A tailor of Florence having worshipped the image of S. John Baptist in
the Church of S. Michael Berteldi, very devoutly for a long time; kneeling on a
time before it early in the morning, after he had pattered over his ordinary
prayers, he began in this sort, Glorioso Santo Giouanni benedetto, io ti priego
che, etc. that is, Glorious and blessed S. John, I beseech thee grant me these
two requests: Tell me whether my wife ever played false with me? and what shall
become of my son? This was the prayer of that devout tailor. Now here it is
to be noted, that a young fellow Cleark of the parish (who had sundry times
observed him kneeling and praying in this sort, desirous to discover this
secret, and to know what speeches he used to the Image) hid himself behind the
Altar where the Image stood, that so he might hear the prayer which he made.
He then answering in the person of S. John Baptist, said, Sappi charissimo
sigliuolo, etc. Know my dear son, that for the devotion and reverence thou
have borne me these many years, thou shall be heard: Come again to morrow
morning, and thou shall have a certain answer. For this time depart in peace.
The tailor exceeding glad of this answer, went home, and failed not to come the
next morning at the time appointed: not forgetting after he had mumbled over
his Matins, and done his devotions, to put Saint John in mind of his promise,
saying, D^lcissimo Santo Giouanni, io ti priego che mi obserua la promessa:
that is, Sweet Saint John, I pray thee keep touch with me, and perform thy
promise. Whereunto the Sexten (who missed not to come again to make an end of
his sport) answered in the person of S. John, Seruo and amico mio, sappi
cheltuo figliuolo sara impiceato presto, and la tua donna ha fatto fallo con
piu di vno: that is, My good servant and friend, be it known unto thee that
thy son shall shortly be hanged, and that thy wife has hornified thee more
then once. The tailer hearing this, rose up, and departed, as mute as a fish,
but as angry as a waspe: and when he was come to the midst of the Church,
turned back, and neither kneeling down, nor using accustomed reverence, nay
not so much as vailing his bonnet, began in this sort, What S. John art thou?
The Sexten answered, I am thy good S. John Baptist. Whereupon he could not
refrain, but cursed him with the foresaid curse, which put me in mind of this
story: telling him withal, that it was not of late that he had had a wicked
tongue, and that therefore Herod cut off his head. But I will here allege his
own words, not altering so much as the Orthography: Sia col malanna and con la
mala Pasqua che Dio te dia. Tu no^ dicesti may altro che male, and per la tua
pessima lingua ti fu eglitagliat^ el capo da Herod. And straight after: So che
tu non hai detto el vero di cosa to ha t'habi domandata: io sono venuto qui ad
adorarti da vinticinque anni, o piu, non ti ho may dato impaccio alcuno: may io
ti prometto che may piu ci ritornero a vederti. Which history (recorded by the
Lord Piero di Cosmo di Medici) I was the more willing here to relate, to show
how these silly souls (who are even blind and brutish in their superstitions)
use this holy language in revenging themselves of the Saints as well as of
others. We in France have certain curses proper and peculiar to our language,
as Italians and other countries have to theirs. For this curse used by the
foresaid Preachers, Ad omnes diabolos: Ad triginta mill diabolos, etc. (...)
is a kind of copper Latin cast in the mould of the French phrase: for
Frenchmen are wont to heap up devils by many thousand cart lodes together, as
when they say, Ie le done a trente mill chartees de Diables, ou quarante: Let
thirty or forty thousand cart loades of devils take him. And here consider
what long custom can do: for Michael Menot (one of the foresaid Preachers)
does father this phrase upon Saint Paul. His words are these, fol. 129. Saint
Paul hearing that a wicked wretch had committed fornication, said presently, I
give him over to all the devils in hell. Sanctus Paulus audiens quod quidam
miserrimus fornicatus fuerat, slatim dixit, Et eum do ad omnes diabolos: which
is yet somewhat more tolerable then that which he records of one of the two
harlots which came to plead before King Solomon, that she should swear by her
faith, fol. 47. Altera superbe respondit, dicens Mentiris; est meus quem teneo;
quaere tuum vbi volueris: and sic in illa camera verberabant se mutuo. Dixit
altera, tu non habebis per fidem meam, nec tu, etc. Et sic venerunt ad Regem
Salomone^, etc. By this the Reader may see whether I had not just cause to say,
that that which he fathered upon S. Paul was more tolerable, seeing it is only
false in forma; whereas this is false both in forma and in materia.

15 Now as the imprecations wherewith men are wont to curse one another, are
more usual at this day then ever they were in former time; so these which they
use in cursing themselves, are no less frequent: as when they bequeath
themselves to the devil (some add body and soul, guts and all;) or when
they say, I would I might never come in heaven, etc. which puts me in mind of
that which I observed once at Venice, how the election of Officers being made
by plurality of voices (given by casting of bullets, as the manner is,) some
of the competitors being elected, and some rejected; the custom is, that all
of them, even those also that are disappointed and frustrate of their
fore-framed expectation, thank the gentlemen as they come forth: who to keep
corresponce with them, besprinkle them with Court holy water, and tell them one
after another, that they are very sorry it was not their good hap to be elected
to such or such an office, and that it was not their fault. And not contenting
themselves with these simple insinuations and protestations, one uses this
imprecation, another that: one says, Se Dio me gardi st'almi. Another, Se Dio
me garenti la mia moglie. A third, Se Dio me garenti miei filroli. A fourth, Se
Dio me gardi st^occi. A fifth, Se no, che siae appicato per la g^la. A sixth, Se
no, che me vegna il cancaro. But with what conscience most of them curse
themselves in this sort, I make them their own judges. For seeing that some of
the competitors were elected, and some not; certain it is that most voices
were for them, and not for the other: whereas if we may judge by their
protestations which they bind with such fearful imprecations, we must needs
say that they gave with both. But leaving the resolution of this question to
some Oedipus, let us call to mind that which has been said, viz. that custom
can do much. For doubtless long custom in evil, takes away the sense of
evil in whole or in part: which lamentable experience proves too true,
especially in these days, wherein men take pleasure in training up of youth
(not yet of years to discern between good and evil) and in teaching them to
swear, blaspheme, and curse after the Court fashion.

16 There remains yet another kind of cursing a man's self, as horrible in it
own nature, as it is common in the Court: I would I might lie with such a
Lady or such a Gentlewoman upon pain of damnation. By which we may perceive,
that as this age is paramount to all the former in all sorts of sins: so
Princes Courts as far exceed all other places: and yet (that I may not
deprive Italians of their due praise) it is less common in France and other
countries of Christendom, then in Italy.

CHAP. XV. Of thefts and robberies committed at this day.
BEfore I enter discourse of thefts and robberies, I am to entreat thee
(gentle Reader) to give me leave to premise this short preface; that if this
Age do so far excel and go beyond the former in other knacks of knavery: it
does it much more in this of cunning conueyance. For I dare boldly affirm,
that if a man would make a narrow search into the theeuish practices, filchings
and robberies (at leastwise into the dealings of those good fellows who take
without leave) so common and rise at this day; he should find that there are
(almost) as many sundry sorts of notorious thefts, as in old time there were
thieves. The reason hereof is evident, for that stealing of all other vices
requires most wit, wherein this age far excels the former (if we may judge
of the tree by his fruits:) whence it is that the Lacedaemonians were permitted
to steal by their laws, so they were not taken in the fact. Now this quick
and nimble wit applies it self rather to evil then to good, and that much
more at this day (if all things be equally considered) then in former time:
albeit this complaint was taken up long ago: Vnde habeat quarit nemo, sed
oportet habere. That is, Needs must be had, but whence none list enquire. And
it is an old and ancient saying, Lucri bonus odor ex re qualibet. That is,
Gain has a good favor, howsoever gotten. By which we may perceive, that men
never wanted will to have. But men at this day, as they have a better will, so
have they greater skill. For as they have bin more vehemently inflamed with a
desire of gain, so have they invented more effectual means for the compassing
thereof; setting down this as a necessary principle to be holden in the first
place, that he that would be rich must turn his back to God: which they can
well enough put in practice when occasion serves. Besides, they have profited
by all their predecessors inventions, and therein have employed the greatest
cunning and skill they have. No marvel therefore if there have been some
shifters in all ages, who have followed the occupatio^; since there was never
yet man to be found but sought out some means to live: so that many, when all
other failed, have lived upon the fee-simple of their wits, and betaken
themselves to this easy occupation, as to their last refuge. But how is it
(may some say) that great thieves should ever escape, and petty thieves go to
the pot? or rather (according to the old saying) that the greater should hang
the less? The question (me thinks) is easily answered, if we consider that a
petty pilfere^ has not wherewith to stop his accusers mouth: whereas great ones
are never without their sleeves full of gags. For I remember that Pinatel (who
was first executed by order of law in the person of his picture (if I may so
speak) and after in his own person) told me and certain others at Genoua
(whither he was fled) (...) that he doubted not but to reconcile himself to
the King again, by means of the high Sheriffs wife (who had obtained the
confiscation of his goods) in that he had a goodly present, wherewith to bribe
her (besides the value of the confiscation) and yet remain rich all his life
after. Notwithstanding I deny not but that great thieves are now and then
brought to the gallows as well as petty thieves: but this hard hap commonly
befalls those unthrifts, who having brought their twelue-pence to nine-pence,
and their nine-pence to nothing; have not wherewith they may either stop the
mouths, or grease the fists of their accusers. For many (we know) who clime
too hastily, fall as suddenly, those especially who have to deal with Princes
treasures, which are (as Frenchmen speak) suiet a la pince, that is, easy to
be purloined. Whereupon King Lewis the eleventh used a very pleasant conceit:
for looking upon a piece of tapistrie, wherein a certain noble man (who from a
very mean Cleark of the Exchequer, was advanced to great place, even to be
Lord Treasurer of France) had pourtraited the steps and degrees whereby he had
ascended from the bottom of baseness to the height of honor, himself
represented sitting on the top of Fortunes wheel; told him he might do well to
fasten it with a good strong nail, for fear lest turning about, it brought
him to his former estate again: which was truly prophesied of him, as the event
showed not long after. And verily not only great Lords who are advanced to
such high honors; but generally all Courtiers, and such as have any dealing in
Princes affairs, ought always to remember the similitude used by Polybius,
who co^pareth Courtiers to counters. For as they stand sometime for ten,
sometime for an hundred, sometime for a thousand, and sometimes again for one
only, as it pleases the Auditor to place them: so Courtiers (as the toy takes
Princes in the head) are honored or disgraced, advanced or debased in a moment.
And this they have as proper and peculiar unto them, that when they have used
them as sponges to drink what juice they can from the poor people, they take
pleasure afterward to wring them out into their own cisternes. But to return
to the distinction of great and petty thieves. It is a thing very remarkable,
and proper to this age (at leastwise in this respect, that it is more
practiced) that greeat thieves rob the less, as great fishes devour the young
fry. But my purpose is here only to speak of petty thieves, I mean such as
commit qualified robberies, and whom the executioner graceth by putting a
halter about their necks (where there is any face or form of justice) which
afterward serves them in stead of a ruff.

2 To begin therefore with pilferers and their petty larcenie, see a strange
device now lately invented, how since that Italians with their iuggling tricks
frequented France, there have been many cut-purses found disguised like
gentlemen; yea some who have bin hanged with their chains of gold about their
necks: which I remember I heard reported of him whom King Francis the first
hanged for iugling away the Duke of Neuers purse in his presence. And certain
it is, that their iergon whereby they maintain themselves, and keep
corresponcy each with other, was never in such perfection: a prerogative which
they have above the greatest Princes in the world, who because they cannot
cante, are ever devising new characters: which notwithstanding are often
descried even by those from whom they labor to conceal them: whereas these
noble cut-purses (never busying themselves so much) have so enriched their
canting and gibbridge (especially now of late) and are so expert therein, that
they can chat and chaffer one with another, without fear of being descried by
any, save those of their own profession. As for sleights and subtilties, even
Villon himself (who read a public lecture to those of his time) might learn
more of the craft (I mean more feats of filchery and cunning conueyance) of
the meanest scholar in his school, then ever he knew in all his life: yet I
deny not but that he was a notable expert fellow in his profession, and of a
ready wit: for it becomes not a citizen of Paris to speak otherwise of his
worship. But since our cut-purses (or snatch-purses) haunted these iuggling
Gypsies (the Italians) and learned their tricks of cunning conueynance, we
must needs confess that there have been stranger feats of agilitie seen,
then ever before. I take the word cut purses in a more general acception then
the proper signification will permit; namely for all such good fellows as can
play so well at fast and loose, with their fine feats of pass and repasse,
that without offering a man the least violence in the world, they can iuggle
the money out of his purse, and make it pass into their own. For example, a
Frenchman newly arrived at Venice (about thirteen years ago) lodging in an
Inn called the Sturgeon, was told by an Italian (who lay in the same house)
that it was not safe for a man in that country to show his money: and therefore
counseled him that if at any time he did weigh his gold, or tell any money, he
should not do it openly as he was accustomed, but should lock himself in his
chamber. The Frenchman taking this advertisement as proceeding from a simple
honest meaning, thanked him heartily, and thereupon took acquaintance of him.
The Italian (not long after) having espied fit opportunity, came unto him, and
told him that if he would change French crowns for Pistolets, he would gladly
exchange with him: and whereas (quoth he) your crowns will go here but for
single Pistolets, I will give you something over and above in exchange. The
Frenchman answering, that it was the least courtesy he could show him: he
desired him to remember what he told him the other day, concerning the close
keeping of his money; wherefore (quoth he) I think it not amiss if we take a
pair of oars, and carrying a pair of balances with us, row up and down the
great channel, and there weigh our crowns. The Frenchman answered, that he
was ready to do what he thought good. The next day therefore they took a pair
of oars, where when the Italian had weighed the French-mans crowns (the
better to color his knavery) he put them in his purse and pocketed them up:
and making as though he had been seeking for his Pistolets which he was to give
in exchange, he caused the waterman (to whom he had formerly given the
watchword) to land his boat. And because he landed in a place where there were
many short and narrow lanes on either side, the Frenchman lost my gentleman in
a trice: neither has he yet (I suppose) heard any news of him, nor of his
hundred crowns. My self came to the Inn three or four days after that
pageant was played. Another marking a Frenchman putting his purse into his
bosom, and after taking a pair of oars to cross the water (an ordinary
thing at Venice) leaped in after him with such violence that he caused the
boat to lean so much on the one side, that the Frenchman fell into the water:
where leaping in presently after, he pulled him into the boat again; yet not
without pulling his purse out of his bosom by the way; which he did so nimbly,
that the party perceived it not, till it was past recovery: and so the Italian
departed with a thousand thanks, and a purse to put them in. Another used more
speed, for faining that a Scorpion was gotten into his back, he entreated
another Italian to look if he could epsy it; in the mean time iuggling his
purse out of his pocket. And here I may not omit a like trick of conueyance
which another Italian played with a French gentleman newly come into Italy with
Odet de Selue, Ambassador for the French King at Venice: for as he was in his
Inn, looking upon two cheating Italians playing at cards (who were partners,
as appeared afterward) one of them faining that he had lost all his money, and
had nothing left but certain pieces of gold, at which his fellow refused to
throw, because they were not weight; he entreated the Frenchman to lend him a
few crowns for them: who had no sooner drawn his purse, but they scattered
all his money; and marking on which side of the table it fell, blew out the
candle. We might well admit into this society a Sergeant of Paris (whose goods
had been distrained and sold to the very straw of his bed) who going by a
Goldsmiths shop, cast sand in his eyes, and having so done, put as much gold
into his box as he thought good. But to return to our cunning cut-purses: how
active and nimble (may we think) were they which cut forty or fifty before
they could be descried? What say I forty or fifty? Nay I have heard of one of
this theeuish trade borne at Bourges, chief Clearke to an Attorney of the
Parliament, called Dennis Gron, in whose trunk (after he had bin taken and
convicted of the fact) were found fourscore purses, and about three thousand
crowns in gold: who (doubtless) would have obtained his pardon if his cause
had been tried by the laws of the Lacedaemonians, which permitted theft (the
better to inure their people to nimblenesse and actiuitie) so they were not
taken in the fact: which (as Xenophon shows) stood with good reason: for no
man ought to follow a trade, wherein he has no skill. Now these bunglers who
are taken with the manner, show that they are not their crafts masters, in
going no handsomlier to work then a Bear when the picks muskles. Which a Duke
of Burgundy well observed (a man naturally given to this lurching
legerdemai^e, which he practiced more of wantonness then for any want, as
knowing himself to have a notable filching faculty, and an answerable
dexterity in cleanly conueyance; the rather for that by this means he was
better acquainted with such companions) espying one of these light fingerd
gentlemen as he was iuggling away a silver goblet at a great feast, and holding
his peace for the present, sent for him shortly after, and told him roundly of
it in this sort: Sir, you may thank God that my steward saw you not pocket up
my plate; for I can assure you he would have hanged you all but the head. What?
will you follow a trade to which you were never bound prentise, and wherein you
have no skill? Well, you shall have it upon condition you will give over the
occupation, and practice it no more upon pain of death, since you go so grossly
to work. By which we see how this Prince concurres in opinion with the
Lacedaemonians. But why (may some say) should we think the Lacedaemonians would
have pardoned him, considering they held such as were descried and taken in the
fact, unskillful in the trade, and consequently unfit to follow it? Doubtless
they would have pardoned him for his great dexterity in cutting the 80.
purses, in that he was taken but with the 81. For it fared not with him as with
those filching co^panio^s (born under the unlucky planet Mercury) who being
pardoned the first offense, fall into it again and again. Which hard hap
befell one Simon Dagobert (the Kings Atturneys son in Yssoudun) who having
played the filching fellow a long time, and admonished to keep himself true,
lest in the end he found the gibbet a Jew; was taken at the last, and condemned
to the gallows: where as he was led to the place of execution, the duke of
Neuers chanced to pass by, and mediated to the King for him, because he heard
him spout a little Latin; which (albeit it was not understood) made him and the
rest believe that he was a man fit for some great emploiment. And as if he had
bin so indeed, the King having pardoned him, sent him with one Roberual into
the new found land: in which voyage he verified that which Horace says, They
change the air that seas do pass, But mind remains the same it was.
Coelum non animu^ mutant, qui trans mare currunt. For after his coming
thither, he fell to his old trade of nimming more freely then ever before. So
that being taken the second time, he went the way which before he had missed.
And I persuade my self he would not have escaped better cheap, either with
the Lacedaemonians or with the foresaid Prince, since (in all probability) he
had been often taken with the manner before; it being almost impossible, that
committing thefts in this sort by the dozen, he should ever go closely and
artificially to work. Howbeit if ever there were any, in whom we might see
what a nature prone to theft may do, him we have as a lively mirror thereof.
For I heard it credibly reported by his own citizen (a man of good worth) that
notwithstanding he had dealt with him sundry times to reclaim him, and made
means to get him out of prison, yet the knave to requite his kindness (as he
protested to me) stole from him a new gown, (besides other apparel) wherewith
he was taken, having it upon his back: and another also under it, which he had
stolen elsewhere: as also with three shirts which he had on. The like he had
done not long before, in stealing a gentleman's velvet cassocke, who had kindly
entertained and lodged him. But the most notable theft that ever he committed
in this kind, was in stealing a bridegroomes new apparel (the Kings Atturneys
brother of Poitiers) and his brides: for which he thought he might well
adventure hanging, considering they were for the most part all of clean silk.
Which cunning conueyance of his, is the more to be wondered at, in that he was
of necessity to come and go six or seven times (at the least) before he could
convey them away; which he did very slily, carrying them into his lodging in the
Nu^nery of S. Crosses in Poytiers; where he remained when they came to call him
coram, for that they suspected none but him. But the sly merchant looking
through the window, and espying the Sergeants coming to apprehend him,
conveyed himself away, after he had locked and barred all the doors. Where
they breaking into his lodging, found beside the foresaid apparel, about forty
pair of shoes of all sizes, with a number of breeches, and a great quantity of
cut cloth, and some whole pieces, as also a pretty library of books, which he
had stolen at sundry times from scholars. Moreover, his manner was to deal
worse with his hostisses then with his hosts; for whereas he stole nothing from
his hosts but their apparel, he took from these dames their goodliest relikes
in kind requital of their courtesies. Yet the finest feate that ever he played,
was the theft he committed in the prison, where he was cast for the like
offense: for being not able to contain himself, and to hold his fingers till
he was set at liberty, he stole the Iaylers cloak whilst he was in the
prison, and sold it to a good fellow, letting it down through the trellis of
the prison window, looking into the street. Which verifies my former
assertion, what a nature prone to theft may in time come unto, viz. to grow to
such a degree of impudency as to steal in the very prison, where felons and
other malefactors await their dismal doom, and from no meaner man then the
Iayler himself. But I do the less wonder hereat, in that my self have seen
cut-purses at Paris rifling men's pockets, and iugling away their purses at the
very gallows, and that hard by a cutpurse ready to be executed.

3 I will now dismiss this arch-theefe Dagobert: and as I have alleged
examples of those who have pardoned thieves convicted of the fact, and suffered
them to go quietly away, and peaceably to enjoy their pilfer and pray; so I
will here record one to the contrary, of a gentleman who punished a thief with
his own hands, yet so as it brought him to a pecke of troubles. For feeling a
good fellow cutting his purse, as he was looking upon the King playing at
tennis (the very same day that the now deceased John d^ Bell^y was installed
Bishop of Paris) and suffering him to do his pleasure, dissembling the matter
as though he had felt nothing; yet in the end, not content to make him restore
his purse, he further cut off his ear. But it repented him (poor gentleman)
not long after, not for that he cried quittance with him, but for handling him
in that sort: for if he had but stabbed him, he had never (questionless) been
troubled; but because he cut off his ear, the hangman of Paris commenced suite
against him for incroching upon his office.

4 But to return to our subtle sleights, more common and frequent at this day
they ever they were, and that in all manner of thefts. Could a man desire to
hear of a more cunning conueyance then that which was played at Paris about
sixteen years ago, by one who kept his countenance so well, that he caused the
owner of the featherbed which he was about to steal, viz. one Guerrier Proctor
of the court of Parliament dwelling in S. Bennets cloister, to help him up with
it. But I will here relate two felonious facts committed by a thief, which are
nothing inferior, but rather far exceeding any of the former. A certain good
fellow being desirous to have his neighbors cow, rose very early in the
morning before day, and coming to the house where the cow stood, drove her out
(making as though he had r^n after her.) His neighbor waking at the noise, and
looking through the window: neighbor (quoth the thief) come and help me to
take my cow which is run into your yard, your door being carelessly left
open. His neighbor having helped him, he persuaded him to go along with him to
the market (for if he had staid at home, his theft would have been discovered)
and as they went together upon the way, when the day began to dawne, the poor
man knew his cow, and said, Neighbor, this cow is much like mine. It is very
true (quoth he) and therefore I go to sell her, because our wives contend about
them every night, not knowing which to take. Thus continuing their talk, they
came to the market place; where the thief fearing he should be descried,
fained that he had some business in the town, and thereupon desired his
neighbor to sell her in the mean time as dear as he could, promising to give
him the wine. His neighbor therefore sold her, and brought him the money;
whereupon they went straight to the taueuerne according to promise. Now after
that they had made pretty good cheer, the thief conveyed himself away,
leaving his neighbor in pawn for the shot. From thence he went to Paris, and
being on a time in the market place, where many asses were tied (as the custom
is) to hooks fastened in the wall; seeing all places taken up, he made choice
of the fairest ass, got upon his back, and riding through the market place,
sold him very dear to a stranger: who finding no other room empty save that
whence the ass was taken, tied him there again. Whereupon when the true owner
(from whom he was stolen) would have loosed him, and led him away, there arose
such a hot bickering betwixt him and the stranger who had bought him, that they
fell together by the ears. Now the thief, (who had sold the ass) being in
the throng, and seeing all this sport, and namely how the buyer was thrown
down and well beaten, could not forbear saying, Curry me, currie me well this
stealer of asses, and spare him not. Which when the poor man, who was in that
pitiful plight (desiring nothing more then to hear of him that had sold him
the ass) heard, and knowing him by his voice; he cried out, That's he, that's he
that sold me the ass: Whereupon my gentleman was apprehended, and (all the
foresaid knaueries being verified by his own confession) was executed, as he
well deserved. Hence we may learn these two things, first, what great wits,
and how full of subtilties and sleightes this Age affoordeth. Secondly, what
punishments befall wicked men through the just judgment of God, and how he
takes vengeance on them when the magistrate is at a loss, and destitute of
all means whereby he might find and firret them out: nay how he works and
brings things so about by the hand of his providence, that guilty
malefactors like fluttering gnats burn themselves (as it were) in the candle.
I confess indeed, there are not many such subtle thieves as this to be found
in a country. But many there are, whose mouths are their own accusers, and
who (as we say) put the rope about their own necks, as they best know who by
their places are to give judgment; who if they be any thing wary and wise,
work so by their interrogatories, that they make these gallants (how good a
face soever they set upon the matter) so to faulter and fall foul with
themselves, that in the end they cut their own throats, and sacrifice
themselves to their own shame.

5 And seeing there is nothing more worthy a Christian man's meditation then
such judgments of God, I hope it will not be ungrateful to the Reader if I
here digress a little, and allege two other examples; the one modern, the
other ancient: both of them suting with the former, and exemplifying that which
has been said. Erasmus therefore reports, that a thief having broken into a
house in London, where he lodged, and entered in through the roof, to see if
he could meet with some good boon, made such a noise, that he caused all the
neighbors to flock thither; which when he perceived, he thrust himself
amidst the throng, as though he had been one of the company that sought for the
varlet; and by this means kept himself unknown. Not long after, perceiving
that the uproar was past, and that they looked no more for the knave (supposing
he had escaped) he went forth, nothing mistrusting he should have bin descried.
But the blab, not able to hold his tongue, bewrayed himself, and so brought
his neck within the halter: for as he was going out at the door, meeting many
talking of the thief, and cursing of him, he cursed him likewise, affirming
that he had made him lose his hat. Where note, that whilst the rascal
labored to save himself, running now here, now there, his hat fell off his
head, which they kept, hoping thereby to discover him. They then hearing him
say that he had lost his hat, began to suspect him, and upon suspicion
apprehended him: who after he had confessed the fact was hanged. Many like
stories are recorded in profane writers, but (since I promised only one other)
I will content my self with that wherewith Erasmus has paralleled the former.
Plutarch then writes that a certain temple dedicated to Pallas (in the city
of the Lacedaemonians) having been robbed, there was an empty bottle found,
which made all the people to wonder exceedingly; for no man could imagine what
the thieves should do therewith. At the last, one in the company seeing them
all in such an amazement, If you will hear me (quoth he) I will tell you what I
conjecture, I imagine that the thieves being ready to execute their enterprise,
drank some Aconite (a kind of deadly poison) and carried wine with them in this
bottle, that if they brought their purpose to pass, they might preserve
themselves from the danger of the poison by the wine; and that if they were
descried, it might put them to a more gentle death, then the Judges would have
inflicted upon them. They hearing him render so sensible a reason, and
perceiving that he spoke not as one that did conjecture, but as being well
acquainted with the business, began to question with him, one after another in
this sort: who are you Sir that can conjecture so well? where learned you the
art of divination? what acquaintance have you in this city? In the end they
pressed him so much, and urged him so far by their interrogatories, that they
made him confess that he was guilty of the fact, and one of the thieves. Now
as there are sundry examples of the like providence of God in detecting of
thieves, so are there also of murderers, as hereafter shall be declared.

6 But to return to theeuish sleights: for, alleging out of Erasmus de
lingua, the example of an English thief, I remembered other stories which he
has elsewhere of the tricks of these tradesmen; out of which I will only pick
out such as I judge most notorious: I mean such as were performed with greater
subtilty, dexterity and slight. And I will begin with a story, cosin-germaine
to that which I lately recorded of the thief who played his part so well, that
he caused the owner of the featherbed which he was about to steal, to help
him up with it: dispensing for this once with my former promise, in making a
medley of secular men's virtues with Church-mens. For the fine feate which I am
about to relate, was played by a priest of Louaine, called Antonie, who having
bidden two good fellows to dinner (whom he met by chance in the street) and
understanding at his coming home, that there was not a morsel of meat in the
house (and knew too well that he had never a penie in his purse) he devised
this slight, that he might keep touch with his guests: he went into his
neighbors house, with whom he was very inward, and the kitchen maid being
absent, stole thence a brazen pot wherein the meat was boiling, and carried it
home under his gown, commanding his maid to power out the meat and the broth
into an earthen pot: and having caused her to scour it, he sent it back to
the (...) again, requesting him to lend him a certain sum of money, and to
take the pot in pawn. The messenger brought good news to Sir Antonie, viz. a
piece of money that came in pudding time to furnish the table, and a short
scrole, by which the creditor acknowledged that he had received a brass pot in
pawn upon the sum which he had lent him. But being ready to go to dinner,
and missing one of the pots, he began to chide and take on, so that all the
house was in an vproare; the kitchen maid protesting that she never saw it
after Sir Antonie was there. Now albeit they made conscience to suspect him for
such a fact, yet in the end they went to his house to see whether they could
find it: and because they could hear no news of it, they asked him bluntly
for it. He answered that he knew of no such thing. But when they laid it to his
charge, and avouched to his face that he had stolen it, seeing none came into
the house but he only: he made this answer, True it is indeed, I borrowed a pot,
but I sent it back to the owner again. Which when the creditor denied: See my
masters (said sir Antonie) there is no trusting of men now a days without a
bil of their hand; he would straight have laid it to my charge, had I not had
his hand and seal to the contrary; whereupon he showed the scrole which the
boy had brought him. So that the creditor was well mocked for his labor
throughout all Louaine, it being blazed abroad, that such a man had lent a
sum of money upon a pawn that was his own.

7 After this theeuish trick played by a priest, it is good reason that we give
ear to another done unto a Priest, to requite the former. A good fellow in
Antwerpe having marked a Priest that carried a purse by his girdle, which (as he
supposed) was sore troubled with a timpanie; after low and humble obeisance,
told him that he was entreated by the Curate of their parish to buy him a Cope,
and because sir (quoth he) you are just of his height, I would desire you to go
with me to a merchants shop to try one: for I persuade my self, if it fit
you, it will fit him. The Priest easily condescending to his request, went with
him to a shop where these Copes were sold: where having tried one, the merchant
affirmed that it was as fit as if it had been made for him. The knauish
companion watching opportunity to show them a cast of his office, after he had
well viewed M. Priest on every side, told him that it had one fault, viz. that
it was shorter before then behind. Nay (quoth the mercha^t) the fault is not in
the cope, but in this great purse which bears it out, and makes it seem so.
The Priest therefore laid his purse aside: which done, they viewed him round the
second time. In the mean while, this conicatcher (to make an end of his sport)
whilst the Priest had his back turned, nimbly snatched up the purse, and
showed them a fair pair of heels. Whereupon he cried out, Stop the thief,
stop the thief: the merchant crying as fast, Stop the Priest: and the thief,
Stop the mad Priest, (for the people seeing him run in this strange habit,
supposed he had bin mad indeed.) But whilst the Priest and the merchant
wrangled together, the thief escaped.

8 There is yet another story recorded by the same author, not much unlike the
former for nimblenesse and good footmanship, albeit it come far short of it
in acuteness and quicknes of wit; being answerable to the country from whence
it came, which breeds no great wits, except perchance by a miracle. For this
pageant was played by a Hollander at Leyden. This good fellow walking through
the city, w^nt into a shoomakers shop: where the shoemaker asked him what he
would; and perceiving that he cast his eye upon a pair of Buskins properly.
boots which hung hard by, demanded of him whether he would have a pair or
not: he answering that he would. The shoemaker ma^^ choice of such a pair as
he thought would fit him best, and pulled them on; and having so done, he
willed him to try a pair of See the end of this section
shoes, which he said were as fit for him as the boots. These things thus
passed over, the fellow in stead of agreeing of the price, and paying the
shoemaker, began to question with him merrily in this sort, Tell me in good
earnest, did never any man thus fitted for the race as I am, run away, and
pay nothing? Never (said the shoemaker). But if perchance (quoth he) a man
should run away, what would thou do? I would run after him (quoth he).
Do thou speak in good earnest (quoth he)? Yes marry do I (said the
shoemaker) and I would do it indeed. We must try a conclusion (said the
other,) I will begin the course, come on therefore follow me: and forthwith
ran away as fast as he could drive; and the shoemaker after, crying, Stay the
thief, stay the thief. The fellow seeing them come thick and threefold out
of their houses, fearing lest some would have laid hands on him, set a good
face upon a foul fact, and as though he had been but in jest, said, Stop me
not for the love of God, it is for a great wager. Thus the poor shoemaker
returned home again very angry, that he had lost both his pains and his
pence; for the other got the goal by ouer-running him. Here, because Erasmus
calls them ocreas, I have translated them boots; yet we may not think that
they were like French boots, but such as might be worn with shoes.

9 But having spoken sufficiently of thieves that run away with the booty,
let us now treat of those who stir not a foot after they have played a part
of legerdemain, but look smoothly, as though butter would not melt in their
mouths. A Scottish gentleman told me that when King James the fifth went over
into France (which was Anno 1536.) the Earls of Errol, Argile and Mar^e having
feasted the Ladies of Saint Antonies street, where they lodged; whilst the
Earl of Argile was looking upon certain gamesters that played after supper,
there was a gallant as brave as a Peacock, who in sporting manner untied about
five and twenty or thirty Angels, and rose Nobles, which being bended
together and folded one in another, served in stead of golden buttons to the
cuts of a night gown, which the Earl had on, as the fashion was in those
days. The Earl seeing him so sumptuously attired, and going about his
business with such good grace, as one that meant no hurt, but only to make
some sport, suffered him to do his pleasure. But when this royster thought he
had enough, showing that that which he had done was in good earnest, he went
slily away out of the hall. Whereupon the Earl (who had made as though he had
known nothing, whilst he was fidling about his gown) told the company how
the knave had served him, and withal showed them evident signs thereof; whch
was not done without great laughter. Whereupon they (who were better acquainted
with such sleights) gave him a caveat to be more wary another time, seeing for
the present there was no remedy, but patience.

10 I proceed to another good fellow, who was his crafts master as well as the
former, at least had as good a grace in cunning conueyance. In the reign of
King Francis the first, a gentlemanlike thief as he was groping the Cardinal
of Lorrains pocket, was seen by the King as he sat at Mass right over the
Cardinal; where he perceiving himself to be discried, beckened to the King to
hold his peace, and he should see good sport. Whereupon the King suffered him
to do his pleasure: but shortly after he used certain speeches to the
Cardinal, whereby he gave him occasion to feel for his purse. The Cardinal
missing his money, stood in a maze, wondering at this accident: which ministered
to the king (who had seen the whole pageant) matter of merriment. But when he
had taken his fill of laughter, his pleasure was, the money should be restored
to the Cardinal again: for he supposed the fellow had taken it of purpose to
make sport. But he was deceived; for whereas he imagined that he had been some
honest gentleman and of good note (seeing him so resolute, and setting so good
a face upon the matter) he found afterward that he was a notable thief indeed
(disguised only like a gentleman) who meant not to jest, but counterfetting a
iester, to go about his business in good earnest, as the former had done.
Whereupon the Cardinal turned the jest upon the King: who (as his manner was)
swore as he was a gentleman, (...) it was the first time that a thief had made
him his fellow.

11 And here the theft committed in the presence of the Emperor Charles the
fifth, comes in very fitly after the former acted in the French Kings presence
(as has been said) and partly also with his consent. The Emperor having
commanded his servants to trusse up bag and baggage; whilst every man was
busy in packing up his implements, there came a good fellow into the hall
(where the Emperor was, with a small train, ready to take horse) who as soon
as he was come into the room, and had done his duty, began to take down
the hangings, making as if he had had other business in hand, and had been in
have. And though it was not his occupation to hang up, and take down hangings,
yet he performed it so well, that when he who had the charge to take them down
came into the hall, he found that another had eased him of that labor, and
(which was worse) had carried them away. See what impudent thieves there are
now a days.

12 Howbeit the boldness of an Italian thief (who did the like) at Rome, in
the time of Paul the third, was nothing inferior to the former. There had been
a great feast in a Cardinals house, and the plate being set up in a chest that
stood in a chamber near to the hall, where the feast was kept: whilst diverse
waiting for their masters, walked in this outward chamber (or Anticamera as
Italians speak) there came in a good fellow in a cassock, apparelled like a
steward, with a torch before him, who desired those that sat upon the chest to
rise up, saying that he was to use it; and they were no sooner risen up, but he
bad the porters that followed him to take it up and carry it away. This gallant
trick was played after that the steward of the house and all the servants were
gone to supper; at least it is to be thought that if any of them were then in
the Anticamera (as their custom was) they did not mark it.

13 But what shall we say to the boldness and impudency of another Italian,
(hanged at Bononia about eleven years ago) who having served out a long
prentiship at Rome in learning to counterfeit men's hands and writings, and to
take seals from one instrument to put to another; because he much resembled
Cardinal Sermonet, went in a Cardinals habit and train (though very small)
through Mark d'Ancona and Romagna with a counterfeit Bull, whereby he said he
had a commission from the Pope to gather the tithes of that country: albeit he
came near no great cities for fear of being detected. But having had good
success in his attempts (because the most took him for Cardinal Sermonet) he
passed through Romagna and came somewhat near to Bononia. Now as soon as the
Bishop of Ferm^ (who was the Popes Vicelegate) heard thereof, he sent one of
his gentlemen unto him (who had sometime attended upon Cardinal Sermonet) who
certified the Vicelegate that he was not the man he affirmed himself to be;
which caused him somewhat to suspect this gallant, the rather for that he had
not observed accustomed solemnities and ceremonies which other Cardinals were
wont to observe. Whereupon he sent him again with a troop of soldiers, giving
him express charge and commandment to apprehend him, if he knew for certain
that he were not the man he counterfetted himself to be. In the mean time
this companion (being now discovered the second time by sundry privy marks)
was better known by one of his ears, which he had lost for his good deserts,
which he showed at unawares as he put off his little Cardinals hat. The Captain
therefore commanded his soldiers to lay hands on him. But he no less resolute,
bold and impudent then before, charged them to take heed what they did, with
his thundering threats making them all to quake for fear, brauing it out with
as high and lofty terms as the proudest Cardinal in Rome could have done, if
the like violence had been offered him. The soldiers (who made scruple at the
first to encounter him) were in the end encouraged by their captain to grapple
with him. Where having apprehended him, they brought him to Bononia with two of
his men who were not privy to this his knavery (the rest which were accessory
being fled away.) And there he was condemned by the Vice-legate, and hanged at
Saint Petronio's gate in a Cardinals attire, wearing on his head a mytre of
paper with this title or inscription, IL RE DE' LADRI, The King of thieves,
that is to say, The King of good fellows. He had six thousand crowns about him,
which (as it was reported) was nothing to that which his two men (who were fled
away) had carried with the^. I do the rather set down this story at large,
because it is a very notable and memorable fact. For albeit we have heard many
who have usurped the name and held the place of those whom they resembled (as I
have declared in my Latin Apology) yet they took such men's names as they
knew were dead, or of whom a man could hardly hear any certain news. Which
was far otherwise with this companion, seeing the Cardinal (whose name he
borrowed) was then living (as he knew well) and not so far off, but that he
might have heard from him in a very short time. Now since I am come to the King
of our modern thieves (even in the judgment of those that condemned him) I
should do him wrong if I should proceed further, in hope to find any more
notorious and cunning theft then his.

14 Notwithstanding lest he should be left alone, and lest it should be thought
that Italy only were furnished with such bold Brittans, I thought it not
impertinent here to insert two other stories, one of a Frenchman, another of a
Polonian, who for such feats (proceeding from like audacitie) deserve not
only to be of his Court and Counsel, but successors to his Crown. The
Frenchman (as very a conicatcher as the former) was borne at Saumur upon
Loire, being so cunning in counterfetting the Kings seals and letters, that
showing certain extraordinary commissions, which (as he said) he had obtained
of the King, he got great sums of the Kings receivers; and made a mighty mass
of money by selling of certain woods which were felled for the Kings use. But
being in the end discovered, he went the same way that the king of good
fellows had showed him: and as he was hanged in a Cardinals habit, so this
companion was executed at Paris in a gentleman's attire before the Church of the
Augustine Friars, the same day that the Court of Parliament was kept in that
Covent about sixteen years ago. Some are of opinion that he was the man that
gave intelligence to king Francis the first (by means of a notable theft which
he committed) of that which the Emperor Charles the fifth, and the King of
England had plotted against him: and did not only advertise him thereof, but
brought him their very tickets, instructions and letters. For meeting a
Flemmish gentleman upon the way traveling toward England, he took
acquaintance of him, telling him that he was his countriman, and so rode along
with him to the haven where they were to take ship. Whither being come, when
the Flemming was laid down to take his rest (waiting for wind and weather) the
Frenchman (who had persuaded him to rest himself upon the bed) faining to be
sound asleep, rising softly, went and bought a budget like unto the Flemmings,
and having filled it with roles of white paper until it was about the same
weight, laid it upon the table in stead of the Flemmings budget. And having so
done, he awoke the Dutch man, and told him that he had left certain things
behind him which he had forgotten, and therefore was of necessity to return
back again, entreating him not to take it unkindly that he brake off
company. The Flemming little suspecting what might be the meaning of this
sudden change, but thinking he meant good sooth, could not but thank him for
his good company, and after many kind embracings, recommended him to Gods
protection, and so betook him to his rest again: yet he left not his budget
(I mean the budget which he supposed had been his own) any longer upon the
table, but put it under his pillow. Wherein the simple fellow was like to that
noddie, who when the steed was stolen, shut the stable door. Now whilst the
Flemming slept, the Frenchman went post with his budget, which he should have
put under his pillow, or in a surer place, before he had laid him down to
rest. And you may easily conjecture whether the Frenchman brought not a
welcome present to the French King (though he had stolen it,) and whether the
Flemming brought not heavy news to the King of England. Some say that he
beheaded him, saying that he would make him an example to all such sticklers as
intermeddle in Princes affairs, to teach them to be more wary and wise, and to
handle the matter a little more cunningly. This is the fine fetch which was
reported to have bin played by him, whose cheating and knavery I have before
recorded, both of them being practiced against the same King. Which being so,
we may well think that this cunning contriuer of thefts, intended to benefit
himself in endomaging the King as much by his last thefts, as he had done by
his first. But many are of opinion that they came from two several men, and
were coined in two several mints. Howsoever, I would not give less honor to
the one then to the other. I come now to the Polonian called Florian, for
boldness and audacitie nothing inferior to the former: who having by the same
cunning device counterfetted the seals and letters of the King of Poland, came
over into England as the Kings Ambassador, where he continued a long time,
being respected and honored as be seemed one of his place; and where he forgot
not to use the Kings credit in diverse theeuish practices as he had formerly
done, and as he did since in dealing with great States: the King his master
seeking in the mean time to have had his head.

15 I will add yet one other example of thefts (albeit I was purposed here to
have made an end) not like the three last, nor any formerly mentioned, but
rather contrary unto them, as having nothing common with them; and therefore so
much the more necessary to be spoken of, to the end it may appear that our Age
may not only brag of sundry new theeuish practices, but of all the rare
sleights and subtilties mentioned in ancient stories. For here we have an
example of one thief stealing from another. A year ago, or somewhat more,
there was a merchant in an Inn at Paris, who had laid up a great sum of money
(which he had received for certain wares) in a cupboord: where a servant in
the Inn having marked him, watching his opportunity, opened the cupboord, and
stole thence two bags, one full of gold, the other of silver; and being laden
with them, went about two leagues from Paris toward Montargis, where being
come to his Inn very late in the evening, and weary of his journey, he
entreated his host to help him to a horse, which might be ready for him the
next morning: who told him it would be a hard matter to hire one. The traveler
after diverse offers, at last promised to give him a French crown for one till
dinner: which free offer made his host somewhat to suspect him, especially
considering he had seen his two bags; whereupon he promised to provide a horse
for him against the next morning. Having therefore got him on horseback by
break of day, and accompanying him to the place where he thought it fittest to
arrest him, he took him such a bastinado in the nape of the neck, that he
struck him down to the ground, so amazed that he knew not where he was; and
afterward made such agreement with him (crying out only for mercy) that
having taken as much of the stolen money as he thought good, he returned home
again with his horse. Now it so fortuned, that one of those who went post to
pursue the thief, found him with the remainder of his money going toward
Montargis; and knowing him to be the man he sought for, he fed him so with
fair words, that he drew him along with him to the next town, and there
committed him over to the Justices to be sent to Montargis; where being
imprisoned, he confessed the fact, and accused his host, who was presently sent
for, to the end they might be confronted together: and notwithstanding his
denial of the fact, was condemned to the rack. But he appealed to the Court
of Parliament at Paris, where he was broken upon the wheel, the servant
escaping better cheap, being only hanged.

16 Thus having alleged sundry examples of the cunning and boldness of our
modern thieves, it will not be amiss to record an ancient story taken out of
the Author, for whose Apology this treatise is a preparatiue. Though in so
doing, I shall pass the bounds which I have prescribed to my self, and
anticipate the argument of the books ensuing: notwithstanding because it will
not be prejudicial, but rather beneficial to the Reader, I am easily drawn
to dispense with my self herein. Mark then the story of the slight and
policy (or rather sleights and policies) of one Villon, not borne in France
but in Egypt, and that not some few years since, but above five and twenty
hundred years ago: which story (taken out of HERODOTVS) I will here translate
with greater fidelity, then either Laurentius Valla in his Latin translation
(such as it was before my refining of it) or the French, which is now extant.
These therefore are his words. A King of Egypt called Rampsinit, minding to
lay up his treasure in a safe place (whereof he had far greater store then ever
any of his successors) he built a house all of hewn stone, a part whereof
stood out from the other building, to which there was easy access. But the
Mason being disposed to play the knave with him, left a stone loose in the
building, which might easily be taken out of the wall by two, or (if need were)
by one. The work being finished, the King laid up his treasure therein. After
a time, the Mason perceiving that his glass was almost run* and the lease of
his life well near expired, called unto him his two sons, and told them how
(to the end he might leave them well provided for, and that they might have
wherewith to make merry when he was gone) he had used a fine device in building
the closet for the Kings treasure: and having showed them in particular how
they should take out the stone, he gave them the measure of it, assuring the^
that if they kept it carefully, they should be keepers of the Kings treasure.
Their father being dead, they stayed not long before they assayed the means
prescribed. For coming shortly after to the Kings palace in the night, and
finding the stone, they took it out very easily, and stole the^ (...) ^ightie
mass of money. The King coming thither not long after, and perceiving that his
coffers were not so full as they were accustomed, wondered not a little; yet
could not tell whom he might accuse, considering all the doors were surely
locked, and all things sealed as he had left them. But coming thither the
second and third time, and perceiving that his treasury diminished daily (for
the thieves repaired thither continually) he caused ^innes and snares to be se^
round about the place where the treasure lay. The thieves repairing thither as
they were accustomed, one of them having entered in, and coming near to the
coffers, perceived that he was entangled in a snare: and knowing in what danger
he was, called to his brother, and told him what misfortune had befallen him,
willing him to come in quickly, and to cut off his head: for (said he) if I be
found here, and known, I shall be the cause of thy death also. His brother
being ^asily persuaded (as liking well his advice) did as he had bidden him.
And having laid the stone in his place again, returned home, carrying with him
his brothers head The King coming to his closet early in the morning, was
exceedingly amazed to see the thieves body in the snare without a head,
especially considering there was no breach in the wall, by which he might enter
in. Departing therefore thence, he did as follows. He commanded that the dead
corpse should be hung upon the wall, committing the custody thereof to his
guard, straightly charging and commanding them, that if they espied any that
did mourn, or bewray any grief or compassion at the sight thereof, they
should attach them, and bring them before him. The man's mother, much perplexed
that her sons body was thus hung up, came to her other son, desiring him to
devise some means to take down his brothers body, threatening him, that if he
would not, she would inform the King that he was the man that had stolen his
treasure. He having been sundry times threatened and rated by his mother in this
sort, and perceiving that she would not desist for all the reasons he could
allege, devised this slight. He sadled certain Asses, and lading them with
rundlets of wine, drove them before him; and being come to the place where the
guard watched the corpse, he let loose the hoopes of the barrels, making way for
the wine to run out, and then began to cry out and to beat his head, as not
knowing to which of the asses he should run first. The guard seeing so much
wine spilt, ran thither with vessels thick and threefold, thinking the more
they saved the more they should gain. Where he in the mean time faining as
though he had been horn mad for anger, reviled and cursed them all. But seeing
they spoke him so fair, and entertained him with so good language, he made
show by little and little as though he had been pacified and had forgotten his
former furious fit; and after much ado having gotten his Asses out of the way,
he mended his barrels. Now among other speeches which passed between them in
the mean time, one of the company being very pleasant, brake a jest upon him
which made his worship laugh; in lieu whereof he bestowed one of his barrels
upon him, which they resolved to draw dry, and to carouse of in the same place
and plight they were in, entreating him to bear them company. Whereunto he
condescended, and stayed with them. And because they had so kindly entertained
him and made him such sport, he presented them with a second barrel: so that
having that blessed abundance, even wine at will, they never left tippling and
carowsing, till their wits stood wetshod; and being in the end overcome with
sleep, they rested in the same place. He then in the dead time of the night
went and took down his brothers body; and to the further disgrace of the
guard, shaued all their right cheeks: and laying the body upon one of his
Asses, returned home again, having fully accomplished his mothers desire. The
King hearing that the body was stolen* as highly displeased; and resolving by
some means to find out the thief that had committed the fact, he used this
device (which notwithstanding I can scarce believe.) He commanded his daughter
to go to a brothel-house, and there to prostitute her self to all comers; upon
condition they should first acquaint her with the most notorious fact, and
cunningest knavery that ever they committed: and that he that should confess
the stealing of the thieves carcass, should forthwith be attached by her, and
sent to the Court. Whilst then the Kings daughter addressed her self to
fulfill her fathers mind, the rumor of the Kings intended resolution came to
the theefes ears, who purposing to show that he was more crafty in preventing,
then the King in inuenting this wile, thus deluded his daughter: he cut off a
man's hand newly dead* and keeping it close under his gown, went to visit her.
Where she asked him the same question she had demanded of others. Whereupon he
told her, that the most wicked and notorious fact that ever he committed, was
the cutting off of his brothers head, who was taken in a snare as he adventured
to rob the Kings treasure; and the wittiest was the taking down of his corpse
from the gibbet, after he had made the guard drunk. She hearing this, laid
hands on him, with intent to apprehend him: but the knave (by reason of the
darkness of the place) gave her a dead man's hand in stead of his own: so that
whilst she thought she had him fast by the hand, he slipped away, leaving her
this liuelesse pawn to use at her pleasure. Which when the King heard, he was
greatly astonished, as well at the craft, as at the boldness of the thief. In
the end he sent his Heralds throughout all his dominions, commanding them to
proclaim in the Kings name, that he would not only pardon him that had done
this fact, but highly advance him if he would repair to the Court. The thief
reposing himself upon the gracious pardon of the Prince, went to the Court:
where King Rampsinit having him in great admiration, gave him his daughter to
wife, as being the wittiest man in the world. In that, as the Egyptians
excelled all other men in wit and wiles, so he excelled all other Egyptians.
This is the history as HERODOTVS relates it, which I have translated almost
word for word as near as I could, to keep the propriety and grace of our
tongue; a thing as difficult in translating of him, as of any Greek writer
whatsoever, and that for sundry reasons not necessary here to be stood upon.
Yet this I will not omit, how that in translating hereof, I have noted sundry
scapes in Valla's translation, which notwithstanding I corrected not in my
former edition. Neither is any man to wonder hereat, seeing I acknowledge in my
Preface thereto, that I have left a number of scapes and ouersights
uncorrected, untouched and uncensured: considering also that the diligence
which is seen in perusing a text when a man translateth it himself, is far
greater, then when he corrects another man's work, endeavoring to save the
credit of the translator as much as may be: especially when he does it in have,
as it is well known I did. Yet I deny not but that there are some places in
the translation of this story, wherein I could not satisfy my self: and
therefore I persuade my self I shall much less satisfy those who are
skillful in the Greek tongue. But I presume, that they who are most cunning,
and consequently do best conceive the difficulties with which I was to
encounter, will of all others be most easily satisfied. Now this history suteth
so well with the argument in hand, that I could not well omit it, being written
of a thief, whom the author graceth with the two properties specified in the
former examples, to wit, craftiness and boldness, and both in the highest
degree. Whereby we may learn what use there is to be made of paralleling of
histories, especially of ancient with modern. For whereas the cunning and
boldness of this old thief, may happily at the first seem strange and almost
incredible; yet if we compare it with the craft and boldness of our modern
thieves, we shall find that there is no such cause it should be thought so
strange. And for as much as it may be thought somewhat hard, that the King
could find in his heart to prostitute his daughter in such sort (as it is
indeed very harsh I confess) yet sounds it not so harshly in my ears, as
this their censure of HERODOTVS does (for I have heard many ever excepting,
especially against this point) since himself protests that he gives no credit
thereunto, but only relates it as he heard it. And yet I could allege (if need
were) sundry stories, which we must either account false and fabulous (whereas
notwithstanding they are holden to be most certain and infallible) or confess
that in this there is great semblance of truth.

17 But whilst I was copying this story out of HERODOTVS, another came into my
mind of a thief, or rather a cutter by the high way, infinitely more resolute
then the former, and as bold and venterous as any of that cutting crew, whose
fell and felonious attempts and actions have bin before remembered. Dion the
historian records the history of this thief (or rather captain of thieves)
who kept such a ruffling in the reign of Seuerus the Emperor about 195.
years after Christ. A certain Italian (says he) called Bulas, having
gathered a troop of six hundred thieves, committed great robberies in Italy
for the space of two years, maugre the Emperor and the many garrisons
residing in those quaters. Diverse sought to take him, because the Emperor was
desirous to have him apprehended: but he so handled the matter, that those
which saw him, saw him not, those which found him, found him not, and those
that had him, had him not; which he did partly by liberal and bountiful gifts,
partly by crafty wiles: which he knew well how to put in practice in time and
place. For he had intelligence of all such as at any time went out of Rome, or
arrived at Brundusium (called by some Brendis) how many they were, so also of
what quality and condition, and what substance they had. Some he forthwith
dismissed after he had taken from them part of their goods: tradesmen he
detained for a time, and when they had served his turn, he recompensed them
for their labor and pains, and afterward sent them away. And understanding on
a time that two of his men should be exposed to wild beasts, he came to the
Iayler and made him believe that he was the Prouost-marshall of the country,
and that he stood in need of the men whom he had in prison, and thereupon
caused him to deliver them into his hands. Then going to the captain that had
commission to discomfite hm and his troop, he began (as if he had been some
third person) to revile the thief, (that is himself) promising him that if he
would follow him, he would deliver him into his hands. Whereupon drawing him
along with him into a valley under color as though he would apprehend Phaelix
(for so was Bulas surnamed) he laid hands on him, and counterfetting the person
of the Prouost-marshall, sat down in the judgment seat; where having called
the captain before him, he caused one of his men to shave him; and having so
done, he dismissed him, saying, Bid thy master have more care of his vassals,
lest in the end they all turn thieves: (for he had of his crew at that instant
a multitude of the Emperors servants, some who for want of pay, and others by
reason of their slender pay had left the Emperors service to follow him.) Of
which when Seuerus was particularly informed, he was mightily incensed, taking
it in high scorn, that he who had been so victorious over his enemies in
Britain by his Lieutenant, himself being in Italy in proper person, should
be so bearded and braued by a thief. Whereupon he gave a new commission to one
of his guard for the apprehending of him, and sent him with a great troop of
horsemen, threatening him with death if he brought him not alive. The Captain
having reciued such a peremptory commandment, understanding that he was wont
to entertain another man's wife, caused her husband to persuade her to assist
him in the business, that so he might be sure to surprise him. And by this
slight he was caught whilst he was asleep in a cave, and was afterward
brought before Papinian (governor of the Province) who asked him why he gave
himself to robbing and spoiling? to whom he answered by propounding another
question; And why (Sir) are you a governor? After this he was cast to wild
beasts: whereupon his fellows (to the number of six hundred) were dispersed,
as unable to do any thing without their captain.

18 There remain two other sorts of thieves, of which I had rather here speak
then defer them to the next Chapter, which I reserve for such as make no open
profession of stealing, but cloak their knaueries under color of their
calling: which to speak the truth are none of the smallest (as most of those
heretofore mentioned) but of the greatest and grossest, to wit, Pirates and
Bankerupts. First for Pirates; they are I confess no new vpstarts, but of
great standing, even from all antiquity, as may appear by certain verses of
Homer, alleged by Thucydides. Yet our Age, number for number, has had more
cunning and skillful, more dangerous and hurtful thieves in this kind then any
of the former. He amongst ancient pirates is famous for his boldness, who
being brought before Alexander the great, and demanded how he durst be so bold
as to play the pirate in the narrow seas? answered, Because I do this with a
single ship, I am called a thief, thou that do the like with a great
fleet, art called a King. Which answer pleased Alexander so well (as the story
reports) that he pardoned him. Here note that the word pirate which I have
translated thief, signifies one that robs by sea, whom we call a rouer, or
sea-robber: which general word I was the more bold to use, because it suteth
better with the other general, viz. robberies. But whether we use the general
or the particular, it skilleth not: we have here the answer of a very bold
thief, especially seeing he had to deal with such a mighty monarch as
Alexander was. Notwithstanding I persuade my self, that he that shall well
consider the dealing of Dragut (a pirate of our time) shall find that he was
nothing inferior in boldness and subtlety either to him or a dozen of any of
the most famous thieves mentioned in ancient stories. Concerning Bankerupts, I
will not say of them as I did of Pirates, that they are as old as the man in
the Moon. For certain it is, there were no bankerupts till long after pirates
began to roue, seeing it is necessary there should be banks before there could
be any bankerupts: (for doubtless the coiners of this word, called them
bank-rupts that kept not their banks, but brake them, which the Latins call
foro cedere) and it was a long time (we know) before men knew what banks meant,
namely before there was such traffic as now there is. And as banks are more
in use at this day then ever they were, so breaking is more usual, there being
as many bankerupts in some places as good bankers. In some places (I say): for
I except France, as worthy to have this honor given unto it (not for that it
is my native country, but because it is a truth cleared by daily experience) in
that it is not so addicted to this kind of theft, as other countries are, and
Italy above the rest. For it stands with good reason, that those who first
brought up the use of banks, should be more expert therein then their scholars,
and should reserve some secret or other to themselves, how they may break
banks and become bankerupts, if they chance to be wearied with that
occupation. For as they who are in good credit and account, and mistrusted by
none, need no great cunning to become bankerupts: so they whose credit
begins to crack, and to whom men have an eye, cannot handsomely break
without many sleights and subtilties. Albeit these latter (as experience
shows) play the merchants herein more cunningly then the former. And verily
the common saying, There would be no thieves if there were no receivers, ought
to be extended to bankerupts. And it further gives us to understand, how
transcendent the wickedness of this age is in comparison of the former. For
now arrant thieves do not only escape scot^free, but find abettors even amongst
those that should repress them, and who only have the sword in their hands to
execute the law upon them. Nay there are some Churches in Italy which are
professed sanctuaries of roguery: and rather harbor a thief that has stolen
ten or twenty thousand pounds, then one that has cut a purse not worth a
groate. And it is grown now to a custom to give days of payment, yea day after
day; during which time, honest men who are cosened of all their goods in this
sort, are constrained to see these conicatchers make good cheer at their own
costs, and yet dare not speak a word. Now these days of respite, are strange
alluring baits. I remember I was once in a place, where a side of a rich
merchants house (who was a banker) had been burned, where it was reported that
himself had set it on fire, to the end he might with some color obtain a
longer day of payment, whereby he should gain twenty times as much as the
fire had endomaged him. Yet I deny not but that such terms are sometime
expedient, and that they were invented upon good consideration: I speak only
against the abuse herein committed. But leaving the deciding of this
controversy to more competent Judges, I will add this one thing concerning
these bankerout thieves, that though I have spoken of bankerupts, taking the
word bankerupt in his special and proper signification, yet I exclude not
those that are comprised under the general acception, whether they become
bankerupts by hiding their heads, or making over their goods, or otherwise.

19 As for women's thefts, my purpose is to reserve them for th^^ kind of theft
whereof I am hereafter to entreat, as being that which makes them much more
famous or rather infamous: and wherein if not all women (God forbid it should
be so) yet some of all sorts have their hands. Whereas only some filthy
queanes, especially our puzzles of Paris use this other theft whereof we have
spoken: whence I will borrow two examples which shall easily show that the
number of cutpurses is not small. The first shall be of a woman taken as she was
cutting a purse in the street, who perceiving that the party whose purse she
had cut, would accuse her if she did not restore it again, took him aside, and
leading him into a corner apart, told him secretly; True it is indeed I cut
your purse, and put it in my basket among the rest, so that I know not which of
them it is; see if you can know it better then my self. And thus she made him
look for it in her basket which was almost full of them. I have also heard of
an old woman, who seeing a poor wench much grieved for that her purse was cut,
told her that she knew a good remedy for it: Deal (quoth she) as thou have
been dealt with. The wench easily persuaded to follow her advice, did so; and
so it was, that in the first purse which she cut, she found her own purse
again.

20 But before I proceed to prosecute the second kind of theft, I will show a
pitiful and lamentable thing accompanying these poor wretches executed for
robberies, more to be bewailed at this day then ever. For where there is one
that is touched with remorse of conscience, or confesses his offense before he
give his last farewell to the world, or call to God for mercy, there are ten
that die like dogs; having no more feeling of the frown or favor, the justice
or mercy of God, then brute beasts. And how many are there (I beseech you) who
are turned off the ladder whilst they are in their gibes and jests? One being
in this case, said, Sirs, see you tell not my friends that you saw me on the
gallows, for so you may chance make me run mad. Another; Masters, tell me in
good faith, do you think I would ever have come hither if I had not bin brought?
Another, when his ghostly father bad him pluck up a good heart, for he should
surely go that day to Paradise: O sir (quoth he) it will suffice if I come
thither to morrow night. Another, when Sir John told him, My friend, I assure
you you shall suppe this night with God in heaven: answered, Go and sup there
your self, for I am purposed to fast to day; or, Go you in my room, and I
will pay your shot. Another being upon the ladder, asked for drink, and
because the hangman drank before him, he said he durst not pledge him for
fear of the French pox. Another being led to the gallows, said he would not
go through such a street for fear of the plague. Another, I will not pass
through such a lane, for I am indebted to one there, who will arrest me.
Another said to the hangman now ready to turn him off, look well what thou
do, for if thou tickle me, thou will make me start. But this of a Picard is
most famous of all the rest, to whom (being upon the ladder) they brought a
poor weather-beaten wench that had miscarried, telling him that if he would
promise upon his faith and salvation to take her to wife, they would save his
life: whereupon desiring to see her go, and perceiving that she was lame and
that she limped, he turned himself to the hangman, and said Attaque, attaque,
elle eloque: Dispatch, dispatch, she halteth. And I remember that being at
supper in Auspurge with Charles de Marillac then Bishop of Vienna, and
Ambassador for the French King, when this story was told; a Dutch gentleman
who was at the table, paralleled it with another very like, of an accident that
happened in Denmark, to wit, of a man adjudged to the block, to whom (being
upon the scaffold) they brought a woman that had trod awry, offering him the
same condition they had done the former: where the fellow having viewed her
well, and perceiving that she had a sharp nose and flat cheeks, said he would
not buy repentance so dear; uttering withal a Dutch proverb in rhyme, the
meaning whereof is this, under a sharp nose and flat cheeks there is no good
to be found. I remember also that it was concluded out of these examples at
that supper, that whores in former times were more hated and abhorred then at
this day. But to leave this discourse, and to return in a word to the jests
and scoffs of these wicked wretches, I will only add this one thing, that if
there were nothing else to show the power and efficacy of Gods word where it
has free passage, this alone were sufficient to prove that where men's
consciences are touched to the quick, such events are seldom or never seen;
because the word of God teaching what eternal life and eternal death mean,
and piercing through (as the Apostle says) even to the dividing of the soul
and the spirit, causes the stoutest champions and most desperate ruffians
seriously to bethink themselves of their future estate: whereas men's forged
and devised doctrines, under color of religion, dull some, and minister unto
others matter of laughter.

21 I proceed now to the second kind of theft, which I kept in store for women,
I mean that whereby they hornifie their husbands. And here calling adultery
theft, I follow the Latin, where furtum (which properly signifies theft) is
often taken for adulterium, that is, adultery. For which cause it is called by
a periphrasis, furtiua Venus, furtiua voluptas, furtiua gaudia, and furtiua
nox. The like circumlocutions being used also in Greek. And so a child
begotten in adultery is called in French A stolen child, word for word, or
begotten by stealth.
Un enfant desrobe. And verily (all things being duly considered) it will be
found that there is no theft comparable to this, if we regard the common
saying, That which is worth the stealing, is worth the restoring. Which cannot
be said of the theft we now speak of: for how can a woman restore that unto
her husband, which she steals not from him, but rather alienateth and loses
in suffering it to be taken from her? or what honorable satisfaction may make
amends for such a fault? Therefore it was excellently said by the wittiest of
all the Latin Poets, -- nulla reparabilis art
Laesa pudicitia est, deperit illa semel.
Who also in a civil and modest manner does not only express adultery by
this or the like phrases, Laedere pudorem (which signifies word for word, to
hurt or wrong ones chastity) but by others also which properly signify theft,
as when he says, Auferre pudorem, and, rapere pudorem. Of the first we have an
example in the second book of his Metamorphosis, in these words: Et silet, and
laesi da^ signa rubore pudoris. Of the second, in the sixth: Aut linguam, atque
oculos, and quae tibi membra pudorem
Abstulerant, ferro rapiam.
And in the first, -- tenuitque fugam, rapuitque pudorem. And in the Epistle of
Helena to Paris: Nec spolium nostri turpe pudoris habe. Which is spoken of a
married man, and of her of whom he delivered that excellent saying formerly
mentioned. In which phrases we are to observe the word pudor, shame, which
signifies, that a woman committing such a fact, does not only loose her good
name (as we say in French, Oster l'honneur a vne fille, To take away a maids
good name) but even all shame and modesty. We are here further to note, that
our ancestors (to the end they might emphatically describe an impudent person,
and show how great a vice they judged impudency to be) called an impudent man
a dog, and an impudent woman a bitch. But how (may some say) do these examples
taken out of Ovid and such like Poets, agree to the former discourse concerning
theft, since in the verses where married women are only mentioned, and not
maids, it is not said that they defraud their husbands, but that, that is taken
from them which properly belongs to their husbands? To which I answer, that
albeit women commit not this theft themselves, they are notwithstanding rightly
called thieves; because that after they have defrauded their husbands of the
love and loyalty which they promised them by solemn stipulation, and set it
upon others, they yield and prostitute themselves unto them, that so they may
steal that from their husbands which of right belongs unto them.

22 I say they prostitute themselves: to put a necessary distinction between
such as are allured by pleasure, and those who are compelled by force. For she
that (for want of bridling her lust) is become bankcrupt of her honesty, has
(doubtless) a whores forehead, and is in plain terms a very thief: whereas
she that is not able to withstand the violence that is offered her, and so is
constrained to yield to the wicked will of man; or is circumuented by subtilty,
and so has that taken from her which otherwise she would never have yielded,
argues by her resistance not only that she is not accessory to the theft; but
that her chastity is nothing impeached or impaired thereby. And what better
guardian can there be of a woman's chastity then the love which she bears to
her husband? For if love be seated in the soul and not in the body; it must
needs follow, that so long as the soul is not polluted with the body,
chastity remains entire without either spot or blot. And how may we better
know that the mind remains pure, the body being defiled, then by a womans
resista^ce? Now that chastity is not seated in the body, it is evident by that
phrase which is usual in sundry languages, whereby she who before she was
married was called a modest maid, is after marriage called a modest matron.
Wherefore poor Lucretia did not judge aright of herself and her own estate,
when she said, she had lost her chastity, considering it is not in the power
of man to deprive a woman thereof. Therefore that which she afterward added,
that her body was defiled, but her mind was undefiled (as not consenting to the
fact) does control her former assertion, this being granted that the soul or
mind is the seat of virtue, and not the body. Which point profane writers did
not so well consider: for they do not only excuse this her foul fact, in
embruing her hands in her own blood; but have hence taken occasion to extol
her to the skies, as a most virtuous and courageous woman, in revenging the
outrage done unto her, by her own death. But before I make answer to the first
objection, touching the violence and villainy, which (as they say) was offered
and done to her chastity: I would desire them to show me what they mean by
revenge; for in my understanding it is absurd, that an injury should be
revenged by the death of him to whom it was offered, and not of him that
offered it. I might further allege, that she said not, Mors vltrix erit, or,
vindex; Death shall take revenge: but Mors testis erit, my death shall be a
witness. As though she should have said, My death shall witness that to all
the world, which lying hidden in my heart, I am not able to express. I was so
far from being allured by lust and sensuality to yield mine assent, that my
life by reason thereof is a burden unto me, and as bitter as death it self.
For answer to the second. Be it that her death were vindicatiue, yet it were
but a revenge of the injury done to the defiled body, and not of the wrong done
to the undefiled mind, which is the seat of chastity. Whereupon an ancient
writer (whose name S. Augustine concealeth) has this excellent saying, O
strange and admirable thing, there were two persons, and yet one only
committed adultery. But S. Augustine disputes the point further in this sort:
If it were not light skirtednesse and leuitie that caused her to company with
Tarquinius, she is unjustly punished, considering she is chaste. For certes, the
more her adultery is excused, the more is her murder condemned; and
contrarily, the more her adultery is condemned, the more is her murder
excused: this being granted, that it were lawful for a man to kill himself.
The same father commending the fine conceit of the foresaid writer, has a
finer of his own in his second reason (if it be his) when as he says, Si
adultera, cur laudata? si pudica, cur occisa? that is, If she were an
adulteress, why is she commended? if she were chaste, why was she murdered?
Upon which words a friend of mine (an excellent scholar, and one whom God has
enriched with many rare gifts and graces of his spirit, the fruit whereof is
reaped in many places of Christendom at this day) made not long since this
pleasant Epigram, which I will here impart to the Reader: Si tibi forte fuit,
Lucretia, gratus adulter,
Immerito ex merita praemia caede petis.
Sin potius casto vis est allata pudori,
Quis furor est hostis crimine velle mori?
Frustra igitur laudem captas, Lucretia: namque
Vel furiosa ruis, vel scelerata cadis.
I will here also set it down in French as it was turned ex tempore by one of
the Authors friends: Si le paillard t'a pleu, c'est a grand tort, Lucrece,
Que par ta mort tu veux, coulpable, estre louee:
Mais si ta chastete, par force est violee,
Pour le forfait d'autruy, mourir est-ce sagesse?
Pour neant donc tu veux ta memoire estre heureuse:
Car, ou tu meurs meschante, ou tu meurs furieuse.
That is, Were that unchaste mate welcome to thy bed,
Lucrece, thy lust was justly punished,
Why seek'st thou fame that di'dst deservedly?
But if foul force defiled thine honest bed,
His only rage should have been punished:
Why di'dst thou for another villainy?
Both ways thy thirst of fame is too unjust,
Dying, or for fond rage, or guilty lust.
But not to speak of Christians, I persuade my self that if this fact of hers
had been propounded to heathen Philosophers, they would have given no other
judgment. Sure I am of Xenophon, who in two several places gives this reason
why husbands may lawfully kill the adulterer, viz. because he steals from them
the love and loyalty of their wives, due to none but to themselves: For if
(says he) it so fall out that a woman be forced against her will, yet her
husband will entertain her as kindly, and love her as dearly as before, so
long as her love toward him is hearty and entire. Which saying of his agrees
well with my former assertion, that there is no better guardian of a woman's
chastity, then her love to her husband. Now this point I was the more willing
to handle, as a cordial for chaste and modest matrons; that if they chance
either by fury of the wars, or insolency of the conquerours, to fall into
the like inconvenience with Lucretia, they should not despair as she did, but
rather remember that which has been said, and make use thereof: lest otherwise
they run from one mischief into another, casting the helue after the
hatchet, as it is in the French proverb. Of which desperate courses we have
daily examples, some whereof (as they come to my mind) shall be recorded in the
Chapter of murders.

23 But, for one that takes the matter so to heart, that she stands in need
of such aduertisements, there are (I fear me) an hundred who had need of
other manner of admonitions, to put them in mind how straight the band of
matrimony is; and to withdraw them from the detestable opinion of the
Philosopher, who laboring by all means to confound the order of nature,
hartened on women by the example of an house, which is not a pin the worse, for
lodging other guests and inmates beside the owner. Epictetus also (whom with
Musonius I take to be the honestest of all the Philosophers) says, that women
in his time defended themselves and their sweet doings with the saying of Plato
in his Politickes, That women ought to be common; and therefore they had this
book continually in their hands. Wherein though Plato did much ouer-shoote
himself, yet it was the least part of his meaning his words should be wrested
to this sense, or have this construction set upon them, which these modest
matrons made thereof to defend themselves, and justify their dealing in the
dark. For he said not, that women were to plight their troth to their
husbands, that so they might keep open house for all comers; but he aimed at
another mark, which though it be not warrantable, no not in the judgment of
the very heathen, yet thus much I dare say, that it is far more tolerable
then the long tail of mischieues and inconveniences which adultery draws
after it. How ever it be, we may plainly perceive by the testimony which
Epictetus gives of the Roman Ladies in his time, that they took no such
great delight in reading the history of Lucretia: for if they had,
questionless they would never have pleased themselves so much in reading
Platoes Politickes, especially those places where such sweet sayings are
recorded. And though women at this day have not Platoes works, it skilleth
not, seeing they can say their lesson well enough without book. Wherein I
report my self to the dames of Paris, and to them rather then to any of our
good gossips, not because it is the city wherein my self was borne, but for
that the praise of all subtle sleights possible to be invented (whereby they
cuckolize and hornifie their husbands, sore God knows against their wills) does
properly belong unto them in the opinion of all upright, conscionable and
indifferent judges. Which commendation he gave them, who being told that the
time would come when he should wear horns as well as his neighbors, and be
mocked as kindly as he had mocked others, said, he knew a good remedy for it.
And being entreated to show what preservative he had in store against such
cuckolizing, answered, That he would never marry in Paris: insinuating, that
there was no place in the world where this inconvenience might worse be
avoided. For my part, if I were to speak my conscience herein; as he said,
that he loved Plato well, but loved truth better: so having made this
protestation, that I prefer the truth before my native country, I must needs
confess, that though I have traveled through diverse countries and soiourned
there no small time, yet was I never in place where cuckolds are better cheap,
or (to speak more properly) where they may be made better cheap then at Paris.
Some cuckolds are glad they have such horns, thinking themselves the better
for them: others, who are not yet come to this preferment, watch opportunity to
clime thereunto. A third sort are mal-content with their heavy heads: but alas
poor souls, there is no remedy but patience: for if they complain of their
wives never so little, they shall be sure, not only to wear longer and larger
in spite of their teeth, but in stead of pulling them in and hiding them, shall
be made to show them to the world; as we see in the example of certain kind
cuckolds mentioned before, who commencing suit against their wives for such
dalliance and double dealing, got nothing but their pains for their labor,
viz. to be pointed at even by little children, who could say, these are they
who caused themselves to be registered for cuckolds by the sentence of the
Court. By which we may see, what difference there is between this and former
ages; when (as Xenophon witnesses) the law was so strict against adulterers,
that they only of all delinquents were to die the death. But leaving the
histories of former times, we see how men are permitted in many places of Italy
(in such a case) to do execution upon their wives, without other form of
justice. And I remember, that during mine abode at Naples (shortly after the
beginning of the war of Siena) a certain An exile, or banished man
Forussite being secretly entered into the city killed his wife, whom he took
at unawares in the fact. And it was told me some few days after, that he was
not only acquit and cleared by the Court, but that the magistrates were about
to enact a law, that all Forussites who stealing privily into the city could
perform the like justice in doing execution upon their adulterous wives,
should not only be exempt from punishment, but also redeem their banishment.
Yet I cannot justly say that it was so concluded: but sure I am, that I heard
it spoken by one of their chiefest counselors, shortly after the death of
their Viceroy. And though we had no other story but that of the Sicilian
Euensong, it were sufficient to show, that cuckolds were then made dog cheap.
But I fear me, all that I can say herein, will be but so many waste words
spoken in the wind, especiallly being directed to those who rely so much upon
the noddy like simplicity, and cuckold-like bounty of their trim husbands.
For doubtless there are a number at this day, cosin-germans to that wittall,
who suspecting that his wife played the wanton in his absence, came upon a time
and took her at unawares in the fact, and seeing his lieutenants shoes
standing by the bed side; See (said he) a plain proof hereof. It is enough
for me to have seen it: and having so said, went back again, leaving them to
make an end of their sport. And coming the next morning to his kinsmen and
friends, told them what had befallen him: saying withal, O Lord how may a man
be transported with anger? for when I saw the knaves shoes standing by the bed
side, I could have found in my heart to have pulled them in a thousand pieces.
But to return to the argument in hand. Albeit this discourse would serve for
no other end, yet it would serve to prove that those huswiues, who because they
can so easily plant horns on their husbands heads, are called gallant wenches,
quick witted, merry, discreet, wise, well spoken, sociable, or (at the worst)
good gossips; should be termed (as they were in old time) thieves, bitches, and
mastiue-whores, to omit their common epithete of salt-bitches. But it is now
high time we proceed to the pranks which women have played so cunningly with
their husbands, that it is not without cause that both Latin and Greek writers
call them thefts: for if adultery (how ever it be committed) may truly be
called theft; much more that which is accompanied with such subtilties and
sleights.

24 To prosecute therefore the examples of the fine fetches practiced by our
huswiues in such like thefts, far surpassing (in my conceit) the wiles and
subtilties of our ancestors wives: I will begin with a slight which I have
heard at Paris a thousand times, and have found it since among the narrations
of the late Queen of Navarre, being so famous that it may well be the
ringleader of the dance. A certain groom of Charles last Duke of Alencon's
chamber, having intelligence that his wife (much younger then himself) was very
familiar with a young gentleman; being at the first very loath to credit the
report, yet at the last he resolved with himself to try the truth thereof.
Whereupon he fained business abroad for two or three days: where his wife
being loath to let so good an opportunity slip, without having her lovers
company, sent for him straight after her husbands departure. But he giving
them not so much time as to be one half hour together, returned back again,
and knocked hard at the door. She knowing it was her husband, told her lover;
who was presently stricken with such a bodily fear, that he would have given
all the points at his hose to have been gone, and could have wished himself
with the man in the Moon. But she willing him to make himself ready in all
have, bad him be of good cheer, and let her alone, for she knew a ready way to
let him escape without danger. In the mean time her husband continued knocking
at the door, and calling to her as loud as he could. But she turning the deaf
ear, made as though she heard nothing, and to color the matter the better,
called aloud to one of her men, and said, Why do you not rise to cause them to
hold their peace, that make such a noise at the door? Is this a fit hour to
come to honest men's houses? If my husband were at home, they durst not be so
bold. Now albeit he cried as loud as he could, Sweet wife open the door, yet
she opened it not till she saw her lover ready, watching fit opportunity to
slip away. Then opening the door to her husband (who had but one eye) and
bidding him (or dissembling rather to bid him) welcome in the kindest melting
manner, she began in this sort: Welcome home sweet heart; O how glad am I of
your coming? for I had a strange dream this night, wherewith I was so
delighted, that I never took greater content in all my life: for me thought
you had recovered the sight of your eye. Then embracing and kissing him, she
took him gently by the head, and closing his good eye with her hand, Do you
not see (said she) better now then you did before? And whilst she thus
welcomed him home, blindfolding his good eye, she gave her lover opportunity to
slip away. The said Princess further reports, how a husband-mans wife hearing
that her husband was coming, caused M. Curate (her second husband) to save
himself in an upper loft, by covering the trap door with a fan: who wearied
with staying there so long, looked through the trap door, where he espied the
woman's husband sleeping by the fire; but the great Lout leaned so heavily on
the fan (as he stouped down) that both came tumbling down together hard by
the good man: who awaking at the noise, and asking his wife what it meant;
Sweet heart (said she) it is our Curate, who borrowed our fan, and has now
brought it home again. The simple sot took this as a sufficient answer; yet
(said he) he returns it very churlishly, for I was afraid the house would have
fallen upon my head. She further makes mention of a maid, who to the end she
might more securely enjoy the company of her lover, who was servant in the
house with her (which house the Princess also mentions) scared her mistress
out of her house (in the absence of her husband) by making her afraid of a kind
of spirit called a Hobgoblin. But her husband coming home again about two
years after, and finding that his wife had removed to another house upon this
occasion, brought her back to her old home, telling her that he would not
fear him a whit, though it were the devil himself. And indeed he played his
part so well, that albeit the spirit (I mean the maid that counterfetted the
spirit, who also overthrew and tumbled boords, tressels and stools up and
down the chamber) buffeted him the first night; yet he made the white devil
pay for it the night following, catching hold of her hand as she began to deal
her blows. Which puts me in mind of a like story which I have often heard of
my deceassed mother, of a maid that served Iocelin Badius her father, who to
scare all out of a certain room, whither she used to resort to solace her
self, and spend the time in daliance with a serving man of the house,
counterfetted a spirit; which knavery had not been detected but by means of the
said Badius her master, a man of excellent parts, and great learning for those
times, as appears by his works. We read also in Boccace, that spirits,
hobgoblins and such like phantomes, have helped women to play the wantons in
celebrating these mysteries. And verily since spirits and ghosts left walking
by night, women which followed the occupation have lost much by the bargain,
seeing this was their last and surest refuge. I remember well, that when I was
but a child, a Parisian cosined her husband by means of such a Robin good
fellow; which knauerie of hers was the argument of a play, which many years
after I saw acted by the Players of Roane. See here (gentle Reader) how Monks
and their mates (I mean their kind Kates) have benefited themselves and made
their trenchers fat (as it is in the French proverb) with this opinion and
persuasion of the common people; at which notwithstanding (since abuses were
detected) even they who before maintained sundry like trumperies with tooth and
nail, have made but a mock and a matter of merriment. For we are not ignorant
what Tragedies the Iacobins of Berne, and the Franciscans of Orleans played by
means of these spirits, whose help notwithstanding in getting new customers,
Monks and Priests used not, because the good opinion which men had of their
holiness, did furnish them sufficiently with sundry other devices, as
hereafter shall be declared: which could not for all that (since their
knaueries were discovered) help them at a dead lift, and serve them as a
Delphian sword for all assayes, as in former time. And can we now wonder, that
true religion which has opened men's eyes, and enlightened them with the
knowledge of the truth, should have any more mortal enemies then Priests and
whores? Where under the name Priests, because Monks shall not complain that
they are forgotten, I include the whole fry and fraternity of fornicating
Friars, tag and rag, whether they be black, white, or gray.

25 But to return to our modest matrons: let us hear how a dame of Siena kept
both her own credit with her husband and Friar Rainalds also, to whom
(although he was her gossip (as being godfather to one of her sons) before he
became a Friar) she had prostituted her self, not once nor twice, but so
often, that a man would have thought she should have been cloyed, at least
should not have been so greedy of such meat. It fortuned that whilst the
Friar was with this filthy queen, and his fellow with her maid in a loft of
the house, her husband came knocking at the door, and calling for her.
Whereupon she cried out, Alas, I am undone, it is my husband. Then musing a
little with her self, she bad the Friar make himself ready in all have, and
he should see how finely she would gull her husband, and boar his nose with a
cushion. And having told him what part he should play in this pageant, she
answered him (who was all this while rapping and bouncing at the door) I come
to you sweet heart, I come. (Now here you are to note by the way, that she had
laid her child in the same place where the Friar and she had been dallying
together.) And straight she whips out of bed, and had no sooner opened the
door, but she begins in this sort: O husband, wot you what? I had little
thought I should ever have seen this hour, that we should lose our son: for
except our good gossip Friar Renald (whom God sent hither in this our
extremity) help us, I persuade my self we shall never see him alive again.
Her sottish husband had welnigh swounded at the very first: but after a while
taking heart again, he desired her to tell him what the matter was. Whereupon
she like a false queen began to relate every circumstance in this sort: At the
first (said she) I was almost dead to see the child swound in such sort; for I
thought he would presently have given up the ghost, so that I could not tell in
the world what to do: but (as God would) M. Renald our good gossip came at the
very instant, and taking him in his arms, said, Gossip, the child is sick of
chest worms, which gnaw upon his stomach, and will be his death except he
take some remedy for them: but fear not, I will conjure them well enough I
warrant you, and that quickly; for before I go hence, you shall see him as well
again as ever he was. And because (said she) we wanted you to say certain
prayers, and that the maid could not find you, he entreated his fellow to say
them in an upper loft; M. Renald and I having shut our selves here in this
room, because none but he and the mother of the child may be present at such a
mystery. And I persuade my self he has the child yet in his arms, and
stays only upon his fellow, who if he had said his prayers, all were ended,
for the child is now well recovered. The simple sot, nothing mistrusting his
wives knavery, sighed deeply and said, he must needs see him. But she fearing
lest M. Renald had not been ready, and in such case that he might not be
suspected, said unto him: O good now, go not in yet, except you will mar all;
stay ^ut a little and I will see whether you may come in or not, and accordingly
I will call for you. The Friar, who had the child in his arms, and heard their
whole discourse, made himself ready at his leisure. And when he thought it
time to let them in, he called aloud, Ho gossip, did I not hear your husband?
The simple cockscombe answered, Yes marry did you Sir. Whereupon M. Renald bad
him come in: and composing his countenance to gravity, said, Here take your
son, whom by Gods goodness I have recovered; I did verily think he would not
have lived till night: but do you hear sir, you must erect a statue of wax
just of his bigness to the honor of God before the image of blessed Saint
Ambrose, through whose merits our Lord has showed you his favor. He then
taking the child in his arms (as though he had taken him out of his grave)
began to kiss him, and to thank his good gossip for this great cure. In the
mean time Friar Renalds fellow (to the end he might so play his part, as that
it might be answerable to the pageant which he had heard from the place where
he lay hid) came down from the loft, and told his brother Renald that he had
said the four prayers which he had enjoined him. Which done, the simple fellow
made them a banquet of the best wine, with store of preserues and sweet meats;
and accompanying them out of his house with a thousand and a thousand thanks,
recommended them to Gods protection: and causing a picture to be made in all
have, set it up among his other pictures before the image of S. Ambrose.

26 Moreover, we read of sundry women who have played strange parts with their
husbands, through the counsel and advice of Priests (or Monks) who had some
interest in them; but those I will reserve (as reason requires) to furnish out
the legend of Ecclesiastical virtues here next ensuing, (lest it should be
said, that for the great respect I have of women's credit, I should ascribe that
unto them which of right belongs to Churchmen.) To prosecute therefore my
former discourse (after I shall have once again entreated the Reader to pardon
me, if I be ouer-tedious in the rehearsal of some of these stories, the better
to discover these damnable devises, and to breed a lothing and detestation of
them, the memory whereof ought otherwise to be buried) I will begin with a fine
feate played by a woman of Florence, as it is recorded by two Florentines, who
have written of it almost in the same manner. Whilst this Florentine was with
her knave, there came another, to whom (though sore against her will, yet for
certain respects) she gave entertainment. She then hearing him come up the
stairs, desired him that came first, to hide himself behind the bed, till she
had sent the second away; whom, because she could not dismiss so soon as she
wished, it so fortuned that her husband came whilst both were with her in the
house. Then if ever there was poor woman put to her shifts, it was she, seeing
she was to answer for them both at once, and to give a reason of their coming:
and as for the second, he could not choose but be descried, having left his
horse in the court, thinking her husband had been gone from home. What does she
then? Mark the wile of a woman's wit: she requested him that came the second,
to draw his sword, and with an angry frowning countenance to run down the
stairs, and to say as he went, I vow here before God I will meet with him in
some other place: which when he had done (not answering her husband a word, who
asked him what the matter was, but that he would meet with him some where else,
which he bound with a great oath) the good man went up the stairs, and finding
his wife at the stairs head (pensive and sore afraid) asked her what the
matter was, and why the man who^ he met went in such threatening manner? She
drawing back toward the chamber; that her knave behind the bed might hear
her, answered, Alas husband I was never in such fear in all my life; for here
is a young man within, a stranger whom I never saw before, who fled hither to
save himself, being pursued by one with a drawn sword. To be short, she
handled the matter so cunningly by her prittle prattle (the gallant which lay
hid, afterward affirming that it was so) that whereas she like a villainous
queen had done her husband double wrong in one and the same action, yet she
made him believe that she had done both honestly and wisely, in foreseeing that
no such mischief should be committed in his house. The good man then having
invited the knave to supper, and furnished him with a good horse, brought him
safely to his house to Florence. This was the Florentines feate. Let us now
hear how another huswife near to Florence gulled her husband with the like;
which though it may seem at the first not half so cunningly carried as the
former, yet it exceeds not only it, but all the rest I have remembered: so that
I cannot sufficiently wonder how women should have such wits and wiles to save
their credit and good name, and in the mean time should be so ill advised to
hazard the same. But the providence of God is much more to be wondered at, in
causing these shifts and devices (invented to cloak their knaueries) to be the
only means to discover them to the world, and propagate them to posterity:
which ought to teach us to walk before him in fear. This gentle Gillian then
having hid her varlet under the bed, went forthwith to her husband (who came
home when she little expected) and began to chide him exceedingly, telling him
that it seemed he was purposed to commit her into the sergeants hands, who were
but newly departed, having ransacked every corner of the house. The poor man
quaking to hear such news, asked her advice what was best to be done,
considering the gates of the city were already shut. She told him she knew no
better course then to hide himself in the doue-coat: where having mewed him up,
and taken away the ladder, to put him in greater fear, she caused her knave to
counterfeit the Sergeant, and after he had made a great rumbling noise about the
house, she slept with him securely, holding him close prisoner of who^ she
stood in fear. It were infinite to recount all the sleights and subtilties
which are reported of these huswiues (to omit those that are daily invented)
though I should but only reckon up such as have been played at Paris, where
notwithstanding women have no such need of a Robin good fellow to help them at
a pinch, as in other places, considering the great liberty (or license rather)
which is granted them. Now as we have spoken of some thieves more cunning then
bold, and of others more bold then cunning: so we have examples of two sorts of
theeuish queanes to instance this kind of theft whereof we now speak. And to
begin with their boldness and impudency: I remember a notable example of a
woman whom I have seen sundry times at Paris, who hearing her husband knock at
the door as she was in bed with her lover, would not once stir a foot, but
charged the porter (to whom she had given the watchword) that he should not
open the door till he had been soundly wet a full hour by the clock, to the
end she might enjoy her knaves company the longer, and commit her villainy at
her pleasure. Where her silly husband (nothing mistrusting such false play)
continued crying and calling, Wife open the door. But the more he cried, the
more she cursed, saying, that he labored but in vain, and that she was too
cunning to be deceived by such a companion, though he knew well how to
counterfeit her husbands voice, threatening him withal, that if he would not be
gone, she would crown him with such a garland as he would not like of. In the
end when she thought it fit time (having hid her sweet heart) she set the
porter to open the door: to whom notwithstanding she cried out at the window
(to color the matter the better) Thou knave, why do thou open the door to
this ruffian? thou shall answer for this gear. This pageant (being much like
to one formerly mentioned) was played at Paris about seventeen years ago.

27 But as the seldom and rare apparition of spirits has not a little
endomaged popish Priests and wanton women: so doubtless both of them have lost
much by the bargain, since pilgrimages grew out of request, those especially,
who because they could have no children by their husbands, were wont to seek
the help of some good Saint. True it is indeed they have recourse to
processio^s also (which are yet in some credit.) But going on pilgrimage (I can
tell you) was another manner of matter then going in procession; for our Lady
of virtues would by one means or other make virtues of vices before they came
home again. Concerning Priests, I remember a subtle slight invented by a
woman dwelling near Amboise, which has nothing common with the former, being
such a device as by Gods judgment befell the Priest who followed her direction.
The story (which is famous amongst five hundred) is this: The Curate of Onzain
near to Amboise, persuaded by his hostess (who^ he kindly entertained) to
make as though he would be gelded (to prevent the suspicion and jealousy of
her husband,) and the feate to be done by one M. Peter des Serpens, borne at
Villantrois in Berry, sent for his kinsfolks, and having told them that though
he durst never discover unto them his malady, yet he now found his case to
stand in such tickle terms, that he was constrained to take that course:
whereupon he made his will, and having told M. Peter (to color his knavery the
better) that if he chanced to die, he would forgive him with all his heart
(albeit he had secretly agreed with him only to make a flourish, and for this
end had given him four French crowns) he put himself into his hands,
suffering himself to be bound, and in all points to be handled as one that
desired to be cut indeed. But it is to be noted, that as the Priest had agreed
with M. Peter only to make a flourish as though he would do something: so his
host (who had intelligence of this pageant) had couenanted with him under hand
to geld him indeed, promising to give him twice as much as he had received of
the Priest to counterfeit and do nothing: so that being persuaded by him, and
having this silly sir John at his mercy; after he had strongly bound him with
cords and thongs, hand and foot, he went roundly to work, and showed him a
cast of his office indeed, telling him withal, that he was not wont to make a
mock of his occupation. Lo here into what a pitiful plight this poor Priest
was brought through the device of this wicked woman, and how going about to
deceive her husband more cunningly then ever he had done before, himself was
ouerreached by a cunning deceit, much more prejudicial to his person. This
accident happened about 35. years ago. Now this gelding of the Priest puts me
in mind of another not unlike, caused also by a woman, albeit upon a far
different occasion. For Poggius writes that there was one in Eugubium a city
in Italy, who being exceeding jealous of his wife, and perceiving that he could
not learn whether she used the company of some other or not, threatened to do
her a shrewd turn, and thereupon gelded himself; that if afterward she chanced
to be with child, she might be convicted of adultery. And as one narration
draws on another, whilst I was penning the second example, a third came to
my mind, caused likewise by a woman, though upon an occasion differing from
both the former, which I would not have related (it being so exceeding strange)
but that I heard it credibly reported by one who is a deadly enemy to lying
and leuitie. The story is this: The bastard of the house of Campois near to
Ro^morantin having solicited a gentlewoman for the space of two years, and in
the end won her good will: finding himself not so disposed to execute his
villainy when she yielded her self, as he desired; departed to his lodging at
Chabris in such a rage and fury, that having got a barbers razor, he cut off
his priuities, the indisposition whereof had frustrated him of his hope, and of
the fruit of that which he had so long desired: and having so done, locked
them up in a cupboord. This accident (as I was informed) happened about five
and twenty years ago. And because it serves so notably to discover unto us
what moodie, mad, and furious spirits this age affoordeth, I would not omit it
no more then the former. Albeit they make mention of two sorts of gelding,
which appertain not to the subtle sleights of women as the former.

28 My purpose was here to have ended the examples of women's stratagems, but
that one comes now to my mind which I cannot omit, though tending to an other
end. (Notwithstanding all of them proceed from that spirit which has ever been
accustomed to make men the instruments of their own destruction.) See then as
fine and cunning a stratageme as can be devised (for I hope I may be bold to
use this Greek word, seeing of late it has found such good entertainment
amongst us) used by a woman of Orleans, to come to the period of her purpose,
which was to draw a young scholar to her lure, with whom she was in love. For
finding not how she might signify unto him the great affection which she bare
him, she came to seek her Confessor in the Church, and making as though she
were in great perplexity and distress, having told him under color of
confession that there was a young scholar (to who^ she pointed as he walked by
chance in the Church, little suspecting such a matter) who ceased not to
solicit her to folly, and so to bring him self and her also into a pecke of
troubles: she earnestly entreated him to give him such good counsel as he
thought fit and requisite in such a case. And hereupon (as one who fained all
this of her fingers) to the end she might draw him to her bower and bed, whom
she had falsely accused to haunt her house, she told him in particular what
means the scholar had used, viz. that his manner was to clime over the wall
in the evening, at such an hour as he knew her husband was abroad, and after
that to clime up into a tree, and so to come in by the window: to be short,
that he did thus and thus, using these and these means, so that she had much
ado to save her self. The ghostly father failed not to tell the scholar
hereof, using such remonstrances as he thought meet. The scholar, albeit his
conscience told him that there was not a word true of all that she had said,
and that he had not so much as once entertained any such thought: yet made as
though he took all in good part, as one that stood in need of such reproof,
and thanked the ghostly father. But (as the heart of man is prone to evil) he
was not such an ass but that he could imagine that she accused him of that
which she desired he should put in practice, considering she had showed him the
way which he was to go, and the means he was to use; whereupon falling from
evil to worse, he failed not to go the way which was showed him. Not long
after, the ghostly father (who had dealt in the matter in good earnest) seeing
himself so cunningly abused, could not contain, but cried out in the open
pulpit, There she is, there she is, that made me her bawd.

29 But it were infinite to recount all their dainty devices, those especially
which they use in this behalf: yet one thing there is very worthy our
consideration, viz. that the false idolatrous religion (compared in holy
Scripture to whoredom or fornication) has always been the principal breeder
and nourisher of this vice; and therefore the Catholic Clergy (as they will
needs be called) have not only wrought their wits and employed their five
senses to invent sleights, as well for themselves as for their paramours (whom
they meant to abuse,) but have used for this purpose that which they call
divine service, as namely the Mass, the very marrow of their Matins. For it is
notoriously known, that they use it ordinarily as a bawd. Nay they are come to
this pass, to make their midnight Masses, or (for default thereof) their
Matins and morow-masses to serve for the same end, for which the Pagans used
their Sacra bonae Deae. Thus we see how besides these wicked wiles, devised by
our wanton wenches and light-skirted huswiues, many, nay infinite have bin
invented by the counsel and advice of these ghostly fathers: who like good
Churchmen should have set them in the right way to heaven, whereas they like
blind guides, led them the ready way to hell. But I leave it to thy
consideration (gentle Reader) how even the meale-mouthed Monks and maidenliest
Priests of them all, behaved themselves in private; when they were not ashamed
to defend the stews in public, even in their popular sermons: as we have
heard before of Oliver Maillard, who goes yet a step further, and alleges a
place out of S. Augustine in defense thereof, and would make that holy and
learned father believe, that he did approve of that which profane Pagans have
condemned even by the light of nature: for if we compare the dealing and
demeanor of the heathen in this particular with that of many who call
themselves Christians, we shall find that they have dealt Christianly, and
Christians heathenishly, that is to say, profanely. For the heathen punished
adultery very severely, and for the most part with death it self: whereas many
Christians (as elsewhere I have showed) make but a jest of it, and a matter of
meriment. And such are the times, and so great is the corruption of this age,
that he that would have examples of rare chastity indeed, is to seek them
rather in ancient then in modern stories. And here I remember that Baptista
Fulgosius having recorded a story of the chastity of a maid of Alexandria
called Pythomene, breaks forth into an exclamation, considering the difference
betwixt maids in those times, and those at this day, which I will set down
after I have related the history as follows: Pythomene being a slave to a
citizen of Rome, was so exceeding beautiful and of such excellent behavior,
that the Roman became in love with her: but perceiving that he could not win
her neither by promises nor by menaces, he began to hate her as much as
formerly he had loved her; and thereupon accused her to be a Christian (as in
truth she was.) All which notwithstanding, she persisted constant in keeping
her chastity, though it were with enduring a most cruel death, viz. to be sod
in boiling pitch. After the recital of which story, Fulgosius says, where
are those maids to be found now adays, who may not well enough blush for
shame to read this history? since most are so far from making resistance
when men offer violence (which notwithstanding they might do without danger) as
that they leave father and mother, sister and brother, kindred and acquaintance,
yea and expose themselves to infinite dangers, only to satisfy their beastly
lusts: whereas she chose rather to lose her life, then her chastity. The same
author records other like stories* which would (no doubt) be accounted very
strange, especially to such as make no more of fornication or adultery, but a
work of nature and a trick of youth.

30 There is yet another strange thing worthy to be observed, viz. that they
who have such quick and sharp wits in contriuing of these sleights (wherein
they go far beyond their ancestors) should on the other side not only be
brutish, but (as it were) blockish and senseless in matters of common course or
civil conversation, especially in things appertaining to their salvation,
which are as it were riddles unto them, and cannot sink into their heads; and
therefore they lie open as a prey to all that will abuse them, as we shall see
more at large hereafter. Whereas there is no such subtlety or slight but they
can easily conceive it: what say I, conceive it? nay plot and practice it for
the atchieuing of their wicked designements: which I speak not of women only
(albeit I have alleged no examples but of them only) but also of men, who
notwithstanding (all things considered) have not heads to invent such
subtilties as women have: besides they take liberty to themselves (so great is
their corruption) to do that publicly which they condemn in women, though it
be done never so privately; as though God had given one law for one sex, and
another for the other. Another reason there is why men have no such great need
of these subtilties and sleights, in that many use force and violence, as we
see in rapes, which are committed at this day with greater impunitie then ever
they were. Yet when I speak of fine fetches, I must except our good Catholics
of the Popish Clergy; who as they have played sundry iuggling tricks of fast
and loose, by means of their filthy bawds and bitches, whom they have used or
rather abused: so have they done also by their sweet selves. That of a
Franciscan is memorable among the rest, who married his fellow Friar to a rich
widows daughter (a gentlewoman of Italy) as hereafter shall be declared.

31 But to return to the fine fetches and subtle sleights of these gentle
Gillians: consider here a cunning conueyance which may well be called theft, at
leastwise iuggling and double dealing, devised by certain huswiues, who
knowing themselves to be barren, bumbast their bellies with store of linen
cloth and little cushions (yet so as that they may swell by degrees) and
counterfeit women with child who have lost their taste, or are wayward, or long
for strange meats, or are heavy and ill at ease; and at the end of nine
months feign themselves to be delivered of a child, conveyed secretly from a
poor neighbors house, or perhaps from the hospital. But this is not all. For
as these barren Does have used this cunning carriage: so have they also, who
when God sends them a daughter, desire rather a son, the better to content
and please their husbands. It is well known that there was a dame of Dauphine
about fifteen years ago, who perceiving that her husband bare her no great
good will, for that she had borne him none but daughters, devised this slight
to win his love again. She dealt with a poor woman, who counted much about
the time with her self, and after she had obtained a promise of her that she
should have her child as soon as she was delivered, and that she had practiced
all the fetches formerly mentioned (requisite to counterfeit a woman in that
case) being now to play the last and principal part of the pageant, she no
sooner heard that the poor woman was in travel of childbirth, but she began
to groan, to lay her down upon her bed, as though the pains of travel had
come upon her; and thus she continued groaning, and waiting for the woman's child
that was promised her. Which was accordingly brought her by certain midwiues,
and that so secretly that her husband did acknowledge it for his own son,
and so it was generally holden of the most. But here consider Gods just
judgment upon her, viz. that she could never set her love and affection upon
him, nor find in her heart he should have any thing to do in her house (though
by means of the foresaid supposition he was left sole heir by his reputed
father.) And her hatred against him increasing daily more and more, in the end
grew to that pass that he was constrained to oppose himself against her, and
to seek remedy by order of law: where he prosecuted the matter so hotly in
following of his right (as being the sole heir) that he called her to account
for all the goods that his father had left her. Which did so sting and cut her
to the heart, that she went about to compass his death; at leastwise it is
credibly thought that he was murdered by her means. But consider another
prank which is oftener played by women with child, who desiring to be delivered
of a son (to win the love of their husbands) make enquiry against the time
of their travel for some poor women (who come near their count) that they
may agree with them upon some reasonable conditions to have their sons, whom
they may substitute in stead of their own, if happily they be delivered of a
daughter. Yet this is not the only reason why women use these sleights. But
this I say, that those who use these theeuish practices for the end before
mentioned, are far more excusable (if any may be excused) then those that
practice them to the end they may enjoy their husbands goods, and so defraud
the right heirs. On the other side, there be some who hide their great
bellies, that so they may be accounted honest maids or matrons; or lest it
should be known that those who are now their husbands, were formerly their
harlots. For which purpose vertugals (invented by curtizan courtiers) serve
them excellent well. Whereupon a certain Franciscan descanted not amiss, who
preaching at Paris on a time, said, that when women began to wear vertugals,
they abandoned virtue, but the gale remained with them still.

32 And here I will conclude this Chapter, though I am not ignorant that this
argument would afford store of matter to furnish a more ample discourse, and
that I have omitted sundry particulars appertaining thereunto; as traitors
among the rest, who of all other thieves are most to be detested. For doubtless
whosoever shall seriously consider their plots and practices, shall find them
as it were compounded of all manner of theeuish practices. Nay I dare be bold
to say, that he that will make an Anatomy of treason, shall find that it has
sundry veins (as it were) and sinews of sacrilege, except we shall give
Philosophers the lie, who teach that friendship is a sacred thing, and therefore
in no case to be violated: which notwithstanding traitors do, and that in the
first place. Howbeit, I persuade my self, that there were not half so many
treasons in old time, as there are at this day. Yet herein God is merciful
unto us, in that as the number of traitors does more increase, so does the
senate of wise and deepe-reaching politicians, who firke and firret them out.
Whereof I remember I have read a memorable example in Erasmus his book de
Lingua, of Pope Julius the second his Ambassador, who by speaking two or three
words bewrayed himself, at leastwise gave occasion of suspicion, which laid the
first ground of his detection. The story, as I have translated it out of Latin,
is this. During mine abode in England, there came an Italian to the Court, sent
as Ambassador from Pope Julius the 2. to move the King to war against the
French. Who after he had delivered his embassage before the Kings privy
Council, answer was made him, that his Majesty was for his part willing and
ready to yield to his Masters motion; but that it was not so easy a matter to
levy such forces upon the sudden, as wherewith he might encounter so puissant
a Prince; considering that England by reason of long peace had not been enured
to the wars: In answer whereunto, a word escaped him, which he might well have
kept in; for he said he had told the Pope as much long since: which made the
Lords of the Council suspect that (notwithstanding he were the Popes
Ambassador) he favored the French faction; whereupon they watched him so
well, that they found him conferring by night with the French Ambassador: for
which fact he was committed to prison, and had all his goods confiscate.
Howbeit if he had fallen into the Popes hands, it would have cost him not only
his liuelihood, but also his life. Now these words (so sottishly spoken by the
Ambassador) gave King Henry occasion to hasten the wars: whereas if he had
concealed and kept them to himself, he might perhaps have accorded both
Princes, and set them at unity. This is the story as Erasmus relates it,
speaking of it as of an accident which fell out during his abode in England;
and therefore might have certain intelligence thereof, especially considering
his great credit in the Kings Court. And I was the more willing to record it
(though only by the way) for that it affoordeth us a very rare example of
traitors, whose teeth are knocked out of their heads before they can bite: I
mean who are discovered before they can atchieue their plots and proiects, or
bring their purposes to their period. I say ( only by the way) because my
purpose is not so to insist upon them as to prosecute them to the full: but to
content my self with that which has been spoken, leaving the Reader to search
out other examples which he shall judge fittest for this purpose. A matter of
no great difficulty, seeing our modern histories are (as it were) full
fraught with them. And now I proceed to discover, and (as it were) to point
forth other thefts with the finger, not so easy to be descried. For though I
here end this Chapter (which is too long I confess) yet I do not bid adieu,
nor give a final farewell to all thieves.

CHAP. XVI. Of the thefts of Merchants, Physicians, Apothecaries, etc.
Having formerly spoken of notable and famous thieves, who being discovered,
are straight condemned by the law, and sent to the gallows, wheresoever
justice is rightly executed: It is high time I should now entreat of those who
cloak their thefts under color of traffic or trade, office or vocation: or
(to speak in a word more plainly) who steal not like thieves, but like
merchants, or men of this or that trade and occupation. But before I enter
discourse hereof, I must entreat those whose consciences witness, that they
are not of their number to whom I direct my speech, that they would not go
about to make their quarrel good, who shall happily feel themselves to be
galled hereby. For I protest, my meaning is not to speak any thing to blemish
the reputation of such as walk conscionably in their vocations and callings,
and demean themselves therein as in the presence of God.

2 First then to begin with Merchants, their proverb is this, Ou marchand, ou
larron, that is, either a merchan^ or a thief. Which many seem to use as a
mask, to the end they may not be discovered in their theeuish knaueries.
Others swear they are losers by selling their wares at this or that price; in
the mean while dispensing with their oath, be it never so false in the sense
they would have others to understand it: holding it sufficiently warrantable,
if in their own sense and meaning it may pass for truth. For there is another
proverb which says, The merchant that is no gainer, is a loser. Whereunto
they have relation, when they swear that they lose by this or that
merchandise. I have also heard of a starting-hole which certain of them have
found out, when they swear they have refused thus much and thus much, for such
and such wares. But I leave their words, and come to their deeds: for we may
easily beware of their words, if we keep in mind the Italian proverb, Non ti
sidar and non saray gabato, that is, Trust not, and thou shall not be deceived.

3 And seeing that thefts committed in selling of wares, are either in the
quantity or quality, I will first begin with the quantity, consisting in
weights and measures. And doubtless, I were worthy great blame (my conscience
would also check me of untruth) if I should say that our modern merchants had
forgotten either their cunning counterpoizing of the balance in weighing, or
the quick dexterity of the thomb in measuring. Nay they are so far from
yielding an ace to their ancestors herein, that they are able (in regard of
their good proficiencie in the art) to read a lecture to those mentioned by
Oliver Mayllard, and to teach them diverse subtle sleights and conueyances in
weighing and measuring, invented since for their own advantage. For touching
the balance, some can make it rise and fall as they list, and never be
perceived: and as for measuring, they are not content to use the trick of the
thombe, but of the ell also. And yet without the help of these sleights, they
can make it come to their own reckoning. Witness those who having some loose
cloth, and not well fulled by the list (which is commonly seen in narrow
clothes) will be sure in measuring it, not to go far in the breadth, but
measure it in the list as near as possibly they can. These few examples may
suffice for those that use subtle conueyances in weights and measures. For if I
were disposed to busy my self with such as give indeed good weight and large
measure (but it is good weight by their own weight, and good measure by their
own measure, both being false:) besides that I should tell you of a thing not
unknown to little children, and which is common to this age with the former, I
should speak of a theft wherein there is neither subtlety nor slight.
Neither will I mention such as bearing men in hand that they sell by a great
weight, sell by a small: or making as though they did weigh and measure by the
standard of such a city, weigh and measure by another. Both which belong to
quantity, as has been said.

4 Touching the quality, I mean thefts committed by falsifying and
sophisticating of wares, it is a boundless and endless argument. First, there
is no doubt but that may sleights and cheating tricks have been practiced
heretofore in corrupting and adulterating of wares: and that many are committed
at this day, which were never discovered before. And besides those that have
been in former time, and are in use at this present, many new ones are daily
minted, to be put in practice when others chance to be discovered: considering
also that one country uses this slight, another that. And note, that when I
say wares or merchandise, I mean generally all such things wherein a man may
traffic, comprizing herein gold and silver coined, as being metals wherein
merchants use to traffic, as in common wares: besides that they afford
means to traffic in all other commodities. And because my purpose is (among
other examles of falsification) to insist in these two metals, I will give them
the first place which they seem to challenge of right: since not only all
other commodities, but gold and silver also are falsified, to get gold and
silver. First then we are to know that the falsifying of these metals is very
ancient, as may appear by certain Greek and Latin words serving to express
sundry sorts of this deceitful knavery. Secondly, that as the custom of
falsifying metals is ancient, so the means to discover such deceitful
dealing is as ancient, as of gold by the touchstone: whence this French
proverb grew, which I have often heard at Paris: Il est de bas or, il craint
la touch: He is a counterfeit, he is afraid of the touchstone. But how many
pieces of gold are there to be seen at this day so cunningly falsified, that
they infringe the former proverb, in fearing the trial of the touchstone
never a whit? How many pieces are there to be seen which must be deeply graued
into (especially in Portuguizes, and other pieces of the value of half a
Portuguize, as those of Saltzbourgh) or else melted to discover the deceit?
Moreover, there was a time when gold was not suspected to be light, unless it
were clipped. Whereas now the fairest French crowns which are not clipped at
all, are often the lightest, by the cunning of those who have drawn out their
quintessence by washing them. Further, we know how that not long since it was
easy to know whether a piece were souldred or charged, whereas now there are
some so cunningly souldred, that a man had need to put on his spectacles if he
would not be deceived. And whereas heretofore a counterfeit piece of gold and a
false piece of silver (which we call a slip) was never so falsified but that it
was worth at least the two thirds of the value: they have now devised a trick
to confound metals so cunningly together, that some crowns coined at this day
are not worth eighteen pence, and some quart d'escus not worth two pence. I am
not ignorant that there are diverse other subtle sleights found out to falsify
these metals, but I hope I have sufficiently spoken hereof, to give notice how
far this kind of theft (now in use) exceeds that which was used in the days
of our ancestors. And I persuade my self (if diligent inquiry were made) that
Alchymie (which has bewitched more at this day then ever it did, even Princes
themselves) would be found to be the true cause thereof. For as for those
suitors who spent much time in courting Penelope, were at the last contented to
enjoy the company of her waiting maid: so those who could not with their
Mercury become so great Lords are they promised themselves, were at the last
contented to become false coiners, employing in this fine art all those secrets
and mysteries which they had learned in blowing so many years together.

5 Having now spoken of the falsifying of these two metals wherewith all sorts
of wares and merchandise are bought, serving also as wares to traffic in: it
will not be amiss in the next place to entreat of such things, the mutual
intercourse whereof makes most for the preservation of man's life. What are
these (may some say?) Verily such as serve for back and belly. The number of
which (albeit it be exceeding great and almost infinite, yet amongst those
which serve for the nourishment of the body) I will single out such as are sold
by the Apothecary, and of such as serve for attire, only woollen clothes and
silks. But here some may happily ask the reason, why I should bid battle to
Apothecaries in this particular, seeing the greatest part of that which they
sell, is extraordinary sustenance, serving rather for the sick then for the
sound? I grant indeed that Apothecaries wares are usually (and almost only)
for sick folks (if we except some licorish mouths.) But I make choice of
them the rather, because the falsifying of them is more dangerous. For whether
is more dangerous, to adulterate the meat of one that is in health, or of one
that is sick? Doubtless it cannot be denied, but that there is greater peril
in corrupting the diet of the sick, then of the sound and healthful person. If
any shall say, that all drugs which Apothecaries sell for the use of the sick,
are not meats, but being converted into nourishment, become most pernicious. I
answer, that such reasons make rather with me, then against me. For if potions
be not ministered for nourishment, but for an Antidote to the disease (which may
well be resembled unto poison) how much greater must the danger needs be in
falsifying medicines, then in corrupting of meats? Besides, it is not of late
time that men began to cry out against the Apothecaries qui pro quo: and we
have already heard what sentence Oliver Maillard has given hereof, where he
alleges the proverb which was current in his days. But to let them pass
with the time past, this I dare affirm for the present, that the abuse then
committed as well in this as in other respects, was never comparable to that
which is now practiced, not so much for want of knowledge as of good conscience
(though the error herein committed by our ancestors, may well be imputed to
their ignorance.) For doubtless, neither simple nor compound drugs were so
well known in the time of the former Preachers, as at this day. But to what
end serve the books which instruct us in the knowledge of them, except we read
them? To what end do the Doctors teach them, if men have not care to learn
them? What is a sick man the better if his neighbors garden (who is very
curious in searching out of strange herbs) be full of that simple whereof he
stands in need, if the Apothecary minister some other unto him which will prove
perhaps as hurtful as the right would have been healthful? To what end serves
traffic (which is now greater then ever) if Apothecaries make no conscience
to carry rotten and mouldie drugs to the sick, and as long as they have any
such, never take thought for a new supply? Besides, to what purpose is it to
have a learned Physician and fortunate in his practice, if his receipt fall
into the hands of an Apothecary that cannot read it? I hope Apothecaries are
not so straight laced, but that they will grant that there are many of their
trade who have much ado sometimes to read the prescripts of Physicians. Of
mine own knowledge I can say thus much, that being in place where an
Apothecary was perusing a receipt, I perceived that he read a clean contrary
thing to that which a few days before I had learned at one of Master Syluius
his lectures: and thereupon wagering with him touching the particular wherein I
found the contrariety, we referred it to the Physician who had prescribed the
receipt: who having demanded of the Apothecary, whether he were not ashamed to
make a question of the truth of my assertion, affirmed that the Physic so
ordered as the Apothecary had intended, would have been his patients death,
though he had had a thousand lives. I have also heard it reported by a very
skilful and honest Apothecary, that himself heard an Apothecary at Blois, in
stead of Agarici optimi (mentioned in the Physicians prescript, and written
with an abbreuiation (as the manner is) Agarici opti with a dash) read Agarici
opij: which opium together with other drugs, wrought in the patient so contrary
an effect to the Physicians expectation, that except his skill and provident
foresight had espied the error and prevented it in time, it would have proved
the poor patients last sickness. But because (when any object against them
this their accustomed kind of qui pro quo) they answer that they follow the
example or practice of ancient writers, and do as those who in the absence of
the Parson go to the Curate (as it is in the French proverb) I would gladly
request their further answer to this question, viz. whom they imitate of all
the ancient Grecians, Latins, or Arabians, and how their comparison can stand,
when in stead of an hot herb or drug, they take one of a cold operation, and
contrarily: And in stead of a drier they use a moister: and in stead of a
looser, a binder? etc. For I am not ignorant that the ancient Grecians have
written a catalogue of certain drugs which might in case of necessity be used
in stead of others: howbeit they did it not without examining the
correspondence of their qualities; in which point these hucksters follow them
not. For proof whereof, I would gladly see them answer Matthiolus, who
reckons up a number of simples which they use, mistaking one for another, and
others which they falsify and sophisticate by their mixtures and blendings.
But thus it is, unlearned Apothecaries will be sure to make no reply, but will
pull in their horns, and say, that they do as they have seen others do.
Others who have studied the nature of simples (though slenderly, God knows)
will not stick to compare with such a learned man as Matthiolus was: nay some
of them are not ashamed to prefer themselves before him, and to brag that
they know some one herb better then he did: and further, that they do nothing
in using their qui pro quo, but they can give a reason for it. To be short,
they cloak their negligence or covetousness, or both, with certain flight and
triuiall questions, which they move upon some simples, presuming like Empericks
upon some experimental skill which they arrogate to themselves: but poor
patients (who in the mean time die in their hands, and pay withal for the
pins) appeal from such skill.

6 But leaving this their qui pro quo, wherewith they cloak and color their
knaueries (though it may be truly said that they dance but in a net, and cover
them selves but with fig-leaues) I will come in the next place to their other
sleights, which though they be not so commonly practiced, yet are such, as that
those who are taken tardie in them, may assure themselves that process is
already out to attach them, if it be in place where justice is rightly
executed. And first I will begin with Saffron, concerning which Maillard
complains of such as used to moisten it, to the end it might be the heavier,
and of those that mingled oil with it* fol. 66. col. 3. Nunquid ponitis oleum
in croco ad dandum sibi colorem and pondus? He had spoken before of this wicked
custom of moistning not only bags of saffron, but also of ginger, pepper and
cinnamon, fol. 27. col. 2. Et vos qui ponitis bags gingiberis, piperis, croci,
canellae (and sic de alijs aromaticis rebus) infra cauea^ super terra^, vt
magis ponderent. His former words are these: Et vos Apothecarij qui ponitis
gingiber ad faciendum species, nunquid consilium datis seruitoribus vestris ita
faciendi? And in the place which I first alleged, he says of the same abuse.
Habetis gingiber, nunquid permutatis cum canella ad faciendum species? These
are (as I remember) the greatest complaints which this preacher takes up
against Apothecaries and Grocers of those days. But (alas) if he were now
living to see the demeanour^ of some of them, he might well say that he
complained without cause. For what is it (I beseech you) in comparison of that
which is practiced at this day? especially since the custom has been every
where so rife, to sell bags of spices ready garbled? who knows not that they
dust ocre into it, and pieces of bricks beaten small, and oftentimes rice,
coriander, and crusts of bread, to help the color? And lest spices by such
mixtures should lose the strength and sharpness, they mingle pepper of
Callicut (commonly called Guinnie pepper) therewith: as also half grains of
paradise, with poudred pepper, and beaten almonds with saffron. They also
falsify Scammonie sundry ways. And as for Theriack (called Triacle) many
Apothecaries take any rotten drugs of their shops that come first to hand, and
having well beaten them, put ink unto them to help the color. In a word,
there is not so much as Muskand Amber, which they sophisticate not. Besides,
they put hot herbs into certain salues and ointments in stead of cold. But I
will refer other falsifyings or sophistications to be deciphered by those of
whom I have learned those already mentioned, contenting my self with this
which has bin said, which may suffice to give warning thereof.

7 There is yet another dangerous qui pro quo, where they put the dose of one
drug for the dose of another, as when in stead of six drammes of a drugge
which is less laxatiue, and two of that which is more, they put the clean
contrary.

8 I proceed now to another kind of qui pro quo, more practiced (I take it) in
these days then ever it was by our ancestors, especially considering that
Maillard makes no mention thereof. What may this be, may some say? Verily when
they minister to a man, physic prescribed for a woman, and contrarily:
likewise to a young man physic for an old man, and to an old man physic for
a young man: to one that is sick of the dropsy, physic for one in a
consumption, and contra. Whereof a young gentleman of Sauoy could give
sufficient testimony, to whom they ministered on his marriage day a potion
prescribed for one that had a fever, in stead of a drink which should have
made him more lusty and frolic; so that being in bed with his bride, he was
constrained to purge all the night long the contrary way. But he at Lions
escaped not at so easy a rate: for a barber having given him a bottle full of
aqua fortis (which he had taken out of a cupboord in the night, in stead of
another water) and the patient having drunk it, it brought him to his end in
less then four and twenty hours; which accident happened about six and
twenty years ago. Now if any shall ask what theft Apothecaries commit
herein? I answer, that whosoever performs not his duty in his trade, and yet
takes money as though he performed it, is a thief; whether the fault proceed
from his insufficiency and want of requisite knowledge, or from carelessness
by reason of a cheuerell conscience. But I shall not need (I hope) to speak
further of this matter, to prove that our age deserves to bear away the bell
as well in this as in other thefts: neither is it my meaning that my former
discourse should any way crack the credit of those who attend upon their
callings as they ought, but rather to bring them in greater credit with such
as fear to fall into the hands of such like hucksters.

9 But I might happily be suspected to have dealt under hand with Physicians, if
I should spare to speak of them, having spoken so largely of Apothecaries. I
will therefore (to take away all such suspicion) enter some discourse of them
also, beginning with that which I heard related in my fathers house at Paris in
the audience of many, by a doctor of Physic, a man of good account (although
this his relation did not a little blemish his reputation in the judgment of
all that heard him.) I had (said he) a fat Abbot in cure, and had brought him
to so good a pass, that I could easily have recovered him in a short time; but
well perceiving that whereas in the strength of his disease he promised
mountains of gold, with abatement of his pain he abated the promised and
deserved reward, scarcely affoording me a merry look or a fair word of any
reasonable contentment: I took this course for mine own satisfaction: I told
him that I doubted a dangerous relapse, which would prove worse then the
disease, and that I saw evident symptoms thereof, and therefore that it was
necessary he should take another potion to prevent the worst. So I prepared and
delivered it, and it wrought the wished effect so well, that, within two hours
after, he found he had reckoned all this while without his host, and stood in
greater need of me then ever before. Being in this pitiful plight, he sent for
me again and again: but as he had been forgetful to content me, so was I
unwilling to pleasure him. I was (at least would be) otherwise employed. At
last comes one of his men, who greasing my fist reasonably well, told me that
his master entreated me for Gods sake to visit him, thinking verily he should
never escape. This fellow having used the only means to dispatch my
business, entreated so well, that I went to the Abbot, whom within three days
I recovered again, and made him as merry as Pope John, neither did he
afterward stick to regreet me with the said silver salutation. This is the
story, almost word for word as himself reported it, not thinking to disgrace
himself any whit thereby (though he did to his loss, as he well perceived
afterward, wishing, with a hundred lashes well set on, he might retract his
over lavish disclosing of it, which so nearely concerned both his credit and
commodity:) but imagining that those which heard him did little favor the
Monkish fraternity, he thought (belike) their dislike of them and their bad
dealings, would have moved them to favor his folly, or at least to dispense
with his cheuerel conscience in abusing the Abbot, and so mickle mirth would
have ensued thereon. But it was the will of God that the testimony which he
gave against himself should not be forgotten. Now then consider (gentle
Reader) in what a dangerous case those patients are which fall into such men's
hands. For if when they use all their skill and knowledge, yea and all their
conscience, they often hurt intending to heal, not knowing what they have done
till it be past remedy. What a lamentable thing is it, when of set purpose
they hazard the lives of their patients, only to try some paradoxicall
receipt, which they have happily dreamed of? and (which is worse) when they
purposely intend (the toy so taking them in the head) to wreake some
reuengefull humor upon those whom they have in their hands, as when the barber
holds the razor to a man's throat? But leaving this argument (as belonging to
the tractate of murder rather the^ to this of theft) I will speak only of
those, who the more they fat the churchyard, the more they fill their purses,
cloking their ignorance with arrogance and impudency. For I persuade my self
that this age and that last past, will better furnish us with examples of the
greedy covetousness and blockish ignorance of Physicians, then any of the
former. First therefore concerning covetousness, where can a man find the like
to that of one called Petrus Aponus or Petrus de Apono, professor of Physic
at Bononia, who would never go out of the city to visit any patient under
fifty French crowns a day: and being upon a time sent for by the Pope, before
he would go, he bargained for four hundred French crowns the day. Which puts
me in mind of that which Philip Commineus records of a Physician called M.
James Cottier, to whom King Lewis the eleventh gave fifty four thousand
French crowns in ready money (which was above the rate of ten thousand French
crowns a month) besides he gave unto his nephew the Bishopric of Amiens, and
diverse offices and lands to him and his friends: where he to recompense the
King for these so great favors, used him as if he had been his slave, giving
him such hard and outrageous words as a master would hardly give his servant.
But I will here set down the historiographers own words, who (as it is well
known) is famous above all that have written the French storie^, as being
accounted another Thucydides. These therefore are his words in the Chapter
where he shows how he suspected all men a little before his death. He had
(says he) a Physician called M. James Cottier, to whom he gave for five
months 54. thousand French crowns in ready money, which was after the rate of
ten thousand crowns a month, and four thousand overplus: besides he gave the
Bishopric of Amiens to his nephew, and other offices and lands to him and his
friends. The said Physician used the King so roughly with hard outrageous
words, as no man would have used his servant. Moreover the King was so afraid
of him, that he durst not turn him away (telling many how it grieved him.)
Howbeit he durst not adventure to cast him off, as he did all his other
servants; because he told him boldly, I know (says he) you will shortly turn
me off, as you do your other servants, but (by a great oath he swore) if you do
it, you shall never live a week after. These words did so exceedingly terrify
the King, that he never left flattering of him, and giving him what he would
demand; which was a great purgatory for him in this world, considering the
great obeisance so many great Lords and men of worth had done unto him. See
here what this historian reports of this physician: who in two other places
makes express mention of ten thousand French crowns which he monthly
received. These few examples will make us less to wonder at that which
Froissart reports of a Physician called M. William of Harsely, who cured the
French King Charles the sixth, and restored him both to his wit and health; how
that he died worth three thousand pounds in ready money. But it shall not be
amiss to allege the words of the historian, seeing he speaks as well of the
covetousness of Physicians in general, as of the said William in particular.
For having spoken of this his great cure, he further adds, that it was
thought expedient and requisite still to retain this William of Harsely in the
Court, and fully to satisfy him to his contentment: (for this is the period of
Physicians purposes, to catch the rewards, and to pocket up the gifts of Lords
and Ladies, great ones especially, whom they visit and have in cure.) Well,
they entreated him to make his abode with the King; but he requested them to
hold him excused, saying he was old, weak, and crazed, and could hardly
accommodate himself to the fashions of the Court: in a word, that he would
return to his own home. They perceiving him inexorable, would not retain him
perforce, but suffered him to depart, with a fair reward of a thousand crowns
in gold; offering him moreover, that if it would please him to make his repair
to the Court, he should be furnished with four horses at the Kings cost, when
he thought good. But I suppose he never came thither after. For being come to
Laon (where his most abode was) death intercepted his return. He died very
rich, leaving behind him the sum of three thousand pounds in ready money. In
his life he was most miserable, taking pleasure in nothing but in treasuring up
store of Ark-Angels: his expenses in housekeeping usually not amounting the
sum of two pence halfepenie the day, (for he would make bold with his
neighbors for his diet.) All Physicians are sick of the same disease.

10 But I may not ouer-passe one who has surpassed (I suppose) not only the
rest of that profession, but the rest of that quality, I mean of that
covetous disposition (who died nine years since or thereabout) called Iacobus
Syluius: one of whose tricks shall suffice to give a taste of the rest. He was a
man endued with most profound knowledge in Physic, and an admirable
dexterity in delivery of his mind, so that he could speak readily as good and
pure Latin, as his profession would permit: in a word, he was so rarely
accomplished in regard of the Theorick, that if it had bin seconded by
practice, he might well have bin reputed another Galen. But cursed covetousness
had so possessed and poisoned his heart, and had made him so to forget God and
all goodness, that whereas (to manifest his gratitude to the giver of those
gifts) he should have taught some poor scholars privately for the public
good: he contrariwise would not permit so much as five or six poor scholars
to hear his public lecture gratis, no not among two or three hundred who
paid him monthly a quart d'escu a piece. Nay, it struck him to the heart to
see at his lecture (in the College of Tricquet in Paris, where he used to
read before he was the Kings professor) two poor scholars who had paid him
nothing; so that he commanded them forthwith to get them gone: which they
being unwilling to do, he told the rest, that except they thrust them forth, he
would not proceed. Which I report not upon hearesay, but as being an eye and
eare-witnesse thereof. This fact was thought so strange, that a Scot (least he
should unprovided for at his death, which happened (...) till long after) made
him an Epitaph, in a distich of excellent good grace, to express this his
covetous disposition, which brought him into so great disgrace. The distich is
this: Syluius hic situs est, gratis qui nil dedit vnquam:
Mortuus and, gratis quod legis ista, dolet.
That is, (as I have turned it) Syluius lies here in this grave,
That never any thing gratis gave:
And still it grieves him being dead,
His Epitaph may be gratis read.
But besides his intolerable covetousness, he had this bad quality, to envy
the students of his profession, seeming to affect nothing more then to bring
them to a dislike thereof. For proof whereof I might here allege the oration
which he made at his first and second lecture, when he was advanced to be the
Kings professor. But that I remember he would often say, that a man could not be
a Physician without the knowledge of all arts and sciences; and that it was
absolutely necessary he should be of a good and strong constitution. Yea, that
it was mere madness for poor scholars to study Physic: alleging for
this purpose (besides sundry other arguments) the saying of Iuuenal: Haud
temere emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi.
It being requisite (and that for many reasons) that students in this art
should have wherewith to maintain themselves. But no more of this man. To come
therefore to the covetous humors of others of his profession: we have already
recorded the story of King Lewis his Physician (as we found it in Philip
Commineus) in whom this vice (as we have heard) was accompanied with incredible
arrogancy: yet those who have read the story of a Physician of (...) Syracuse.
Sarragose in Sicilie (called Menecrates) will not think it altogether
incredible: for he was not ashamed, when he writ to any Prince, to style
himself Menecrates, otherwise God Jupiter. This Epistle among others he writ
to Philip of Macedon, father to Alexander the great: Thou art King of
Macedonia, and I am King of the Art of Physic: thou may (if thou will) put
those to death that are in health, and I can save the life of such as are
sick, and to the healthful I can give long life without sickness. Therefore
the Macedonians which are living are thy subjects; but those that shall live,
are mine. For I Jupiter give them life. To this King Philip answered very fitly
and finely in a word; which being translated into English, cannot have the like
grace that it has in Greek. For all his Letter was nothing else but a
salutation, which the Grecians were wont to use when they writ to any, wishing
them all health; as if he should say, Philip unto Menecrates wishes all
health: there being an equivocation in the salutatio^; for he referred that to
the health of the mind, which seemed to be spoken (as it is commonly taken) of
the health of the body: as though he should have said, This shall suffice for
a full answer, that thy brain is out of temper. But let us hear another
manner of brauado used by this devilish Physician, who would needs be called
God. For seeing none but he (as himself bragged) could cure certain diseases
which were thought to be incurable; he bound his patients, that for the benefit
of their health once recovered, they should ever after obey and serve him as
slaves and vassals: which they did, all yielding their sworn service to their
said Sovereign; and in their several habits, one like Hercules, another like
Apollo, a third like Mercury, another like Aesculape, some like one god, and
some like another, attended on this jolly Jupiter clothed in his royalties. But
as the answer of King Philip well befitted this glorious fool; so the service
he did him afterward, no less became his godhead. For, having invited him to
supper with all the gods of his retinue, in stead of such meats as others which
sat at the table with him were served with, he caused oblations to be offered
upon their table (whereon an altar was erected) and store of perfumes,
frankincense, and sweet odours to be burned before them: which when these new
gods saw, they stole away one by one, monstrously ashamed, but more an hungered.
We further read in Ctesias of a Phisitio^ who had such a conceit of himself,
that he presumed to make the daughter of a King of Persia his lemman, under
color of curing her of a disease. As also in other historians, how that
certain Physicians under the like color abused diverse Roman Ladies. Now let
the Reader consider how many honest men may be made cuckolds by this means.
True it is indeed, that a tailor of Florence (thus abused by a Physician) was
kindly revenged of him for this injury: for coming home and finding his wife
weeping and exceedingly perplexed for the outrage which the Physician
(entreated by him to visit her) had done unto her never making show or
semblance that he knew of any such thing, he went to the Physicians house about
a week after, when he was from home; and taking a fair piece of cloth with
him, brought it to his wife, telling her that he was sent to take measure of
her for a peticoate; whereupon she going with him into a by-roome to undress
her self, he used her, as her husband had used his wife. But to return to
covetousness, one of the two vices wherewith I began this present discourse;
is it not strange to consider that there should be such covetous Physicians at
this day, as are not ashamed to importune and solicit their patients (being
as yet in no danger of death) to make them their heirs, though no soul sibbe
unto them? And is it not yet more strange, that they should so inueigle them as
to obtain it of them.

11 I come in the next place to the ignorance of those horseleaches which take
upon them the profession of Physic: an argument so large and ample, that it
might furnish us with sufficient matter to fill up a large volume, being also
common to this age with the former. But I dare boldly affirm, that it is so
much the more admirable and less excusable in this then in the former, in that
the light of learning shines now more clearly then it did in former time: or
(to speak more properly) in that the palpable darkness of those times is now
turned into a bright Sun shine. For if ever there were art or science poorly
arrayed, and pitifully handled, doubtless it may truly be said of Physic
above the rest: on the other side, if ever there were art or science richly
decked, beautified, adorned, and restored to it former splendour and dignity;
Physic questionless has the prick and the prise: especially since students
began to draw that out of the clear fountains, which they had taken before
out of troubled streams; considering also that many stand in no need of
interpreters to expound their teachers. What a shame is it then (for I am
ashamed to utter it) to hear some Physicians even at this day call a clyster a
cryster? For if it do not become a poor tradesman, who never learned his A, B,
C; and if being pronounced by him, it sound harshly in the ears of such as
have but only learned to speak in some tolerable manner: what ears (but
those of an ass) can endure to hear it thus pronounced by those who do not
only profess this science, but enrich and raise themselves thereby? And let
the Reader consider how they pronounce other words, who are so barbarous in
this which is so common, and how they use them crisse-crosse and kim kam. But
what is it to me (may some say) though a Physician be ignorant of the tricks
and terms of art, so he be skillful in his profession? I grant indeed, that
ignorance of the terms might well be borne with, if it were so: yet thus much
I dare say, that those who are barbarous in the terms of Physic, do commonly
practice the Art barbarously. (Howbeit when I speak of the barbarousnesse of
the tongue, I include not the Arabian herein, so it remain entire and in his
purity.) But how (I beseech you) should they be good practitioners in Physic,
who are not only ignorant of the terms, but of the very things themselves
belonging to the Art signified by these terms? For example, though a Physician
could not give the proper name to such or such an herb, it were not greatly
material, so he knew it, and could show it (if need were) to the ignorant
Apothecary. But how should they do this, when as many who know the right names
of simples, and who in all reason should have more knowledge then any
Apothecary, content themselves with this, that their Apothecaries know them? So
that whereas they should control Apothecaries, they are often controlled even
by Apothecaries themselves. Nay, some are so impudent, that they stick not to
say, that the knowledge of simples belongs not to their profession, and that
they must needs trust Apothecaries therein. Wherein (me thinks) they do as
one, who giving good advice, should leave it to be practiced by the first
commer, not knowing whether he were able to perform it or not. For undoubtedly
the good receipt of a Physician, is a good advice which he gives his sick
patie^t. But what a miserable thing is it, if he must trust an Apothecary
therewith, himself being not able to judge whether he do well or ill: nay,
being altogether ignorant whether in stead of using such or such simples which
are sovereign and medicinal, he use others which are dangerous and mortal?
And I would gladly ask them (if I thought they would answer me) what name they
best deserve in the opinion of the most competent Judges that ever were, to
wit, Hippocrates and Galen; who are neither good Herbalists nor Anatomists? For
if in ancient time they thought it absurd to separate Surgery from Physic
(seeing that a Surgeon, to speak properly and according to the Etymology
of the word, is nothing else but a Physician that works with the hand) what
shall we say of those Physicians who have no care to know either the fabric
and frame of the body, or the nature and quality of those drugs and simples
which they prescribe? but leave the one to Anatomists, the other to those whom
they call Herbalists. Nevertheless I am not ignorant that these different
offices are not used every where. Howbeit I persuade my self that all truly
ingenuous who are not forestalled with a preiudicate opinion, will grant me
that there are many to be found almost in every place, who take upon them the
practice of Physic, and yet have need of such officers and attendants to trot
after their tails (if I may use so homely a phrase.)

12 I proceed now to other practices of ignorant Physicians, no less
dangerously pernicious then impudently audacious. Some there be that bargain
with Apothecaries to keep the receipts of learned Physicians, and to write in
every of them for what disease it was prescribed. Then, not considering whether
their patients sickness proceed from the like cause, whether they be of the
same temperature and age, and keep the same diet; nay, not respecting whether
the patient be a man or a woman, cause them to swallow the same pills, and to
drink the same potions. Others use the receipts of ancient Physicians, having
no regard of our climate and manner of life, altogether differing from theirs.
Others follow their own appetite in prescribing their patients a diet of such
or such meats* so that a Physician who naturally loves or misliketh these or
these meats, will prescribe them or forbid them his patients accordingly.
Others again, being afraid to lose their reputation, prescribe presently upon
the first view of the urine, not asking whereof the patient does complain:
albeit many learned Physicians acknowledge that a man ought not to trust too
much to the crisis of the urine, but to use it only as a help, being jointly
considered with other symptoms. And if the learned have small insight into
vrines (as themselves confess) how skillful are the ignorant therein, may we
think? Verily we assure our selves that they have no skill in them at all: yet
they are the men (forsooth) who as soon as they have looked upon the urine,
straight put pen to paper, to prescribe some receipt for their patients,
without any further inquiry after such symptoms as might bring them to the
knowledge of the disease. At least, that Physician ought ingeniously to have
acknowledged himself to have bin altogether blind in such matters, or to have
put on a false pair of spectacles; who when one brought him a man's state, and
told him that it was a woman's who was thought to be with child; answered, that
he knew very well by her urine, that she was with child indeed, and that she
might assure her self thereof.

13 But leaving their other devices to be discussed by those who have more
leisure then my self, I will speak a word or two of Barbers and Chirurgians:
yet recording no extraordinary thing, but only that which many vpbraid them
with and lay in their dish, viz. how they defer that to the twentieth or
thirtieth dressing, which they might have applied at the third or fourth,
keeping the wound fresh and green, yea sometimes renewing them in steed of
consolidating and healing them; as also how their gross ignorance is often the
cause of the cutting off of an arm or a leg. Moreover I were greatly to blame,
if I should not hold them as barbarous (at least in their kind) as the
Physicians formerly mentioned. Now this puts me in mind of a Barber who after
he had cupped me (as the Physician had prescribed) to turn away a Catarrhe,
asked me if I would be sacrificed. Sacrificed said I? did the Physician tell
you any such thing? No, (quoth he) but I have sacrificed many, who have been
the better for it. Then musing a little with my self, I told him, Surely (Sir)
you mistake your self, you mean scarified. O Sir, by your favor (quoth he) I
have ever heard it called sacrificing, and as for scarifying I never heard it
before. In a word, I could by no means persuade him, but that it was the
Barbers office to sacrifice men. Since which time, I never saw any man in a
Barbers hands, but that sacrificing Barber came to my mind. But seeing their
ignorance and blockishnes may be sufficiently discovered by such like errors, I
will not prosecute this argument any further: but only call to mind that which
has been said, how I hold them no better then thieves, who being unskillful in
their profession, make no conscience to take the reward due only to such as
are expert and skillful in the Art. And verily, if we look a little more
narrowly into the matter, we shall find them to be no simple thieves, but
thieves in grain, seeing by their ignorance they deprive those of their lives,
whom they had formerly bereft of their money. Now all this which has been
spoken, makes not a little for the credit and benefit of such as are Artists
indeed, and practice it faithfully (whether they be Physicians or Surgeons,
Barbers or Apothecaries) to the end they may be more carefully sought after:
and on the other side that such horseleeches may the better be shunned and
avoided.

14 Concerning the second thing which I propounded to speak of, viz.
commodities or wares serving to cloth the body: doubtless the subtle devices
invented to falsify them, are neither so many nor so dangerous. And as I have
spoken summarily of the former, so will I speak as briefly of this, and will only
mention (as I promised) certain fraudulent dealings practiced in woollen
clothes and silks, to the end I may show that our age could teach the former
wherein Oliver Maillard lived, some trick or other of cunning conueyance as well
in this as in other particulars. And first I will begin with Merchants, who not
content (by their subtle manner of measuring formerly spoken of) to get upon
the measure, have devised a way to falsify clothes in regard of the matter,
putting in flocks in steed of woll: so that whereas chapmen think they have
their cloth of like woll within, as it apeareth to be without; they find by
experience (after they have worn it but a little) that they bought plain flocked
cloth. Now under the name Merchant I comprehend Clothiers, using the word in a
general acception: and though there were nothing else, the common french
proverb confirms it, which says: Il fait assez qui fait fair. So that if I
should speak of the deceit used in dying, I think I should offer Merchants no
wrong to lay it to their charge. For though all false Diverse have not the
watchword from Merchants: yet, as if there were no receivers, there would be no
thieves; so if Merchants would receive no wares but good and mercha^table,
doubtless Clothiers and dyers would not falsify them. If they shall answer,
that themselves are the first that are deceived: I answer again, that if they
be not skilful in their trade, they should shut up shop. But to proceed to
another argument; what will they say (trow we) to that late device in coining
of new phrases and forms of speech, and making them go for current almost in
every man's mouth; whereby we are drawn to acknowledge that we receive better
wares of the^ then indeed we do? I will instance and exemplify this with the
stuff which they call Florence Searge, and will speak of it as of a thing
which I learned to mine own cost. About ten years ago when men spoke of
Florence Searge, they meant such as was right Florence Searge indeed, made in
that city; but since that time, they have caused counterfeit Searge to be made
very like unto it, which at the first they called Searge after the fashion of
Florence (by which no man could be deceived.) Howbeit they have by little and
little through long custom left out these words: After the manner, and have
called it in plain terms Florence Serge for breuity sake; which abridging or
rather clipping the kings English makes much for the profit of the seller and
the cost of the buyer. I mean, when a Merchant of a good large conscience
meets with a chapman, who is unacquainted with this new style. Which thing I
confess happened unto me when this new phrase came first in use, and therefore I
said I would speak of it, as of a thing which I learned to mine own cost. For
having sometimes bought Florence Searge at Florence, and knowing it to be very
excellent good stuff indeed, I had ever after a mind to wear it, and no
other, if it might be had for money. Meeting therefore with a Merchant, who
found Florence in France, I quickly agreed of the price, (though it was very
dear) and departed glad of the bargain. But he met with me, and not I with
him: for after that I had worn a short cloak (which I made of it) some few
days, I perceived that I had not found Florence in France: and then you may
assure your self, I was not mute nor tongue tied, when I came to expostulate
the matter with my Merchant for the cheating trick he had played me: who
seeing he could not deny it, used no other excuse, but that it was the usual
manner of speech. And what should a man say to this gear, (to speak
Maillard-like) but Ad triginta mill diabolos talem modum loquendi? Now albeit
I have instanced in this one example of Searge, yet it is not without a fellow;
sure I am that Spanish felts may bear it company. For the case is not alike
with these wares, as with those which they say were brought a hundred, two
hundred, or three hundred miles off; albeit they were made but two or three
houses off: but they are on the sure side of the hedge. For if they tell one
that knows it not, that it is Florence Searge, it will be sold for Florence
Searge: and if they tell another that knows it, they will answer him straight,
it is the common and usual phrase of speech: the like may be said of Spanish
felts.

15 Notwithstanding I were to blame, if I should say that Silkmen are not as
witty as woollen Clothiers. Nay contrarily I persuade my self that by how much
silk threeds are finer then woollen threeds: by so much are silke-mens wits more
fine and subtle to devise cunning sleights to deceive. For first as woollen
clothiers flock their cloth: so silke-men weaue crewell with their velvet,
which is to silk as flocks are to wool. Nay, I have heard that the ground of
some of their velvet is plain thread. But they have a trick which clothiers
have not; for by steeping them in water, they make them seem more substantial
and better wrought then indeed they are. And if they can play the merchants so
well in velvet by means of the water, they can do it much more in Satin by the
same means. As for Taffata, they steep it not only in water, whereby they
deceive, but have a further device, whereby they make a piece of Taffata which
has but two threeds, seem as though it had four, that which has four, as
though it had six, that which has six, as though it had eight, and that
which has eight, as though it had twelve: So that for ten else of Taffata
which is right grograine indeed, and wrought as it should be, you shall have
ten pieces of counterfeit. Farther, we are to note that as Florence Searge
which is sold in other countries to them that know not what belongs unto it,
goes for Florence Searge, but to them that are acquainted with it, is sold for
Searge made after the manner of Florence: so the Satin which they call Satin of
Bruges, is but vne hapelourde (as the French man speaks) that is, a false and
counterfaite stuff; and as I may say a meet bai^e to cunny-catch those who
either have not dea^^ with any of long time, or have forgotten it: for to those
that know it not, it is good Satin, to others that know it, it is Satin of
Bruges. This short advertisement therefore shall suffice to stir up those,
who by reason of their practice in the trade, are better acquainted with them
the^ my self, to discover the like impostures: For there are ever two sorts of
tradesmen of the same trade, fair chapmen and false cheaters. Otherwise I
could not have discovered so many of their secrets and mysteries, if some
honest Merchants of whom I learned the former, had not first acquainted me
therewith. Therefore I protest it was the least part of my meaning to houer in
generalities in my former discourse, neither is it my purpose to do it in that
which follows.

16 Notwithstanding I may not in any wise forget Usurers, least it be said that
I favor them. True it is that when I first read in Menot and Maillard such a
number of their subtle sleights and crafty conueyances, I thought it almost
impossible to add any thing unto them: but when I begun to entreat of this
argument, I perceived that I needed not go far, or trouble my self much in
discovering of others, coming newly sparkling from the forge. Among which I
will range this in the first rank (not because it is very witty, but because
it is very pleasant) of an usurer of Vincence, who was very importunate with
the preacher of that place to cry out lustily against usurers: and being
demanded by him, why he was so earnest to have him preach against them; he gave
him this answer: Sir (quoth he) I hope if you cry out mainly against them, and
reprove them sharply for it, you will in the end make them leave it: and then if
I can once be alone, or have but few fellows, I doubt not but I shall quickly
grow rich, whereas now I ca^ get nothing among such a multitude. But let us
proceed to other wicked practices, much more pernicious, whereby they ensnare
especially spend thrifts and bad husbands. For it is ordinary with bankrupts
when they begin to break, to have their next recourse to usurers, though this
be the breaknecke of all, and the ready way to overthrow them horse and foot.
See then here a trick very common at this day: If a rich merchant-vsurer be
entreated to lend a sum of money; his answer will be, that he has none, but
he has wares which he cares not to part withal, so he may have the value of
them in money, but that he shall be sure to lose by them if he sell them over
quickly: whereupon he will direct the borrower to a good fellow (with whom he
has agreed underhand) who will not give above five or six hundred crowns for
that, for which the borrower agreed to give a thousand; which thousand he is
bound to pay, as though he had received the money in hand, and pursed it. Which
trick has affinity with that formerly spoken of by Menot and Maillard. But
see here a far stranger device, which they mention not at all: for sometimes
they deliver not the merchandise really, but by imagination; sending them only
in their names to cause them to give a bill of their hand almost for twice so
much as they receive. Moreover, there are such villainous vsuries practiced at
this day, with such strange courses and proceedings, as (doubtless) the
aforesaid Preachers never heard of: and it is not unlike but that they have bin
devised of late. For the means whereby usurers in some countries are wont to
gnaw the borrower to the bones, are these: First note, that some are lenders by
their occupation, and others sureties: when then a man comes to an usurer who
lends for five in the hundred, and after much ado has got a promise, upon
condition he put in a sufficient surety, (the good wife also giving her
consent by means of some good present) he must hire some good fellow to be
surety for him, by presenting him with some thing; who will do nothing for all
that, except he may have a pawn worth very near twice so much. And yet all
this will not serve the turn neither, for that surety must get another
surety, who must of necessity be won by some present at the borrowers cost.
And after all is done, he (sparing nothing in the mean time to feast these
conicatchers) binds himself in Darby bonds to give certain pledges at the
terms end, if he miss payment at the time appointed. If then he break day,
three or four under the name of pledges (more or less, as it was formerly
agreed) come to an Inn, and there make good cheer at the borrowers cost. And
besides, have a certain daily allowance mentioned in the bond, which comes
often to twice so much as their charges: and there they run upon his score,
till he come to take some other order; I mean, till he satisfy their host for
all that they have spent, and content them for their wages: and by mediation of
Angels renew the bond, both with the creditor and the sureties, to obtain a
second term (for the first being expired, he must see them afresh, or se^ke
for other sureties, such as his creditor shall like of) and so at the last, the
land or house, or whatsoever was laid to pawn, is so deep in the usurers
book, that the borrower is no way able to redeem it. But this is the devil
and all, that they will not stay till he owe them so much as the pawn is
worth, but cause the house to be adjudged them for the lone of 400. or 500.
crowns, which is worth 1500. or 2000. whereof they are to have the use until
it be plucked out of their claws, the usury notwithstanding of five in the
hundred still running on, till it be paid, or till such time as at the request
of other creditors the house or land may be sold at port-sale, that he may have
the overplus of the true value. Albeit it falls out many times in such
selling by port-sale (the country being poor of it self; and the creditors
men of power and might) that the house is sold or valued at half the worth, no
man willing or daring to inhance the price. Besides all this, when the creditor
lent his money, he delivered such pieces of gold as he thought good (whether
they were weight or not, it mattered not) with hobby horses, and silver
daggers, or such like toys, for such a price. Tell me now (good Reader) what
say thou to this kind of usury? Do thou think that the devil himself
could do worse if he should become an usurer? for my part I am persuaded he
could not. And yet the usury which is so common at this day, in grinding the
faces of the poor people, makes their case much more lamentable, when griping
extortioners do not only impouerish them (they being poor already) but even
cut their throats, in taking their meat out of their mouths by their
monopolies, daily devised by these wicked wretches going to meet the wagons and
boats bringing in commodities, and corrupting the carters and watermen to make
them stay by the way. I remember I was once in place where it was reported that
these merchants for Monopolies caused the horses to be conveyed away, faining
that they had necessary use for them: where as it was well known, their drift
was to take them from the watermen, that being unprovided of horses to draw
their boats, they might be caused to stay by the way.

CHAP. XVII. Of the thefts and injustice of Lawyers.
COncerning thefts committed by Lawyers, especially by such as are termed
Pettifoggers, though they be now far greater, and in greater number, and
suites in law more chargeable then ever they were, (notwithstanding all
politic courses and prouisoes to the contrary) yet they are more tolerable
then those of their predecessors. For if volenti and consentienti, non fit
iniuria, and si nolentem qui seruat, idem facit occidenti; what harm do
pettifoggers, to hold out their hands and open their purses to such as desire
to fill them, upon condition they make them some sport, and let them see a
thousand fine fetches, and as many cunning conueyances and feats of theirs? In
the reign of king Lewis the eleventh, there was a Bishop which took such
delight in this sport, that when the King would have eased him of a number of
suites, he earnestly besought his highness to leave him some twenty or
thirty behind, wherewith he might merrily pass away the time. But that humor
is now very common, and it is grown to this head, that men do not only
delight in it, but seek no other pastime or recreation all their lives long:
so that to live without suites, were a death unto them. What reason is it then
that Lawyers should make them such good sport for nothing? Or that they should
be weary of taking before they be weary of giving? And I am easily induced to
think, that when they were called Pragmaticiens, that is, Pragmatitioners (by
the original word) things were not so out of square; but since that a syllable
of their name was clipped away, and they called Praticiens, that is,
Practitioners, they knew well how how to make themselves amends for this
curtailing of their name, as well upon their purses who were not in fault, as
upon theirs who were authors thereof. Besides, these terms of pratique and
praticiens were given them fitly for the purpose, to teach them how they were
to handle those that came within their clouches. Further, most certain it is
that Lawyers can get pounds more easily at this day, then they could crowns in
former time: for whereas the Poyteuin in times past commenced but one suite for
a pins point, he now commenceth half a dozen for as small a matter. The Norman
who used to go by water for want of a horse, and to send his writs by land for
fear of losing, rides now on horseback, and carries his writings with him.
And surely there is great reason, that horsmens practices should exceed
footmens. But in earnest, I verily think that there are more pettifogging and
conicatching Lawyers to be found at this day, who do even flea, eat and gnaw
the poor people to the very bones (especially where the Romish religion is in
request) and use more crafty sleights, subtilties, cogging parts, concussions,
and all manner of corruption, then ever were heard of in former time. Now it
would the more grieve me for this age wherein we live (in which men are more
given to wrangle at the law, then ever) if it were good going to law; then now
it does, seeing it is so chargeable. For as the sea, notwithstanding it be so
boisterous and raging, has many customers; if it were quiet and calm would
have many more, even a hundred for one: so if Lawyers (who in kindness cut men's
throats) do not discourage men from following them, what would they do if
suites were not accompanied with so many miseries? doubtless the Poyteuin who
in old time commenced but one suite for a pins point, and now (as has been
said) makes half a dozen of it, would co^mence twenty (at the least) for as
small a matter. In a word, it were good (in my judgment) for the ease of the
poor people, if suites were so peppered and salted, that no man (no nor the
devil himself) might swallow them. Notwithstanding, as when a wicked man is
slain by another as bad as himself, we acknowledge the hand of God therein
executing his judgments before our eyes, and yet we approve not the murderers
fact: so when we see these busibodies who are ever wrangling with their
neighbors, and following the law (albeit they might better sit still at home)
to be so vexed and disquieted, and tossed from post to pillar, and so to
receive their deserved reward by the just judgment of God; yet we may not
approve those by whom they are thus molested. Let us therefore see whether
Pettifoggers do more kindly entertain their clients at this day, then they did
when Maillard and Menot were living: and for more breuities sake, let us hear
what the most famous of all the French Poets says hereof: La les plus grands
les plus petis destruisent:
La les petis peu ou point auxgrands nuisent.
La trouue-l'on facon de prolonger,
Ce qui se doit, and se peut abbreger:
La sans argent pouurete n'a raison:
La se destruit mainte bonne maison:
La biens sans cause en causes se despendent:
La les causeurs les causes s'entreuendent.
La en public on manifest, and dit
La mauuaistie de ce monde maudit,
Qui ne sauroit sous bonne conscience
Viure deux iours en paix and patience.
There greater men the poorer swains devour,
There never poor gainstood the mighties power.
There means are found, short suites in length to draw:
There needy clients wail the want of law.
There famous houses find their fatal end:
There fools in causlesse suites their goods mis-spend.
There wrangling pettifoggers wont to sell
Their clients suites: there every cause can tell
This cursed worlds mad guise, that are not able
To live two days in peace without some brable.
And a little after: Et cestui-la qui sa test descoeuure,
En plaiderie, a fait un grand chef d'oeuure:
Car il a tout destruit son parentage,
Don't il est craint, and prise d'auantage.
Who does but veil his cap the bar before,
Has done knights service in his clients cause:
Though he have wrought his houses just disgrace,
Yet he the more is feared and honored more.
And then speaking of sundry sorts of suites, which he compares to sundry
kinds of serpents, he says: De se froid la, qui lentement se train,
Par son venin a bien seu mettre haine,
Enter la mere, and les mauuais enfans.
And that cold serpent, with soft trailing gate,
Has learned to sow the seeds of foul debate
Betwixt the mother and her impious brood.
Which agrees well with that which Menot often reproves in children, for
going to law with their mothers. Further, the same Poet says, that
Cleargie-men, who ought to dissuade others from going to law, are the greatest
wranglers of all others, in these verses: Pas ne diront, qu'impossible leur
semble
D'estre Chrestien and plaideur tout ensemble:
Aincois seront eux-mesmes a plaider
Les plus ardans.
They will not quite despair, that one self man
Should be a Lawyer and a Christian:
Yet who so hotly plead as they the while?


2 To conclude all in a word, we are to take whatsoever the foresaid preachers
have spoken concerning the miseries which accompanied their suites, and
afterward trebble them, if we would know all the mischiefs and miseries which
follow our wrangling in the law. And poor Menot needed not to have troubled
his head so much about Judges bribes (as though he could have cured this sore,
which is Noli me tangere, that may not be touched:) for they learned this
lesson many hundred years ago: and finding the practice pleasant and
profitable, they have so well remembered it, that they could never since forget
it. And if there were nothing else but tract of time since they first peaceably
enjoyed this privilege, prescription doubtless would give it them. Tract of
time I say: for if we duly consider what Solomon and the Poet Hesiod say, we
shall easily perceive that even in their days Justice (which is painted blind
and without hands) was clean banished out of the world. Which custom though
it be very ancient, yet our Age (I persuade my self) bears away the bell, not
only in regard of the Theoricke, but much more of the Practicke. For now they
are not contented to take such bribes as may be eaten or drunken (as the cooks
in Paris know well, with whom these Lawyers had to deal, fearing lest the
great store of foul which came flying in at their windows, and dropping down
their chimneyes all at an instant, would be tainted before they came to the
table.) Neither are they content that their wives should be presented with
bracelets, chains, and rings of gold, winking at it as though they knew
nothing: nor that their men should take under hand, to the end they may share
with them in the booty: but are come to this pass, to say Come on, and
forthwith put out their hands. Yea (notwithstanding the Proverb which
forbids to look a given horse in the mouth) they stick not to ting and
peize the money, before they will say, Well then. And yet this does not content
them neither: for they are grown to this extremity, to cause many a poor
Naboth to give the^ a vineyard of ten acres, to do them justice for a vineyard
of five or six. Nay, they have gone a step further, and grown to harder
terms: for they have not been ashamed to ask that which cannot be lent,
sold, or pawned, neither by the Law of God, nor man; the loss whereof is far
greater and as irrecouerable as the los^e of life it self: they are even come
(I say) to enforce men to buy justice at such a rate, as is not only contrary
to all civility and justice, but redounds also to the infamy of succeeding
posterity. To speak in plain terms, there was in this Age within the reach
of our memory a President of the high court of Parliament at Paris, who did
extend his right so far, as to request an honorable Lady, to lend him her
placket piece, promising on that condition to give her audience. I will beware
how I name that President; yet thus much I dare boldly say, that it was he who
was afterward metamorphosed into an Abbot: and being invested into that
dignity, writ a book against the Lutherans, which he dedicated to the Pope:
the style whereof was so hard and rough, that his Holiness carrying a leaf of
it by chance to the closestoole, did all to chafe and excoriate his Apostolic
seat therewith. To be brief, it was he, whose nose was enchassed in many fine
Epitaphs, whilst the Pope (who had at that time many yrons in the fire) should
be at leisure to canonize him for a Saint. Howbeit I will not deny, but that if
Communis error facitius, and if that be lawful for a President of the
Parliament which is lawful for other inferior Judges; this Judges advocates may
allege the examples of some who have done little better, and of others who
have done far worse. Among which the Provost called La Vouste may well be the
ringleader of the dance, for the notable knauish part, which he played with a
virtuous Lady, who coming unto him in hope to entreat him in her husbands
behalf, (whom he kept in prison) he requested her to do him a small pleasure,
only to give him a nights lodging, promising upon that condition to grant
whatsoever she would ask. She (poor soul) was here put to a plunge; (and
what woman is there who entirely loves her husband, that would not have been
in the like case?) For considering with her self on the one side, that if she
yielded to his impotent affection, she should violate her faith plighted to her
husband: and one the other side, that she should save his life by consenting
unto him* she handled the matter warily and well. For although she was resolved
to prefer her husbands life before her good name, yet she first acquainted
him therewith; who easily dispensing with her, (as it is like he would) she let
his Lordship take his pleasure, which he so much desired, persuading her self
he would be as good as his word. But the next morning this wicked wretch, (yea
supersuperlatiue knave, if I may so speak) having hanged him, said unto her; I
promised (indeed) you should have your husband again: Well, I will be as good
as my word, I will not keep him from you take him to you. If we here consider
the difference which ought to be between Christians and heathen, can we say
that the knaueries of Verres (for which he was so battered with the canon shot,
and stricken down with the thunderbolt of Tullies eloquence) did any way come
near this notorious villainy, committed notwithstanding in the sight of the
Sun? I have often heard of another of his knauish parts, which (because it
makes much to show his integrity) may well go hand in hand with the former,
that so both of them may be registered in his chronicles. Whilst this jolly
gentleman was about to hang a silly soul who was upon the ladder, a good
fellow came unto him, and whispered in his ear, promising that if he would
save his life, he would give him a hundred crowns in ready money: which words
had so good a relish, and made his teeth so to water, that he presently gave a
sign to the hangman to hold his hand, and (having devised a good sca^bling
shift) came near to the place of execution, and said aloud in his gibbridge,
Regardas, messeurs, en qual dangi^ me mettio a quest malhurous: Car el a
courone, and non m'oudisio pas: Lo mal de terre te vire. Dauala, dauala: tu
seras menat dauant l'official ton judge. That is, See (my masters) into what
danger this rogue has brought me: for he has He aequiuocateth in the word
courone, which signifies as well a shaven crown as a crown in gold. His
meaning was that he had a 100. crowns to give for his pardon: But he would have
the people understand as though he had sp^ken of his shaven crown, viz. that
he had primam tonsuram at the lest and therefore that he was in danger of Law,
in going about to hang a clergy man, who was exempt from the power of the Civil
magistrate. See chap. 40. ^ect. 5.
courone, and never told me. A plague light on thee. Come down, come down
Sir, thou shall be presented before the official thy Judge. And here I
remember another trick yet far more strange, played by another who had the
same office. This good fellow desirous on the one side to save a thieves life
that was committed into his hands, upon condition he might have a share in the
booty (as was formerly agreed), and on the other side fearing lest the people
should murmur and mutine, if he suffered not the Law to have his course, and
that himself should be in danger of his life, he shifted it thus. He
apprehended a simple fellow, and told him that he had sought for him a long
time, and that he was the man that had committed such a fact. The silly soul
denied it stoutly, as one whose conscience acquit him of all that was laid to
his charge. But the Provost being resolved to proceed on, and to prosecute the
matter against him to the proof, suborned certain good fellows to deal with
him under hand, and to show him that it was better for him to confess the fact
(seeing that whether he denied or confessed it, there was no remedy, he was
sure to lose his life): and that if he confessed it, the Provost would be bound
by oath to cause so many masses to be said for him, that he might assure himself
he should go to heaven: and though he denied it, he should be hanged
nevertheless and go to the devil, because no man would procure him so much as
one mass. The simple sot hearing that he should be hanged, and after go the
devil, was terribly afraid, and said that he had rather be hanged and so go
to God. In the end he told them he did not remember that ever he committed any
such thing: notwithstanding, if any man did better remember it then himself,
and were sure of it, he would dye patiently: only he besought them in any hand
to keep touch with him for his masses. He had no sooner spoken the word, but
he was brought to the place of execution, to supply his room that had deserved
death. Howbeit, being upon the ladder, he uttered certain speeches, by which
he gave the people to understand, that he was sorry that ever he had confessed
so much, notwithstanding the heaven and happiness they had promised him. To
remedy which inconvenience, the Provost gave a sign to the hangma^ to turn
him off the ladder, lest he should tell tales out of the school, which was
done accordingly. But because I am come to the very height of these men's
impieties, I will here strike sail and direct my course to another coast.

3 And if I must needs speak of Judges and Justices wives, as well as Maillard
and Menot, be it known unto all men, that they are not content to have their
gowns died in the blood of the poor, nor to get their living by the sweat of
their bodies (as those houswiues mentioned by the foresaid preachers) but make
their market better, and go a nearer way to the wood. For whereas they get
nothing but brave apparel and jewels by such sweat, these get offices besides
for their husbands. And what say these gentle Gillians and chaste Penelopes,
Quae faciunt placitum Domini Abbatis, Domini Episcopi, Domini Cardinalis (as
Menot speaks) when they see their husbands advanced by their means, but that
it is good to have the favor of great Lords, and that a man cannot tell what
need he may have of their helping hand? Questionless, if Menot or Maillard
were now living, they would answer them roundly (if they had not forgotten
their old Latin) Ad omnes Diabolos talem fauorem.

4 Which being so, it cannot be but that that wicked kind of cheating and
chaffering which was used in Menots time (as we may perceive by his complaints)
should be much more common and ordinary at this day, viz. that Lawyers should
lend their consciences to great Lords. For seeing they obtain offices of them
at so easy a rate (viz. by their mere favor) they cannot choose (as they
think who have as large a conscience as a ship-mans hose, or a Franciscans
sleeue which others call a cheuerell conscience) but make them win the day and
carry the cause, though they should offer the greatest wrong in the world.
Notwithstanding I do not affirm that all married men which are promoted by
great Lords, are advanced by means of their wives: but this I say, that it is
either a thing lately practiced among them, or at least far more common and
ordinary then in former time. How ever it be, our Age will afford us sundry
examples of such as even with shipwreck of their consciences (if they had any)
show great Lords that they are not unthankful, but that they so well remember
the benefits and favors they have received at their hands, that they wholly
become their most humble and affectionate servants. Howbeit I will not stand to
exemplify this in those who do no better then damn their own souls in this
behalf, but will record a very memorable example of a certain Judge at
Paris, to whom I hope I shall do no more wrong to put him in the rank among
the rest, then they did him at Paris (Anno 1557.) in setting him on the
pillorie. This venerable Judge purposing to show better then ever before, that
he was a miller in conscience as well as in name (let not this crack the
credit of those millers that keep a good conscience) and willing to show a
great Lord how much he would do for him (being willing as it seemed to do much
more then he was requested) not content to damn his soul to the devil in
this case; flourished so with his Eloquence and Rhetorical insinuations, that
he persuaded others to send their souls to hell for company. For he so hotly
prosecuted the matter against the Countess of Senigan (who was unjustly
accused to have helped the Duke of Al. A^scot.
Ascot to save himself out of the castle of Vincennes where he was imprisoned)
that he suborned a number of false witnesses to depose against her, using for
this purpose the help of a commissioner called Bouuet: but both escaped at too
easy a rate. For after they had been condemned for double dealing and false
packing, in suborning false witnesses to further the suite commenced against
the said Countess, they were adjudged to ask her forgiveness in way of
honorable satisfaction, and after to be set on the pillory in the market place
of Paris, and last of all to be banished. Neither do such base companions only
stretch their consciences upon the tenters to pleasure their Lords and
masters, (at whose command they are ready with life and limme) but to gratify
others also. Witness the Chancellor who cried out upon his death bed, Ah
Cardinal, thou have sent us all to the devil. Which I speak not any way to
blemish the good name of his successor; whose great knowledge (as all men
know) joined with like integrity, may serve as a pattern and president to all
posterity.

5 But to return to false witnesses, and the suborning of them (because my
purpose is to treat of the^ more at large). Albeit then this false packing in
suborning of false witnesses be a sin of great standing, and almost as old as
the man in the Moon: yet it never came (I take it) to the height it is come
unto in these days, as may appear by an answer (which is now grown to be a
byword in every man's mouth) made by a good fellow, who being demanded what
trade he was of, answered, that he was a witness. Which answer could never
have come from any, but from such a one as had had his abode in those places
where men made witness bearing a trade or occupation, making merchandise
thereof as of wares. And we may assure our selves that his fellows would never
have answered so simply. If any shall say, that the number of false witnesses
is not (in all probability) so great at this day as it was some few years ago,
considering there are not so many executed for it, as in former times. I answer
that the reason follows not: for experience shows that there are more put to
death by order of Law in some places where less trespasses are committed, then
in others where greater villainies are practiced. The execution therefore of
justice in one place often or seldom does not argue the multitude or paucity
of offenders in another* it shows rather the vigilancie and integrity of
those that have the sword committed unto them. If they shall further reply and
say, that though the number of false witnesses be now as great, and their
punishment less then ever it was; yet it is not because there is greater
impunity, but for that it is a point of greater difficulty, to discover them,
considering their suborners teach them their lesson better, and they remember
it better then their predecessors. I answer to the contrary, that it is as
ordinary at this day for false witnesses to bewray, betray, and almost beray
themselves; yea and to beat themselves (as it were) with their own rods, as
ever it was in former times. Among many other notable examples of false
depositio^s (which have happened within these few years,) of such as had
foully forgotten their lesson: that is commonly alleged (for proof hereof)
which is of certain varlets suborned by a Lord of Berri against a citize^ of
Bourges called Boyuerd, was who accused of murder: for whereas they were told
that the best mark whereby they might know the said Boyuerd, was that his nose
was made like the handle of a rasor: they being severally examined by the
Judge, and asked how they could know him; answered all with one accord, that
they could easily know him by a cut of a razour, which he had upon his nose. So
that when Boyuerd (against whom they came to depose) was brought forth, they
said he was not the man, because he had no scarre upon his nose. And thus being
detected, they were accordingly executed: the suborner and false accuser being
beheaded and quartered only in effigy, which was no small advantage for him.
Now albeit this be as notable an example of false packing as happened these
twenty years. Yet we may not think that it is the only example, but that
some of fresh memory may be found to match it. This at the least which happened
(as most men know) within these seven weeks to certain false witnesses,
suborned against one brought from Orleans to Paris fast bound and pinioned: how
these wicked wretches so forgot themselves, that whereas they should have said,
that the man against whom they deposed, had a red beard; they said he was
swart, and had a black beard. Now what severe punishment has been inflicted
upon such companions. I leave the Reader to enquire; yet this I know (and who
knows it not?) that during the last civil wars in France, and whilst the
deuourers of co^fiscations ruled the roast, this accursed trade was practiced
with as great impunitie, as ever it was either in this or in former Ages.

6 And is the lurry of Lawyers, who (as Maillard speaks) take ab hoc and ab
hac, or a dextris and a sinistris, quite worn out? Nay would to God it were
not much greater then before, and that it were not so notoriously known, that
even little children could talk of it. Notwithstanding I will here allege
one only example, which shall sufficiently clear this jolly manner of
proceeding. The Attorney of my Lord Beau-ieu and heir of Miles d'Hyliers,
Bishop of Chartres, (who is yet living, if he be not very lately dead) having
received of the foresaid Lord a house standing in the place Maubert in Paris,
(which he sold (as it is reported) for 150. or 200. pounds in ready money:) in
recompense of the pains which he promised to take in advancing his business,
in steed of promise, he like a villain betrayed him most perfidiously to his
adversary (the Lord of Beaumont La ronce) in hope of a parcel of land worth
three hundred pounds, which was promised him.

7 As for cunning conueyances, subtle sleights, crafty devices, and cousining
shifts used in Law, would to God they were but quadruple to those in former
times, and that young beginners were acquainted with no more sleights then the
craftiest Lawyers were in former ages. I will here allege only two examples
to this purpose, which notwithstanding shall counteruaile two dozen of others.
The first is of a crafty conueyance grounded upon a rigorous course in the
formal proceeding of justice, not unlike to that in Terence, Summum ius summa
saepe iniuria est: which is this. The Proctor and Counsel of a certain
gentleman who was the plaintiff (as being the next kinsman) being corrupted,
and having compacted under hand with the Counsel and Proctor of the adverse
party, caused the said plaintiff to pay a certain sum of money, very
fraudulently giving him the key of the budget back again in keeping, wherein
the money was; to the end that when the defendant should come to receive his
money at the time appointed, and that the depositary should answer, that he
could not deliver him any til he had the key; he might take witness that he
refused to pay it, and so sentence might pass on his side, that his adversary
had not tendered the money according to covenant; and consequently that he might
be cast in his suite, and wiped of all: which fell out accordingly. The second
is of a most strange slight devised to save the life of one imprisoned for a
capital crime. The story is this. One William Kinsma^ being condemned by the
under Judge of Poitiers to be boiled in oil for a false coyner, appealed to
the Court of Parliament at Paris; whither being brought, his proctor Belluchian
gave him intelligence, that the next day he should be confronted with 20.
witnesses. Whereupon Kinsman entreated him to send him some nimble headed
fellow (promising to give him ten French crowns), and by him he directed the
said Belluchian, that at night he should disguise himself, and repair to the
house where the witnesses lodged, faining himself to be one of the number: and
that in supper time he should give it out, that William Kinsman (against whom
they were come to depose) would escape as he had done sundry times before. The
proctor did as he was enjoined; whereupon they growing hot upon his words, would
needs wager with him to the contrary, and laid down every man his quart
d'escu. Of all which particulars the proctor took a register by two public
notaries, whom he had brought with him secretly for that purpose: which being
authentically taken, he sent it to the said Kinsman; who being confronted the
next morning with these witnesses, and demanded (as the manner is) whether he
held them for honest men, and whether he would except against any of them?
answered, that they were all as true to him as Judas was to Christ; for (said
he) they have sworn my death: for proof whereof, see this scrole. Now as this
was (in any man's judgment) a most sublimate subtlety (as I may say:) so I
think no man will deny but that albeit the defendant advised his proctor
thereof, yet it may well be reckoned in the number of those which are daily
forged in the Lawyers shops (to use the French phrase,) and consequently may
fitly be placed here among the rest.

8 Now if there be happily any that will not rest satisfied with the former
examples, but shall think that this age has greater store of them: I will
allege two others, which I hope will suffice to make up the whole number, and
which (if I be not greatly deceived) were devised of late, at leastwise not
mentioned by the foresaid Preachers. The first is, that whereas in former time,
the definitive sentence of the Judge did put an end to all suites; they have
now found out a trick to continue, protract, and multiply them so much the
more: for there are some suites which have bin decided ten times by sentence of
Court, and yet are as new to begin as ever they were. The second is, that for
one head which is cut off from a suite, there forthwith spring out as many more,
as there did in old time out of the serpent Hydra. To wind up all in a word,
whereas our ancestors complained only of the length of suites (for it is no
new saying, Lis litem serit) we have just cause to complain, that they can
never have end.

9 Now if it were necessary to particularize that which has been spoken in
general touching the corruption which is to be seen in pettifogging
practices, I could here allege a very strange practice, which (thanks be to
God) was in request but only for a time, no longer then the credit of the
author thereof, the self same man who was made so famous by a comedy acted in
Artois, where it was said: Bertran di te lechon. Il nesce mie se lechon. Par me
foy il luy faut bailler sur ses fesses. Non, non, il est trop grand pour auoir
sur ses fesses* il vaut mieux luy bailler les seaux: that is, Bertram say thy
lesson. He cannot say his lesson. In good troth he must be beaten. Nay, by your
leave Sir, he is too old to untruss: we were better give him the keeping of
the broad seal. This fine fellow (who^ I will not make known by any other
name) not content to seal hand over head whatsoever great men entreated him,
granted writs out of the Court of Parliament at Paris to both parties, as well
the plaintiffes as the defendants, with reuocatory letters one upon another,
sometimes to the number of six or seven. Now what age can boast or brag ever
to have seen or heard the like?

10 But if we should proceed further, and come to the fountain and original of
these evils, we should (no doubt) find it to be so great, that we may well
wonder they did not master the banks, and ouerflow in greater measure. For if
we consider the great impunitie and free liberty which is granted to prolling
pettifoggers, chicken Justices, and corrupt Judges, who at this day wrest and
pervert the law; we may wonder they do not ten times worse. But if we should
see an exemplary punishment inflicted upon such malefactors, like unto that
recorded by Herodotus, viz. that the son succeeding in his fathers office (who
had been a corrupt Judge) should be forced to sit upon his fathers skin, we
may assure our selves, they would look a little better about them; neither
would they so eagerly pursue, nor so greedily gape after offices as they do.
But I fear me, such Lawyers will answer, that when that punishment (mentioned
by Herodotus) was inflicted upon this Judge, offices were not set to sale and
sold by the drum as now they are (seeing this customary buying and selling of
offices began but of late years) and therefore that they had great reason to
look a little better to their places: whereas the have which men make now a
days to fill their bags again, causes them now and then to forget their
duty. They may further allege, that whereas Herodotus reports that a young
girl about 8. or 9. years of age, said unto her father, Look to your self
father, least this man corrupt you with his bribes: they on the contrary are
solicited by wife and children, by friends and kinsmen, to take every present
that is offered. Now albeit this excuse may pass for current with men, yet the
question is, whether he before whom they must one day give an account of their
stewardship, will take it for good payment; questionless they may assure
themselves he will not. But to return to the impunitie formerly mentioned: if
we consider how the course of justice is perverted, and how they who should
remedy and redress it, are the greatest agents for it, we shall not greatly
wonder at the matter. And where they should begin to punish such as offend in
this kind, I make them their own judges. For say they should punish some
malefactors, yet what likelihood is there they should punish those to whom they
secretly give the watchword, not to do as they enjoin them in their letters
missiue? But I will not prosecute this point any further, seeing a word is
enough to the wise: only let me (for a conclusion of this chapter) parallele
this ancient history in Herodotus with a modern example, which seems to suit
and second it in this very point, touching rigor and severity in the execution
of justice, much differing from the impunitie which reigns at this day. The
story is recorded in Froissard, where he recounteth a fact of Baiaget the
Turkish Emperor (whom he calls Amorabaquin by the name of his father) being
accompanied with certain French Lords, who upon the receipt of their ransom
were newly set at liberty, in the reign of Charles the sixth king of France.
His words are these. Moreover, it happened that whilst the Earl of Neuer^ and
other French Lords were in the Court with Amorabaquin, a poor woman came with
a petition to the Emperor, desiring she might have justice against one of his
servants (for it was his pleasure that justice above all things should be kept
inuiolably throughout all his dominions) who made her complaint in this sort:
My Lord o King, I come unto thee as to my Sovereign, to complain of one of
the grooms of thy chamber, who came lately into my house, and drunk up my
Goats milk which I had provided for my self and my children for all the day.
I told him that if he did offer me that wrong, I would complain unto thee: and
I had no sooner spoken the word, but he gave me two boxes on the ear; and
would not forbear, though I threatened to complain unto thee. Do justice my
Lord o King, and take order that I may be recompensed for the injury he has
done me, that all men may know that thy will and pleasure is to rule thy people
with justice and equity, according to thy oath and promise. The Emperor gave
good ear to her words, and said, With all my heart. And thereupon caused his
Turkish servant to be brought before him, and the woman also, commanding her to
renew her complaint. The man (who was terribly afraid of the Emperor) excused
himself, and said, that there was not a word true of all that she had said.
The woman replied both wisely and boldly, affirming that she spoke nothing but
the truth. At these words the Emperor made a little pause, and said, Woman, be
well advised what thou say; for if I find thine accusation to be false, thou
shall die a cruel death. She answered, Be it so my Lord o King: for if it were
not true, I should have had no cause to have troubled thee: therefore do me
justice, I ask no more. I will do justice (said the Emperor) for I am sworn
to do it to all my subjects within my dominions. And immediately he caused
certain of his Iannizaries to apprehend his groom, and to open his belly (for
otherwise he could not have known whether he had drunk her milk or not,) who
finding it to be as she had said (for it was not yet digested in his stomach)
informed the Emperor thereof. Who understanding that her cause was just, said
unto her, Thou did not complain without cause; now go thy way, thou have
justice for the wrong that was done thee: and forthwith caused her to be
recompensed for her loss. Thus the man that had committed that fact was
punished. The French Lords who were at the Court with Amorabaquin, saw this
judgment executed. This history I thought good to parallele with that of
Herodotus, for that in this point of severity they seem to have some
similitude and agreement; albeit as well the actions as the persons upon whom
the punishment was inflicted, be somewhat different. Howbeit I deny not but
that this fact of Amorabaquin ought to be termed cruelty or temeritie rather
then severity, in that the theft which he punished was but petty larcenie,
and the party not convicted thereof by order of law. But like enough, the
Emperors intent was to terrify others by his example. I could further
allege sundry other examples of like rigor and severity exercised by
Judges, and that upon their nearest kinsmen. And not to seek far off for
examples, we read in the French Chronicles of certain Kings who have done the
like. But that which should especially move Princes to execute justice (though
they had no regard of him who will one day call them to a reckoning) is the
example of those who through neglect or for default thereof, have first wasted,
and after lost their countries. And if we consider the great change and
alteration which is to be seen at this day, as well in this as in other
things, we may well wonder thereat: for it is well known, that fifty pardons
are granted with less suite at this day, then five could be obtained two
hundred years ago. And we have heard how a Judge of Paris (who was living
within these hundred years) would use the same reasons for the due execution
of justice, which men use now a days to hinder the same. For whereas we say,
he is a young man, and in the April of his age, it were pity to put him to
death, for he may do good service to his Prince and country; and on the other
side, he is an old man, and has one foot in the grave, it were great pity to
hasten his death, which is ready to knock at the door: whereas (I say) those
that bolster up malefactors, use such speeches: he (on the contrary) was wont
to say of a young man, hang him, hang him, he will play the thief again; and
of an old man, hang him, hang him, he has played the thief too long. Which
severe sentence of the Judge concerning young men, puts me in mind of that which
was once objected to the King of France refusing to grant a pardon to one that
sued for the sixth or seventh murder, viz. that the felon was guilty but of
one murder, and that the rest were to be imputed to the King, considering that
he had never committed the last, if the king had not pardoned the first. Which
agrees well with the saying of an heathen writer: Veterem ferendo iniuriam
inuitas nouam. And, Inuitat culpam, qui peccatum praeterit. Which sayings ought
duly to be considered of all such as plead or sue for the impunitie of
malefactors. And they ought further to remember that Bonis nocet, quisquis
pepercerit malis. Now if heathen men did so well consider of these things, how
much more ought Christians seriously to meditate hereon? Howbeit I deny not
but that there are some who are ready to take the least occasion to practice
their cruelty, and that from such things from whence others take occasion to
be more slack and remiss. For example, during mine abode at Padua, I heard of
one that had borne office in the city not many years before, who whipped a
scholar so much the more, because he was his friends son: for when the youth
(after he had been soundly beaten) told him that he was such a man's son: O
(quoth he) he is my good friend: therefore because thou art his son, thou
shall have two lashes more.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Murders committed at this day.
COncerning murders, Menot keeps a foul ado about nothing, in making great
outcries against such as will not stir a foot when they see a man of worth
slain in the streets. I say about nothing, not considering the thing in it
self: but comparing it with that which is usual and ordinary at this day.
For since that France was Italianized, I mean since it learned the trick of
the Italian trade in hyring assassins (for I must use new words to express new
wickedness) to cut men's throtes, as if they should agree with a Butcher to
kill an ox or a calfe; who can think the saying of Menot any thing strange?
Nay, it were a rare thing if three or four days should pass over our heads
without such accidents; whereas Menot (perhaps) never saw such a fact ten times
in all his life. But what would he have said, if he had seen a murder
committed at Paris about six years ago, in Saint John of Beanois his street,
where my self was borne? where a Gentleman dyning in a house right over
against Saint John's Church, was entreated to speak with one at the door, about
a matter of importance: who rising from the table went to the door with his
napkin on his shoulder mistrusting nothing: whither he was no sooner come, but
four men (whom he had never seen before) drew upon him, and played their
prises so well that they left him not, till they had laid him for dead in the
place. The murderers departed at midday in the sight of a multitude there
assembled, not a man among them so much as once opening his mouth against them.
This murder I saw not my self, but only heard it constantly affirmed by very
credible persons, who were there present. But I will here record another,
whereof my self am eye-witnes; which notwithstanding does not so much concern
murderers, and such as kill men for a set price, as the great impunity which
is granted the^ in most countries at this day. During mine abode at Rome in the
time of Pope De Monte called Julius the third; an Italian meeting another in
the street, asked him, when he meant to pay him that he owed him (which words
I heard as I passed by.) And I had not gone a dozen paces further, but I heard
a great noise, and I was no sooner come to them, but the party that had
demanded his money, fell down dead, the other having stabbed him with his
dagger. At the very instant came the Marshals me^ (not mistrusting any such
thing) who in steed of executing martial Law (as I expected) committed such a
fact whereby there was no more difference between them and the murderer, then
between a thief and a receiver. For in steed of apprehending him, and
committing him to prison, they help him and made way for him to escape. Which
when I related to some of my acquaintance, they made me no other answer, but
that it was an ordinary thing. And this puts me in mind of that which I
sometime heard reported of a wag-halter of Bourges, whose surest refuge was the
Iaile, by reason of the inward acquaintance he had with the Iaylour: so that
whilst they were seeking him up and down the city (after he had played them one
trick of conueyance or other,) he was already in the place where they would
have lodged him, though entertained there after another manner then they would
have used him. Yet we are the less to wonder, that one or two officers which
should see justice executed, should harbor a notorious malefactor; then that a
whole multitude should do it as it were with common consent; as they did at
Rome toward this murderer, as has been said. Moreover there is a custom in
this country, which in many places would be holden uncouth and strange. For
there are certain murther^* whereat justice does not only wink, but also
approves, yea and often promises reward to the murderer. As when a Prince or
weal public makes a law, and gives it out by proclamation, that if one exile
can slay another within the confines of the country out of which he was
banished, he shall not only redeem his banishment and be recalled, but also
be rewarded and recompensed for his pains. I was (I remember) at Venice at the
publishing of this proclamation some twelve years ago, and saw it put in
execution the day after the publication thereof, as follows. A banished man
having secretly arrived and crept into the city the evening after the
promulgation of this Law, had no sooner intelligence thereof, but he made
diligent inquiry where he might find one whom he might murder according to
the tenure of the said Edict: and being informed where such a one was, he
watched him until the evening, and striking at him as he came out of a house,
(but missing of his aim) he pursued him to the channel where he had cast
himself, and there wounded him to death. I am not ignorant with what reasons
they use to defend and justify this law. This is the principal, that it is a
means to make banished men suspect each other, and consequently to keep them
from assembling together. But Christians ought to leave such politic courses
and considerations to Platoes commonwealth and Aristotle's politics, where a
number of such devices are to be found, which ought to be so far from
Christians, that they should not be once named without horror. Howeuer it be, I
will here add another like histori^ of an accident which happened during mine
abode in the same city, though I was not an eyewitness thereof as I was of
the former. The Saffies of the city searching a ship (as the manner is) for
wares de contrabando (for so they call all such wares as are forbidden upon
pain of confiscation) they came to two Franciscans (at leastwise apparelled
like Franciscans) commanding them to open their chest; which they having sundry
times refused to do, in the end they burst it open by force. Now the wares
which they found in it were two men's heads newly cut off. Howbeit, after that
the Franciscans had whispered them in the ear, they made no great matter of
it, but turned it to a matter of merriment, and pleasant dispute, viz. whether
these heads were forbidden wares or not. The report indeed went, that the
matter should be hotly prosecuted against them: but within two days after, the
storm was over, all was hushed and gone, which made the world suspect there was
some false packing among them. Of which fact when speech was moved, I remember
I heard it related, how that by this license given by proclamation (much like
to that formerly mentioned) a brother would bring in his brothers head. What
would Menot and Maillard have said (may we think) of such Policy, if it may
be so called? But howsoever we term or take it, I am to entreat the Reader
to remember it, that therewith he may confront any strange Law recorded by
Herodotus.

2 But now to return to murderers and such as butcher men for a set price; a
thing (doubtless) more to be lamented in Italy then in any other country:
where those villains are many times so hasty to compass the death of those
whom they have undertaken to make out of the way, (to the end they may finger a
little money) that for want of taking a view, and marking them by the privy
marks which are given them, in steed of them they murder those that resemble
them: which the Italians call Amassar in fallo. I have further heard, that some
being masked, have been slain in steed of others. And all the recompense which
they could get, who have bin thus encountered and set upon, yea so beaten and
wounded, that they have been brought almost to deaths door, has been this: By
your leave Sir, or I cry you mercy Sir, I took you for another. Indeed they
bid those that are masked, unmask themselves, to the end they may see whether
they be the men they seek for or not; which if they find them to be, they ease
them of the pains of masking themselves again.

3 But my purpose is here only to discourse of such murders as are
punishable, and are indeed punished both by the law of God and man. To handle
therefore the two principal kinds, there are (as we know) two sorts of
murders: some are committed in way of revenge; others in hope of gain. Those
that murder men in the heat of their rage, and in desire of revenge, either
commit the fact themselves, or hire others to do it, whom they know they can
draw with a silver chain, whether they be common assassins or others. Those
that kill men in their mad mood with desire of revenge, are likewise of two
sorts: for some (as Frenchmen) t^ke present revenge in the heat of their
passion when their blood begins to boil, at leastwise smother it not long:
others (as Italians above the rest) nourish their reuengefull humor, and
suffer it to fester in their cankered stomachs a long time. Two things also are
to be considered in the execution or act of revenge: for some revenging
themselves upon their enemies, practice the saying of Virgil (not considering
that he speaks de host, not de inimico:) Dolus an virtus quis in host
requirat? which is more practiced by Italians then by any nation in the world.
Others never do it, but openly, and as a man would say with drums and
trumpets, never setting upon a man suddenly or at unawares, nor taking
advantage of him, (which the French call supercherie) but giving him warning
before hand to look to himself, and time to draw his weapon; making conscience
to set two upon one. Which in old time was more strictly observed in France,
then in any country the Sun does circle; and is still practiced by all true
hearted Frenchmen, such I mean as do not degenerate. Notwithstanding I have
heard many Italians make a mock at this custom. And no marvel, considering
they profess and practice the clean contrary. For if once they bite their
fingers ends in threatening manner, God knows, if they set upon their enemy face
to face, it is because they cannot assail him behind his back. And they are
not so mad as to bid him look to himself, or once to offer the encounter
except they be the stronger, and so well guarded, that they will be sure to be
two to one at the least: nay though they should set ten upon one, yet will they
cry, Vittoria, vittoria. And which is worse then all the rest, besides all
these advantages which they labor to get over their enemies, and the treason
which they plot and practice to their uttermost, they make easy passage for
themselves by means of dissembling treachery. Witness Simon Turk who slew an
Italian at Antwerpe (or caused him to be slain) about fifteen years ago, in
a chair made by a most devilish device, having smothered his hatred for many
years together, and given pregnant proofs of unfeigned reconciliation.
Witness also (about the same time) the Italian who killed Vaudray the knight
of the watch at Paris in S. Antonies street, in his own house: for having a
long time borne him in hand that he had forgiven and forgotten the grudge which
was between them, he came on a time to his house whilst he was at dinner,
where Vaudray was no sooner ris^n from the table to embrace him, as one that
professed great friendship and kindness, but he stabbed him with his dagger,
and slew him. In like manner the Lieutenant criminal of Roane (about two years
before) riding on his mule to the Court, was slain by an Italian, who stabbed
him so nimbly into the breast, that his men perceived it not till he had
conveyed himself away, and being mounted upon a lusty courser, saved himself
by the swiftness of his beast. But because I am not ignorant that such
examples as these are easy and at hand to every man, and that I should but
cloy our dainty trauailers who have been in Italy, with setting before them
old cole-worts in a new dish, I will here record a late murder, wherein we
shall as in a crystal see the most devilish and damnable desire of revenge
that ever entered into the heart of man. An Italian having nourished malice and
rancor in his mind for the space of ten years together, dissembling all the
while to be friends with his fo; as he was walking on a time with him, in a
by-place came behind him and threw him down, and holding his dagger to his
throat, told him that if he would not renounce God, he would kill him. The man
being at the first very loath to commit so horrible a sin, yet in the end
yielded to do it rather then to lose his life, and so renounced both God and
the Saints, and all the Kyrielle (as they spoke in those days,) whereupon the
wicked wretch having his desire, stabbed him with his dagger, which he held to
his throat, and afterward bragged that he had taken the kindliest and the
brauest revenge of his enemy that ever man did, in that he had destroyed him
both body and soul.

4 I proceed now to prosecute those murders that are committed of a covetous
and greedy desire of gain; which are of two sorts. Some commit them in hope
of reward, as I showed before when I spoke of assassins: others, in hope they
may enjoy the spoil of trauailers with more security, whom we call thieves
and robbers. Of assassins, we have spoken sufficiently before. As for thieves,
would to God they were not so frequent in all places: for it may truly be said
of this age, that it surpasses all the former in notorious thefts, as we may
perceive by the new punishment inflicted upon such malefactors in the reign of
king Francis the first, by his express edict. For seeing ordinary punishments
would nothing move them, he devised an extraordinary kind of torture, viz. to
break them upon a wheel, and there to leave them to languish and pine away.
But neither was this sufficient to make them give over the trade and
occupation, nor to keep others from following it: witness the many executions
which have been since, especially at Paris. That of a gentleman called
Villieuineuf, of the County of Tonnerre, is famous among the rest, who kept a
good fellow of purpose to cut men's throats, who was executed with him, and a
young youth which was his lackey, who was whipped; and the cut-throate companion
burned quick before his eyes, and himself afterward broken upon the wheel.
And this puts me in mind of an Italian who committed his robberies (if they
may be so called) in the very city within his own house, whereas others are
wont to rob by the high way: (whence cutters by the high way side, and robbers
are used as synonymies.) This Italia^ called Francisquino having continued
sometime at Bononia the fertile, in one of the best men's houses of the city,
being held to be some great noble man, by reason of his state and bounty, was
discovered in the end to lead such a life as follows. Under color of
keeping open house for all gamesters at dice and cards (an usual thing with
gentlemen in that country, though in some cities more then in others) and of
having continual supply of fresh company, to show his bounty and
magnificence, his manner was to send for such as newly arrived in the city, to
visit him: and as soon as they were come, and that he had saluted and welcomed
them (according to the manner) to call for the tables or cards, and to bid his
man make dinner or supper ready in the mean time, or to provide a banquet
according to the time of the day. But in stead of preparing it, the bloody
butcher addressed himself to slay them when his master Francisquino should
give him a sign: which course of life they had led so long, that (as the
report goes) when they were apprehended, and had confessed al their villainies,
the carcasses of ten or fifteen men which they had thus murdered, were found
cast in priuies. In fine, this was their punishment. After they had been
pinched with pinsers, they were ripped and bowelled, and their hearts being
hastily pulled out of their bodies, were showed them. But to return to France,
and to the boldness of these theeuish companions: this is recorded as a most
memorable fact of two brethren borne in a certain place between Niuernois and
Burgundy, near to Vezeley, who were spitted upon a stake some fifteen years
ago for stealing the Kings treasure toward Briare: of whom this is worthy to
be observed, that they verified the old saying, Conueniunt rebus nomina saepe
suis: for their surname was Latro, that is, Thief; neither did they belly their
name, for as they were thieves in name, so were they thieves in deed. The
report goes, that when the Kings officers came to apprehend them in a place
whither they had retired themselves, they defended themselves very
courageously, in such sort that one of them was slain in the place before he
would yield. Their fellow thief called Villeprune was executed at Rome in the
time of Pope Paul the third, to whom King Francis the first had sent his
process to attach him.

5 But what need we examples to prove that our age does bear away the bell as
well in this as in other vices, when we see that the weapons and instruments
fit for the following of such a trade of life, have not only been invented of
late, but are daily renewed and (as it were) refined by sundry devices: For,
for whose sake (I beseech you) were guns invented by a devil in the shape of a
Monk, but for thieves and robbers? For proof hereof, since harquebuzes,
pistols and pistolets of all sorts and sizes were in use, who were the first
(trow we) who not content to carry three or four cases at their saddles,
filled their sleeves and breeches with them? And by whom were those great
slouching slops and swaggering hose (like little tubs or beere-barrels) first
invented, but by such good fellows as wanted a commodious place to harbor
such guests? Now look how much Germany is more famous then other countries for
inuenting these instruments, so much are we the less to wonder that there
should be so many good fellows to be found at this day that should employ them
to that wicked end: though through the great care and vigilancie of the Princes
of Germany, the number of them is well abated within these few years. We are
not (I say) to wonder hereat, no more then at that which we read in ancient
writers of the Chalybes, who were the first smithes, at leastwise most expert
and skillful in that art. Yet questionless French thieves go far beyond
German thieves in subtle sleights and cleanly conueyance. Touching Italy (for
I will now mention no other country) I have ever known it less subject to the
danger of cutters: and verily during those three years and a half that I
soiourned there (spending my time for the most part in travailing from city to
city) I heard little or nothing of robberies by the high way. And I remember
that being at dinner on a time with my Lord Odet de Selu^, then Ambassador for
the French King at Venice, and having asked him the reason hereof, we grew to
this conclusion, that Illis quidem erat animus, sed non satis erat animi: that
is, that their will was good, but their heart was naught. For if we consider
what manner of men they be that intermeddle in this cursed occupation, we shall
find that there are not more desperate ruffians in the world, nor more lavish
of their lives then they: seeing that ten of them (as I have often heard it
credibly reported) have adventured to set upon twenty or five and twenty. And
that Italians are not so desperate, nor so prodigal of their blood, I report
me to the answer which an Italian gentleman made to a forreiner with whom he
was in deadly feud: for perceiving that it stood not with his credit to avoid
the combat, unless he alleged some peremptory reason, he accepted the
challenge. But changing his mind shortly after, when the time was come that
they should meet in the field, his adversary now traversing his ground, and
expecting when his antagonist would enter the lists, he told him that he was a
devilish desperate fellow, and therefore would have no dealing with him. But
if we should judge of all by one (may some say) we might twit all Frenchmen
with that which was spoken by a Pickard bragging of his valor, who having
vaunted that he had spent some years in the wars, and yet never drew his
sword, and demanded the reason thereof, answered, Pource que ie n'entrois mie
en colere: Because (quoth he) I was never thoroughly angry. But I dare be bold
to say, that Italians have oftener borne away the blows and received the foil
of fiery Frenchmen, then Frenchmen of desperate Italians. And though there
were never a Pickard that could be moved to anger, yet the Gascoines are
terrible fellows, and hot enough to make the Italians quake like an Aspin
leaf, and beray themselves for fear: though seven or eight fond and foolish
terms of war which we have borrowed from them, may (happily) make posterity
hold not only the Gascoines, but all other Frenchmen greater dastards then
faint-hearted cowards and white liuered soldiers; as though we had learned all
our skill in martial discipline and warlike affairs of them, from whom we
have have borrowed some ink-horne terms. But because I have spoken my mind
more at large elsewhere, of the injury which we do our selves in this behalf,
selling our honor to those of whom we borrow some triuiall and tapster-like
terms, I will not prosecute this argument any further. To return therefore to
the matter in hand, whether it be for the reason formerly alleged, or for
some other (for we commonly say, that there are some good and some bad of all
sorts): the common opinion is, that there is less robbing in Italy then in any
other country. By robbers I understand those good fellows, who trusting not
so much to the slight and subtlety of their wit, as to their strength and
skill in their weapon, joined with brazen-faced boldness and audacitie, set
upon passengers with intent to borrow a bag or get a booty, though with hazard
of their lives. For as for other sorts of thefts (as namely filchings and
pilferings) Italians (I must needs say) have no fellows, especially in
subtlety joined with impudency: which knacks of knavery and tricks of cunning
conueyance, Frenchmen newly arriving, learn to their cost. Which I would not
have understood of all Italy alike: for this I can say of mine own experience,
that travailing from Rome to Naples with the ordinary post (whom they call
Procaccio) I saw sundry passengers do that which I had not seen elsewhere in
all Italy besides. For they were no sooner come to their Inn, but they
vnsadled their horses, and carried their saddles unto their chambers, where
they might have them ever in view, whilst they took their repast. Of which
trouble, albeit my self and the rest of my company were well eased (for, for
a crown a day, which each of us gave to the post (as the manner is) he mounted
us well, and defrayed our charges) yet I could not but pity them who were put
to those shifts: and I chanced to say that there could be no such danger as
they imagined, in that it was not credible that any thief durst presume so
much upon his cunning, as to undertake so bold an attempt. Which speech (though
spoken in simplicity) was prejudicial to a certain Flemming in the company,
who being thereby persuaded that there was indeed no such danger, neglected the
next day to carry in his saddle as the rest did; for he found after dinner that
another had eased him of that labor: and then I confessed that these devilish
thieves were worse then I took the^ for. Now this calls to mind an objection
which may be made against the rareness of robberies in Italy: for it may be
said that there lie such sharp shauers in the high way between Rome and Naples
(except the coast be scoured, and the world well amended of late) that
trauailers are glad to get into the company of the post, who does not think
himself safe enough neither, unless he have a troop of fifty or sixty horse
at the least. To which I answer, that these foruscites which haunt the passages
and high ways, are not worthy to be named the same day with those good
fellows who brave it out in other places: for they fear no colors, but
adventure to set upon twice or thrice so many as themselves; whereas these
faint-harted foruscites (as I was then informed) never set upon any (by their
good wills) except they be two to one at the least. But I will leave them to end
their own quarrels and controversies among themselves. For I protest I am so
far from envying Italy her great foison of resolute thieves and robbers, that
I could wish with all my heart, that all the good fellows which France and
Germany will afford these dozen years, would repair thither.

6 But leaving Italy (into which I have travailed further then I purposed) I
will return back into France my native soil, taking it in a general
acception for the countries bordering on every side, and will begin wtih a
gentleman of Sauoy who committed his robberies in or near his house, between
Lions and Geneua (being called of the place Monsieur d' Auanch^) and I will
speak of him as of a man of an odd disposition among a thousand good
fellows, as being a more cunning and gentlemanlike thief (if I may so speak)
then the vulgar sort, somewhat resembling that archtheefe who kept such a
ruffling in the reign of Seuerus the Emperor, mentioned before in the Chapter
of Robberies: for herein especially he excelled him, in that he would part
stakes with those he robbed, if they yielded their purses before his blood was
up. Howbeit he was exceedingly hated for that he bare small affection to Monks
and Nuns, and took pleasure in playing them many shreud turns, which were (as
the proverb says) Princes sports, such as please those that act them. To omit
the pranks which he played with the Nuns of S. Claire at Geneua, I will only
relate two of his exploites, or rather of one divided into two branches,
whereby he made two Franciscans first very merry, and after very mad. For
having admitted them into his castle, and made them good cheer, to make an end
of their good entertainment, he told them he would pleasure either of them with
his pretty wench. Where they refusing his kind offer at the first, he requested
them to make bold with him, telling them withal, that he well considered they
were but flesh and blood as other men. In the end he locked them all up in a
chamber together: and returning thither an hour after (or thereabout) he asked
them how they had done in their new occupation. And understanding they had not
bin idle: O wicked hypocrites (quoth he) is this the way to overcome
temptation? And having so said, he stripped them (poor souls) as naked as my
nail; and having whipped them as long as himself and his men could lay on
load, he sent them away all naked as they were, to teach them to fight another
time more valiantly against such temptations, or not to give them the
encounter. But whether this labor were well bestowed on them or not, I leave
to be decided at the next Council.

7 In the mean time I thank this good fellow with all my heart for putting me
in mind of a story recorded by Pontanus of certain Arabian thieves, which is
as memorable in his kind, and as rare an example as can be found (in my
opinion) in any story, whether Greek, Latin, French or Italian. Wherein we
shall on the one side see a point of admirable wisdom in a man falling
suddenly into the hands of thieves and robbers: and on the other side, a part
of great humanity in cruel cut-throtes, who had addicted themselves to this
damnable trade. This gentleman called Robert Al. of S. Seuerin.
Sanseuerin (who had been a brave and valiant captain in his days) travailing
toward mount Sinai, to perform a vow which he had made (according to the
great superstition which reigned in former times, and in part also within these
hundred years) having descried certain horsemen coming toward him,
demanded of his guide and guard (for he had safe conduct from the Soultan) who
they were? They (poor souls) trembling for fear, answered that they were
Arabians, the most desperate and dangerous thieves in the world. Where he was
so far from being danted with the fear of danger, that contrariwise he
encouraged his company to be of good cheer, telling them that it was their
best course to lay open their carriage, that when they came they might find
dinner ready, whereof he knew they stood in great need, considering they were
toyled with the dust and heat. Mean time, whilst his men were making
preparation as they were enjoined, he addressed himself to meet them, and
saluting them very courteously (being a goodly man of person, as well for
stature as feature) smiled on them, and bad them welcome; interlacing many
pretty speeches by his interpreters, and thus kindly entertained them without
bewraying his fear, or giving the least sign of sinister suspicion. The
Arabians liking well of his speeches, willingly accepted his offer, and dined
merrily with him, and after they had received some small presents departed,
having so forgotten all their barbarous cruelties, that contrarily they thanked
him heartily for their good entertainment. This is the story (gentle Reader)
whereof I kept thee in so great expectation, by which I hope thou will take no
less content then my self. For certes we way well wonder hereat, especially
considering what stories report of these Arabian thieves above the rest, in
cruelty resembling Lions and such like savage beasts: so that I persuade my
self the Poets would no less have extolled this chieftaine, then they did
Orpheus for mollifying the hearts of savage beasts by the sweet sound of his
melodious harp. And verily there are some thieves so cruel and currish, that
it were better to fall amongst Tygres, or into the Lions den, then into their
hands. For that which Ovid says, Obsequium Tygresque domat, rabidosque Leones.
is found true by daily experence. And that which he says in another place,
Corpora magnanimo satis est prostrasse Leoni,
Pugna suum finem cum iacet hostis habet.
cannot be called into question by any that have read or observed the nature of
this beast; as my self once observed a Lion practicing the precept of Virgil
containing the duty and disposition of a generous mind, which is, Parcere
subiectis and debellare superbos. For he made much (as a man would say) of
little dogs which were put into his grate, and played the wanton with them;
whereas he presently devoured the great curres, tearing them in pieces, even
whilst he was playing with the little puppets. As also considering what we
read of Orpheus his harp, by which he mollified the hearts of savage beasts,
although it be spoken Poetically, and must (at least may) be meant of his
eloquence, whereby he won the hearts of men, how barbarous soever they were.
Howbeit we cannot deny but that Lions take delight in the melodious sound of
musical instruments, of which my self have had experience in a great Lion in
the Tower of London, where whilst I with certain others beheld him, there came
in a Musition which played upon a violin (the number of such fiddlers being
great in England) who had no sooner begun to play upon his kit, but the Lion
leaving his flesh began to turn about, as though he would have danced: and
when he left of playing, he left his turning, and betook him to his flesh
again: and when he began to play again, he returned to his dance again.
Which spectacle and sport pleased me so well, that I could not content my self
to have seen it once, but came thither again the second time, bringing others
with me, (who, notwithstanding I had told them what I had seen, and affirmed
it to be true, yet would hardly be persuaded;) as also a Musition who played
upon another instrument, where the Lion danced and leapt about, as he had done
before, albeit he had then no flesh as formerly he had. By this therefore which
has been said, as also by that which sundry authors have written hereof, we
may safely conclude, that there is more gentleness and generous nature in some
savage beasts, then in some men, be they thieves or others. At leastwise the
lamentable story of the voyage of Frenchmen into Florida of America (in the
year last past) does, and so long as the world endures will verify this of
certain Spaniards: For (to omit infinite other treacherous cruelties) we read
how that those who chose rather to yield themselves to the mercy of the
Spaniards then of wild beasts, were pitifully massacred every mothers son;
whereas they who chose rather to commit themselves to wild and savage beasts,
and to expose themselves to infinite other dangers, escaped both with life and
limme. Therefore by how much the cruelty of some men is greater then of
others, and by how much we esteem these Arabians more cruel cut-throtes then
other thieves; by so much are we to think this story more strange and
admirable. The rehearsal whereof has made me somewhat to digress from the
argument in hand.

8 Therefore to pass over this just motive of digression, and to come in a word
to the point of our purpose; as there is great difference between incest and
single fornication: so nature teaches that it is a far greater and more
horrible sin for a man to murder his kinsman, then one that is no way allied
unto him; and yet more heinous to murder father or mother, wife or children,
brethren or sisters. Notwithstanding we must needs confess, that since the
trade of assassins (I mean this bloody butchering of men for a set price) came
in use, our age does no less abound with ordinary and extraordinary murders,
then with the two kinds of whoredom formerly spoken of. Howbeit parricidie and
fratricidie, and such like murders, were never so hot among Christians as
between the Guelphes and the Gibelins: the heat (or fury rather) of which
deadly feud remains in Italy unto these days, as well for the former
quarrel as for other flawes and factions, as the histories of that country do
sufficiently declare, and as they who travail into Italy may know more
particularly. For as I travailed with two others from Florence to Siena, two
days after it was yielded up to the Duke of Florence, in the name of King
Philip: I heard an old man (borne near Siena) report very strange things, not
impertinent to the argument in hand. For being demanded what were the most
remarkable things that were to be seen at Siena; Alas (said he) my sons,
what do you think to see at Siena? Siena is no more Siena: you shall see
nothing there but the horrible vengeance of God. And being asked what he meant
thereby; I have seen (quoth he) many a time and often with these eyes,
kinsmen, yea brethren imbrue their hands in one another blood for quarrels
(God knows) arising upon small occasions. And he added, that their manner was to
dip their hands in the blood of the slain, and having rubbed their faces
therewith, to show themselves to their fellows in this butcherly and beastly
manner. These and the like speeches this old father who was above fourscore
and ten years old uttered not without many tears; thanking God withal, that
in mercy he suffered him to live to see vengeance taken upon them. For (said
he) I doubted whether there was a God or not, when I saw such horrible facts
remain unpunished. This is the good report which this old man gave of his
country. But would to God we were to seek for examples of such pitiful
occurrences only in Italy, and that our civil wars had not eased us of this
labor, in furnishing us with such store, that it is hard to say where we should
begin such doleful discourses. Howbeit we find elsewhere more examples then were
to be wished, of which I have alleged some few in the tenth Chapter. To which
(before I come to modern examples) I will add one more out of Pontanus, (the
author of whom I borrowed the rest;) and will make choice of such a one as
shall fit the argument in hand, touching murders committed in Italy by one
kinsman upon another, by reason of deadly feud and factions. This worthy
learned writer therefore reports, how that his ancestors being forced to
abandon and forsake their native soil by reason of the civil war, and
having retired themselves into an odd corner of the country which they had
fortified; so it was, that their enemies watching their opportunity, surprised
it on a time when it was slenderly guarded: who when they had taken it,
assaulted the tower wherein Pontanus his great grandmother was, where her two
brethren (who were of the contrary faction) called upon her to yield her self;
which she promised to do, upon condition they would not hurt her children. But
they refusing to accept the condition, set the tower on fire, and so burned
their sister and their young nephews for the devilish and damnable affection
they bare unto their own faction.

9 But to come to modern examples, and first to begin with fratricidie, we had
in the year 1545. a very memorable (but a lamentable) example of one John
Diazius a Spaniard borne in Cuence in the kingdom of Toledo, whom I knew at
Paris, where all godly and learned men had him in as good account as any
stranger that set foot in France these many years, being for his fair
conditions and sweet behauior as it were another Abel. But let us hear how he
met with his Cain. After that he had made good proficiency in the study of
Divinity, and attained to the knowledge of the Hebrew tongue, he could find no
relish in the Romish religion; whereas before he had been plunged in it up to
the hard ears, after the Spanish fashion (I always except the Marranes:)
which change so displeased his brother Alphonsus, who was then at Rome, (where
he had bin a pettifogging sumner in the spiritual Court for diverse years)
that after he had intelligence thereof, he could never rest nor be at quiet
with himself. For having sought for him at Ratisbone, and finding him not, he
went to Newbourgh a city in Germany, under the dominion of the Count Palatine
of Rhene, where after he had communed with him a long time, perceiving that it
was not possible to draw or divert him from his opinions, neither by menaces
nor promises, nor any other remonstrances; he made semblance as though himself
had been caught by his brothers reasons, and won to the bent of his bow,
purposing by this subtle device to draw him along with him to Trent (where the
Council was then holden) and from thence to Rome, and so to Naples, telling
him that he might benefit himself much better in those parts then in Germany.
Which counsel of his, though John Diazius approved and liked well, in such
sort that he was half persuaded to follow his carnal motion: Notwithstanding
being loath to do any thing without the advice of those religious and learned
men appointed for the conference at Ratisbone (of which number Martin Bucer was
one) he acquainted them therewith; who having Alphonsus in jealousy, and
doubting that it was but the copy of his countenance, and that he did but
cou^terfet a convert, to the end he might pervert his brother, they al with one
consent utterly dissuaded him from it. Alphonsus being thus frustrated of his
hope, entreated him to bear him company only to Auspurge: from which also
being dissuaded by them, he determined to leave him, having one only man with
him, who afterward served him in stead of an executioner, as by and by we
shall hear. Having then exhorted him to continue constant in the profession of
the truth, and showed him all tokens of brotherly love, kindly taking his leave
of him, and forcing a piece of money upon him, he left him at Newbourgh, and
took his journey to Auspurge; from whence returning back again to Newbourgh
the next morning, and leaving his horses at the towns end with a good fellow
(whom he kept for the purpose) he came to the house where his brother lodged
about the break of day; where his man knocked at the gate, and enquired of a
boy that came to the door for one John Diazius, saying that he had a letter
for him from his brother Alphonsus. Whereof he had no sooner intelligence, but
he leapt out of his bed from a friend of his, and casting his night-gowne about
him, went out of the chamber into a withdrawing room, whither he had appointed
the messenger to come; his brother Alphonsus staying in the mean time at the
stairs foot. The messenger being entered in, delivered his letter: where as he
was reading it at the window (for it was not yet clear day) he standing behind
him, struck him into the right temple with a hatchet which he had under his
cloak: the violence of which blow was such, that it gave him no leisure to
tell who had hurt him. The bloody butcher then fearing lest the body now ready
to breathe forth the soul, should make a noise as it fell to the floor, laid
it down softly on the ground, and leaving the hatchet deep in his head,
returned to Alphonsus his master expecting him at the stairs foot, as has
been said. Diazius his friend (who was all this while in bed) suspecting that
all was not well, rose up to see where he was, and what he did. And he was no
sooner come into the withdrawing room, but he heard the spurs of the
murderers at the stairs foot: and because he knew not whether they came up or
went down, he made the door fast at the stairs head. But (alas) it was too
late, as he knew shortly after, by that pitiful spectacle which presented it
self to his view, not without horror and fearful astonishment, as you may
well imagine. But as soon as he could recover himself, he drew near to the
corpse lying upon the ground, folding his hands and lifting up his eyes to
heaven, as though he were praying. The^ pulling the hatchet out of his head, he
perceived that he had some life in him; in which estate he continued the space
of an hour: so that when he heard any man call upon God, he made some little
sign with his eyes. This done, he called to those of the house, to the end
they might be witnesses of this so pitiful a spectacle. Now what punishment
was inflicted upon these wicked murderers, it is uncertain, albeit most are
of opinion that they escaped scotfree, for that the Emperor Charles the fifth
at the Popes entreaty writ in their behalf, that their indictment might be
deferred for a time, and that he with his brother Ferdinando (under whose
jurisdiction they were taken) would have the hearing of the matter themselves.
How ever it were, the constant report goes, that certain Spaniards at
Inspruck were not ashamed to say that there was no evil in this murder, and
that he which murdered an heretic, was ipso facto absolved by the Pope. Let
us now hear another like unto this in substance, though much differing in
circumstance: I say like to it in substance, in that one brother murdered
another, but much differing especially in one circumstance, which may happily
make it seem as strange as any murder committed these many hundred years. By
this circumstance I understand the nonage of a Cain murdering his innocent
brother Abel. For I heard it reported, that about the year 1547. a child in a
village of France near Dammartin in Guole, who was but five or at the most
six years of age, conceived such hatred against his brother because he had
the greater piece of bread, that he stabbed him forthwith with a knife which he
had in his hand, and slew him. In which story we may as in a crystal behold
the wicked seeds of sin, which naturally breed and (as it were) spawne in our
hearts, not only in our nonage or infancy, but as soon as we are crept out
of the shell, and bewrays it self when we come to have the least use of
reason.

10 But the world is full of examples of men that have murdered their wives:
Italy especially, and therefore I hold it needless to insist upon particulars.
Notwithstanding I cannot omit two very strange murders, I mean such as for
their plotting and acting were extraordinary: for whereas such executions are
commonly done rashly in heat and choler, these were committed of set purpose
upon a grounded and settled resolution. The one is of a citizen of Millan, who
(as it was told me in a place near Millan, about a dozen years ago or
somewhat more) being in France, and having intelligence that his wife played
false at tables and bore a man too many, being (as we may suppose) sufficiently
informed thereof, took horse and rid post to his house at Millan; whither he
was no sooner come, but he called for his wife to the door, who coming in all
have to welcome him home, being (as it seemed) very glad of his return,
received of him a counter-curtesie and a terrible cooling card with a stab of
his dagger, after he had all to be rated her, calling her false, perfidious,
disloyal, treacherous, and wicked wretch. And leaving her in such a case that
he needed not to fear she would play false with him again, he took horse and
departed. The second is of a Switzard, who having taken his wife at unawares
playing the harlot, bore the injury patiently for a time; but having pardoned
her in his heat (contrary to the common practice) he slew her a few days
after in his cold blood, saying he could not endure a woman that would play him
such false play: he slew likewise his children and himself also, as after we
shall hear.

11 Yet there are not (God be thanked) so many examples of women which have
murdered their husbands, though there be more then a man would happily imagine.
Among the rest an Italian Lady called Frances Bentiuole is not to be
forgotten, who perceiving that her husband (commonly known by the name of
Galeot Lord of Fauence) played the man and stood to his tackling, in defending
him self courageously against the two murderers which she had suborned and
hired to kill him, that they had much ado to dispatch him, took up a dagger,
and with her own hands gave him his deadly wound. Now the hatred which moved
her to commit this murder, was conceived upon a rumor blazed abroad in the
city, and whispered into her ears, that before he married her, he had
contracted himself to another citizen. A weighty reason no doubt. It is also
reported, that a woman dwelling near Narbone being in bed with her husband,
cut off his priuities, for that he had defiled the marriage bed: of which
example I have already spoken. But infinite are the examples of light houswiues
who have procured the death of their husbands, to the end they might more
freely enjoy the company of their paramours. And many have poisoned them, that
so they might more cunningly cover and conceal their villainy. For which crime
my hostess of the Lantern at Paris was burnt about thirty years ago. For
her husband being loath at the first to drink the wine which she had poisoned,
because the color of it was changed, yet adventured to drink of it after his
man; and perceiving by his sudden death that it was of present operation, he
preserved himself by an Antidote. The like punishment was inflicted upon a
gentlewoman of Brie in the same city, and much about the same time, for killing
her husband in his bed, with intent to marry her knave, who was executed with
her for company.

12 We have also late and fresh bleeding examples of Fathers murdering their
children: but two are famous and memorable among the rest, which may well go
hand in hand, in that they killed their children without any cause or color at
all, for a thing which they could not help. The one is of an Italian, the
other of a Switzard. The story of the Italian has been published before:
howbeit I will not speak of it as fetching my authority from the printed
pamphlet, but as being then at Padua my self where the murder was committed.
About thirteen years ago a good fellow (named in, the printed story) being
cast at Venice in a suite whereon depended his whole estate, was so out of taste
with the world, and so despaired of Gods providence, that he persuaded himself
there was no remedy but that his daughters when they came to age, in stead of
being honestly married, were of necessity to go to the common stews. For
preventing of which so great an inconvenience, he was persuaded by one (whose
counsel and advice he had asked in the managing of this business) that it was
his only course to cut their throats whilst they were young. And so he did
one night, having the evening before borrowed a Barbers razor. Being then at
Padua (as has been said) when this tragical event happened, I could hardly
refrain from going to behold this ruful spectacle: I mean these silly souls
lying in that pitiful plight. But when certain scholars, my companions (who
had seen them) related unto me the manner of their death, and how they lay
wallowing in their blood, it imprinted such a lively sense of compassion and
co^miseration in my mind, que non me bastaua l'animo, (as the Italian speaks)
that I could not find in my heart to see them. They further told me, that there
were three in all, one of which had her hand almost cut off, which she had used
(as they supposed) as a buckler against the fury of her father; who (as it was
afterward reported) cast himself headlong from the top of a rock not far
from Tirole, whither he had fled to save himself. The second is of a Switzard,
who having taken his wife at unawares playing the strumpet, and pardoning her
for the present, changed his mind not long after, and repealing his pardon,
slew her with his own hands, saying he could not endure to see her live that
had played him such false play. And having slain her, he dispatched his
children also; saying, he would not have his children called bastards. And the
report goes, that after he had thus embrued his hands in their blood, he laid
violent hands upon himself also, throwing himself from the top of a house, or
(as others say) of a tower, having first written in a paper (which was found
about him) the fact which he had committed, and the reasons that moved him
thereunto, viz. that knowing himself to be but a dead man in law, he chose
rather to be his own executioner, then to undergo an ignominious death. By
which examples we may perceive that the devil is as full of his subtle
sleights and stratagems, and as cunning a knave as ever he was. Now these two
examples do suite each other (as has been said) in this very thing, that these
men slew their children without cause or color at all, for that whereof they
were as innocent as the newborn babe.

13 And have we not examples (on the other side) of parricides, that is, of
children murdering their parents? Yes (God knows) and that even in France it
self, which had lamentable experience hereof not long ago. For Anno 1565.
September. 28. this accursed enemy of mankind had such power and command over a
young man dwelling in Chastillon sur Loing (a graceless griffe unworthy to grow
upon such a stock) that he caused him to take unto him the heart, not of a
man, but of a beast, nay worse then of any brute and savage beast, in
committing so cruel and so unnatural a fact. And for as much as the Lord of
the said place (a man for his virtues, especially his wisdom, admired at this
day, and beloved of all men) has thought good to publish this story in print:
I hope it will not be taken amiss, if treading in his steps, I here make a
short abstract and abridgement thereof. The story is this. John Guy the son
of Eme Guy a The word signifies either a cappet or a hatter, or a haberdasher
of hats and caps.
capper in Chastillon sur Loing, had been a very loose lewd boy, and a notable
vagabond even from a child: in which dissolute courses he had been fleshed and
animated by the ouer-great indulgence of his father. Now it happened upon a
Saturday (the day before specified) that swaggering abroad and keeping revel
rout (as his manner was) he came not home till very late in the evening:
whereupon his father was exceedingly incensed against him, and told him, that
seeing he continued his reuelling in this sort, there was no remedy, he must
thrust him out of doors. Whereunto he answered very boldly and saucily, that
he was ready to be gone, if he had his apparel. These speeches thus passed
over, his father went to bed. Howbeit he was no sooner laid, but he was
enforced by menacing threats to command him silence, considering his round
replies in that fierce and furious manner. In the end, seeing all was in vain,
and that his menaces nothing auailed; being no longer able to endure his long
and proud replies, he rose in great anger to correct him for his sauciness.
Now when he perceived his father coming toward him in that manner, with intent
to beat him, he caught hold of his sword which hung in the chamber, and
therewith ran him through in a trice, so that he sunk down presently, crying
out that he was slain. The neighbors amazed at the cry, came rushing in, and
the Justice shortly after, where they found the poor man lying all along in
the place, expecting nothing but present death, which arrested him not long
after: and his son standing by him dressing himself (his sword lying by him
all on a goare blood) who notwithstanding that his father moved with
compassion, and forgetting his unnatural dealing and cruelty toward him, had
willed him to save himself, saying, Save thy self, save thy self my son, I
forgive thee this my death; and that his mother also had persuaded him
thereunto, yet God in his just judgment so held him back by the reins of his
providence, that he had not the power to stir a foot. Being then demanded
by the Justice, what had moved him to kill his father in that unnatural and
barbarous manner; he answered, that he never meant to kill him, but that he
might thank his own heat and hastiness, in running so desperately upon his
sword which he held in his hand only for his own defense. This is the history
as touching the fact. But forasmuch as the foresaid pamphlet, whereby it was
first published, contains many remarkable points which ensued hereupon till
the time of his execution, very worthy our observation (for in the morality
consists the fruit and profit which we are to reap by this history) I shall
entreat the Reader not to take it in ill part, if I be somewhat more large and
prolixe in the rehearsal hereof then I have been in the rest. For assuredly
considering the very name of parricide is so horrible and hateful to all, I
would not have prosecuted this story so far, had it not been of purpose to
speak something of his conversion, to the end I might show as well Gods great
mercy, as Satan's great enmity against mankind; the poison of which passion he
bewrayes against such as keep not sentinel over their hearts, and stand not
upon their guard. This murderer then thus attached, by course of justice was
sent to prison, and witnesses were produced, who deposed that he had been very
disordered and unruly of a child, despising for the most part his parents
admonitions and reproves, notwithstanding they had always received and
entertained him in the kindest manner, whenever he cried peccaui. His
indictment being drawn, he was sentenced by the Judge of Chastillon the
Saturday following, to have his right hand cut off upon a scaffold in the
market place, right over against his fathers house, both his paps to be pinched
with red hot pinchers, and afterward to be hung by the feet upon a gibbet,
and strangled with a stone of six and twenty pound weight tied to his neck,
where he was to hang the space of four and twenty hours; and last of all to
be hung upon the common town gibbet, there to remain. But he appealed from
this sentence, being persuaded thereunto by a wicked wag-halter who had been a
false coyner, and for his misdemeanour condemned with him, and sentenced to be
sent to the galleys: from which he had also appealed. Whereupon they were sent
to prison again, to the great tower within the Castle, till such time as they
should be conveyed to Paris; during which time many resorted unto them,
especially to visit this Parricide, to see if they could bring him to a sight
and sense of his sin, and so to be the instrument of a souls salvation. But
perceiving that he conceived no otherwise of his offense then of a petty
fault, they unfolded unto him the heinousness thereof, and the fearful
judgments of God which would overtake him for the same, not only in this life
by the sword of the magistrate, but likewise after death by his final doom,
if he did not confess the fact and acknowledge his fault, that so he might
have recourse to the throne of grace, ever open and of easy access to those
who with a true sense and sorrow for sin unfeignedly desire pardon and
reconciliation, in assurance to be heard. But he never gave the least sign
that he was any thing moved with these remonstrances, but still answered that
he had appealed, and that he had not slain his father, but that he ran upon
his sword, the scaberd falling off to the ground. This was all that could be
wrong out of him at that time. And albeit they plied and pressed him again and
again, yet could they not bring him to a sight and sense of his sin: for the
more they labored to discover and lay open the enormitie and hainousnes of his
fact, the more he excused and cloaked the same, saying to himself, Ah wicked
wretch, I might have escaped if I would, and my father knowing he had received
his deadly wound, counseled me so to do; but then (fool that I was) I would
not listen unto him. They then told him that it was not in his power to stir
a foot, or to move a finger without Gods permission and providence, and
therefore that he might assure himself it was the will of God he should not
fly away, but tarry by it, and abide the trial, that so he might be brought
(if it were possible) to acknowledge his offense, and that receiving condign
punishment for the same, he might serve as an example of his divine justice.
Moreover, they exhorted him to make use of this chastisement and correction,
and to consider that the prison is Gods school, wherein he was to learn how
he hates and abhors sin, manifesting his just judgments upon the wicked
when it seems good unto him, either by the sword of the magistrate, or
otherwise: whereunto he answered not a word. Howbeit in the end, after they had
pressed him further by sundry like speeches, the more to aggrauate his offense
by every circumstance, he confessed that he had such a hard heart and
cauterized conscience as was incredible: making signs in the mean time as well
with his head as with his hands, whereby they perceived that God began to work
in his heart, and thereupon they propounded the mercy of God as before. Now
after they had spent many like speeches to rouse up his drowsy conscience from
that dead slumber which had seized upon him, they were advertised that the
false forger (formerly mentioned) had persuaded him to be of good cheer, and
to lay nothing to heart, but to prolong his life by all means possible.
Whereupon order was taken they should be sequestered one from the other, that so
this wicked wretch might no longer poison him with such pestilent persuasions,
who put them in some better hope when he heard no more of them. Neither was
their hope in vain: for being solitary and alone by himself, he thought more
seriously upon their speeches, in such sort, that he confessed to the iaylour
and others, that he had highly offended God, in that he had so wickedly and
wilfully murdered his father, and that he had justly deserved death; desiring
withal that the Bailiffe might be sent for, saying he would desist from his
appeal. Whereupon they exhorted him to make a holy use of those godly
admonitions which had been given him, telling him withal that he did well to
give over his appeal, seeing he should escape never the sooner, and that it
was much to be feared lest appealing to the Court of Parliament at Paris, they
would be so far from mitigating the severity of his punishment, that they
would add to the rigor thereof. Mean time came a Minister of the word, who
plied him so with pithy persuasions, that he brought him to acknowledge the
heinousness of his sin, and to ask God forgiveness, in such sort that
perseuering in this acknowledgement, he ceased not to utter many good and godly
sanctified and sauorie speeches, by which he gave clear evidence that God had
miraculously wrought in his heart. And persisting in his former resolution of
forsaking his appeal, he advertised the Bailiffe hereof: whereupon he was
executed accordingly the Monday following. Where it is to be observed, that
from that time forward, till the hangman had made an end, and parted two old
friends, this poor patient (and now penitent parricide) had God and Christ
ever in his mind and mouth, still crying to heaven for mercy and forgiveness:
being armed in this his last conflict with such constancy and heavenly
resolution, that he never twicht for any torment, nor once changed countenance;
which struck an amazement into the minds of the multitude. He that desires to
have a more ample discourse hereof, may have recourse to the foresaid pamphlet.

14 As for women which have murdered their children, I persuade my self there
are but few to be found which murder them after they are once grown in
years. Howbeit many there are, as well of those which kill their newborn
babes, as of those who execute their cruelty upon them in the womb before
they see the light of the Sun. And doubtless this murdering of children in
the womb (to begin with it in the first place) is a very ancient sin. For
the Greek Poet Phocyllides gave a caveat to the women of his time to take heed
of it. And Ovid likewise (another Pagan Poet) sharply censureth a huswife for
the like offense: adding withal many excellent disswasions to that end. And it
was one branch of Hippocrates his oath (as we know) never to minister nor
prescribe women any thing that might cause abortion, or any way endanger the
fruit of their womb. Now there are two maine reasons of this wicked practice.
Some do it for fear they should be known to have played the wantons and lost
their virginity: or (to speak somewhat more generally) for fear of being
disclosed to have had to do where they ought not, be they married women or
widows. Others for fear of abridging and shortning their youth, especially
for fear of that which Ovid speaks of. Scilicet vt careat rugarum crimine
venture,
Sternetur pugnae tristis arena tuae.
And as for the shortening of their youth, the same Poet says. Add quod and
partus faciunt breuiora iuuentae
Tempora --
Notwithstanding whose testimony, we find it true by daily experience. I have
further heard of certain gentlewomen, and my self have known some who made
no bones to wear poytrels or stiff stomachers, endangering thereby the life
of their child: and to the end they might not lose the credit of having a fine
slender body, made no conscience to destroy that which should have bin as
dear unto them as their own lives: I speak of such huswiues as miscarried in
the carriage. As for those murdering Medea's who made away their newborn
babes by casting them into ponds, priuies, etc. Nunneries within these few
years would have funished us with store of examples, as well as of those which
murder them in the womb. Neither want we examples of former ages: for
Pontanus says of his time: Quod quidem execrationis genus maxim Sacerdotes
attingit, qua Deo virginitatem quum vouerint, pollutis tamen votis, rituque
sacerdotali periuranter atque inceste contaminato, grauidae factae, ne scelus
pateat, execrabiliori conantur scelere id ipsum prohibere ac corrigere: dum aut
medicaminibus adhibitis abortionem procurant, aut partum statim ipsum
exanimant, terraeque aut cloacis clam infodiunt. Now when I say that we might
have found store of such examples within these few years; my meaning is not,
that it is so hard a matter to find some at this present: but that the number
was then far greater then now it is, as well in regard of the multitude of
Nuns, as for that they were in greater fear of losing their good name, if
once they should have been known to have played fast and loose, then now they
are, considering their ghostly fathers are not so strict and stoicall, but that
they will (if need be) give them physic for the green sickness. Moreover,
in that they see sundry Nuns leave their Nunneries, I mean their
brothel-houses and beds, and betake themselves to the marriage bed, where they
live orderly and well: it makes them look a little better to their consciences
before they go about such murders. Yet it cannot be denied but that this
wicked murdering of poor innocents extends it self beyond the Cloisters,
not only to mariageable maids who are under the mothers wing, or in the
government of their kinsfolks, (even to such as are worshipfully and nobly
descended) but to widows also: which the said Pontanus has not concealed
touching those of his time. For he further adds: Nec vero monstrosa hac
feritate sacerdotes tantum, verumetiam viduae, ac nubiles puellae,
splendidissimaeque etiam foedantur familiae. But maidseruants of all other are
oftenest taken tardie with this fault, and they only (poor souls) are called
coram before the magistrate, according to the old saying alleged before out
of Iuuenal, Dat veniam coruis, vexat censura columbas. For I have often seen
such at Paris hanged for this crime, and none but such. And I remember I once
saw an Anatomy in the Physic schools of a maid that was hanged for casting
her child into a privy. To this purpose it is which the said Pontanus adds
in the sequel of that history: Vir maxim notus, mihique perfamiliaris aedes
quum emisset, emundaretque latrinarum sordes, interque emundandum accurrisset
subitam ad exclamationem redemptoris operam eam facientis, animaduertit
infantuli cadauerculum sordibus illis inuolutum. And verily none should be
better acquainted with such secrets then midwiues, were it not that the manner
is to go to their houses, and after they have blindfolded them, to lead them
to the place where the travailing woman lies, whom they also mask or muffle
for fear lest the midwiues (who must of necessity have their faces uncovered)
should know her. This I can say of mine own knowledge, that I once heard a
midwife report, that she was not only thus hoodwincked (a practice that would
be found common at this day, if diligent inquiry were made) but that the child
also was murdered before her face, as soon as it was borne. And that she did
no sooner begin to exclaim against that so heinous and horrible a fact, but
she was in danger to have been served with the same sauce by these murderers
and their accomplices. She further added, that they hung the chamber (in which
the woman was delivered and the child murdered) with white cloth, to the end
she might take no notice thereof: and that they conveyed her back again to
her house hoodwinked as before. By this we may see what murdering minds some
women bear. True it is indeed, our Ladies at this day need not to take so
cruel a course, considering they have so many prophylactica to keep their
bellies from tympanizing. Touching the currish cruelty or rather fury and fiery
affection of women against there own blood: Pontanus records a far stranger
fact then any yet mentioned, of certain which stifled their children with
their own hands as they were coming from between their feet; not so much
for fear of having their whoredom and harlatry known, as to be revenged of
their husbands. Whereof he seems to speak as of a thing which fell out in his
own time. For having discoursed at large of the foresaid villainies committed
in those days, he adds, Compertas audio etiam vxores, quae vt viros hoc
iniuriarum genere insectarentur, aut illatas ab illis iniurias vlciscerentur,
hac potissimum ratione in lucem venientem prolem proprijs eliserint manibus.
Howbeit I cannot think that so desperate and devilish a desire of revenge
could ever enter into the heart of any Frenchwoman: and God grant that France
never find a race of such Medea's. But here I am in some doubt whether I
should with silence pass over those women who commit their children to the
first nurses they meet with, never enquiring of their qualities and
conditions, nor of their skill and will to perform their duty; nor yet
whether they be sound or sickly, of a good or a bad constitution, as rotten,
pocky, leaprous, etc. Who after they have once rid their hands of them, and
committed them to their care and custody, seldom or never take thought for
them, or remember them, till they hear the passing bell go for them, they
being ready to give up the ghost. Notwithstanding I dare not call such mothers
murderers, (especially when they have a just excuse to exempt them from the
performance of this duty:) Yet thus much I dare say (let them take offense
that will, it skilleth not, so that wise and modest matrons be not offended)
that they are more cruel then the very heathen, who exposed their children to
the wide world, recommending them (as it were) to the stars and destiny. If
they shall allege for themselves, that all children which fall into the hands
of such nurses, neither die, nor otherwise miscarry: I answer again, neither
do all die that are exposed. For fortune is so favorable to some, that they
may thank God, that ever they were exposed: whereas children committed to such
nasty nurses, either die shortly after, or carry about them such diseases and
maladies, as make them miserable all their lives long. By which we may see how
far women at this day degenerate from the natural affection of the Queen
(formerly mentioned) who was so highly offended with one of her Ladies for
giving her child suck; so loath she was it should have any nurse save her
self, and so jealous (as it were) of imparting this honor to any other. But
sithence I am come by good occasion to speak of the custom which in times
past was common among the heathen of exposing children, my purpose is not to
give it so general a pass, but to discourse of the difference between these
Pagans, and those who have the name, and bear the badge of Christians. First
then I confess, that this custom of exposing children has had small or no
entertainment among Christians, as sundry Greek and Latin authors do
sufficiently witness. For it has not been heard that enfans trouues (as the
French call them) were ever exposed by any, but by such as were pinched either
with poverty or fear of infamy. Albeit Monasteries at this day, stand many
of these murdering Medea's (who are neither urged with the one, not pressed
with the other) in the same stead that exposing did in old time: which
unnatural and cruel course they take, lest through the multitude of children
they should be constrained to keep a meaner house and carry a lower sail. And
hence it is that many parents make their children believe, that they have vowed
virginity, which (God knows) they never meant; and under color hereof confine
them in some monastery in their younger years, whilst they know no more what
virginity means then little girls, who put the finger in the eye when they
are called maids. But what curses and imprecations children thus mued up, use
against their parents when they come to years of discretion, is more then
notoriously known. The question then is, whether they do not as good as
murder them, when they force the stream against his course, in compelling them
to enter into such a state of life, wherein they cannot live without falling
into horrible pollutions, which cease not to pull the fearful judgments of God
upon their heads. For mine own part I am of opinion, that by how much the
soul is more precious then the body, by so much this murder is greater then
the former.

15 I might here add sundry other sorts of murders, at leastwise facts as
heinous as any murder, as of griping usurers and such as by sinister means
grind the faces of the poor people, and sift them to the very bran, as
pettifogging proctors, prowling promouters, and chicken Justices, who are
therefore rightly called common cut-throates, bloud-suckers, and cormorants of a
country. But I will content my self with these before specified, and come to
those that are felons de se (as Lawyers speak) whose examples ought the more
to humble us, in that they show us what great power the devil has over us,
when we give him but the least advantage, and stand not upon our guard by
holding him out at the staffes end: I mean when we quench not his fiery darts
by the shield of faith, and beat them not back by the sword of the spirit.
For though Pagans made little or no conscience to make away themselves, and
though most Philosophers approved it by precept, and some also by their
practice; yet the Christian world was never so corrupt, but that it has ever
condemned these felons de se, and razed them not only out of the number of
Christians (by denying them Christian burial) but even of men; notwithstanding
they have been frequent and common in all ages, as histories record. First
therefore to begin with women (as we did before with the fact of Lucretia) we
read how that the mother and her two daughters (in the reign of Diocletian
the Emperor) under color of doing their easement, light out of their chariot,
in which they were carried to Antioch, there to forswear Christian religion,
and to sacrifice to the Emperors Gods, or shamefully to be entreated, and
afterward put to death; cast themselves into a certain river, and there were
drowned. And profane story affoords us sundry examples of maids, who chose
rather to lose their lives then their virginity. Whereof we have sundry
preside^ts eue^ at this day, and that in both sexes. Among the rest I remember
how a woman of Switzerland, about nine or ten years ago, understanding that he
whom she had admitted into her bed, was not her husband, but a knauish
companion that had deceived her, fell into such a sea of sorrow, that she
drowned her self. And we read in the Queen of Nauarres narrations, of the
pitiful death of a gentlewoman who hanged herself for very grief that a
Franciscan had had the use of her body. But more of this hereafter, when we
come to entreat of the whoredoms committed by our good Catholics. I have also
heard of certain women who dispatched themselves in great fury and rage, for
that their husbands had cut in sunder the true loves knot, and profaned the
nuptial bed, when they could not be revenged of them that were riuals of their
love: as also of others, who upon other occasions have laid violent hands upon
themselves. Neither does this hard hap befall the weaker sex only; for we
find that many men also have been drawn or rather driven to do execution upon
themselves. And concerning the profanation of the nuptial bed, let us here
again call to mind what happened in a town of Switzerland (about twenty
years ago) how a man having taken his wife in the like fault, and pardoned her
for the present, repented certain days after, and slew her; and not her
only, but the children also which he had by her, saying, he would not have his
children called bastards: and having so done, cast himself headlong from a
high steep place, and brake his neck. In whose bosom a paper was found,
wherein he had set down the reasons which had moved him to commit these
murders, especially to make away himself, viz. that knowing himself to be
but a dead man in law, he chose rather thus to end his days then to be put to
a shameful and ignominious death. Which puts me in mind of that which
Pontanus relates of an Italian Lord, who having slain him whom he suspected
to have been naught with his wife, was watched so narrowly by his brother, that
being out of all hope to escape, he first slew her with his own hands, and his
children after; and having so done, threw himself from the highest tower of
his castle. I have heard it also credibly reported, that a citizen of Padua
having slain his daughters being but very young, some few days after cast
himself from the top of a rock, in the self same place whither he had fled to
hide his head. As for those bloody murderers of the double die, which make
away not only their children but themselves also, I will here record as
tragical a story as is to be found (in my opinion) in any historian, ancient
or modern, which (as some relate it) was lately acted in Beausse, as
follows: A certain husbandman (who was reasonably well to live) binding
sheaues in the field, sent his son of an arrand home to his house, and being
greatly offended with him at his return, for that he stayed longer then he
expected, he threw a clod at him, and hit him such a blow on the head, that he
struck him stark dead, so that he fell groueling down to the ground;
whereupon having covered him with sheaues, he went home to his house in a
desperate mood: where finding his wife bathing her self, and giving her young
child suck (whereof she was delivered not many weeks before) he went into his
barn and hanged himself. His wife having intelligence hereof by one who had
occasion to go into the barn not long after, leaping out of the bath in great
fear, left her child so heedlesly in the bath, that it fell into the water,
and so was drowned. Where she (poor soul) amazed, and almost beside herself
to see her husband hang in that ghastly manner, and finding at her return that
her child was drowned, was driven into such an ecstasy of despair, that she
went back again into the barn, and locking the door upon her, hanged her
self by her husband. Where note the mischieues that came thick and
threefold, one in the neck of another: the father killing his son, and the
mother drowning her child against their wills; and both of them in like
desperate mood hanging themselves. Only here was the difference, that she
drowned her child through mere oversight, and he killed his son by mere
chance and casualtie: for according to the common saying, He often kills who
thinks but to hurt.

16 Now as men are driven to this extremity of distress and despair, not
only upon these or the like, but upon sundry other occasions: so many there
are who for other causes have made away themselves. For which purpose I might
allege a pack of villainous usurers, who by the just judgment of God* have
had no other executioners then themselves: And all such generally as are
tormented with that inward fury of an accusing conscience, are subject to this
so infamous and detestable kind of death. For after they have once iudicially
arraigned and condemned themselves in the Court of Conscience, by a strange
kind of proceeding, they put the sentence in execution in as strange a manner.
For example: A Secretary in a town of Switzerland having bin sentenced by his
conscience (in such sort as has bin said) understanding that his knaueries
were too well known: albeit his heart had often failed him, yet in the end he
did open execution upon himself, even then when his keepers thought him
furthest from danger. For though they kept him for the present from hurting of
himself, having found him in the bath stabbing and lancing his body with a
penknife, yet the same day he made a escape from them, and leaping out of a
window brake his neck. And here I may not forget Bonauenture des Periers
(author of that damnable book called Cymbalum mundi) who notwithstanding the
pains which was taken in watching of him, (for that they saw him in a
desperate mood, ready upon every light occasion to sacrifice himself to his
own shame) fell upon his sword, the point running in at his breast, and out at
his back. But we have an example of a far more strange and dangerous
distress (considering the occasion) in Francis Speira an Italian: and so rare
in this kind, that it will hardly be paralleled either with ancient or
modern: for he made himself away by such a death as other desperate and
devilish minded miscreants would not willingly choose, viz. by a long and a
lingering death; for he famished and pined himself away, obstinately abstaining
so long from all manner of sustenance, till he had starued his soul out of his
body, as we may read in Sleidan and other historians.

CHAP. XIX. Of Cruelty practiced at this day.
ALbeit the murders formerly mentioned be not altogether void of cruelty;
nay, though some of them breathe forth (as it were) nothing but barbarous,
savage, and cruel immanitie: I will notwithstanding allege some few examples
hereof apart by themselves; yet not all our modern examples promiscuously
which offer themselves to my pen, but such only as are rare and extraordinary,
exceeding the vulgar sort. And albeit our last civil wars might serve as a
plentiful storehouse to furnish me with choice of matter, yet I will beware
how I harp upon that string, lest rubbing of old sores, I should make the
wounds of many to bleed afresh. Neither will I speak of the cruelties executed
at Merindol and Cabriere, which being but barely related in the high Court of
Parliament at Paris by the Attorney Aubery and other Lawyers, caused the
auditors to stop their ears, they were so hideous and horrible. This one thing
may give sufficient testimony of the enormitie and heinousness thereof, in
that John Me^ier Lord of Oppede, ringleader in this dance, as being chief
President of the Parliament of Province, and Lieutenant general for the King
in that country in the absence of the Lord de Grignan, could not find soldiers
cruel enough to his liking, notwithstanding he had made choice of the veriest
bloody butchers that were in a country, commanding them (among other his
Canniball-like cruelties) to rip up women with child before his face, and to
tread their babes under their feet. O currish cruelty, well worthy that
horrible death which befell him, not by the hand of man, but by the just
judgment of God, the searcher and seer of all secrets! And this persecution
raised against the poor people of Merindol and Cabriere, is so much the more
famous, in that they led a great army against these poor souls, who never
desired any thing more then to yield themselves, never attempting nor once
intending to resist and make head against them: but humbly entreating that they
might be suffered to use the liberty of their conscience in their private
houses, and not to be enforced to admit of the Roman religion; at leastwise
that they might be permitted to fly into some other country upon such
condition as they should think good.

2 But leaving this history, I proceed to other examples of cruelty, nothing
inferior to that in Herodotus, which notwithstanding is thought by many so
incredible. For where is the man to be found, who hearing what he reports of
Herpanus, viz. how he was served with the flesh of his own son, and how he
are thereof at a feast, to which he was invited by Astiages King of the Medes
(never suspecting he should have bin served with such a sauce, nor entertained
with such a dainty dish) will not presently fancy it to be as very a fable as
that which the Poets have fained of Atreus, who made his brother Thyestes: eat
his own children? Notwithstanding we find as great cruelties practiced in
these days. For Pontanus reports how that certain Italians having taken one
of a family with which they were in deadly feud, chopped him forthwith into
small pieces, and having pulled out his liver, broiled it upon the coals, and
ate of it (every man his morsel) with great rejoicing, using sundry solemn
ceremonies and merriments therewith: I will here set down his words at large:
A^iam meam Leonardam, rarissimi exempli matronam, non sine multis lachrimis
puer audi^bam referentem, quam inter digladiantes quasdam inter se familias
inimicitia summis exercerentur odijs, captum quempiam factione ex altera,
eumque e vestigi^ concisum in minutissima etiam frusta: moxque exemptum illi
iecur, in prunis candentissimisque carbonibus ab factionis eius principibus
tostum, perque buccellas minutim dissectum, inter cognatos ad id inu^tatos in
^entaculum distributum. Quae aut luporum tam exanhelut^ rabies, aut sauientis
pro erepta prole tigridis hanc ipsam superauerit? Allata etiam post
degustationem tan^ execrabilem p^cula non sine collecti cruoris aspergine:
congratulationes habita inter se, risus* i^ci^, leporesque cibum ipsum
condientes. Denique and dijsipsis propinatum tanta vindicta fautoribus. Quid
hic exclamem nihil habeo, ni ^orte, etc. Which story calls another to mind to
this effect. A certain gentleman bearing great affection to a married
gentlewoman, went into the wars; where he entreated his fellow soldiers,
that if it were his chance to be slain in the field, or otherwise to die, they
would take his heart and present it unto her with certain speeches which he
delivered unto them. After his death (which happened not long after) his heart
was taken and kept by the gentlewomans husband (who had bin informed of the
request he had made to his fellows,) and he was no sooner come home, but he
caused his cook to dress it in such curious manner that his wife a^e thereof,
thinking of nothing less then of such meat. Whereupon asking her how she
liked it: she answered, she liked it well. You cannot choose (quoth he) but like
it well, for it is the heart of your best beloved. She straight perceiving his
meaning, took the matter so to heart, that she never ate good morsel after:
neither had she need; for she died shortly after for very grief. Which fact I
have not here set down to parallele it with the former cruelty, but only to
show his savage nature in causing his wife to eat man's flesh. For (all things
being well considered) it will appear that this his currish kindness toward
her, was rather rigorous severity then ouergreat cruelty. In like manner a
Dutch gentleman punished his wife for playing the strumpet, rather rigorously
then cruelly: who having slain the gallant, (to whose lust she prostituted her
self) appointed her his skull to drink in, in stead of a cup. The same (in my
conceit) may be said of a gentleman of Piemont, who having taken his wife in
the fact, caused her together with the old bawd (which had helped her in this
business) to strangle the gentleman with who^ she was found, and to bear the
dead corpse company all their lives after: for he closed them round within a
wall, leaving them only a little hole, by which they might receive bread and
water. Such facts (I say) are rather to be reckoned in the number of
ouer-rigorous punishments, then of ouer-cruell revenge: as that which I have
alleged out of Pontanus, which as it may be paralleled with the fact of
Astiages recorded by Herodotus, and that of Atreus mentioned by the Poets; so
are there sundry in this age which may as fitly be paragonized with that of
Medea. At leastwise I can readily furnish the Reader with three. The first is
that which I have already alleged out of Pontanus, of those murdering
Medea's, who to avenge themselves of their husbands, stifled their children
coming from them with their own hands. The second of a huswife of Millan, who
(as Bandel reports) finding not how to wreake her malice upon her husband,
who was divorced from her for adultery, being with child by him (albeit he knew
not so much) let loose the raines to her rage, and wrought her wreake upon the
fruit of her womb, whereof by violent means she was delivered three months
before her time, and after so cruelly massacred it, that I had rather it should
be read in the writings of Bandel, then in mine. The third likewise may be
taken out of the same author, where he speaks of a young Spanish damsel, who
having prostituted her self to a gentleman in hope of marriage which he had
promised her (although she was but of mean and base parentage) and hearing
afterward that he was married to another, conceived such hatred against him,
that she wrought her wits how possibly she might compass his death: In the end
she used this policy, she persuaded him by her flattering letters to come and
visit her; and the time being appointed when they should meet, she earnestly
expected his coming, having made all things ready (with the help of an old
beldame) to welcome him to her house in such sort and manner, as her fierce and
outrageous malice (inflamed with extreme desire of revenge) should counsel
her. To the end therefore she might the better come to the period of her
intended purpose, and accomplish her designs, though at the first she
entertained him with complaints and grieuances, yet by and by after making as
though she rested fully satisfied with the reasons which he alleged, and that
she was somewhat appeased, she yielded to his impotent affection, to play the
wanton with him as before. Whereupon they went to bed together, where she still
expected when to find him sound asleep, that she might execute her furious
enterprise* Neither failed she of her purpose for not content to have given him
many deadly wounds (being awaked at the first blow, and perceiving himself so
entangled in the cord which the old trot had drawn, that he could neither move
hand nor foot) she tyrannized over the dead corpse by sundry savage and
barbarous cruelties, before she could quench the heat of her rage. For which
cruel murder, she having voluntarily confessed the fact (at least bewrayed
and betrayed her self by her words) was beheaded, and the old bawd also, as
Bandel says. Howbeit others (following Paludanus a Spaniard who has written
this story in Latin) affirm that she was never taken. How ever it were, we may
see the fact of a right Medea in the glass of this example, as well as in the
former: which whosoever shall duly consider, cannot think that strange which
Herodotus reports of Amestris wife to King Xerxes, how she having procured
her husband to deliver his concubine into her hands, cut off her dugs and cast
them to the dogs, as also her nose, ears, lips and tongue; and having thus
mangled and disfigured her, sent her back again to her house. To conclude, if
the question be touching the greatness of women's cruelty, we are first to be
resolved of that which Iuuenal says, that they are superlatiue in their
reuengefull desires: secondly of that which Ovid discourses of at large, viz.
of their mad malicious minds, especially when any encroch upon their free hold,
and disturb them in their possession. His words are these: Sed neque fuluus
aper media tam saeuus in ira est,
Fulmine^ rapides dum rotat ore canes:
Nec lea, cum catulis lactentibus vbera pr^bet,
Nec breuis ignaro vipera laesa pede:
Foemina quam socij deprensa pellice lect^
Ardet, and in vultu pignora mentis habet.
In ferrum flammasque ruit, etc.
That is, More fierce and fell was never chafed Boar,
While with his angry tusks he all does goare
The busy Mastiffe: nor no Lioness,
Whose suckling whelps her empty teats do press:
Nor the short Viper hurt with heedlesse gate*
Then is the wife that finds a rival mate
Unto her love and bed: and in her brows
The signs of her conceived hatred shows.
For further confirmation hereof, I will allege one other example out of
Philip Commineus, and that in his own words, as follows. For shortly after,
the said King Lancelot was poisoned at Pr^ge in Bohemia by a noble woman (whose
brother I have seen) with whom he was in love, and she also with him; who
being out of patience because he had married King Charles the 7. his daugther
(now called the Princess of Vienna) contrary to his promise, poisoned him in a
bath by giving him an apple to eat, putting the poison in the haft of the
knife. Thus far Comminens: where he further reports that the king of
Hungary cast one Matthias into prison (who was King after him) having first
slain his elder brother. Now we may well imagine how she would have
entertained the Queen, if she had had her in her hands.

3 But to return to these savage cruelties executed in way of revenge:
Pontanus records a notable example which fell out (as it seems) in his days.
A slave of Mauritania being buffeted by his master and almost beaten to death,
to the end he might be avenged of him, and put an end to his wretched and
miserable life, he took this course. Having espied his time when his master
was gone far from his house (which stood in the country) he locked and
barred the gates as well as he could, and having bound his wife hand and foot,
he carried her and her three children to the top of the house, there expecting
his masters return. Who coming home, and finding the gate shut against him,
began to threaten his slave as he showed himself from the house top. The slave
answered that he would by and by make him sing another song: and forthwith
threw down two of his children. The poor man (their father) remaining for a
time amazed and confounded at this spectacle, and more like a dead man then a
living creature, yet coming at last to him self again, thought it his best
course to entertain him with fair language, and to promise him not only
pardon for the two murders already committed, but also manumission and
freedom, to the end he might (at leastwise) save his third son. And so did.
But the slave replied and said, Thou may fawn and flatter, and make fair
weather with me as long as thou will, but I will not spare him for all that,
except thou will cut off thy nose. The poor man (in hope to save his child's
life) accepted the condition, and cut off his nose. Which he had no sooner
done, but the slave cast him down from the top of the house, and his wife
after. And having so done, seeing his master torment himself in that manner,
and cast forth such horrible outcries, said, Thou may hang thy self if thou will, but I will keep my self (I warrant thee) out of thy fingers. And having
so said, cast himself down headlong from the roof of the house.

4 Now albeit the cruelty which is exercised in this and such like revenge, be
exceeding great, yet it is much more increased, and (as it were) redoubled by
those who in wreaking their malice upon their enemies, wrap in others also with
them, who (to use an old English phrase) cannot do with all. As it fortuned
about sixteen years ago in a city in Italy (at Boulongne if my memory fail me
not,) where a malicious minded miscreant so extremely thirsted after revenge,
that finding no other means how he might cry quittance with his enemy, laid
gunpowder in his celler, and afterward set fire to it, and so blew up the
whole house; where not only his enemy, but sundry others were murdered with
him. Others, no less cruel then the former, in stead of revenging themselves
upon those that have any way iniuried them, either because the parties are
dead, or for that they dare not encounter them, revenge themselves upon those
that are mere innocents, only because they are allied unto them, or are their
friends or countrymen. Whereof this age will afford sundry examples, not only
in matter of common hostility, but also of private enmity. As the said
Pontanus relates how the Italian Lord having slain one who (as he supposed)
had played the knave with his wife, was so straightly besieged by his brother,
that having first made away his wife and children, he cast himself headlong
from the highest tower of his castle. Hereupon (I say) he relates, how that he
which besieged him (called Corradus Trincius) perceiving that he had escaped
his hands, and that he had lost his hint and opportunity of revenging himself,
cruelly murdered all that he could meet with, who were either kith or kin unto
him. And not so only, but chopped them in pieces like herbs to the pot, and
scattered them in the fields and highwayes: the like he did with their bowels
also. His words are these: Corradus Trincius, qui Fulgin^^ Vmbria imperitauit,
c^so Nicolao eius fratre a praefecto arcis Nucerin^, ob adulterij suspicionem,
praefectum ipsumita expugnara aggressus est, vt ille, amissa tandem omnispe
euadendi, interfectis prius vicora and liberis, sese ^ summa turri deiecerit,
ne viuus in Corradi potestatem perueniret. Itaque Corradus deceptus
opportunitate in viuum illum s^uiendi, quot quot familiares, cognatos, amicos,
notos, quique cum illo consuetudinem exercuissent aliquam, captos, cruciatosque
ad excarnificationem, ad vltimum comminus in frusta, exenterarique imperauit,
ac per sentes maximeque frequentium viarum sep^s ac margines eorum vis^era
intestin^que suspendi ac passim dispergi: vt ^eque aut vindictam appellare hanc
possis, aut punitionem. But some do worse then all this; when not content to
revenge themselves upon their enemies, they wreake their malice upon their
kinsmen and acquaintance.

5 There is yet another kind of cruelty practiced rather in sport and in a mad
merriment then in way of revenge: whereunto Princes and great Lords are more
addicted then men of base or meaner place. Whence grew the proverb, (applied
to such as please themselves in keeping revel rout, and playing the pike in a
pond): These be Princes sports, they please them only that do them. Which puts
me in mind of that which I saw done by a young Nobleman, who was no sooner
presented with two great English mastiues, but the toy took him in the head,
to make trial of them upon the legs of a poor boy, how well they could bite:
and letting them loose at him, he quickly perceived what they could do: which
was a pitiful spectacle to all save himself. And now (gentle Reader) consider
how the Athenian Judges would have censured such a fact, when they put a young
man to death, only because he took pleasure in putting out of birds eyes;
taking it as a pregnant proof of his future cruelty. But to return to those
that play the bloody butchers with such as never offended them, (nay which are
neither kith nor kin, nor yet countrymen to those that injured them) the said
Pontanus writes of an Italian captain whom he calls Nicolaus Fortibrachius,
who carried a dumb man with him whither soever he went, laden with halters*
and when the fancy took the fool in the head to hang any that he met with
(to the end he might have some sport) he would make a sign to the dumb man,
and then the whoreson would straight put a rope about the parties neck, and
trusse him up at the next tree. In which pastime the kind captain took such
pleasure, that if any one day had passed over his head, wherein he had not done
some such execution, it grieved him as much as if he had lost so much time. He
further makes mention of one Riccius Monteclarius, whose manner was to kill
men in kindness, and gently to cut their throats, tempering his cruelty with
mimicall conceits. For when he was minded to murder any, his manner was to
entertain them very friendly, and to inuit them to a feast, and to ask them
how many glasses of wine they would drink with him, and how many morsels of
such or such baked meat they would eat: and having demanded these frivolous
and ridiculous questions, he would presently stab them with his dagger till he
had killed them.

6 Moreover, cruelty shows it self in excessive punishments, to which
purpose the said Pontanus alleges an example of the King of Naples
Lieutenant, who not content with the punishment prescribed by law, caused
malefactors to be sawne in pieces overthwart the back. It further bewrays it
self in those that take pleasure in inuenting of new torments, whether with
intent to practice them themselves, or to teach them others who may put them in
execution. Which puts me in mind of a good fellow who published a book about
five and twenty years ago, full of pictures of racks, and all kind of
tormenting instruments, which the wit of man could possibly devise. But we may
not here forget the just judgments of God which have befallen the inuentors of
these cruel torments, as well in this as in former ages. For as Perillus
having presented the cruel tyrant Phalaris with a brazen bull, which might
serve him in steed of a furnace to burn men in, was constrained to take the
first trial thereof, and to feel the smart of it himself (as befell Arnutius
Paterculus with his brazen horse:) So Philip Commineus tells us how the
Bishop of Verdan, who first showed King Lewis the eleventh the invention of
iron cages, was the first whom the King mued up in one of them, and that for
fourteen years together. We read also of sundry savages who first felt the
smart of their cruel counsel given against others. And thus much touching the
lewdness of the Laity. In the next place we are to borrow a word or two with
our good Catholics of the Popish Clergy.

CHAP. XX. Other examples of the wickedness of this age, especially of such as
The Popish Clergy.
term themselves Cleargy-men.
WE have already heard what inuectiues the good Preacher Menot makes against
the Clergy of his time: and we know how S. Bernard (long before) cried out
against them. Let us now see if they did repent at the last, and turn from
their wicked ways, making benefit of such reproves. What say I, benefit?
Nay, they were more obdurate and hardened thereby. For as light huswiues before
they have put off their peticoates are as nice as a Nuns hen, and show some few
sparks of shamefastnes and modesty; but when they once perceive that their
licentious lewdness is brought to light, and that they are upon the stage, and
their lives in every child's mouth, keep open house for all comers, and are
more lavish both of their lips and lap, yea ten times more exorbitant, in spite
of all that speak against them: Even so for all the world did Clergy men (at
leastwise the greatest part) when they once perceived they could no longer
conceal their symonies, villainies, whoredoms, lecheries, and such like loose
and dissolute demeanor, of all which I am now to entreat. For as for their
false iugling and erroneous doctrine, wherewith they have so pestered the world,
I am to discourse hereafter apart, toward the end of this book.

2 Neither will I now busy my self with their hawks and hounds, as Menot does,
nor with their whores and concubines, nor yet with their crosier staves and
myters, viz. how many they should have (I speak according to Menot who calls
two bishoprics two myters, and two Abbayes two crosier staves) neither with
their election, as whether the holy Ghost be president there, or that spirit
which had the greatest stroke in the election of Pope Syluester (according to
those historians who do not affirm that the devil was chosen Pope, and called
Syluester the second: but that he obtained the Popedom by the help of the
devil, to whom he had given himself body and soul long before.) But will
briefly show that which every man that has his eyes in his head, may easily
perceive, as well in these as in sundry other particulars, how that since the
time of this Preacher they have in such sort made forcible entrance and taken
possession of the things which they could not then peaceably enjoy, that if he
were now living he would easily see it were but lost labor to dispute against
them. For it is not to be thought that a Popish Prelate will beat his brains
now adays to know whether his benefices be competible or incompetible: how
many livings, how many whores, how many hounds and how many hawks he may
keep. For suppose he have three cart loades of benefices (if it were
possible,) five or six herds of whores, and as many hounds as the Cardinal had
whom the good Preacher Barelet mentions (which were near a thousand) yea and
as many hauks as all the Princes in Christendom (provided always that he
beware how he speak or do any thing for which the Pope his maker may be moved
to deprive him:) he is in the mean time dispensed with, as being an honest
man: and besides authorized to employ his five senses in whoredom and lechery,
in despite of the French pocks and the knaue-bald disease (for excommunication
has no power over these Ladies) and to keep (if need be) a dozen of bawds for
the purpose. And when his stomach will not serve him for these, to seek out
dainty bits for his tooth in the very midst of Nunneries (otherwise called
monasteries of reformed women) into which it is not lawful for any secular man
to set foot. But if They for he, and so in that which follows.
they chance to be weary with continual change, or through remorse of
conscience betake themselves to one only, and pass their promise to marry her;
then are they in danger (forsooth) to be deprived of their livings, and
severely to be punished. Whereof we have late and fresh examples in two modern
Bishops (both I take it yet living) who had no better excuse for themselves
then to say, that she that was holden to be their wife, was but their concubine
or whore. But whether this excuse will pass for payment before Gods tribunal,
let themselves judge. Howsoever, it is not much unlike that which I heard from
the mouth of the late deceased Archdeacon of Hardas (being at Padua with the
Cardinal of Tournon) who said, The devil take all those married villains who
are permitted to eat laced mutton their bellies full: which he spoke generally
of all the Clergy, but it arose upon speech had of a Bishop, who was secretly
married, as it was reported. This was the sentence of this charitable
Archdeacon. Now whereas I have so often called the Pope their maker, be it
known unto them, that in so speaking I use but their own phrase, save that
they apply it rather to Cardinals then to Bishops: as when they say, Such or
such a Cardinal is such a Popes creature; as they know well who have been in
place where such things have been debated. True it is indeed, that in a
Council where this question was propounded, An sint Episcopi immediate a
Christo, an medtate a Pontifice, a Bishop (who was in a pelting chafe for that
they had moved his patience) cried aloud, Parcat mihi Dominus Christus, non sub
abapso: which I heard related by a Bishop who told me that he heard it from his
own mouth. Howbeit I do not well remember whether he said it was in the last
Council or in the former. But sure I am that in a Council it was, where (as
he further reports) a certain Doctor seeing himself encountered and foiled
with certain texts of Scripture, alleged for his excuse: Ego non sum
Theologus, ego sum Canonista.

3 Howbeit we are not so much to wonder at the Popes greater creatures (who are
now grown to such power, credit and account, that they scorn to seek for a
dispensation of their creator, to authorize them to live in all wantonness,
riot and dissoluteness, as himself does) as at his lesser creatures, who
living in some sort under discipline, and (as it were) under the rod, ought in
all reason to be more afraid to offend for fear of the whip. But if I shall
demonstrate and show that even they also run with full swing after their lusts
and pleasures, letting loose the raines to all licenciousnesse, notwithstanding
all restraint which ought to withhold them, let the Reader judge what will
become of the rest. By the Popes lesser creatures I understand the single soled
Priests, both black and white Friars, both Mendicants and Redituaries (if I
may usurp this goodly Latin word Redituarij) and to be short, all such as are
but mushroms and baggage in respect of fat Abbots.

4 But before I come to decipher and lay out their loose life and dissolute
demeanor in orient colors, and instance the same by particular examples, I
cannot omit that which is notoriously known at this day (which notwithstanding
may happily seem incredible to posterity) how that not long since the
weightiest arguments which they could allege to prove a man to be out of the
right Romish Church (and therefore worthy to fry a faggot) were these: That he
was no whoremonger, no drunkard, no swearer, nor blasphemer, and that he did
allege the Scriptures. In so much that a certain Friar being accused to the
Bishop his Diocesan to be a Lutheran, was acquitted by him as clear of the
crime objected, because he wanted none of the foresaid qualities. Whereupon an
Epigramme was made, which for the good grace it has, deserves here to be
inserted, especially considering that (to my knowledge) it never came to light
before. Esse Lutheranum rumor te Gaurice clamat:
Sed tuus Antistes te tamen esse negat.
Tam scortaris (ait) quam si vel Episcopus esses,
Et potas dubiam peruigil vsque diem.
Nec memor es Christi, nisi cum iurare libebit.
Nec scis Scripturae vel breue Iota sacrae:
Nempe per haec sueuit nunquam fallentia signa
Ille vigil sanas noscere pastor oues.
That is (if I hit it right) Rumor reports thee for a Lutheran,
Thy ghostly father counts thee no such man:
For whores thou haunt'st (says he) with lusty chase,
As if thou wor'st a myter by thy place.
Thou reuelst so (beside that wanton play)
That evermore thou drink'st the night to day.
Of Christ (save when thou swear'st) thou think no whit,
Nor know one letter of the holy writ.
By these sure signs (that never fail their master)
Are all ^ound sheep known of their careful pastor.
But let us hear the description of the virtuous qualities of Friars, made by
another Prelate. Pour nombrer les vertus d'un Moine,
Il faut qu'il soit ord and gourmand,
Paresseux, paillard, mal idoine,
Fol, lourd, yurongne, and peu sauant:
Qu'il se creue a table eu beuuant,
Et en mangeant comme un pourceau.
Pourueu qu'il sache un peu de chant,
C'est assez, il est bon and beau.
That is, If that I must in order tell,
What virtues long to Monkish cell:
He is not fit for Cell or Couen,
That Is not a glutton and a slouen:
Sluggish, lecherous, for naught fit,
A drunken dolt deuoyd of wit.
He must eat at each repast,
Until his belly welnigh braist.
He must guzzell in the wine,
Till he be drunken as a swine.
And if he can but chant it well,
This man is fit for Quire or Cell.
To which testimonies these prouerbiall sayings agree very well, As fat as a
Friar, As frolic as a Friar, etc. And these verses put me in mind of a poem
which will ease me of some labor in gathering the sweet doings and demeanor of
these displing Friars (though they have not the like means that Prelates have:)
which notwithstanding I would not have vouchsafed once to have alleged, but
that it has as good a grace, and runs as roundly as a man would wish. 1
Mes freres, ie vous priez de suiure
Quelque honneste facon de viure
En simplesse and sobriety*
Et laisser vostre ebriete,
Eguillon de toute malice.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
2
Voire, mais viuans sobrement,
Vous seruiriez Dieu purement:
Et puis chacun auroit envy
De suiure vostre bonne vie.
Mieux vaut suiure virtue que vice.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
3
Mais c'est chose a Dieu detestable,
D'estre assis trois heures a table
A yurongner and gourmander.
Voulez-vous point vous amender,
De peur que Dieu ne vous punisse?
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
4
Mais ayant beu vingt fois d'autant
Null de vous n'est iamais content,
Sentant vuider son gobelet.
Car il demand a son valet
Qu'incontinent il le remplisse.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
5
Mais vos deuis and vos propos
Sont tous de putains and de pots,
Aussi pleins de lasciuete
Que vous estes d'oisiuete:
Et tousiours songez a malice.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
6
Mais pensez-vous seruir a Dieu,
Blasphemans son Nom en tout lieu,
Et ne pensans pour pe nitence,
Fors qu'a croistre vostre pitance,
Ou crocheter un benefice?
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
7
Mais pensez-vous qui soit assez
De prier pour les trespassez
Qui ont fait du bien au convent,
Si vous ne priez Dieu souuent
Que sa grace vous soit propice?
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
8
Mais quel service appelez-vous
D'ainsi murmurer contre nous,
Tout confondre en piteux desordre,
Et despiter Dieu, nous and l'ordre,
Si vostre pitance appetisse?
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
9
Mais dequoi seruent tous vos chants,
Quand vous estes trompeurs meschans,
Qui n'auez virtue ne science
Qu'a regratter la conscience
De quelque femmelette nice.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
10
Mais que sert d'aller au moustier,
Et Psalmodier le Psa^tier,
Et rechanter en cent facons
Versets, Antiennes, lecons,
Ayans le coeur a la saucisse?
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
11
Mais quoi? vostre devotion
N'est rien que simulation,
Et vostre chant melodieux
N'est a Dieu sinon odieux,
Aimant pur coeur qui le benisse.
Monsieur nous faisons le'seruice.
12
Mais c'est peu de seruir de bouche,
Si le service au coeur ne touch.
Auoir l'esprit a la cuisine
En chantant au temple matine,
Ne sert qu'aux poulmons d'exercice.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
13
Mais pour le service divine
Vous faites service de vin,
En fredonnant vos doux accords.
Mais que nourrissiez vostre corpse,
Peu vous chaut que l'ame perisse.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
14
Mais vous estes si desreiglez,
Et en vous maux tant aueuglez,
Qu'il n'y a homme si sauant
Par ses raisons vous poursuiuant,
Qui de rien amender vous puisse.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
15
Mais vous ne donnez iamais rien,
Et ne vous chant quand ne combien,
Ne qui, ne quoi, n'en quelle sort
On vous done and on vous apporte,
Mais que le convent enrichisse.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
16
Mais vous n'auez ni soin ni cure
De lire la saint Escriture,
De l'estudier ni entendre,
De la retenir, and l'apprendre
Au s^t and ignorant nouice.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
17
Pour response au Souprieur fair,
Le convent dit, qu'il n'y a friar
Qui n'accomplisse and ne consent
A l'exhortation present,
Et de bon coeur n'y obeisse.
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
18
Mais quand ie di, Friar Simon,
Pourqu^^ n'allez-vous au sermon?
Friar Gring^ire and friar Gille
Que ne preschez-vous l'Euangile?
Chacun dit, Ie fai (...),
Pater, en disan^^ service.
19
Or ne sauroit-on tant prescher,
Tant exhorter, tant reprocher
Leur mauuais train, pour les confondre,
Que ne les ^yez tous respondre,
Quelque chose que dire puisse,
Monsieur nous faisons le service.
That is, 1
To you sir Friars this suit I make,
That some good course of life ye take,
In single heart and soberness,
And leave your daily drunkenness,
Which of all ill does stir the fire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
2
Ye do: but if you sober live,
To God ye shall right worship give:
And in the people breed a strife,
To tread in steps of your good life.
Virtue then vice has better hire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
3
But unto God it is detestable,
To sit full three hours at the table,
In drunkenness and belly cheer.
Why do ye not amend this gear?
Lest God you punish in his ire?
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
4
But when y'haue drunk carowses twenty,
If once ye find your mazors empty,
Not one of you does rest content,
But calls for fresh replenishment
Unto his nouice or apple-squire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
5
But what is all your discourse and talk?
Of queanes, and how the pots may walk.
As full of lust and wantonness,
As you your selves of idleness.
Ye muse of ill in town and shire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
6
But think you, God ye serve aright,
His name blaspheming day and night?
Never thinking of contrition,
But how t'encrease your pension,
Or some fat benefice t'acquire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
7
But think you it is enough at least,
To pray for such as are deceast,
And to your Covent something gave?
While you ne pray that God ye save,
And with his grace your hearts (...),
An't please you (Sir) we serve (...) Quire.
8
But what a service call you this?
If of your commons ought ye miss,
In spite of God, us, and our calling,
To make such murmuring and such brawling?
Enough to set the world on fire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
9
But wherefore serve your songs so grave,
When each you plays the cosining knave?
And has no virtue nor science,
Save to vex women's conscience,
Which are full nice in their attire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
10
But what auaileth't to go to Kirk,
To sing the book of David's work:
To descant in an hundred sorts
Your Lessons, Anthemes, and Reports:
When pudding is your chief desire?
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
11
But this your invocation,
Is deep dissimulation.
And these your songs melodious,
Are unto God but odious,
Who does the praise of the heart require.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
12
But little auailes to sing with voice,
Except the heart sing and rejoice.
It is but exercise of lungs,
To strain your sides and wag your ^ungs,
The while your mind's at kitchen fire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
13
But you in stead of work divine,
Best service offer unto wine:
Their Airs you chant most sweet and fresh,
And, so you pamper may the flesh,
You care not for the soul a brier.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
14
But you are so inordinate,
So hoodwinck'd in your foul estate,
That not the wisest man alive,
Can argument so well contriue,
T'amend the life of Monk or Friar.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
15
But naught you give, and all you take,
Regardlesse how, and for whose sake,
Of whom, or why, (so that you have
The thing your greedy gut does crave:)
What care you so y'enrich the Priour?
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
16
But never comes it in your head,
The sacred scriptures once to read:
To study them, or mark their frame,
To think thereon, or teach the same
Your nouices, for thanks or hire.
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
17
For answer unto the Subpriour,
The Covent says there is not a Friar,
But well accepts and does fulfill
This exhortation, heart and will.
Obedient as child to sire,
And all say (Sir) we serve the Quire.
18
But when I say to him, or him,
Why mist you sermon, Friar Sim?
Sir Giles, and you sir Gregory,
Why preach you not the Gospel? Why?
An't please your worship, says the Friar,
I do my duty in the Quire.
19
And thus they answer all and each,
(What ere we say, what are we preach:)
Nor can the voice of man so sound,
As their ill guises to confound:
But still in answer they conspire:
An't please you (Sir) we serve the Quire.
But seeing I have honored the Laity so far as to register their lives and
actions thus authentically (as it were) in the court roles, from point to
point, I fear me I should be holden an enemy to our holy mother the Church,
some lurking Lutheran or odd Huguenote, if I should not make as honorable
mention of her obedient children the Catholic Clergy.

CHAP. XXI. Of the lechery and whoredom of the Popish Clergy.
FIrst therefore to begin with whoredom: let us see to what height it is
grown since Menots time. Est filia seducta (says he, fol. 82. col. 3.) quae
fuit per annum inclusa cum sacerdote cum poto and cochlcari (at bed and board)
hodie venit ad confessionem: vis dicere quod cras debet ire ad dormiendu^ cum
Canonico, vel cu^ alio sacerdote, and sic perseuerare toto tempore vitae suae?
Moreover he says that the first prey that soldiers sought for when they
entered any town, was Priests le^mans (or concubines.) But if I durst be so
bold, I would speak of the infamous tribute which was wont to be exacted of
Priests, to the end they might be dispensed with for keeping of le^mans, which
has also borne a shameful name. And such as desire to know the original of
such sweet doings, may here see it. In the first Council of Toledo (which was
holde^ (as the story says) in the reign of the Emperors Arcadius and
Honorius:) to the end it might appear what holy spirit was then president in
Councels among a number of Prelates there assembled, this canon was agreed upon
for the keeping of Concubines. Caeterum is qui non habet vxorem, and pro vxore
concubinam habet, a communione non repellatur; Tamen vt vnius mulieris, aut
vxoris, aut concubinae, (vt ei placuerit) sit coniunctione contentus. And about
two hundred years after, Isidore (as Gratian quoteth him in his great dunghill
of decrees, did. 34.) has written hereof in these words: Christiano non dicam
plurimas, sed nec duas simul habere licitu^ est, nisi vnam tantum, aut vxore^,
aut certe loco vxor^s (si coniux acest) concubinam. Whereupon Priests inferred,
that seeing such liberty was granted to common Christians by virtue of this
text, they which made others Christians had a larger privilege, and so have
utterly rejected marriage, as too strict a rule. But as for keeping of
concubines, they so notoriously abused themselves and their neighbors wives,
that Germany (in the reign of the Emperor Maximilian) amongst many other
grieuances against the Church of Rome (called Grauamina) exhibited two to this
effect (concerning the foresaid tribute) grau. 75. Insuper etiam clericos
religiososque and saeculares, accepto ab eisdem annuo censu, public cum suis
concubinis, pellicibus and alijs id genus meretricibus illegitime cohabitare,
liberosque procreare sinunt. Again, grau. 91. Item in locis plerisque Episcopi
and little officiales non solum tolerant sacerdotum concubinatum, dummodo certa
persoluatur pecunia, sed and sacerdotes continentes, and qui absque concubinis
degunt, concubinatus censum persoluere cogunt, asserentes Episcopum pecuniae
indigum esse: qua soluta, licere sacerdotibus vt vel coelibes permaneant vel
concubinas alant. But they not content with their concubines or whores, have
further by subtle sleights abused honest and chaste matrons. For proof whereof
the Queen of Navarre relates a very memorable and tragical history, which I
will here briefly set down. There was a Franciscan lodging in the house of a
gentleman of Perigort (whom the Friar ruled at his pleasure, and by reason that
he was his confessor, was very inward with him) who being privy and after a
sort author of the purpose which the gentleman had to lie that night with his
wife, (delivered but 3. weeks before) played his part so well, that he came
before the appointed time in stead of her husband. And having satisfied his
lust, went away unknown unto her, because he spoke never a word: and going
presently to the porter, willed him to open the gate, and to help him to his
horse, making him easily believe what he listed, by reason of the great credit
he was in. Afterward came her husband at the time appointed; where she
(thinking it had bin he who was newly departed from her) could not refrain,
but used certain speeches unto him, whereby he perceived the knauish part that
had bin played him. And because there lodged none in that part of the house but
his wives brother and the Franciscan, he suspected the Friar, and hyed him
straight to his chamber, but found him not, which greatly increased his
suspicion. But having spoken with the porter, he was fully persuaded that it
was he indeed. Whereupon he returned back to bring his wife word how the matter
stood: which did so exceedingly perplexe her, and drive her into such a
desperate and furious fit, that being there all alone (her husband having left
her to pursue the Friar) she hanged her self: and as she strugled too and fro
in the agony of this cruel death, she killed her little babe, with a blow of
her foot. Who being ready to give up the ghost, cried out so loud, that it
awaked a woman lying in the chamber, who having beheld this pitiful spectacle,
all amazed and affrighted ran to look for her mistress brother: who being
come, and seeing his sister in this lamentable estate, after many outcries and
deep sighs asked her who it was that had committed that horrible fact; she
answered she knew not, but this she knew for certain, that none came into the
chamber but her master. Whereupon he presently ransacked every corner of the
house to find him out: and finding him not, was the rather persuaded that he
and none but he had committed the murder. Thereupon he took horse and hotly
pursued him, and watching him by the way as he returned from following the
Franciscan (whom he could not overtake) he no sooner saw him but calling him
dastard and villain, drew upon him. The other (having no leisure to enquire
the cause of such an assault) was feign to stand upon his guard. And thus they
continued foining and fighting, till in the end, what with bleeding, what with
weariness, they were constrained to surcease. Then the gentleman understanding
of his brother in law, that he was innocent and ignorant of the fact, and
hearing what the Franciscan had done, and how that whilst he was pursuing him,
this other mischief had happened, he cried him mercy for wounding of him, and
getting him on his horse (as well as he could) brought him to his house, where
he died the next morning, confessing to his kinsfolks and acquaintance that
himself was the cause of his own death. Howbeit his brother in law was
counseled for satisfying of the law, to sue for his pardon to King Francis the
first, which he obtained. By which story we see that the inordinate lust of a
Monk was the death of three persons. But we shall hereafter hear of a more
horrible fact committed by another of the same coat: a Friar of the same fry,
who with his own hands committed three murders to atchieue his mischievous
purpose, which was to have his pleasu^e of a gentlewoman of the house where he
lay: for the effecting whereof, his purpose was to convey her to his covent.
But I will reserve this narration for the Chapter where I intend to speak of
murders and manslaughters. Mean while this one thing I must needs say by the
way, that it was an usual thing with those displing Friars in former times to
convey gentlewomen to their Cloisters, stealing them away either in the Church
(when for devotion they stayed somewhat longer then their fellows) or in some
other place where they might do it conveniently. As may appear by that known
story, of a gentlewoman who was rescued by her husband as she passed by his
house coming from a covent of the Franciscans (where she had bin long time
prisoner) to go to another, there to be exchanged for another woman; being
conducted by certain ghostly fathers, apparelled and pouleshorne as they were.
But lest any should think that there neither is, nor ever was any such danger
for gentlewomen to fall into the hands of these false Friars: I am not in such
have but that I can tell you what befell a butcher of Strasbourgh, some few
years before the Franciscans were expelled thence. How that having lost his
wife, and thinking she had bin dead (and so she was indeed to him, but not to
the Franciscans who kept her cum poto and cochleari, at bed and board, as Menot
speaks) seeing a Nouice which came ordinarily to the shambles with a ghostly
father, he was wont to say, that he did so well resemble his wife, that had he
not bin persuaded she were dead, he should think it was she disguised in
strange attire. In the end it was well known that the poor butcher had good
cause to think so: and that this nouice, that is to say, one that wore the
habit of a Franciscan nouice, was his wife indeed, whom he thought he had lost.
Which vile villainy God in his providence suffered not to be detected till that
the abuses of Popish religion were discovered, for which as well the
Franciscans as the other Monks, together with all the Cannibals of the Crucifix
were expelled the city. Many other examples there are of the like feats which
these good vpholders and favorers of Saint Francis were wont to play. And the
foresaid Queen of Navarre records a pleasant story to this purpose, of two
Franciscans, who (because they never carry money about them) would needs have
ravished their ferrywoman, and paid their fare in that payment: howbeit their
good will (which they could not put in execution) was for that time reputed for
the deed. But since this good Princess has done us and succeeding posterity
so great a pleasure, as to take the pains to record certain stories as
pregnant proofs of the chastity of these venerable Friars, and to publish
them in print, I will omit the most notable of all the rest, viz. of a
Franciscan in a town of Perigord, who at the marriage of his hosts daughter,
caused meat to be served into his chamber for himself and his fellow Friar,
making scruple to sit at table with the rest of the guests; yet made no
conscience after supper to go to bed with the bride in humility, taking the
same pains with her in charity which he knew the bridegroom meant to take.
Notwithstanding I may not omit a fine feate played by a Franciscan, who married
his companion to an Italian gentlewoman, and so cunningly handled the matter
that he had five hundred ducats for his pains, which his fellow had received
for his wives dowry: and brought it so about, that he peaceably enjoyed her,
and received all kind entertainment at her and her mothers hands (who was a
widow) which a new married man could in reason expect. This jolly Franciscan
(being ghostly father to the widow) had brought her to so good a belief in his
gods, that she verily thought her daughter had met with a better match then
possibly she could have wished. And the better to persuade her (although he
needed no great Rhetoric for this purpose, considering the good opinion she
had conceived of him, by reason of the great devotion she bare to his order) he
used this speech unto her, (suting the request which she had made unto him to
find out a fit match for her daughter:) I am fully persuaded (quoth he) that
God has sent his Angel Raphael unto me (as he did to Tobias) to find out a
good husband for your daughter. For (I assure you) I have met with the
honestest young gentleman that is this day in Italy, who has sometimes seen
your daughter, and is so far gone in love, that as I was to day at my prayers,
God sent him unto me, to show me the great desire he has that this match may
go forward. And therefore knowing his house, kinsfolks, and honest demeanor
so well, I promised him I would break the matter unto you. See here the
preface which this ghostly father used to this silly widow. But to set a fair
gloss upon the matter, and to take away all suspicion of double dealing, he
further added: True it is, there is one fault which I find in him, and it is
but one: The thing is this; going about to rescue one of his friends whom his
enemy would have slain, he drew his sword thinking to have parted the fray:
but it so fortuned that his friend slew the other, whereupon (though he had
stricken never a stroke) he fled the Country because he was present at the
murder: The French word signifies murder, and therefore I have kept the
propriety of the word: for otherwise it should be called manslaughter rather
then murder.
and by the advice of his kinsfolks has withdrawn himself into this city in
a scholars attire, where he continues as a stranger unknown; and is so to
remain till such time as his friends shall take order for his return, (which
he hops they will do very shortly. And therefore the marriage must secretly be
solemnized; and you must permit him to frequent public Lectures in the day
time, and every night to sup and lodge with you. The silly old widow found
great probability in all this tale, (for as the common saying is, It is an
easy matter to deceive where there is no deceit) so that upon these conditions
they were betrothed the same day, and at Mass after midnight were married, and
the marriage being consummate, lived together (for a time) with mutual love and
liking one of another: so that her mother said, she had great cause to thank
God. But Dominus vobiscum uttered in the Mass by this so honest a young
gentleman (who was both a Franciscan and a Mass Priest) began to mar the
market. For this new married mistress going with her mother to hear Mass in the
covent of the Franciscans (according to the great devotion which she bare to
Saint Francis, as has been said) as this gentle Sir John turned himself to
say Dominus vobiscum, she poor soul was stricken with greater astonishment
then ever bel-founder was, telling her mother that the Priest which said mass
was her husband, at least one that much resembled him. Her mother making great
scruple once to imagine that such holy men would use such false dice, and
thinking withal that such a thought could not be entertained without a mortal
sin, labored to draw her daughter from that opinion. But Ite, missa est,
struck it dead. For turning himself the second time, he did not only
confirm her in her opinion, but made her mother also of the same mind: who
notwithstanding would not fully believe it till the evening, that she came and
found him in bed with his wife; where (according to the plot which they had
laid) she held his hands as though it had been in sport, whilst her daughter
pulled off his nightcap. Under which finding his shaven crown, they needed
not to make any further doubt whether he was a Priest or no, but rather to
devise how they might be revenged as well of him as of the ghostly father; whom
the old gentlewoman sent for without delay, making as though she had some great
secret to impart unto him. In the end she delivered them over into the Judges
hands, who (doubtless) would never have suffered them to have escaped so
scotfree as they did, but that they were corrupt at the core: as the Queen of
Navarre says in the end of this narration. But I heard afterward in Italy,
that they acquit them upon small penance. For in times past they made
conscience (as we know) to lay hands upon these holy men; nay they were glad to
rid their hands of them, and to turn them over to their gardians, to be
dismissed in pace, or otherwise dealt with as they should think good. And
sithence we are speaking of Italy, I will here insert the history of that lecher
who played the knave with one Berengers wife, an Italian Marquess. This
houswife (never respecting the noble house whence she was descended) played the
harlot with one of her Chaplains (though a very dandiprat, and exceedingly
deformed.) But this companion escaped not so scotfree as his fellows. For
being bewrayed by the barking of a dog, he was taken and stripped stark
naked, and had that part cut off wherewith he had offended. Which happened in
the time of Pope Steven the eight, about the year of our Lord 941. But to
return to Franciscans: I have not forgotten the history of the gray Friar
(calling himself Saint Francis) who played his part so well with a silly
superstitious woman, that she admitted him to her bed: but before he could
bring his resolution to execution, the curtain was drawn, and the play ended
otherwise then he expected, and by those whom he never suspected. For Saint
Peter (as porter of Pararadise) and Saint Thomas (as one who would never have
believed such a matter) came to seek him even to his beds side, and sent him
packing after another manner then he came thither. I have not (I say) forgotten
this story, but reserve it to his proper place.

2 Now these gallants not content to play the knaves in grain, and to exceed
all the ruffians that ever entered the Huleu of Paris in obscenitie of speeches
and filthy conversation, have bin bold (and that in open pulpits) before the
crucifixe and all the men and women Saints there present (keeping demure
countenances in looking on and saying nothing) to use such modest talk as were
enough to make all the whores (at least the curtizans of Venice and Rome) to
blush for shame. Witness a Franciscan of Tours, who preaching upon Easter
tuesday in a village called S. Martin le beau, nigh the city Blere in
Touraine, and recommending him self and his suit unto them, said, Madames, I
am bound to give you thanks for your liberality to our poor covent. But shall
I tell you? you have not considered of all our necessities. And then he used
such a villainous speech, that is, so beseeming his cloister (according to the
old saying, A man is not to look for grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles)
and so unworthy all chaste ears, that I will not stain my paper therewith. And
if perhaps I forget my self so much in other places as to blot paper with the
like, I shall desire the Reader not to take offense thereat, nor to gather
thereupon that I take pleasure in the recital of such hideous and horrible
villainies; but to persuade himself that the only desire I have to decipher
out villains by their villainies, and wicked men by their wickedness (to the
end that the knowledge of them may breed a bitter detestation of such monstrous
abomination) has moved me to imitate the Lacedaemonians, who teaching their
children sobriety and temperance, showed them their slaves drunken, that
seeing their beastly behavior, they might in their youth grow to a lothing and
detestation of their drunkenness. Notwithstanding if there be any curious
head, desirous to know what this rotten speech was, which the Monk uttered, he
shall find it (with sundry others) in the narrations of the Queen of Navarre,
whose meaning (in publishing those Nouuelles) was to let posterity understand
the notorious wickedness of these false Friars, who were reputed not only
honest men, but even pety Saints. Now as the Satyrist says, Nemo repent fuit
turpissimus: so it is certain that their loose licencious life and dissolute
demeanor has daily increased and grown by degrees. But we have seen it in
the ruff, especially sithence this rascal rout is come to this pass, to
desire (as one writes) that they might be permitted in their confessions to
handle those parts and members of the body, which had bin instruments in
committing the sin which they confessed. And when a Bishop told one of them
(that had put up this petition) what an absurd and shameful thing it would be
for men and women to show their priuities: he answered, that if it were
accounted no dishonesty for confessors to contemplate at the same instant with
the eyes of the mind (which are far more pure and precious then the eyes of the
body) not only the parts and members of the body which had committed
filthiness, but the filthy fact it self disclosed and laid open unto them in
holy ^hrift; much less ought it to be thought a dishonest or unseemly thing to
behold and view them with their bodily eyes. Further, he alleged that the
confessor resembling the spiritual Physician, ought to feel his patient as
well as the bodily Physician does his. And these his Scoggin-like scoffs he
burnished with blasphemies, profanely abusing the words of our blessed
Savior, Go and show thy self to the Priest: as though the Jews had bin
accustomed to strip off their clothes, and show themselves naked to the Priest.
But to return to these jolly Preachers: what modest speeches (think we) use
they in private, when they use such obscene scurrility in publik? When I say in
private, I mean not only their own cloisters, but the cloisters of their most
dear, loving and well-beloved sisters: for their manner was to build them near
together. Whereupon a merry companion took occasion to say, Here is the barn,
and there are the threshers. Which puts me in mind of that which a ieaster once
said to King Henry the second: for when it was debated which way they might
best furnish the King with money, he propounded two. The first was, that if the
King would let him wear his crown by course, he would furnish him with two
millions of gold. The second, that he should give commandment that all Monks
beds should be sold, and the money brought unto him. Whereupon the King asking
him where the Monks should lie when their beds were sold? with the Nuns,
quoth he. Whereupon the King replied; But thou considerest not, that there are
nothing so many Nuns as Monks. To which he had this answer at his fingers
ends; It is true, if it please your Highness (said he) but every Nun can well
lodge half a dozen Monks at the least.

3 But how comes it to pass (may some say) that these poor Franciscans are
more commonly flouted and played upon then the other fry of Friars? Verily it
is not for want of examples as well of other Monks as of simple sir John's; but
because they bear the world in hand that they have ascended a note above Ela,
and attained a greater degree of holiness then the rest of this rabble,
therefore they are more narrowly looked into then the rest. And when the best of
them all (who boast themselves to be most holy) are not worth a rush, it must
needs follow that the rest are bad enough. Nevertheless, for his satisfaction
who might happily make such an objection, I will allege some rare examples of
simple Sir John's, that is, of such as are not Monks, but single soled Priests.
First then we are not to wonder that these gallants (especially Curats and
Vicars) should go into every man's house and take toll of their wives, seeing
all men almost (at least the greatest part) kept open house for them, and put
them in trust with their wives, making account that they had to deal with
their souls only, and not with their bodies. In such sort that a simple sot
finding a Sir John at work with his wife, durst hardly believe (for fear of
committing a mortal sin) that he came thither for any bad intent. Which
women knowing well enough, were not to seek for an excuse when they chanced to
be found at unawares with their good Curate: as we have formerly alleged
examples of their craft and subtilty in playing false with their husbands, when
and as often as they were taken napping in the fact with one or other of their
kind acquaintance. But let us see what subtle sleights Priests and Monks had
in their budgets, to pass their wicked purposes, when they met with any
obstacle or rub in their way. It is reported of two or three good fellows (one
of which was a kind Curate in a burrough-towne situate in the mountains
between Daulphine and Sauoy) who counseled the good wives of their parish to
feign themselves to be possessed, that when their husbands went on pilgrimage
for the dispossessing of them, they might commit them to their custody till
their return, that so they might not be niggards of their stoles, nor their
other instruments which might do their wives good. We read also of sundry
others through whose counsel women have fained themselves sick of one disease
or other, whereunto their sex is usually subject, that under color of
applying to them their relikes, they might apply unto them some other thing. As
a Minorite Friar in Sicily served the young wife of an old Physician, named
Agatha. For she having in her confession laid open to this Monk some part of
her mind, as namely that she bare no great affection to her husband: and having
given sufficient intimation (at least to one of so quick a conceit, as without
casting of her water could soon perceive where she was pained) that she longed
for change of pasture, was persuaded by him (before he had absolved her) that
the next day when her husband was gone to visit his patients, she should feign
her self sick of the mother (as indeed she was somewhat subject unto it) and
that she should call for the help of my Lord S. Bernardine: which she did.
VVhereupon they entreated this Minorite to bring the miraculous relikes of S.
Bernardine, and apply them to this poor patient. The Friar being glad that his
plot stood in so good terms, foreslowed not his business, but coming straight
to her beds side, and finding more witnesses there then he desired, told them
that he must begin with holy shrift, which was enough to make them all void
the room; so that there only remained his companion and the gentlewomans maid.
And then was it time both for mistress and maid to go about other matters then
confession. Now as they were hard at work, the poor Physician came home (not
giving the pedlar of relikes so much time as to put on his breeches, but only
to leap out of bed) and finding these two confessors so near his wife,
began to scratch his head, not daring to speak all that he thought. But it
struck him to the heart (poor soul) when after their departure he found one
of the Confessors breeches under the beds head, as he was tricking up his wives
pillow. But as the moral was well handled, so the play was far better acted.
For his wife presently preventing him said: Sweet husband, because the relic
of blessed S. Bernardine has recovered me, I desired the Confessor to leave it
with me, fearing a relapse. The Friar being advertised by the maid of the
starring hole which her mistress had found, (to the end that the Catastrophe
might be answerable to the Prologue) returned to fetch his breeches with
ringing and chiming of bells, with crosses and holy water, accompanied with all
the fry of their fraternity, and namely with the Priour of the house: and
having taken them out of a fair linen cloth (in which the sick soul had
wrapped them) he caused all the standers by to kiss them, and first of all the
silly noddy her husband: and having laid them up in a shrine, departed thence
with this precious and wonder-working Jewel. Others (as Poggius) report that
the breeches of S. Francis covered the knavery of the breeches which the
Minorite Friar had left behind him. To the same purpose Boccace writes of an
Abbatesse in Lombardy, who rising in have from a Priest (with whom she had
layen that night) to take one of her Nuns in bed with her Paramot: in stead of
her vailes (which some call the psalter) she for haste put on the Priests
breches on her head; which the poor Nun straight perceiving, as she was to
receive her benedicite (for the points of the breeches hung down on either
side,) Madame (said she) first tie your coi^e, and then I will be contented to
hear whatsoever admonition you shall give me: with that the Abbatesse
perceived what it was, that she had inconsiderately put upon her head, and
there upon changed the copy of her countenance, and was straight in another
key. In this history there is one remarkable point, which I may not omit,
wherein all agree which relate the same (although they vary somewhat in other
circumstances) viz. how this jolly Minorite under pretense of shriuing her,
took occasion to lie with her. This I say is the rather to be marked, because
it confirms the saying of that good old Preacher Oliver Maillard, who
complains that after these gallants have heard women's confessions, and
learned who they be that follow the occupation, they run after them. Qui
auditis confessiones mulierum, deinde curritis post eas. Howbeit we have more
ancient and authentical testimonies hereof. For Poggius a Florentine
reports that there was an Eremite at Padua called Ansimitius (in the reign
of Francis the seventh, Duke of that city) who being held to be a holy man,
corrupted many women (those especially which were descended of noble houses,)
and all under color of confession. And he adds a very pleasant jest, how
that when this Eremite was detected, he was brought before the Duke, who having
examined him, caused his secretary to know of him the names of all the women
which he had abused. Who after he had reckoned up a great number, such
especially as resorted to the Dukes palace, he said, he had told all. But the
Secretary still urging him to confess more, and to conceal never a one. The
poor Eremite fetching a sorrowful sigh, said, Why then (Sir) write down your
own wife. At which words the Secretary was so astonished, that the pen fell
out of his fingers. The Duke on the other side was almost resolved into
laughter. But to omit these examples: daily experience does sufficiently show,
that auricular confession served Priests and Monks in stead of nets to catch
women withal. For my part I remember well, I once heard a Priest at Paris
vpbraided for lying with a woman in the Church presently after he had shriuen
her. I have also heard of a Curate near to Vienne in Dauphine, who was taken
(about twelve years since) playing the knave behind the high Altar on good
Friday, with a woman whom he had under benedicite, with whom he had often played
the like pranke. For punishment of which offense he was sentenced by the Bishop
of the Diocese not to sing Mass for a certain time. Which puts me in mind
of a grievous punishment which an Italian Bishop inflicted upon a Priest (about
forty years ago) for his cruel handling of a poor tradesman, in beating him
most barbarously beyond all mean and measure, viz. that he should not set foot
in any Church for the space of three months. Which sentence the magistrate of
the place perceiving to be ouerpartially given in the behalf of the Priest, so
encouraged the poor man underhand, and heartned him so on, that he was fully
resolved to be revenged. Neither failed he of his purpose: for meeting with his
Sir John in a place where he was not able to make his part good, he beat him
well and thriftily, restoring him his blows with advantage. For which fact
being complained of to the magistrate, he commanded him that he should not set
foot in any tavern for three months after. Which sentence of the magistrate
when it came to the Bishops ear, he was much offended. Howbeit the magistrate
(who knew well what he had done) was not mute nor unprovided of an answer, but
replied in this sort: Say, (I beseech you my Lord) do you not think it a
greater punishment for him which is wont never to lie out of the Tavern, to be
forbidden to go thither for the space of three months, then for a Priest to be
debarred for three months from coming to Church, which he makes so little
account of, that he could be content for a small matter never to come there al
his life long? This story I was the more willing to record, because it does so
well exemplify the light penance which the other Bishop enjoined the wicked
Priest, who was so impudent to play the fornicating Friar (I say not in the
Church, but) hard by the high Altar; not upon Shroue-tuesday, but upon good
Friday, golden friday, holy friday, when all men are weeping full sore and
bitterly for the poor god which is kept in prison: wherein so much as to
laugh, is accounted a venial sin: and which is more, in the sight of all the
he and she Saints in the Church, who turning their faces aside for shame, could
notwithstanding see them as well behind as before: To be short, who committed
such a crime, for which he deserved (to speak according to their cannons) to
die five hundred deaths, if it were possible. And notwithstanding this so light
and slight a punishment, the Legate of Auinion thought it so great and so
grievous, that he released him thereof. So that M. Curate played the knave
again with the same woman, and in the same place more freely then ever before,
in spite of all that spoke against it; neither did he surcease from singing
his ordinary Masses, which were found as sauory and toothsome, yea as easy to
be digested by those which greedily feed upon such froth, as the Masses of the
maidenliest Priest of them all. Now who so lift to make diligent inquiry into
all the knaueries committed by these Churchmen, shall find them almost
infinite. But their punishments so exceeding rare, and (for the most part) so
slight and slender, that it was, in a manner, nothing but mere mockery. Whereof
to omit other testimonies, we have a notable president in the Franciscans of
Orleans, after that horrible and execrable imposture of theirs, which was since
notoriously known to all the world.

4 But leaving this discourse, let us return to the whoredoms of these bon
companions: and to the end it may appear that they thought scorn to be
inferior to their Prelates in that occupation, let us hear an incest in the
highest degree, committed by a Priest, as it is authentically recorded in the
late Queen of Nauarres narrations, yet more briefly then it is there set
down. In a village near Coignac, called Cherues, a maid (that is, one that
was a maid by her own assertion and in common opinion) sister to the Curate of
the parish, was found to be with child. And because she led a very holy life
(in outward appearance) she made the common people easily believe that she was
great with child by the holy Ghost, and that she was another virgin Mary. This
rumor blazed abroad, came to the ears of Charles Earl of Angoulesme (father
to King Francis the first) who sent certain of his servants thither to make
diligent inquiry thereof, because he doubted all went not well, but that there
was some false packing amongst them. In whose presence the wench (being about
13. years of age) having bin before adjured by the Curate (her brother) upon
her salvation to reveal the truth, and then the second time sworn, answered,
I take the body of our Lord here present upon my salvation, before you my
masters, and you my brother, that never man touched me more then you. And
having so said, she received the consecrated host. They hearing her take this
solemn oath, returned back again and informed the Earl how the case stood:
who hearing their report, thought upon that which they never dreamed of, viz.
that it was not without cause that she used that form and manner of oath, that
never man touched her more then her brother, and took it for certain that it
would be found that her brother had gotten her with child. Whereupon he sent
them back again, commanding them to imprison the Curate: which they had no
sooner done, but he confessed the fact. So that both of them were burned
certain days after she was delivered. We read also of one Thomas Abbot of
Abingdon, who (not contented to keep three paramours) had two children by his
own sister.

5 But to ease my self of further labor, in collecting out of sundry authors
that which might serve my purpose: I will for this present content my self with
a short treatise in French (wherein this story is set down) taken out of an
English book, containing an inuentory (or catalogue) of the villainies
discovered in the visitatio^ of Monasteries, Couents, Collegiate Churches, and
other religious houses in England, by the commandment of king Henry the eight:
where (to let pass their other knaueries) the whoredoms, adulteries, incests
and sodomies of Priests and Monks of those houses are set forth, with their
names and sirnames, as it here follows. In the Monastery of Belle or Battle
in the Dioces of Chichester, these Sodomites were found at the first
visitation, John Abbot, Richard Salchurst, Thomas Cuthbert, William March, John
Hasting, Gregory Champion, Clement Westfield, John Cross, Thomas Crambrooke,
Thomas Bayll, John Hamfield, John Iherom, Clement Grigge, Richard Touey, and
John Austine. Other Sodomites in the Church of Canterbury among the Monks of
Saint Benet are these, Richard Godmershan, William Litchfield, Christopher
James, John Goldingston, Nicholas Clement, William Cawston, John Ambrose,
Thomas Farleg, and Thomas Morton. Other Sodomites in the Cathedral Church of
Chichester, John Champion and Roger Barham. Item, in the Monastery of Saint
Augustine, Thomas Barham sodomite. The catalogue of whoremasters and adulterers
is too long, and therefore I will speak only of their stoutest champions,
that is, of those who kept many whores: some of which, like towne-buls, not
contenting themselves with a round half dozen, had nine, others eleven, (in
remembrance of the eleven thousand virgins) others thirteen, and some twenty.
But because I will not deprive them of the honor given to their fellows,
these are their names. In the Church of Canterbury among the Monks of S.
Benet, Christopher Iamys played the whoremonger only with three married women,
William Abbot of Bristow had but four whores, whereof one was married. In
Windsor Castle Nicholas Whyden priest, had but four. In the same place George
Whitethorne had five, Nicholas Spoter five, Robert Hunne five, Robert Danyson
six, Richard Priour of Maydenbeadley five. In the Monastery of Shulbred in the
Diocese of Chichester, George Walden Priour had seven, John Standney seven,
Nicholas Duke five. In the Monastery of Bathe, Richard Lincombe had seven,
whereof three were married: he was a Sodomite besides. In the Cathedral Church
of Chichester, John Hill had but thirteen. This is much (may some say:) but
what is it to John White Priour of Bermondsey, who had twenty? It is commonly
thought that there were above 400. Couents of sundry sorts of Monks and Nuns
in England (besides those that belonged to the begging Friars, which were nigh
two hundred.) Now let the Reader calculate, how many bastards there were then
in England, I mean Monks bastards begotten of strumpets? And if there had bin
a visitation of Religious houses throughout France, Italy and Spain at the
same time, let the Reader judge what sweet doings would have bin found. At the
same time I say, because their dealing in the dark was not then so plainly
discovered and laid open, as it has bin of late time: and therefore they had
far better means to defray such charges, and to bleare the eyes of the
world, then ever they had since. Hitherto I have said nothing of Germany: for
albeit it be of greater extent then any of the former, yet it is thought to
have bin more barren of such bastard slips (I mean these Friars brats) and
less pestered with such vermin. Howbeit we need not doubt but that they also
have followed the game as well as their fellows. At least this we read in the
arraignement of the Iacobins of Berne, that they were found feasting and making
merry in the Covent among fine dames, not in the habit of Monks, but of
gentlemen.

6 Further, there go sundry other reports of Franciscans and Iacobins, who have
bin taken leading their strumpets about with them attired like nouices. And
verily it was a politic course of theirs, to permit their displing Friars to
lead nouices about in this sort: for under that pretext they had always a
Ganimede or a whore by their side. Howbeit I persuade my self that since a
Franciscans nouice was delivered of a child in a ferry boat, as they crossed
over the river Garumna, (a fact almost as strange as the delivery of Pope
Ioane) they have bin a little more wary in observing the old rule, Si non cast,
tamen caute, If not chastely, yet charily.

7 Now it is not of late years only (in this age, or in that wherein Menot
lived) that these stoned Priests have manifested by their practices, how the
poor people were abused, in believing that there was as great difference
between them and Seculars in regard of fleshly concupiscence, as between cocks
and capons. For in a book written against the Carmelites, about the year
1270. (called The fiery dart) this (to omit other particulars) was laid to their
charge. The principal cause of all your gadding to and fro, in town and
country, is not to visit the fatherless, but damsels; not widows which are in
grief and anguish of spirit, but young wanton wenches and Beguines, Nuns, and
naughty packs. He that thus reproved and admonished them, being the general of
their order, who since that time resigned up his place, and forsook his cowle
also, as some affirm. Guil. de sancto Amore, who lived about the year 1256.
says no less; The begging Friars (says he) lead Beguines about the country
with them, which way soever they go: grou^ding their practice upon the place of
S. Paul, Have we not power to lead about a sister, a wife. See here (gentle
Reader) what these silly souls said in those days. But what would they have
said (may we think) if they had heard of such a fry of fornicating Friars, as
has bin mentioned? Moreover, to the end they might more finely flout both God
and men, they have made no bones, (that I may add one thing more touching
their Beguines whom they carried about with them) to forge and frame a religion,
according to which their Monks and Nuns (after they had made some proof of
their continency) lay wallowing together like swine in the filth of their
fornication: in the mean time bearing the world in hand, that though they
companied together in this sort, yet that they were no more tempted with
carnal concupiscence then two logs of wood lying one by the other.

8 And thus much of the pranks played by these Frier-dockers. Now in winding up
of this Chapter I will resolve this one question, Why Monks and Friars are
called Beaux-peres, Ghostly fathers. One considering their doings in the dark,
and insisting upon the word peers, that is, fathers, made these verses in
imitation of a Latin Distich: Or ca Iacobins, Cordeliers,
Augustins, Carmes, bordeliers,
D'ou vient qu'on vous nomme Beaux-peres?
C'est qu'a l'ombre du Crucifix,
Souuent faisons filles ou filz,
En accointant des belles meres.
That is, Ye Iacobins, Carmelites, Cordeliers,
Augustines, and all ye fornicating Friars,
How came ye by the ghostly fathers names?
For under the Crucifixe and high Aulters,
We wont to get us sons and daughters,
In kind acquaintance with our ghostly dames.
But to leave ieasting (for the author of this Hexastich was merrily disposed,
albeit he slaundered them (as we know) but with a matter of truth:) I am of
opinion that Beaux-peres is all one as if a man should say Beaux-vieillards,
Fair old men; which I do the rather think, because (...) or (...) (a word of
the vulgar Greek) seems to be corrupted of (...), that is fair, and (...),
that is an old man, which Epithete argues that they have always lived at their
ease. For we call him a fair old man, who maugre his gray beard, is yet fresh
and flourishing, the fair lineaments of whose face are not wrinkled with
labor and care. And verily Monks, especially mendicants (those at Venice above
the rest) are the fairest old men in all Italy: though there they be only
called peers, fathers, and not Beaux-peres. And it would (no doubt) be as
goodly a sight to see Monks in France, if they would let their beards grow as
Italians do. Howbeit that which has bin spoken, is not that any man should
envy them.

CHAP. XXII. Of the gluttony and drunkenness of the Popish Clergy.
IT is an old saying, Apres la panse, vient la danse, that is, After feasting
follows dancing: and therefore it had bin more convenient (as it may seem)
first to have spoken of gourmandizing and drunkenness (as ringleaders to all
wantonness) according to my former discourse grounded upon sundry ancient
proverbs. Howbeit I have first spoken of lechery, relying upon the authority of
Iuuenal, who says that whoredom is of all other vices the most ancient,
though it be spoken more merrily then truly. First then to speak of the
quality of meats before the quantity, (that is, of lickorishnesse before
gluttony) we need to go no further then to Theological wine and chapter bread.
For when we would express in one word, the choicest wine were even for a King,
we must have recourse to Theological wine. Likewise if the question be
touching the finest and daintiest bread, like unto that which was in the city
of Eresus, for which Mercury thought his pains well bestowed to come down
from heaven to make provision for the gods (if we may believe the Poet
Archestratus;) when all is done we must come to Chapter bread, I mean the
right chapter bread, whence that which bakers sell at Par^s has borrowed the
name but not the goodness, save in some small measure. Well then, this is a
good beginning; for the feast cannot be bad where there is good bread and good
wine. Concerning meats, certain it is, that when we say, Such a one fares like
a Commissioner for flesh and fish, we ought rather to say, He fares like a
Churchman. For, for whom are great Pikes bought at six French crowns a piece,
but for the dainty mouth of our holy mother the Church? For whom (think we)
did rippiers first trot up and down the country, but for our holy mother?
Howbeit, they do not (I must needs confess) eat fish and flesh both at one
meal, (for Physicians counsel them the contrary) but they commonly sit so
long at meat, till they be so crammed with flesh, that they are ready to
burst; much like to Dutchmen, who when they keep their grand gaudeamus, make
conscience to drink a drop of wine, till they be drunk with beer.
Nevertheless there are many now adays who keep their stomachs for fish till
Lent. Howsoever, it is not without cause that we usually say Theological wine
and Abbots cheer, as we may perceive by the description not of a dinner or
supper, but only of a breakfast; and that not of an Abbot, but of a Priour, in
these verses: Un gros Prieur son petit fills baisoit,
Et mignardoit au matin en sa couche:
Tandis rostir sa perdris on faisoit.
Se leave, crache, esme^tit, and se mouche.
La perdris vire: au sell de broque en bouche
La deuora: bien sauoit la science.
Puis quand il eut pris sur sa conscience
Broc de vin blanc, du meilleur qu'on eslise,
Mon Dieu (dit il) done moy patience:
Qu'on a de maux pour seruir saint Eglise?
That is, A ^oggie Priour kissed his pretty son,
And early danced him in his downey bed.
Meanewhile his cook makes due provision,
Of a plumpe Partridge for the purpose fed.
He rises, spits, and sneezeth, blows his nose:
The smoking Partridge down his gullet goes,
Hot from the spit.
Then can he lay on his large conscience,
Quarts of best wine that ever grape did make.
O God (says he) but grant me patience,
What toil we taken for the Churches sake?
What shall we say then to the dinners and suppers of those Prelates that have
a dozen crosier sta^es and as many myters attending on them, if a paltry Priour
have a Partridge to his breakfast? But mark how pitifully he complains of
the hard service he endures under his holy mother the Church? True it is, that
another of the same coat made the like complaint, because they would needs
have him eat partridges, woodcocks, and feasants without orenges. But you are
to know (Sir) that this was a mytered Bishop, whereas the other was but a poor
Priour. But to return to our proverbs, Theological wine and Abbots cheer or
prelates fare. Doubtless, without them we should never have understood this
excellent place in Horace. Nunc est bibendum, nunc pede libero
Pulsanda tellus: nunc saliaribus
Ornare puluinar deorum
Tempus erat dapibus, sodales.
Nor yet this in the same Poet: Absumet haeres Caecuba dignior,
Seruata centum clauibus: and mero
Tinget pauimentum superbo
Pontificum potiore coenis.
And that we stand in need of these proverbs to give us the true meaning of
these verses, hear what the Gloss says upon the latter place word for word,
Mero dicit potiore (id est, meliore) coenis Pontificum, id est, quam quo
Pontifices in coenis suis quae semper sumptuosissim^ fu^rant (vnde nunc
Theologicum dicunt vinum) vsi sunt. Thus we see how greatly commentors upon
Poets are beholding to Divines and Prelates. As for Theological wine, I am not
ignorant that it is greatly controuerted whether it should be called Vinum
Theologale, or vinum Theologalis, per appositione^: for the common report is,
that when they have drunk deep, they agree no better then cats and dogs. But
I will leave the deciding hereof to the judicial Reader: for I am not very
certain whether it be true that they go to fists when they are well tipled, or
not. Notwithstanding I remember that when the Sorbonists kept their conuenticle
on a time with the Bernardines, and that before they had drunk (at leastwise
as they protested, and indeed it was very early in the morning) after they had
willed me, my Attorney and Proctor to avoid the room, for that they were to
consult what answer to make to a letter which my deceased father had obtained
of King Henry (wherein he had enjoined them something which did not please them
very well): we saw them almost ready to go together by the ears, being wearied
and hoarse again with chiding and chafing. Which fact of theirs I durst not
have bin so bold as to have related* had I not had two sufficient witnesses
thereof, much more offended therewith then my self, who before their coming
had some inckling of their civility. And verily if they had plucked one
another by the beard, it should not have bin the first time; for they had done
no more then the Bishop of Caua and the Bishop of Greguetto did once in a
Council. Moreover, these two proverbs call another to mind, viz. the face of an
Abbot, which being an ancient byword, persuades me that Abbots in old time
had fiery faces. Touching the Cardinal of the bottels (or flagons) he may well
think that I did him great wrong if I should here forget him* howbeit I will
not make a custom of it, because it would make me remember the injury and
disgrace which the Italians commonly offer us, in calling us tosse-pots. Now if
these jolly Prelates shall say, that when they make good cheer, their table
talk is nothing but good and honest; Oliver Maillard will tell them they lie in
their throats, and that they talk of nothing but of whoredom and lechery:
for these are his words, Vadatis ad mensam Praelatorum vel Dominorum magnatum,
semper loquuntur de luxuria, vel aliquibus detrahunt, and ille qui vilius
loquitun, dicitur melior.

2 But here we are to answer an objection which might happily be made against
that which has bin said: for some may say that it is not unlike but that
Cha^nons, Priours, Abbots, and other the Popes gross gorbellies should make
good cheer; and that they might well be accounted stark fools if they did not
thus pleasantly pass away the time, seeing that all the trauail they take, and
suite which they make for the obtaining of benefices and Ecclesiastical
promotions, is for no other end. As we read of one who before he was Pope, was
the most crouching submisse Cardinal that ever was lodged in an oven: for his
manner was to eat upon a net, as it were in way of devout humility; but after
he had obtained the Popedom he commanded them to take away the net, saying,
he had caught that which he fished for. But as for such a lurry and rabble of
poor farthing Friars, who have neither rent nor revenue, nor a foot of land
to live upon, who are therefore called pedlars of relikes, because they live
only upon the alms of well disposed persons and granmercies: and those who
are called Mendicants, that is, begging Friars, what probability is there they
should have wherewith to make good cheer? The objection (me thinks) is easily
answered, if we call to mind the common saying, There is no life to the beggars
when they have laid all their cantels together. But howsoever the mystery of
that secret stand, it is not without cause that we say, he is a friar, as who
should say, he is a good fellow and a bon companion, who minds nothing but
merrily to pass away the time. Neither is it without cause that we say, He is
as fat as a Monk, of which I have already spoken. Howb^it, we use (I confess)
this word AS in our proverbs, as when we say, As fat as a hog, or As fat as a
pig. And that there is indeed some correspondence, analogy or hidden sympathy
between swine and Friars, (taking Friars in puris naturalibus) their good S.
Anthony has well declared, who being a swineheard in his life time, would
needs at his death take upon him the charge of a heard of Friars: (though they
who run up and down the country, crying, Have you any thing to bestow upon
my Lord S. Anthonies swine, make him a very swineheard indeed: and as his
Legend says he was in his days an Archimandrite or governor of Monks:)
witness the Epigramme ensuing: Diceris Antoni porcos pauisse subulcus,
Viuus: adhuc Monachos lumine cassus alis.
Par stupor ingenij est, ventrisque abdomen vtrisque:
Sorde pari gaudent, ingluuieque pari.
Nec minus hoc brutum genus est, mutumve suillo,
Nec minus insipidum, nec minus illepidum.
Caetera conueniunt, sed non leuis error in vno est,
Debucrat Monachis glans cibus esse tuis.
Which one has thus turned, Once fedst thou, Anthony, an heard of swine,
And now an heard of Monks thou feedest still;
For wit, and gut, alike both charges bin:
Both louen filth alike: both like to fill
Their greedy paunch alike. Nor was that kind
More beastly, sottish, swinish, then this last.
All else agrees: one fault I only find,
Thou feedest not thy Monks with oken mast.
Another Scot also made a Latin Epigram, wherein he makes some doubt whether
the swineheard and guardian of Friars be the same S. Anthony or not: but in the
end he resolves the case thus: Credibile est Circen mutasse potentibus herbis,
In Monachosque sues, inque sues Monachos.
That is, It Is like that Circe by her spells divine,
Has turned swine to Monks, and Monks to swine.
But to search no further for more testimonies, let us content our selves with
one of their own, comprised in these goodly verses, Sanctus Dominicus sit
nobis semper amicus,
Cui canimus nostro iugiter praeconia rostro,
De cordis venis, siccatis ante lagenis.
Ergo tuas lauds si tu nos pangere gaudes,
Tempore paschali, fac ne potu puteali
Conueniat vti: quod si fit, vndique muti
Semper erunt fratres qui non curant nisi ventres.
See here (gentle Reader) the testimonies which themselves give of their
Sardanaple-like sobriety. For doubtless it cannot be but that these verses
were made either by a Friar speaking in sober sadness without hypocrisy, or
by one into whose body some Friars soul entered, causing him to speak so Friar
like. At leastwise this testimony agrees with it excellent well: O Monachi,
vestri stomachi sunt amphora Bacchi:
Vos estis (Deus est testis) teterrima pest^s.


3 As for those silly souls the singlesoled priests which profess not so
austere and strict a life, being only Masse-mongers by their occupation, they
have great reason (questionless) to drink of none but of the best. And
therefore I hold a certain Sir John (a gentleman's chaplain) excused, who
^^siring the Butler to give him of the best wine, but being served with the
worst, took this cast of his office so to heart (thinking it so great a
disparagement and so heinous an indignity) that when he perceived him on a
time at Mass, he grew into such a mad mood that he lost his voice, he
gentleman on the other side being in great have, and desiring only a hunting
the Mass (because his horses stood ready for him at the Church gate) fell
into a pelting chafe by reason of so long a pause, seeing Sir John protracted
that which he desired might have bin abridged. But in the end he was glad to
send his page to ask him what fly had so suddenly stung him. Sir John
answered that there was one in the company that was excommunicate, which
hindered his proceeding: and having told the lacky (sent unto him the second
time to know the party) that it was his butler, he gentleman was easily
persuaded to send him away: which done, he went on roundly with the Mass.
Whereupon the poor Butler had his absolution, yet upon condition that he
should not fail to give Sir John of the same wine that his master and mistress
drank of. Now the reasons for which I say they will be sure to drink of none
but of the best, are these. First, because it preuents crudities, which might
make them slauer or sniuell whilst they are deep in their devotion. Secondly,
for that devotion is more ardent in a hot stomach then in a cold. Thirdly,
because they are about to sing: for this they take from the Poets (called in
Greek (...), which properly signifies chanters or singers) and therein they
follow their opinion, which has bin such in all ages, that a man cannot sing
worth a button, except he have first drunk deep and that of the best. But some
may happily say, that by this means they are in danger to be drunk. And what
though they drink till they be drunk, so they do it for a good intent? For if
it be no hurt to say, hoc est nasum meum, in stead of hoc est corpus meum, so
it be done cum intention consecrandi: And if it be no hurt to cast a child
into a well, so it be done cum intention baptizandi, as some Glosses affirm;
what great matter is it if they drink themselves drunk cum intention
missificandi? And therefore they had reason to bear with a poor Curate near
to Fere in Tartenois, who intending pleasantly to sing his Mass, and to
sacrifice his breaden god the next morning, had so merrily sacrificed to God
Bacchus the evening before, that whereas he should have baptized a child, he
administered extreme unction. In like manner he is to be excused, who having
taken his preparatiues over evening, when all men cry (as the manner is) The
King drinks; chanting his Mass the next morning, fell asleep in his
memento: and when he awoke, added with a loud voice, The King drinks. Howbeit
the Priest of S. Mary in Paris, who falling asleep in his memento, had his
challice and plattin stolen by one which help him to say Mass^; and awaking
ran into the street, crying a thief, a thief, was laughed at as a fond
fool, not without cause: for he should first have agreed with him, whose help
he desired in mumbling over his Mass. But it is to be noted, that he fell
asleep (as the rest did) through the great deuoire he had to prepare himself
to sing well.

4 And since I have proceeded thus far in speaking of the jolly gaudeamus of
these Churchmen: I will add one word more in the behalf of these poor
fiue-farthing sacrificing Massemonging priests, not for any great good will I
bear them, but for pity and compassion which I take upon them, viz. that if
they knew how to plead their own cause, they might show that they have great
wrong done them, in that they are cut so short of their allowance, and have
such small pittances, in comparison of Priours, Abbots, and the rest of that
rabble. For if the sacrifice which they daily offer, be like unto that which
the Priests (called Salij) instituted by Numa Pompilius celebrated, (as the
author of the book entitled A brief collection of sacred signs, sacrifices
and sacraments, both learnedly and soundly proves) what reason is there that
they who perform the office of the Salij, should not have Saliares dapes, but
should leave them to those which perform the duty but once in the year? But
I will leave them to plead their own cause.

CHAP. XXIII. Of thefts and robber is committed by the Popish Clergy.
IF I should diue deep into this argument* I should but plunge my self into a
bottomless gulf. For if it have bin an old and ancient saying, The Church
spoileth both quick and dead: and if the devices of pilling and polling have
ever since increased, what store (may we think) must there needs be at this
day? Now concerning great and notorious thieves, who are so far from hiding
their heads, that they glory and take a pride in robbing and spoiling, and
exposing their robberies to the view of the world, my purpose is not to entreat
at this present, but only of Priests and Monks, who being as poor as Irus,
notwithstanding fare like Lucullus. For if the Egyptians and Solon also since
their time (as Herodotus tells us) having enacted a law, that every man
should show what trade he followed, and what means he had to live, should
allege no other reason but this, that he which spent freely, having neither
rents nor revenues, nor any means to earne a penny, nor any to maintain him,
must of necessity be a thief; what would our Mendicants (trow we) say, if they
should be thus examined? For if they have not a foot of land, as they profess
they have not, (for otherwise they should do ill to beg) and if they know not
how to get their living; whereon then do they live? nay, not only live, but
fare so like Epicures? If they shall answer, that they live upon the alms of
well disposed people; that is clean contrary to the complaint which they
commonly make, that men's charity toward them is not only cooled, but even as
cold as ice. If they shall say, that they live upon borrowing, who will believe
them? For all men know, that to lend to those who have nothing to pay, is all
one with giving, according to the common saying, Where there is nothing to be
had, the King loses his right. Herein therefore I appeal to their own
consciences, what means they have had now of late time (since they began to
complain of the want of charity) to make their kitchins hot. But because I
should stay too long, if I should hear their confession in that particular, I
will undertake the matter, and answer for them my self, or rather rehearse some
of their subtle devices, which shall serve in stead of an answer. Who knows
not then, that they have holden the world in such servitude, as that they have
violently taken not only from the rich, but also from the poor, either all or
the greatest part of that which their children should have inherited? Or who
can be ignorant that the reason of the tragedy acted by the spirit of Orleans,
was, for that these ravens saw they had lost the prey which they thought they
had seized upon? And doubtless it was a great good hap the matter should be so
well handled, that it could be got out of their clouches. For when they came to
shriue silly souls that lay at the point of death, their manner was to put
them in no other hope of being saved, but by making S. Francis, S. Dominick, or
some other Saint (patron of the Order that the Confessor was of) their heirs.
Nay, they were so cunning in bewitching the consciences of those whom they had
under benedicite, that they did not only make them give the moitie or two
thirds of their goods, which their wives and children should have enjoyed; but
(in case their children would not become Friars of the order of S. Francis, S.
Dominick, or some such sweet Saint) these jolly Saints knew what they would
have. So that if children after the decease of their parents, refused to become
Monks, those holy Saints would take upon them to be their heirs, defeating
them of all. Witness men's wills and testaments which are to be seen at this
day. But this is a far fouler matter, in that they made such have many times,
that they would not tarry for them whom they held thus ensnared, until they were
near their end, but by subtle means made them undress themselves before they
went to bed.

2 For what greater or more cruel theft and robbery, nay what more cruel
rapine and ravening can be imagined, then that which they call the Croysado?
Did ever thieves, which set their daggers to the throats of passengers to make
them deliver their purses, use such robbery as the supposts of the Croysado?
For doubtless poor men who have never a cross in the world to bless
themselves withal, are in no danger of thieves, according to that of the Poet,
Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator: whereas a poor man, who is made to
believe that if he give such or such a sum of money, himself, his father,
mother and children shall be saved; and in case he give nothing, all shall be
damned, is in far worse case then if he fell among thieves? For if he have no
money to give, rather then fail he will pawn himself to the Sarracens. And
most certain it is, that many poor people have not only pawned, but even
sold their souls outright to the devil, in getting money by unlawful means,
whereas they were in good hope by this means to deliver themselves out of his
paws. And as true likewise is it, that they have long since proclaimed to the
world, that they had power and authority to sell even heaven it self:
(witness the Latin verses in S. Steuens Church in Bourges, written upon a
pillar in tables of stone, beginning thus, Hic des deuote: coelestibus associo
te.) Howbeit they enforced none to give money for it, as they did in the time of
the Croysado. For confirmation and authorizing whereof, these pelting Preachers
alleged many tickling texts to this purpose, not taken out of the Bible, but
out of certain hypocritical Friars: interlacing therewith such fond
fooleries, that it is almost impossible posterity should believe the^. One
amongst the rest is reported of a ghostly father, who preaching at Bordeaux,
avouched that when any money was given for the dead, their souls in purgatory
hearing the sound of the money falling into the basin or box, crying, ting,
ting, began to laugh out heartily, and say, ha, ha, ha; hi, hi, hi.

3 Besides, they have many subtle conueyances equipollent to robberies, yea
some worse then robberies: albeit they cease not to commit other qualified
thefts. For instance whereof, one at Casal (about ten years ago) finding a
purse with three hundred French crowns in it, revealed it in his confession to
a Friar; who told him that in conscience he ought not to keep it, but give it
to a third person, till such time as the owner should enquire after it. But the
false Friar handled the matter so cunningly, that in the end himself was the
third man. Not long after came the owner of the purse, repairing to him that
found it; who sent him to the Friar who had the keeping of it. But he who had
before desired only to be the keeper, would now needs be the owner, and so
was, (for all that the deceased Monsieur Brissac could do, being then the Kings
Lieutenant of Piemont) seeing there was none to depose or witness against him,
but he that gave it him. And what should we call that trick of conueyance
which a Frier-docker (one of those which asked if they had any thing to give to
Saint Anthonies pigs*) played with a butchers wife of Calabria, when for two
acornes which he gave to two of her swine, he carried away a whole piece of
linen cloth? But I will reserve this narration to another place, where I
intend to speak of counterfeit miracles; contenting my self for this present
with one other theft, yet such a one as cannot easily be sampled: so that if we
were to compare Ecclesiastical thieves (if I may so speak) with secular, the
Ecclesiastical for this alone would bear away the bell. For though in old
time there was great talk of such as went to rob dead men's tombs (called in
Greek (...), as a man would say, tombe-diggers,) yet of late time they (at
leastwise the seculars) have bin content to rob the living only. But the
Monks of the Abbey of Bourgmoyen at Bloys have given evident proof, that they
would not yield an inch to their ancestors herein, when they dug up a
woman's corpse interred in their church, to rob the coffin of the lead wherein it
was wrapped. Lo here how these false Friars verify the common saying, The
Church takes both of quick and dead, not only in the hid and mystical, but
in the literal sense also.

4 As for great Ecclesiastical thieves, that is a case by it self, which
touches their head principally, in such sort, that any scabby Monk or
fiuefarthing Friar reproved by him for such a legerdemaine, may answer him as
the pirate answered Alexander the great: for the theft which their holy father
(as they call him) commits under the color of Constantines donation, as
fare exceeds the petty larrecine and pilfering practiced by his imps, as
Alexanders robberies the pirates or Sea-rouers. And therefore there is no reason
why such as are chief in place next to this Arch-theefe, should busy
themselves about pety thefts not beseeming their greatness. And hereof
(doubtless) they have great consideration (as experience shows): for the
least which they commit, is the spoiling of Churches of their relikes; I mean
not dead men's bones, but gold and silver. For there was a pamphlet lately
published (entitled Harengua) wherein is declared how certain Iacobins
summoned a great Cardinal to restore unto them their crown of gold.

5 But in speaking before of the Croysado, I forgot a Franciscan of Millaine,
called Sampson, who by that means had scraped together an hundred and twenty
thousand ducats, which he offered for the Popedom.

CHAP. XXIIII. Of man-slaughters and murders committed by the Popish Clergy.
I Will begin this Chapter with the story which I promised to relate when I
spoke of the Franciscan, whose inordinate lust cost three persons their lives,
one man and two women. For then I promised to relate a far more horrible fact
committed by a Friar of the same order, who to compass his mischievous purpose
(which was to have his pleasure of a gentlewoman of the house) committed four
murders with his own hands. The story is this: In the reign of the Emperor
Maximilian the first, there was within his dominions in Flanders a very famous
Covent of Franciscans, near to which dwelt a gentleman who exceedingly
affected the Monks of the Covent, and was very beneficial unto them, hoping by
that means to be made partaker of their good works, fasts, and prayers. Among
the rest there was a tall proper Franciscan, whom the gentleman had made choice
of to be his Confessor, and had given him full power and authority over all
his household: whose mind was so inflamed with the beams of his wives beauty,
that he was almost beside himself. And purposing on a time to come to the
period of his intended purpose, he went all alone to the gentleman's house, and
finding him not at home, asked the gentlewoman whither he was gone? She
answered, that he was gone to see certain lands of his, and meant to stay
abroad two or three days; adding withal, that if he had any business with
him, she would dispatch a messenger after him. He answered that it should not
need, and began to walk up and down the house as one that had some weighty
matter in hand: which the gentlewoman noted, and perceiving by his countenance
that he was mal content, she sent one of her maids unto him to know if he
wanted any thing. The ghostly father (who was walking up and down the court)
answered that he did, and thereupon leading her into a corner, took a dagger
out of his sleeue and thrust it into her throat. In the mean time one of the
gentleman's tenants came on horseback into the court, bringing with him the
rent of his farm: and he was no sooner lighted, but he saluted the Franciscan;
who embracing him in his arms, stabbed him behind with his dagger, as he had
done the maid, and having so done locked up the castle gate. The gentlewoman
wondering that her maid stayed so long sent another to know the reason why she
made no greater have: who was no sooner gone down into the court, but the
Friar took her aside into an odd corner, and served her as he had done the
former. Then perceiving that there was none left in the house but the
gentlewoman and himself* he went unto her and told her that he had bin long in
love with her* and that the time was come that she must needs yield unto him.
She (who never mistrusted any such thing) answered in this sort* Father, I
persuade my self, that if I were so leudly disposed* you would throw the first
stone at me* To whom the Friar replied* Come down into the court, and you
shall see what I have done. Now when she saw her maids and her tenant lying
slain before her eyes, she was so aghast, and stricken with such astonishment,
as if Perseus with his Gorgons head had transformed her into a stone, and was
not able to speak a word. But forthwith this wicked wretch (who meant to have
his pleasure of her more then once, and therefore would not force her) said,
Mistress be not afraid, for you are in his hands who of all men in the world
loves you best. At which words he put off his long habit, under which he had a
shorter, which he offered her, and withal told her that if she refused it, he
would send her packing to Pluto with those whom she saw lying before her eyes.
The gentlewoman more like a dead then a living creature, determined to make as
though she would obey him, both hoping to save her life, and to protract the
time, in hope her husband would come home: and so at the Friars command she
undressed her head, making as little have as she could. But in the end having
her hair hanging loose about her ears, the Friar (not respecting how goodly
and fair it was) hastily cut it off, and having so done, caused her to strip
her self unto her smock, and arrayed her with the short habit which he had
about him, and after put on his other again; and so departed thence with all
speed possible, carrying with him his young nouice whom he had so long desired.
But by Gods providence the gentleman her husband having dispatched his
business sooner then he thought, returned homewards the same way the
Franciscan went with his wife. Now when the Friar perceived him a far off, he
said to the gentlewoman, See, yonder comes your husband, and I know that if you
look upon him he will rescue you out of my hands; wherefore go on before me,
and see that you turn not your face toward him; for if you give him but the
least sign, I will cut your throat before ever he can help you. At these
words the gentleman drew near, and asked him from whence he came? Sir (quoth
he) from your house, where I left my mistress your wife in good health,
expecting your coming. The gentleman went on, not perceiving his wife. Howbeit
his man (who was wont to entertain the Friars fellow called Friar John) began
to call to her, thinking it had bin Friar John. The poor gentlewoman (who
durst not once turn her head aside toward her husband) answered not a word:
whereupon he crossed the way to look her in the face; where she speaking not a
word, gave him a twinch with a weeping eye. He then returning back to his
master, said, Sir, as I crossed the way I marked the Friars fellow, who
(questionless) is not Friar John, but much resembles my mistress your wife, who
looked very rufully upon me. Tush (quoth the gentleman) thou talkest like a
fool: and made no more of it. But his servant persisting in his opinion,
entreated him to give him leave to go after them, and to stay a little to see
whether he mistook himself or not. At his importunate entreaty the gentleman
stayed, to see what tidings he would bring. Now when the Franciscan heard the
man behind him calling for Friar John (doubting that the gentlewoman was
discried) he came running upon him, and with a long pike staff which he
carried, took him such a blow under the short ribs, that he struck him off
his horse to the ground, and presently falling upon him, cut his throat. The
gentleman seeing his man a far off falling down, thinking that he had fallen
by some mischance, went back to help him up: whom the Friar had no sooner
espied, but he struck him with his pike staff, as he had done his man, and
bearing him down, fell upon him. But the gentleman (being lusty and strong)
clasped his arms so fast about him, that he could neither stab nor hurt him,
causing withal his dagger to fall out of his hand: which his wife forthwith
took up, and gave to her husband, holding him down by the cowle with all her
might, whilst her husband stabbed him in diverse places, until he cried him
mercy, and confessed all his villainy. The gentleman being loath to kill him,
sent his wife home to call some of his men, who came running thither in all
have, and taking up the Franciscan, brought him to the gentleman's house, from
whence he was carried to the Emperors Deputy in Flanders, to whom he confessed
this his notorious and felonious fact. Where it was also found partly by his
own confession, partly by proof and information given to the commissioners
appointed for that purpose, that a number of gentlewomen and other beautiful
maids had bin conveyed into that monastery, after the same manner that this
Franciscan would have carried her away. Whereupon after that the women (detained
by them in the monastery) were had out, both they and the Covent were burned
together for a monument and example to all posterity.

2 After this foul fact committed by this Monk, let us hear how a Priest of
Limoges (about eleven years ago) committed sundry murders one in the neck of
another. A gentleman of Lymosin, Lord of S. John of Ligoures (kinsman to the
Marshall S. Andrew) having committed incest with his wives mother, and having
had children by her, declared it to a shaueling in way of confession. Whereupon
the Priest (who was a false coiner) took occasion to persuade him (as having
him in his lurch and at his lure, by this his confession) to play the knave as
he had done, and to become a false coyner with him. Now after they had followed
this occupation for a time, the Priest perceiving that the gentleman was still
troubled in conscience with his incest (notwithstanding he had sundry times
absolved him) and that he affected his wives mother more then his wife,
persuaded him, that the mother was rather his wife then the daughter, and
therefore that his marriage, his children and all were accursed. Whereupon he
undertook to dispatch them out of the way, whilst the gentleman was absent,
yet not without his consent. For coming one night (as his manner was) into the
Castle (with certain cruel cut-throates which he had brought with him) he went
directly to the chamber where the gentlewomen lay, and murdered them all in
their beds; as also two young children, one of which called him by his name, and
held up his hands unto him, as the Priest executed since in France, and the
gentleman at Lauzanne, confessed at their deaths. Neither herewith content,
with his crew of cut-throate companions he massacred the rest that remained in
the house, and laying all the dead bodies together in a chamber, set the Castle
on fire, thinking by that means to cover the murder. But (as God would)
neither the bodies nor the chamber wherein they were, took fire, and so the
murder was detected. Whereupon the gentleman knowing not well what course to
take, nor which way to turn himself, fled into Sauoye, where passing by
Geneua he was discried, and from thence pursued and apprehended at Lauzanne,
where he was executed according to law, acknowledging his offense and Gods
great mercy toward him, in bringing him by this chastisement home to himself.
This is the history, as I heard it credibly reported by those that saw him
arraigned and executed: which albeit I have of purpose abridged (as I have done
also the rest) yet I could not omit one circumstance, how that even then when
the child called him by his name, and held up his hands unto him (as children
are wont to do, smiling on those they look upon) he did most cruelly murder
him. And it was not without cause that God would have this circumstance freely
confessed both by the Priest and the gentleman, which otherwise would never
have bin suspected. For doubtless it does much aggrauate, and as it were
double and treble his offense, especially if we compare it with the fact of
heathen men, as of those ten whom Herodotus mentions in his fifth book, who
being sent to murder a newborn babe, were so moved with pity when the child
smiled upon them, that their hearts relented, and (as it were) melted within
them. Howbeit, there are so many circumstances to be considered in this
abhomninable fact, that it is hard to say where a man should especially insist.

3 But because the naming of Lauzanne (where this execution was done) puts me
in mind of Geneua adjoining, where another murdering Priest was executed, I
will here relate that story. A certain Priest in Foussigny called Dom John
(under the dominion of Thiez then governor of Geneua) having boared out his
brothers eyes with an awle as he was asleep, and obtained his pardon of the
then Bishop of Geneua: not long after he committed him to a gossip of his, to
the end he might drown him, by casting him down from a bridge into the water,
under color of bringing him to Chambery to S. Suayre, a Saint then in great
request. Which thing the assassin knowing not how to effect, whilst he was in
his journey (seeing he had not the heart to commit such a cruel fact,) not
long after under color as though he would bring him to S. Claude, he carried
him in the night into a barn, where he with one of his companions murdered
him: and having so done, cast him into a swift stream, where he was found by a
woman which sought after a strayed calfe. VVhereupon the Priest was apprehended
in his bed with his whore, and brought to Geneua, where his hand was first cut
off, and after that his head; having before confessed the fact, and given no
other reason of the hatred which he bore him, but only because he was a great
spender. It is further reported, that this kind Kit having pricked his
brothers eyes with a nawle, and perceiving that he was not stone blind, but
that he could see a little; boared them the second time with a wooden pin.
This punishment was inflicted upon this malefactor shortly after the
reformation of religion in the said city.

4 But among other murdering Priests, I may not omit one, of whom mention is
made in the French Chronicles, who escaped not so scot-free as the former. In
the year 1530. the nineteenth of April, a certain Sir John coming to Autuns
College in Paris, right over against Saint Andrew des Ars, to visit the
Parson of the place where he was Curate, killed his man in the night, and after
cut the Parsons throat. For which murder he was degraded in the Court of our
Ladies Church, the same year, the fourth of May: and being apparelled in a
fools coat, was sent to a worshipful gentleman, one Master John Morin (then
Judge of criminal causes) by whom he was sentenced to have his hand cut off,
and it together with the faulcheon wherewith he had committed the murder, to
be nailed to a post before the said College, and after to be burned quick
before the town house. This sentence being given in open Court, was put in
execution the fifth day of the said month.

5 But give me leave to speak a word or two more concerning Paris: for there
(no doubt) we shall find sundry other examples of murders committed by
Clergymen, and namely by Priests. But for this present I will insist in one
only, which was discovered and punished by order of law, as follows. In an
Inn at Soyssons called The great head, the good man of the house his daughter
played a slippery trick with one, and was delivered of a daughter. Her father,
who could never abide the child, because it put him in mind of his daughters
shameful fact, sent her to Paris to a Sempster to learn to sow. And coming
afterward to Paris himself, he fell in acquaintance with a priest called M.
Hector, a bakers son, borne at Noyon; to whom he declared that he had a
daughter about seven or eight years of age, whom he would gladly have bestowed
in a monastery or some other place, he cared not where, nor how, so that he
might never hear of her again; telling him, that for the effecting hereof he
could be content to give an hundred crowns. The Priest being greedy of gain,
undertook the matter, and causing the girl to be brought unto him, together
with the money which they were agreed upon, he took his leave of him, and
carried her home to his house. Whither he was no sooner come, but he cut her
throat* and having so done, carried the corpse into the churchyard of S.
Nicholas in the fields, where having cast it among certain nettles, he walked
up and down as though he had bin praying on his Portuise. Shortly after came a
Sexten, and as he was digging a grave, the Priest came unto him, and told him
that he had seen a pitiful spectacle, to wit, a young maid having her throat
cut, and cast among the nettles; and desired him for avoiding of offense, to
bury her, promising to give him a teston for his pains. The Sexten refused his
offer, and further told him, that he would inform the Court thereof: which he
did; (the Priest in the mean time flying to Noyon.) The Court having
intelligence hereof, caused the corpse to be carried to a place called Chastelet,
there to be exposed to the open view: whither (as God would) the Sempster (her
old mistress) came to see her: who knowing her well, declared to the Court how an
Inne-keeper of Soyssons (her grandfather) had committed her to the custody of
one M. Hector a Priest. The Sexten also informed the Court of the conference
which had passed between M. Hector and him. The Court taking notice of these
informations, sent his brother in law to prison, hoping by that means to
learn what was become of him, (seeing he resorted often to his house.) Now
during the time of his imprisonment, (they daily pressing him with
interrogatories, to the end they might learn what was become of his brother,
albeit he knew nothing) it fortuned that the Priest came to S. Denis near to
Paris; from whence he sent a messenger to his brother in law (never dreaming of
his imprisonment) to request him to come to him, and to inform him what rumor
went of him. Where the messenger coming to the prisoners wife (the Priests
sister) was presently apprehended and brought before the Court; and having told
them where M. Hector was, they sent a warrant for his apprehension. Where,
after he had confessed the fact, he was condemned by the Court of Chastelet to
be degraded, to have his hand cut off, to be broken upon the wheel, and after
to be burned. But he appealed to the high Court of Parliament at Paris, which
mitigating the sentence, condemned him only to be degraded, to have his hand
cut off, to be hanged, and after to be burned. This tragical event happened
about fourteen years ago. But I may not forget a jest of his: for having his
hand cut off, and meeting with one of his acquaintance, as he was going to the
place of execution, he said, Auise un peu, Herry men ami, ie ne saurai peu
canter Mess; on m'a coupe vne main: That is, See here friend Harry, I can say
Mass no more; they have cut off my hand. The man to whom I am beholding for
this story, dwelt in the same town with this malefactor, and told me that he
heard him sing his first Mass, with all the ceremonies and solemnities thereto
belonging.

6 There was also a Priest at Orleans (about 37. years ago) who being jealous
of a whore which he kept, brought her into a tavern, where leading her aside
as though he would have dallied with her, he cast her on a bed, and with a
razor (which he had in his sleeue) cut her throat. For which murder he was
only condemned to perpetual prison, as it was told me by a famous lawyer, who
was then a student in the same city.

7 As for cruelties (though no murder be void of cruelty) where can we hear
of a greater then that which is commonly practiced by Monks, (as themselves
confess) I mean their usual manner of pulling men over the perch in pace?
True it is indeed, they utterly renounce and disclaim this word cruelty: for
they will not grant that it is cruelty to send men into another world in pace.
But if they deny it to be cruelty to murder a man in pace, they must needs
deny that to die of hunger and thirst is a cruel death: which is ^ p^^gnant to
common sense. But leaving this dispute, let us come to other notorious
cruelties, and among the rest to a kind of torment which laymen among
Christians would never have inflicted upon Pagans or infidels, but would have
left it for Barbarians, as being too barbarous to be practiced by them. It is
that which Plutarch (in the life of Artaxerxes) calls Scapheusis: to which
this is not unlike which I am about to relate. The last Duke of Lymbourgh being
dead without issue, the Princes who were next heirs (as being nearest of
blood) viz. the Duke of Brabant and the Earl of Guelderland waged war one
against another, for the Dukedom. In the end the Duke of Brabant got the
victory: where the Bishop of Collen (who had aided the Earl of Guelderland)
was taken prisoner, and committed to the custody of the Earl of Mount in
Haynoult, where he continued for the space of seven years, till he had agreed
to all such articles as were demanded of him. Being set at liberty at the
last, he besought the Earl of Mount to bear him company to Tuits (a town
standing upon Rheyne right over against Collen) whereunto the Earl easily
condescended. Now as they were going over a bridge which stood upon the river,
an ambush of horsemen (which by the Bishops appointment lay hard by) rushed out
suddenly upon the Earl mistrusting no such matter: and thus he seized upon
him, and kept him in perpetual prison: and to the end he might give him more
kind entertainment, caused an iron cage to be made, which in summer was
anointed over with honey and set in the open Sun, lodging the poor Earl
therein, there to be assaulted by flies (you may well imagine how.) Consider
here (gentle Reader) this Bishops cruelty (joined with treason) coming not
much short of the immanity of Busiris and Phalaris. For doubtless of all other
cruelties those are the greatest, which cause men to languish and pine away for
a long time in great anguish.

8 Moreover, we read of two Channons of Collen, who used the like treachery:
for having invited a bailiffe of the town to dinner, called Herman Grin, and
making great show of love and kindness (albeit they hated him to the death)
they led him out to see a Lion, (which they kept in honor of their Bishop) whom
they knew to be hunger-bit: and he was no sooner come into the place, but they
shut the door upon him. The man seeing himself in this danger, plucked up a
good heart, and winding his cloak about his left arm, thrust it into the
Lions mouth as he came rushing upon him, and with his right hand thrust his
rapier into his belly, and slew him.

9 But to return to Prelates: we read how one Henry Archbishop of Collen most
cruelly tormented Earl Frederick: for having broken his arms, legs, thighs,
back and neck upon the wheel, he caused him to finish the rest of his life in
lingering pain, exposing him to the crows.

10 But if any desire to hear of a cruelty not proceeding from revenge, but
committed in a merriment against such as never gave the least offense: this it
is. In the reign of the Emperor Otho the great, Hatto Bishop of Ments, took
such pity upon the poor in the time of a great dearth, that he got a
multitude of them together into a barn, and burned them all therein; saying
that they differed nothing from rats which devoured corn, and were good for
nothing. But observe the fearful, terrible, and horrible judgment of God
which befell him whilst he was yet living: for he sent great troops of rats,
which after they had grievously tormented him, ate him up quick. And it little
auailed him to go up to the top of his high tower to save himself: for the
rats hunting him from place to place, pursued him thither also; whereupon it is
called The rats tower unto this day. And yet notwithstanding this fearful
example, Heribert Archbishop of Collen, had a brother who used the poor after
the same manner, in the time of a dearth.

11 But what shall we say of a Iacobine who poisoned the Emperor Henry the
seventh with his breaden God, which he gave him in the consecrated host? What
will the Friars Devil do (trow we) if their God be so dangerous to deal with?
Upon which argument I writ this sporting A staff of eight verses.
huictain. Les Payens ne vouloyent mettre au nombre des Dieux
Ceux qui au genre humain estoyent pernicieux.
Si le Dieu de paste est un Dieu qui empoisonne,
(Don't l'Empereur Henri tesmoignage nous done)
Que diroyent les Payens de ces gentiles Docteurs,
Qui les hommes ont fait de lui adorateurs?
Car si leur Dieu ne fait de meurtrir conscience,
Enter leur Diable and Dieu quelle est la difference?
That is, Never did Pagans mong'st their Gods recite,
Who ever mortal wight had ill bestead:
If then the God of bread can poison hide,
As has been tried by Henry to his bane:
What would our Pagans feign, that knew of yore
How they do it adore with bended knee?
For if their God be free to work such evil,
What difference is betwixt their God and Devil?
If any shall happily object, that these savage cruelties were not committed in
these days, but long before. I answer, that seeing the world has ever grown
worse and worse, and the Clergy rather then the Laity (as the three Preachers
so often before alleged do sufficiently testify) those cruelties may well be
accounted but small and tolerable in comparison. But if any be incredulous or
hard of belief, he may read what Cannibal-like cruelties certain Monks and
Popish prelates have exercised of late against such as would not embrace the
Roman religion, and how they handled them when once they came within their
walk. As among the rest, the history of John de Roma a Iacobine Friar, one of
the holy house of Spain, a persecutor of the poor Christians of Merindol and
Cabriere, who never left beating his brains, how he might invent new torments
to inflict upon these poor people and their confederates: one of which was to
fill boots with boiling grease, and to pull them on the legs of those whom he
was to examine, that the extremity of pain might so distract them, as that
they might make no pertinent answer to any demand. And we are not to wonder
how they could play the bloody butchers, and exercise their tyranny upon these
silly souls, seeing they usurped almost a sovereign power and princely
authority over them. Not to go far back, nor far off for examples, we read
how the said Friar under color of his commission (as being one of the
Inquisition) was both accuser, party, and Judge; and how he carried with him
through Prouence a number of vile varlets well appointed; in all places where
ever he came (especially in country towns) breaking open chests and trunks,
and stealing thence gold and silver, and what else might easily be packed up,
and carried away; pilling and polling those whom he could not otherwise spoil,
either by impositions or amercements, or confiscations of their goods.

12 I was here purposed to have ended this Chapter, but that I remember I have
not spoken of those that imbrue their hands in their own blood, and sacrifice
themselves to their own shame: which I had rather here add (though somewhat
out of order) then altogether to omit them. Howbeit my meaning is not to busy
my self with the examples of Clergymen who have laid violent hands upon
themselves, therewith to parallele the examples of Laymen who have bin moved to
do the like. I will only insist upon one, which is proper unto them quarto
modo (as Logicians speak.) For all the former examples of felons de se, are
common as well to the Clergy as to the Laity. But this which I am about to
relate, is peculiar to Cleargy-men, and Laymen have no part therein* being a
murder committed upon a proud conceit which popish priests had of their
merits, that they (forsooth) did as far exceed Laymens merits, as the
pillars in the Church do their shadows. For though Laymen put great confidence
in them, yet they never so relied upon them, as that they would adventure to
cast themselves from the top of a high tower, or into a deep well: which befell
this merit-monger of whom we speak. The story is this. A Monk called Heron,
having lived fifty years in an Ermitage, and strictly observed the rules and
orders of his founder, was so puffed up with pride and vain conceit of
himself, in regard of the merit of his works, that the devil appeared unto him
and tempted him, to take trial of the virtue of the^ by casting himself into a
well; assuring him he should escape without harm. The fond Friar thinking it
had bin an Angel sent unto him from heaven for this end, cast himself into a
well of that depth, that the bottom of it could not be seen; whence being
drawn out again with much ado, they could not persuade him that it was the
devil which appeared unto him and tempted him: and so he died the third day
after, persisting obstinate in this opinion. This story I found in a fragment
of a Latin book (the author whereof is not known) written fair in parchment,
and seems to be of great antiquity, at leastwise of as great as such
Ecclesiastical records may be. But who ever was the author thereof, certain it
is, he was a favorer of the fraternity. For he speaks of them, as being one
of the same order, and gives them brotherly warning to look to themselves. I
will therefore allege the Latin story word for word, as I copied it out of
the said fragment, which (I take it) never came to light before: for otherwise
I would have contented my self to have advertised the Reader thereof. Howbeit
if it have passed the press, I shall do no man wrong but my self, since I have
eased the Reader of so much pain in the copying of it out. Certain of mine
acquaintance to whom I showed it, are of opinion that it is to be found in a
book called Vitae Patrum. DE MORTE HERONIS SENIS.
Heronem post multorum laborem annorum deceptum,
quod non habuit discretionem.

ET vt hanc candem definitionem antiquitus a sancto Antonio and caeteris
patribus promulgatam, recens quoque (sicut promisimus) confirmet exemplum,
recolite id quod nuper gestum, oculorum vestroru^ vidistis obtutibus: senem
videlicet Heronem ante paucos admodum dies illusione Diaboli, a summis ad ima
deiectu^, quem quinquaginta anni^ in hac Eremo commoratum, singulari
districtione rigorem continentiae tenuisse meminimus, and solitudinis secreta
vltra omnes hic commorantes miro feruore sectatum. Hic igitur quo pacto quaue
ratione post tantos labores ab insidiatore illusus, grauissimo corruens lapsu,
cunctos in hac eremo constitutos luctuoso dolor percussit? Nonne quod minus
virtute discretionis possessa, suis definitionibus regi, quam consilijs vel
collationibus fratrum atque institutis maiorum maluit obedire? Siquidem tanto
rigore immutabilem (...) continentiam semper exercuit, and solitudinis
cellaeque ita iugiter secreta sectatus est, vt ab eo participationem in^undi
confraternitate conniuij, ne veneratio quidem dici paschalis aliquando potuerit
obtinere: in qua fratribus cunctis pro anniuersaria solemnitate in Ecclesia
retentatis, solus non poterat aggredi, ne quantulumcunque, perceptione
leguminis parui, a suo videretur proposito relaxasse. Qua praesumptione
deceptus, Angelum Satanae vel^ti Angelum lucis ^um summa veneratione
suscipiens, eiusque praeceptis prono obediens famulatu, semetipsum in puteum,
cuius profunditatem oculorum non attingit intuitus, praecipitem dedit: de
Angeli videlicet sui sponsione non dubitans, qui ^um pro merito virtutum ac
laborum suorum, nequaquam posse firmauerat vlli iam discrimini subiacere. Cuius
rei fidem vt experimento suae sospitatis euidentissime comprobaret, supradicto
se puteo nocte intempesta illusus iniecit: magnum sc. virtutis suae meritum
probaturus cum inde exisset ill^sus. De quo cum pene iam exanguis ingenti
fratrum labor fuisset extractus, vitam die tertia finiturus, quod his deterius
est, ita in deceptionis suae permansit obstinatione, vt ei nec experimentum
quidem mortis suae potuerit persuadere, quod fuisset daemonum calliditate
delusus. Quamobrem pro meritis tantorum laborum and annorum numerositate, qua
in eremo perdurauit, hoc miseratione and humanitate summa ab his qui eius
compatiebantur exitio, vix a Presbytero and Ab^ate Paphnutio potuit obtineri,
vt non inter biothanatous reputatus, etiam memoria and oblatione pausantium
iudicaretur indignus.

And here I thought it not amiss to allege another place out of the same
book, where mention is made of an Abbot, who was in like sort deluded by the
devil, though not so dangerously as the former.

DE ILLVSIONE ABBATIS IOHANNIS.
IN quo etiam Abbatem Iohannem qui * lico commoratur, nouimus nuper illusum.
Nam quum exhausto corpore atque defecto, perceptionem cibi biduano ieiunio
distulisset, accedenti ei ad refectionem die postero, veniens diabolus in
figura Aethiopis tetri, atque ad eius genua prouolutus, Indulge, inquit, mihi,
quod ego tibi hunc laborem indixi. Itaque ille vir tantus and discretionis
ratione perfectus, sub color continentiae incongruenter exercitatus,
intellexit se ab hoc calliditate diaboli circumuentum, talique distentum
^eiunio, vt lassitudinem non necessariam, immo etiam spiritui nocituram,
fatigato corpori superponeret: and paracharaximo scilicet illusus numismatis,
cum in illo very regis imaginem veneratus est, parum discutit an esset legitime
figuratum. Vltima vero obseruatio huius probabilis trapezitae, quam de
inquisitione ponderis esse praediximus, taliter implebitur, si quicquid
gerendum cogitatio nostra suggesserit, omni scrupulo retractantes, atque in
nostri pectoris trutina collocantes, aequilibratione iustissima perpend^mus, an
plenum honestate communi sit, an timore domini sit grave, an integrum sensu,
aut humana ostentatione, aut aliqua nouitatis praesumptione sit leave: an meriti
eius pondus inanis cenodoxiae non iniminuerit, vel adroserit gloria, and sic ea
protinus ad examen publicum trutinantes, id est, ad Prophetarum and Apostolorum
actus, ac testimonia conferentes, vel tanquam integra atque perfecta, and illis
compensantia teneamus, vel tanquam imperfecta, atque damnosa, nec illorum
ponderi consonantia, omni cautione ac diligentia refu^emus.

CHAP. XXV. Of Blasphemies uttered by Popish Prelates.
THe blasphemies of our good Catholics of the Popish Clergy, I here handle
apart from those of the Laity: not intending thereby to honor them, or
thinking it more fitting and beseeming them, but yielding rather to my memory,
which does not always furnish me with fit examples as often as I could wish,
but makes me to attend and wait, whereby I am constrained in the mean time to
entreat of some other argument, whereof I have examples more ready at hand.
But the Reader can lose nothing by the bargain: for the longer my memory
causes me to stay, the more examples it affoordeth me afterward, which I
communicate and impart unto him.

2 But not to dwell too long in the preface, we have here first to note, that
whereas it was said in old time as it were by way of a proverb, He swears
like a gentleman: (for it was thought a thing unbeseeming a base pais^nt to
renounce God, non pertinere ad rurales renu^tiare Deu^, as we heard before out
of Menot) others were wont to say and do even at this day, He swears like a
carter, or he swears like an Abbot, or he swears like a Prelat. But leaving
the discussing of this question to others, (viz. which of all three is grounded
upon best reason) this one thing I will say by the way, that gentlemen and
carters have learned the trick or trade or art of blaspheming of Popish
Prelates and other polshorne Popelings, and not they of them. And I doubt not
but all men of good and sound judgment, and such as are not carried away with
prejudice in regard of partiality or private respect, will iumpe with me in
this opinion. If they shall say that Churchmen have bin indeed masters in
that trade, but that their scholars have excelled them; I easily accord that
in some blasphemy they might far exceed them. But two sort^ of blasphemies
there are, which are proper and peculiar to them alone. For whereas Laymen
blaspheme God but in word only, Churchmen blaspheme him also in deed: for
they both dishonor him by their wicked lives, and tear him in pieces with
their bloody oaths: (for I take the word here in a more general acception
then it is commonly taken, being directed by the Greek Etymology formerly
spoken of.) And though we should but speak of blasphemies in word only, how
many sorts (may we think) are there to be found in the writings of these Sir
John's, of which Laymen never dreamed?

3 First therefore to begin with blasphemies common as well to Laics as
Clericks, uttered in dishonor of God by these swearing swaggerers and fustian
fools, it will not sink into my head, that secular men ever rapped out such
wicked and wild oaths as Churchmen have done, but rather the contrary. How
ever it be, this I am sure of, that though I continued long in Italy (where
above all other countries blasphemy does most fearfully abound) and was often
in place (though sore against my will) where I heard very outrageous and
detestable speeches against our Savior Christ and the blessed Virgin (whom
they handle after a far stranger manner then they do in France,) yet never
heard I such a blasphemy as this, which was uttered by a Priest at Rome, Al
dispetto di quel can che pendeua nella Croce. He had indeed belched out sundry
other before he came to this which he reserved for the last to make up his
mouth withal, as being most horrible of all the rest. And what moved him (may
we think) to break forth into this blasphemy, but a strumpet of his (forsooth)
who had played him a slippery touch, as himself affirmed. As (...) this were
not to play Will Summers to strike his next fellow: that because the curtizan
had angered him, he would revenge himself upon God, and so despite and
villanize him, as neither Turk nor Jew could have done worse. For he further
added a most execrable speech, which I will here omit. As for blasphemies
uttered in cool blood without choler, passion or heat of affection, our good
Catholics of the Romish hierarchy are so far from being indebted to the Laity,
that (except they will be very ungrateful) they must needs acknowledge
themselves much beholding unto the^: for proof whereof, as I have alleged
examples of the blasphemies of the one, so I will here allege some few of the
other. And first I will begin with that which is spoken in way of a proverb,
Weep not, for perhaps it is not true. Which grew (as it is said) upon speech
of one that preached of the passion, who after he had made the poor people
shed tears by the pitiful exclamations which he made upon the cruel death
which our Savior suffered upon the cross* having had the pastime and sport he
looked for, said, Weep not, for perhaps it is not true. And what shall we say
of the ghostly father, who preaching at Tours (about three or four years ago)
said, These wicked Huguenots do utterly renounce the Pope, and say, that we are
only to hold that which Christ has taught: But I tell you, that if Christ and
the Pope should sit here either of them in a chair, and the one of them should
enjoin me one thing, and the other another; I would obey the Pope rather then
Christ. And this agrees well with that which an Italian writes of a
Cardinal, who being sick unto the death, and desirous to be shriuen, when his
confessor told him (upon occasion) that he ought to worship one only God. So I
do (quoth he) and that is the Pope. For seeing that the Pope is God on earth
(and that both are not to be worshipped) I had rather worship him that is
visible, then God who is invisible. His confessor replying again, and telling
him, that the Pope was neither God nor Christ (albeit the simple seduced world
did hold him for his vicar.) How (quoth he) can it be said, that the Pope is
Christ's Vicar? if that were so, Christ should be greater then the Pope. But I
would thou should know, that if he should come in proper person to Rome, the
Pope would not entertain him, except he would submit himself and kiss his
pantoufle. Notwithstanding Pope Julius the third (otherwise called John Maria
de Monte) was content to be called Gods Vicar, when ^he said, that if God was
so angry for an apple, that for it he cast our first father Adam out of
Paradise, then might he (who was his Vicar) well be angry for a Peacock which is
a greater matter (I wisse) then an apple. This he meant of a Peacock served him
in at dinner, which he had commanded should be kept cold for supper, but was
not. For which oversight being in a wonderful chafe, a Cardinal sitting with
him at the table, told him that he ought not to be so angry for such a trifle:
to whom the Pope answered as is aforesaid. The same holy father missing his
dish of porke, which was wont to be one of his standing dishes, (for he loved
porke and peacock exceeding well) when his steward told him, that the Physician
had given order there should be none served in, because it was hurtful for his
health: he would not take this reason for good payment, but began to despite
him whose vicar he boasted himself to be, saying: Porta mi quel mio piatto,
all dispetto di Dio: Fetch me my My dish of meat, ^^^lic^.
Porke in despite of God. In reading of which story, that came to my mind
which I heard reported of Pope Paul the third, how that in procession at Rome,
where the Corpus Christi (as they call it) was solemnly carried before him in
procession, he should say, that if the company which went before staid so long,
they would make him renounce Christ. Whereupon one ran before, and willed them
to march on faster: for his Holiness (says he) is in such a rage by reason of
your long stay, that he is ready to renounce Christ and all the Kirielle.
Consider (gentle Reader) how handsomely these things hang together, that he
which went in solemn procession in honor of the body of Christ (as they would
make us believe) should deny Christ. But they who by the grace of God have
their eyes opened to see such abuses, ought to consider what the Greek proverb
says of such speeches, that Often when the tongue trippeth, it tells the
truth. For (considering the abuse therein committed) were it not better to deny
Christ, then to make him such a morris dancer in a May Game? An example of
this tripping we have in him who said to a Priest, Come and say Mass in an
hundred thousand devils names, for my master is angry. Another Masse-monging
gentleman of Lorraine being angry with his son (who was a Masse-maligner)
said unto him, Get you to Mass in the devils name, to Mass. Whereof his son
took advantage, acknowledging that his father spoke truer then he was aware.
But to return to our blasphemers, we find that the Popes.
Vicars aforesaid made no conscience to appropriate and apply to themselves
(some in earnest, others in sport) those texts of Scripture, wherein he (whose
vicars they pretend themselves to be) speaks of himself. Alexander the fifth
lying on his death bed, used the same words to those that stood about him that
Christ did to his Apostles, My peace I give unto you, my peace I leave with
you. And Pope Paul the third knew how to apply the words of Saint Paul: I would
wish my self separate from Christ for my brethren, which are my kinsmen
according to the flesh. For being told upon a time by certain Cardinals in
open Consistory, that he could not give Parma and Plays^nce to his bastards,
except he would damn himself: he answered them in this sort, If Saint Paul
bare so tender an affection to his countrymen (whom he calls his brethren)
that he desired to be separate from Christ to the end they might be saved; why
should not I bear so tender an affection to my sons and nephews, as to
labor to make them great with the hazard of mine own salvation? As for the
speech of Pope Leo the tenth, it suteth better with the atheist call speech of
the gallant who said, Weep not, for perhaps it is not true. For when Cardinal
Bembus alleged a certain place out of the new Testament, he answered him in
this sort, O what wealth have we gotten by this fable of Christ? of which
blasphemy, not only this Pope, but the greatest part of his pu^-fellows are
guilty in the highest degree, if we may judge of the tree by his fruits.

4 There are also sundry other blasphemies uttered by these Sir John's* as well
in their disputations as in their sermons and writings, of which I will here
allege some few examples. A popish Prelate disputing on a time against
certain his adversaries, said he wondered that they understood not a text in
the new Testament, very pregnant to stop the mouths of the Lutherans in the
matter of Justification by faith only. For mark (said he) when the Apostles
were on the sea in a sm^ll ship* tossed with the wind, Saint Peter (being a
Lutheran, and bel^euing that his b^^e ^aith was able to save him) said unto
Christ, Bid me come unto thee upon the waters. And (he having bidden him come)
leapt into the sea with his naked faith and hardly escaped drowning: Nay, he
had bin drowned out of question, if Christ had not miraculously assisted him
and pulled him into the ship, causing him to return to his work again, viz.
to his rowing. Now then let these fellows who rely so much upon their faith, go
and drown with S. Peter if they will. For my part I am not determined to
forsake the small vessel, but to abide in it rowing at one oa^e or other, still
laboring and exercising my self in good works. If we had no other example,
this alone were sufficient to show how these Sir John's dallied with the
Scriptures. Howbeit there are infinite like to be found. Among which, that of a
Popish Prelate is very common, who was not ashamed to say, that Saint Paul
spoke many things which he might well have concealed, and that if he had
considered the offense which might have bin taken thereat, he would have bin
better advised before he had spoken them. But what greater blasphemies could
all the devils in hell devise and forge, then those which we read in the book
of Conformities, printed at Millan by one Gotard Pontice, in the year 1510.
and after that in other places? where sundry things are recorded more like
dreams and dotages then true stories. For though the world in old time was
maruailously blinded (as we know) in such sort that a man would have thought
they had (through the just judgment of God) shut their eyes, that they might
not see the truth: yet was it nothing to the blindness of those blind bayards,
who published the book of Conformities, containing such horrible, hideous and
hellish blasphemies, that it is almost incredible there should any be found so
graceless as once durst breathe or belch them out. For proof whereof consider
these particulars: Christ was transfigured but once, S. Francis twenty times.
Christ changed water into wine but once, S. Francis did it thrice. Christ felt
the pain of his wounds but a short time, S. Francis felt the pain of his for
the space of two years together. And as for miracles, as giving sight to the
blind, restoring limbs to the lame, casting devils out of men possessed, and
raising the dead, Christ has done nothing in comparison of S. Francis and his
brethren. For they have given sight to above a thousand blind; they have made
above a thousand lame to walk, as well men as beasts; they have cast devils
out of mo then a thousand demoniacks, and have raised above a thousand from
death to life. Is it possible that a man should hear these false Friars teach
and preach such stuff as this without spitting in their faces? what say I,
without spitting in their faces? nay without tearing them in pieces? True it is
indeed, they durst not say in plain terms, that Christ was not worthy to wipe
S. Francis his shoes for they are content to say that ^e excelled the Apostles,
the Saints, and the Angels:) But having confidently avouched that his miracles
did infinitely surpass Christ's miracles: they thought there was none so simple
but could easily infer the conclusion, though he had never studied the
principles of Logic. But I shall desire thee (gentle Reader) to lend thy
patient ear to other sayings in this book, Fol. 5. of the foresaid
impression: Beata Maria, vt Franciscus mitteretur in mundum, Patri supplicauit.
Item, Maria Francisci precibus indulgentiam pro peccatoribus in Ecclesiae
Sanctae Mariae de Portiuncula impetrauit: that is, The virgin Mary prayed to
God the Father that he would send Saint Francis into the world: and by his
intercession obtained pardon for sinners in the Church of Saint Mary de
Portiuncula. But herein consists the very quintessence of impudency, in that
they make the Scripture to come at their whistle, and serve their devilish
legendary lies, which they have coined of their S. Francis. As when they say
(in the same place) Franciscus est in gloria Dei Patris, Phil. 2. that is, S.
Francis is in the glory of God the Father. He that desires to hear more of
such abuses, deprauations and falsifications of holy Scripture all on a thrum,
far more incredible then the former, let him read that which is written fol.
4. Christus fecit Franciscum sibi similem: primo in vita virtuosa: deinde
impressione stigmatu^. Hinc de beato Francisco illud Ecclesiastici 44. dicitur,
Non est inuentus similis illi, qui conseruaret legem Excelsi. Quibus verbis,
beati Francisci celebritas, praeclaritas, sanctitas, and fama radiosa
declaratur. Fuit enim homo syncerissimus. Item, qualiter, quomodo, and ad quid
Deus fecit Franciscum, ostenditur Genesis 1. and 2. vbi sic scribitur, Faciamus
hominem (id est Franciscum) ad imaginem and similitudinem nostram: and praesit
piscibus maris, and volatilibus coeli, and bestijs terrae, vniuersaeque
creaturae, omnique reptili quod mouetur in terra. Et sequitur, Formauit Deus
hominem de limo terrae: and inspirauit in faciem eius spiraculum vitae, and
factus est homo in anima^ viuentem. Sequitur, Posuit ^um in Paradiso, vt
operaretur and custodiret illu^. Et ibidem, Ex omni ligno Paradisi comede: de
ligno autem scientae boni and mali ne comedas. Et subditur, quod Deus ait, quod
non erat bonum esse hominem solum: and fecit ei adiutorium simile sibi. Et
tulit vnam de cos^is eius, and ex ea Euam aedificauit. In quibus verbis
ostenditur quod B. Franciscus fuit homo, primo singularissimus, and a Deo in
mundum destinatus, non casis fortuito, aut hominum consilio: sed diuina
prouidentia, qua regulantur omnia. Ideo ad hoc ostendendum dicitur, Faciamus.
Verbum est totius Trinitatis beatum Franciscum ad mundum dirigentis. Secundo,
quod fuit homo syncerissimus, and a corporis brutalitate segregatus: quia homo
fuit, and per consequens non sensualis, aut sensualitati corporis deditus, sed
ab ea separatus, rationabilis, and rationi subditus and subiectus. Sic enim
motus sensuales refrenauit poenitentia arctiori vt hostem domesticum perfect
subijceret, and sine difficultate rationi pareret. Tertio, quod fuit homo
perfectissimus: quia ad imagine^ Dei. Quarto, homo exemplarissimus: quia ad Dei
similitudinem. Quinto, in vita rigidissimus: quia piscibus maris praefuit.
Sexto, Angelis dilectissimus: quia volatilibus coeli iunctus fuit. Septimo,
cunctis peccatoribus amicissimus: quia bestijs terrae. Octauo, Deo vnitissimus:
ideo praefuit vniuersae creaturae. Nono, diabolo infestissimus: quia omni
reptili terr^. Decimo, sua reputatione abiectissimus: quia de limo terrae.
Vndecimo, gratia plenissimus: quia inspirauit in faciem eius spiraculum vitae.
Decimosecundo, operatione virtuosissimus: quia factus est in animam viuentem.
Decimotertio, Dei contemplatione intentissimus: quia in Paradiso semper erat.
Decimoquarto, verbo efficacissimus: quia operatus est salutem multorum.
Decimoquinto, in omnibus ordinatissimus: quia custodiuit se and alios.
Decimosexto, imitator Apostolorum and perfectoru^: quia ex omni ligno comedit.
Decimoseptimo, excecrator scelerum contra Deum commissorum: quia de ligno mali
non comedit. Decimooctauo, paupertatis desponsator, and abdicator terrenorum:
quia adiutorium simile sibi, videlicet, contubernium paupertatis est sibi
datum. Vltimo, ordinator omni^ sanctitatis and religionis: quia ex eo Ecclesia
quoad tres ordines est formata. Tres enim propagines ex ipso sunt, velut ex
lateris costa germinatae and productae.

That is, Christ has made S. Francis like to himself: first, in his virtuous
life: next in imprinting his wounds in his body. Whereupon it is said,
Ecclesiast. 44. There was none like unto him in keeping the law of the most
high. Which words set forth the fame, the excellency, sanctity, and glory of
S. Francis. Item, of what quality, how, and to what end God created S. Francis,
is set down Genesis 1. and. 2. chap. where it is said, Let us make man (that is
S. Francis) after our image and similitude: and let him have dominion over the
fish of the sea, the fowls of the air, the beasts of the field, and all
creeping things which move upon the earth. And then it follows, God made man
of the slime of the earth, and breathed into his face the breath of life, and
man was made a living soul. Item, the Lord God took man and placed him in the
garden of Eden to dress it and keep it: and commanded him, saying, Of every
tree of the garden thou shall eat, but of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil thou shall not eat. After it is said, It is not good that man should be
alone: and he made him an helper like unto himself, and took out one of his
ribs and thereof made Eve. By which words it is manifest, first that S. Francis
was a most singular man, one whom God had preordained should come into the
world, not by chance, or by the counsel of men, but by his own providence,
whereby he disposes and governs all things. And therefore it is said, Let us
make: A speech uttered by all the persons in the Trinity, appointing S. Francis
to come into the world. Secondly, that he was most pure, void of all carnality,
brutishnes and sensuality: for he was a man, and so consequently not carnal nor
addicted to fleshly lusts as beasts are: but exempt from it, as having an
understanding soul, obedient and subject to reason. So that through his strict
penance, he so well curbed and kept in his sensual appetite, that he perfectly
foiled and brought under his intestine enemy, obeying reason without
difficulty. Thirdly, most perfect, because he was created in the image of God.
Fourthly, a most perfect exemplar or Idea of all goodness, because he was made
after the similitude of God. Fifthly, of a most austere and strict life, because
he had sovereignty over the fishes of the sea. Sixthly, most beloved of the
Angels, because he was joined to the fowls of the air. Seventhly, a great
friend to all sinners, because he had Lordship over all the beasts of the
field. Eighthly, most nearly united to God, because he was ruler and governor
of all creatures. Ninthly, a mortal enemy to the devil, because he had power
over all that creeps on the earth. Tenthly, of all men most base in his own
conceit, because he was made of the dust of the earth. 11. Most replenished
with grace, because God breathed into him the breath of life. 12. Full of virtue
and operation, because he was made a living soul. 13. Ravished with the
contemplation of God, because he was always in Paradise. 14. Most mighty in
word, because he saved many. 15. Most orderly in all his actions, because he
kept others and himself also. 16. An imitator of the Apostles and of the
perfect; for he did eat of every tree. 17. A detester of all wickedness
committed against God, because he did not eat of the tree of knowledge of
evil. 18. One that had (as it were) betrothed himself to poverty, renouncing
the world; because God gave him an helper to assist him, viz. poverty to be his
companion. And lastly, a dispenser of all sanctity and religion, because of him
the Church was formed, as concerning the three orders: for those three branches
sprang out of him, as from a rib taken out of his side. Nay there is no
testimony of Scripture from the first chapter of Genesis to the end of the
Apocalypse, which is not used or rather abused to magnify and set out the order
of S. Francis. Fol. 83. Et ideo Johannes Euangelista, postquam Apoc. cap. 7.
descripsit tempus missionis ^. Francisci, scilicet sub apertione sexti sigilli,
and quomodo est missus: quia vt Angelus habens signum Dei viui: subdit de
multitudine, Francisci praedicatione, vita and exemplo, and suorum sociorum, ad
Christum conuersa and conuertenda. Quum dicit, quod vidit numerum signatorum,
centum quadraginta quatuor millia ex omni tribu filiorum Israel: hoc potest
exponi, quod in hoc ordine tot essent futuri fratres, sieve conuertendi per
fratres, deducto populo ad Dominum, and hoc in ordinis processu. Vel tempore
Antichristi, quando hic ordo, destructis aliis ordinibus, praedicabit contra
Antichristum. Et tunc iuxta dictu^ Apostoli and Scripturae, and Apoc. cap. 8,
reliquiae Israel ad Dominum conuertentur. Vel potest dici, quod per numeru^
certum (iuxta modum loquendi Scripturae) accipit incertum: vt non solum sint
signati, scilicet habitu Francisci and crucifixi, centum quadraginta quatuor
millia, sed infiniti alij. Et hoc videtur Johannes innuere, quum subdit, quod
vidit post praedicta turbam magnam, quam nemo dinumerare poterat: ex omnibus
tribubus, populis and linguis, etc. Sic ergo multitudine locorum per angulos
mundi diffusorum, apparet multitudo fratrum qui sunt istius ordinis.

That is,

And therefore Saint John the Evangelist (Apocal. 7.) having set down the time
when Saint Francis should be sent into the world, namely, at the opening of the
sixth seal: and in what sort, viz. as an Angel having the sign of the living
God: He tells us of the multitude which should be converted to Christ by the
holy life and doctrine of him and his fellows. When he says, that the number
of those which were sealed was an hundred forty and four thousand of all the
tribes of Israel: which may be thus expounded, that there should be so many
Friars of that Order, or of such as were to be converted by their means, (the
people being brought unto the Lord) and that in the continuation of the order;
or rather in the time of Antichrist, when this order should preach against
Antichrist, the rest being abolished. And then (according to the saying of the
Apostle, the Scripture, and the Apocalyp. chap. 8.) The remnant of Israel shall
be converted to the Lord. Or it may be said, that by a certain number (in the
Scripture phrase) is meant an uncertain: to wit, that there shall not only be
an hundred forty and four thousand Franciscans and Crucigeri sealed, but an
infinite number of others also. And this seems to be Saint John's meaning when
he says, that he saw a great multitude which could not be numbered, of all
tribes, people and tongues, etc. So that the multitude of Franciscans may be
gathered by the multitude of their Couents in all quarters and corners of the
world. And fol. 4. in the same page before the former place, we have these
words: Quibus and alijs quae hic omittu^tur, quanta est gloria beati Francisci,
euidenter astruitur and monstratur: and consequenter apparet, quod beatus
Franciscus in coelo praemium habet magnum: and in sede celsa sublimatur: vt de
ipso dicatur Domino Jesus illud Psalmi octaui, Gloria and honor coronasti eum,
and constituisti super opera manuum tuarum. Dedit enim illi gloriam regni
qualem nullus ante eum habuit. 1. Paral. 29. that is, by which (and sundry
other particulars here omitted) it may appear how great the glory of Saint
Francis is, and consequently how great a reward he has in heaven, and how he
is exalted and set in a high throne. For Psalm. 8. the holy Ghost says to
Christ concerning him, Thou have crowned him with glory and honor, and have
set him over the works of thy hands. For he has given him a greater measure
of glory in his celestial kingdom, then ever he gave to any before him. 1.
Paralip. 29. And fol. 14. Fuit etiam beatus Franciscus ministris pluribus etc.
that i^, Saint Francis was also manifested to many provincial ministers, when
he established the last rule. At which words of Saint Francis, Christ bowing
himself, said, that that was his meaning touching the observation of the rule;
and thereupon cried with a loud voice in their hearing, that himself and not
S. Francis was author thereof. It is there further said, that Saint Francis
kept every jot and ^ittle of the law. And fol. 17. that he was Patriarch,
Prophet, Apostle, Martyr, Doctor, Confessor, Virgin, Angel, nay above all
Saints whatsoever, most conformable to Christ. And fol. 46. he sets down
the names and sirnames of his twelve Apostles, viz. Petrus Cathanei, Johannes
de Capella, Philippus Longus, etc. And straight after he says, As Judas
Iscariot wrs cast out of the office of Apostleship under Christ, so Johannes de
Capella was put from his Apostleship under Saint Francis. And what would we
more? when they stick not to say (fol. 220.) Beatus Franciscus titulatus fuit
titulo JESUS per conformitatem quam habuit ad vitam Jesus: NAZARENVS quia vigo
purissima: REX, sensuum interiorum and exteriorum custodia and regulatione.
IVDAEORVM, quia iubilo and gaudio plenus creaturas omnes ad Deum laudandum
solicitauit: that is, Saint Francis was called Jesus in regard of his
conformity with him in his holy life. A Nazarite, because he was a most pure
virgin. A King, as having power and dominion over his inward and outward
senses. Of the Jews, because that being full of spiritual and heavenly joy,
he stirred up all creatures to praise God. But enough of these diabolical and
damnable speeches: for I suppose I am come to the height of the blasphemous
impieties of these Monkish miscreants, if I may so call them to express the
impiety, whereof their blasphemies give sufficient testimony.

5 Touching blasphemies which have been uttered in the pulpit by Popish
Preachers, I will here allege some few examples as an additament to the
former, yet so as if I happily omit any which shall afterward come to my mind in
the second part of the Apology (where I am to show how our ancestors suffered
their Preachers to lead them by the nose) I will not miss there to insert
them. For the present, I remember a speech which Menot a French man, and
Barelete an Italian delivered in the pulpit, containing such a blasphemy as
were enough to make the hair of a man's head stand upright, viz. that rather
then Christ should not have bin crucified, the vi^gin Mary would have crucified
him with her own hands. True it is, they allege their authors, and further
add that it proceeded of an earnest desire she had of the salvation of
mankind. But because it might otherwise happily seem incredible, I will here set
down their own words, quoting the place where they are to be found. First
then in the sermons of Menot fol. 169. col. 3. toward the end, somewhat before
these words, Finis euangeliorum quadragesimaliu^, we read as follows: Audiui
ab ore magistri Huet, in conuenta Parisiensi praedicantis, quod si non alius se
obtulisset, virgo Maria tanto zelo amabat redemptionem generis humani, quod
proprijs manibus filium crucifixisset. As for Barelete, mark what he says of
the blessed virgin, fol. 115. col. 2. Quia tempore passionis, quamuis sui
dolores essent intensi, videndo filium affligi, tamen volebat filium mori pro
humanae generationis salute. Et vt dicit Archiepiscopus, Si alius modus non
fuisset, ipsamet filium proprium occidisset: quia non minor erat charitas sua
quam Abrahae, qui filium suum erat paratus occidere. Moreover he says that the
Apostles went to complain to her of her son, because he kept not touch with
them in sending the holy Ghost: and that there was a dissension between the
Father and the holy Ghost, who feared to come into the world, lest they should
be dealt with as the Jews dealt with Christ. Vnde isto mane veniunt ad Mariam,
dicentes, Heu, filius suus nobis promisit mittere spiritum sanctum: hodie sunt
december dies quod ascendit, and adhuc spiritum sanctum non misit. Et virgo, Non
dubitetis quod hodie omnino mittet: nec a^^ mittere debuit. Et ratio, Quando
Deus traxit populum de captiuitate Aegypti, quinquagesimo die descendit in
forma ignis in monte Sinai, dando legem: fuit figura, quod quinquagesimo die
resurrectionis suae, nos liberaret and viuificaret, vnde ponamus nos in
oratione. Petrus cum alijs se ad vnam partem posuit: Lazarus cum Lxxij. ad
aliam: and Magdalena cum alijs mulieribus ad aliam: and virgo Maria in medio.
In coelesti palatio facta est dissentio inter Patrem and Spiritum sanctum. O
pater (inquit filius) promisi Apostolis meis paraclitum and consolatorem:
tempus aduenit vt promissionem attendam. Cui pater, Sum contentus: indica
^piritui sancto. Cui Spiritus sanctus, Dic mihi quomodo te tractauere? Cui
filius, vide me per charitatem: ostendit ei latus and manus and pedes
perforatas. Heu mihi, sed vadam in aliam effigiem, quod non audebunt me
tangere. Qui descendit cum maximo strepitu. Factus est repent de coelo sonus
tanquam aduenientis, etc. See fol. 178. col. 1.

6 But let us hear another discourse of the same Preacher, stuffed with far
greater and more incredible blasphemies, especially considering that the
chiefest mystery of Christian religion is thereby profaned. Fol. 229. col. 4.
these be his words: Quamuis ab aterno Deus praedestinauerit, etc. (which
because they are somewhat long and tedious, it shall suffice to translate them
into English, abridging them in some places:) Though God (says he) had decreed
the incarnation of his Son, and the salvation of mankind from all eternity;
yet it was his will and pleasure that it should be impetrated by our prayers,
and the prayers of holy people: so that the holy fathers even with tears
desired to see that day; and how great their desire was, the Scriptures
declare. Now Adam, Enos, Enoch, Mathusalem, Lamech and Noe (who lived so long)
seeing they could not obtain the thing which they desired, resolved to send
Ambassadors. First Esaias, saying chap. 16. Lord send the Lamb the governor of
the land (Agnum dominatorem terrae.) And chap. 45. You heavens send down your
deaw from above, etc. And in the 64. chapter, O that thou would break the
heavens and come down, and that the mountains might melt at thy presence.
After that, the Prophets send Moses, Exodus 4. Obsecro Domine, mitte quem
missurus es: that is, I beseech thee, O Lord, send him whom thou should
send: that is, thou have sent me before for a particular deliverance, now send
for the general deliverance. After that, the Kings sent David, who spoke thus,
Lord show us ^hy mercy, and give us thy saving health. After all these came
Aaron, sent by the Priests, who said, Lord bow the heavens and come down. In
the last place came the Church, which said, Stir up thy strength and come, O
Lord lift up thy self. The Patriarchs seeing that these requests took no
place, sent women. First Madame Eve went and spoke thus, Thou have condemned us
for our sin, yet remember it not O God, but deliver me out of this dark
dungeon. To whom God answered, Eve thou have sinned, and therefore art unworthy
my son should be sent into the world for thy sake. The second was Madame
Sara, who said* O Lord help us: to whom God answered, Thou art not worthy: for
thou did not believe that thou should conceive and bear a son. The third
was Madame Rebecca, to whom God said, Thou shewedst thy self partial between
Jacob and Esau. The fourth was Madame Judith, to who^ God answered, Thou have
bin a murderer. The fifth was Queen Esther, to whom he said, Thou louedst
vanity too much, when thou deckedst thy self to please King Assuerus. At last
they sent a maid of fourteen years of age, who with a deiect and shamefast
countenance kneeled down and said, I beseech thee (O my God) that my best
beloved may come into his garden, that he may eat of his apples. (This garden
was the virgins womb.) Which when the son heard, he said unto his father, O
my father, I have from my youth loved this maid, and have labored to have her
to my spouse. Whereupon God the Father presently calling the Angel Gabriel, said
unto him, Gabriel go quickly to Nazareth to Mary, and carry her these letters
from me, and tell her that I have chosen her to be my wife. Then said the
Son, And tell her from me, that I have chosen her to be my mother, and that I
will be incarnate in her womb; I will be her son, and she shall be my
mother: Deliver her this message. Then spoke the holy Ghost, and said, I will
dwell in her, and she shall be my Temple; Carry her this message from me. Then
Gabriel coming to her* said, Aue gratia plena, Dominus tecum. Ab A (quod est
sine) and Ve, culpa; immunis a triplici Ve. De quibus Apoc. 12. Ve, ve, ve,
habitantibus in terra. Gratia plena. Hieronymus, Been, Gratia plena, quod
caeteris per parts, etc. At these words of the Angel she was sore troubled.
Now she had three gentlewomen with her, Prudence, Virginity and Humility. And
first she went to Prudence to have her counsel, saying, O my love, tell me
your opinion, what I were best to do. Prudence answered, Mary, I consider that
which is written in the 29. chap. of Ecclesiasticus, He that is hasty to give
credit is light minded. And therefore it is well said in the Gospel, that Mary
mused in her self what manner of salutation that might be. Ecclesiasticus 32.
Audi tacens, and pro reuerentia accedit tibi bona gratia. Give ear and be
still, and for thy good behavior thou shall be loved. The Angel seeing her
thus troubled, said unto her, Fear not Mary: why art thou afraid? After this
she asked counsel of her second gentlewoman Virginity, who said unto her,
Mary ask the Angel how thou shall conceive: if he answer and say, By the seed
of man; beat him away with a cudgel. O iuuenculae, quando vestri amatores
nominant impudica, etc. How can this be, seeing I never knew man? The Angel
answered, The holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the most high
shall ouershadow thee, and therefore, etc. And a little after, There was a
disputation who should work this redemption, whether the Father, the Son, or
the holy Ghost; and it was agreed that the Son should be the Redeemer. And
the reason, etc.

7 And if it were possible for thee (gentle Reader) to have so much patience, I
would further desire thee to read this other discourse of the same Preacher,
that thou may see how he is like himself in all things, and how one
blasphemy draws on another* For fol. 168. col. 4. he says, Altercatio facta
est, quis debebat ire ad matrem, nuntiare hanc resurrectionem: Adam dixit, mihi
incumbit, etc. The meaning of which words (as also of the rest which ensue
touching the same argument) is this. It was debated amongst them, who should go
to the blessed virgin Christ's mother, to signify her sons resurrection: Adam
said, that it was his duty to go; For (said he) I was the cause of the evil,
and therefore I ought to be the cause of the contrary good. But Christ answered
him, Thou would (happily) tarry by the way to eat figs. Abel said that that
office belonged to him: Christ answered, No verily; for thou may (perhaps)
meet thy brother Cain by the way, who will kill thee. Noah also offered himself,
saying, that that honor was due to him: to whom Christ answered, Surely thou
shall not go; for thou love drink too well. John Baptist said, I will go:
Nay said Christ, thou of all other shall not go; for thy garment is but of
hair. The thief said, that that office belo^ged to him: but Christ rejected
him; For (said he) thy legs are broken. In the end an Angel was sent, who
began to chant it out in this sort, Regina coeli, laetare: Alleluiah*
Resurrexit sicut dixit, Alleluiah. And straight after came Christ with all the
Saints, and the Virgin, etc. There are also sundry other blasphemous speeches
as well in this as in the rest of their jolly Preachers, (though principally in
this:) but because those (which now come to my remembrance) are more
tolerable, and for that I am not at leisure to seek after others, I will
content my self for this present with these above mentioned. The texts of
Scripture I have here alleged, as they are to be found in the vulgar Latin
Bible. But with what brazen-faced impudency they were wont to abuse them, shall
be showed hereafter.

8 And now I proceed to those who baspheme God indeed; which vice I said was
proper to Churchmen: where I advertised the Reader, that I took the word
blasphemy in a more general acception then it is commonly taken, having
respect to the Greek Etymology. For as he that usurps the Kings crown (being
but his vassal) or sets himself in the throne of the kingdom or chair of
estate, does commit no less treason against the majesty of the Prince, then he
that utters some contemptible speech derogating from his soueraignety, crown
and dignity: so (doubtless) he that arrogateth to himself divine power in word
or deed, may as properly be called a blasphemer of God. But forasmuch as the
signification of the word has not bin usually stretched so far, I will not
greatly stand to argue the case, whether it be lawful to use it so or no: it
shall suffice that I have showed upon what ground I thus used it. But if any man
shall think that it may more fitly be called high treason against the highest
Majesty, I will not greatly contend with him. Now I would here instance this
with examples, but that they are so obuious and ordinary, highwayes so plain,
that a guide were needless. For, to say nothing of that man of sin, who
calling himself God on earth* causes (as much as in him lies) as great
homage to be done unto him as unto God: are not they (I beseech you) usurpers
of the honor proper only to God, who take upon them to consecrate, bless and
absolve? nay to open heaven to some, and shut it against others?
Notwithstanding the world (we see) swarmeth with such vermin in all places
where the Church of Rome has lost nothing of her credit. And albeit this kind
of blasphemy be peculiar to Churchmen (as has bin said) yet I am not ignorant
that Princes also (who of their humane would make a divine majesty) may well be
enrolled in this register. But to show how many ways they offend in this kind,
would be an argument no less odious then tedious, and chiefly for me, who by
all means labor to make speedy dispatch of this present treatise.

CHAP. XXVI. How that as there are stranger sins committed at this day then
ever before, so God inflicts stranger punishments upon the authors and
inuentors of them.
SAint Augustine among many his memorable sayings, has one very notable and
worthy so excellent an author, viz. that if God should openly punish every
sin and transgression in this life, it would be thought he reserved no
punishment for the last judgment. On the other side, if he should not inflict
open and exemplary punishment upon some offenders, men would not believe that
there were a divine providence. Therefore when we see any break forth into
heinous enormities, and yet to escape scot-free, (at leastwise for aught we
know) we should call not only our religion but our wits also into question, if
we should hereupon infer, that wicked men escape the heavy hand of God, and
that their sins remain unpunished. And verily I cannot but wonder what
should be the reason that this point cannot sink into the heads of Christians,
considering the very heathen have by the dim candlelight of natural reason
attained to this secret of Gods providence: as we may see in Plutarch, and in
the greatest part of Poets, as namely in certain verses alleged by Justin
Martyr. Notwithstanding there is a further point to be marked, viz. that God
does not only inflict outward or civil punishments upon men, such as
magistrates are wont to do* but reserueth some to himself which the bodily eye
cannot see, which he manifests when it seems good unto him. These are the
exquisite torments and tortures which wicked men endure in their consciences,
not for an hour or a day, but for many years together. Nay he suffers
oftentimes the worm of conscience to gnaw upon them almost al their lives
long. But if this punishment (may some say) be so secret and hid from the eye
of man, how can we reason or speak thereof? Verily to omit infinite
testimonies as well in sacred as profane stories, this hell of conscience
discovers it self in sundry persons by his effects, as Physicians do
diseases by their symptoms, though never so secret and covered over with never
so fair a skin. And as great men in times past were more obnoxious and liable
to such distress of conscience (as stories record of sundry tyrants:) so we
see it verified at this day* in such as are advanced to the highest honors, and
set (as it were) on the top of fortunes wheel, after they once forget
themselves: and how they are necessarily enforced by their continual carriage
and course of life to verify the old saying, Needs must he fear many, whom
many do fear* whereof we have a very pregnant proof and notable example of
one in these days, who dealt with France for a time, as Diogenes did with his
tub, when he rolled it, tumbled and tossed it, ouerturned it, and knocked out
the head of it, or rather played at tennis with that kingdom and the King
thereof. For what joy (may we think) can he have to live (what show soever he
make) who fears nothing more then arms, and yet has nothing wherein he may
put more confidence then in arms? who dare trust no living man, nor yet make
show that he distrusteth any? Whose fear, which lodges with him at home,
accompanies him also abroad? who is constrained to put no difference between
friends and foes, but equally suspecteth all? In sum, who the more he thinks
upon the occasions of his fear, the more he has cause to fear? May we not
well think that such a man begins his hell in this world, in stead of
enjoying some small pleasure in the remainder of his life? Could a man have
desired of God a better revenge for his Cretismes, Catelinismes and
Phalarismes, then this? But to come to other wicked men, who are not advanced
to so high a degree of honor, but are glad to crouch to such gallants: All men
might have taken notice (at leastwise heard) how the Lieutenant who was graced
by a French Poet with the title of Radamanthus, and (who deserved in a double
respect to be called Lieutenant criminal) was seized upon with a grievous
disease (as I heard it reported by the College of Physicians which had him in
cure,) during which sickness he had such a serious consideration of his life
past, that he lay a long time before any man could persuade him but that he was
condemned to be hanged. Alas (said he) I know I have deserved death: for I have
committed such and such extortion: I had a hand in such and such rapine: I
suffered my self to be bribed and corrupted by malefactors, to the end they
might escape and go unpunished: I have too roughly and rigorously entreated
poor innocents: to be short, I have made merchandise of my conscience every
way. And not content to houer thus in generalities, he came in particular, to
name those of whose death he thought himself guilty, and to ask them
forgiveness. At last he remembered that the King had often showed mercy on
malefactors, and thereupon conceiving some wanne hope, he was ever harping upon
that string. Now albeit they labored to confirm him in this conceived hope of
pardon, yet he no sooner considered the heinousness of his offenses, but he
was straight driven from his hold again, and said, that if the King should
once know them, he would never pardon him. And in fear of this accursed death
(whereunto he thought they were ready to lead him) had this poor patient
died, had it not bin for one of his Physicians who caused a man to come booted
and spurred with letters patents in his hand, and to knock boldly at the
door, and as soon as he was let in, to cry pardon, pardon: which was
accordingly performed, yet not without putting him (poor soul) in danger of
his life; for having heard him knock in that manner at the gate, he persuaded
himself that it was the hangman. And though the party suborned knew well
enough how to play his part, yet could he scarce make him believe that the King
had pardoned him. But being brought in the end to believe it, and so to pluck
up a good heart, he lived some few days after. Howbeit ere long he changed
this miserable life into a more miserable death, as we shall hear in the
sequel of this discourse. In the mean time let the Reader consider in what
misery he must of necessity be, who was thus assaulted of his conscience. For
then doubtless by reason of his disease which distempered his brain and
intoxicated his understanding, he showed himself to be the man which in truth
he was. And we may well think that the Chancelour of France felt no less
conflict in conscience, when lying on his death bed he cried out, Ah Cardinal,
thou have sent us all to the Devil.

2 But I pass from this secret punishment (which we may assure our selves has
seized upon many) to that which we see daily before our eyes. First then, the
holy Scripture teaches us to acknowledge the hand of God in wars, pestilence
and famine, executing his just judgments upon us for our sins. Whereof the
preachers (before alleged) have not been unmindful to admonish us. As when
Menot says, Quae est causa quod ^ames toties regnat super terram, nisi peccata
and iniquitates enormes quae nunc regnant? And Barelete, Nonne vidisti
temporibus clapsis, Italiam peste percussam? Vere hoc totum propter peccata
inaudita hominum and multeru^. Further, Menot says of blasphemers in
particular, that God sends them a red rose of Naples. Now then if such
punishments be sure and certain testimoners of sins reigning in the world, and
that they have increased even in these days: we may hereupon conclude, that
sin is likewise much increased. Howebeit, my purpose is not to insist upon
these ordinary chastisements, but rather to show (as the title of this chapter
occasioneth me) that as our Age abounds with more rare villainies then ever
were known or heard of in former time: So God inflicts far stranger
punishments upon men for the same. For proof hereof, how many new and strange
diseases are there at this day raging in all places? And surely great reason
there is, that as men are not content with the sins of their ancestors, but
add new to the old: so God in like manner should not content himself with
ordinary punishments, but should add unto them extraordinary plagues. As he
has punished whoredom of late with that disease which the Frenchmen call the
Neapolitane disease, they of Naples and other Italians, the French disease: But
such has bin the frowardness of the wicked will of man, that that which
should have been as a bridle to curb and keep him in, has been as a spur to
prick him forward, especially since there were remedies to cure such maladies.
And now the report goes, that there is a new kind of French pox, the
Quintessence (as it were) of the former, which is simply incurable; which if it
be so, we may assure our selves, God would thereby teach us how dangerous a
thing it is to harden our hearts against his heavy hand. And may we not well
think these so many strange maladies (in which Physicians are not only put to
their trumps, but even at a non plus) such and so many fearful judgments
which God inflicts upon the meaner sort by the mighty: and upon great
potentates by poor paysants: so many sundry sorts of death more sudden and
fearful, yea and often accompanied with greater despair and rage the^ our
Ancestors ever saw or heard of, to be new chastisements or rather punishments
sent of God? Yes doubtless, whereof we might find sundry examples if we would
but open our eyes to behold such spectacles, as often as they offer themselves
to our view. I have heretofore showed (where I spoke of such as made away
themselves) how Bonauenture de Periers (author of that detestable book called
Cymbalum mundi) notwithstanding the pains that his friends took in keeping and
watching him (for that they saw him in a desperate mood,) was found to have
run upon his sword, having set the pomell to the ground, the point running in
at his breast, and out at his back. I have further spoken of a secretary of a
town of Switzerland, who pressed with a sense and feeling of his wicked life
(having made a escape from his keepers) cast himself (with Razes) from a high
rock and so dyed; since which time sundry like stories have come to my mind.
But to omit those who by Gods just judgment have been their own executioners;
certain it is that there are many who dye in their beds, in no less despair
and rage then they: who doubtless, would have made the like end, if there had
not been a narrow watch set over them. The number of which would be found to be
great if enquiry were made. But I will here only speak of certain
persecutors, who in the end have been pursued (as I may say) and persecuted by
the just judgment of God, and that upon the open stage (as it were) in the
view of the world. And I will begin with the Lieutenant Criminal (mentioned
in the beginning of this chapter) who being recovered of a dangerous disease
wherein he had been sore troubled in conscience, was shortly after stricken with
another in his legs (called the wolf) in such sort that he lost the use of his
limbs, and dyed in the end be^traught of his wits, after he had a long time
barked (as it were) at God, as the dog at the Moon, having nothing in his
mouth but wounds, blood, and blasphemy. The Chancellor and Legate du Prat made
no fairer market, notwithstanding his brave hospital (of which king Francis
the first was wont to say, that it was not large enough to lodge so many poor
people as he had impouerished. For he died at his Honor of Nantouillet, of a
strange disease having his stomach eaten through with worms, not without
fearful cursing of God through extreme impatience, occasioned as well by
extremity of pain, as through spite and anger to see all his coffers sealed
up before his face: so that he could not refrain but break forth into these
words: See what is gotten by serving the king with body and soul? This du Prat
was the first that put up a bil in the court of parliament for the detection of
heresies, because (as he said) they were full of blasphemy; who also being
wearied with that long and tedious suite in the cause of Berquin, gave out the
first commission for the examination, arraignement and condemnation of such as
should speak against the Roman religion. And what befell the now deceassed
Steven Poncher Archbishop of Towers, whilst he labored for the erecting of a
new court, called the burning chamber? was he not seized upon by a fearful
disease called Le feu de Dieu, which began at his heels, and crept along to
his head, so that he was constrained to cut off one limme after another, and in
the end dyed miserably, using no better language then his fellows? The like
befell one John Ruze counselor of the Parliament; who was one of the greatest
burners in his time (I mean one that raised the hottest persecution against the
professors of the Gospel, that they might be brought to the stake) For as he
returned from a court which he had kept against them, he was taken with the
aforesaid disease in his stomach and privy parts, so that he had much ado to
get home: the extremity whereof was such, that having in a manner burnt up his
entrals, it caused him to end his days in great misery, the rather for that he
did not once acknowledge the just judgment of God. And as the vengeance of God
was speedily executed upon him, so was it also upon another counselor of the
same court called Claudius des Asses; for the very same day that he had
se^tenced a Protestant to fry a faggot, as he was playing the knave with one of
his cha^bermaids, he was taken with an Apoplexy in the fact, and so dyed.
Likewise one John Andrew, a Stationer (who served these persecutors and their
accomplices, for a spy) as he was walking for his recreation, was taken with a
frenzy which never left him to the hour of his death, which followed shortly
after. We read also of strange judgments which befell those that were the
chief agents in the persecution raised against the poor people of Cabriere
and Merindoll; by all which we learn, that those who escape the hands of men,
ought always to remember the old Proverb, He is not escaped that traileth his
halter. For verily such wretches (though quit and cleared by earthly Judges) if
we respect divine Justice, draw their halters after the^, not only in this
life, but after death also. Which I speak as well in regard of John Menier Lord
of Oppede, as of others, who were so sentenced for extortion, pilling and
polling, spoiling and sacking, violence, and all manner of barbarous and
sauadge cruelties which they exercised upon the inhabitants of those places,
contrary to their oaths and promises, and the trust reposed in them; that
whereas it was expected that after so many notable pleas and orations in which
their knaueries were excellently displaied and laid forth (as it were) in
orient colors, such exemplary punishment should have been showed on them, as
might remain a memorial and perpetual president to posterity: It appeared in
the end, that all was nothing but a fair flourish for fashion sake. Now albeit
they escaped the punishment which Justice allotted them, through the injustice
of men: yet escaped they not the hand of the Just Judge, as has been said.
Menier and the rest of that rout felt it very fearfully, by a strangury and a
disease called Le feu de Dieu, which burnt him from the nauel upward: which
grievous diseases he bare so patiently, that from the time they seized upon him
till the last gasp, he ceased no to blaspheme and curse his creator; little
remembering the examples of many holy Saints and servants of God whom he had
heard singing Halleluiah in the midst of their torments, even then when he most
cruelly butchered them. Neither is there any maruail to be made of this
difference, considering he suffered as a fellon and a murderer, they as
Martyrs. But to omit these cruel cutthroates of the Popish Clergy, who
persecuted the poor Protestants of Prouence before the Lord of Oppede came
amongst them; there was a Iacobin Friar called de Roma (of whose cruelties I
have spoken somewhat before) who felt the beauy hand of God as well as his
fellows: for under color of his commission (being one of the holy
Inquisition) he tyra^nized as well over the bodies as the goods of those whom
he had found to swerve from the Church of Rome, and withdrawing himself to
Auinion, intended to make merry with the prey and pillage he had brought out of
Prouence. But the polling extortioner was spoiled of all that he had by his
own servants, and brought to extreme beggary: and shortly after fell into a
fearful disease unknown to the Physicians which bred ulcers in sundry places
of his body so full of crawling worms that his flesh fell away by peacemeale,
stinking so intollerably that no man (no nor yet himself) could endure the
smell thereof. In the end it grew to that extremity that he desired some man
would kill him; and perceiving that al was but in vain, he offered to lay
violent hands upon himself, but finding not how he might put his wicked
purpose in execution, he was constrained to undergo his torments unto the end;
not without many outcries or rather howlings, accompanied with cursing and
blaspheming the name of God: the common and ordinary refuge for such wicked
wretches when they feel themselves overwhelmed with dolor and grief. And here
another story comes fitly to my mind, of one who is not wont to be forgotten,
when we speak of the judgments of God, to wit, Petrus Castellanus, in whom we
have as notable an example of divine Justice as in any whosoever. For having
bin a zealous professor of the Gospel, in the reign of king Francis the
first, in such sort that he incurred the ill will of the Sorbonists (which he
then little respected, by reason of the great favor he was in with the foresaid
Prince) he turned coat in the reign of king Henry the second, because he saw
the professors of the Gospel had no countenance in the court: in such sort
that a man would little have thought it had been he which professed true
religion before; and not content to temporize and turn like the wether cock
with every waft of contrary wind, he went to Orleans (having been newly
installed Bishop of that See) to preach against the religion which before he
had professed: whither being come, he gave them two or three strawbery sermons.
And as he was on a time belching out his blasphemies against the truth and his
own conscience, he was taken suddenly with a disease, which made his Lordship
come down after another manner then he went up. The report goes, that one
half of his body was as hot as fire, and the other half as cold as ice,
joined with a bloody flixe, whereof he died not long after, not without many
throbs and fearful groans. I am here to entreat thee (gentle Reader) not to
take offense that I point out some men in particular, and describe them by
their names, contrary to the course I have taken almost throughout this whole
treatise; desiring thee to remember that I am not the first that have broken
the ice, seeing I deliver these things but at the second hand, as I find them
set down in three several books lately published. I shall further desire thee
to consider, that such stories as these, serving so notably to set forth the
just judgments of God, ought authentically to be recorded. Notwithstanding I
will spare the naming of two others, for that I find them no where named. One of
which (I take it) is yet living, who albeit he made profession of the Gospel
at the first, yet after he had courted it a while, he did so turn and
temporize, so apply and acco^modate himself to the fancies, fashions and humors
of the Court, that like Hercules enthralled to Queen Omphale, or Sampson
besotted with his Dalila, he was so lulled asleep in his mistress lap, that he
quite lost his former credit and reputation: so that he that had heard him,
would little have thought he had been the man whom God had endued with such exact
knowledge in the tongues and arts, that since that time his match could hardly
be found. The second is of one who had been Counselor to the French king Henry
the second, and employed by him in sundry Embassages; who giving a final
farewell to the truth which formerly he had professed (fearing lest it would
lie as a block in the way to his preferment) lost forthwith his sense and
understanding, in such sort that he became a mere sot and a senseless thing.
And we have had within these few years such rare examples of Gods judgments
even upon Princes themselves, and of so late and fresh memory that they cannot
easily be forgotten, and therefore I spare to name particulars.

3 Now the reason which moved me to allege such examples of the judgments of
God as have befallen persecutors rather then others, is for that such
persecution is proper and peculiar to these days and times: wherein cruelty
and all kind of impiety like a great deluge have broken the banks, and
ouerflowed in more fearful manner then ever before: whereof we have seen what
has been the issue and event, and God grant that it may be both the beginning
and the end of all such tragedies and turbulent garboiles.

THE SECOND PART OF THE PREPARATIVE TREATISE TO THE APOLOGY FOR HERODOTVS.

ANCHORA SPEI
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted for JOHN NORTON. 1607.

TO THE HONORABLE KNIGHT SIR ROBERT RICH, AND TO THE WORTHY GENTLEMAN Master
Henry Rich his brother: sons to the right honorable the Lord RICH.
Having no other means out of my small fortunes to do you honor (right
worshipful and worthy Gentlemen) and to make your worthiness known to the
world, but only this paper present: J do here (according to my long intended
purpose) present you with the second part of Stephens Apology: desiring it may
remain with you as a pledge and testimony of my thankfulness, for the
continual flow of your manifold favors (far above the proportion of my
deserts) and as an earnest of that propense mind and unfeigned affection which J
bear to your house and name. The work you may justly challenge at my hands by
a double right. First in that it was begun at my honorable good Lord your
fathers house in Essex: where being destitute of other books, and knowing not
how to pass those long nights with better recreation: at your entreaty
together with my entire friend Monsieur Beaufort (the^ your schoolmaster for
the French tongue, and now Doctor of Physic in Basil) I first undertook the
work: beginning (as you know) (...), with the second part in the first place.
Secondly in that it is done by him who owes himself and all he can do, to
your love and service. But as the first borne among the Jews had a double
portion; so you Sir Robert have a double right herein above your brother.
First, in that your helping hand has not been wanting to the work, in
translating (at my motion, and for your own recreation) the 36* Chapter: which
without any great filing or fourbishing of mine, went to the press as it came
from your pen: being done so faithfully according to the French, and so fitly
and finely in regard of the English phrase, that J fear nothing so much, as
lest (like a piece of velvet in a beggars coat) it should shame the residue of
the work. And this I both should and would have seconded with your other
translation of D. Tylenus his confutation of the Bishop of Eureux (which you
left with me when you left the University) but that it was prevented by a
worse. Secondly, in that you were not only Primus motor, the man that first
set it on foot; but also (...), and he that kept it still on the wheels. For
had I not been first moved by you, it had never bin begun (at least by me:) and
had you not so often called upon me, as well by word as writing, it had lain
still in loose leaves as an idle toy, fitter to be ^udibrium venti, or meat
for the mothes, then matter for the Press. They therefore that shall reap
either profit or pleasure by this my translation, are to thank you for your
good motion, without which it had never seen the light of the Sun. And think
not (M. Henry) that you are here excluded; for as it was begun, so was it also
finished with special respect to your intended travail, that it might furnish
you with matter for discourse, in keeping complement at the French Court,
whither you have been so often sent for by your respective Godfather his
Majesty of France. To you both therefore I send it, as well to do you honor,
as to receive honor from you. Yet know this, that paper praises (being nothing
but the wind of men's words) can neither eternize your name, nor blazon your
fame to posterity (as that proud pedanticke thought, Appion Gra^matic.
who promised immortality to those to whom he dedicated any of his works.)
Virtue only and valor are the highway to true Honor; which Marcellus
signified by the two Temples which he dedicated to the Goddesses Virtue and
Honor, being so contrived, that no man could enter into the Temple of Honor,
but he that had first gone through that of Virtue. And the truth hereof may
appear in the glass of these examples: For these four worthies of the world,
Alexander, Caesar, Augustus, Constantine, of whose names cities were built and
months denominated, continue famous even to this day. And so long as the two
months in the year, July and August; and those two renowned cities,
Alexandria and Constantinople remain, their memory shall never perish. Whereas
Nero, Commodus, and such like monsters, Suet. in N^rone, cap ^5. Aurel. Vict.
de Caesarib. c. 17. and Eutrop. ^i. 6
who attempted the like (the first laboring to have April called Neronius; the
second, September Commodus) have fallen to the very counterpoint of that they
aimed at, dying like a candle which leaves the snuff stinking after it; being
now no way famous but by the infamy of their wicked lives. And what can be said
of the Kings of France called the idle, save only this, that they have left
nothing memorable, but that they left no memory? The like inglorious end
cannot but befall all those who either with the idle drone eat more then they
earne; or waste the candle in idle play, which was allowed to have lighted them
to bed. This I speak not as taking upon me to school you, or to read you a
lecture as if you were still in the University; but in duty to your Father
(to whom J am so infinitely indebted for his honorable favors) and in love to
your persons, to encourage you on in a good course, by adding fuel to the
fire, and oil to the flame: that as you are rich in name and in outward goods,
but more rich in those of the body, so you may be most rich in those of the
mind, and so be true inheritors not only of your Fathers name and goods, but
also of his virtues, in being the shadow of his mind; making his example and
honorable courses the Cynosura by which you are to direct your course. For
(doubtless) in so doing you shall not only avoid Scylla and Charybdis, those
dangerous rocks and devouring gulfes which lie in your way, where so many are
either swallowed up, or suffer ship-wracke, (you know what J mean:) but arrive
in the end at the haven of eternal happiness. And there J leave you.

Your Worsh. most affectionate, R.C.

THE SECOND PART OF THE PREPARATIVE TREATISE TO THE APOLOGY FOR HERODOTVS.
The Preface.
I Proceed now to prosecute the second part of this present Apology. For
having in the beginning of this Discourse propounded to handle these two
things; first the reverend opinion which some had of antiquity: secondly, the
base conceit that others had thereof. And having showed how the former did
honor and reverence it, in regard of the virtuous lives and valorous deeds of
their ancestors; and how the latter (on the contrary) had it in high scorn
and disdain, in regard of their rudeness and simplicity, I thought it not
impertinent (the better to content and satisfy the Reader) to allege some
few examples, by which he might see, as in a crystal, the particulars which I
undertook to demonstrate. And hoping I have sufficiently acquit my self,
touching the former point (as having showed how far the wickedness of these
times does exceed and go beyond that of former ages in sundry things) it
remains I should endeavor the like in the second: which when I shall have
fully finished, I hope I shall have made a reasonable good preparatiue to the
Apology for Herodotus. But how (may some say) can these particular instances
and allegations sufficiently serve to win credit and authority to Herodotus
his history, considering they consist of modern examples, borrowed partly from
this, and partly from the Age last past? Mark therefore my answer, which will
further show the scope which I aim at. Albeit we find strange stories in
Herodotus, which seem to some altogether incredible, partly because they
cannot conceive how men should be so notoriously wicked and profane; partly
because it will not sink into their heads, that ever any were so rude and
rusticall: yet I doubt not, but when I shall have decyphered the villainies of
this Age, how transcende^t they are, in comparison of former times; we shall
have just cause to say, that as we have seen sundry strange things in this
last centenary of the world, which were not known nor heard of in the former
(much less in the ages before) and yet are such as we cannot call into
question (except we will distrust our senses, as having bin eare-witnesses and
eyewitnesses thereof:) so we are not to think but that the age in which
Herodotus lived, and the precedent, had some proper and peculiar to themselves,
which would not have bin thought so incredible, had we lived in those days. I
affirm the like of the second point, assuring my self that when I shall have
showed how those that lived in the age last past, were not only simple, but
also rude and rusticall in comparison; all men of judgment will easily grant,
that as we cannot doubt of the rusticitie of our late forefathers, it being so
authentically witnessed (though otherwise perhaps it might seem incredible:) so
neither are we to think but that they which lived so many hundred years ago
had their clownishnesse proper to themselves, which would not have bin thought
so incredible (as now it is) had we bin their next successors; seeing we might
have had it confirmed by infallible testimonies. Now this argument my purpose
is to handle generally, to the end it may serve as a preparatiue to the
Apology for Herodotus, till I have more time and leisure, as also better
means and opportunity to handle it more distinctly, and to find out modern
examples to suit and parallele those which seem so strange in this our
Historian.

2 But what? (may some say) should a man think those stories in Herodotus to
be incredible, only in regard of the two former reasons, viz. their notorious
villainy, and sottish simplicity? No verily: for many men's incredulity proceeds
from a third cause, viz. in that they consider not the great change and
alteration which is to be seen almost in every thing since those times: but
would have the natural disposition of men in diebus illis, and their course of
life so to suit ours, as that they should take pleasure in those things wherein
we take pleasure: and contrarily, that whatsoever disliketh us, should have bin
distasteful unto the^. And (which is more) they would find an agreement and
correspondence between the estates of ancient kingdoms and common wealths,
with those at this day. Nay, some are so inconsiderate in reading of ancient
stories, that they measure the climates of foreign and far remote countries
by their own. No marvel therefore if finding such discord and disagreement in
all these things, they judge ancient stories to be as far from truth, as the
things they read are differing from those they daily hear and see. Knowing
therefore this to be a third reason why many can hardly subscribe unto them, I
have reserved for it the third part of this treatise. But I am to entreat thee
(gentle Reader) to give me leave to omit that for the present, which my
occasions will not permit me to annexe, not doubting but I shall give thee a
specimen hereof in the Preface which I am to prefixe before this present work.

CHAP. XXVII. How some Poets (contrary to the current) have preferred their
own age before the former, as being much more civil, and of far better
grace.
THe sighs of Hesiod, and groans of Tibullus, uttered in the depth of their
discontent, in dislike of the customs and fashions of their times, have bin
sufficiently witnessed before by their verses: wherein they affirm (as we have
heard) that they had bin happy men, if they had bin borne before: whereas they
thought themselves wretched and miserable, in being borne in so bad a time. But
what shall we say of those who contrarily think themselves happy, in that they
were borne in so good a time: good (I say) in regard of the former. For what
says Ovid? Prisca iuuent alios, ego nunc me denique natum,
Gratulor: haec aetas moribus apta meis.
Let others praise the times and things forepast,
I joy my self reserved till the last.
This age of all does best my humor fit.
Where though he cross and contrary Hesiod and Tibullus in his wish and
desire, yet he concurres with them in the cause thereof. For the reason which
made them wish they had bin borne in some other age, was the exceeding great
looseness and lewdness of their own. On the other side, the reason why Ovid
contented himself with his own, and preferred it before the former, was not
because there was less wickedness and impiety, but greater vrbanitie and
civility. For he says expressly, Sed quia cultus adest, nec nostros mansit in
annos
Rusticitas priscis illa superstes auis.
And if I were to prosecute this argument, I might particularize wherein his
age was more civil then the former, and namely then those which came nearest
to that of old dreaming Saturn, as Poets speak. I might also draw out a long
thread of a little flax, and show how men's wits have bin more and more
sharpened, refined, and (as it were) sublimated from time to time. Whence it
comes to pass that they have had a further insight into the works they took
in hand, and have daily added something unto them, to perfect and polish them
the better, so that antic words and workmanship seem to be but rude and
rusticall in comparison. But if I should further proceed in handling of this
argument, I should but entangle my self in an endless labyrinth: it shall
suffice therefore, if (according to my former promise) I compare the age last
past with this wherein we live: yet not taking upon me curiously to scan every
point of this comparison; but after I have handled some of less moment, to
come to the maine and most material point of all, which deserves a far more
ample and large discourse. Howbeit I am first to perform my former promise,
and to allege certain French phrases, whereby we express the base conceit
we have of Antiquity, and that for the same reason for which Ovid says,
Prisca iuuent alios. I say then that besides this French phrase, Fait a
l'antique, or fait a la vieille mode, that is, made after the old fashion, by
which we signify a thing to be made rudely or inartificially, (though fait a
l'antique be sometimes used without scorn or contempt, according as the
subject is whereof we speak) we have other phrases whereby we declare the
conceit which we have of the rusticitie and clownishnesse of ancient times. For
when we say, Cela se faisoit au temps iadis, that is, This was made in old
time: our meaning is, that it is out of use, and quae obsoleuit (as the Latins
speak) and such as at this day would seem but rude and rusticall. But this
phrase Du temps des hauts bonnets, that is, when high hats were in use, or when
high bonnets were in request, seems to have had his original from the rude
and clownish apparel then in use, though it specify but one particular: as if
we should say, When men arrayed themselves so clownishly, or, when men had not
the wit to choose a fashion fit and easy for them. This likewise is spoken in
way of derision, Du temps que les bestes parloyent, In old time when beasts
spoke: as if we shou^^^y, In old time when there were such sots, that a man
might have persuaded them that beasts could speak. Which is spoken (I take it)
in regard of Aesops fables, which were then turned into our mother tongue. We
say also, Du temps qu'on se cachoit pour prester de l'argent: When men hid
themselves to lend money: which (though it be spoken in way of derision as the
former) is an argument rather of simplicity then of rusticitie. For they
(doubtless) were very simple, who in stead of lending their money before
witnesses, and taking a bond of their debtors before public notaries (as the
manner is now) lent it in secret; more respecting the borrowers credit, that it
might not be known he stood in need, then their own security. And therefore
it may well be numbered among the prouerbiall sentences formerly spoken of in
the beginning of this treatise, which show the great good opinion generally
conceived of the fidelity of men in former times. Besides all which, we have
these three prouerbiall sentences spoken of Kings: Du temps que les Rois se
mouchoient a leur manche: that is, When Kings wiped their noses on their
sleeves: or, Du temps que les Rois faisoyent de leur manche^vn mouchoir: that
is, When Kings made handkerchieues of their sleeves. And, Du temps que les Rois
estoyent bergers: that is* When Kings were shepherds. And, Auant que les Rois
sortissent horse de page: that is, Before that Kings came out of their
minority. The last of which is in some sort proper to the Kings of France. For
King Lewis the eleventh was the first (as the French story says) that
cashiered the Lord Potectour, and disanulled the law of Minority: showing his
heirs and successors how they might command Kings, and say, Sic volo, sic
iubeo. The first of these, viz. When Kings wiped on their sleeves, is somewhat
harsh and less in use: giving us to understand, that Kings in old time were so
sordid and slouenly, that they would not stick to play the pranke that
children are wont to do when they cannot find their handkerchieues: or because
they would make short work, and not be all the day in blowing their noses. For
my part I make no question but that it is an hyperbolicall speech, which I
cannot affirm of the second, viz. when Kings were shepherds: and if I should,
I might easily be confuted by infinite authorities. True it is indeed, there
are few Kings to be found who have bin shepherds: howbeit many have bin
grasiers, and have gotten their chiefest wealth and riches thereby. And our
historian tells us in his eight book, that though Kings in old time had but
small store of money, yet they had great store of cattle, wherewith they used to
traffic. Where he also speaks of a Queen who played the cook, and wrought
pastry work with her own hands. How ever it were, we read of a Cardinal of
Auinion who knew well how to make use of this proverb, in answering a King of
France like for like. For when the King (seeing the Persian pomp of the Popes
Court, and the pride of the Cardinals) asked him whether the Apostles ever went
with such a train after them? he answered, No verily: but you must consider
sir (quoth he) that they were Apostles the same time that kings were shepherds.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the rudeness and rusticitie of our Ancestors in sundry
things.
AS there be some Poets who commend former times, and extol them to the skies,
in the mean time speaking basely of their own; and others contrarily who (in
other respects) make greater reckoning of their own age then of the former: so
we cannot but hear how old men praise the good days and times which they had
in their youth, in comparison of the present: whereas the younger sort make no
account of any age but of their own. Now if we consider the reasons which
moved them to think and speak in (...) sort, we shall find that they did it
upon the same ground and for the same consideration. For as they who so highly
honored and extolled antiquity, did it in regard of virtue and valor, then
far greater without comparison, then at this day; and they on the contrary
which had it in such contempt, did scorn it in regard of the rudeness and
rusticitie which then reigned: so (doubtless) the thing for which old men
either do or can with any color prefer times past before the present, is the
simplicity and fidelity of those times. Whereas youth at this day esteem
rather their own age then any other, for that they see greater cunning and
dexterity, and a more civil and vrbane kind of life. So that if any shall
say, that when old men speak of the good times which they have seen, they
understand it not only in regard of that honest, simple and plain dealing
which was then used, but in other respects also, I will not greatly contend; so
they grant withal, that they did it principally in that regard. For when
Horace (describing the qualities of an old man) says that he is -- Laudator
temporis acti,
Se puero* censor, castigatorque minorum.
That is, Of his young times a man of large report,
A sharp controller of the younger sort.
His meaning (no doubt) is to signify the usual speech of old men, viz. that
all things stood in better terms in their younger years: and that there was
not such excess and riot in the world as is to be seen at this day. Which
they speak as being of opinion that the world waxes daily worse and worse:
and hereupon would rule and square, not only the manners, but also the actions
of the younger sort accordingly. For if an old man speak of the youth of these
times, he will tell you that it is no wonder to see so many mischiefs raging
in the world, and that we are not to look for such golden days as he has
seen; the world being clean changed and turned up side down, so that he can
hardly remember what he has seen. And he will especially inuey and declaime
against pomp and bravery in apparel, and delicate fa^e* which he will affirm
to be far greater now then it was in times past; and that it is the cause of
the dearth and scarcity we now see: as also of many outrages and
misdemeanors, and that it makes men more effeminate. Nay they proceed
sometime further, in making the youth of those times petty Saints, when they
say (as the author of the Courtier does relate it with excellent good grace) Io
haueua vent' anni che ancor dormiua con mia madre, and mie sorelle: ne seppi
iui a gran^tempo che cosa fossero done: and hora fanciulli non ha^no a pena
asciutto il capo, che sanno piu malitie che in que tempi non sappeano gli
homini fatti. That is: I lay with my mother and sisters till I was twenty year
old, and knew not of a long time what manner of creature a woman was: whereas
children now scarce crept out of the cradle, know mo knacks of knavery then men
of years did in times past. Now as old men exceed the bounds of truth, by
running so far into one extreme: so shall we likewise, if we deny that they had
not reason to complain of a bad change, the world still declining from better
to worse. To conclude then, we will easily grant these gray beards, that in
their younger years the world was not so wicked: so that they yield to our
green heads, that it was more rude and rustical; and that it was not so
witty, because it was not so wicked.

2 But lest they should say that my tongue runs at randon: I will instance
it by examples. And because there is nothing, which we make greater account of,
or judge more necessary for our bodies, then food to nourish them, and raiment
to cloth them; and therefore are not only careful but even (...) providing
such necessaries: I will enter discourse of them in the first place^ ^ouching
the first, therefore (because I take it for a confessed truth, that our
ancestors never showed themselves more curious in their diet, then many
countries at this day,) I shall desire the reader not to take it amiss, if I
compare some of their customs and fashions, with those in use at this present.
And first I will begin with one which is so common and ordinary, that
children of ten or twelve years of age may well remember it: and if I should
say that it were yet practiced in some places of France, I should not (it may
be) speak without my book. It is a foolish custom taken up by certain
gentlemen, who to the end they may cunningly deceive and finely fetch over
their servants, cause their table to be furnished at the first service, with I
know not what fried fritters, hotchpotches, sippets, sauces, and
gallymalfrayes: and then with store of Mutton, Veale, and bou^sing pieces of
Beef, which pieces of Beef they will rather feed upon, then upon any other
dish. And after that the stomach has revenged his quarrel upon such gross
meats, they serve in Capon, Chicken, Pigeon, and wild foul. Yet not all in
one course: for they keep Partridge, Phaysant and other dainties, for the last
service; the stomach being not only satisfied, but even closed up. So that it
is great pity to see how the seruitors (poor souls) are glad to eat such
meats, as their stomachs were never accustomed unto, and to leave their
ordinary fare for their masters and mistresses. I mean how they are to take the
pains to eat the finer meats, as wild foul, and venaison, and to leave the
grosser for them. What then can the old man answer, Laudator te^poris acti se
puero? Or what can he say (trow we) to defend or excuse the rusticity of former
times? (for in that I call those that used this seemly service, but rude and
rusticall, I favor them much.) And were it not that I am afraid I should be
over troublesome, I would gladly ask them yet another question, touching
Partridge, and such like foul, viz. Whether those men had noses or not? and if
they had, what noses they were, when they could find no goodness in wild
foul, and venaison, except it were tainted a little, that is, (to speak plain
English) except it stunke a little, this stincke seeming to them to be (...) of
venaison?

3 But now to proceed to the fashions of other countries, which have been
(perhaps) practiced alike by our ancestors, as has been said. Albeit then
there be no Frenchman to be found at this day, if he be of the right stamp,
and have wherewith to maintain himself, who has so bad a taste, but can put a
difference between tender and tough flesh: yet it were a wonder (I had almost
said a miracle) to see a German who never travailed abroad, that either
observed or cared to observe this difference. For example, Ne gallina malum
responset dura palato, as Horace speaks: that is, lest the pullets flesh
should be over tough, and unpleasant to the taste, the Frenchman who has no
leisure to kill it a day or two before, that it may wax tender of it self,
will have twenty devises besides those mentioned in Horace. But when he shall
leave France his native country, and come into Germany, he will not a little
wonder to see a pullet (or some cock of the game, for want of a better) served
to the table, which he had heard crowing in the court but half an hour
before: which shall be killed, plumed, and boiled, al in the sodainnesse of an
instant. If our ancestors then (not to speak of Germans) have done the like,
may we not truly say that they were very rude and rusticall? Except some
proctor shall happily plead for them, and tell us that their stomachs were
hotter then ours; so that they could digest meat half raw, as well as we can
flesh thoroughly roasted, boiled, or baked. But Physicians, which lived in those
days, witness the contrary. This therefore may serve for an instance of
cookerie or dressing of meats. Let us see another in the choice of them:
choice I say, not of diverse sorts of meats, but of the same kind. And here
(doubtless) we shall find many masters, whom Galen might as well laugh at, as
he did at those suitors which courted Penelope (as Homer records) for eating
the great villainous swine, and leaving the young pigs for their servants. For
considering the common saying in every man's mouth, Young flesh, and old fish:
had not our ancestors small wit (in comparison) to eat the old dam, and to
leave the young? to eat the old Partridge and to leave the brood? to eat the
old Hare, and not so much as once to touch the leuerets? Notwithstanding
whatsoever can be spoken of our forefathers in this behalf, may truly be
affirmed of many countries at this day. For when I was at Venice I heard
certain noble men affirm, that they had learned of the French Kings
Ambassador sent to the State, that young partridges and leuerets were very
good meat. And I remember, the Lord Conrade Resch told me, how that being at
Basil, and demanded by certain Switzers what he would do with those leuerets
which were brought him for a present; answered that he would make distilled
water for the gout: which they (simple souls) did verily believe. I might here
also speak of the (...)-like rusticks, who taking pigs ears and pigs skins,
the rumpe, pinion* and neck of geese, (which Frenchmen call la petite oye, the
goose giblet) as also calves and sheeps feet, with capons livers, and such like
garbage; of all these put together, make a hotchpotch or gallimalfray: wronging
themselves as well in this as in other things. But if I should enter discourse
hereof, I doubt I should not be believed: and I fear me this argument would be
thought too homely and base, and so would derogate from the grave and serious
matters contained in this book.

4 To come therefore to the rusticitie which our ancestors bewrayed in their
apparel, of which the pictures and statues yet extant, do give sufficient
testimony. Were it not a goodly sight to see a man bigguined with a hood upon
his head, like a great flasket, and a string under the chin: (a fashion not yet
altogether worn out of use:) or one with a high hat like a spire steeple, or
like a Turkish Or tolibant^
turbant, or a crosse-bow, or a Switzers swearing swaggering cap; of that
bigness, that of so much cloth a man might make (as the fashion is now) three
or four? Were it not (I beseech you) a seemly sight to see the fine feature of
my finicall fellow and gentle Jack braggard, when he has put on his iacket
reaching a full handful below his knees, being of that size that a man might
make a cassock and a pair of bases of it, or a great riding hood after the
Spanish fashion? And were it not as goodly a sight to see, not only all his
neck, but often all the upper parts of his shoulders and his breast also bare by
reason of his fond fantastical apparel indented like a half Moon? And as for
women, had not Madame N. With her great gaping gorget.
a la grand gorre (as Preachers in those days were wont to speak) a very good
grace, when she had her gown on, the very sleeves whereof were large enough to
make a whole one? And was it not as goodly a sight to see their long tails
tucked up, or trailing along, and sweeping the Church as they went? And if we
speak of base botchery, were it a comely thing to see a great Lord or a King
wear sleeves of two parishes, one half of woosted, the other of velvet? or a
dublet of three parishes, the back and forepart of half woosted, the upper
part of the sleeue of skin, and that toward the hand of velvet? True it is
indeed, the forebody had a guard of velvet of some two fingers broad, which
because it had never a whit on the back, was called Nichil au dos, a word which
has gone current in many men's mouths, who understanding not the original
thereof, have pronounced it Nichilodo, and applied it generally to all such
things whose inside is not answerable to the outside, though especially to
apparel: as at this day those peticoates or saueguards which have only the
forepart of stuff and the rest of linen cloth, or such like, (as some
gentlewomen use to wear) may in this sense be called peticoates a la
nichilodo. But, as it were to be wished that this were our gentlewomens worst
huswifery; so we must needs grant, that (considering those times) there was no
great hurt in such botchery. In speaking whereof I have extended my discourse
as far as Ovid has done his, in his verses formerly alleged; where he does
not only affirm that his age brought up a more civil carriage and course of
life, but even court-like and magnificent in outward comportment, such as was
not to be seen in former time; as indeed they go hand in hand, for the most
part. Notwithstanding we are not ignorant how many mischiefs and miseries
attend upon bravery, and what benefit has accrewed to the weal public by
means of frugalitie. We read in the French story how certain of the Nobility
of France sent two messengers to king Charles the sixth, to inform him of the
change and alteration that had bin in the state since the days of his father
Charles the fifth; among other things, how much the expenses of his house
exceeded his fathers expenses: but the maine matter for which they complained,
was, for that the Cha^celor had spent twenty pounds in apparel in one year,
which he had purloyned out of the kings treasure: which was judged so heinous
an offense, that he fearing to undergo the penalty, was glad to fly his
country. I leave it therefore to thy judgment (gentle Reader) to consider how
much the world is grown more miserable at this day, with all his pomp and
prodigality, then it was in former time with all his frugalitie. For it is now
come to this pass, that a paltry companion will not stick to bestow ten
pounds (or very near) upon one only pair of bre^ches. Notwithstanding if all
things be duly considered, it may well be doubted whether that which is called
botchery, may fitly be termed frugalitie or not, seeing that when they would
not be at the cost to wear sleeves of velvet, they made far more vain and
needless expenses.

5 Concerning the attiring and trimming of the body, was it not a goodly sight
to see a man with a close shaven beard, wear a great perriwig, bien
esperlucat, that is, finely frezled? for that is the word which was then in
use, and is to be found even in Menot himself, in stead of the Latin word
calamistratus. And so in the rhyme made by a bon compagnon, long before Menots
time, we read these verses, Plus fringant and esperlucat,
Et cent fois plus gay que Perot,
O^ le valet d'vn Auocat.
That is, More spruce and nimble, and more gay to seen,
Then some Atturneys Clarke* or George a Green.
And how should we excuse their rudeness and simplicity, in taking such
pains to nourish that which puts the^ to greater? For who is so simple,
that knows not, I say not the inconveniences, but the diseases which are
caused by these long perriwigs? And yet some there are who take a pleasure and
pride in them. But whether a beard become a man well or not, I appeal to those
who are as much ashamed of themselves that they have none, as a dog that has
lost his tail. For proof whereof I report my self to these verses: -- Turpis
sine frondibus arbor,
Turpis equus nisi colla iuba flauentia velent:
Pluma tegit volucres, ouibus sua lana decor^ est,
Barba viros, hirt^que decent in corpore setae.
Notwithstanding all this, the poor Crucifixes then in use, were constrained
to accommodate themselves to the humors of those times. For falling into the
hands of such as wore their beards shaven, there was no remedy, they must have
their beards shaven in like manner. And meeting with other good fellows, who
chose rather to wear a tuft or two in stee^ of a beard, they also must have
the like. Whereas being in those countries where men use to wear their beards
tied to their girdles, or reaching down to their knees, they must of necessity
follow the fashion, though sore (God knows) against their wills. For every man
would have his Crucifix hold that fashion comely, which himself thought comely.
This is the reason of the sundry sorts of Crucifixes that are to be seen at
this day.

6 But let me not forget their manner of building whereby they deprived
themselves almost of all those commodities, which we desire to have (and that
not without just cause) in our buildings: and I had almost said, that they
imprisoned themselves in their houses, in making them like prisons or dungeons.
For whereas they cared not what their buildings were, so that they had thick
and strong walls, in the mean time they deprived themselves of the benefit of
the light, for want of wit to make such windows as are in use at this day.
Besides, they made them strait and narrow, whereas they might have made them
large and broad: and with many holes like rats nests, in steed of a number of
lightsome, large and pleasant lights: and to foresee that one house might not
ouertop or drop upon another, or that their neighbors might not ouerlooke
them, was a thing nothing regarded. And touching the house which cannot so
honestly be named as it is necessarily used, they have not followed nature, in
setting it in a fit place. For whereas nature has removed the basest and most
unseemly parts of the body furthest from the sight and smell; they contrarily
set it to the open view, of purpose (as it were) to be seen.

7 And when we compare the workmanship used in old time, with that which is to
be seen at this day, can we say that those artisans had any wit in their
heads? For who so shall mark the fairest cupboord or bedstead made in those
days, will (doubtless) judge it to be rather Carpenters then Ioyne^ work.
And he that shall observe their Iron works which are to be seen in cupboords,
chests, or doors, may well doubt whether lockesmithes in former time used files
or not, or rather what fashioned files they had. For we may well perceive, they
have been filed, yet nothing so smoothly and artificially as at this day. True
it is indeed (to make amends for this defect) they were no niggards in
bestowing cost upon their work; I mean in enriching it with compartements and
such like ornaments, though neither barrel better Herring. This I must need^
say, that whereas men are now a days very sparing in bestowing cost upon their
buildings: they the^ lauished it out (as it were) for the heavens, as if it had
cost them nothing. Witness the harness then in use, which was so ponderous,
that a man having it upon his back, was unfit almost for any service: whereas it
is now not half so weighty, and yet of pistol proof. The like may be said of
murrions or head pieces; I mean such harness and headpeeces, as were made
since the invention of harquebuzes: for before the invention of guns, men
contented themselves, if they had them of the thickness of iron plates. And to
speak somewhat of our common and ordinary weapons, would not one of their
swords make three of ours? And are there not some swords to be seen, the very
handle of one of which is heavier then any two used at this day, blade and all?
which notwithstanding are both easier for carriage, and more commodious for
defense.

8 And what shall we say of the phrase and manner of pronuntiation used by our
ancestors? what ears had they (may we think) who could with patientce endure
to hear Mon friar Piarre, my brother Pete^? Mo^ friar Robart, my brother
Robart, La place Maubart, The place Maubart? And yet the French Poet Villon
(one that writ as eloquently as any in those days) speaks so. This may serve
for an instance of their Dorick dialect in taking delight to speak broadly,
much like the Dorians among the Grecians, and the Sauoyards among the French.
There are another sort of simper-de-cockets, who counterfeit puppets, in
speaking so finely that they will scarce open their mouths; for making
conscience to say Francois, Anglois, they say Frances, Angles. Nay, there are
some Courtiers which affect this nice pronunciation, following certain fine
mincing minions rather then reason. For certes this pretty kind of puppet-parley
was first taken up by women, who feared to open their mouths too wide in
saying Francois, Anglois. How ever it be, I persuade my self, that neither
they nor their followers are able to give any better reason of this their
pronunciation, then the gentlewoman of Sauoy could give of her singing
magnificet in stead of magnificat; who thought by this means to shun the fault
of her country dialect in pronouncing A in stead of E. Neither can these fine
finicall affecters allege the Italian tongue (which says Francese and
Francesi) to warrant their pronunciation: except they will do this wrong to
their own language, to say that it has borrowed from the Italian. Italians
indeed use to say Inglese and Inglesi; but herein doubtless they imitate us,
as not being able to judge whether we speak well or ill, purely or corruptly.

9 Further, our ancestors have bin as gross and absurd in their words and
phrases, as in any of the premises. And verily considering the notorious
absurdities committed at this day by such as will needs be too fine in their
affected phrases (or rather foolishly finicall) they seem to me very
pardonable. For we have so purged and pruned the dead and rotten branches from
the tree of the old French tongue, that we have lopped off the good together
with the bad. And then like bad husbands have gone a begging (or borrowing)
that of our neighbors which we had growing in our own orchyards (yea better
then they had any) if we would have taken the pains to have sought it out: as I
have showed more at large in my Conformity of the French tongue with the
Greek.

10 And how cunning and expert they were in making fine and well framed
orations in their gross gibbridge, may appear by the stories of those times.
As for their rimes (I mean their rythmes) it is a world to see how rude and
rusticall they were. For they neither cared for rhyme nor reason, neither
regarded they how hoblingly they ran, seeing they never respected the number
of feet: which is the less to be wondered at, considering that Marot himself
in his first Poems, played the rimester at all adventure, knowing neither
section nor caesure, nor yet observing the difference between E masculine and
E feminine. And verily most of the rimes clouted together (I cannot say
composed) in ancient time, seem to have bin made of purpose to move laughter,
those especially which are of this strain: Priez pour Martin Preudom,
Qui a fait fair ceste vie,
Que Di^u^^^ face pardon,
En rhyme and en tapisserie.
That is, All good folk pray world without end,
For Martin Preudom that made this legend:
That he of God moght pardoned be,
Both in good rhyme and tapistrie*
For the author of this goodly A quatrain or staff of sour ver^es.
tetrastich, was so simple, that he thought his straining of himself to make
rhyme doggrell, would be a sufficient excuse for him, though he spoke
ridiculously and without reason, viz. that God would pardon him in rhyme and
tapistrie. Another old Elderton and right baladin-rimester made no bones to
conclude an Epitaph in this sort: Et mourut quatre cens and neuf,
Tout plein de virtue comme un oeuf.
That is, And died in the year four hundredth and nine,
Full (as an egg) of grace divine.
The like good grace had most of their Latin rimes, especially their Epitaphs,
as namely this which follows: Qui iacet intus,
Fuit Carolus Quintus:
Dic pro illo bis vel ter,
Aue Maria, and Pater noster.
But it is now high time we should speak of their rudeness in matters of
greater consequence, namely in the maine point mentioned before, which is the
salvation of men's souls.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the gross and blockish ignorance of the Popish Clergy,
especially of the Mass Priests.
IN the former Chapter we might plainly see the gross and palpable ignorance
of the former Age. Notwithstanding though it had been ten times greater then it
was (if it had been possible,) yet so long as the Clergy had not their parts
therein, in being as blind bayards as the rest, the poor peoples case had not
been half so lamentable: whereas the most brutish and blockish ignorance was
to be found in Friars cowles, especially in the Masse-monging priests. Which we
are the less to wonder at, considering that which Men^t twits them in the
teeth withal, that in stead of books, there was nothing to be found in their
chambers but a sword, or a long bow, or a crosbow, or some such weapon. Sed
nunc (says he) quid in cameris Sacerdotum reperietis? An expositionem
Epistolarum, aut Postillam super Euangelia? Non: Faceret eis malum in capite
magister Nicolaus de Lyra. Quid ergo? Vnum arcum, vel balistam, spatham, aut
aliud genus armorum. But how could they send ad ordos such ignorant asses? You
must note (Sir) that they which examined them were as wise woodcocks as
themselves, and therefore judged of them as penmen of pike-men, and blind men
of colors. Or were it that they had so much learning in their budgets, as that
they could make a shift to know their insufficiency; yet to pleasure those that
recommended them, they suffered them to pass. One is famous among the rest,
who being asked by the Bishop sitting at the table, Es tu dignus? answered, No
my Lord: but I shall dine anon with your men. For he thought that dignus (that
is worthy) had signified to dine. It is reported also of another, who going to
the Bishop for his orders, and being asked this question (to try his learning
and sufficiency) Who was father to the four sons of Aymond? and knowing not
what to answer, was refused as insufficient. Who returning home again, and
showing the reason why he was not priested; his father told him that he was a
very ass, that could not tell who was father to the four sons of Aymond.
See I pray thee (quoth he) yonder is great John the smith, who has four
sons: if a man should ask thee, who is their father, would thou not say
that it were great John the smith? Yes (quoth he) now I understand it well.
Thereupon he went again, as having learned his lesson better. And being asked
the second time who was father to the four sons of Aymond, answered, that it
was great John the smith. Many such pleasant questions were asked them for
sport and pastime sake, and to make my Lord Bishop merry (who sat by;) as also
to take trial of the^, whether they were plain noddies and cockscombs or not.
As when one being asked what was the daintiest morsel in a pig, and having
answered that it was the pigs coat; for this so good and fit an answer was
thought worthy to have the order of priesthood. Whereas another (which came
after) being demanded what was the best bit in a calfe, and having answered
that it was the skin (for he thought he would be sure to answer as the former
had done) was holden unworthy to be made a parish Priest, as having made a
caluish answer; thereby showing that he had not wit enough to be of that trade.

2 But I am ashamed to employ my pen and pains about such sottish questions as
were asked them, to try whether they were bons compagnons or not: asked (I say)
only pro forma, to the end they might say they had bin examined. Now if there
be any so hard of belief as will not credit it, I shall desire him to consider
how ever it was possible to get from these Priests (which were as blind as
beetles) a pertinent answer to any demand touching their place and office: I
mean the office into which they most of all desired to be invested. How blind
and ignorant were they? (may some say.) Surely so blind that they could hardly
see to read. And if this shall seem yet more incredible, I refer my self
to their Canon law, where it is recorded that a Priest baptizing a child upon a
time, used these words: Baptiz^ te in nomine patria, and filia, and spiritua
sancta. But because it is a very memorable fact I will set down the words at
large. Mark then what is recorded word for word in the third part of the
Decrees De consecr. did. 4. canone 84. Zacharias Papa Bonifacio Episcopo:
Retulerunt mihi nuntij tui quod fuit sacerdos in eadem prouincia, qui Latinam
linguam penitus ignorabat, and dum baptizaret, nescius Latini eloquij,
infringens linguam, diceret, Baptizo te in nomine patria, and filia, and
spiritua sancta: and per hoc tua reuerenda sanctit^s considerauit eos
rebaptizare: sed sanctissime Frater, si ille qui baptizauit, non errore^
inducens, vel haeresin, sed pro sola ignorantia Romanae locutionis, infringendo
linguam (vt supra diximus) baptizans dixisset, non possumus consentire vt denuo
baptizetur. Which Canon has done Peter Lombard knights service; for it has
served his turn excellently well: Lib. 4. sen. did. 6. For, for a full and
final resolution of this question, Si baptismus sit verbis corrupt prolatis*
he alleges nothing but this Canon. Quaeri etiam solet (says he) si corrupt
proferantur verba illa, an baptismus sit? De hoc Zacharias Bonifacio scribit.
Retulerunt, etc. For my part, I remember well I have heard some Priests
administering baptism say Abrinuncio, in stead of Abrenuncio. And in
consecrating (as they speak) hoc est corpum meum.

3 But some advocate may happily stand up in defense of them, and say, that all
of them neither are nor have bin so ignorant, but that there are some which are
but simple priests, who can not only legere vt Clerici, that is, readily and
distinctly, but also understand what they read. I grant indeed that all are
not such ignorant asses: but this I say, that the most ignorant are least
dangerous. For proof hereof: who corrupted the text of the new Testament, but
they that had a little smattering in learning? Who was he that corrected the
place in S. Luke, which speaks of a woman who having lost a groat, swept the
house to find it? Who put euertit domu^, she ouerturned the house, in stead of
euerrit domu^, she swept the house? but he who had read over so many classicke
authors, that in some blind corner he met with euertit in stead of euerrit.
They have also served the place in the Acts of the Apostles with the same
sauce. For in stead of demissus per sportam, they have put demissus per portam.
In honor of which correction, these four verses were made by one that heard a
Popish preacher follow that translation in his Sermon: Par ici passa deuant hier
Un tres-notable charpentier,
Qui besongn^ de tell sort,
Que d'vn panier fit vne port.
That is, This way the other day did pass,
A jolly Carpenter as ever was:
So strangely skillful in his trade,
That of a basket a door he made.


4 There be sundry other places corrupted after the same manner, in the first
impression of the old translation. And I remember a Printer was in danger to
fry a faggot for putting euerrit into the text in stead of euertit. And as for
sundry words of the New Testament, they have either changed their writing and
orthography, or at leastwise their signification, in framing unto them
significations according to their own coniecturall imaginations. As in the
place of Saint Paul, in stead of haereticum deuita, that is, Shun or avoid
an heretic: they (like profou^d divines) have diuined the sense to be this,
Put an heriticke to death. Yet all this is nothing to the interpretation of
this place, Inuenimus Messiam. John. 1. We have found the Mass. Nor of this,
Signa autem eos qui crediderint, haec sequentur etc. Sign them with the sign
of the Cross, etc. Amongst which brave interpretations, this may not be
forgotten which was made by a Curat of Artois, who suing his parishioners for
not repairing the Church, and namely for not pauing it, took the 17. chapter
of the Prophet Jeremy for his advocate to plead for him, where it is said,
Paueant illi and non paueam ego, etc. Whereas (quoth he) Jeremy says
expressly, Let them paue it, and not I, does he not give you to understand, that
it belongs not to the Curate to paue the Church, but to the parishioners? But
what shall we say to this interpretation, Confitemini alterutrum, Confess your
selves to the priest? For here I cannot see how the Latin word sounds any
thing near to the English, as in the former. And verily I do hear ingeniously
confess my ignorance, that I know not how such interpretations could ever come
into their heads.

5 But having discoursed sufficiently of simple Priests or monks; let us in
the next place come to Prelates; who (doubtless) have seconded the single soled
Priests: witness that profound clerk, who hearing some allege certain laws
called Cleme^tina and Nouella, fell into a pelting chafe, for that they urged
him with the testimony of whores, and harlots. And as for Prat the Chancellor
of France (if I may speak of him without offense, considering he was a clergy
man in his days) he showed he had some learning, though no more then would
serve his turn; when having read the letter which king Henry the eight had
sent to the French king Francis the first, wherein this clause was: Mitto tibi
duodecim molossos: I send you twelve mastiue dogs; he expounded it, I send you
a dozen mules. And being confident in this interpretation, went (accompanied
with another noble man) to the king, requesting his highness to bestow upon
him the present which the king of England had sent him. The king (who as yet
^ad heard nothing of this present) maruailed that Mules should be sent him out
of England, affirming that it was a rare nouelty indeed; and being desirous to
see the letter, ((...) that others also might read it,) they found them to be
duodecim molossos, twelve mastiue dogs. Whereupon the Cha^cellour seeing
himself made a laughing-stocke (and you may well imagine how) found out a
starting hole, which notwithstanding made him more ridiculous the^ before: for
he said he had mistaken the word, in taking mol^ssos for muletos.

6 And lest any should take exception against their Latin for want of
congruitie, let him know that herein they are dispensed with by their father S.
Gregory, who says, Non debent verb^ caelestis oraculi subesse regulis Donati.
And therefore one of the foresaid Preachers was greatly to blame, to lay this
in the Priests dish, that they understood not their Donate. And he that should
urge them to render a reason of their pronuntiation, should press them too far,
and sift them too narrowly. And I persuade my self, it was the least part of
Saint Gregory's meaning, that ever they should trouble their heads about it.
For he thought their mass was as effectual with Dominu vobiscon, as with
Dominus vobiscum, and Peronnia saecula, as Per omnia saecula; which makes me
less to wonder that a Channon should be called into question, because he would
be singular and have his pronuntiation apart by himself, in saying Per omnia
saecula. They found fault also with those that pronounced Kyrie eleison, in
stead of Kyrieleison, as by and by we shall hear.

7 And as for the Greek, you must pardon them, though they understand not one
jot; seeing greater Clearkes then they (I wisse) have not been ashamed to say,
Graecum est, non legitur: and Transeat, Graecum est. And if any man account
this their ignorance an evil thing, let him take this withal (for it may be
truly affirmed) that this evil is the cause of some good. For by this means
the number of men and women Saints has been increased. Saint Lonchi (otherwise
called Longi) may testify for men Saints: and Saint Typhaine for women saints;
for this Saints name comes of the Greek word (...) signifying a lance, or
spear (albeit it was long since given to him that pierced our Sauiors side
with a spear. And the name of the woman Saint, viz. Typhaine, comes of the
greek word (...) (as a man would say, The appearing of God.) And as true it is
likewise on the contrary, that this ignorance has augmented the number of
devils. For of Macrobius and such like names, they have coined new names of
devils. But as for poor Malchus (who had his ear cut off, and afterward his
name taken from him, and given to a kind of sword) I will leave him to plead
his own cause, lest it should be said, that I were the Jews advocate. Besides,
there is another benefit which accrewes to the Church by this means. For their
ignorance in not understanding the true and proper Etymologies of Greek words,
no not so much as whether they were Greek words or not, has made them ^^ke
out many subtle notations which otherwise had never been dreamed of. For
example, if it had been known, that presbyter had been all one with (...), an
old man; certes, they would never have dreamed of the Etymology which we find
in the book called Stella Clericorum, in the chapter beginning Quos ergo
praelati and presbyteri, etc. viz. presbyter dicitur quasi praebens iter. And
(as some wits are quicker and sharper then others, besides, Facile est addere
inuentis) they have not stayed here, but have found out a more subtle notation,
namely this, Presbyter quasi prae aliis bibens ter. Albeit this, I must needs
confess, is not so generally received. The like may be said of the word
Diabolus, that is, Devil. For had they known that (...) had signified a
standerer, or backbiter, we had bin yet to seek for this Etymology proceeding
from a most profound and deep speculation, Diabolus* ex dia, quod est duo: and
bolus, id est, morcellus. Quasi faciens duos bolos, de corpore and anima: that
is, This word Diabolus comes of dia* which signifies two, and bolus a morcel;
as making but two morcels of a man; one of his body, another of his soul. And
this (as I remember) is the Etymology given by Hugo Carrensis, but followed by
the foresaid preachers, and namely by Oliver Maillard. fol. 176. col. 2.

8 Moreover, if we pardon them the ignorance of the Greek tongue, there is
greater reason we should pardon their ignorance of the Hebrew, considering it
has (as we know) been always less common. And we must remember withal, that
it has been as a whetstone to sharpen the wits of many doctors, to find out
pleasant Etymologies and to draw them out of the very words themselves. Thus we
read that the name Jesus has two sillables, which signify the two natures of
Christ: it has further, five letters, three vowels, and two consonants, the
three vowels signifying the Trinity, the two consonants the two substances of
Christ's humanity, his body and soul; which subtle speculation is taken out of
the book of conformities of Saint Francis with Christ fol. 193. where Pope
Innocentius in his Sermons is said to be the author of it. But what? shall we
say nothing of the notation of Cephas? which they have made Greek, Latin,
French; rather then either Ebrew, or Syriacke. Let us here what Baralete says
to prove that Saint Peter ought to be preferred before S. Paul* Quod ad
praelationem vero, Petrus est mayor quam Paulus, quia Papa mayor est qua^
Legatus. Petrus fuit vniuersalis Christi Vicarius, cui dixit Christus, tu es
Petrus, tu es Simon: tu vocaberis Cephas, quod Grace dicitur mayor and primus,
quia scilicet fuit Papa. As for those who maintain (for proof hereof) that it
was a French word which our Savior then used (because Chef in French, is as
much as head in English, or Chieftaine and principal commander in any
enterprise or employment) they have gone clean against the hair. For they
might with greater reason have fetched it from the Greek (if they had
understood it) in cutting off the two last syllables from (...), whence the
French borrowed their word Chef.

9 See here (gentle Reader) how they played and sported themselves with the
interpretation of Greek, and Ebrew words in the Bible. And seeing the Greek and
Ebrew tongues are further remote from the common use; no marvel if they which
were offended with the Channon for pronouncing per omnia and not peronnia (so
offended I say, as that they were ready to have had him into the Court) would
have been much more offended if they had heard him pronounce Kyrie eleison in
stead of Kyrieleison; especially if they had heard him say Allelulah (making
therein an I consonant) in stead of their Alleluya. For whereas they said that
this his pronunciation made them suspect him of Lutheranisme, it was because he
maintaining it to be good, alleged certain reasons whereby he gave
sufficient testimony that he had studied the Greek and Latin tongue, which
this long time have been thought to infect men with Lutheranisme and heresy.
Witness our good Master Beda who in the presence of king Francis the first,
objected to the late William Bude (who labored by all means to hold the king
in his good resolution, and to draw him on to a greater forwardnes, for the
establishing of the professors of those languages) that the Hebrew and Greek
would be the fountain of many heresies. But Bude stoutly withstood the
foresaid Beda, proving him forthwith to be but a bedlam, and that it wa^ not
for him to judge of such things, whereof he had no more knowledge then a blind
man of colors. And so the kings most godly enterprise was happily atcheeued in
despite of Beda, and to the great infamy of him and his fusty fellows, as also
to the great contentation and singular honor as well of the King as of Bude.
And (no doubt) if these jolly Rabbis which withstood this good motion, durst
have spoken the truth, they would have confessed that which a French Poet
shortly after did finely flap them in the mouth withal, that it was to be
feared lest the Latin, Greek and Ebrew would (in the end) lay open all their
trumperies.

CHAP. XXX. How our ancestors suffered the holy Scriptures to be buried in an
unknown tongue, and corrupted by false glosses and interpretations.
AMong the things which posterity will hardly be brought to believe, this
(doubtless) will be none of the least, that our ancestors should not be permitted
to read the Scriptures. I thought it therefore not impertinent to say something
of this argument, the better to satisfy the simple sort, who may well wonder
how men could ever lend their ears to such dreams and dotages, farlies and
fooleries, as we have spoken of in part already, and are to speak more at
large hereafter, considering they agree no better then harp and harrow. Let
posterity therefore know, that the state of the Church stood in such terms
within these thirty years, that he that had read the Scripture in his mother
tongue, was in as great danger of the burning chamber, and had as great need to
hide his head, as if he had bin a false coyner, or had committed some greater
offense. For he that was found reading the Bible, or had it only in his house,
was sure to fry a faggot; especially if he did answer to such interrogatories as
should be ministered unto him accordingly. Which rigorous dealing is witnessed
by sundry sorrowful songs and doleful madrigals, published about that time,
albeit without the authors names. Of which argument also there was one made
Anno 1544. beginning thus, Vous per dez temps, de me vouloir defendre
D'es^udier en la saint Escriture.
Plus m'en blasmez, plus m'en voulez reprendre,
Plus m'esiouit, plus me plaist la lecture.
Ce que Dieu nous command
Faut-il qu'on le defend
Par tourmens and menaces?
Cessez vos gra^^ auda^es.
Que l'Eternel ne bransle sa main dextre,
Pour vous monstrer que lui seul est le maistre.
That is, Ye lose your time that would for fend mine eyes
The reading of the sacred histories.
The more ye blame me for so blessed deed,
The more I list, and more I like to read.
What God himself directly shall command,
Shall ye with threats and torments dare withstand?
Leave off your proud audacious enterprise,
Lest that The Eternal shake his irefull hand,
And teach you what it is against God to rise.
For it fared with many of those Doctors, as it did with those who^ our Savior
reproves for taking away the key of knowledge, in that they would neither
enter in themselves, nor yet suffer such as would, to enter. For neither would
they read the Scripture themselves, nor suffer others to read it. Nay one of
their Reuerendissimi was not ashamed to say openly (as has bin heretofore
witnessed by others) I cannot but wonder to hear these young fellows allege
the new Testament: Per diem I was above 50. year old before I knew what the
new Testament meant. But what reason had they to forbid the translation of the
Bible into the vulgar tongue? Verily this goodly reason, because (forsooth) it
was to be feared lest the simple people should read sundry things therein,
which they would pervert to their own destruction, for want of sound
understanding and judgment; and so would fall into manifold absurdities and
errors. To which sleeueles reason this answer was made (about fifteen years
ago) by a man of excellent parts in those days: upon whom God has since
doubled and trebled, and does still multiply the graces of his spirit. Nos
grans Docteurs au cherubin visage,
Ont defendu qu'homme n'ait plus a voir
La saint Bible en vulgaire langage,
Don't un chacun peut cognoissance auoir.
Car (disent-ils) desir de tant sauoir
N'engendre rien qu'erreur, peine and souci.
Arguo sic, S'il est donques ainsi
Que pour l'abus il faille oster ce liver,
Il est tout clair qu'on leur deuoit aussi
Oster le vin, don't chacun d'eux s'enyure.
That is, Our learned Rabbis with their malmseynose,
Forbidden men the holy writ to read
In vulgar tongues: for learning (they suppose)
Nothing but error, pain and care does breed.
Arguo sic, If then for cause of this abusion,
The Bible must be bard from looking on:
Needs mote their wine be taken from their sight,
Wherewith they been each one so often mis-dight.
But how then is that to be understood which we read in Oliver Maillard (that
good old Preacher,) where he tells the burgesses and citizens of Paris, that
they had the Bible in the French tongue? Verily he meant a kind of Bible which
was first translated for the nonce, and fitted for their tooth: and after,
glossed with the gloss of Orleans which corrupts the text, yea so interlaced
and interlarded therewith, as that they would be sure it should not cross nor
contrary their false devised doctrine; and that nothing might be found in the
whole Scripture, which might sound aught but holiness and honor to our holy
mother the Catholic Church of Rome. These were the Bibles wherein they gave
their Antidotes, in such places especially where they feared the poor people
might be poisoned, as they speak. Of which argument I made these verses
following, Comment ont nos Rabbis permis and defendu
Le liver qu'ils ont craint de tous estre entendu?
La Bible ont defendu en langage vulgaire,
Puis l'ont fait imprimer, pour au peuple complaire.
Ceci s'accorde bien: car tout ainsi qu'on voit,
Que nous ostons le vin, a qui par trop en boit,
Ou qu'auecques force ^au tellement on l'appreste,
Que fair mal aucun il ne peut a la test:
Ainsi ont nos Rabbis voulu la Bible oster,
Ou bien leurs mixtions a la Bible aiouster.
That is, How have our Rabbis licensed and forbade
The book so feared of laymen to be learned?
For both they have f^^bade in vulgar tongues
The Bibles use: and ^or they feign would please.
It now comes newly ^^^oking from the press.
All this may well agree: For as we see
The wine ore reaue^ from the drunken man,
Or else so tempered from the cooler spring,
That naught may ^^reamen up to hurt the brain.
So, or our Rabbis take this book away,
Or with their mixtions can his strength allay.
Now these their mixtions they call counterpoison, albeit they deserve rather
to be called deadly poison. For certes, the Scriptures being read in that holy
manner that God has commanded, will poison no man, (I mean they will not
leaven our heads with erroneous opinions, but rather purge us of the leaven of
false doctrine,) but it is their gloss which poisoneth such as are not
provided of some sovereign Antidote or counter-poison.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the paraphrasticall expositions used by the foresaid Preachers,
especially in expounding the history of the Bible.
Having declared in the former Chapter, how these Doctors did exexpresly forbid
the reading of the holy Scripture in the vulgar tongue, except it had such a
gloss as would mar the text, and such a cautionate interpretation, as that
they would be sure their trumperies should not be discovered: I am now to show
how they abused it in their Sermons sundry other ways. And first how they used
a kind of paraphrase, wherein they play with the holy Scripture as Comaedians
are wont, or rather convert it into mere Comicall conceits. For example, we
find nothing recorded in Scripture of the woman (called a sinner) who came to
our Savior as he sat at table ( Luke 7.) but only this, that being at dinner
in the Pharisees house, a woman of the city of Nai^, which had been a sinner
(or a loose liver) came to seek him, that she washed his feet with her
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head: that she kissed them, and
anointed them with sweet ointments: and how Christ showed by a similitude,
that we should not wonder that her sins were forgiven her; and how that after
he had said, Thy sins are forgiven thee, he added, Thy faith has saved thee:
Go in peace. Thus much we find in the Gospel touching this history. Let us now
see into how wide and large a field these Preachers wandered, and amongst the
rest Menot, (whom I have so often alleged.) First they can tell you this
woman's name, (albeit the Evangelist has concealed it,) and not that only, but
her parentage also and pedigree: nay further, that she was at the Sermon which
our Savior made before dinner: neither that only, but what talk they had
together, and in what terms. And which is more, Menot speaks of it, as if
he had seen it lively pourtraited before his eyes. For consider what he
writes, fol. 160. Quo ad primum, Magdalena (for he takes it for a confessed
truth that it is spoken of her) erat Domina terrena de castro Magdalon, tam
sapiens, quod erat mirum audire loqui de sapientia eius, and prudentia; O ergo
Magdalena, quomodo venistis ad tantum inconueniens, quod vocemini magna
peccatrix? Et non sine causa: quod fuistis male conciliata. Data est tribus
conciliariis, qui eam posuerunt in talistatu: scilicet primus, Corporalis
elegantia: secundus, temporalis substantia: tertius, fuit libertas nimia. De
primo, Proverb. vlt. etc. Primum ergo quid fuit causae huius mulieris
perditionis? Fuit elegantia corporalis (that is,) What was the cause of this
woman's ruin and destruction? verily her surpassing beauty. Videbatur that she
was made (as a man would say) of purpose, to be looked on. Pulchra, iuuenis,
alta; cherry-cheeked, soft and succulent, ruddy as a rose, Minion like-minsing,
pleasantly warbling. Credo quod non erat nisi quindecim vel sedecim annorum
quando incepit sic viuere, and triginta quando rediit ad bonitatem Dei. Numera,
etc. Quando pater fuit mortuus, plena erat sua voluntate. Martha soror non
audebat ei dicere verbum: and videbatur ei quod faciebat magnum honorem illis
qui veniebant ad illam. Quicquid faciebat, erat viuere at her pleasure, and to
banquet, hodie inuitare, etc. And a little after, This silly sot who had
prostituted her self to every come^, erat in castro suo: the brute was noised
already throughout all Iewry and the country of Galilee. Omnes bibendo and
comedendo loquebantur de ea and de eius vita. Martha soror timens Deum and
amans honorem of her kindred, being very much ashamed of the shameless
impudency of her sister, videns quod omnes loquebantur of her and her sweet
doings, venit ad eam, dicens, O soror, si pater adhuc viueret, qui tantu^ vos
amabat, and audiret ista quae per orbem agitantur de vobis, surely you would
kill him with grief. Facitis magnum dedecus progeniei nostrae. M. Magd. words.
What is the matter now? quid vis dicere? Martha speaks.
Heu soror, non opus est vltra procedere, neque amplius manifestare. Scitis
been quid volo dicere, and vbi iaceat punctus. Every child can talk of it. O
Magd again
hypocrite! what need you to take care for me? must you needs have an oar in
every man's boat? what the devil mean you by this gear? (Lord save us all.)
Nonne estis magistramea? Quis dedit mihi this stout dame to trouble me? Vadatis
precor ad domum verstram: scio quid habeo agere ita been sicut vna alia. Habeo
sensum and intellectum to know how to demean and behave my self. Meno^ words.
Surely, it is so goodly a creature, that she cannot think of any thing save of
her self. Martha rogabat eam vt iret ad sermonem, and consuleret aliquem
homine^ bonae vitae. Magdalena dixit ianitori, Non dimittas mihi intrare hoc
castrum this mad sister of mine, who brings hither nothing but dissension,
and unquietness, vbi non consueuit esse nisi cantus gaudij. After this he
makes a long narration of the means which Martha used to persuade her sister
to come to our Saviors Sermon: not telling her what he was, but only that he
was a very goodly man. O soror, essetis valde foelix si possetis videre vnum
hominem qui praedicat in Jerusalem, Est pulchrior omnibus quos vnquam
vidis^^s: tam gratiosus, tam ^onestus: he is of so good behavior, and knows
so well to give kind entertainment, as you never saw the like. Credo sirmiter
quod si videretis eum, essetis amorosa de eo, est in flore iuuentutis suae. And
a little after, Illa cepit pulchra indumenta sua, aquam rosaceam pro lauando
faciem suam, cepit speculum. Videbatur quod esset vnus pulcher angelus. Nullus
^am aspexisset, qui non fuisset amorosus de ea: ipsa ante se misit mangones
portantes great store of crimosine cushions, vt disponerent sibi locum. Martha
videbat haec omnia, fingens nihil videre: and sequebatur ea^ sicut si fuisset
parua ancilla. Christus iam erat in media praedicatione, vel forte in secunda
part. After he shows how all men honored Magdalen, wondering to see her
come to the Sermon. And that as soon as our Savior perceived her, he began to
preach how detestable a thing outward bravery and pompous attire was. Tunc
(says he) ipse capit detestari vitia, bragas, pompas, vanitates, and
specialiter peccatum luxuriae, and contra has mulieres etc. Afterward, he
shows how that notwithstanding Magdalen was touched to the quick with that
Sermon, thinking of nothing so much as of repentance, and leading a new life:
yet that she was in great danger to have been drawn away by her customers and
old acquaintance, and brought to her old by as again. Venerunt (says he)
galandi, amorosi, rustici, roisters, qui dixerunt, surgatis, surgatis, facitis
nunc your self a superstitious hypocrite. Vadamus ad domum. Quae dixit, O
amici mei; rogo, dimittatis me: non audistis quid dixit ille bonus praedicator
de poenis inferni vobis and mihi praeparatis, nisi aliud faciamus? And a little
after, Habebat in suo armariolo sweet and precious water, quae vendebatur
pondere auri. Coepit quaerere de loco in locum, de platea in plateam, de domo
in domum, Quis hodie dabit prandium praedicatori? Dictum est ei quod in domo
Simonis. And after, he relates the speech which she used when she kissed our
Saviors feet, and washed them with her tears: and how she lay crowching under
the table like a dog: as also how our Savior said unto her, O Mary arise. And
that she should answer, My Lord, I will never rise from hence, till you have
pardoned all my sins, and given me your blessing. And how he should say unto
her, Arise my dear, thy sins are forgiven thee, thy faith has saved thee.
Lastly he tells us how Martha having brought Mary Magdalen to the virgin
Mary, she kneeled down before her and said, Madame, I beseech you pardon me if
I presume to speak unto you: I have been a lewd and wicked sinner, but by Gods
grace I will be so no more; your son this day has pardoned me: happy are you
that have such a son. See here how this jolly Preacher deciphereth this
history, agreeing so well with the players of the passion, that it is hard to
say, whether he borrowed it of them, or they of him. By players of the passion,
I mean those Comaedians which set forth the story of the passion in rhyme, to
be played in stead of other moral matter, or in stead of some play and pageant,
or both. And first, that this woman (which the Evangelist calls a sinner) was
called Magdalen (as we heard even now out of Menot,) and that she took her
name of the castle Magdalon; see it here confirmed by one of these balladin
rimesters (save that in both names he uses E in stead of A) in these verses
rightly smelling of the old vein: I'aei mon chasteau de Magdelon,
Don't l'on m'appelle Magdelaine:
Ou le plus souuent nous allon
Gaudir en toute joy mondaine.
That is, I have my castle Magdelon,
Whence I am called Magdalen:
Whither we to sport our selves have gone,
In all delight of worldly men.
He further makes her the wickedest wretch that ever was in the world, addicted
to all villainies which the wit of man can possibly devise: and he brings her in
singing wanton and lascivious songs; and a Squire named Rodigon courting of
her. He further shows, that she would never give ear, nor once listen to her
sister Martha, and last of all, the manner of her conversion.

2 But to return to Menot, let us see how he sets forth the history of the
prodigal son in orient colors, and how like a wier-drawer he stretches
that out in length, which the Evangelist had couched and wound up in few words,
enriching it with all circumstances forged of pleasure, and couched in apt
terms to make sport, and to move laughter. fol. 119. Pater quidam habebat
duos filios, quorum junior se ostendit magis fatuum, quia inconstans fuit. This
young man was wilful, fickle, and inconstant, a minion, and a lusty brave
gallant. Ipse erat vnus puer plenus suo velle, versatilis etc. qui quando venit
ad cognoscendum seipsum, suam fortitudinem, suam iuuentutem, suam
pulchritudine^, and quod sanguis ascendit frontem, his strength, his youth, his
beauty, and that he thought himself no small fool: Venit ad patrem resolutus
sicut Papa, and dixit ei; Pater, da mihi, etc. Pater, sumus tantum duo filij:
ego no^ sum bastardus: and sic, qua^do placeret Deo to do so much for your
children as to call you to his mercy, non exhareditaretis me, sed haberem
partem meam sicut frater meus: Scio consuetudines and leges patriae, quod te
viuente nullum ius habeo in bonis vestris: tamen sum filius vester, and me
amatis; rogo detis, etc. And a little after, when this foolish and unadvised
youth habuit suam partem de haereditate, non erat quaestio de portando eam
secum; ideo statim he makes cheuissance thereof, he priseth, and sells it:
and ponit the sale of it in sua bursa. Qua^do vidit tot pecias arge^ti simul,
valde gauisus est, and dixit ad se; Ho non manebitis sic semper. Incipit se
respicere; and quo modo? vos estis de tam bona domo, and estis apparelled like
a beggar? Super hoc habebitur prouisio. Mittit ad quarendu^ Drapers, whole
salemen, silkmen, (who came thick and threefold to serve him) and apparelled
himself from top to toe: Quando vidit, emit sibi pulchras caligas of scarlet
well drawn out, a fair shirt with a gathered band, a dublet guarded with
velvet, a Florence cap, having his hair finely combed and smoothed, and qua^do
sensit the damask wauing at his back, vt sensit hunc damascum volantem supra
dorsum; haec secum dixit, Oportet ne mihi aliquid? non, etc. Lack I any thing
now? No: thou have all thy feathers, it is now high time for thee to fly away.
After, he reports how that he should say, he must needs abroad to see the
world, and that they which were always kept under the mothers wing, were
idiots and dolts. To be short, that he who had not travailed into foreign
countries nihil videt. My father has now laid the raines on my neck, Pater
meus laxauit habenam supra collum. After, he relates how that travailing
through strange countries, he feasted this man, and that man, and kept king
Arthurs round table, being always accompanied and attended on at his Innnes
with players, naughty-packes and idle huswiues. And in the end, how that
postqua^ nihil amplius erat fricandu^, when they had drawn him dry, mittitur
pulchra vestis Domini bragan^is, caliga, bombi^inium: quisque secum ferebat
peciam of my jolly Jack braggards hose and dublet, every man carried away a
piece. Ita quod in breui tempore my gallant became an apple squire, apparelled
like a houseburner, as naked as a worm, etc. And with much ado, he kept his
shirt as clean as a dishclout, (with a knot upon his shoulder) to cover his
poor carcass. Thus well entertained they him in his prosperity, and in all
his pompous iollities.

3 We read also John. 7. that the high Priests sent officers to apprehend
Christ, after he had cried aloud in the Temple, You both know me and whence I
am: for I am not alone, etc. And how he said to the officers, Yet a little while
am I with you, and then I go to him which sent me: you shall seek me, and
shall not find me, and where I am can you not come, etc. And how there was a
dissension among the people by reason of him, and how some of them would have
taken him, but none laid hands on him. As also how the officers returned unto
the high Priests and Pharisees, who said unto them, Why have you not brought
him? The officers answered, Never man spoke as this man. Whereunto they
replied, Are you also deceived? Do any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees
believe in him? but this people which know not the law, is accursed. Lo here
the purport of the words of the text in Saint John. Now let us hear what is
patched hereto in the paraphrase of this gentle Preacher. They of the Synagogue
heard that Christ was hid in the desert, and therefore purposing to make speedy
dispatch, levied a great band of Sergeants, ruffianly rogues, vagabonds, and
forlorn fellows, and said unto them, Go your ways and wheresoever you meet
with him, bring him to us, as a disturber of the state. And if he resist you,
kill him; you need not fear, you are well appointed. These gallants being gone
into the desert, and having compassed the wood, found him all barefooted as he
was, and upon his knees, praying for wicked sinners. The Lord hearing them
behind him, turned back and said: O my children, you are come (I know) to
apprehend me, and to put me to death, but let me entreat you that I may live a
little longer; for yet a little while I am with you, etc. Take no care; all
things shall come to pass which are looked for. After a while you shall do with
me as you please. Now when they heard such gracious words, and saw so amiable a
countenance, they fell all down upon their knees, craving pardon for their
bold, presumptuous, and fellonious attempt, and straight returned to Jerusalem
to their masters again: who said unto them, where is he? have you not found
him? If you have found him, why have you not brought him? Did we not charge and
command you, that you should bring him either living or dead? Tell us, is he
escaped from you? How often has he played us these pranks? Escaped? (said
they) no, no: we were no sooner come before him; but he spoke unto us in such
sort, as we were all amazed, and gave us such heavenly instructions, that we
are persuaded, there was never man spoke like unto him. What? (said the
Pharisees) are you such white liuered soldiers, that words can beat you
back? O my Lords and masters (said they) you speak merrily: would to God you
had been with us; he is so gentle, and courteous: O good God, who would not love
thee? when we came near unto him, he said not so much as who is there? but
saluted us kindly, and offered himself readily. Then the Jews answered, he
has a be in a box which helps him in all this gear; he has enchanted,
and suborned you.

4 Moreover, they were as bold as blind bayard, in paraphrasing upon the old
Testament as well as upon the new. For example, in the history 1. King. 3.
which records King Salomons judgment of the two harlots, in giving the child
to the right mother, the text says not, that they debated the matter in the
presence of the King, nor that one of them should swear by her faith; much
less that the king should say, Hold your peace, hold your peace: for as far
as I see, you never studied at Angiers nor Poytiers to learn to plead well.
And yet Menot would make us believe, that all this stuff is essential to this
story.

CHAP. XXXII. How the foresaid Preachers abused the Scriptures, partly through
ignorance, and partly through malice.
But they not content to patch to the history of the Bible, as tel-tales are
wont to do, to enhance the report and enrich their tale, that it may carry the
greater show, and so be a lie with a latchet; take further liberty to abuse it
sundry ways besides; yea to quote places out of it for confirmation of their
false devised doctrine. For there is no one conclusion in all their religion so
absurd, foolish, or full of impiety, which they will not defend and maintain
by one text or other. And with such pertinent quotations are their books full
fraught and farced, who have encountered them at sharp, and given them the
foil: where we may see their impudency to have bin such, as that they would not
stick to allege those places for them, which made most against them; which
they did by confuting their true exposition. For they knew they had to deal
with such as either could not, or would not understand; and therefore no marvel
if they were so terribly afraid to have the Bible in the vulgar tongue: for
they saw that if it once took place, they could no longer rule the roast, and
lead the world in a string, as formerly they had done. Besides, they were not
ignorant, they should be encountered on every side, and set upon thick and
threefold, when men were once armed with a number of texts, against which they
saw they had no armor of proof to defend themselves. Wherefore we may well
think, that he which found fault with Saint Paul for uttering sundry things
which he might well have concealed (considering the scandal and offense which
he gave thereby) was no hypocrite, but spoke as he thought. The like may be
said of another profound Doctor, who was not ashamed to say, that if he were
persuaded that none had S. Paul's Epistles but himself, he would cast them into
the fire: using this brave Doctor-like Latin, Per diem, si putarem quod non
esset nisi me qui haberet Epistolas Pauli, ego mitterem in ignes. Doubtless
the good Spanish Doctor (mentioned before) needed not to wish S. Paul's Epistles
burnt, seeing he had a sufficient excuse for answering either them or any other
text, to say, Ego non sum Theologus, ego sum Canonista. But seeing the foresaid
books are as full of these examples, as an egg is of meat, I hope the Reader
will hold me excused if I allege them not pel-mel, but only cul out some few
of them which may serve best to discover their impudency.

2 And not to speak of Inuenimus Messiam, alleged for proof of the Mass,
and such like places touched before in speaking of their ignorance (for
questionless such profound Preachers and deep Divines, as the three Worthies
so often before remembered, would have scorned such allegations) yet I cannot
omit the Pycard who succeeded one of them, and eclipsed (as it were) the glory
of them all in the judgment of our good Catholics. This famous preacher
intending to prove that we are saved by our works, reasons in this sort. Is
it possible that these wicked Lutherans should be so impudent as to deny that
we are saved by works, when we have the flat and formal text of S. Peter for
proof hereof? Let them tell me the meaning of these words, Iustus vix
saluatur: Is not this the meaning, that the just man shall hardly be saved? And
if he be hardly saved, is it not (I beseech you) by his works? Consider here
(good Reader) before we pass on to a further point, how maliciously and
impudently this fond fellow equiuocateth; and think with thy self how many
texts he will abuse, who makes no conscience thus to dally with this? if such
deceitful dealing may be called dallying, whereby so many poor souls are
seduced, and in stead of wholesome doctrine, are fed with plain poison.

3 But because my purpose is to insist upon foolish or malicious allegations,
and to single out some few out of many, I will speak only of such as are
authorized by a Council; which Popish Prelates have made their Achilles to
bear off the great blows which might light upon their images. For in the
Nicene Council (not that great and famous Council holden under Constantine
the Emperor, but that which was assembled in the days of Charles the great,
above eight hundred years ago, by an Empress who was so good a Christian,
that she put out her sons eyes, and after caused him to pine away in prison,
where he ended his days in great misery:) it was concluded that it was
expedient not only to have Images, but also to worship them. Now the strongest
arguments which they used for proof hereof, were these. First, a certain
Bishop called John (Ambassador for the East Churches) alleged Genesis 2. God
created man after his own image. Whence he inferred, that Images were to be
used. And Canticl. 2. Show me thy face, for it is fair. Another laboring to
prove that Images ought to be set upon Altars, alleged the saying of Christ,
Math. 5. No man lights a candle to put it under a bushel, but upon a
candlestick, and it gives light to all that are in the house. A third, to
prove that it was profitable to look upon Images, alleged the saying of the
Prophet David, Psalm. 4. Signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui, Domine (as the
old interpreter does translate it) that is, The brightness of thy face does
shine upon us. A fourth, alleged Psalm. 26. v. 8. Domine* dilexi decorem domus
tuae: that is, Lord, I have loved the beauty of thy house. In like case also
would they help and advantage themselves with the saying of the Psalmist, Psalm.
48. v. 9. As we have heard, so have we seen; saying that we know God not only
by hearing of his word, but by looking upon Images. Another bishop named
Theodorus was aware of this subtlety: It is written (said he) that God is
marvelous in his Saints. And in another place it is said, in the Saints which
are upon the earth: Ergo we ought to behold the glory of God in Images. Another
alleged this similitude; As the Patriarchs used the sacrifices of the
heathen: so Christians ought to use Images in stead of the Pagans idols. These
are their goodly allegations, which (because they were authorized by this
Council) have bin canuased by these discipling Friars in every sermon: to say
nothing of sundry other of as good grace, and proceeding from as good a wit and
sound judgment.

4 If any shall here wonder how it was ever possible there should be
(especially in those days) such sottish Preachers, as would so doltishly apply
the Scripture; I will here record a late sottish speech much more to be
wondered at. In the conference holden at Poyssi (the brute whereof was blazed
throughout the world) a certain Magister Noster called Demochares, pleading
for Images against a Minister of the word, and perceiving that his cause went
down the wind, would needs maintain it by an argument taken from the glass
windows in Saint Benets Church, concluding very logically in this sort. This
Church (quoth he) was built in S. Dennis his time, but ever since there have
bin Images in glass windows: ergo Images have bin since S. Dennis his time.
To whom the Minister answered in three words fitly and finely, that his
argument was made of glass.

5 But to proceed on in this discourse of the abuse of Scripture, let us come
to those that abused it in such devilish sort, as great Mahomet himself could
not have done worse: I mean in disgracing Christian religion more then ever
Mahomet or the Mahometists did. Who may these be? Verily such as turn it to
gibes and ieasts, and merry conceits; especially the deep dissembling ducking
Friars, who are not ashamed to apply sundry places written expressly of our
blessed Savior to their sweet Saints; those I mean by whom they enrich
themselves by preaching their miracles.

6 We heard before in the Chapter of blasphemies, of such as made it but a
matter of merriment to gibe at some, and to commend other some, in playing the
Scoggins with the Scripture; a common thing at this day even among the Laity.
Which device me thinks should first have come from our M. Pasquin (as being
near his scuruinesse, who Lucifer-like vsurps authority not only over Gods
word, but over his throne and scepter) albeit it has bin practiced since,
especially by our gallant Courtiers. For in the beginning of the reign of king
Henry the second, many jests were broken upon such Lords and Ladies of the
Court, as were not in like favor and grace they had been in in the days of
his father; but were as much debased as they had bin before advanced. One of
which I remember was applied to a noble man who had bin in high place, but was
then tak^ a peg lower, Ecce Adam quasi vnus ex nobis factus est. As also that
of a certain Lady who had a prosperous wind in the stearne, and was set (as it
were) on the top of fortunes wheel, Regnum meum non est de hoc mundo: where I
have also spoken of certain places of Scripture wherewith the Friars were wont
to sport themselves and make their worships merry. To which notwithstanding
sundry others might be added, as this among the rest, Si non esset hic
malefactor, non tibi tradidissemus eum, spoken by certain Monks of a pasty
which their Abbot had sent them; by which they meant, that if the Cook had
played his part in baking of it, and that the Abbot had liked of it, he would
never have sent it. It is further said, that this goodly interpretation of
these words of the Psalmist, Qui dat niuem sicut lanam: Which sends cold
according to the cloth, came from the Monks cloisters.

7 But now we are to speak of those buffons who abuse the Scripture in their
Sermons to move laughter. To return therefore to our good Preachers, we are
to note that some even in these days have made (as it were) a practice and
profession, a trade and occupation thereof. Of which number Menot is one. For
fol. 209. col. 3. he says, When men first sit down to meat, there is not a
word among the^, they ply their trenchers so hard, their tongues seeming to
give place to the office of their teeth: In medio autem exit sermo inter
fratres; dicunt enim here is good bread and good wine. But in the end, In omnem
terram exiuit sonus eorum. And fol. 196. col. 4. Dominae ancillis quae in^rant
cameram earum, and non custodiunt se ab ipsis, saepe ostendunt quae non licet
hominibus loqui. Nay, they do so highly honor and reverence the beginning of
Saint John's Gospel, that they write it in parchment, enchase it in gold, and
hang it about their necks to serve them in stead of Amulets against dangers;
which powerful preservative (if they be not very forgetful of their
Philosophy) they call Agnus Dei. Thus profanely abusing even the holy Gospel
it self (which is Gods-spell) to charms and sorceries, and magical
incantations (which are no better then Diuels-spels) as we may see in Menots
sermons.

8 As for those who apply the Scripture written expressly of our blessed Savior
to their Saints, we shall not find neither can we desire more notable examples
then those before mentioned, taken out of the book of Conformities. For what
could the devil himself (if he were here in proper person) do more to profane
the holy Scripture, then the author of that damnable book has done, in
applying not only texts of Scripture spoken expressly of Christ, to this
devilish impostor, so as he sticks not to say in the end of the book, Multa
quidem and alia signa fecit Franciscus, qu^ non sunt scripta in libro hoc) but
those also which are written of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles and other
holy Saints of God? But if these particular^ applied to Friar Francis shall not
(happily) give satisfaction to all, I will here allege others of S. Dominicke.
Let us therefore hear what Barelet (not contenting himself with the former
places) says further of his Saint Dominicke and of his order. Haec (says he)
est illa religio quae in vn^ veteri Testamento significata, Zachar. 6. Ecce
quatuor quadrigae, etc. that is, (for I will only translate these words) See
what an excellent religion this is, which was prefigured in the old Testament
by Zachar: chap. 6. Behold there came four chariots out from between two
mountains. In the first chariot were red horses, that is, MINORITES: In the
second black horses, that is, EREMITES: In the third were white horses, that
is CARMELITES: In the fourth lusty horses of diverse colors, to wit, the
PREACHING FRIARS.

9 But these Doctors not content to abuse the Scripture to make sport (as when
they made jests of certain texts) or to fill their purses and panches the
better (as when the Franciscan applied that to his Saint Francis, or the
Iacobin to his Saint Dominicke which was spoken of Christ) being accustomed to
a wanton kind of licentious liberty in playing and dallying therewith, made
it come at their whistle and serve them for all assaies, even to confirm their
dreams and dotages; though no more to the purpose, then Magnificat for
Mattins, to use their own proverb. In whose Postils and Dominicals, albeit
there be almost as many examples as leaves or lines; yet two or three shall
suffice. And first we will begin with the jolly Preacher Barelet, who upon
these words in the last of Saint Luke, Art thou only a Pilgrim in Jerusalem,
and know not the things that have been done there in these days? says,
that Christ was a Pilgrim in three respects, (for to fit his purpose the
better, I must translate peregrinus a Pilgrim) namely in regard of his
apparel, his lodging, and the implements which he carried about with him.
First for his habit and attire, a Pilgrim has a bottle, a scrip, a hat, and a
staff. So Christ had first his bottle viz. the flesh which he took of the
virgin Mary; which was of three colors: First white, through the virgins
purity. Apoc. 19. After, I saw the heavens open, and behold a white horse.
Secondly red, with the blood of the cross. Esaias 63. Why are thy garments red?
Thirdly, black, when his body became black and blew upon the cross. Esaias the
53. Et liuore eius sanati sumus. Secondly, he had a scrip, to wit his soul,
full of the gold of grace and glory. Thirdly, he had a hatte, namely a crown
of thorns. Fourthly, a staff, viz. the cross. This is the reason why it is
said, Art thou only a pilgrim in Jerusalem? namely in regard of his attire.
He was also a pilgrim in regard of his lodging: For pilgrims etc. And did not
Menot reason with very good grace (save that his argument was not in forma)
when he argued thus, Chorea est iter circulare: Diaboli iter est circulare:
Ergo chorea est motus Diaboli: and proved the minor* that Diaboli iter est
circulare, by these places, Job. 1. Circuiui terram (note that it is the Devil
which speaks) and perambulaui eam. 1. Peter. 5. Circuit quaerens quem
deuoret. And Psalm. 11. In circuitu impij ambulant. But let us hear a more
strange device hammered out of his own head; and consider how trimly he
descanteth upon the ground of the Ga^muth VT, RE, MI, FA, SOL, LA, in a
mimicall manner playing upon every note with some text of Scripture, as if the
holy Ghost had purposely written it for that end. For he plays upon VT with a
text beginning with VT, and upon RE with another beginning with RE, and so of
the rest. Which fond and fantastical conceit because it could not be kept
well in English, I have here set it down in his own words, in Latin* fol.
29. Col. 1. Vos mundani audite, quia ad vos dirigitur verbum, nec est meu^, sed
illius qui pependit in ^ruce. Luc. 6. Vae vobis qui ridetis, quia flebitis. Et
timeo ne cante^is semel cantilenam damnatorum, qui (sicut columba) habet
gemitum and fletum pro cantu. Hic cantus habet sex notas valde miserabiles,
scilicet, VT, RE, MI, FA, SOL, LA* Primam notam profer^ quilibet damnatus
dicens, Vtinam consumptus essem, ne oculus me videret, Job. 10. Secunda^ vero
addit dicens, Repleta enim malis anima mea. Psalm. 87. Et omnes alij respondent
cum eo, Repleti sumus despectione, Psalm. 122. Tertiam omnes insimul cantant,
dicentes, Miserabiles facti sumus omnibus hominibus. 1. Cor. 15. Quartam cantat
quilibet eorum dicens, Facies mea intumuit a fletu. Job. 16. Item, faciem meam
operuit caligo. Job. 23. Quintam addunt omnes simul dicentes, Sol iustitiae non
est ortus nobis, and in malitia nostra consumpti sumus. Sap. 5. Sextam canta^t
simul dicentes, Lassati sumus in via iniquitatis. Sap. 5. Et iterum, Lassis non
datur requies: and pellis nostra quasi clibanus exus^^ est^ and defecit gaudium
cordis nostri, ac conuersus est in luctum chorus noster; and cecidit corona
capitis nostri: Vae nobis quia peccauimus. Thren. vltimo.

10 They further abuse the Scripture in tying themselves to the words (like an
Ape to his clog) never considering the scope and circumstances of the place,
albeit their manner is not to stand upon the literal sense at all; but to
reduce all they have to say, to certain Allegorical, Anagogicall and
Tropologicall senses. For example, Menot, to show that we are not to wonder
that the most holy Saints and dearest servants of God should be so sore afraid,
when death draws near and knocks at the door, has these words: What? would
you have us more certain of our salvation then S. Paul, who was ravished in a
vision, and rapt into the third heaven, an elect vessel, chosen by our Lord to
be an Apostle? True it is, he once said, I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ. But when it came to the point indeed, he slunke back, and said, I
appeal unto Caesar. Acts 25.

11 But if further inquiry were made, it would (no doubt) be found that they
have sundry other ways most wickedly profaned the holy Scriptures: but for
this present I will content my self with these already mentioned. For in that
they abuse certain places in following the old translation, and stand so
stiffly upon the words, that they ground strange conclusions thereon* though it
be a manifest fault, yet is it more pardonable then the former. For the
Liripipium will not give these licenti^^s (I mean our great graduats, the
Batchelers and Doctors of Sorbonne) leave to busy their brains with the
Greek and Ebrew, but to content themselves if they can serve out a mess (I
should have said a Mass) with the Latin ladle: as for these learned languages,
to leave them as they find them.

12 I come now to the height of their villainy, the quintessence of their
forgery should I say? or rather knavery, in foisting in a number of sentences
under the name of Scripture, which are not to be found either in the old or new
Testament. No marvel therefore if they have been so bold with the ancient
doctors in alleging their testimonies to prove the virtue and efficacy of
their Mass, as we may see in the end of that worthy work of Conformities;
where we find a number of sweet sayings in commendation of their Mass*
gathered (as it is there said) out of S. Ierom. S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom,
and other ancient fathers, which are no where to be found in the^^ works: nay,
which are clean cross and contrary to the tenor of their doctrine. And we
may well assure our selves, they were never so le^d as to belch forth such
blasphemies, as that which is fathered upon S. Chrysostom Tantum valet
celebratio Missae, quantum Christi passio: quia sicut mors Christi redemit nos
a peccatis: sic Missae celebratio saluat nos; that is, The sacrifice of the
Mass is of as great virtue, force and efficacy, as the passion of Christ: for
as the death of Christ has freed us from sin; so the sacrifice of the Mass
saves us. O the blasphemy of these filthy Friars.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of other abuses of Scripture.
WE heard in the former Chapter how the professors of the Roman religion were
wont to wring and wrest the Scripture, and to allege them hab-nab without
either rhyme or reason, and how some were faulty herein of ignorance, and others
of malice: but here we shall see how they abuse it after another manner. First
therefore we are to note, that when they saw they could not set any gloss upon
their lies and Legends (in that they could not find a text though never so
strained that might give any color thereto) their manner was to face it out
with shameless lies, as if they had had their budgets full of tickling texts.
And how (I beseech you) did they manage the matter? They made (forsooth) every
lying Legend a maxim and principle having sufficient light in it self, and
needing no proof from any place of Scripture; though every place be a proof,
and every text a sufficient testimony, as they would bear us in hand. For they
knew that the poor people, whom they had enchanted with the whore of Babilons
filthy cup of abominations, did think them to be such, without all doubt or
dispute. And that it is even so, tell me (gentle Reader) how often thou have
heard this Proverb, It is as true as God is in the Mass, spoken by our good
Catholics, who were of opinion, that there was no article in Christian
religion more certain and sure then this? For who was not persuaded in old time,
that every page in the Bible did speak thereof? No marvel therefore if they
entertained such fables hand over head, without demanding proof or place of
Scripture for confirmation thereof. Howbeit they went a step further when they
told the people in their sermons that the Lutherans (who^ they afterward
baptized Huguenots) were much like that wicked wretch Caine, who would not once
hear Mass in all his life: whereas his brother Abel (that good Churchman)
heard it every day. But a Curate in Sauoy went beyond them all; for exhorting
his parishioners to pay their tithes, he said, take heed (good brethren) how
you follow the example of that cursed caitiffe Caine: follow rather the example
of good Abel. For Caine would neither pay his tithes nor yet hear Mass,
whereas Abel paid them duly, and that of the fairest, and of the best; and
never a day went over his head in which he heard not one Mass at the least.
Now albeit I could easily name this gentle Curate, yet I will spare him for this
once: only let me add this one thing, that he was not so well provided of an
answer, when it was proved to his face, and that out of his own words, that
Priests in those days were married. For he was as mute as a fish, when he was
encountered with this argument. Good Sir, at that time whereof you speak,
there were but four in all the world, to wit, Adam, Eve, Caine, and Abel: now
Caine did neither sing nor yet say Mass; for he could not (you say) endure to
hear it. And as for Abel, he could not both sing himself, and also hear it.
It remains therefore that Adam sung it, and that Abel or Eve ansvvered, and
held the torch: whence it follows that Priests were then married. But if he
had had but one dram of wit, he might have answered that there were Martin
Priests in those days who both sung and answered themselves. Another Curate
(his pue-fellow) affirmed in open Sermon, that when the Angel Gabriel came to
salute the virgin Mary, he found her saying our Ladies Psalter. And to suit the
story of Abel who heard Mass every day, we may not in any wise forget, how
that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and other good Patriarchs never went to bed without
making the sign of the cross, and saying their Pater noster and their Aue
Mary. Now if a man should have asked these silly souls, how they knew this or
that? It sufficed for a full answer, to say that they heard it of such a good
preacher; witness the common saying, It is true, for I heard a Preacher say so.

2 But the devil foreseeing that the simple people would one day search the
Scriptures, and so perceive when our great Sorbonicall doctors strained the
string too high, and went a note above Ela; fearing to lose his right for
default of showing good evidence, has foisted in a number of counterfeit
Apocryphal writings, thereby to bleare the eyes of the simple, who cannot
perceive his false iuggling: I mean a bundle of books fathered upon the
Apostles or their disciples; and yet fraught and farced with devilish
doctrine, flat contrary to that of the Apostles: nay with such fables, as
Christian ears can no more endure to hear, then the fictions and fooleries of
Mahomets Alcoran. Neither is it of late time that he used this device to shake
and (as much as in him lay) to ouerturne and ruinate the very foundations of
our religion: for many years ago he vented abroad Euangelium Nicodemi,
Euangelium Thomae, Euangelium Bartholomaei, Euangelium Nazaraeorum, Librum
Pastoris, and such like: albeit he labors now afresh to the uttermost of his
power to infect the world with the stench of them again. Whereof he has given
a pregnant proof in a damnable book, entitled Proteuangelion, si^e de
natalibus Jesus Christi, and matris ipsius virginis Mariae. For the better
authorizing whereof, he has fathered it upon S. James, calling him
cosin-german and brother to Christ. But what contains it, may we think?
Verily such sweet stuff as this: how Anne the virgin Mary's mother (and wife
to Ioachim) makes her moan to God in regard of her barrenness, affirming that
he dealt worse with her then with any other creature: worse then with the very
elements, the water, and the earth, which brought forth fishes, herbs and
plants. But first she alleges the example of the birds, which she remembered
by seeing a sparrowes nest in a Laurel tree under which she sat: and she had
no sooner ended her complaint, but an Angel took his flight toward her, (for
it is expressly said, aduolauit) and said unto her, O Anne, God has heard thy
prayer, thou shall conceive and bear a child, and shall be famous through the
world. Whereupon she vowed to dedicate her child to God, whether it were male or
female. The Angel having done his message, brought the same news to Joseph
her husband, who would not believe it, till he was by miracle confirmed in the
truth of the Angels report. To be short, at the end of nine months she was
delivered of the virgin Mary; and (according to her vow) presented her to God,
when she was but three years old: where she was received with many ceremonies
by the high priest, who prophe^ied that mankind by her should be redeemed. It
is further said, that he set her upon the third step of the Altar, where, as
she stood (through Gods goodness) she began to dance trimly. And this she did
to win the love and liking of the Israelites. Now here it is to be noted,
that during the time of her abode in the Temple, she was fed like a dove,
receiving her viands from the hand of the Angel. But when she was twelve
years of age, the Scribes assembled and consulted what course they should take
with her (being now come to those years) that the sanctified of the Lord might
not be polluted. Mean time Zachary the high priest had a revelation as he was
praying, that he should assemble all widowers in town and country, and that
each man should bring a rod with him, that she might be committed to his care
and custody, whom God should choose by miracle. All which being done
accordingly, a dove came out of Joseph's rod and light upon his head: whereupon
the high Priest said, God has hereby manifested that it is his will and
pleasure thou should have the custody of this holy virgin. But Joseph
refused, saying, I have a great charge, and now am old, and she but young;
therefore (I fear me) the children of Israel would laugh me to scorn, if I
should take her to wife. But when he heard of the fearful judgments of God
which befell Core, Dathan and Abyram, being greatly moved therewith he said;
Mary, I take thee here from the Temple of the Lord, howbeit I will leave thee at
my house, and return to my Carpenters occupation: and I beseech God bless and
preserve thee now and ever. Now certain years after, as she went with a
pitcher to draw water, she heard a voice from heaven, saying unto her, Aue
gratia plena, etc. Afterward are inserted certain sentences taken out of the
Gospel: and in the end it is added, how that being now 16. years of age, and
great with child (as having gone six months) Joseph returning from his work,
wherein he had employed himself for certain years (coming not home so much
as once in all that time) and finding her great with child, was much amated.
And as he was communing with her about sundry things, an Angel appeared unto
him, and certified him of all these proceedings. But it was great pity that a
Scribe who came to speak with Joseph, perceiving Mary to be with child, should
make town and country ring of it again, in such sort, that they were
forthwith apprehended and brought before the high Priest: where when Joseph
affirmed that he never used fleshly familiarity with her; and she again
protested that she never had carnal company with him nor with any other man, he
caused them to drink the water of Jealousy: which when they had drunk, and
felt no inconvenience; he said, that seeing God would not detect them, he would
not be the man that should condemn them. After, follow the words of S. Luke
chap. 2. how that Joseph was of necessity to bring her to Bethlem by reason of
the royal commandment which came from Augustus Caesar: but it is not done
without a lie for the whetstone, and using such villainous speeches as these,
That when Mary said to Joseph, Depone me ab asina, quia quod in me est me vrget
vt progrediatur, he took her down, and said unto her, vbi te inducam vt tegam
pudenda? quia locus desertus est. Lastly, it is said that she was brought in
bed in a cave near Bethlem (saving the credit of S. Luke who writes
otherwise,) and that Joseph found a midwife (by great good luck) who met with
another afterward called Salome, who not believing that a virgin could have a
child, came to take trial thereof. But I had need of a brow of brass and a
face of flint, the like bebauched impudency that the author of this story had,
if I should set it down in English: I will therefore content my self with the
Latin here ensuing, Exiitque obstetrix ex spelunca and obuiauit illi Salome,
and dixit obstetrix ipsi Salome, magnum tibi spectaculum habeo narrare, virgo
genuit quem non capit natura ipsius: and virgo manet virgo: dixitque Salome,
viuit Dominus Deus meus, nisi scrutata fuero naturam eius, non credam quod
peperit. Et ingrediens obstetrix, dixit ipsi Mariae, Reclina teipsam, magnum
enim tibi certamen incumbit. Quum autem in ipso loco palpauit eam Salome,
egressa est dicens, Vae mihi impiae and perfidae: quoniam tentaui Deu^
viuent^m. Et ecce, manus mea igne ardens cadit a me. Et flexit genua ad Deum,
and ait, Deus, etc.

3 But to leave the rest to those steel stomachs that can digest it,
considering there are many things there ripped up far worse without comparison
then any of the former: consider with me (good Reader) a little, how the devil
has openly mocked and played (as it were) with the nose of Christendom, in
publishing this book, blindfolding in the mean time the eyes of the world.
For he used him as his instrument in the compiling and publishing thereof, who
labored tooth and nail, by word and writing, to make a hotch-potch of these
two religions (if they may be called religions) viz. Mahometizme and Iudaizme
with Christian religion: him I say he used as his Amanuensis, who publicly
preached and stiffly maintained sundry gross heresies, not only full of
blasphemy, but even repugnant to civil honesty: I mean that worshipful
writer master William Postell. But how (may some say) was it ever possible that
this book, being composed by such a vile monster, was not suspected, as it
should have been, had it been delivered by an Angel from heaven? For answer
whereunto, we are to know that the devil (as I said) has exposed Christendom
as a laughing-stocke, and wonderment to the world, and has (as it were) with
Mercuries pipe lulled our Argosses asleep, whose office is to stand Sentinel
over the State. True it is (I confess) the villainies of these varlets were not
so well detected in those days as they have been since: notwithstanding so
much was then discovered, as was sufficient to give warning thereof: which I
will leave as being now (God be thanked) sufficiently well known: and will
come to the phrase and style of the book. I say then, and will justify it to
any skillful Hebrician, that he has coined sundry Hebraismes, and fained them
of his very fingers, and foisted them among those which are usual and ordinary
in the Scripture. As for the phrase it is so affected, that it does plainly
bewray it self. The matter also of the book was forged by such a spirit as
Postels was (if he were not the author thereof) in scorn of Christian
religion: where the author to make a fair flourish, and color the matter with
some probability, has inserted certain sentences of the Evangelists in
manner of a rhapsodie, and shuffled in others to which he supposed he could
give some luster by certain texts of the old Testament, as namely that of the
water of Jealousy, etc. Thus thou see (gentle Reader) to what impudency
some devilish spirits are grown at this day. But if any curious Athenian
desire to hear more of this stuff (I mean of such counterfaite books
foisted in by the craft and subtilty of Satan) he shall find a great lurry of
them in a book called Orthodoxographa Theologiae sacrosanctae (and garnished
with sundry other flanting titles) which seems to have been written of purpose
in scorn and derision of Christian religion. For if the doctrine therein
contained be orthodoxall, doubtless the doctrine of the Bible must needs be
heretical. Necessary therefore it is we should have a special regard to what
writings we give such glorious titles, seeing that in giving it to one, we take
it from another, they being as contrary as day and darkness. If any shall
here say, that some of them are translated out of Hebrew, and others out of
Greek; yet when he has proved the point, he may put the gain in his eye. For
it is easily answered, that the devil can show him self a devil as well in
Hebrew and Greek as in any other language. Now this Protoeuangelium I have
encountered rather then any of the rest, for that it is fathered upon Saint
James, cosingerman and brother to Christ, as the title purporteth. For in the
first impression (which is in a small volume with the annotations) it has this
title, Proteuangelion, sieve de natalibus Jesus Christi and ipsius matris
virginis Mari^ sermo historicus diui Iacobi minoris, consobrini and fratris
Domini Jesus, Apostoli primarij and Episcopi Christianorum primi Hierosolymis.
Howbeit in the second impression, where it is made a part of the foresaid
book, entitled Orthodoxographa, S. James is not called cosingerman, but only
brother of Christ. I have, I say, encountered this book rather then any of that
rabble, to the end the Reader by this may take a taste of the rest. For if they
durst publish such stuff under the name of S. James, what would they not dare
to do under the name of Nicodemus, and a number of such worshipful writers as
are there to be seen? And thus much for a taste, for the whole tun is of the
same liquor, color and tang. There was likewise another damnable book
published since that time under the name of S. James. The Acts also of the
Apostles have bin dispensed abroad into many hands, composed by one Abdias,
whose writings (though altogether impious and profane) some have not bin
ashamed to gloss in sundry places as well in the preface as in the body of the
book, and to affirm that he either took it out of S. Luke, or S. Luke out of
him. Besides all these, the Ecclesiastical history it self has bin published
by a devilish Monk called Nicephorus Calistus, whom I call a cloister devil
not without cause. For besides that he was a cloisterer by his profession, he
shows himself as ignorant as a Monk, as impudent as a Monk, as wicked and
profane as a Monk: so ignorant, that even young children may teach him his
lesson: so impudent, that he is not ashamed to tell most shameful lies: and so
profane, that he sticks not to jest and gibe at God himself and his holy
truth. All which particulars shall one day (God willing) be manifested and laid
open to the world.

4 Now albeit the foresaid Preachers might find in these and such like
classicke writers, pretty store of trim tales, ever ready at hand when they
meant to step into the pulpit to give their quarter blows: yet they were not
negligent to furnish themselves with other manner of ware, which they might
mingle with the old, and not ever cloy their auditory with stale stuff. Or if
happily they alleged any author, they alleged such as were ^picke and span
new, coming newly smoking from the press. Which puts me in mind of that which
I once heard delivered by one Bonauenture (a Franciscan) in a Sermon which he
made at Ipre in Flanders: where he affirmed, that when Christ was grown a
pretty tall stripling, able to take pains and to follow his occupation, Joseph
employed him in his trade, commanding him to saw a piece of wood; where he
missing the mark which he had made him to saw by, sawed it over short:
whereupon Joseph being very angry, would have beaten him; and he had lamskinned
him indeed if he had not stepped aside and taken up a cudgel to defend himself:
which made Joseph take up another, either of them weilding their weapon and
keeping their standing. And whence trow we (said the Friar) learned he this?
Out of S. Annes Gospel, I warrant you. And I remember I have read a like story
of another Franciscan called Bardotti, which may fitly parallele the former,
who preaching at Bourdeaux, of the good thief to whom our Savior said, This
day thou shall be with me in Paradise: affirmed he had found in a certain
Gospel the reason why he went straight to heaven, not so much as saluting
Purgatory by the way; because that when Christ fled into Egypt, he would not
suffer his fellows to rob him nor those that were with him: and that he should
say unto him, I beseech you Sir remember me another time for the good turn I
have done you: which he promised to do; and so did, when they hung together
upon the cross. Thus we see these ghostly fathers could never be drawn dry,
considering they had as many Gospels as they could desire: out of some of
which, they took many fine fables to make their auditors some sport: out of
others sundry miracles able to ravish them with admiration (I mean such
miracles and lying wonders as the Evangelists never mention:) and out of
others, answers to sundry objections, which might mar their mirth, by putting
out the great fire of their greasy kitchen. As this Bardotti, who having much
ado to maintain his Purgatory against the foresaid place of the Evangelist,
alleged this story for a full answer. I have also heard of another Preacher
who served his turn very well with this voyage into Aegipt, to assoile a
question wherewith he was sore troubled, viz. when that was fulfilled which was
foretold by the Prophet Ezechiel, Et disperdam simulachra and cessare faciam
idola de Memphis? for he said, it was then fulfilled when our Savior fled into
Egypt, being but a child. I come now to their lying legends and pretended
revelations.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of fables taken out of their Legends, and such like baggage,
wherewith they stuffed their Sermons.
But the storehouse of most idle, most addle and Frier-like fables, has been
and is the book entitled The golden Legend of the Saints, containing such a
number of absurd and ridiculous tales, that the Reader had need to hold hard
behind, for marring his breeches: which Frenchmen do oftener in the vintage
then any other season. Neither is he to be too nice or dainty; for he shall
meet with many places, out of which he shall never be able to extricate
himself, without doing that which fresh water soldiers do, as not having bin
used to the sea. Amongst which (if I may judge of other men's conceits by mine
own) these may be numbered. Frater Iuniperus (who^ S. Francis held for a very
holy man) purposing on a time to play the cook very bravely, put chickens into
a great pot, without either pluming, drawing or washing them; as also fresh and
poudered beef, together with herbs, pease, beans, and such like pulse,
neither washing or clensing them: and boiling all these together over a great
fire, served in this goodly dish of meat, and set it before his fellows. The
same Frater Iuniperus (and here a man had need to have a strong stomach indeed)
being lodged upon a time in a good bed, and fair clean sheets, laid pilgrim
salve therein, which he left his host for full payment, without giving him any
other farewell. Both which tales are taken out of the book of Conformities
before alleged; the first, fol. 62. the second, fol. 63. both these modest
stories being there recorded to show the humility of this holy Friar. But if
humility did consist in the second pranke here specified, questionless there
would be none comparable to that of young children; for they play this slippery
trick oftener then their nurses would have them: yet we must not judge rashly
of this fact of Iuniperus; for he knew (it may be) by revelation that he was to
set another hew upon the sheets before he went thence. And what can a man tell
whether it was not a receipt which he had learned in some Legend? For let me
but speak this one thing in his behalf, that it is scarce probable that the
stink of these excrements should be like other men's, especially considering we
read in the foresaid book of Conformities fol. 51. how that a Monk of the
same Covent called Ruffin, drove away the devil by threatening to untruss a
point into his throat: for it is there said, that when the devil heard this,
he ran away in a marvelous rage, as if a tempest had bin at his tail:
whereas going back for fear of holy water, he does not make a whit the more
have. Now if the devil was in such a bodily fear, to be so perfumed by Friar
Ruffin, the perfume doubtless which Friar Iuniperus left behind him in his bed
to pay his host withal, was more then Memphiticall.

2 Pardon me good Reader, if I be too broad; for I am enforced to accommodate
my self to the matter in hand. For (as the Greek proverb says) It is hard
to find modest words to express immodest things. Notwithstanding I do not (as
thou may perceive) say the worst I can of these filthy Friars, for the
respect I have of their holy mother the Church: but if I take them tardy the
second time, let them assure themselves, I will curry their cockscombs for
altogether.

3 But who is such an Heraclitus that would not burst with laughter, when he
shall read in the life of S. Dominicke, how he besieged the devils in a
certain demoniack, and would not suffer them to depart without giving pledges:
and how in the end they got the holy Martyrs which lay buried in the Church, to
be their sureties? But that I may the better satisfy the Reader, I will here
set down the very words of the story, as they lie in the old French tongue. Un
homme estoit demoniacle de plusieurs diables, lequel lui fut present (assauoir
a S. Dominique) and il prit l'estole, and la mit sur son col. Et puis en
ceignit le col au demoniacle, and commanda a iceu^ que d'oresenauant ils ne
tourmentassent celui homme. Et tantost ils furent tourme^tez dedans lui
fourment, and dirent, Laisse-nous aller. Pour quoi nous contrains tu a estre
tourmentez? Et il dit, Ie ne vous laisseray iusqu' a tant que m'aurez done
plege que ne re^ournerez plus. Et ils dirent, Quels pleges vous pouuons-nous
donner? Et il dit, Les saints martyrs qui reposent en ces^e eglise. Et ils
dirent, Nous ne pouuons, car nos merits ne le requi^rent pas. Et il dit, Il
conuient que vous les donniez, ou ie ne vous laisseray pas aller quittes. Et
ils respondirent, Qu'ils y mettroyent peine. Et apres un peu de temps ils
dirent, lacoit ce que nous ne soyons p^s dignez, nous auons impetre que les
saints martyrs nous plegerout. Et il requit auoir sign de ces^e chose. Et ils
dirent, Allez a la chase ou les ch^^s des martyrs sont, and vous les trouuerez
renuersez. Adonc allerent, and fut ainsi ^^ouue comme ils auoyent dit. That is,
A certain man possessed with many devils, was brought to S. Dominicke, who
took the stole and girded it fast about his neck, commanding them that from
thencefoorth they should not torment him: and forthwith they were grievously
tormented within him, and said, Suffer us to depart, Why do thou thus
torment us? To whom he answered, You shall not depart, until you have gotten
some to be your sureties, that ye will never enter into him again. They said,
What sureties? The holy Martyrs (said he) which lie here in the Church.
Whereunto they answered, Our merits do not deserve that. Well, you must procure
the^ (said he) to give their words for you, otherwise you shall not be set
free. They answered, they would do their endeavor: and returning again not
long after, said, Albeit we be unworthy, yet have we gotten the holy Martyrs to
be our sureties. Then he demanded a sign of them. If you go to the shrines
(said they) where the s^uls of the Martyrs lie, you shall find them ouerturned.
Whereupon French they went* but not so suitable to the story.
he went, and found it as they had said. After which story (or fable rather)
this other follows, which for the grace it has, deserves to go with it hand
in hand. It happened that as this holy father preached on a time, certain
simple seduced women fell down at his feet, and said: O thou man of God help
us. If this doctrine which thou have taught be true, an erroneous spirit has
this long time blinded our minds. To whom he said, Fear not, stay a little, and
you shall see what master you serve. And immediately they saw a black cat
leaping in among them, of the bigness of a great curre, with flaming eyes, a
long, large and bloody tongue reaching down to her breast: a crooked writhen
tail turning up on high, showing her posteriorums which way soever she went,
whence came a horrible stinch: who having fisked this way and that way about
these devout dames a long time, in the end went up by the bel-ropes, and left a
filthy stink behind her. And so these women thanked God, and turned to the
Catholic faith. But because such stories as these are but Frier-like fables,
very harsh to all men's ears that are not Frierified: I think it good whilst
they are now listening and attentive, to let them hear at once, the rest I do
remember. First then (fol. 211. of the foresaid book of Conformities) we read
how S. Francis, to show that he was a pure virgin, stripped himself naked
before the Bishop of Assise; and others; and how he gave his breeches to the
foresaid father, showing that he was not defiled with women. Thus much for the
master. Let us now hear how well his scholars followed his example. Fol. 62.
Friar Leonard putting off his breeches at the gate of Viterbe, put them upon
his head, and binding his other apparel like a fardell about his neck, went
stark belly naked through the streets, where he endured many villainies:
afterward he went into the Friery, where all the Friars cried shame upon him:
but he was so holy a man, that he respected not what they said; telling them
that he had done the like as he passed through two other cities. There is also
mention made of another of his disciples, which took pleasure in playing the
like pageant: who whether he resemble the doggish Diogenes or not, let the
Reader judge.

4 And now I come to those examples, which will not give a man his breakefast,
(as the former) but only his belly full of laughing cheer, so as he may
perhaps endanger that which I spoke of. And if you please to begin with S.
Francis, let us listen a little to his great wisdom recorded fol. 114. of the
said book; how he saluted the birds, spoke unto them, and called them his
brethren, commanding them to hearken to the word of God: and how they hearing
him preach unto them, reioiced exceedingly, thrusting out their necks, and
opening their beakes one upon another, ma^king him all the while very
attentively: and how when the sermon was ended, he walked through the midst
of them, and permitted them to depart. Whereupon they flew all away with a great
noise, and divided themselves into four companies, according to the four
quarters of the world, thereby signifying that the order of Saint Francis should
be renoumed, and dispersed throughout the earth. Again, fol. 149. we read
that a Grasshopper abode eight days with him, in stead of Saint Mary, and that
when he called her, she flue unto him and light upon his head, and so taking
leave of him departed. As also how a Nightingale and he song Anthemes a whole
day together by course. Again, fol. 114. how he made the Swallows to cease
their chattering, calling the^ sisters. And in the same page, how he cured a
man-keene wolf (which had hurt many in the city;) by making the sign of the
cross, and how he made this agreement with him any brother wolf, thou must
here promise me, that thou will not raven as heretofore thou have done; and
then the city will keep thee. Which the wolf promised to do, bowing down
his head evidently. Then said Saint Francis, swear unto me upon thine honesty,
and therewith put forth his hand; where the wolf lifting up his right foot,
laid it gently in Saint Francis his hand. Who said my brother wolf, I charge
thee in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou follow me now presently
which he did. We read also of sundry Saints, who took pleasure in talking with
beasts: but this brotherhood with wolves is peculiar (I take it) to Saint
Francis.

5 Further, who can contain himself when he shall read how Saint Macarius did
seven years penance among thorns and bushes, for killing of a flea? Which
verily was another manner of penance then that which Saint Francis did for
eating Coquinam de ^ardone. But I may not forget another pranke played by Saint
Dominicke, recorded toward the end of his legend, which was the fact of a
bon-companion indeed, at leastwise so penned that it will make good fellows
sport, and minister unto them matter of merriment; viz. that there was a holy
Nun called Mary, who had a sore thigh, and had endured great pain of it for
the space of five months, and was past hope ever to have it cured: who
thinking her self unworthy to pray unto God, or to be heard of him, besought
Saint Dominick to be a mediator for her, that she might be restored to her
limbs again. Where falling asleep, shortly after she thought she saw Saint
Dominicke close by her, and how he took from under his coape a strong smelling
ointment, wherewith he anointed her thigh. And that when she asked him what it
was; he should answer, that it was The ointment of love. Which riddle I leave
to the Reader to read as his fancy shall give him: for my part I conceive no
otherwise of it, then of the private familiarity which was between S. Francis
and S. Claire (recorded fol. 84* book of Conformities) and of his inward and
familiar acquaintance with Friar Mass, a beautiful young man, whom he once
embraced and lifted up from the ground, in such sort, that he thought himself
all on a fire.

6 Moreover in the Legend of Saint Germine, it is reported, how that he
preaching on a time in Britain, when the king would not entertain him, nor
those that were with him; a heardman (who came from feeding his cattle)
carrying an alms to his cottage (with was given him at the palace) and seeing
this blessed Saint Germine and others with him hungry and cold, received them
courteously into his house; and having but one calfe, caused it to be killed
and dressed for the^. And that when supper was done Saint Germine caused the
bones to be brought, and laid upon the skin, and having prayed over them, the
calfe rose up upon his feet. The next morning he went to the king, and giving
him very hard language, asked him why he had denied him lodging? To which when
he could not tell what to answer, Saint Germine said, get thee hence, and leave
thy kingdom to thy better. Which done, he commanded the herdman should come
(and bring his wife with him) whom he crowned king in the presence of them all;
(who wondered at the fact) so that ever after, the herdman and his successors
enjoyed the kingdom.

7 Again, we read this fabulous story in the Legend of Saint Cosmas and S.
Damian, word for word. Pope Felix (the eight after Saint Gregory) built a
famous Church at Rome in honor of Saint Cosmas and Saint Damian. In which
Church there was one which attended upon these holy Martyrs, who had his thigh
almost eaten away with the canker. To whom as he was asleep these Saints
appeared, and brought with them instruments and ointments. And the one said to
the other, where shall we have wherewith to fill up the place, out of which we
must cut this corrupt flesh? The other answered, there is an Ethiopian newly
buried in the Churchyard of Saint Peter's aux liens, fetch hither some of his
flesh that we may put it in the place; who went presently into the Churchyard,
and brought thence the dead man's thigh. They then cut off the sick man's thigh,
and put the dead man's thigh in stead thereof, and having carefully anointed
the wound, carried his thigh to the dead man. Now when the Secretine awooke, he
put his hand to his thigh, but felt no pain, nor yet any scarre or sign of
his wound. And when he took the candle and saw his thigh well again, he
doubted of himself, thinking he had been some other. But coming at last to
himself, he leapt out of his bed for joy: telling his friends what had
befallen him in his sleep, and how he had been healed; whereupon they sending
in all have to the dead man's tomb, to know the truth, found the dead man's
thigh cut off, and his in the grave, in stead thereof.

8 But if any desire to know more of these old wives tales, let him read the
foresaid lying Legendary; or Nicephorus Calistus his Ecclesiastical story; who
(to omit other fables) reports that Saint Chrysostomes body spoke after he
was dead, and that Theodosius the Emperor sent letters unto it: as also the
sermons of Oliver Maillard, and Michael Menot. And to the end he may furnish
himself for all assays, let him read fructuosissimos atque ^^^^nissimos
sermones Fr. Gabrielis Baraleti, a toto verbisatorum coetu diu desideratos: as
also Sermones Dormi secure: where they are huddled together one upon another,
thick and threefold. But the book of Conformities (mentioned before)
contains mo of these fond fables, quantity for quantity, the^ any of the
rest. There you shall find that it was as ordinary a thing with Saint Francis
his nouices, to raise the dead, as to drink a cup of beer, and as easy a
matter as for a squirrell to crack a nut. As also how Saint Francis slew a man
in his iollitie, that he might in a bravery raise him from the dead again.
Fol. 120. Locus est dictus de Nuceria, in quo Franciscus fecit illud insigne
miraculum, quod cuiusdam medici filiu^ primogenitu^ prius occidit, and
contritu^ suscitando restituit. And not to rake up the filth, nor rip up the
fooleries of their other lying Legends, you may see in the former chapter,
which entreats of our good Catholics of the Popish Clergy, how many
miracles are fathered upon him. But the best is, that the most there spoken of
are confirmed by the testimony of none, but of the devil (so far did those
wicked wretches authors of that book ouer-shoot themselves) and that sundry
miracles which are there said to have been wrought by him and his disciples,
were wrought by no other means, then by Satanical operation and diabolical
illusions. Which though it be not there recorded, yet it was the will of God,
these fables should so be penned that they might easily be descried.

9 I was here purposed to have ended this rhapsody taken out of the Legends,
but that two other came afterward to my mind, recorded in the book of
Conformities, which in conscience I cannot omit. Fol. 72. A blind man rubbing
his eyes with Friar Francis of Duratio's frocke, recovered his sight. Fol. 74.
A woman of Tholouze being grievously diseased with a bloody flixe for the space
of fourteen years, said in her self, O if I could but touch the hem of his
garment I should be whole: which she did, and so was cured, etc. Fol. 64. Friar
Bennet of Arezze bare great devotion to S. Daniel, whose sepulcher in Babylon
guarded with dragons he desired to see; but could not, by reason of the long
journey and fear of those serpents. Whereupon there appeared unto him a huge
and monstrous dragon, who set him upon his tail, and carried him straight to
Daniels sepulcher: where opening the tomb, he took one of Daniels fingers in
devotion, and forthwith was carried by the dragon back again into his place.
Many are of opinion that it was an Angel of God. The same Friar, like a second
Jonas, was cast into the sea in a tempest, and being suddenly environed with a
little cloud, was carried to the terrestrial Paradise: whom when Enoch and
Elias saw, they demanded of him what he was? And when they heard that he was
Saint Francis his brother, they danced for joy, and led him about to show him
every corner of Paradise. From thence he was carried back again over the sea in
a little cloud, which maruellously astonished those that beheld it.

10 But to return to Friar Iuniperus. Fol. 91. Friar John of the Valleys
affirms, that he smelt the savor of Iuniperus twelve leagues off; and note
that they were twelve leagues of good measure: for he says, Huius odorem, seu
aduentum, frater Johannes de vallibus, dixit se sensisse per viginti octo
milliaria. And as Friar Iuniperus did all this in humility, so likewise (to
show his humility) he played with a little boy at titter-totter. And touching
sottish humility, see here as foolish a part as ever was played by the wise
men of Gotham. Fol. 74. Frater Thomas pollicem sibi amputauit propter
humilitatem, ne sacerdos fieret, claruit multis miraculis: that is, Friar
Thomas cut off his thumb in humility, for fear of being made priest, and was
famous for many miracles. I do the rather relate this tale in his original
(viz. in the very words and terms wherein it is written) because I doubt not
but it will seem as strange to the Readers as it did to me; especially if they
shall consider the reason which is there given, that he did it through
humility forsooth, that is, (as I conceive of it) because he thought himself
unworthy to say Mass: whereas the poor Priest should not only have cut off
his thumb, as willing to lose a member of his body, but should rather have
died ten thousand deaths (if it had bin possible) as abhorring to be of the
number of those Masse-mongers, I mean those butchers of our Saviors body, or
tormenting executioners, as much as in them lies. Now what punishment he
deserved for such indiscreet, or rather sottish humility, I leave to the
judgment of the Reader. But the punishment which King Francis the first
adjudged two companions unto, who had cut off one another hand for fear of
being sent to the galleys, was, that they should be sent to the gallows, as I
heard it credibly reported to Charles of Marillac, then Bishop of Vienne, and
Ambassador for the French King at Ausbourgh.

11 As for their other drugs and draffe, mentioned in the title of this
Chapter, by them I understand other tales not taken out of their lying Legends
(as the former) but forged by fond Friars, and fained of their fingers: some of
them in the cells of contemplations, others in the cells of revelations, and
others in other blind corners. For it is the custom of those profound
Preachers, and namely of the four so often before alleged, in reporting any
story of their he or she Saints, to say that they had it out of the story of
his life (which they call his Legend,) or out of such or such an author: and
sometimes that they borrowed it at the second hand from such as had it by
contemplation or revelation: and sometime again (which sometime, is oftentime
with them) they allege no author at all, but content themselves with a
hearesay or a scriptum est. Which I speak not only in regard of the tales
they tell us of the Saints, but of that which they report of meaner persons
also: a usual thing with them when they speak of any miracle, as I might
easily instance by sundry examples; but I leave the Reader to search for them
in the sac^els of these worshipful writers (who among the rest of their
contemplative doctors, allege Landulphus and Bonauenture: as also certain
omnigatherums, entitled Revelations, and among others Librum reuelationum
Elizabeth) and will content my self only with three histories or fables, one
of which is of the rabble and riffe raffe of those which the Friars and Priests
have in high account, because they help to make their kitchins hot. The story
is this (in the Sermons entitled Dormi secure, in dedicatione Ecclesiae,
sermon 68.) Legitur de quodam sacerdote, qui in quadam Missa liberauit de
Purgatorio animas nonaginta nouem: and quum interrogaretur, etc. that is, We
read of a certain Priest, who by saying a Mass, delivered ninety and nine
souls out of Purgatory. And being demanded why he stayed there, and went not
on to an hundred, to make up a round number: he answered, that a devilish
door hindered him, which striking against the wall, made such a noise that he
quite forgot where he was: and being then wrapped in contemplatio^, it put him
clean out of the socket. The second story or fable (story for them, fable for
us) is this* In Natiuitate Domini, sermon. 69. vnde legitur exemplum, quod
fuerint duae Iuuenculae, etc. that is, (somewhat to abridge the Latin Legend)
There were two young maids which conuersed very familiarly together, who on
Christmasse even at night, after they had heard the first Mass, sequestring
themselves from the rest of the Nuns, went apart into an odd corner of the
Cloister, there to chat of this child Jesus, listening when they would ring to
the second Mass. Where sitting together, the one said to the other, Why have
you two cushions, and I but one? I will lay one of them (quoth the other) in
the midst betwixt us, for the child Jesus to sit upon: for he has promised (as
the Evangelist says) that where two or three are gathered together in his
name, he will be there in the midst amongst them. This done, they sat there
together (taking great pleasure in such talk) from the Nativity of Christ to
the Nativity of S. John Baptist, that is, from Christmas til Midsommer: all
which time seemed to them as if it had bin but two hours. In the mean time
the Abbatesse and the rest of the Nuns were sore perplexed, wondering not a
little what was become of these nouices. Now it fortuned upon John Baptists
eve, that a heardman passing by the place where they sat, and espying a goodly
child sitting upon a cushion between them, went forthwith to the Abbatesse,
and acquainted her therewith: who following him to the place, saw this child,
which seemed to her to play with the girls. They then being found there by the
Abbatesse, were much abashed, and asked her if they had rung to the second
Mass? for they supposed they had not stayed there above two hours: where she
having told them, that they had bin there half a year, viz. from Christmasse
to Midsommer, they wondered exceedingly. And being asked whither the child was
gone which sat betwixt them; they protested and swear they saw no child there.
So I had bread and cheese, and came my way home. Let us now come to the third,
taken out of Barelete. Saint Katherine saying on a time the fifty first
Psalm, beginning Miserere mei Deus, and being come to Cor mundum crea in me
Deus, Create in me, O God, a clean heart: our Lord appeared to her, and took
out her heart: and after three days were expired (during which time she had no
heart) he gave her a new heart, and said, Good daughter Katherine I have given
thee a new heart, that thou might be clean in my sight. In sign whereof
(although the place was closed up and healed again) there remained a little
scarre ever after. To which she having respect in her prayers, was wont to say,
Lord I commend thine heart and not mine unto thee. Which tale of a tub he took
as it seems out of the legend of this Saint, though like a filching fellow he
cunningly conceal it.

12 And now I hope (gentle Reader) I have fulfilled my promise which I made in
the title of this chapter: for which cause I doubt not but I have deserved well
of our holy mother the church; But to come to their works of supererogatio^: I
will bestow some pains to show, how these Preachers applied their tales,
stories or fables, in their sermons. First, they begin with a place of
Scripture, which they call a theme (whence comes this fine phrase, Iuxta
thema praelibatum) which if it be suitable to the matter they intend to speak
of, it is so much the better: if not, there is no remedy, they must take it as
it is, and patience. Now here note, that though they were to preach of any
Saint, yet would they take some text which speaks either of Christ, or of some
other. For example, one of the sermons in that worthy work called Dormi
secure, de S^ncto Andrea, sermon 1. begins thus; Christo confixus sum
cruci, Galat. 2. Notate charissimi (dicit enim beatus Augustinus super verbo
praedicto) quod Christus etc. Certe hoc fecit sanctus Andreas, cum magno
desiderio quieuit per biduum in cru^e, and in eo obdormiuit in Domino, ideo
conuenienter dicit, Christo confixus sum. And in the sermon de S. Augustino, Tu
signaculu^ similitudinis Dei, plenus sapientiae, Ezech. 28. And a little after:
Quare merito dicitur de eo (sancto Augustino) tu signacuium similit. etc. In
quibus quidem verbis tria notantur, in quibus sanctus Augustinus commendatur,
primum est, etc. And in the 13. sermon De sancta Agnete. Quam pulchra es and
decora charissima in delitijs. Cant. 7. Notate charissimi: dicit enim sanctus
Gregorius, quod mos est amantium mutua collaudation^ laetari. Hinc est enim
quod De^ filius, qui, etc. aduertens pulchritudinem sanctae Agnetis, quam
habuit in corpore and anim^, been commendat eam dicens, Quam pulchra es, etc.
In quibus quid^m verbis sancta Agnes tripliciter commendatur a Christo suo
dilecto. Primo, etc. True it is (I must needs confess) he has had more care
and conscience in other places; not because he made any bones to abuse the
Scriptures, but for that he ingeniously confesses, that he applies such or
such places to some other then to him of who^ they are written. For, sermon. 6.
De sancta Lucia, upon these words: Lux in tenebris lucet* and tenebrae eam non
comprehenderunt. John. 1. he says, Notate charissimi, quamuis istud verbum sit
dictum de Christo, tamen conuenienter potest dici de sancta Lucia. In quibus
quidem verbis tria notantur, in quibus sancta Lucia nobis tripliciter
commendatur, primum est nobilitas nominis, etc. But his impudency is much more
intolerable, when he does not only apply the text to another person, but
wresteth and wringeth, choppeth and changes that which makes not for his
purpose, or rather against him. For preaching of the conception of the blessed
virgin, and going about to prove that she was not stained with original
sin, he takes a text which speaks of the conception indeed, but that which
is spoken of sin which accompanies that conception, he leaves quite out.
Mark how David Psalm. 51. says, Et in peccato concepit me matter mea, And in
sin has my mother conceived me. Now this gentle Sir John, to the end he may
apply this text to the virgin Mary, cutteth off these words and in peccato, and
alleges only these concepit me matter mea, my mother conceived me. But what
proper proofs he brings for confirmation hereof, shall be declared in the
chapter next ensuing, where we will entreat of their questions; and therefore I
will here only allege this one example, Vnde been dicitur illud. 1. Ioh.
cap. 5. Tres sunt qui testimonium dant, scilicet, virgini Mariae, quod sit sine
originali peccato concepta. Et Danielis tertio. Hi tres quasi ex vno ore
laudabant Deu^, scilicet quod matrem sua^ praeseruauit ab originali peccato.
After they have read the text, one handles it one way, another, another. Some
allege a moral or philosophical sentence, as the author of the sermons
dormi secure, who after he has read his text, is by and by over head and ears
in Aristotle. For example, straight after the foresaid ^ext Psalm 51. Concepit
me matter mea, you shall find these words, Notate charissimi, dicit Aristot. in
lib. secundo de generatione and corruptione, quod melius est esse qua^ non
esse. Quum igitur Deus voluit Mariam, etc. And in the sermon de sancto
Augustino, Tu signaculum similitudinis Dei, plenus sapientiae, perfectus
decore. Ezech. 18. Notate charissimi, dicit enim Aristot. 6. Topic. quod imago
est, cuius generatio est per immutionem; hinc est enim quod sanctus Augustinus,
etc. And in the sermon de sancto Laurentio, victoriam and honorem acquirit, qui
dat munera, Proverb. 22. Notate charissimi, dicit Arist. 4. Ethicorum, quod
laus and gratiarum actio debetur danti a recipiente. Hinc est enim quod sanctus
Laurentius, etc. Now this quotatio^ of Aristotle's Ethics puts me in mind of a
deep divine, who said, that if the scripture were lost, we might find a great
part of it in Aristotle's Morals. And we know that in old time, Aristotle and
his expositors, were oftener alleged in Theological disputations, then the
Scripture or the ancient fathers. But to return to the method which these
preachers observed in their sermons; some of them after they had read the text,
or theme (as they speak) divided the matter (which they were to entreat of)
into certain heads. The old manner was, to make one part Allegorical, another
Anagogicall, and a third Tropological: whereas they should have made one part
Morological, another Mythological, and a third Pseudological. Some began with
canuasing of certain questions: others used some other entrance. But to come
to that which I promised to speak of, namely how they applied these tales:
their manner was (to the end they might apply their doctrine to the present
occasion) to use certain divisions, and to bring in every branch of their
division all the foolish fables they could possibly devise. For example,
Barelete handling this text, Quum haec diceret, extollens vocem quaedam mulier
dicit, beatus venture qui te portauit: shortly after his entrance, has these
words: Applica Euangelium, de impedimentis confessionis erit sermo noster, in
quo quinque impedimenta sunt videnda in praesenti. Primum dicitur pudor
propalandi* secundum dicitur timor recidiuandi: tertium, etc. All which points
he handles in order, alleging sentences, as well out of profane as
Ecclesiastical writers, and all such examples as he could remember, whether
true or false, fitting the matter or not. As in handling the second part, Vna
maxima est in Theologia (says he) quod Deus nouit omnia peccata nostra. Non
debet peccator etc. And a little after, o Peccator, peccata tua sunt nota.
Exemplo patet de Abbate Paphnutio, qui ad Thaidem meretricem perrexit in
Alexandriam, fingens se esse mercatorem, and ipsam inuitat ad turpem actum.
Quumque ad secundam and tertiam cameram peruenissent, tandem ipsum conducit ad
locum secretiorem. Possumus (inquit Paphnutius) videri; respondit, nisi nos
Deus videat, alius non videt. Credis (inquit) a Deo videri? Imo heu filia,
quantum debemus erubescere coram Deo, si erubescimus coram hominibus? Compuncta
and lacrymis plena, acceptis rebus suis, quae erant pretio quadringentarum
librarum, in medio Ciuitatis omnia consumpsit, inuitans Iuuenes ad actum illum.
Sanctus Dei ipsam conclusit in quodam loco, sigillans plumbo per annos tres in
poenitentia. Ad propositum. Non erubescas confiteri, etc.

13 Now whereas I said, that they used the testimonies of profane writers, it
is to be observed, that they quoted them not only to prove moral or
philosophical, but sometimes also Theological conclusions. Barelete for
example (upon these words of the virgin Mary, Beatam me dicent omnes
generationes) says, that the Pagans, the Sybils, Ovid and Virgil did write in
her commendation, (fol. 71. col. 4.) albeit he allege but this one verse out
of Virgil, Vltima Cumaei venit iam carminis aetas. He says moreover that the
Saracens and Turks do worship her in their churches, and punish those that
speak against her, as we may read in the Alcoran. The author likewise of the
sermons entitled Dormi secure, not content most impudently to wrest this
place. 1. Ioh. 5. There are three which bear witness in heaven: expounding
these words which bear witness, of the virgin Mary forsooth, that she was
conceived without sin: affirming that by those three we are to understand
Alexander Niccam, Cardinal Bonauenture, and S. Bernard, of whom we are to
speak more hereafter: Nor content to abuse this text, Daniel 3. These three as
it were with one mouth praised God: in saying that they praised God, because he
preserved his mother the virgin Mary from original sin. Not content (I say)
with these false allegations and deprauations of Scripture, nor resting in the
testimonies of the Doctors of the Church, alleges the Saracens, and Mahomets
Acoran for confirmation hereof. Nec mirum (says he) quod ista affirmatio a
Catholicis teneatur, cum etiam Saraceni illud praeconium sibi attribuant: nam
in quodam libro suo qui dicitur Alcoran, qui liber fuit aeditus per discipulum
Mahometi, and est authenticus inter eos, sic inquit Mahometi discipulus: Audiui
nuntium Dei dicentem, Nullus de filijs Adam nascitur quem non tangat Satan,
praeter Mariam and filium eius. Quapropter and ipse Mahometus collaudans
virginem in suo Alcorano sic dicit, O Maria, Deus vtique deputauit te, and
elegit te super foeminas saeculorum, O Maria, Deus annunciauit tibi verbum suum
de se, nomen eius Messiah, and Jesus Mariae filius honorabitur in hoc saculo
and in alio, etc. Now here note that before he came to the testimony taken out
of the Alcoran, he had alleged all such texts of Scripture and testimonies of
the Doctors as he thought would serve his turn, and had added thereto (the
better to fortify and strengthen his opinion) Sancta synodus dicit, quod dicta
sanctorum doctorum, scilicet Augustini, Hieronymi, and aliorum, a cunctis
fidelibus sunt retinenda, sicut quatuor Euangelistae. But what after all this?
He then proceeds to fables and fictions, and lying Legends: of the application
whereof I now entreat. Tertio (says he) dico quod virgo Maria est sine
peccato originali concepta, quia est exemplis confirmatum: specialiter autem
tribus exemplis, quae facta sunt in tribus magnis doctoribus sanctae matris
Ecclesiae, scilicet in magistro Alexandro Niccam, in domino Bonauentura
Cardinali, and in sancto Bernardo. And what (trow we) contain these tales?
Marry Sir how the virgin Mary was offended with such as held opinion that she
was conceived in sin; and namely with master Alexander Niccam, who having
given it out three sundry times, that he would prove that she was conceived in
sin, was ever prevented with sickness, so that he could not perform his
promise: and how afterward renewing his purpose, the night before he was to
prove his assertion, he fell into a grievous disease. Where when he called upon
the blessed virgin, she came presently unto him, and said, Hanc infirmitatem
pateris, pre eo quod me esse conceptam in peccato originali probare niteris:
That is, This sickness is inflicted upon thee, because thou wentest about to
prove, that I was conceived in sin. And having so said, she took her maids
knife, and therewith cut out a piece of rotten flesh out of his side, and with
a needle and a silk thread ( serico filo) sewed it up again. VVhereupon he
did not only renounce that damnable opinion, but wrote a great book for
confirmation of the contrary. And as for the other two fables which I should
here insert, I will defer them to the end of the next Chapter. Now for a
small conclusion, he brings this goodly allegation, of which I have already
spoken, Tres sunt qui testimonium dan^ (scilicet virgini Mariae) etc. See here
(gentle Reader) how Rhetorically he casts and contriueth his matter, in
keeping these tales for his last and surest proof. For mark how he
marshalleth his arguments to prove quod est concepta sine originali peccato:
primo quia fuit a Deo praeseruata. Secundo, quia hoc est per sacram Scripturam
praefiguratum, ac per dicta sacrorum doctorum approbatum. Tertio, quia est
exemplis praenunciatum ac confirmatum. But how they made these tales to serve
their turns in the maine matter concerning either the wealth or the honor of
our holy mother the Church, or both, I am to show hereafter.

14 As for the tales which they are wont to tell us in their Sermons, in honor
of their Saints; their applications were such, that for every virtue which they
ascribed unto them (and they would be sure to leave out none by their good
wills) they would (for an unanswerable argument) add one fable or other of
something done or spoken by them.

CHAP. XXXV. Of sundry sorts of questions, and some no less impious then
frivolous, wherewith the foresaid Preachers were always ready furnished.
Moreover, they spent one part of their Sermons in canuasing of certain
questions which were as fond and frivolous, as foolish and fantastical as
those above mentioned. Some of them (I say) were curious; others, not only
curious, but also vain and frivolous; yea for the most part sottish and
ridiculous: notwithstanding such curiosity (as it is well known) has been
censured in all ages. For we see how greatly it offended S. Paul, and many
ancient Doctors after him: among the rest, S. Augustine (as I remember) tells
us of one that shaped a fond fellow such an answer as his curious question well
deserved. For having demanded, what God did before he created the world: he
answered him, that he made hell for such curious companions. And Constantine
the Emperor shows in a certain Epistle what mischief such curious
questions brought with them. Which notwithstanding could not keep Peter
Lombard, Thomas Aquinas, and other Schoolmen from broaching thousands of such
unprofitable and frivolous quirkes and quiddities; nay some pernicious and
blasphemous. Neither has it kept our modern Doctors from disputing of them in
the schools, nor daily coining of new. And what (I beseech you) do these
questions concern? They concern God, the divinity and humanity of Christ,
and the Angels. As, Vtrum Deus posset peccare si vellet, etc. Whether God could
sin if he would? Whether he can make those things which he could in times
past? Whether he can know any thing which he knows not? Whether he could have
taken upon him humane nature in the weaker sex? But these are reserved for the
most illuminate Doctors (I say illuminatis Doctoribus) Vtrum plures in Christo
filiationes? Item, Vtrum Deus potuerit suppositare mulierem, vel diabolum, vel
asinum, vel cucurbitam, vel silicem? Et si suppositasset cucurbitam,
quemadmodum fuerit concionatura, editura miracula, and quonam modo fuisset sixa
cruci? Item, what should Saint Peter have consecrated, if he had then
consecrated when the body of Christ hung upon the cross? Ite^, whether it shall
be lawful to eat and drink after the resurrection? And concerning the
Angels: whether they agree well together, or not? Whether God does use the
ministry and service of all, or not? Whether they be grieved at the
condemnation of those which are committed to their custody, or not? I omit the
questions which are moved about the names of Angels and Archangels, their
preheminences and seats, to wit, how high one is advanced above another; and
other speculations concerning their Hierarchy. They have also sundry questions
de notionibus, relationibus, instantibus, formalitatibus, quidditatibus,
ecceitatibus, and other such like bald and barbarous words, which seem to have
bin invented of purpose to conjure devils: which notwithstanding were
ordinarily tossed up and down in the mouths of schoole-doctors, as well
Nominals as Reals; as Thomists, Albertists, Occamists, Scotists, and the rest.
They have also in former times vainly busied themselves; and do still beat
their brains even at this day about fond and fantastical questions, which
they move touching the articles of our faith and Christian belief: and namely
touching the holy Sacrament of the Altar (as they call it) as we may see in a
book called Cautelae Missae. And yet their skill was never such, in
multiplying question upon question about this point, but that a man might move
a number of others never heard of before. And surely no marvel, considering
their sacrifice is liable to so many and great inconveniences. For albeit they
have moved many doubts of the inconveniences that might befall their
consecrated host, notwithstanding some such have befallen it, as they would
never have dreamed of* For they speak not a word of such an accident as befell
S. Francis (as it is recorded fol. 72. of the book of Conformities, so often
before alleged) how he saying Mass upon a time, found a Spider in the
chalice, which he would not cast out of the cup, but drank her up together
with the blood; and afterward rubbing and scratching his thigh where he felt
it itch, caused her to come forth again. This verily is such an accident as
might minister matter of sundry other questions never heard of before. For
first it may be asked, whether the blood being so poisoned, had as great virtue
in it as if it had not been poisoned? and whether it were of such a piercing
nature that it could penetrate even to Purgatory? Item, whether the Spider came
thither of her own accord, or rather by revelation, above the strength and
against the course and current of nature? Item, whether she were partaker of
the merits of the sacrifice? at leastwise whether she were sanctified or not?
It may further be demanded, whether she could be made tipsie with this drink,
or not? And they that are well seen in such subtilties may yet move two or
three dozen of questions more: which made me say, that we are not to marvel,
if hitherto they could never find how to make an end of these questions, which
this strange, mystical, or mysterificall manner of sacrifice ingendreth.

2 Notwithstanding their case were not so greatly to be pitied, if they did but
busy their heads and break their brains about the former points: but they
are so far from resting there, that they will needs enter in Sanctum
Sanctorum, even into Gods closet and secret counsel. And this their curiosity
has excited them through their foole-hardy invention, to patch to the
historical books of the Bible a number of circumstantiall fooleries, as we may
see by that which has been already spoken of their paraphrasticall
expositions. Nay, they have proceeded a step further, in subiecting the
histories of the Bible (as they have done the fables in their Legends) to such
servitude and slavery, that they come at their whistle, and tell them what was
the name of Tobies dog.

3 For exemplification of which particulars, to begin with curious questions
wherein there is less danger: let us hear the pleasant conceited reason
alleged by Menot (fol. 47. col. 4.) why Christ would not suffer Saint Peter
to use his sword. Because (says he) he was not cunning at his weapon, as
having never learned at the fence school; as well appeared when he cut off
Malchus his care, whereas he should have cut off his head. For is it a seemly
sight (think ye) to see one carry a book at his belt, whereon he cannot
read? Even so (says he) it is as unseemly a thing to see a man wear a sword
by his side, who knows not how to use it. But to omit this bold and blind
assertion, let us here observe touching the cause which moved our Savior to
give this commandment to Peter (notwithstanding the true reason be most
evident) two other points, which he holds as most certain truths, though no
logician on the earth be able to conclude the^ out of the text upon which alone
we are to ground our faith. First, that Saint Peter meant to have cut off
Malchus his head when he cut of his ear, but that his blow somewhat missed.
Secondly, that the blade wherewith he cut off his ear was a Rapier. I omit
another particular no less pleasant then the former, viz. that Peter was then
Pope: for he demands, Sed cur Dominus noluit quod Petrus gladio vteretur,
viso quod Papa erat? And in very deed, this question has exceedingly troubled
many of their profoundest Doctors and Preachers. For even Pasquin himself
objected this sentence of our Savior against the Pope: albeit he knew well
enough how to shape him an answer, as we may see in these two Epigrams.

The question.

Quum tibi non aetas habilis sit Caraphe bello,
Et castris habeas cognita claustra magis:
Quum desit miles, bellique pecunia neruus,
Quis te praecipitem cogit ad arma furor?
Infirmis humeris damnata quid induis arma?
Quae tibi quum libeat ponere, non liceat
Cur respirantem and curantem vuln^ra mundum
Concutis, and Martem solus ad arma cies?
Da miseris requiem, and spatium concede malorum,
Si nobis pater es, si tua cura sumus:
Conde senex gladium, and Christi reminiscere verbi:
Quod dixit Petro, dixit and ille tibi.
The answer.

Quod dixit Petro Christus, nolim esse putetis
Dictum (Pontificum pace Petrique) mihi.
Nam neque sum Petri successor, nec quoque talem
Agnoscit bona pars Christicolarum hodie.
Pauli ego (successu coeptis meliore deinceps
Dij faueant) sumpsi nomen and arma simul:
Et Christi verbi memor intrepidusque minister,
Non veni pacem mittere, sed gladium.
4 And now to return to Malchus whose ear Saint Peter cut off, thinki^g to
have cut of his head, but that he took his aim amiss; the same preacher
says, it was not without cause that Malchus was the high Priests servant,
seeing that Malchus signifies a king; and hereupon he makes this Catholic
collection; that as Malchus was servant to the high Priest, so the regal
Majesty of Kings and Emperors is subject to the power of Priests. And here
the naming of S. Peter puts me in mind of another question moved by the same
Preacher; viz. Why Christ committed the keys of the Church rather to S. Peter
then to S. John, who was every inch as good a man as he? Mark his answer. S.
John (says he) was Christ's kinsman, and cosingerman; and therefore he committed
the^ not unto him, but to Saint Peter, to give a president in his own example,
how in bestowing Ecclesiastical dignities we should not respect affinity or
consanguinitie, but holiness of life and conversation. To which also Moses had
an eye, when in stead of resigning his sovereign authority to his sons,
(though wise and sufficient men) he resigned it to Joshua, who was no way
allied unto him, as being of another tribe.

5 Moreover, they have their budgets full of other curious questions concerning
Christ and the virgin Mary, which they have borrowed of their conte^platiue
Doctors (as they call them) as of Landulphus, Bonauenture, etc. as namely,
whether Christ ever laughed? Oliver Maillard relying upon the authority of
Landulphus, answers that he wept often, but that he laughed not once in all
his life: where he also patcheth together sundry curious questions, touching
the garment which Christ wore; as that it was of ash color, that it was round
both above and below: that it had round sleeves, and phylacteries and borders
beneath, after the Jewish fashion. And that the virgin Mary wrought it all of
needle work. And that as Christ grew in stature, so his garment grew
proportionally; and that it did not wear nor wax old. Item, that the year
before his passion he was accustomed to wear another slender garment under it.
Menot again (on the other side) holds it for a most certain truth, that his
flesh was exceeding tender, yea so tender that it grieved him more to hit his
heel against a little stone, then if another had been smitten in the apple of
the eye: but take this reason with you; Quod corpus eius suit formatum ex
purissimis sanguinibus Beatissimae virginis Mariae. Further, seeing it was
necessary the Church should know what was the greatest dolor and anguish that
Christ suffered: they have found that it was that bloody agony and painful
pan, gwhich seized upon him when he went into the garden at the twelft hour,
and there sweat water and blood in such abundance, that it made a pretty
brook. But how came this secret to be known, may we think? verily not by the
contemplation of these Doctors (as the rest) but by revelation, showed to a
devout woman who has ease^ them of much labor in this behalf. Yet this is
not all: for they will needs take upon them to know how the rods were made
wherewith Christ was whipped in Pilats Palace, (called the Praetorium) and how
many stripes he had: as also how many thorns were in his crown. And some of
them have been rapt into so high conte^plation, that they have found out new
stuff in all this gear: as first, that an instrument was tied to every twig,
which cut like a razor. Though in the number of stripes all men's conte^plations
do not fully agree. For according to the speculation of some deep Divines, he
had just five thousand: whereas others say he had six thousand, viz. five
thousand on his body, and a thousand on his head. Touching his crown,
Bonauenture says, that there were a thousand thorns in it. But what kind of
thorns were they? Dicit Lira, says Oliver Maillard, fol. 108. col. 2. Quod
erant de iunco marino. Et quaesiuit ab illis qui fu^rant cum Beato Lu^^uico
rege in terra sancta, quod quidam dixit quod illae spinae penetrabant sotulares
cu^ duplici semella, quantumcunque essent noui, and sortiter reparati. Corona
erat sicut corona Imperatoris, in qua erant mill cuspides: and ponebant super
caput eius, prementes cum magnis baculis and lapidibus

6 But Saint John has made them work enough in concealing what our Savior
writ with his finger upon the ground, when the woman taken in adultery was
brought before him. And among sundry opinions touching this matter, Menot
cites certain, fol. 138. col. 4. where he affirms that the man which was
taken in adultery with her, hid himself behind the throng. And all on a
th^umme in the former colume, you shall find an answer to a question touching
the good thief* namely whether God can pardon any man's sins before he has
done penance, and made sati^faction.

7 And it never troubled them to tell what our Savior said to his Disciples,
concerning the fig tree, which withered up by the roots; but imagined
presently in their idle brains, that he told them that the fig tree signified
the Sinagogue of the Jews which should shortly be destroyed, because God had
cursed it. And he that will not credit this report, may read Menot fol. 166.
col. 3. where he gives a reason why our Savior was then hungry, viz. because
he had had but a short supper. But why had he no better supper? Because (says
he) he came late to his lodging. For they that come late to their Inn, get
commonly but a slender pittance: Howbeit, he confesses that it was no
corporal but spiritual hunger, as some Doctors affirm.

8 Over and besides all this, they have made such diligent inquisition, as that
they have found out almost all the names of the men and women recorded in the
Gospels, (that I may parallele that which I affirmed even now concerning the
name of T^bies dog) in such sort that there is not so much as the least half
penny farthing Ganymede among them, but can answer readily to such questions.
For example, they put it out of question, that the woman called a sinner, which
came to anoint Christ's feet as he sat at table in the Pharisees house, was
called Mary Magdalen; and that she which said, Blessed is the womb that bare
thee, etc. was called Marcella, they hold as certain and sure, as if the
Evangelist had said it. Barelete fol. 71. col. 3. Quum haec diceret, extollens
vocem quadam mulier (scilicet sancta Marcella, famula beatae Marthae, sororis
Lazari) dixit, Beatus venture qui te portauit. Though Oliver Maillard say only,
that it was one of Marthaes gentlewomen, fol. 140. col. 3. But when they were
put to it indeed to find out some of those names, they used a new kind of
Metamorphosis; for when they could not tell the name of the soldier that
thrust our Savior into the side with a lance, they call him in plain terms
Lance: (...) in Greek being as much as Lance in English: which name has bin
corrupted since, and pronounced Longi. But after he had crept into that credit
to be registered among the Saints (by doing so meritorious a work as the
piercing of our Saviors side) his name was augmented by a syllable, and he
called (after the Latin termination) Longinus.

9 But their curiosity ran over the brimme, when they came to handle such
questions as these: whether Christ had not bin crucified, if Judas had not
betrayed him? whether the virgin Mary would have crucified him, if none other
would? The former of which you shall find in the Sermons of Barelet, fol. 158.
col. 4. The latter, not only in his Sermons, fol. 115. but also in Menots,
fol. 169. col. 3. And (more the pity) they are never noubled with such
questions as these, but can resolve the^ as easily as a squiril can crack a
nut: whereas they stick and stand (I mean they are not resolved, but waver
like the weather-cocke) in handling of other questions, which the very heathen
made conscience once to call into question* Menot (for example) says, Sed
quicquid fit de corpore, anima quae peccauerit, ipsa morietur. Sic relinquo
quaestionem arduam de immortalitate animae. But these two questions are nothing
in comparison of those which I cited before out of Barelete in the Chapter of
blasphemies, viz. what reasoning there was in heaven when it was debated and
afterward concluded that Christ should be incarnate in the womb of the
Virgin, fol. 229. col. 4. Item, what a stir there was among the disciples,
when they contended which of them should bring the virgin Mary word, that he
was risen from the dead, fol. 164. col. 4. Item, what the Apostles said to the
virgin Mary, being offended that her son kept not touch with them in sending
the holy Ghost. And what strife there was in heaven (o most execrable
blasphemy) betwixt the Father and the holy Ghost, both of them refusing to come
down upon earth, for fear of being handled as Christ was, fol. 178. col. 1.
But what term I these questions? seeing he is as peremptory and resolute in
auouching them, as if he had found them recorded in the Scripture.

10 I proceed now to another question, not altogether so impious as the former
(especially as the three last) which I have purposely kept for the winding up
of this Chapter, reserving for it all the room that remained, as being a
question which seems to challenge thus much at my hands, that I should make a
more large and ample discourse thereof. For there was never yet controversy in
Christian religion so stoutly, so vehemently, nor so virulently canuased and
ventilated, tumbled and tossed, opposed and defended. The Doctors of the Roman
religion never banded so one against another: never was there such hold and
draw, such siding and parts taking, such heauing and shouing about any question
as about this: whether the virgin Mary was conceived in original sin, or
not? But the greatest stickling (which cost so many broken heads) was betwixt
the Iacopins (or Iacobins) and the Franciscans: the Iacobins maintaining the
affirmative, the Franciscans the negative. And here I remember a story to this
purpose recorded in the French Chronicles: about the year 1384. there were
certain Doctors and others of the order of the preaching Friars, which taught
publicly that she was conceived in sin; of which number there was one, who
said, that if he did not prove it by pregnant proofs, he would give them leave
to call him Huet. Whereupon when any of the foresaid preaching Iacobin Friars
were seen in the streets in Paris, the common people would run after them,
crying in derision aux Huets, aux Huets: so that they were ashamed ever after
to show their heads. And about this erroneous opinion, a great Council of
Clergy men and others of note, was holden at Paris, where it was condemned in
a full congregation by the University, and that in solemn procession. This is
that which our Chronicles (such as they are) report hereof. Now let us see how
both sides bestirred themselves, and sweat about this question. A Iacobin of
Francfort called Vigand, writ a book about threescore years ago, wherein he
defended that the virgin Mary was conceived and borne in sin: confuting all
that held the contrary, as well ancient Doctors as modern Divines* censuring
(among the rest) one John Spengler a Francisca^; who being touched to the quick
by the said Vigand, so belabored the matter, that he procured a disputation to
be holden at Heidelbergh: but Prince Philip Count Palatin of Rhein hindered it.
Thereupon the Iacobin cited the Franciscan to appear at Rome, where this
question having hung a long time upon the hinges, was then hung up at a crook.
Certain years after it so fortuned that the Iacobins held a general Synod at
Vimpssen, wherein it was debated how they might hold counterpoise against their
adversaries the Franciscans, and maintain their opinion (notwithstanding it
was rejected almost of all, and that many Doctors had written against it, and
made the world believe the contrary by means of counterfeit miracles) seeing
there was no remedy but they were of necessity to devise one means or other,
which they might have in readiness to help them at a dead lift, to counterfeit
some miracle as the Francisca^s had done. And it being concluded in this
conuentuall Synod, that they were to proceed by false miracles, it was agreed
upon that this pageant should be played by four Iacobins of Berne, whose names
I will afterward set down. To the end therefore they might come to the period
of their purpose, having first communicated with the devil (to whom one of
them which was a Necromancer directed the rest) and obtained a promise of aid
and furtherance, they lay ever after in the wind to spy what occasion they
might to advantage their cause. It happened not long after that a good fellow
one John Ietzer a tailor, borne at Zurzacke was admitted and matriculated as
one of their order: who not long after he had taken the habit, was visited in
the night by one of these ghostly fathers, who wrapped in a sheet, went to his
cell, and began to counterfeit a spirit, making a great rattling noise by casting
of stones, etc. Whereupon the poor nouice complaining to the 4. principal of
the order (the self same men who plotted this knavery, one of which
counterfetted the spirit) he was comforted and encouraged by them, and exhorted
to patience. And one night the spirit spoke to this poor nouice, charging him
to do penance for him: which when he had made the foresaid Friars acquainted
with, they thought it their best course to cause him to do penance openly for
the delivering of the said spirit. Whereupon one of them began to preach of the
spirit, and to tell the people why he did this penance: which was not done
without extolling of their order (which he had made choice of, that he might be
relieved by their merits) and censuring that of the Franciscans. Now the spirit
on a time did highly extol the order of the Iacobins to this nouice, as well
for the honest good men that were of it, as for the good discipline that was
observed in it: adding withal, that he was not ignorant how it was hated of
many by reason of their Doctor S. Thomas, who^ they follow in affirming that
the virgin Mary was conceived in sin: yet that many of these their maligners
and evil willers were grievously tormented by the just judgment of God: yea
and that the town of Berne should utterly be destroyed if they expelled not
the Franciscans from among them, for teaching that she was conceived without
sin; and that Doctor Alexander of Hales and John Scot (the subtle Doctor,
both Franciscans) suffered great pain in Purgatory for maintaining that
opinion. In the end he fained it of his fingers, that the blessed Virgin her
self did assure him of her polluted conception, resolving him of sundry other
points greatly controuerted among the Doctors: and that she printed in his
right hand the sign of her sons passion, by piercing it with a sharp nail:
and after to assuage the pain of his wounds, gave him a little lint made of
the swaddling bands wherewith she swadled him in Egypt. Yet these four
Preachers not herewith content, caused him to drink enchanted water, whereby
they put him clean out of the socket, and made him as mad as a march Hare; and
having so done, printed in his body four other wounds of Christ. Where the
poor soul coming to himself again by means of another water which they
gave him, wondered at his new wounds: notwithstanding they made him believe it
was the handy work of God. After all this, they laid him in a little parlour
apart by himself, which was hung about with tapistry work full of pictures,
wherein the passion of Christ was pour^raited, by which he was to learn the
countenances, gestures and behauiors of Christ: all which they did of purpose
to delude the poor people, who had already heard of these goodly miracles.
Besides, they caused him to play the passion before them, after they had made
him serve out a long prentiship. They gave him moreover a drink, which caused
him to foam and froth at the mouth, making him believe that he encountered
death most valiantly as Christ had done. To conclude, they played so many
prankes with this poor Friar, that in the end he perceived part of their
knavery. Notwithstanding they handled the matter so cunningly, that they
persuaded him all was Gospel: and used him not long after as their instrument
to counterfeit a miracle. But all their knavery (which was before greatly
suspected) being at the last discovered and detected by this silly soul, (whom
God had miraculously delivered out of their hands, they having attempted so
many ways to bring him to his end) a round course was taken with these holy
fathers. For after that the Clergy (who had labored long to save their lives,
but all in vain) had committed them over to the secular power: they were
burned in the town meadow of Berne, right over against the Covent of the
Franciscans. Their names were John Vetter Priour, Stephen Boltzhorst Preacher,
Francis Vlchi Subpriour (who was a Necromancer and counterfetted the spirit,)
and Henry Steniecker Receiver. I have here omitted sundry like pageants played
by these Iacobins, which the Reader may find at large in the history written of
this Tragedy. See here (gentle Reader) how horne-mad these fond Friars were, in
being driven to such ecstasies of devices to defend their opinions, and to hold
counterpoise against their adversaries. Which (doubtless) they did, not for
any great zeal they had of the truth, but in an ambitious humor which made
them burst almost for anger, to see the opinion of the Franciscans (their utter
enemies) in such request, embraced and applauded of all.

11 Let us now hear how the jolly Preacher Barelete sends these Franciscans
packing, together with their opinion, calling them aemulos of his order. First
therefore having affirmed that he had nine and forty Doctors of his opinion
(whereof he quoted the greatest part) he begins in this sort. Quid vobis
videtur ciues mei super hoc? Quare omnes religiones non pugnant pro doctoribus
suis? Ecce quot doctores, quot sapientes hoc affirmant? Sed dicunt aemuli
nostri quod fuit priuilegiata, quia a peccato praeseruata. Ostendant illud
priuilegium, and eis fidem dabimus. And he alleadges a passage out of Alexander
of Hales, where he sets down his opinion clean contrary to that, for the
which the foresaid spirit (suborned by the Iacobins of Berne) gave it out that
he was tormented in Purgatory. Si beata virgo Maria non fuisset concepta in
peccato originali, non fuisset obligata peccato, nec poenae, nec habuisset
reatum peccati. Sed qui non habet reatum peccati, non indiget redemptione (quia
redemptio est solum propter obligationem peccati, vel poenae, and propter
reatum peccati.) Ergo beata virgo non indiguisset redemptione: quod non est
secundum Catholicam fidem ponendu^. Which being so, the foresaid spirit
suborned by these Iacobins had small reason to cause this poor soul to be so
grievously tormented in Purgatory, considering he here yields unto them what
ever they desire. But I leave this controversy to Barelete, who in the
beginning of his Sermon says, Non solum antiqui doctores, sed etiam
posteriores tenuerunt, and in scripturis reliquerunt, quod virgo beata, and
omnes homines (praeter Christum) in sui conceptione peccatum contraxerunt: quod
patet triplici testimonio inpraesentiarum. Primo Ecclesiae doctorum: secundo
Canonistarum: tertio Religionum.

12 On the other side, Oliver Maillard in one of his Sermons brings in two
dames, viz. truth and falsehood, delivering their opinions dialogue-wise
touching this article, where first falsehood begins thus: I affirm that the
virgin Mary was conceived in sin, during which time she was the child of
wrath, and under the curse; and that if she had not been redeemed by the death
of Christ, she had bin condemned: which I will prove by sundry arguments. First,
David says, I was borne in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived
me. Now after that Falsehood had alleged sundry reasons to this purpose, Truth
begins in this sort: Madame, I cannot endure to hear that the Virgin who
bruised the Serpents head, and was from all eternity chosen of God to be the
mother of our Lord, should so much as for a moment be under the wrath of God.
In the end, after that Truth had said that it was true indeed, that she was in
danger to have fallen into sin, but that she had a special privilege. It
was asked her, But what say you (Madame) to the opinions of so many Doctors, as
S. Bernard, Thomas of Aquine, Bonauenture, Guydo, etc. To this she answered (to
cut off all occasion of further disputation) that before the Church had
determined it, it was lawful to hold either way; but now since the Council of
Basil is of another opinion, it is dangerous to hold the contrary: and for my
part I think it no better then plain heresy. And the words of my text (says
Maillard) are plain and pregnant for it: Tota pulchra es amica mea, and macula
non est in te: Cant. 4. That is, Thou art all fair my love, and there is no
blemish in thee.

13 But the author of the Sermons entitled Dormisecure brings in other
manner of proofs. For he alleges three miracles which were wrought of
purpose, for confirmation of this opinion: having first been so bold as with an
impudent Satanicall spirit to falsify the saying off the Psalmist, in cutting
of that which made not for his purpose; and in stead of Et in peccato concepit
me matter mea, alleging only these words concepit me matter mea; taking them
for his text and subject of the discourse which he made of the conception of
the blessed Virgin, and applying the^ unto her: whence he labors to prove that
she was not conceived in sin: and that by three kind of arguments. First,
because God preserved her from sin (for he beggeth the question, or rather
takes that for granted, which is most of all controuerted.) Secondly, for that
it was prefigured in the Scriptures, and avouched by the Doctors of the Church.
Thirdly, for that it was confirmed by examples. But by what examples I beseech
you? Verily by lying wonders, and counterfeit miracles: the very same wherewith
the Iacobins were wont to vpbraid the Franciscans. The first is of a certain
Magister noster (called Alexander) who having given it out, that he would
prove the blessed Virgin to have been conceived in sin, was three times
together taken with an infirmity, so that he could not make good his promise.
And afterward appointing a day wherein he would determine this question, he fell
the night before into a grievous disease: where as he lay sore pained, he
called upon the virgin Mary: who came to him forthwith, and told him, this
cross was laid upon him, because he went about to prove that she was conceived
in sin. And having so said, she took her maids knife and therewith cut a piece
of corrupt flesh out of his side, and with a needle and silken thread ( Serico
filo) sewed it up again, and so departed. Now she was no sooner departed, but
he felt himself well amended, and revealed the whole matter to a scholar which
lay in the chamber with him: and ever after renounced his former opinion: and
not so only, but writ a great book as big as a dunghill, in defense of the
contrary. The second fable is this: A devout Minorite, going every night into
the Quire, to patter over his prayers, heard commonly a buzzing noise upon the
virgin Maryes Altar, much like the buzzing of a fly: and wondering what it
should be, he spoke unto it on a time and said, I adjure thee in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ* that thou tell me what thou art. By and by a voice
answered, I am Bonauenture. O famous Doctor (quoth he) in what terms stands
the matter with you? what is the reason you make this noise? who answered, I
shall shortly be well and in happy estate, for I am one of those that shall be
saved. Only because I held that damnable opinion that the blessed Virgin was
conceived in sin, I suffer here my Purgatory, and do penance upon her Altar;
but as soon as I am purged hereof, I shall go straight to heaven. Vnde (says
he) Bonauentura potest de ista conclusione dicere illud Psalmi: Propter te
mortificamur tota die. The third is of Saint Bernard, viz. that after his death
he appeared to one with a mark upon him; and told him that he had that mark
set upon him for maintaining her polluted conception. Thus we see (if we may
believe these fables) how the virgin Mary was revenged on them which held any
such opinion of her, as she misliked. But let us hear what great delight she
took in those that celebrated the feast of her conception. A certain Abbot
called Helsin being on a time near drowning, saw a man apparelled like a
Bishop in his Pontificalibus (who if we may believe Barelet, was an Angel at
the least) who asked him if he desired to return in safety into his country
again. The Abbot answering with tears, that he desired it with all his heart;
he said: Understand then (quoth he) that I was sent unto thee by our blessed
Lady (mother of our Lord) whom thou have so instantly called upon: and that
thou, and all that are with thee shall escape, if thou will promise me to
celebrate the feast of her conception every year with solemn procession* and
teach that it ought to be celebrated. Which the Abbot having requested him to
appoint the time when, and the manner how he would have it kept, promised to
perform. And so he and all his company escaped that danger. Which tale Barelet
also tells; adding withal, that it was an Angel which appeared to him:
where he further brings another argument grounded upon this fable; That (says
he) which is revealed by an Angel, ought to be holden for a certain truth: but
an Angel revealed that the virgin Mary was conceived without sin (as
appears by the story of the Abbot Helsine) who, etc. therefore we must firmly
believe that she was conceived without sin. He further alleges three other
arguments for confirmation hereof, of such excellent good grace, that I could
not in conscience omit them. His first argument is this. That which most men
affirm, is to be holden as a certain truth. But most affirm that the blessed
Virgin was conceived without sin. Ergo we are to hold that she was conceived
without sin. His second argument: No feast is celebrated but in remembrance
of some holy thing. The feast of the Virgins conception is celebrated. Ergo her
conception was holy: and consequently she was not stained with original sin.
His third argument; Pardons are not granted but for some holy end: Pope Sixtus
the fourth gave pardon to all that celebrated the feast of the conception of
the blessed Lady during her Octaues. Ergo, her conception was holy.

15 I will hereunto add another, which will make us less to wonder at the
former; viz. how she honored those that honored her. About the year 1470.
under Pope Sixtus the fourth, one Allen of Roche a Iacobin Friar forged the
Virgin Maryes Psalter (called the Rosarie and preached it in stead of the
Gospel: and not herewith content, instituted a Fraternity thereof, which was
approved by the Popes bulls, with large grants of indulgences. And James
Sprenger Prouincial of Germany countererfaited sundry miracles for the
authorizing thereof. Nay, they were not ashamed to publish a book of this
blessed brotherhood: in the beginning whereof it is said, that the virgin Mary
coming on a time into Allens cell, made a ring of her hair, wherewith she
married him: as also that she kissed him, and offered him her paps to handle,
and suck. In some, that she was as familiar with him as a woman is with her
husband.

16 And now (gentle Reader) I hope I have sufficiently informed thee touching
the questions moved by these illuminate Doctors, and of their manner of
disputation; as also what hard hold there was betwixt them, each side tugging
for their order, and working miracles in despite of their opposites, for
confirmation of their opinions. At leastwise what hot bickering there was about
this last question: and how Truth in the end gave Falsehood the foil. Now
albeit I am not ignorant that there are many cart loades of other questions
which have been canuased by the school Doctors: yet these I hope may suffice
to discover the folly which reigned in those days, and still swayeth the
Popish clergy even at this day; who do not only busy their heads and beat
their brains, about the foresaid questions, but about others also of as great
moment: as whether Ascension day, or Hallow-masse (otherwise called all Saints)
be the greater Holiday? Some alleging that God is greater then the Saints.
Others, that he can be no more without his Saints then a king without his
courtiers.

17 But it is high time I should here remember my self: for discoursing in this
chapter of those wise masters who can tell you the name of Tobies dog, or any
man or woman's name purposely concealed in the Gospel; I forgot to speak of
those profound preachers, who affirm that the child which our Savior set in
the midst of his disciples (when they contended which of them should be the
greatest) was Ignatius, afterward called Saint Ignatius, Saint John's disciple,
as some affirm: and of those fond Friars, who taught that Cleopas his
companion, mentioned by Saint Luke, was Luke himself: and that it was
Nathanael who was afterward called S. Vrsine. As also how they are not
contented to know that the disciple (whose name is concealed John 18. was John
himself: but will further search how he came acquainted with the high Priest:
and they have made such diligent inquiry into old records (as witnesses that
lying devil Nicephorus) that they have found, that he came to be known of the
high Priest, by selling him his fathers house.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of certain fine fetches and dainty devices used by the foresaid
Preachers to make their auditors laugh or weep; to win an opinion of
holiness, and to keep their kitchins hot: as also of their foolish and
ridiculous speeches.
ALbeit these jolly Preachers (formerly spoken of) held this opinion, and
taught it as a most certain truth, that Christ never laughed in all his life:
yet they followed not his example herein. What say I, followed? Nay, they took
such pleasure in ridiculous and Scoggin-like speeches, as that they were not
ashamed in preaching of the passion, to use sundry ridiculous ieasts, and
diverse sorts of quips and girding taunts: and some no^ herewith content, have
used many apish gestures tending to this end. Of which number there was a
Franciscan, who having laid a wager that he would make the one half of his
auditors laugh, and the other half weep, at the same instant, and that upon
good friday; used this device: He put on a garment which was very short behind,
leaving off his breeches. Then standing in the midst of his auditory in a
pulpit which was open behind, he began to exclaim against the impiety of the
Jews, declaring the excessive torments which they inflicted upon our Savior
Christ: and withal bowed his head and his shoulders, and crossed his arms in
such sort, that he laid open all his hinder parts; which those behind the
pulpit had no sooner espied, but they brake out into a great laughter.
Contrarily, those that stood before him could not forbear weeping by reason of
his patheticall speeches and tragical gestures. And thus he won the wager,
making the one half to laugh and the other half to weep at the same time.

2 Another Franciscan (called by Erasmus, Robert Liciensis) having boasted at a
banquet, that he could make his auditors weep when he listed: one of the
company laughed him to scorn, and said, that he might happily make some silly
souls, as women, idiots or young children to weep, but that it was impossible
he should make any man weep that had any wit. At which words the Monk was
half mad to be so mocked, and said, You then (Sir) that seem to be so grave,
come to morrow to my Sermon, and stand in the place that I shall appoint you,
right over against me, and if I do not make you weep, I will give this company
a banquet; but if I do, you shall give me one. It being thus agreed upon, he
went the next day and sat where the Monk appointed him. Then came in the
Franciscan, provided to preach, and not unmindful of his wager, began to
discourse of Gods bounty and goodness toward men, and how they showed
themselves ungrateful for his daily blessings bestowed upon them: and that
they were so hardened in their wicked ways, that they could not be reclaimed
by any means, nor drawn by any persuasion to repentance, or to mutual love
and charity one toward another. Then pressing the point a little further, in
the end he brought in God himself speaking on this wise: O heart harder then
steel, o heart harder then the adamant: The steel is softened with fire, the
adamant is dissolved with goats blood: but do I what I can, yet can I not make
thee shed one tear. And not content to have spoken it once or twice, he
repeated it again and again, raising his voice louder and louder: so that at
the last the man that had laid the wager with him, could forbear weeping no
more then his fellows. Which when the Franciscan espied, he stretched out his
hand and said, I have won. These words his auditors took as spoken in the
person of God; as if he should have said, I have prevailed, as having obtained
that which I desired, viz. the mollifying and softening of their hearts.

3 The same Robert kept a sweet heart by the dispensation of his S. Francis,
who told him on a time that she liked him well in all points, were it not for
his habit. I pray thee then (quoth he) tell me in what habit thou likest me
best? In the habit of a soldier (quoth she.) Go to, said the Friar, fail not
to come to my Sermon to morrow. Now the next morning he went into the pulpit
with his sword by his side, armed souldier-like at all points, under his gown.
And beginning his Sermon with an exhortation to Princes to wage war against
the Saracens, Turks, and other enemies of Christendom, in the end he brake
forth into these words: Is it not a lamentable thing that no man will offer
himself to be Chieftaine of so laudable an enterprise? If that be the matter,
behold I am here ready to pull off this habit of S. Francis, and to serve as a
captain or common soldier. At which words he cast off his gown, and preached
half an hour in the habit of a captain. Not long after being sent for by
certain Cardinals his friends, and demanded the cause of this his new kind
of preaching: he answered, that he did it to please his sweet heart, as has
bin said.

4 The same Robert being to preach before the Pope and his Cardinals; when he
had well considered all their pomp, and how they reverenced and adored the
Pope, said never a word, but Fie Saint Peter, Fie Saint Paul: which when he had
diverse times repeated, spitting first on the one side, and then on the other
(as those whose stomachs are ouercharged,) he went out of the pulpit, leaving
all his auditors much amazed; some thinking he had been bereft of his wits:
others, that he had been tainted with some heresy. And as they were ready to
imprison him, a Cardinal (who knew his humor better then the rest, and bare him
some good will) made means to the Pope that he might be sent for, to give a
reason before him and the Cardinals there present, of those words. Whereupon
being demanded what he meant by such horrible blasphemy? he answered that his
purpose was to have spoken of another argument (which he expounded unto them
summarily) but considering (quoth he) that you so enjoy your pleasures in this
world, and that there is no pomp nor magnificence like to yours: and on the
other side, considering in what great poverty, anguish and misery the Apostles
lived, I thought with my self, doubtless either the Apostles were great
fools to take such a tedious and troublesome way to go to heaven, or these men
are in the ready way to hell. But as for you (Sirs) which keep the keys of
the kingdom of heaven, I cannot conceive amiss of you: as for the Apostles, I
cannot but scorn them as the veriest fools in the world, in that living as
you do, they might have gone to heaven, yet chose rather to lead such a strict
and painful life.

5 I now proceed to the inventions of other Popish Preachers recorded by the
same author out of whom I had all my former stories, namely by Erasmus. A
certain Preacher having a long time cried out against such as addicted and
devoted themselves to the service of the devil, represented to them upon the
sudden a man with a vizard on his face, having eyes like flaming fire, a great
crooked beak, teeth like a wild Boar, and crooked nails, holding a forke of a
strange fashion in his hand, casting out a hideous voice: who whilst they all
looked steadfastly upon him, said, See what a master you serve, setting Christ
aside. Which story I will here parallele with another very fit for this
purpose, which was paid me or rather given me in exchange for the former, by a
gentlewoman of Lorraine, my very friend, of one that preached in a village in
Lorraine, who after he had showed his auditors that they should all go to hell
except they did amend. And what (quoth he) do you think hell is? Do you see
that hole? I tell you it stinkes ill, but hell stinkes far worse. Where note,
that the hole which he showed them was the Sextons posteriorums, who agreed
with him to play this pageant.

6 I return to Erasmus, who reports that he had seen certain Monks, who
passing through the throng to go to the pulpit, covered their faces with their
couls, and when they kneeled down to pray to the fountain of grace, and said
their Aue Maria, knocked their knees so hard against the bottom of the pulpit,
that all the Church might hear the noise. He says also that he heard report
of an Italian preacher, who going into the pulpit, covered his head with a
cloak* that he never preached in Churches but in the open air: that he would
not admit any man to come and talk with him (for he denied that favor to
Princes) that he lay upon the hard boords, contenting himself with bread and
water; that he had a pale and lean face as if it had bin the very picture of
death: that he spoke by an Interpreter, and used strange gestures and outcries,
by which he did affright the people; sometimes thrusting his head into an
halter, counterfaiting with his eyes those that are strangled, and then better
advised, and (as it were) coming to himself again, uncovering himself and
striking his breast with his fist, cried in his Italian, Misericordia,
Misericordia: that he used bitterly to inueigh against dice, cards, and tabers,
as also against such as wore feathers, so that he pulled on a time a feather
out of a gent^^^ans hat, who sat near the pulpit, and rent it in a thousand
pieces, casting it here and there among the people, making horrible outcryes.
He also reports of another who having made a long and vehement inuectiue
against the wickedness of the people in crucifying Christ afresh, showed them
a crucifixe, whereunto were tied bladders full of blood, which sprang forth
when he touched them, and thereof ^e took and sprinkled among the people.

7 But let us now listen to the actions and speeches of these gentle Sir John's,
of some of which my self am witness: others I have heard, and others I have
read: some in the news of the Queen of Navarre, and others elsewhere. I have
heard of one who preaching at Orleans, iested and gibed at his auditors,
telling them that he would show them a cuckold, and thereupon made as if he
would have cast a stone at him: where when they all stouped down for fear of
being hit: Oh, oh, (quoth he) I had thought there had been but one, but now I
see you are all cuckolds.

8 Another in the country of Beauuois preaching in a meadow, having mightily
inueyed against the Lutherans, told his auditors that he was much afraid lest
some of them were infected with the leaven of their devilish doctrine: and
therefore desired those whose conscience told them they were not tainted
therewith, but were good and sound Catholics, to kneel down and to take a
mouth-full of grass with their teeth, in honor of our holy mother the Church*
which he seeing them do, and laughing at them, said, Depuis l'heure que Dieu me
fit naistre,
Ie ne vi tant de bestes paistr^.
That is, Long have I lived, and living have been heeding,
So many beasts yet never saw I feeding.


9 Moreover, when they were in a pelting chafe and fustian fume against their
auditors: their manner was not to spare no not the devil himself; witness, M.
John Fouet vicar of Villers in Tartenois, who said to his parishioners, seeing
you will not amend, the devil will take you, and me after. Witness also another
Curate who said, you make no reckoning of any thing I tell you, but grow every
day worse and worse; in the mean time I am charged with your souls, which I
bequeath to great Beelzebub. But when I speak of men's souls given in charge
to Curates, I should do the Curate of Pierrebuffiere in high Limosin great
wrong, if I should forget him. This profound preacher, to the end he might the
better exhort his parishioners to live well, told them: At the day of judgment
(said he) God will call me to give an account of you, and will say unto me,
Curat of Pierrebuffiere, what have thou done with thy sheep? Then shall I have
never a word to say. Which words he repeated 3. times, hiding himself every
time in the pulpit: and having so done, he lift up his head and said; I know
what I will answer: Beasts, o Lord thou gave them me, and beasts I return
them. True it is, that this cannot have so good a grace being translated into
English, as it has in his proper dialect, being couched in absurd and
barbarous Limosin terms; and therefore I caused it to be transcribed out of
the original, as follows, Quan se vendro lou iour deu iugamen, Diou me
demandaro que you ly rendo conte de vou autre: and me apelaro, Chapelo de
Peyrebusieyro, en qual eytat son ta olia? and you ny mot. Et eu ^^ apelaro en
quero, and diro, Chapelo de Peyrebufieyro, en quel eytat son ta olia? Et you ny
mot. Et enquero eu me diro, Chaphelo de Peyrebufieyro, en quel eytat son ta
olia? Iusque a tree viague; Et you ly reypondray, Seigne, beytia la m^ beylada,
and beytia la te rendi. But to parallele the example of the Priest, who (as
Erasmus reports) showed the crucifix to his auditors: I have heard it
constantly affirmed, that there was a Monk at Blois (about twenty years ago)
who preaching late upon All Saints day, in a dark place, had a young nouice
behind him, who eftsoons held up a dead man's head fastened to the end of a
staff, with a candle within it: which he did to make them the more afraid of
the dead; as in truth it struck such a terror into the hearts of certain
women, that (as it is reported) it caused them to travail before their time.

10 And to quite the former story of Robert Liciensis (who so astonished the
Pope and his Cardinals by these words which he spoke as soon as he was come
into the pulpit, Fie Saint Peter, Fie Saint Paul; I remember one who began his
sermon in this sort: By the blood, by the flesh, by the death of Christ, we are
redeemed. Making his auditors much to marvel in that he made a little pause
after he had said, By the blood, by the flesh, by the death of Christ. Which I
heard reported by an ancient father, who said he heard it from his own mouth.
Howbeit some say he spoke thus* By Gods blood we are saved, by Gods death we
are redeemed. Further, this puts me in mind of the profaneness of two
Chanons of Blois, one of which being Godfather to one John Gods son, called
him Death; the other being Godfather to his daughter, called her Virtue; so
that joining the proper names to the surname, the son was called Death God,
and the daughter Virtue God. Howbeit these names (as some say) were changed at
their confirmation.

11 Now this kind of swearing puts me in mind of a Curate in Paris, whose
Sermons served many players in stead of Comedies. This jolly gentleman made no
conscience to swear by God in the pulpit, in despite of the Lutherans. For
going about to prove that they were worse then the devil; The devil (quoth
he) will run away as soon as I make the sign of the cross, but if I should
make a cross before a Lutheran, by G. he would fly in my face and throttle
me. And seeing I have begun to speak of this Curate, I will here prosecute the
rest of his Legend, at least so far as I know. For (if we may believe his
own testimony) he is a man (doubtless) whom God has graced with excellent
gifts: I say, if we may believe his own testimony: for in a certain Sermon he
said, he marvelled what should be the reason that other Curates in this town
preached not so well as he; they will say (quoth he) they want learning, and you
know well enough how that a year ago I knew nothing, and now you see how
learnedly I preach. In another Sermon he purged himself of a false aspersion
and imputation, by no other argument th^n the testimony of his sister. There
are some (quoth he) which prate that I keep whores in my house; lo there is my
sister (pointing to her with his finger) who should know if there were any such
such matter, (for I must go through her chamber to come to my lodging) let her
speak aloud whether it be so or not. The same Doctor (who became so learned in
one year) having carried a paper into the pulpit, wherein the Bishop of Paris
and the Official excommunicated certain of his parishioners, and having let
it fall into a hole of the pulpit, he bethought himself of a dainty device
never heard of before, and such it may be as never any man dreamed of: for
having forgotten their names, and lost his paper wherein they were written, he
said, I excommunicate all that are in this hole. But after he had better
bethought himself of the names of those who were fallen into the hole (that is
to say, who were written in the paper which fell into the hole) he said he
excepted the Bishop of Paris and his Official. The same Preacher being angry
on a time at little children, for going up and down the streets and singing
filthy songs; A rablement of bastards (quoth he) gad up and down the town,
singing such and such songs: I would I were their father, o how I would curry
them. He also iested merrily on a time as he was discoursing with Henry the
second (who sent for him for that purpose:) for the King having asked him of
his parishioners; he said they might be good enough, for he preached to them
daily. The King having further demanded of him, how they carried and demeaned
themselves: They are (quoth he) very demure in my presence, and ready to do all
that I command them; but as soon as my tail is turned, Soufflez Sire: which
answer the King took in good part, because it was not spoken in knavery, no
more then his other descants which he used ordinarily in his Sermons. For if it
had been perceived that he had aequiuocated of set purpose in the word Soufflez
(which besides his proper signification, namely blow, is taken of the common
people in the same sense with De belles, that is, Tush, he prates, or he talks
idly,) I believe they would have taught him to have blown after another
fashion.

12 But to return to the Sermons of this idle Doctor, he showed on a time a
fine conceit (although by his own confession he got all his learning in a
year) when he used no other reason but the authority of his horse to confute
those that denied Purgatory: whereas others have travailed both in petty and
profound, yea in most illuminate Doctors, even Saint Patricke himself, and
have alleged the apparitions of sundry cart-loades of souls coming out of
another world, to prove the point; and yet have had their mouths stopped. For
this gentle Sir John (inueying against the Lutherans, for that they would not
believe Purgatory) reasoned against them in this sort: I will tell you (quoth
he) a story, whereby you shall see what wicked fellows they be to deny
Purgatory. I am (as you know) the son of Master E.N. (now deceased) and we
have a fair house at S. Antonies bridge; whither going on a time, as I was
benighted, my horse which carried my maile (you must know he is a good one, and
at your service, Sirs) staid (against his custom) and began to cry Pouf, pouf.
Whereupon I said to my man, Spur, spur. Sir (quoth he) I spur him; but
certainly he sees something. Then I remembered how that I had heard it told my
deceased mother, that certain apparitions had been seen in that place; and
thereupon I said my Pater noster and my Aue Mary, which my good mother taught
me, and having so done, I bad my man spur again, which he did. Then my horse
going but three or four steps further, stood stone still, and cried again
Pouf, pouf. And my man assuring me that he saw something, I said my De
profundis, which my father taught me: and presently my horse went forward. But
staying the third time, I had no sooner said Auete omnes animae, and requiem
aeternam, but he went freely, and never stopped nor stayed after. Now then
seeing these wicked heretics say that there is no Purgatory, and that we ought
not to pray for the dead, I send them to my horse which carries my maile, I say
to my maile horse to learn their lesson.

13 Neither must this worshipful Curate bear away all the praise of such
subtility. For a Iacobin Friar called Deuolay may well match him, who used a
very subtle comparison to prove a point, where all their Doctors had lost their
Latin. These wicked Lutherans (quoth he) will not believe that the body and
blood of Christ is in the Sacrament of the Altar. For (say they) if it were so,
they should the^ see it. But come hither great fool; when thou have a venaison
pastie, do thou not say it is such or such a pasty? and yet thou see not
what is within it.

14 We daily hear of sundry other co^parisons used by these Preachers: some of
which are plainly ridiculous, others not only ridiculous, but also absurd and
scurrilous; yea so many ways profaning Christian religion, that they may well
be counted impious and blasphemous. For though we should pardon those which
compared the grace of God to goats dung (in saying that as a goat being got to
the top of an oven dungeth here and there, so as it runs down on every side:
so the grace of God disperseth it self every where.) Yet what shall we say of
those companions who so profane the mystery of the holy Trinity, as that they
stick not to compare it to a pair of breeches? But how they applied it,
(though I have often heard it) I tremble to write. And the comparison which was
made by a good fellow, who bare no great good will to Friar Francis nor any of
his Fraternity, was no less wicked, though much more witty and of far better
grace then the former, when he resembled the holy Trinity to a Franciscan, in
saying that as there were three persons in the Trinity and yet but one God: so
a Franciscan was shaven like a fool, gray like a wolf, tied with a cord like
a thief; and yet but one man. He spoke also very profanely (though
ridiculously) who told four soldiers (whom he saw out of the pulpit in the
midst of his sermon) that they were in all things like unto Christ. He was
taken (said he) so shall you be: he was brought before the Judge, so shall you
be: he was bound with cords like a thief, so shall you be: he was whipped, so
shall you be: he was led to the gallows, so shall you be: he descended into
hell; so shall you I warrant you: but he came back again, so shall you never.
But if we would have a very fit and proper comparison indeed, we must return
to the Curate mentioned before, whose sermons served many in stead of play
books or pleasant jests to pass away the time. For preaching on a time of the
golden Image which Nabuchodonazor set up, Dan. 3. It was (quoth he) a villainous
great Idol like our S. Eustace; but it was all of solid gold, would to God our
S. Eustace were like it.

15 If any desire to hear other comparisons of the like strain, he may have
recourse to old folks, who have good memories, or he may read the worthy
works which some of these jolly Preachers have left behind them; as namely the
Sermons of Menot who says ( fol. 115. col. 2.) that they have the same custom
in Paradise which they have in Innes in Spain. The custom (quoth he) of
Paradise is to pay before meat, as they do in Spain, where the guests that
come to an Inn must buy their meat beforehand, if they will any. Thus Lazarus
first paid in this world, in enduring many miseries, and after feasted in
Paradise. Whereas the custom of hell, is first to make good cheer, and after
to pay for it, as they do in France. Thus the rich man feasted in this world,
but now is gone to hell to reckon with his host. And fol. 140. col. 4. he is
much more pleasant, discoursing of the repast which our Savior gave to those
five thousand mentioned in the Gospel. For first (says he) seeing the text
says that there were five thousand men besides women and children, we must
needs conclude that there were four thousand women at the least. For we see by
experience, that there are always four women at a sermon for one man. Besides
(quoth he) I believe that there was an infinite number of little children, if
women in that country had as good a custom as they have in this, who would be
sorry to come to a Sermon without their children hanging at their breasts, and a
troop of others at their tails, which cry all the Sermon while, and hinder
both the Preacher and the auditory. After this, he compares the dinner which
our Savior made to these people, to a Limosins dinner. I would gladly know
(quoth he) where he learned to make a dinner or a feast? I cannot think that he
frequented the greedy guts of this town, who will not forget (I warrant you)
when they are at a feast to drink with their meat. This dinner of our Lords
was like the dinner of a Limosin. You know how beggars in Beausse and Champaine
will rear themselves against a wall, and pull six pound of bread out of their
wallets, and drink never a drop therewith: and though they have a pint of wine
standing by them, yet they think it a sin once to peep into the pot. The
French do not so, especially the Picards, who after they have paid the shot
can drink roundly every man his half a quart d'escu: and if there were a half
penny loaf on the board, he should be sure to have a stab that did first cut
it. But this day our Lord made the dinner of a Limosin. And a little after: I
believe (quoth he) it was Lent (as it is now) and every man ate as much fish as
he would. Our Savior at the marriage of Cana gave wine only, and not bread;
but here he gives bread only, and not wine. Wherein he showed his great
wisdom, for he kept open house for all come^s. The Scripture says not that
the virgin Mary was there: for had she been there, she would (I warrant you)
have said to her Son as she did at the marriage (Ioh. 2.) They have no wine. O
my Son, you come very fitly to show your glory and power in feeding this great
multitude: I see they eat apace, but the principal thing is wanting, They
have no wine. Here is good cheer (thanks be to God) but they have no wine to
drink, they have nothing wherewith to moisten their morsels. And why did not
our Lord take care for drink as well as for meat? I answer, propter aquarum
approximationem, miraculi ma^orem declarationem, sacramenti Eucharistiae
praefigurationem: that is, because there was store of water at hand, because he
would show the miracle more evidently, because he would hereby prefigure the
Sacrament of the Eucharist. Touching the first, it is said, that they came from
beyond the sea of Galily: that they sat on fair green grass, and after they
had eaten their bellies full, were permitted to go to the sea and drink a
tirelarigaud, that is, setting cock on the hoope, to drink till they burst. For
he interlards his Latin with this fine French word, Et post comestionem
habebant licentia^ eundi ad bibendu^ in mari a tirelarigaud. Which passage I do
the rather allege at large (albeit it had been sufficient only to have
quoted the place) to the end the Reader might the better perceive how they toy
and trifle with the Scripture: of which profaneness we have alleged sundry
examples before. Howbeit they have some comparisons very pleasant, and nothing
profane; as when Maillard says, that Monks in their Cloisters, are like
pease in the cod; and out of their Cloisters, like pease in the pot.

16 Moreover, these jolly Preachers had an excellent faculty in begging their
small necessaries in the pulpit, and blushing no more then a black dog, albeit
some did it with far better grace then others, using aequiuocatio^s or words of
doubtful construction, very fit for the purpose: as when one said, En nostre
cave on n'y void The grace of the co^cent consists in yt Amphiboly or
ambiguity of the phrase on n'y void goutte, etc. which signifies either a
dark place where a man can see nothing: or a void and empty place where a man
has nothing* in the latter sense it is here used by this cunning beggar.
goutte, en nostre grenier on n'y void grain. Another: At the first when I
began to preach among you, I was flegmaticke, but now I am sanguine; making an
allusion betwixt sanguine and sans guain, that is, without profit or gain.
Another preaching on a time when his parishioners were sheering their sheep,
said, La lain me faut, I want wool: where the simple people understood him as
though he had said, L'alene me faut, I have lost my breath. Suitable hereunto I
have heard of one who told his parishioners in his Farewell Sermon, that he had
been seeking for one all Lent long, but could not find him. And being demanded
who it might be: he answered that his name ended in ette. Whereupon one asked
him if it were not Toinette, another if it were not Perrette, a third if it
were not Guillemette: he answered No. They then naming sundry other of like
termination: he told them it was none of them all. In the end one asked him if
it were not Iaquette. You have hit him (quoth he) you have hit him, it is one
Iaquette indeed that I would gladly meet withal.

17 But we are to note, that there was often great aemulation and heart-burning
between these religious orders of Friars, especially between the Franciscans
and the Iacobins. For so it was, that they which preached best got away the
others custom. For example, an Italian relates (in a book published about
twelve years ago) how a Franciscan preaching on a time in a town of Sicily,
made his auditors believe that Saint Francis descended into Purgatory once
every year upon his holy day, and delivered thence the souls of all such as
had been beneficial to his brethren. Whereupon the Iacobins (who are there
called the brethren of the virgin Mary) perceiving that this opinion which the
world had of S. Francis marred their market, and cooled their kitchins, began
to preach and persuade the people, that the virgin Mary (who had far greater
charity and authority then S. Francis) suffered not those that had been
devoted unto her, or beneficial to her Votaries, to lie frying in Purgatory a
whole year long, as Saint Francis did, but only seven days, seeing that every
Saturday (the day dedicated unto her) she went down thither to deliver such as
had been bountiful or beneficial to her brethren. Which aduertisements brought
them in credit again, so that they had better custom the^ ever before. And
suitable to this tale of Purgatory, I related one before, of a certain ghostly
father who preaching at Bourdeaux, told his auditors that when any thing is
given for the dead, the souls hearing the sound of the money falling into the
basin or poor man's box, crying ting, ting, are so exceeding glad and ^o
(...)* that they laugh out for joy, and cry ha, ha, ha; hi; hi, hi. Hitherto
appertains the story of a Curate of Sauoy (as I remember) who told his
parishioners in a Sermon, that Abel went every day to Mass, and paid his
tithes duly and truly, and that of the fairest and of the best: whereas Cain
made no conscience to do either. And as for those who preached other points of
Popish doctrine, or magnified such miracles of their Saints, as tended not
directly to bring meal to their mill, (as when a Picard alleged in
commendatio^ of virginity, that because Saint Paul and Saint Barbe were
virgins, they bled nothing but milk when they were beheaded*) we have variety
in sundry places of this book. But as for the means which they used to keep
their kitchins hot, I am to speak hereafter.

18 Now how familiarly they preached, we may perceive by that which M. Adrian
Beguine Curate of S. Germine in Noyon said on a time to his parishioners in the
pulpit: My friends, you must have patience with me for this time, for I am bid
to dinner to master Mayor to take part of a pig* otherwise par l'arme du bon
fiu men pere ie vous dirois, rouge, rage, enragee, that is, By the soul of my
good sire, I would tickle you over a text. Another Curate in the town of
Quercie speaking of Shrouetuesday, commended to his parishioners these three
good Saints, Saint Pansard, Saint Mangeard, Saint Creuard, that is, Saint
Belligod, Saint Al. S. Pamphagus.
Eat-all, Saint Burstenbelly.

19 But they used more familiar and homely speeches when they fell in discourse
of women, which they were wont to do in handling certain places of the Gospel,
as where it is said, that Christ appeared first to women after his
resurrection: for then no jest could peep forth, but babbling women would be
sure to have it by the end. He therefore appeared first unto them, as knowing
that this rumor would sooner be bruted abroad, then if he had first appeared
to men. For my part, I remember I was at a Sermon where this argument was
handled at large, and in such sort that it made all our modest maids and
matrons blush for shame: since which time I have heard of sundry others of the
like strain. Sometimes also they extolled women above men, because there was
never any man so highly honored as the virgin Mary. But a certain ghostly
father served them finely in one of his sermons, contrary to their expectation.
For having taken these words out of Luke 24. for his text, O fools and slow of
heart to believe, leaving the rest (as their manner was to shread the Scripture
as they thought good,) he began to discourse how much men were disgraced in
this place, and how no such disgraceful speech was uttered of women in all the
Scripture. And yet if we consider to whom this was spoken, we shall find it was
spoken to the proudest Prelates in the Church. Amongst other things which he
alleged in honor of women, this is not to be forgotten, viz. that there was
no village nor hamlet so small, but if you had asked for the house of a The
conceit cannot be expressed in English by reason of the homonymi^ of the word
sage femme* which signifies as well a midwife as a wise and prudent woman.
sage femme, they would forthwith have showed it you: but a man should be well
served, if he should ask for the house of a sage homme. And after he had
graced women with many other titles of honor which were not given to men,
perceiving by their countenances that they took great pleasure therein, and
began to fleare and giggle, and to look at men over the shoulder; yet for all
this (quoth he) be not so proud, for I shall soon take down your edge: and
having so said, he began in this sort. First there are religious orders of good
men, but none of good women: and then Secondly and Thirdly, etc. forgetting
none of those fine conceits which our buffons and Scoggin-like scoffers use in
gibing at the weaker sex.

20 Yet this is not all. For these venerable Preachers (those especially who
are called ghostly fathers) never respecting the lesson which is taught them,
Si non cast, tamen caute, that is, If not chastely, yet ^^^rily, used for the
most part such obscene scurrilous speeches in the pulpit, that it was a
question whether they preached the word of God, or celebrated the Bacchanalian
feasts in the presence of Margot and Alizon; which names I find in John Menard,
who having been a Franciscan Friar for a long time, and a most zealous
maintainer thereof in defending it with tooth and nail, yet when it pleased
the Lord to open his eyes at the last, and to let him see his sin, he cast
off his cowle, and writ a book against the whole pack of them, called the
Declaration of the rule and order of the Franciscans: wherein he discouers part
of their knavery. Among other things he writes, how that beside their ordinary
allowance and pension which they had of the Covent of Paris, their manner was
to ask money for apparel, books, paper, ink, as also to defray the charges
of their sickness, etc. that they might ever have some little ouer-plus
wherewith to visit the green basket near to the Iacobins, or such like
Tauernes and suspected houses; where a man might have found apparel of all
sorts, which these gallands took to go to the Tennis-court to play with
gentlewomen, disguised in strange attire, yea even Lords wives, whose husbands
were non-residents from their houses. He further adds, that the Franciscans
of Paris played certain games at Tennis with them, upon condition that if the
Friars did win, they should choose the fairest gentlewoman and loueliest Lady
in the company; and if that the gentlewomen or Ladies did win, they should
choose the frolickest Franciscan. But to return to the argument in hand, these
ghostly fathers made no conscience to use the same speeches in their Sermons,
which they had used in a brothel house; to which purpose I could allege sundry
stories, which some might happily think very pleasant: but (as I have often
before protested) I abstain of purpose from the rehearsal of them; for
doubtless it is enough and overmuch, that heaven and earth have been so long
infected with the stink of them. For proof whereof though I should allege
no other example but that which is recorded by the late Queen of Navarre (in
the eleventh Nouuelle) of certain speeches delivered by a Franciscan in a
Sermon, my assertion should be strongly confirmed. Who to show how lightly he
regarded the offense and scandal which he gave by his loose and lascivious
speeches, said to the goodwiues of his parish; Go to fair Ladies, by and by
when you are prattling among your gossips, you will say, But what M. Friar is
this (trow we) that speaks thus boldly? It is some good fellow sure. I will
tell you (Madames) marvel not if I speak boldly, for I am of Anjou, yours to
command, etc. And what conscience made he of giving offense, when he mocked
those who took offense at him? saying, O my masters and dames of S. Martins, I
marvel you should be offended at a thing the least of a hundred, and prattle of
me every where, and say, O it is a foul matter, who would have thought the
ghostly father would have got his hostess daughter with child? And is it
indeed such a wonder that a Monk should get a wench with child? Tell me in good
earnest, what would you have said if the maid had got the Monk with child?
This is the sum of that news. And he that desires to see these particulars
exemplified, may find them in the former part of the Apology, in the Chapter
which entreats of whoredoms committed by our good Catholics.

21 I was purposed here to have ended this Chapter, but that I cannot in
conscience omit a short story very pertinent to this purpose, concerning the
gross speeches which these gorbellied shauelings used in their Sermons; to the
end the Reader may perceive that they are ever like themselves, as being never
cloyed with this clunch, nor any thing daunted, no not when they are among the
dead. The story is recorded by a man of good credit who has written
annotations upon the Abstract of the Franciscans Alcoran; and is thus couched
in his own words. For my part, seeing it comes here so fitly, I will tell you
what I saw at Paris: Four begging Friars being entreated on a time to bury a
corpse, it was the Franciscans turn to sing Requiem and Libera, which they did
very lustily (for they were in good hope to be well rewarded for their labor)
the other three in the mean time talking merrily together. Where (as I came
out of a house) I saw two young lusty Augustines, who held each other by the
hand, and sang, Brunette suis, iamais ne seray blanch. That is, Nut-browne I
am, as you may see,
And never fairer shall I be.


CHAP. XXXVII. Of the subtlety and profoundnesse of the foresaid Preachers or
professors of Divinity: as also of the traditions of the Franciscans,
Dominickes, etc.
WE have heretofore spoken of the gross ignorance of Priests and Monks, and
exemplified it by sundry particulars; to which notwithstanding much more might
be added, this at the least, of a Frenchman servant to a Scot; who being
examined in Latin by the Bishop (who was to give him orders) and thinking that
the Latin which the Bishop spoke had been Scottish, answered: If it please
your Lordship; my master understands Scottish very well, but so do not I. As
also this of another deep Divine, who being asked Quot sunt septem Sacramenta?
answered, Tres, Aspergillum, Thuribulum, and magnum Altar. Howbeit, some of
them I must needs confess (to make amends for this gear) have bin so
vengeably learned, and have found out such subtle speculations, that the most
pregnant wits and ripest judgments can hardly conceive them. And first to
begin with their language, certain I am that diverse of the^ have delivered
such abstruse things, and so far fetched, that Cicero himself never heard the
like. Besides, they have found out a new device to make a medley and mixture of
Latin and French, with such excellent good grace, that it is not possible
almost a man should be wearied in reading thereof. For proof of which
particulars, the places quoted before out of Menot and Maillard may suffice,
especially for such as have not their books at hand. For there they may see
the fine interlarding of these tongues, and that not without some subtlety.
But yet there is a further matter then either of these: for they have so
emphatically expressed their notions in their homespun Latin, that all the
classicke authors of the Latin tongue may cast their caps at them: as when
Oliver Maillard says, fol. 6. col. 3. Primo venit ad primam in domo sua
existentem, and percutit ad ostium, dicendo Trac, trac, trac: and ancilla venit
etc. Tell me now (gentle Reader) whether Cicero or any author of the Latin
tongue had either the wit or the heart to make a Latin word of this short
conceited word Trac, which has so good a grace, and does so well express a
man's meaning?

2 But this is not all: for they have been so curious in rendering reasons of
every word they spoke, as that they have ouerskipped but very few without
knowing their Etymologies, nay they have found out such subtle notations, as
cannot sufficiently be wondered at. For, who would ever have thought that there
had bin such a secret hidden under this word Aue, as we find in sundry of those
preachers and divines, and namely in Barelete, and in the author of the sermons
entitled Dormi secure? Barelete fol. 230. col. 1. says Ingressus Gabriel ad
eam, dixit, Aue gratia plena, Dominus tecum, ab a, quod est sine, and vae
culpa. Immunis a triplici vae, de quibus Apoc. 12. Vae vae vae habitantibus in
terra. As Much also to the same effect writes the other (whom I named even now)
in his first sermon De conceptione beatae Maria virginis. Neither was there
less dexterity used in the anatomy of the word Sacerdos, as it is deciphered
unto us in a book called Stella clericorum as follows: Quinque enim sunt
dignitates Sacerdotu^ praecaeteris. Primo dicitur sacerdos quasi sacris
dotatus, scililet sacris ordinibus, quia ipse est in summo gradu, qui est
Sacerdotum. Secundo Sacerdos, quasi sacris deditus, id est sacramentis, ad
sacrificanda sacramenta; nam ipse sacrificat sacrosanctum corpus Domini cum
verbis, signis, prodigijs, and caetera sacramenta. Tertio, dicitur Sacerdos
quasi dans sacra; dat enim baptismum, confessionem* poenitentiam, indulgentiam,
eucharistiam, benedictionem, and extremam vnctionem. Quarto, dicitur sacerdos,
quasi sacra docens: docet enim verba sancti euangelij and articulos rectae
fidei. Quinto, dicitur Sacerdos quasi sacer dux, quasi ducatum praebens and
iter populo ad regna coelorum, verbo sacrae doctrinae and vitae bono exemplo,
vnde versus; Sacris dotatus and sacris deditus, atque
Sacra docens, sacra dans, and dux sacer esto sacerdos.
And who would have thought that a man could ever have found such a mystery in
the name Dominicus? Dicitur Dominicus (says Barelet fol. 191. col. 4.) quasi
totus Domini: vel Dominicus quasi cu^tos Domini, vel Dominicus quasi a Domino
custoditus. And for Franciscus, what do you think they have found in his
belly? Let us hear what his Legend says, Franciscus dicitur ratione
securitatis, ex virtute and operum perfectione, and honestatis in
conuersatione. Aiunt enim Franciscos dici quaeda^ signa instar securium, quae
Romae ante Consules ferebantur, quae erant in terrorem and securitatem. True it
is indeed, there are sundry other notations given of his name, but this is
holden to be the soundest. Now this subtle and curious Etymologizing is not in
these names only, but in all other names of the Saints, registered in the book
called The golden Legend or Legends: For example, Gregory is compounded of
Grex, that is an assembly, and of Goire, that is preacher. KATHERINE, of Katha,
that is all, and of ruina overthrow, for the devils fort was clean overthrown
in her: Katherine signifying as much as universal overthrow, he being
dislodged and cast out of her. Quintine comes of quinque five, and teneo,
tenes, to hold, signifying one which holds five things. If any shall reply
and say, that it is not to be wondered that the ancient Latinists never
mentioned these Etymologies, considering the names were not then in use; I
answer, that they had as good dexterity in giving Etymologies of ancient latin
words; witness the notation of Mulier, quasi mollis aer. It was also a very
subtle invention, to fetch Etymologies of Greek and Hebrew words from the
Latin, as we have showed before in presbyter, diabolus, and Jesus.

3 But now we are to prosecute other subtle speculations, concerning matters
of greater moment. And first, what brains may we think had they, which coined
so many quaint questions as have been formerly mentioned? And what shall we say
to their great pains in expounding the Scriptures, so as that they make a nose
of wax of the^, as has been showed* We have seen also how cunning Divines
they were in divining and co^iecturing at many things, whereof the scripture
speaks not a word. Besides, we have given some taste of their witty comparisons
and brave arguments: and yet if a man would take a little pains to turn over
the books out of which they gathered all this gear, he might find other
manner of stuff then this. For example, when Menot fol. 48. col. 3. makes
Christ to go through the twelve signs of the Zodiac, it is such a dainty
device as has not been heard of. But their wits were much more refined, and
sublimated in other speculations; as in finding the old and new Testament in
the two horns of Bishops Myters; simplicity and innocence in the Friars cowle:
and sundry like things, as by and by we shall hear.

4 And if we come to the mystical expositions of all the tools and trinkets,
as also the Apish tricks and turnings used in the Mass, we must needs
confess that there lies so great a mystery or secret subtilty hidden under
them, that they (doubtless) are men of the sharpest wit, and best judgment,
which understand least thereof. For is it not cunningly done, to make one
Massemonger act twenty or five and twenty parts, as of Christ, of the virgin
Mary his mother, of all the Apostles, yea and of the traitor Judas? as also of
the thief that was crucified, the Centurion, the Publican, etc? But how is it
possible (may some say) he should act so many parts, and represent so many
persons? I answer, one part is performed only with crossings; for with one
Cross which he makes over the consecrated host and another over the chalice,
severally, he plays two parts: the one of Christ, the other of Judas. By the
three other crosses which are made before, are represented the Father, the holy
Ghost, and Christ who was delivered to death by himself, and by the^ also. But
if this were all the mystery that lay hid in these Crosses al were nothing*
Mark then what follows: After these two Crosses severally made, and that the
Crosse^ has spread his arms abroad (whereby he represents Christ stretched
upon the Cross) and has lifted up the host to be worshipped (which they call
the Elevation) by the three Crosses which he makes, one over the host, another
over the Chalice, and a third upon himself, he acts the part of three
several estates of men, viz. of those in heaven, in Purgatory, and in earth.
As for the five Crosses which are made after the first three, besides that two
of them being severally made, one over the host, and the other over the
Chalice, do signify as has been said; all of them together betoken sundry
other things. As first, the five days, betwixt Palmesunday and Good Friday; or
the five wounds of Christ, two in his feet, two in his hands, and one in his
right side. Neither is this all: For the first three of the five, (being made
over the Chalice and host together,) figure the delivery of Christ to the high
Priests, the Scribes and Pharisees: as also the price for which Christ was
sold, viz. thrice ten, that is 30. pence. Now the^ consider (good Reader) if
under these crossings there be so many and so profound speculations, what
sublimate subtilties there must needs be in all their trinckets, tr^ndals,
ga^bols, knocking of breasts, and in the rest of that so trim and pleasant
stageplay, apish tricks, and mummery? Moreover, every of these Doctors have
had their particular revelations, for the co^firmatio^ of these speculations; I
say every of these Alcoranists of the Mass, as Titelma^, Gabriel Biel, Brunus,
Philo, with others. For the Mass priest his ^lbe (according to some Doctors)
signifies the conversation of Christ in the flesh; according to others, the
purity of his body incarnate in the womb of the Virgin; according to a third
sort, the white garment wherewith Herod apparelled him, when he sent him back
to Pilate arrayed like a fool: and according to a fourth sort, the constancy of
the most clear light. And for the fine linen whereof the Albe is made, it
signifies (as they say) the subtlety of the Scriptures. The like may be said
of the Amict: for some are of opinion, that it represents the veil wherewith
Christ was blindfolded when the Jews mocking him in Caiphas house, buffeted
him: others are of opinion that it signifies the divinity of Christ hidden
under his humanity: some say that it comes in the room of the Jewish Ephod. I
omit to speak of the girdle, the maniple, and the stole, which are also
diversely interpreted. The fire and burning tapers (as some affirm) figure
Christ, who is the fire which consumes the rust of our sins: others say that
the fire signifies the fire of charity, enuyroning Christian people; and the
burning taper, the light of faith, as also the joy of Christ's coming and
incarnation. The paten also (according to the judgment of some deep divines)
signifies the divinity of Christ, as well as the Amict: but according to
others, it has another signification. Gloria in excelsis uttered with a low
and soft voice, signifies (as some affirm) the childish puling voice of
Christ lying in his cradle: but according to other Doctors, it has another
meaning. But what greater skill can a man desire then this, to tell what the
Mass Priest says, when he speaks never a word? Doubtless this is an
Abyssus or bottomless sea of subtilties: and yet this is not all; for hitherto
I have only spoken of the play which is acted by one only. I leave it
therefore to thy consideration (gentle Reader) what manner of play that is
which is played by three: viz. when the Massingmate has the Deacon and
Subdeacon to assist him? For if there were no more but this, that when the
Deacon (according to Titelman) plays his part in singing some parcel of
Scripture shred out of the Gospel, with his face toward the North, he should
with his crossing chase away all the Northern devils; were not this a most
monstrous mystery? But I will no longer insist upon these subtle
speculations, for fear I should bring the Reader in love with the book, whereby
he might be drawn to become a sworn brother to the Guyld of the Massemongers.
Nevertheless, this one thing I will say for a final conclusion, let the
Massemaligners, or Massemarrers call it as they list, either stageplay, or
apish toy, or mommery, iuggling or sorcery; they must needs confess, that
Pythagoras with all his mystical numbers had never the wit to invent so
pleasant and profitable a Morrisdance. And it is not without cause that I here
allege Pythagoras: for besides that the Pythagorean Philosophy has (as we
know) some such liniaments of curious subtlety, we are not ignorant, that the
book entitled The conformity of Saint Francis with Christ, names Pythagoras
first, before all the other Philosophers, whose example Christ has worthily
followed, in having Disciples, as fol. 43. of the foresaid impression. Dubium
est is^ad an Dominus noster Jesus Christus decenter fecit, Apostolos eligendo,
and discipulos habere speciales volendo, quia videretur melius fore, habere
multos, quam paucos, and omnes, quam aliquos speciales. Respondetur, quod
Dominus dece^tissime fecit, primo volendo habere discipulos. Ratio pri^^^, quia
quum esset virt^osissimus, aliquos ipsius ad instar aliorum imitatores habere
debeat: Pythagoras, Plato, Socrates, Aristoteles, and sic de alijs, Johannes
Baptista habuerunt discipulos, quare ipse a fortiori.

5 Howbeit I find the allegories in the book entitled Quadragesimale
spirituale, to be more miraculously subtle (if I may so speak) and to proceed
from a far more pleasant and conceited head: which spiritual quadr^gesimall,
otherwise called Lents allegory, was printed at Paris in the year 1565. after
that it had been reuiewed and corrected by two venerable Doctors of Paris: out
of which book I will here extract certain periods, by which the Reader shall
easily judge of the rest. The author therefore speaking in his first Chapter of
the Sallad which is eaten in Lent at the first service, says, that by the
sallad which is made of diverse herbs, and procures a good appetite, we may
understand in a mystical sense the word of God, which should give us both
appetite and strength. And a little after, by the sweetness of the oil and
sharpness of the vinegar equally mixed together, we are to understand the
mercy and justice of God.

Chap. 2. After the sallad we eat fried beans, by which we understand
confession. When we would have beans well sodden, we lay them in st^^pe, for
otherwise they will never sees kindly. Therefore if we purpose to amend our
faults, it is not sufficient barely to confess them at all adventure (as some
do) but we must let our confession lie in steep in the water of meditation, in
distinguishing and rightly discerning all our offenses in particular. And a
little after: We do not use to sees ten or twelve beans together, but as many
as we mean to eat: no more must we steep, that is, meditate upon ten or
twelve sins only, neither for ten or twelve days, but upon all the sins
that ever we committed even from our birth, if it were possible to remember
them.

Chap. 3. Strained pease (Madames) are not to be forgotten. You know how to
handle them so well, that they will be delicate and pleasant to the taste. By
these strained pease our allegorizing flute pipeth nothing else but true
contrition of heart, which is one part of penance. Note this further, that
pease never sees kindly in well water nor conduit water, but only in river
water: which mystically signifies that true repentance cannot sees rightly,
that is, cannot be made perfect with well water or conduit water, by which are
meant tears of attrition: but he that would have them to sees well, must of
necessity take river water, that is, true contrition. For by well water which
runs not, is understood attrition: and by river water contritio^. And so the
doctors say, that there is great difference betwixt them: for attrition is
uncertain, so that spiritual pease cannot sees well in it: but contrition is
certain, and makes good decoction for the pease of penance. River water which
continually moves, runs and flows, is very good for the seething of
pease. We must (I say) have contrition for our sins, and take the running
water, that is, the tears of the heart, which must run and come even into
the eyes.

Chap. 4. The broth of pease is also greatly to be commended, for it furnishes
Lent dinners very well. By the juice of pease strained through a strainer, is
understood a purpose and resolution to abstain from sin.

Chap. 5. When the Lamprey is eaten, men fall to their other fish. I find that
the Lamprey of all other fish is most nourishing, and therefore I compare
restitution unto it. Some (perhaps) will say, they have not money enough to buy
this Lamprey: indeed I must needs say that Lampreys are commonly dear, but yet
this is true withal, that as they are dear, so they are very excellent meat.
If you will eat of this noble Lamprey, which is the remission of your sins.
viz. the love of God; you ought to buy it, were it never so dear. You must not
think to buy it for a shilling or two, or half a crown, no no^ yet for a
crown: but you must restore all the money, goods, and what else you unjustly
detain from your neighbors; you must empty your purses of it, therewith to
make restitutio^. And further, you must empty your hearts of all rancor and
malice, otherwise you shall never eat worthily of this Lamprey, together with
his blood, wherewith that excellent sauce is made, which is the merit of the
passion.

Chap. 6. By Saffron which is put into all broths, sawces, and Lent meats, I
understand the joys of heaven, which we must think upon, yea (as it were)
smell, relish and ruminate of in all our actions; for without Saffron we shall
never have good juice of pease, good strayned pease, nor yet good sauce.
Neither can we without thinking upon the joys of heaven, have good spiritual
broths.

Chap. 7. Orenges also are right good in Lent (as Physicians say:) By the
orange I understand the love which we ought to have toward God, which is well
noted by the color of the Orange, and the kernels within it; being of a punick
color, that is, yellow drawing to a red, which in the holy Scripture
signifies charity of love which we owe to God, in loving him with all our
hearts, without which all our actions should be unprofitable and vain. Si
linguis hominum loquar and Angelorum, charitate^ aute^ non habea^, nihil sum.
And by the kernels enclosed in the orange, I understand alms given in secret.
And a little after; The kernels in the Orange do show and shadow out unto us the
apple of love. Wherefore I say (and that truly) that God loves this noble
fruit exceeding well, the color thereof pleases him: see therefore that you
present him therewith; he loves the taste thereof, wherefore let him feed upon
it in this thy spiritual dinner.

Cap. 8 You know (Madames) that a woman cannot have a pleasanter thing in her
hand, then a goodly fair posey. This month of March yields a jolly
forwardness of trim posies: for in March grows the sweet Violet of an
heavenly color, azure, and blew. Will you therefore carry this Lent and at all
other times, a fair and pleasant posey in your hands, which shall always give
a sweet smell* Then take the Violet in March, which is the virtue of humility;
for I assure you, it is a virtue highly pleasing God, and profitable for the
soul* The March Violet etc.

Chap. 9. Prunes also are necessary to furnish out a dinner, and therefore they
must be had. By these Prunes which are black and full of good juice, is
understood abstinence from sin, mortification of the flesh, and bodily fasts.

Chap. 10 After this they set Figs on the table for a second service, which are
both good and wholesome, getting a man a good stomach and a sweet breath: By
these figs may be understood the memory of the holy passion of Christ, which
strengthens the stomach, and makes it able to digest tribulations,
temptations, griefs, labors, melancholic passions, and yields a sweet and
pleasant smell.

Chap. 11. Yet this is not all, for if we would feed more liberally, we must
have Almonds also. Physicians say that the bitter Almond is wholsomer then the
sweet, and therefore I will speak of them: I say then, that we must not
forbear to eat these Almonds, albeit they be bitter. Some there are who take
the sweet and leave the bitter: and yet they are not so wholesome. For that
which is distasteful and unpleasant to the palate, may do the heart good. By
these bitter Almonds I understand the remembrance of death, of the last
judgment, and of the pains of hell, which must accompany our Lent dinner.

Chap. 12. The honey which we eat in Lent is a precious thing, and chiefly for
the dames. The Philosopher says, that honey is like gold. By honey I understand
nothing else but a heavenly life and conversation: for the life and
conversation which we ought to lead, especially in this holy time of Lent,
must proceed and distill from heaven as good and precious honey.

Chap. 13. After our fine white manchet we may not forget simnels and wine: for
they are the best part of the dinner. By bread and wine we understand the
obtaining of the joys of heaven; and by the simnels faith, which we ought to
have in one God. Creator of heaven and earth, distinguished into three persons.
This appears plainly in the simnell which has 3. horns or corners, all which
are but one and the same thing by essence of nature. Further, there are simnels
made of another fashion, viz. like the half Moon, having only two horns,
signifying the two natures of Christ, his divinity and humanity. Now all this
we must constantly believe upon pain of damnation: Besides, parents are to
teach it their children, Preachers the people, and schoolmasters their
scholars, especially in the holy time of Lent, according as simnels are then
given children to eat. And a little after, There are two kinds of wine, white
and red: the white signifies the hope which is in Christ Jesus; and the red,
the love which he has showed us in purchasing of the foresaid glory. The bread
whereof we speak, was baked in the oven of this love which is his precious
side, wholly inflamed with the love of mankind. Concerning the wine and the
nature thereof (to omit his two colors) it is strong, and tastes well. By the
strength of it, we may understand the love which God has borne us, in laying
down his life for us: and by the taste, the hope which he has given us to
ascend to heaven, if we will be careful to perform good works and exercise
ourselves therein. And a little after; This wine is of two colors, white and
red: therefore it is said, Dilectus meus candidus and rubicundus, electus ex
millibus. The white teaches us the way to heaven, for it gives good courage
to a man, legs of wine and boldness of joy. The red sharpeneth the wit and
understanding, and helps the memory, to remember that the precious blood of
Christ gushed out of his side for our salvation. This wine is chief of choice
among all liquors electus ex millibus.

Chap. 14. Of the foresaid wine is made good and odoriferous Hypocras, clear
and well spiced. King Solomon does make of it and sells it, as it is said in
the Canticles, Dabo tibi vinum conditum. The merchant and factor for these
Aromaticke drugs, spices and confects, is my Lord Saint Paul, who like a
painful merchant brought them out of a far country, viz. out of heaven. By
these drugges, spices and precious confections, as Sugar, Cassia, Lignea,
Grains of Paradise, Cinnamon and such like dainty delicates, we understand
infinite diversity of glory in heaven, which S. Paul brought with him from
thence, when he was rapt up into the third heaven; and that in such abundance,
that it could not be contained in the shop of man's heart, as it is said, Vidit
arcana quae non licet homini loqui. Nec in cor hominis ascendit quae
praeparauit Deus diligentibus se. My Lord S. Paul saw the joys of heaven and
the glory thereof in a vision, and that in such variety, state and
magnificence, as the heart of man cannot by meditation conceive or understand.
These celestial joys the Apostle sold to King Solomon, a true Apothecary,
that is, to a man of peace, of an humble heart, and contemplative life.

Chap. 16 If a man would have good broths and meats well and finely dressed, he
must look to provide good cooks, for Gentlemen, Lords and great Merchants. The
good cooks which should dress and season our meats in Lent, are the
admonitions, inspirations, and persuasions of our good Angels, which we must
believe rather in this holy time of penance then any other; for they inspire
more good motions into our minds at this time then at any other: because the
devil does then more maliciously tempt us. We commonly feed upon more dishes
in Lent then in any time of the year besides: and therefore we ought to eat,
use, and learn more heavenly admonitions at that time, etc.

Cha. 17. The seruitors which should serve us at the table in Lent, are the
examples of the holy Martyrs, which have suffered great affliction and mysery
in aspiring to glory: all which serve us in their course and place. Saint
Laurence serves in fish and herrings broyled on the gredyron. Saint John the
Evangelist boiled sea fish. Saint Dennys and Saint Cosme, baked pasties out of
the oven: for they were cast into fornaces. Sundry others there be which serue^
in fried fish; and they are such as were boiled in great coppers and caldrons,
for the name of Christ.

Chap. 18. In Lent all the vessel is scoured and made clean, pots, glasses,
and caldrons. The table is also covered with a fair white cloth, and clean
napkins laid thereon; which duty belongs to young girls, women servants, and
waiting maids: therefore in imitation of the Virgins of heaven, we ought to
cleanse our vessels (as pots, glasses, and caldrons) that is, our hearts. For
doubtless we sees carnal desires in our flesh. Wherefore chastity and
cleanliness ought to bring in the white table cloth and cover the table.

Chap. 19. When a man has fed well of all these dishes, I suppose he has had
a competent refection: so that there remains nothing but to say grace. But in
stead of giving thanks, they make the dice trowle upon the tables: one desires
to play at dice, or cards: another takes a lute and plays wanton and
lascivious songs, tou^ds, and horn pypes. And so in stead of saying grace and
giving thanks to God; they honor and ^erue the devil the inuentor of all those
games and sports. Do you know what the tables signify whereat you play? By the
tables which you open after you are well refreshed with bodily food (not with
spiritual) is understood hell, which shall be set wide open for you when you
are satiate with your sins, and then shall the tablemen be turned, tumbled,
and tossed one upon another: that is, the souls shall be tormented with diverse
and sundry torments, specifyed by the sundry points of the tables, and the
often removing of the tablemen from one point to another. Transibunt ab aquis
niuium ad calorem nimium. For the pains of hell are diverse, etc.

Chap. 20. And as for those which play upon the Lute, and sing ribaldry and
baudy songs, in stead of saying grace; doubtless they much forget themselves;
seeing we are all bound to give God thanks for the benefits we receive at our
repast from his liberal and bountiful hand. And here I will show those that
love to play upon the Lute and other instruments, upon what Lute they ought to
play. Mark then, as a Lute has seven strings, so it is hollow: By the seven
strings are meant the seven petitions of the Pater noster, with which we must
give God thanks. For the Pater noster is the best form of prayer that ever was
seen: for therein is contained whatsoever is necessary for us. Likewise the
seven strings signify these seven virtues, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude,
Justice, Faith, Hope, and Charity, (which we ought to have and to pray that God
would give us:) or they signify the 7. virtues opposite to the seven deadly
sins, viz. Humility, Charity, Abstinence, Diligence, Liberality, Chastity,
and Patience. These are the seven strings which we ought to strike and play
upon before God, rendering him thanks and praise, all the Lent long. The
hollownesse of the Lute signifies that our hearts should be emptyed of all
things, save only of the resounding of godly thoughts, and heavenly praises.
The Lute is hollow, having nothing in it but the sounding of the strings when
they are stricken: so ought our hearts to be emptyed of al earthly things, and
to have no other resonance but of good thoughts and such heavenly meditations
as are formerly mentioned. The melody of the strings of the Lute, etc.

Chap. 21. As I was about to take my pen from the paper, purposing to shut my
book, one of my nephews said unto me; o uncle, you have spoken of all save
sweet meats and banqueting dishes which you have forgotten. Indeed (quoth I)
thou say true my boy. Whereupon I took my pen again and writ as follows.
None can be ignorant that sweet meats are eaten at night, upon fasting days,
in stead of a supper: we ought in the time of fasting to be spiritually
excercised, and therefore I think it good when we are disposed to fast, to eat
sweet meats at night, which I will here give you. By spiritual confects, I
understand perseverance in a good course. He cannot be said to fast all Lent,
that breaks off his fast for two or three days: but he must fast full forty
days: that is, it is not enough for him to abstain from sin certain days
only, but he must continue, and persevere in well doing. Qui perseuerauerit
vsque ad finem, (...) erit; qui vero non, condemnabitur. And because
perseverance in obedience is so necessary, I may (in my poor opinion) not
unfitly compare it to the round confect; for roundnes signifies perseverance,
seeing that a round figure has neither beginning nor end; as this letter O
made in form of a confect.

6 But leaving the rest of these Lenten subtilties to curious heads, which
desire to understand more of this trim science (seeing I have showed them the
place where they may find them,) I will come in the next place to the
subtilties contained in the rules as well of the religious beggars, wallet
cariers and rogue^, as of the rest of that rabble. Howbeit my purpose is not to
discourse of the subtilties of every order particularly; it shall suffice to
speak a word or two generally of them all, and after to entreat of some of
them in special. Here then let us note, that when we see either white, black
or gray Friar, be he besmeared or smoaked, mytred or clean brushed; yet is
there not so small a rag in all his array, under which there lies not hidden
some great mystery. But how is it possible (may some say) but that if they be
contrary one to another in their attire, there should also be a contrariety in
the mysteries themselves? For example, if girding with a cord note perfection,
then doubtless a large broad thong with brave buckles, garnished with gallant
tongues, must needs signify imperfection, as those which the Augustines wear.
And how should these subtilties agree in such contrariety of colors? Besides
all this, wherein is it (almost) that one disagreeth not from another? For one
goes barefoot, another wears half a pair of breeches, another a whole
pair: one wears laticed shoes, another clean covered: one has shoes of the
plain hide like Irish brogs, another has wooden shoes properly called sabots
or clogs: some ride, some go on foot. Some have their cowles pointed, others
have them round: some long, others short. Some are but gentleman bald, others
as bald as coots: some are shaven above the ear, some under; a third sort have
but a tuft or two. Some have money, and some have none: some eat flesh, and
some eat none. Howbeit they which brag of their skill in these speculatiue
subtilties, devise all the means they can to make these contrarieties accord
together: though I fear me it is but labor lost. True it is indeed, in some
particulars they may easily be accorded: as in this, that the Iacobins wear
black in their upper garments, and white under; the Carmelites contrarily
wear white above and black under: so that it may be said, that as the
Iacobins wear the virgin Mary's livery (for she revealed it to S. Dominicke)
so the Carmelites wear Elias and Elizeus liueries: So that as they with their
attire please their founders; so these please their foundresse. And if it be
true, that by the subtle speculation (specially of the virgin Mary) the white
hood signifies purity and virginity, doubtless they great exceeding well
together: the Iacobins being pure virgins inwardly, and the Carmelites
outwardly. And verily if they could as well agree in other things as in this, we
should have no cause to object against them the diversity which is in their
sects: but there are such differences among them in some particulars, that the
best answer (in my conceit) which can be made to stop the mouths of all
gainsayers (touching the diversities or contrarieties in their orders) were to
say, that as they hold not one way, so neither do they make account to go to
one place, namely into the same heaven. And that there are indeed many
Imperial heavens, according to the opinion and doctrine of the Friars, may
appear by certain places in the book of Conformities: at leastwise we may
boldly say, they held this opinion, (...) that there was one heaven for eaters
of flesh, and another for eaters of fish.

7 Notwithstanding leaving the censure hereof to others, I will only
particularize the sect of the Minorite Friars (otherwise called Cordeliers or
Franciscans) because it is holden to be the perfectest of all the rest, as
being the only sect that is canonized and registered in the sixth book of the
Decretals or Clementines. But considering that there are subtilties to be found
as well in their habits as in their course of life, I will say nothing of their
habits or attire, save only of the cord and breeches; because in them lies
the most profound speculation. First then, this cord is expounded by some to
signify perseverance, in that we use to bind them with cords whom we fear
will run away: and according to other speculatiue brains, it signifies
diligence, because that when a man is girded, his gown troubles him not so
much in running as when it is loose. Lo here the allegorical signification of
the whole cord. Let us in the next place consider what every knot signifies
apart by it self. The lowest knot (which often traileth on the ground)
mystically signifies canonical obedience: the knot in the midst (which by
reason of often handling is commonly more greasy then the rest) by a mystical
Antiphrasis, purity and chastity: and the knot above (wherewith they gird
themselves hard) their strait and extreme poverty. And as for their breeches,
albeit they be diversely allegorized, yet the common received opinion is, that
they signify the sweet odor of the sacrifice of obedience, because they are
usually perfumed with a most horrible smell.

8 Touching their demeanor and actions in their order, I will make choice
only of a few, without adding the expositions of their subtle significations,
as having not found them in any Doctor. By their demeanor and carriage in their
order, I understand the ceremonial customs of their order or rule. But
because the foresaid breeches are (as it were) the fairest flower in their
garland (either because they help to get women with child, or for some other
reason) I will first begin with them. We are therefore to know, that it is
expressly forbidden the Franciscans, upon penalty of a heavy curse, that they
neither come nor go, eat nor sleeepe, preach nor say Mass without their
breeches, as being mystically incorporate together with the habit; only when
they gall them between the legs (as sometimes it falls out in travail) they
are permitted to put them for a time into their sleeves. Moreover, in the year
of probation, before they take upon them the profession of Monkery, they learn
to hold one finger in the bottom of the glass when they drink, or to hold it
with both their hands, to look down to the ground, to counterfeit wrynecks, to
hide their hands close within their sleeves, to make an hypocritical inclinabo
or ducking in the Church and elsewhere, bowing down the head and heauing up
the tail, with an even proportion; as also to kiss the ground, to kneel
down before the patres, when they chance to meet them: to kiss their hand,
cord, or feet, if they make not offer to kiss them. I omit to speak of
Cabbiges, which they cause their poor nouices to set with the root upward: as
also dead sticks, which they cause them to water; and great bones which they
make them carry in their mouths; besides a number of other tricks described
by the said John Menard (in a book entitled The rule and order of the
Franciscans:) a man that could speak and write of this argument as well as
another, considering he was one of this order. Albeit in the end (through the
great grace and mercy of God) he left his cowle, after that he had founded the
profunditie of the foresaid subtilties, besides a number of others which he
records.

9 To conclude, if happily (gentle Reader) thou be not yet fully satisfied with
these subtle speculations, or that thou had rather hear them in rhyme then
in prose: I have found some such to content thee, where mention is made of the
signification of Bishops Myters, whereof I have spoken somewhat before. L'aube
and le surplis blane denote
Vie sans macule and sans note.
La mitre de deux parts cornue,
Science certain absolve
Du vieil and nouueau Testament.
Les gans, des sacrez sacremens
Sincere administration.
La cross, saine attraction
De brebis a vraye pasture.
La croix, les livers, l'Escriture,
Des humaines affections,
Auecques les afflictions,
Les auenemens signifient.
Voi^a ou caphars se confient
Par belles contemplations.
That is, The Albe and surplise white, do note
A life withouten stain or spot.
The horned Myter represents
Full knowledge in both Testaments.
The gloves that been all new and white,
Handling the Sacraments aright.
The Crosiers staff most plainly shows,
Reducing of their strayed ewes.
The cross, books, scripture, do portend
Of men's desires the doubtful end.
Behold what trust and deep devises
These Prelates have in their disguises.


CHAP. XXXVIII. How Churchmen gathered great store of riches by their five
fetches, especially in the days of our forefathers: and of their shameless
and intolerable covetousness.
IF we consider a little more narrowly the cunning sleights wherewith the
Popish Clergy abused our ancestors, and abuse many even at this day: we
shall find that all of them, from the least to the greatest, have served the^
to this end, to bring the moulter to their mill. And that that which seems to
us (and not without cause) to be foolish and absurd, (to say no more) seems to
them very excellent, and grounded upon good reason, when they consider the
profit that accrews to them thereby: so that whatsoever could possibly be
alleged or said to the contrary, was but so many wast words spoken in the
wind, because it was spoken against their bellies which had no ears: which is
truly verified of others also, according to the old proverb. And we may well
think that they kept this ancient saying always in memory: Lucri bonus odor,
ex re qualibet: Gain is good, whence soever gotten. Neither may we doubt but
that those proud Prelates (who would needs be termed pillars of the Church)
when they were finely flouted and nicknamed pillars and pollers of the Church,
deuourers of Crucifixes, Canuasers of Requiem, Abbey-lubbers, loytering and
lazy lozels, hypocrites and ravenous wolves, would say with the covetous
Athenian in Horace, -- Populus me sibilat, at mihi plaudo
Ipse domi, simul ac nummos contemplor in arca.
For they were mocked and derided of old, as shall be declared in the chapter
next ensuing; and verily they were then grown more impudent then old filthy
bauds. And here comes to my remembrance, what a Monk at Blois told certain
good fellows, who derided him and his order; The seculars (quoth he) shall
never mock the Church-me^ so long as the Churchmen have mocked them. Which he
spoke in regard of those fine tricks of conueyance, wherewith they had deluded
the silly world so long, leading men by the nose, like Bears, or Buffes. True
it is indeed that in so saying, he spoke not so outrageous wickedly as Pope Leo
the tenth, who answering Cardinal Bembus (alleging a certain place out of
the Gospel) said, o what riches we have gotten by this fable of Christ!
Doubtless, as for riches this wicked miscreant lied not: howbeit he should
have spoken most truly if he had said, o what riches have we gotten by abusing
the name of Christ? And verily, it is almost incredible, how great the wealth
and riches of the Clergy was: considering that which Baptista Fulgosius
(though a favorer of the Roman religion) records of one Peter Riarus, who
being a Friar of the order of the Minorites, was created Cardinal by Pope
Sixtus the fourth. For he says that he was not contented to have his gowns of
cloth of gold, and the couerings of his bed of cloth of gold likewise; but not
so much as his fetherbed ticks but were of cloth of gold; and his other
furniture, all of clean silk. Besides, he affirms that at Rome he made a
feast to Eleanor of Arragon, as she was on her journey going to marry the Duke
of Ferrara called Hecules d' Est, wherein were so many sundry sorts of meats
and dainty dishes, that it lasted for the space of seven hours. And lest his
guests should have been wearied, he caused sundry plays to be acted whilst
they were at table. And amongst other magnificences which he used, this was not
the least, that every seruitor at every new course took a new suit. Yet all
this is nothing to that which afterward he reports of the said Cardinals
where (or concubine) called Tiresia, viz. that he kept her publicly, in such
sumptuous manner, that she wore shoes set full of pearls and precious stones.
He that doubts of the truth of this report, may read Fulgosius lib. 9. cap.
1. where entreating de hominum L^xu atque delicijs, he speaks of it, as of a
thing which at that time was notoriously known to all the word. But to return
to Pope Leo, who maruailed at the riches which this fable (as he said) had
brought them; how (I beseech you) did he enrich himself and fill his coffers
by one only Croisado, when a Franciscan of Millan (called Samson) by the money
which he had scraped together by that means, could offer an hundred and twenty
thousand ducats for the Popedom? And if he offered thus much, how much (may
we think) had he gained besides? For it is not to be thought but that he would
keep a mease for Allison in store, and reserve some pretty round sum against a
hard winter. Now if the vassals were so rich, what may we judge of their Lords
and Masters? How ever it be, they have verified (we see) the foresaid Proverb
(iumping in opinion with the most villainous usurers) that the savor of gain
is good, whence soever it arises: which was then more truly verified then ever
before, when they would needs increase their revenues by the hire of harlots.
And now (gentle Reader) consider a little, whether that be not true which Ovid
says (as we must needs confess) Turpe, tori reditu census augere paternos.
That is, Base gain, to raise ones state, by lone of l^st. Consider (I say)
what a shame it is, that the Romish Saint Peter's and Saint Paul's should have
part of their revenues from them which get their living by such miserable sweat
of their bodies; and that so profane a thing (which is a shame once to name)
should be consecrated unto them as a holy thing. True it is indeed, in the time
of Pope Paulus the third, the number of the foresaid lusty lasses was well
abated; for there were in his register but five and forty thousand, as
historians who have written of the lives of Popes do constantly affirm. And
certain it is, that the name Courtisan (being the most honest Synonime that can
be given a whore) had his original from the court of Rome; namely, from those
religious Dames which conuersed somewhat more then familiarly at bed and board
with the Romish Prelates. Now this discourse of Popish riches puts me in mind
of a sermon made by a Monk of Gascoine, wherein he affirmed that Antichrist at
his coming would use large liberality, sparing no cost to win the hearts of
men unto him: in a word, that he would sow silver and gold in the very streets.
Which words made a Gascoin^ teeth (who was one of his auditors) so to water,
that he cried out aloud: E diu, qua^ biera ed aquet bon segno d' Antichrist,
that is, O Lord, when will that good gentleman Anchrist come? If this poor
Gascoine (whose case was to be pitied) had been informed who this Antichrist
was, he would never have asked the question when Antichrist should come; but
would have craved commendatory letters to carry to him. Howbeit, it behooued him
to learn some craft (if he were not experienced therein before) of those, by
whom men are wont to come in favor with his Holiness.

2 But I leave these great Churchmen, so addicted to the world, and return to
their vpholders and abbettors, using in this behalf the authority of the good
preacher Barelete, who mentions the proverb which was current in his days,
and had been long before, to wit, That three things are insatiable, Priests,
Monks, and the Sea. And from whence arose this Proverb may we think? Certain
it is that common experience brought it in use. For when the world saw, that
Churchmen made gain of the very parings of their nails, they used that in
common speech, which they saw daily practiced before their eyes. For they did
not only take of the living and of the dead (as it is in the French Proverb)
but having pilled the parents both living and dead, they polled their children
to the third and fourth, yea even to the last generation. But what great means
had they to effect this? Surely, the fine fetches which they used, were the
readiest way in the world for this purpose. The number of which we know is
infinite: and therefore no marvel if their wealth and riches were infinite.
Amongst others, this was most strange, that they should use the dead as a
means to pill and polle both the living and the dead; of which only my
purpose is to entreat at this present. Now this means has two parts (as
there are two sorts of dead men) the first is, by the dead which are canonized;
the second by those which are not: And with these latter I will begin this
present discourse. I say then, that whereas heretofore they made their kitchins
hot, by using (or rather abusing) the bodies and souls of the canonized
Saints: now of late time they have helped their market only by the goods, and
souls of such as they brought out of Purgatory, to menace and affright those
that would not come off roundly in paying their pence. For the best slight (we
know) which single soled Priests and Monks had in their budgets, was taken in
former time, and is at this day from their Requiem: Witness, that form and
phrase of speech which is common amongst the^, Allons boire sur le premier cuir
qui vie^dra, Let us make good cheer at the cost of the first soul that goes
to Purgatory. Witness also the Curate which complained to his parishioners in
this sort. Alas, what would you have me to do, o my parishioners? you bring me
no offerings, and I see none of you die: how shall I live then, think ye? But
if after they had lustily chanted their requiem, they had not something given
them (according to their desire) that they might sing Gaudeamus, they were
hornemad, as if the devil had been among them; and then the souls of those
poor Purgatorians for whose sake they had song such a short and silly requiem,
returned back to be revenged of their children, kinsmen, and friends, which
gave not the priests occasion to sing so lustily for them, that they might not
be so cruel^y tormented in Purgatory: (as we see in ancient Poets, both Greek
and Latin, now the souls of the dead return back to curse and revile those
which have not done their best endeavor (as they should) in performing such
rites, as to their funerals appertained.) Whereof we have a very memorable
example in the ghost or spirit which the Franciscans of Eureux counterfeited:
and another after that in the spirit of Orleans, that is, in a Franciscan
nouice, named Halecourt, who being hid under the vault of the Church,
counterfeited the ghost of the Provost Marshals wife. And why so? Because
(forsooth) he gave but six crowns to the Franciscans of the place for
interring of her: as also for that having asked of him a little wood, he would
give them none. And here we are to remember the Franciscan of Bordeaux (whom I
mentioned before) concerning the souls of Purgatory, which laughed as often
as any offerings were made for the dead. But because the readers may happily be
cloyed with such a rablement of reports and tales of spirits walking by night,
and of the rattling noyses which they make (especially about those that are in
bed) and of other fooleries which ensue thereupon: I will speak no more
thereof, but proceed to prosecute another point.

3 And that is touching canonized Saints, by whom the Clergy reapes a double
commodity, partly by their bodies, and partly by their souls: by their
bodies, in making relikes of them; by their souls, in using them for diverse
offices and functions, out of which they suck no small advantage. And first
concerning relikes, they were not content to make men worship the carcasses of
such as were thought to have led a more holy and religious life then their
fellows (as having some divine virtue in them,) but further caused them to
adore the relikes of the very damned themselves: witness an ancient Doctor,
who says, Multorum corpora adorantur in terris, quorum animae cruciantur in
inferis: that is, The bodies of many men are worshipped on earth, whose souls
are tormented in hell. Which is manifest by the Legend of S. Martin, where we
read that a damned soul was worshipped with high devotion, as being thought
to have bin a Saint in heaven. I omit two other cosening knaueries, which were
ordinary in this case; The one, in making some poor Saint (who (God knows)
meant simply and thought no hurt) believe that when he was living he had half
a dozen heads, two or three dozen of ears, as many hands, and as many arms
and legs: which imposture was sufficiently discovered above fifteen years
ago, in a book containing the Inuentory of sundry relikes of diverse countries.
The other, when the body, or at leastwise some member or bone of him that was
called a Saint, could be kept no longer, in stead of it they put the first
fair one that came to their hands, though of a malefactor that had been
hanged: yea sometime the bone of an Ass, dog, or such like. As at Geneua, the
relike which was worshipped a long time for Saint Anthonies arm, was found in
the end to be the bone of a Stag. And though they had not used these sleights,
yet to attribute the nature and property of the Godhead to carions, was a
point of notorious wickedness in the highest degree. For though it were true,
that they had been indeed the bodies or the bones of certain men or women,
which had lived in greater devotion toward God then the vulgar sort; yet they
were but dead carcasses for all that. Nevertheless considering we have already
seen how vilely they abused the word of God, applying it to wicked and
abominable writings: no marvel if they abused the Godhead also, attributing it
to whatsoever themselves thought good. For not content to cause men to worship
the bodies of the Saints departed, or some part and member thereof, they made
their garments also, their moueables, their tools, and^ partaker^ of the same
worship. As it is reported that at Triers in the Abbey of S. (...), ^. Joseph*
pantofles have been in request a long time. And at Ai^ in (...), they were
accustomed to show his breeches, together with the virgin^ Mary's smock, by
the same token that the smock was big enough (...) giant; whereas the breeches
were scarce big enough for a boy or a dwarf. It (...) said, that the pots and
spoones which belonged to certain Saints, have been elsewhere reckoned in the
number of holy relikes. Nay, there is not so much as the tail of the Ass upon
which our Savior rode, but it is at Genoua accounted for a relike. And seeing
I have made mention of the Ass, we are further to note that the holy hay (that
is, the hay which was found in the cratch where our Savior was laid as soon
as he was borne) has been very famous in some countries of Lorraine (as I
remember.) But what shall we say to a more strange dotage of those wise
woodcocks which caused men to worship stones, as being the very same wherewith
Saint Stephen was stoned to death? As at the black Friars in Arles, at Vigand
in Languedoc, and at Florence: As also of those wise masters which caused men
to worship the arrows wherewith they affirmed Saint Sebastian was wounded to
death: one of which was kept at the Augustine Friars in Poytiers, another at
Lambesk in Province, and others elsewhere. And surely if these stones wherewith
Saint Steven was stoned, ought to be worshipped: how much more then they that
stoned him? And if the arrows were worthy of this honor: how much more worthy
were they which shot them?

4 But lest the Reader should wonder too much at this foolery, or rather
brutishness, I will here relate a certain story, by which we may perceive
that the poor people (silly souls) in the matter of relikes had neither sense
nor reason: so that their estate and condition was worse then that of poor
blind men who dare trust those that lead them. The story is this, (for we will
do them this favor to call it so). When Nicodemus took our Savior down from
the cross, he gathered some of his blood, and put it in one of the fingers of
his glove (note here that Nicodemus wore gloves as well as we) with the which
blood he wrought many wonders: for which cause being persecuted by the Jews,
he was glad to rid his hands of it by a strange device, which was this. He
took a piece of parchment, in which he writ all the miracles, and all that
appertained to this secret, and closed up the blood together with the parchment
in a great birds bill (the historian has forgotten her name) which when he had
bound up and settled as well as he could, he cast it into the sea, comme^ding it
to the providence of God, whose pleasure was (as the story says) that a
thousand or twelve hundred years after (or thereabout) this holy Bill having
trauersed all the seas from East to West, should arrive in Normandy in the
very same place where the Abbey of Beck is now situate; where being cast up by
the violence of the sea into certain shrubs, it so fortuned that a good Duke of
Normandy (one of the famous founders of religious houses in those days)
hunting a Stagge near to the place; when the huntsmen were at a loss, not
knowing what was become either of the stag or of the dogs; at last they found
him in a bush, kneeling upon his knees, and the dogs by him, all very quiet,
and upon their knees also: (some write that they were saying their Pater
noster.) Which spectacle did so stir up the devotion of this good Duke, that
he caused the wood (where this precious Beak and the jewel therein contained
was found) to be disparked incontinently, and there founded an Abbey, which for
this cause is called the Abbey of Beck (where they have this goodly miracle
yet to be seen) being so rich, that it may truly be said that this Beak fed
many bellies. Now if this one relike or some remnant and remainder thereof did
keep and maintain so many idle bellies (yea fed these lubbers so fat, that
they were nothing but belly) and not so only, but so enriched them: let the
Reader judge what abundance of riches the rabble of other relikes has brought
unto them, being so many, that hitherto they could never be comprehended in any
Inuentory. And we may well conjecture how great they were, by the shrines in
which they were wont to be kept. For the ditches in which these carcasses were
laid, were of earth: to speak more plainly; of these pence which came by
kissing and adoring of them (or adoration, to speak more properly) they bought
for them fine silver houses, gilt over with gold. And though all relikes
neither have bin nor are at this day enchased in silver or gold, yet I persuade
my self that there have been few of them (at least of those which have had the
better hap) which have not brought to these hucksters, the value of a shrine or
very near. Now because all relikes have not been equally gainful and
commodious unto them, in that some had not the luck to light in a country so
addicted to miracles; let us value the best sort of them but at an hundred
thousand crowns (though some perhaps have been worth many millions) the meaner
sort but at threescore thousand, the worst sort but at twelve thousand: and
then gathering the entire sum of them all (and yet of none but of those that
are in fresh memory) we may calculate how many thousand crowns these relikes
have gained them.

5 Which account nevertheless, does not in any sort comprehend particular
relikes, which these pedlers or their mates carried with them up and down the
country: (for these were often disclaimed even by cleargymen themselves,
residing in those parts through which the foresaid pedlers passed.) Which open
disclaiming of them proceeded partly from envy, partly from fear; lest the
simple people should have perceived their iuggling in such open and palpable
knauerie, and so should have begun to have suspected all the rest. And it is to
be noted, that the foresaid knauish companions did so openly mock and
impudently abuse these simple souls, in causing them to worship relics; that
if they had been let alone, their trade in the end would not have been worth a
blewe button, either to themselves or unto others. For they were not content,
in opening their packes, to say (that I may omit common matters) Behold here in
this vial is Christ's blood, gathered from under the cross by the virgin
Marie. Item, see here in this other vial the tears of Christ. Item, behold
here the swaddling bands, wherewith the virgin Mary swadled him in Egypt.
Item, see here the milk of the virgin Marie. Item, behold here the hairs of
the virgin Marie. They were not (I say) herewith content, but grew to that
height of impudency, that they made no bones to say, In this box (but it must
in no case be opened) is contained the breath of Christ, carefully kept by his
mother from his very infancy. Among the rest of this rout, we read of a priest
of Genoua, who coming out of the East, boasted that he had brought with him the
foresaid breath from Bethlehe^, as also the horns which Moses had on his
forehead when he descended from mount Sinay. And albeit he had been told that
he did too shamefully abuse the people in laboring to persuade them, that he
had the breath of Christ indeed, and the horns of Moses: yet would he give them
no other answer but this, that if they would not believe that he had the breath
of Christ, and the horns of Moses, neither would he believe, that the milk
which is openly showed at solemn meetings at Genoua, for the milk of the
virgin Mary, was her milk indeed. And this (I hope) may serve to discover unto
us their particular imposture in the matter of relics: which we may well
think had no less virtue to make their kitchen hot, then that which was
commonly practiced.

6 Thus having seen what gain Churchmen got by the bodies of Saints departed
(for we will for this once, comprize all relics under the relics of men and
women Saints;) it remains that we show how they enriched themselves by their
souls, showing themselves as good husbands in this as in the former. And as in
the former, so in this I will do my best endeavor to the uttermost:
notwithstanding I am to desire the Readers to pardon me, if in reckoning up the
names of men and women Saints, I make not up the roll of the Kirielle. For we
are not only to name them, but also to show what office or occupation has
been assigned to every of them, that so we may the better see what means they
used to make the wind to blow so fortunately upon the Churchmen. And first, I
hope they (...) not so strait laced, but that they will grant that there is
great similitude and conformity in sundry things between the heathen Gods, and
their blessed he Saints, between their Goddesses, and their she Saints:
conformity I say, not in respect of those that are true Saints indeed (lest
any man should calumniate my speech) but only of their worshippers. For if the
adoration of the heathen gods and goddesses, as also of men and women Saints by
them of the Church of Rome, be well considered, we shall find them to suit in
all points, save only in the manner of sacrifice. As may appear by these
particulars. The heathen went to Apollo and Aesculapius, as to the gods which
made profession of Physic and Surgery: and do not they (I beseech you) go
to S. Cosmas and S. Damian? When S. Eloy (who is the Saint for smiths) does
hammer his irons, is he not in stead of god Vulcan? And do they not give the
same titles to S. George, which in old time were given to Mars? And do they not
honor S. Nicholas after the same manner that Pagans honored god Neptune? And
when S. Peter is made a porter, does he not represent god Ianus? Nay, they
would feign make the Angel Gabriel believe, that he is god Mercury. And is not
Pallas the goddess of arts and sciences represented unto us by S. Katherine?
And have they not S. Hubert the god of hunters, in stead of Diana? (which
office some give to S. Eustace.) And when they apparel John Baptist in a Lions
skin, is it not to represent Hercules unto us? And is not Saint Katherine
commonly painted with a wheel, as they were wont to paint Fortune? But there
is yet a further matter to be considered, viz. that if we observe the fables
which are written of the gods, we shall find that certain of their
cousingermaines are recorded in the Legends of the Saints: except we will say,
that it is but a fable being written of the Gods, and a true story being
written of the Saints. For example, that the story of the Dragon which was
slain by S. George is not fabulous, as that of Medusa who was slain by
Perseus. But this they cannot deny, that Boniface the fourth, of the Pantheon
at Rome, that is, the Temple of all the gods, made Panhagion or All Saints,
that is to say, a church for all the Saints: and he further ordained, that the
virgin Mary the mother of Christ, should have the place and office of Cybele
the mother of all the gods. To proceed yet further, albeit I have exempted
sacrifices from the resemblance that is between the adoration of Saints, and
that of the heathen gods: yet a man might find some like sacrifices, if he
would take but a little pains to compare them together. Howsoever it be, I
remember one very fit for this purpose, of a cock which is offered (at least
was wont to be offered) to S. Christopher in Touraine, for a certain The
white-flaw.
sore, which uses to be in the end of men's fingers. Wherein they observe
another ceremony (to increase the superstition of the people) viz. that he must
of necessity be a white cock: for otherwise in stead of making S. Christopher
propitious and favorable unto them by this means, they should offend him. And
as for the sacrifice of the Mass, sundry writers have plainly proved that it
had his beginning from the heathen: as the greatest part of ceremonies patched
to those that were in use in the Primitive Church, have been borrowed from
them: yet so borrowed, as they would never return them again. And it cannot be
denied but that the heathen Poets were the first inuenters, and the great
maintainers of Purgatory.

7 But to leave this correspondence, which is betwixt the Saints and the Pagan
gods (in such sort as has been said,) we will now prosecute the functions and
offices as well of he as of she Saints, to the end it may appear, that the
heathen have dealt more consideratly herein then the Popes creatures. For
though they had a multitude of gods, as great, mean, and little gods (as there
are of Saints) yet they made conscience so to divide offices and functions
amongst them, that their sovereign god Jupiter should have nothing to do,
except he would go shoe the gosling; as though he had been a Nicholas Nemo, and
had stood only for a cipher. Whereas the Popes creatures without any respect
of this at all, have so employed and busied their Saints with the managing of
all their affairs (both great and small) that they have passed God over,
leaving him nothing to do, but only to rain, snow, hail and thunder. And now
at last they will needs have Saint Genneuiefue (her especially at Paris) to
bestirre her stumps in hastening him to cause rain, when there is a great
drought* as also to leave rayning when it pours down too fast, and continues
over long. And as for the thunder and the thunderbolts, Saint Barbe (whom they
have made their Saint for harquebuziers) has by the same means obtained this
office to beat back the blows of the thunderbolt. True it is, all do not
agree who that God should be which thundreth* and hurleth his bolts abroad,
causing storm and tempest: for some have thought that al proceeded from the
devil: and thereupon have used coniurations against tempests (opposing
themselves to the devil herein) as though he were the cause of the^ indeed.
According to which persuasion, a certain Priest of Sauoy having brought the
consecrated host to lay a tempest, and perceiving that he prevailed nothing,
threatened to cast it into the dirt, if it were not stronger then the devil:
taking it for a confessed truth that the devil was the cause thereof. Howbeit
the common saying whereby we express a hideous noise, viz. There was such a
noise that a man could not hear God thundering from heaven, does confute this
opinion. There is yet another particular wherein the heathen seem to deal
more honestly then the Popes creatures, viz. in that they have not so lightly
esteemed any of their gods as they have done many of their Saints, in making
one to keep geese, another sheep, another oxen, and another swine. Which
Saints a French gentlewoman remembering in her sickness, could not but tell her
Confessor, that she feared lest when she came to heaven some filthy beast
should be committed to her charge and custody, wherein she took no pleasure:
but should be right glad, if she might have some pretty puppies in keeping, to
whom she had been already accustomed. But we must not be so nice as this
gentlewoman was, who (so far as a man may conjecture) presumed too much of
her merits: otherwise she would have thought her self well, to have been in
heaven upon the same condition the foresaid Saints were, whose names I will set
down in their proper place. For my purpose is to observe some method in
numbering them up, at leastwise so far as possibly I can, in a matter so
confused and out of order. And verily I cannot devise a better order, then to
divide them by companies according as I have observed in my book entitled The
conformity of the French tongue with the Greek, (where I have touched this
point in a word or two). This then is my conceit of the matter. To some Saints
they have assigned certain offices according to the signification of their
names; for example, touching Saints which are Physicians, it was thought meet
that such or such a Saint should cure this or that disease, which sounded
likest, or came nearest unto his name. And hereupon they have made Saint
Maturin Physician for fools, having relation to the Italian word Matto, coming
from the Greek word (...), of which some Frenchmen have coined the word Mat.
In like sort when it is said that Saint Acaire cures the acariastres, that is,
frantic or furious bedlams; I make no question but that they respected the
original and deriuation of his name. The like may be said of Saint Auertin who
cures the auertineux, that is, fantastical lunatic persons, cousingermans to
the frantic: at least, it is holden that Saint Auertin cures all the
diseases of the head, the greatest of which is the Lunasie, as we know. So when
Saint Eutrope is made Physician of such as are troubled with the dropsy, they
have (I take it) confounded Eutrope with Hydrope. And I persuade my self, that
for the same reason Saint Mammard is made a Physician des mammelles, that is,
of the paps. Saint Phiacre of the Phy or emeroids, of those especially which
grow in the fundament. And as for Saint Main who heals the scab des mains,
that is, of the hands, the words do not only sound alike, but are the very
same. And whereas S. Genou is said to cure the gout, it is because this disease
is for the most part au genou, that is, in the knee. And as for S. Agnan (or
Aigna^) it is very probable that they which pronounced it S. Tignan, made this
poor Saint physician of that filthy disease called Latigne, the scurfe. And
there was the same reason (in my judgment) in assigning trades and occupations
to some of the Saints: for example, when they made S. Crepin a shoemaker and
patron of shoomakers and sowters, they had (no doubt) respect to the Latin word
crepida (borrowed from the Greek) which signifies a pantoufle: so that S.
Crepin is as much in good French as S. Pantouflier, that is to say, S.
Pantoufle-maker. As for S. Medard, whose occupation (if it may be called an
occupation) is to smi^ke and smile; it will not out of my conceit, but that it
comes of the Greek word (...), which signifies to laugh. As for their other
Saints, they had respect (I take it) to the miseries which they suffered
whilst they lived in the world: of which we have an example in S. Susanna,
professing her self to take pity upon those which suffer the same or the like
opprobry that she did, when she was here upon earth. And I dare be bold to say,
that Job upon the same ground was made a Physician: but yet (by their leaves)
they were too blame to make him a Physician of the French pox (as if the botch
which he had, had been the pox) which disease (we know) was not known in the
world till a few years before our time. As for sundry other men and women
Saints, I suppose they were directed by their Legends, when the question was of
assigning them any function or trade of life. Howeuer it be, I will here set
down a beade-role of others which I have not named as yet in this last
catalogue, not forgetting their functions or vocations. And first, as Crepin is
a shoemaker, so S. Roch (who also cures certain diseases) is a sowter or
cobbler: S. Wendelin is a shepherd: S. Pelaud (or according to others, S.
Pelage) a neat-heard. Saint Anthony a swineheard. S. Gertrude a rat-catcher.
S. Honor a baker. S. Eloy a smith. S. Hubert a huntsman or forrester. S. Luke
a painter. S. Nicholas a mariner. S. George a Knight at arms. S. Yue a lawyer.
S. Anne helps men to find what they have lost. S. Leonard sets prison
doors open for prisoners, and causes their fetters to fall from them.
Besides, there are certain Saints which bear office in the Court of heaven:
for one is Porter, another Yeoman of the Guard, another Groom of the chamber,
another Steward, another Secretary, another Chancellor, etc. But I will leave
the further prosecuting of this discourse to such as have more leisure then my
self. Touching Saints which are Physicians, it must be remembered that they do
not profess the cure of all diseases, as our Physicians do; but content
themselves with the cure of one only. S. Eutrope (as has been said) cures
the dropsy. S. John and S. Valentine the falling sickness (called also the
Epilepsie or S. John's evil.) S. Roch and S. Sebastian the plague (though
according to some Doctors S. Roch cures only the scab and scurfe.) S.
Petronelle (S. Peter's daughter) cures all sorts of fevers. S. Apollonia the
tooth ach. S. Maturine the frenzy. S. Roman casts devils out of men
possessed. S. Cosmas and S. Damia are not Physicians but Chirurgions, as
appears by that famous and excellent cure of theirs recorded in their Legend,
of which I have already spoken, viz. how they undertaking to cure one of their
friends thighs, to the end they might make quick dispatch, cut it off, and in
stead thereof put the thigh of a poor black Moore, who (as we may imagine)
died a little before (as it were) for the nonce, and very fitly for the purpose.

8 As for other other men and women saints, he and she physicians, they must
pardon me (if they please) though I do not here register their names: not
because I scorn them, or do it to spare paper, but for fear lest I should
purchase the displeasure of the College of Physicians: for if any of the Popes
creatures being sick, should leave them and go to the foresaid Saints, a
thousand to one but they would accuse me to have marred their market. Another
reason which moves me to desist from making this catalogue, is for that those
which have written of the several gifts, qualities and functions of the
Saints, do not agree among themselves. For some affirm S. Ferioll to be the
fittest in the world to keep geese: others, that this office belongs to S.
Andoch: others will needs bear us in hand that neither of them have any skill
therein, but that it wholly appertains to S. Gallicet, called by some sanctus
Gallus, albeit others say that it is not the same. In like manner, albeit I
said before, that it is Saint Wendalus occupation to keep sheep, yet I am not
ignorant that many hold it to belong to S. Wolf. But I can allege for my
self, Vnde versus, Wendlinus custodit oues, ouiumque magistros: (where it is to
be noted, that the Poet has curtailed this poor Saints name, because it was
too long for his verse.) And this is one of the authorities which I build upon,
in assigning this occupation to this Saint. But if it be lawful for me to use
conjectures in so weighty a matter, I doubt lest some reject S. Wendelin, for
that his name sauoureth too much of the high Dutch: others contrarily like him
better then S. Wolf, because it seems to them a matter presaging some ill
fortune to commit sheep to the keeping of one called Wolf, were he never so
good a Saint. And in very deed, if S. Wolf would take my counsel, I would
advise him to change his name. Moreover, there is some controversy amongst
them, who it should be that keeps lambs, (for when we speak of the office
of the Saints, these are two several and distinct things, to keep sheep and
to keep lambs) for some say it is S. John, others assign another guardian
for them. The truth is, it is scarce probable that S. John should keep lambs,
seeing that the Lions skin which he wears would make them afraid. Again,
S. Hubert (as some affirm) keeps dogs: others say no; affirming that he is
only a hunter or forrester, and no dog-keeper. Besides, many assign the
office which we gave to S. Roch, to S. Main, in healing the itch and scab.
Howbeit his Proctours affirm that this office was not given to S. Main, but
only by lusty rogues which kept high ways, suborned by him to counterfeit
this evil. And as for healing of the gout (which we have assigned to S. Genou)
many attribute it to S. Maure. And some affirm it to be S. Claire that heals
red eyes; others that it is S. Clayre the woman Saint: a third sort, that
neither of them are employed herein, but that S. Otilie (commonly called Otlie)
cures all the diseases of the eyes. Whereas notwithstanding the good woman
went to S. Claire for this end, and besought a Priest to say a Mass for her,
wherein he should call upon S. Claire for the cure of her eyes, S. Auertin of
her head, S. Anthony of her swine. Which puts me in mind of a woman of
Paris formerly mentioned (who is yet living, if she be not lately dead) who
requested a certain sir John to put for her into his Mass a half penny worth
or five farthing worth of the holy Ghost. But whether the testimony of this
good woman be of any weight or not, I report my self to those who are better
seen in the Legends of the glorious Saints: wherein I can say nothing but
this, that they which have bestowed this upon S. Clair (or S. Clayre) to cure
sore eyes, had an eye to the Etymology of their name (as they had to sundry
others, as we have already showed:) for a man can no way better cure the eyes
then by making them see clearly. Moreover, S. Quintin is one of those Saints
which cannot peaceably enjoy his place and office: for there be other saints
which challenge the curing of the cough, as proper unto them. There are others
also who think it much amiss that S. Apollonie (commonly called S. Apolline)
should cure the tooth-ake: affirming Saint Christopher to be the true and
natural Physician thereof. And surely for my part I subscribe thereunto, and
withal affirm, that it is much better beseeming S. Christopher, considering
his tooth (which is to be seen at Beauuois in Beauuoisin, in a little Abbey
which bears his name) which is of that sise, that Godfrey with the great
tooth could never come near it: for it is of that bigness, that the mouth
which should lodge but a brown dozen of them, must needs be greater then the
mouth of the greatest oven Enter Paris and Lion.
betwixt York and London. What infer you hereupon, may some say? Does it
therefore follow that he should be Physician for the teeth? Yes verily; because
that when he cannot get a tooth to set in the room of that which he pulls
out, he needs but to take a little piece of some of his own teeth. But I
should presume too far if I should take upon me to decide such controversies:
and I hope the gentle Reader knowing my profession, will not look for it at my
hands: especially considering that the authors of all these fine fables can no
more tell what they say then the man in the Moon. I will therefore content my
self with this, that I have searched into the marrow of the matter as well as
their greatest Doctors.

9 Touching S. Michael, S. James, S. Claudius, (who lending their names to
their pilgrims, have given them the names of Michaelians, Iacobins and
Claudians) they are not tied by their task to any certain work as the rest
are; and therefore I leave the discourse of them to some other. There are also
other Saints which seem to have been devised upon pleasure or malice, as S.
Lickdish, which sold his gown (as they say) for I know not what lickorish
meat.

10 If any man shall here ask me, whether these worshippers of Saints are
persuaded that they can cure certain diseases which ordinary Physicians cannot
do; I answer, that they are so persuaded indeed. And first touching
barrenness, (which does so plunge Physicians and puts them to their trumps)
there are many Saints which can easily cure it and make women become fruitful
by one only devout embracing. For first S. Guerlichou (in the Abbey of the
city Bourg de Dieu, near to Rommorantin, and in sundry places elsewhere)
braggeth that he can get as many women with child as come, be they never so
many; if whilst they are going with child, they fail not to stretch
themselves devoutly upon the holy Idol which lies all flat upon his back, and
stands not upright as the rest do: besides, that they drink every day a
certain potion mingled with the scrapings of the said image, and by name with
the scraping of that part which I cannot name with modesty. Now whether this
do get women with child or not, I leave to be decided by those that have forged
it or approve of such devilish devotion: which would have been holden a
wonderment to the world, if it had been recorded by any barbarous or heathen
people; what shall we say then to see it in use eue^ amongst those who profess
themselves Christians? Yet I am not very certain whether this Saint be in as
good credit at this present, as he was in times past: since they which have
seen him (to whom I am beholden for this report) affirm it to be about twelve
years ago, since he had that part almost worn away by continual scraping.
There is also in the country of Constantin in Normandy (commonly called
Contantin) a certain Saint called S. Giles, which was no less famous for such
matters (how old and decayed soever) according to the common saying,
(especially of those who vainly busy themselves about such trumperies, and
sell them unto others) there is no miracle comparable to that which is wrought
by an old Saint. I have also heard of a certain Saint called S. Rene in Anjou,
which busieth himself in this occupation. But how women behave themselves when
they are in his company (considering that he shows them that which civility
would have covered,) as I am ashamed to write it, so I am sure the Readers
would blush to read it. I could further discover many other secrets
appertaining to this mystery, which notwithstanding I will omit for the same
reason: and will content my self with that which is reported of our Lady of
gladness, viz. that those that cannot have children, do pull (at least were
accustomed to pull) the bell ropes that are in her church with their teeth.

11 And was there ever yet any Physician that could cure the sickness of
jealousy? No verily: yet it is said that there is a Saint at Tou, that is a
notable workman to cure it, though no Physician could ever turn his hand to
it. We have also S. Auertin, S. Acayre, S. Maturin (I mean S. Maturin of
Archant, whom others call S. Mathelin, whence comes the old proverb used in
way of a byword, Test mathelineuse, a head full of crochets) who cure the
foresaid diseases which Physicians (we know) were never able to do, for all
their Helleborum. These few examples may suffice to show what excellent
Physicians these Popish saints are.

12 There is yet another remarkable difference between the saints which are
said to profess physic in heaven, and other Physicians here upon earth, viz.
that each of these saints can inflict the same disease which they can cure, as
may hence appear: for when we say S. Hands evil, S. John's evil, we signify
as well the disease which they send, as the disease which they heal. True it
is indeed, that some saints are more choleric and dangerous to deal with then
others: of which number S. Anthony is the chief; for he burns up all before
him for the least displeasure done to him or to his minions. For if any injury
be offered either men or swine (for he is Lord Protector of them both) they
make their prayer to S. Anthony, that he would be avenged of them, and then the
devil is among them. As for swine, they speak never a word, yet the whoresons
think never a whit the less: for this Saint will not suffer them to remain
such brute beasts as they are by nature. So that that may be said of this and
other Saints (which are more choleric and dangerous to deal with) which the
Latin Poet affirmed generally of all the gods, Primus in orb Deos fecit timor.
For as that good woman, after she had given a candle to S. Michael, gave
another to the devil which was with him: to S. Michael, to the end he might do
her some good; to the devil, that he might do her no hurt: so it is not to be
doubted, but that S. Anthony and other like Saints have been worshipped as much
or rather more for fear of some mischief they might do unto them, then for
hope of any good they expected from them. And this is the reason of that great
contention and conflict which was betwixt those of the city of Arles and the
Anthonians of Viennois about this question, both of them affirming that they
had the body of S. Anthony in their custody, and each of them showing one of
them, which they affirmed to be his. In fine, S. Anthony was left with two
entire bodies, for default of one; and with many other parts and members in
sundry places, with half a dozen of knees at the least; one of which was at
Bourg, another at Mascon, another at Dijon, another at Chalons, another at
Ouroux, another at the Augustins of Albi. See now what S. Anthony has gotten
by being so lusty, at leastwise by causing this report to be blazed abroad,
that he was such a sharp shauer. This also ought to teach us to demean our
selves wisely toward those who are in danger to be canonized for Saints after
their death, seeing that is not true which the proverb says, Mortui non
mordent.
Les trespasses ne mordent plus, Dead men cannot bite, if we speak of
canonized Saints; or if it be true, this Popish Philosophy is erroneous and
false.

13 But let us see whether there be not in this very point a conformity
betwixt the heathen Gods and the Saints, that (all things being duly
considered) we may perceive which of them have been more honored of their
worshippers. First then, there is no question but that the heathen were
persuaded that their gods could as well hurt as help, kill as cure, (as the
Papists have deemed of their saints.) But whereas the Popes creatures are of
opinion that every saint does but cure one only disease, and that he cannot
inflict any other in way of punishment or revenge, save that only: the heathen
were persuaded that their gods had equal power over all diseases, either to
inflict them or to remove them, in hurting or healing, making sick or making
sound. By which we may plainly perceive, that the Papists come short of the
heathen, in that they give not so much honor to their saints as they did to
their gods: which we are to understand of women saints as well as of men
saints, and of goddesses as well as of gods. But the Popes creatures not
content to give but this half worship to their saints (as well in this, as in
that they bear men in hand, that they can skill but of one trade) are come to
this pass, to do them the greatest dishonor in the world, in assigning unto
^^em so vile and abject, yea so filthy and sordide occupations, that it would
make a man sick at the heart to name them: as when they make some shoomakers,
others cobblers, others swine-heards, etc. For though the Pagans ranged Pan in
the rank of the inferior gods, and of the meanest sort of those which were
companions of the gods, yet they would have been ashamed to have made him a
swine-heard. And as for saints which are handicrafts men, to make armor (as
Vulcan did) is a cleanlier occupation then to make shoes. True it is, that the
Popish Preachers (at leastwise those that had any wit) have so cunningly
contrived their knavery, and carried the matter so in a mystery, that the simple
people have not desisted to give them as good and as great offerings, as if
they had been of a higher rank: for they made this an argument of their
greater praise and commendation. Witness the preacher who discoursing of the
life of S. Crepin, affirmed that this glorious saint might have been Pope, that
he might have been King (yea king of France) that he might have been Emperor,
but that he chose rather to be a shoemaker. And yet my masters and dames (said
he) consider (I beseech you) what a roguish trade it is, and how filthy and
sordide an occupation: If there were nothing else but this, that they must ever
be handling the shoomakers wax, and tugging at these stinking skins with their
bare teeth. By which you may perceive how great the humility of this glorious
saint was. Howbeit he was no sooner come out of the pulpit, but the company of
the most noble shoomakers and cobblers of the place laid hold of him, and
curried him so well, that they caused him to make a pitiful construction of
his sermon from beginning to end. But leaving others to judge of this fact, (I
mean whether the striker or he that was struck had the wrong) I think this
Preacher had reason to say thus much of S. Crepin to save his credit. But one
thing he affirmed which is almost incredible, and which (I persuade my self)
is proper to this saint, viz. that he made choice of this occupation whilst he
was here upon earth, which he meant to follow when he came into heaven.

14 But some may happily reply against that which I have said, concerning the
Popes creatures, that they give less honor to their Saints then the heathen do
to their gods, when they affirm that every saint has not power over more then
one only disease, and knows but one only trade. And they may object that
they make their Saints patrons and protectors of cities and countries, as the
heathen made their gods. And that as the Babilonians (for example) had Bell for
their Patron, the Egyptians Isis and Osiris, the Rhodians the Sun, the
Samians Juno, the Paphians Venus, the Delphians Apollo, the Athenians Minerua,
the Ephesians Diana: So the Spaniards have Saint James for their Patron; the
French Saint Denis; they of Limosin Saint Martial above the rest: all the
Germans in general Saint George; they of Ausburgh Saint Vlrich; they of Colen
the three Kings: they of Milan Saint Ambrose: the Venetians Saint Mark: the
Romanists of these times Saint Peter and Saint Paul together with their
Lieutenant. I omit the Saints who have given their names to cities, as Saint
Quintin, Saint Di^ier, Saint Denis, Saint Agnan, Saint Paul, Saint Omer, which
may be called in Latin (as the rest above mentioned) Tutelares sancti, as they
were wont to call them Tutelares Dij: But what inference can hereupon be
enforced? Surely this, that the Popes creatures (putting their Saints in the
room and place of the heathen gods) have given sufficient testimony that they
had as reverent an opinion of their sufficiency, as the heathen had of the
sufficiency of their gods, in commanding all sorts of maladies, either by
sending them, or removing them, and in knowing all manner of occupations. (For
albeit the heathen do not affirm that their gods do exercise trades: yet this
they hold as a most certain truth, that they know them, and are well seen in
them.) But this is no good consequent; for many men take works in hand which
they afterward put over to others, because they cannot effect or finish the^
themselves, as those who are called in latin redemptores; who though they take
in hand to build an house, and to finish it, yet does it not by and by follow,
they should be Carpenters or hewers of stones, or Masons, or Tylers: but
agreeing with sundry sorts of workmen in that which appertains to every man's
trade, and trusting to their workmanship, took upon them the charge of the
whole. And I make no question but that these great tutelary Saints, (protectors
and patrons of cities) did the like in trafficking with other petty Saints of
less account, touching the work which was proper to their trade, or office
which was belonging unto them: and so having the furtherance of many, took
upon them the government of the whole.

15 But now (whereas I thought I had been come to the end of this discourse,) I
find that there is yet more work behind: for I am aware of a legion of our
Ladies, from whence the greatest part of the Clergies revenue does arise. And
verily the thing which made me forget them (for I will confess the truth) was,
in that speaking of men and women Saints, I was afraid I should have committed
an absurdity, if I should have ranged them in that rank, and afterward the
variety of matter made me forget them. And if any man shall happily think it a
greater absurdity to place them at the tail of the Saints, I have what to
answer for my self: for I can allege that which one help himself withal
in the like case, that he which goes last in procession, has the first and
most honorable place. Nevertheless, if the Popes creatures will not take this
reason for good payment, but will needs move my patience, they shall find
(peradventure) that they have to deal with another manner of man then they
take me for. For I will never let them rest, till they have answered me
categorically, whether so many of our Ladies be so many virgin Mary's, mothers
of our Savior Christ? If they shall answer, that they are, they will run
into gross absurdities. If they shall answer, that they are not, they will
fall into greater. But because I am so persuaded of their courtesies, that they
will easily pardon and excuse this incongruity in my last speech (if it were
so,) I will not vex them with such a violent question, being such a one as
might easily make them lose that little wit and understanding they have, in
answering thereof. Only let me desire them to tell me, whether all our Ladies*
which I am about to name, make one only Lady or not?

16 It is therefore to be noted that some of our Ladies are named of the place
where they reside, and have their abode. Others of the trade or occupation
wherein they are employed. Concerning the first, some of them bear the name of
some city or town, others show by their names what manner of place it is
where they remain. Examples of those which have the name of the city or town
where they reside, are these, our Lady of Loretto, our Lady of Bononia, our
Lady of Wels in Au^ergne, our Lady of Aix, our Lady of Nan^ueill, our Lady of
Francueil. Examples of the second kind, to wit of those whose names express
the nature of the place where they make their aboade, are, our Lady of the
Valley, our Lady of the Mountain, (the name of the mountain being specified
in sundry of them, as our Lady of Mont-ferra, our Lady of Mont-gautier, our
Lady of Mont-Roland: And in La^guedoc, our Lady of Cabimont, (being in the
Cape, that is, in the top of the mountain.) Our Lady of the Woods, our Lady of
the Fields, our Lady of the fair Oak, (because she stood by the way side over
against an oak,) our Lady of the fair Walnut-tree for the like reason, our
Lady of the Well, because she stood hard by a well: our Lady of the Fountain
for the same reason. And at Chartres, for that there are (at least were) two of
our Ladies, whereof the one is within, the other under the Church; that within
being called our Lady above; the other our Lady below, or our Lady under the
earth, or our Lady of Crotes, that is, of the hollow valt; not because she is
crottee dabled and dirty (as the word signifies) but because she is in a
concauitie under the earth made in manner of a cave; for the word Crote (taken
in this sense) comes from the greek crypta, whereupon some are wont to say
croton es prisons, as if a man should say, the deep dungeon in the prison.
Further, they call another our Lady of Carmel, meaning her that is in the
Church of the Carmelites, another our Lady of Snow; for that in the hottest
time of Summer the place was miraculously filled with snow as they say. I come
now to our Ladies who have their names of the trades which they follow, and
actions which they perform. For example our Lady of Recovery, our Lady of
Comfort, our Lady of Gladness, our Lady of All joys, our Lady of Pity, our
Lady of Virtues, our Lady of Good tidings, our Lady of Good wishes, our Lady of
Help, and an infinite number of others.

17 But this is not all. For we must know, that there is great difference
betwixt our Ladies in other things as well as in their names. For one is old
and very foul; another young and very fair, another of a middle age, and
reasonable good countenance, (which yet is tolerable.) One is very big, another
very little, (which also is not much material.) One has a merry look,
another a sad countenance (and herein also there is no great hurt.) Wherein
consists it then? Verily in that they usually compose their countenances, and
attire themselves like harlots, as they were wont to set out Mary Magdalen
(whom they have not been ashamed to paint naked in some places) and as they
have painted S. Mary the Egyptian. Which puts me in mind of that which I have
read in John Menard of our Lady of all beauties at Tours, so called, for that
they used the same devise in painting of her with an ancient limmer used in
painting the goddess Venus. For they beheld all the fair maids and beautiful
young women of Tours, taking from one a high forehead, from another pretty round
eyes, well proportioned, comely and amiable, from another a proportionable nose,
from another a pretty fine laughing mouth, and a dimpled chinne, etc. Now,
whether this object of so fair a Lady stir up devotion the better or not, I
leave to be determined by such as are more competent judges. Howbeit this I can
say, that I have books in parchment containing their Ma^ins, Euensong* and
Complies, and other parts of such silly service, which have the pictures of
fine young dames painted in them, being of such wanton and lascivious
countenances and behauiours, that we may well apply unto them the saying of
Propertius, Docta vel Hippolitum Veneri mollire negantem. But what Ladies
pictures these were, whether the pictures of those whom the owners of these
books had at command, or of those whom they desired they might have, I cannot
define. Howsoever, certes they were some such to whom they bare so entire
affection, as that they could not forbear the sight of them* no not whilst
they were at their prayers, for fear they should forget them.

18 But to return to the former question, to wit, whether all our Ladies which
I named even now, be one and the same Lady or not. If they shall say, that
they are one and the same: I would demand of them, why she does so disguise
her self into so many fashions? If they shall answer, that they be diverse: I
would desire them to show me which of them is the virgin Mary Christ's mother.
But this were to fall again into the former question, wherewith I promised not
to trouble them any more. It were better then (for the present) we should
content our selves with the opinion of the good woman of Mont-richard, who said
that our Lady of Nantueil and our Lady of Francueil were sisters: and that we
take advice upon good and mature deliberation, if we can obtain so much that
all of them may be either sisters or at leastwise of kin.

19 But beside the sundry attires of our Ladies, there is such strange variety
in the habits of the Saints, that he that should go about to describe them, had
need have on his considering cap* to know where to begin. For one is stark
naked, another half naked, another well apparelled. One wears a great hat,
another a little one; a third sort, I know not what to call it, resembling the
Turkish Or, Tolibant.
turbante. Some are muffled, others are hooded, others cowled, others
bigguined. One is armed at all points, another has only sword and buckler;
another but sword and dagger. One is on foot, another on horseback. Neither
is this all; for one laugheth, another weepeth: one looks as though he had
won all; another as if he had lost every cross. To be short, the difference
between them is incredible, yea even infinite, not only in these, but in
sundry other particulars. And therefore it is the more to be wondered (with
which I will conclude) how they being so disagreeing, so cross and contrary
one to another, should notwithstanding make so good harmony in the kitchins of
our holy mother the Church; which all of them labor to uphold with one accord
(employing all their happy and glorious miracle-mungering to keep them hot)
and so maintain them, that our holy mother does not envy the kitchins of Kings
and Emperors. True it is, that she does also keep them pretty and warm with
the revenues of the Saints, (as has been said) which though it be exceeding
great (as may appear by the account that has been cast only in gross,) yet
if we consider how much the gain which she gets by the souls of the saints
departed, does surpass that which she has by their bodies; it will appear
that the revenue which arises from the foresaid corpse, compared with that
which accreweth by the souls, will not buy sugar to the wine.

20 And now I come to the other point which I promised to handle in this
Chapter, viz. how intolerable the covetousness of the Clergy was. But what?
(may some say) May we not discover this impudent covetous dealing by sundry
places of this book, as namely by that which has been already spoken in this
Chapter? It is true (I confess.) But now my purpose is to detect monstrous
impudency, or (if I may so speak) the very quintessence of impudency, yea of
impudency accompanied with most abominable impiety. And the example which I
will produce for this purpose, is so authentical, that they cannot possibly
deny it, except they will deny their own handwriting. For see here their own
words which they have engraued in Gothian letters, in a table of stone, which
is (at least was wont to be not long since) fastened to a pillar of S. Steuens
Church at Bourges, near to the Altar where the high Mass was sung. Hic des
deuote: coelestibus associo te.
Mentes aegrota, per munera sunt ibi lotae.
Ergo venitote gentes, a sorde remotae.
Qui datis, estote certi de diuite dote.
Te precor, accelera, spergas hic dum potes, era:
Et sic reuera, secure, caelica spera.
O si tu scires quantum data prosit ibi res,
Tu iuxta vires donares quod dare quires.
Te miser a poena, dum tempus habes, aliena.
Huc dare te poena veniae, sit aperta crumena.
Consors coelestis fabricae qui porrigit est is.
Ex hoc sum t^stis, hic vos mundare potestis.
Fratres haurite de trunco pocula vitae:
Hic aliquid sinite, very velut Israelitae.
Creed mihi, creed, coeli dominaberis aede.
Nam pro mercede, Christo dices, mihi cede.
H^c datur exponi Paradisus venditioni.
Current ergo boni, rapientes culmina thr^ni.
Vis retinere forum? mihi tradas pauca bonorum,
Pro summa quorum reserabitur aula polorum.
Hic si large des, in coelo sit tua seeds:
Qui serit hic parce, parce comprendet in arce.
Cur tardas tantum? nummi mihi des aliquantum.
Pro solo nummo gaudebis in aethere summo.
Denos sum quater, vnum semel, haec sacra matter
Annos condonat, sanctus Pater ista coronat.
Tot quadragenas dat and abluit hic tibi poenas
Mil missis decies socius, si des ibi, fies.
The subject or matter of these verses (which I speak for their sakes who
understand not Latin; not having translated them, because their grace
consists in the rhyme) is nothing but this, that he which gives to the box,
goes straight to heaven: (and the more he gives, the higher shall his place
be) and he that gives nothing, shall never come there. For Hic datur exponi
Paradisus venditioni: which is thus much in good English, Here Paradise is set
to open sale. But that the Reader who understands not Latin, may judge
whether I had reason to censure these verses as I did, I will expound unto him
these two, Creed mihi, creed, coeli dominaberis ^de:
Nam pro mercede, Christo dices, mihi cede.
That is, For meede believe me, thou shall gain a crown,
Yea rule in heaven, and say to Christ, Come down.
Now if any man desire to have the sense of them word for word, see here what a
fine lesson they teach us: Assure thy self thou shall be Lord great master of
heaven; for in lieu of the money which thou have given, thou shall say to
Christ, Stand back, give place.

CHAP. XXXIX. How our Ancestors were nuzzeled in ignorance of Christian
religion: and how the Popish Clergy always maintained themselves,
notwithstanding their wicked lives were notoriously known to the world, and
that many of their iugling tricks and false miracles had been discovered.
PVrposing to show in this chapter, how some even from the days of our
forefathers, began to open their eyes and to espy the packing and conueyance of
Churchmen; I thought it requisite in the first place, to consider how great
the darkness and ignorance, as also the abuses of those times were. I am
therefore to entreat the Reader to call to mind sundry examples to this
purpose dispersed here and there in diverse places of this book; besides which,
(if need were) infinite more might be added: howbeit, three or four shall
suffice. First then, is it not a strange fopperie to think, that those men or
women which their Church Calender has marked with red letters, are men and
women Saints, that is, gods and goddesses? or at leastwise petty gods, and (as
I may say) subordinate gods? For if they had not judged them such,
questionless, they would never have ascribed unto them divine power, which God
reserues as proper to himself alone. So that here we may see not only their
simplicity single and alone by it self, but accompanied with horrible
impiety. But this is yet far more hideous and horrible, in that they dare
affirm, that if the holy Ghost were bit by a mad dog, it is necessary he
should go to Saint Hubert if he would be healed; which was auerred by a peddler
of the relics of the foresaid Hubert. And considering the great account and
reverent opinion which they had of the Pope as well as of the Saints, was it
not mere madness to think that as soon as a man became Pope, he became also
god? That he had the keys of heaven and of hell, to let those into heaven that
would give some thing to him or his: and to send them packing to hell that
would give nothing? That it was a less sin to kill a man then to eat flesh
upon a friday, or to violate any such commandment enjoined by this earthly
god? But if we consider the sacrifice of the Mass and the abuses therein
committed, what else can be said, but that many have been and are at this day
strangely bewitched, in believing that there are certain souls in Purgatory
which cannot be delivered thence, but by the means of many Masses? That a sir
John having pronounced certain Sacramental words over all the bread in the
market, makes so many loaves to become ^o many gods? That men eat their maker,
and afterward cause him to pass through that place that cannot be named with
modesty? And (which is a point worthy observation) can it never sufficiently
be wondered at, that the things which should be means to root superstition out
of their minds, should plant and root it in them more and more? For they should
have had their breaden god in jealousy, and then at least have suspected him,
when they saw his blood and flesh poison men: his blood poisoning William
Archbishop of York, in the time of Pope Anastasius the fourth; and his flesh
poisoning the Emperor Henry the seventh, by means of one Bernard of
Montpolitian a Iacobin Friar, being one of the faction of the Guelphes. Neither
ought they only to suspect it, but altogether to reject it, with adieu in the
devils name, seeing it suffers it self to be devoured of beasts. For, it is
well known that the magnificent Maygret (now deceased) had a little shag haired
spaniell which ate fourscore of them to his breakfast, and all without drink.
But how should it be revenged of dogs, when it cannot save it self from mice?
For these pretty beasts have not only been so bold as to go into his pixe to
nibble at him there, but have also presumed to run away with him, lying upon
the Altar, whilst the Priest was asleep in his memento: which accident
happened (as we know) at a town called Saint Marie, and at Paris in Saint
Marries Church. Verily, such accidents as these should have taught them a little
more wit, and to have thought with themselves how far they came short of
their reckoning, in attributing Gods divine attributes to such a piece of past
which suffers it self to be devoured of a mouse. Whereas they contrarily, as
often as any such thing happened, added one foolerie to another. For example,
at Lodeue in Gascoine, whereas the mouse which had eaten up this breaden god,
should have made them open their eyes to see the cosening tricks wherewith they
had been abused: they notwithstanding were so far from surceasing to give to
other pieces of past (his fellows) as great honor as before, that they
canonized the mouse, calling her the holy mouse. The like brutishness was
known to have been practiced during the last garboiles in France. For a
certain gentleman Masse-marrer (whom I could name if it were needful) having
heard the sound of the sacring bell in the streets (as he was on his way) asked
what it meant: and having learned that it gave warning, that they were ready
to the Elevation, as a man would say, to lift or raise up god; said to his men,
Let us make have that we may come before he get up, and serve him as grooms of
his chamber; for my part I will bring him his clean shirt. Who being come
thither, took this fine god and offered him to his horse before them all, who
beheld this fact with exceeding great astonishment: but when they saw the horse
thrust out his nose as soon as the br^aden god came near him, they said, it
was an argument that he had bin accustomed to receive his maker. And this puts
me in mind of the holy penknife, that is, the pe^knife wherewith a consecrated
host was pricked at Paris by a Jew, which was afterward reckoned in the number
of holy relics, in one of the Churches of the said city, (at S. John's in
Grieve as I remember:) as if by such an action it had been hallowed. See here
(gentle Reader) how these fellows in stead of scorning these gods which
suffered themselves to be murdered, and eaten up of vermin, have not ceased to
worship them as much as ever before: nay to adore the deuourers and murderers
of them: for I call the penknife wherewith this stab was given, a murderer.

2 And we shall the less wonder how men could ever be so brutish, as to lend
their ears to such doctrine, if we consider in what account they held the
authors thereof. For though Angels descending in some visible shape from
heaven, should have come and preached unto them, they could not have
entertained them with greater reverence, then they did a rabblement of wicked
and abominable lolling-lobbies, which fed the^ not only with plain lies, but
with lies full of impiety, and worse without comparison then Talmudicall or
Mahometicall fables. But to descend from the general to particulars, that is,
from sundry sorts and sects of hypocritical shauelings, to come to one; will
not this be a wonderment to posterity, that men should attribute so much to
Franciscans* yea to their very attire, as to cause children to wear it for a
time, that by this means they may come to man's estate? That some should wear
it a little before their death, feeling themselves deadly sick? That others
(who had no leisure to wear it before, should take order by their wills, to be
interred in it? And who (I beseech you) were they that used this kind of
Metamorphosis? Verily great Lords, as much or rather more then the common
people: yea even kings and Emperors themselves. Indeed the Earl of Carpi
(being one of the last that turned Friar in this sort) is left alone as a
byword and laughing stock to all posterity. But the greater part not content
with their habit, betook themselves to their covent, bequeathing unto them
their goods, and so defrauding their children or kinsfolk, who in equity and
conscience should have been their heirs. And as for those that would needs
become Franciscans, will not posterity wonder to hear, that since this fancy
took them in the head to become of this order of religious men, they were so
far from taking advise and counsel of their parents, that if it had been
necessary in entering into that order, to tread father and mother under their
feet, they thought they were bound to do it? And to the end they might the more
enrich themselves by this means, they were so impudent and shameless (in
abusing the simplicity of the poor people) that they made no bones to tell
them, yea to make them believe that there was no other means in the world
whereby the devil could be saved, but by persuading him to take the habit of
Saint Francis. Indeed I do not remember that I have read this in the book of
Conformities: but sure I am that I have read in it far more impudent lies, in
praise and commendation of their order.

3 Now albeit the mishaps which daily befell ( Iean blanke their breaden God)
should have opened the eyes of these miserable idolaters, yet they shut them so
much the more. The like may be said of their blindness and brutishness,
simplicity and sottishness, in not espying the knavery of the false Friars.
For that which should have discovered unto them the villainy and filthiness of
these miscreants, did the more confirm them in the preiudicate opinion which
they had of their holiness. I will record for example that which happened in
our own time at the death of that famous Franciscan De Cornibus: It is well
known that this knave died of the Neapolitan disease (otherwise termed the
French pox) the buttons or pimples whereof breaking forth and making him look
fiery red, the people which saw him as he was carried to the grave (for they
carried him in his habit or cowle with his face uncovered) were persuaded that
this redness came from hence, in that he was become a Seraphin. Sure I am that
the death of a gentlewoman, who died of the stink of the feet of this
venerable pockie villain, which she had kissed after his death (being
unacquainted with such strong savors) was so interpreted, that it did in like
sort confirm men in the opinion which they had of his holiness. And those
(doubtless) who made no more of the redness of his French pox but the
redness of a Seraphin, (such was their simplicity) if they had taken him in
the fact by which he got them, would have persuaded themselves that they had
seen some other thing then in truth they saw, or (as the Latin Poet speaks)
would have made their eyes believe they had seen something which they saw not.
Much like that good fellow, who perceiving two other feet by his masters
feet (who to the end he might strictly observe the Bishops rules, had his
pretty wench lying by his side) went so simply to work, that he cried out at
the window, Come sirs, and you shall see my master who has four feet. See
here how all Christendom in stead of proceeding and going forward in the
knowledge of these abuses, went backward through the just judgment of God.

4 Nevertheless this great blindness was never so universal, but that there
were some in all ages that did discover part of their trumperies, and perceive
the wicked course of life which these Churchmen led. S. Bernard also (as has
been said) inueyed stoutly against it. And (as I remember) a certain passage
taken out of a book written by Gulielmus de sancto amore, has been alleged
for this purpose. And at the same time (namely about the year 1260.) one
Nicholas Gallique borne in Narbonne, general of the order of the Carmelites,
being no longer able to endure the wicked life of his fellow Friars, did not
only forsake them and utterly renounce their order, but also writ a book
against them, called the fiery dart; wherein he tells them (to omit other
particulars) that they were reprobates, citizens of Sodom, contemners of the
holy Testament, seducers of those that then lived, and of those which should
come after, the tail of the Dragon mentioned in the Revelation. As for the
books of the foresaid Gulielmus de sancto Amore, Pope Alexander the fourth did
what he could to abolish them, and that by express edicts and commandments:
who also (as Platina records) burned a book which the begging Friars had
published, wherein they taught that the state of grace did not proceed from the
law of the Gospel (as they speak) but from the law of the spirit: which he
burned, not for any great conscience he had to see the simple world so abused,
but for fear lest this so absurd and impudent a lie should be a means to
discover their other villainies. This book was called the eternal Gospel, or
the Gospel of the spirit; gathered out of the doctrine of Ioachim the Abbot,
and the visions of a Carmelite Friar called Cyril, by the Iacobins and
Franciscans, who labored by the authority thereof to make their parts good
against the Waldenses (otherwise called the poor men of Lions) and other their
adversaries which armed themselves against them with the sword of the spirit,
the word of God. Of this book the foresaid Gulielmus de sancto Amore writes
as follows. This accursed Gospel is already published in the Church, and
therefore the destruction of the Church is to be feared. If this Gospel be
compared with the Gospel of Christ (say they) it is so much more perfect and
excellent then it, by how much the Sun is brighter then the Moon, and the
kernel better then the shell, etc. Moreover, he mentions other like
detestable sayings there recorded. And of these two co^parisons honorable
mention is made in the Ro^mant of the Rose, where the author speaks in
detestation of this book, and censureth the hypocrisy of the begging Friars
who published it. Vous ne cognoistrez point aux robbes
Les faux traistres tous pleins de lobbes:
Parquoi leurs faits faut regarder,
Si d'eux bien vous voulez garder.
That is, For thou shall never for nothing
Con known aright by her clothing
The traitors full of treachery,
But thou her works can epsy.
And a little after, Fut or baille (c'est chose voire)
Pour bailler commun exemplaire,
Un liver de par le grand diable,
Dit, L'Euangile perdurable,
Don't le saint Esprit fut ministre:
Si comme il apparut au titre,
Ainsi est-i^ intitule.
Bien est digne d'estre brule.
A Paris n'eust homme ne femme
Au paruis deuant nostre-Dame
Qu^ lors bien auoir ne le peust,
Pour le doubler, si bien luy pleust.
La trouuast par grans mesprisons
Maintes tells comparaisons.
Autant que par sa grand chaleur,
Soit de clarte, soit de valeur,
Surmonte le Soleil la Lune,
Qui trop est plus trouble, and plus brune:
Et le noyau des noix, la coque:
(Ne cuidez pas que ie vous moque:
Cela di sans bourde ne quille)
Tant surmonte cest Euangile
Ceux que les quatr* Evangelists
Du Fills Dieu firent a leurs titres.
De tells comparaisons grand mass
La trouuoit on, que ie trespass.
That is, They broughten a book with sorry grace,
To yeuen example in common place,
That said thus, (though it were fable)
This is the Gospel perdurable,
That fro the holy Ghost is sent:
Well were it worth to ben brent.
Entitled was in such manner
This book which I tell here,
There was no wight in all Paris
Beforne our Lady at paruis,
That they ne might the book buy,
The sentence pleased hem well truly,
There might he see by great treasoun,
Full many a false comparisoun.
As much as through his great might,
Be it of heat or of light
The Sun surmounteth the Moon
That troubler is, and changes soon:
And the nut kirnell the shell
(I scorn not that I you tell:)
Right so withouten any guile,
Surmounteth this noble Euangile
The word of any Evangelist,
And to her title they token Christ.
And many such comparisoun,
Of which I make no mentioun,
Might men in that book find,
Who so coud of hem have mind.
The same Poet makes further mention of the books which Gulielmus de sancto
Amore writ against the fained poverty of the begging Friars. For having after
a long and large discourse showed what sort of begging Friars were to be
tolerated, and what not; and having alleged the Sermons of the said S. Amore
for confirmation of his assertion, he adds in the person of False semblance,
Qui groncer en voudra, si gronce,
Et courroucer, si s'en courrouce.
Car ie n'en mentiroye mie,
Si ie denoye perdre la vie:
Ou estre mis contre droiture,
Comme Saint Paul en chartre obscure:
Ou estre banni du Royaume
A tort, comme maistre Guillaume
De saint Amor, qu'hipocrisie
Fit exiler par grand' envy.
Ma mere en exil le chassa.
Le vaillant homme tant brassa
Pour verite qu'il sustenoit.
Verse ma mere trop desprenoit,
Pource qu'il fit un nouueau liver
Ou sa vie fit tout' escrire:
Et vouloit que ie reniasse
Mendicite, and labourasse,
Si ie n'auoye de quoy viure.
Bien me pouuoit tenir pour yure.
Car labourer ne me peut plaire:
D'aucun labeur n'ai-ie que fair:
Trop y a peine a labourer.
Mieux vaut deuant les gens orer,
Et affubler ma renardie
Du mantel de papelardie.
A. O fol diable quel est ton dit,
Et ce que tu as ici dit?
F. Quoy? A. Grans desloyautes apertes.
Ne crain-tu donc pas Dieu? F. Non certes.
Car a peine peut homme atteindre
Chose grande, qui Dieu veut craindre.
That is, Be wroth or blithe, who so be,
For I woll speak and tell it thee,
All should I die, and be put down,
As was Saint Poul in dark prisoun,
Or be exiled in this caas
With wrong as master William was,
That my mother hypocrisy
Banished for great envy.
My mother flemed him Saint Amor,
This noble did such labor
To sustain ever the loyalte,
That he to much agylt me.
He made a book and let it write,
Wherein his life he did all write,
And would each renyed begging,
And live by my traveling,
If I ne had rent, ne other good,
What weeneth he that I were wood?
For labor might me never please,
I have more will to ben at ease,
And have well lever (sooth to say)
Before the people patter and pray:
And wry me in my foxery,
Under a cope of papelardy.
(Quoth Love) What devil is this that I hear?
What words tellest thou me here?
What sir Falsenesse that apert is,
Than dreadest thou not God? No certis.
For seld in great things shall he speed,
In this world that God would dreed.
These places I have here alleged for three causes. First, that the Reader
might better perceive what is meant by this counterfaite gospel, as being a
thing very memorable; albeit I omitted it in my former discourse. Secondly,
that the contents of those books written by William de sancto Amore (which
were afterward burnt by Pope Alexander the fourth) might the better be known.
Thirdly, to give the Reader to understand that his books were not only
burned, but himself also banished France for speaking the truth.
Notwithstanding, here we have to note, that if he, who was only banished about
the year 1260. had but lived three hundred years after, he should not have
escaped so scot free? for they would have set him to have disputed with fire and
faggot, as they did infinite others within these fifty years. As for the
history which I said was very memorable, I find it to be so, for this reason:
in that by comparing that age with ours, we see the great subtilty and craft of
the devil. For he has dealt (me thinks) in this case, (I mean in bringing
this false gospel into credit) as Princes many times do with their subjects,
who when they see they cannot endure to hear of taxes, subsidies, or imposts,
use the word borrowing: which in the end comes all to one reckoning: as Solon
the ancient lawgiuer made that to pass for current under the name of
Sisachthia which under his own ancient name was thought too rigorous. The like
policy has the devil used in tampering with this his execrable gospel. For
perceiving that the name progress, and proceeding of the eternal Gospel (in
such sort as has been said) displeased all men; he knew well how by changing
the name, to retain the doctrine: so that he is come to the point and period
which he first propounded to himself. And that it is (gentle Reader) even as I
say, if ever thou have read the holy Gospel, consider whether it were not high
time for the devil to confront it with another of his own forgery (though
under another name:) to bring in that which the Popes creatures call the
service of God, consisting of such a number of pompous, glorious, glittering
shows and tricks of conueyance, that the greatest Doctor of them all, should
should have work enough (thoug he took three days respite) to reckon up only
their bare names: and yet peradventure in the end might come short of his
reckoning. For let us consider a little, what a long tail of absurdities this
one word Merits draws after it, being flat contrary to the doctrine of the
Gospel.) First, touching the diverse sorts of them, and then the matter of
every sort. For there is (as we know) meritum congrui, digni, condigni, or
rather de congruo, digno, condigno, etc. And as for those which they call good
works, affirming them to be the substance of merits; we know that there are
simple good works, and works of supererogation: besides sundry others which I
cannot stand upon. But wherein (may we think) do these good works consist?
Verily in all manner of devotions and good intentions, by which the Clergy
might have wherewith to fill their panch, in ^inging, singing, quaue^ing,
mumbling, g^umbling, pattering a million of Masses, great, little, hie and low:
Masses with a sop of wine, and dry Masses: Item, Masses for quick and dead,
(called Masses de Requiem,) Masses of our Lady of Pity, our Lady of Virtues,
our Lady of good News, our Lady of all Beauties, etc. Masses of Saint
Sebastian, Masses of Saint G^degran, of Saint Guerlichou, of Saint Aliuergo, of
Saint Andoch; also Masses of all men and women Saints, men and women Confessors
(if there be any such,) men and women Martyrs. To be short, Masses in the name
of the eleven thousand virgins. And yet this is not al: for there are Masses
for Fraternities* Masses for hunters: Masses for w^rriers: Masses for Deacons
and Subdeacons, and for them that are neither: with a rabble of others which I
cannot remember. Here Steph. did either forget himself, or meant to speak the
^heto^ically without a redditio^; for the sentence is (...).
After, if we come to the tools of one only Mass, as the Albe, the Stole,
the Girdle, the M^niple, the Al* amice.
Amict, the Cope, or Chasyble, etc. The Platine (or Patine) the Pixe, the
Censour; (I speak not of the host, because it is not included within the
number of the Massing tools. For, for it alone the stage is erected, and for
it all this pageant or rather tragedy is played. As for their apish tricks,
friskes and gambols, we have touched them before in a word or two: as also the
miraculously subtle and more then Pythagoricall secrets, which lie hid as well
under the said turning tricks, as under the tools and trinkets of the Mass.
Consider now (good Reader) a little with thy self, out of what Gospel all this
gear is taken, and what scripture they follow, who mix spittl^, salt, oil,
and such like stuff (smelling so stinking strong of their sorcery) with the
holy Sacrament of Baptism. Consider further, how exceedingly it ought to mou^
and astonish him, who by the mercy of God has been trained up in the doctrine
of the Gospel: when conuersing with those that make profession of the same
religion: he shall hear not only of the former riffe-raffe ceremonies (yea
wicked and dangerous:) but of an infinite number of others also, as of suffrags
of the Saints, of Images, of Relics, of Lights, of the Popes pardons or
Indulgences, of Bulls, of Myters, of Croziers staves, of Vows, of Shauings, of
Confessions, of Absolutions, of Extreme unctions, and of that so famous
renowned missificall Purgatory, with all the appurtenances thereunto
belonging. Verily, if he stand in a maze and mammering, to hear such
gibbridge, and more to see all this mummery acted upon the stage, I blame him
not. But when he shall read this story, touching this Infernal (called the
Eternal Gospel) and shall consider with himself, how subtle and crafty the
devil is, he shall have no great cause to wonder at the matter. For dobutlesse,
the devil has kept this damnable book in store (changing only the name) to
the end that as there is one Christ, and one Antichrist* so there might be one
Gospel, and one Antigospell, as I may so speak. Neither has he used this
craft and subtelty only in changing the name, but as we have seen in some
cities, when the common stews have been burnt, the ashes thereof have flowne
abroad into al quarters and corners thereof, so that though there remained no
more stews in name, yet indeed and truth, greater then eue^ before: so he
(after that this detestable book was burned) scattered the ashes thereof among
all the books which have been published since by his slaves and accomplices;
whereof the Decretals have had their part, the Su^mes also theirs, the Legends
and Martyrologies theirs; the Questionall, Distinctionall, Quodlibeticall
books, Mandestons, Tartares, Breuiaries, M^ssalles, and Hours, theirs.
Neither herewith content, has further foisted in other wicked works and
writings shrouded under the name of the Gospel, as has been said. This
(gentle Reader) will suffice (I hope) to put thee in mind of the Infernal
(otherwise called the Eternal) Gospel, when and as often as thou shall hear
any question moved touching Popish doctrine. And verily (that I may say the
same thing again and again) seeing men have endured a Counterchrist, it is no
wonder if they suffer a Counter-Gospell.

5 But to return to prosecute my former argument and to show how in all ages
some abuses have been discovered: doubtless, if they who have observed them,
would have advertised posterity of them, we should have had a number of such
aduertisements at this day: but some (God knows) were so simple that they
could not commit such things to writing; others, though sufficiently well
qualified, yet had not the heart to do it. Notwithstanding there are certain
books come eue^ to these times, (much more ancient then those I have so often
mentioned) in which are sundry inuectiues against the Pope, as well in regard of
his life as of his doctrine. But (me thinks) it fares now with Christian
religion as it did sometime with Arts and sciences: for as the liberal arts
flourished not so in the age last past, as they did certain hundred years
before, and as they have done since: so the ignorance of Christian religion was
more gross and palpable in the last Centenarie then in the days of our
grandfathers (at least of our great grandfathers,) and then it was ever since.

6 But here is yet a further point to be noted concerning the Age last past (to
say nothing of such as proclaimed open war and hostility against the abuses
and wicked lives of the Pope and his creatures, as Wicliffe, John Hus, Jerome
of Prage, etc.) how that many have encountered our good Catholics of the
Romish religion, who made no great show of hostility against them. For who
would have thought that Petrarch would have so inueyed against the holy city,
Gia Roma, hor Babilonia falsa e ria? which we find in one of his sonnets (among
other his Poems) containing only a description of the inordinate and dissolute
life of the Court of Rome. Nay he goes further in diverse of his Latin
Epistles, saying that Christ is banished thence, that Antichrist is Lord and
master there, and Beelzebub the Judge: That under the standard of Christ, they
make war against Christ: That greater villainy is there done to him, the^ ever
the Pharisees did him: That the hope of eternal life is holden for a very
fable: That the more a man is infected and even plunged over head and ears in
wickedness, the more he is esteemed and honored. And as for covetousness,
there (says he) for gold heaven is set wide open, and for gold, even Christ
himself is sold. Item, if Judas come thither, and bring with him his thirty
pieces of silver (the price of innocent blood) he shall be admitted, and Christ
shut out of doors. And as for Truth, There (says he) truth is holden for
folly. And in another place, I will not speak of truth: for how can truth have
any lodging or abode there, where all is taken up with falsehood and lies? the
air, the earth, places, houses, towers, etc.

7 Sometimes also our Catholic chickens were so unmannerly as to censure
their holy mother for false doctrine. For we read that the University of
Paris openly condemned an article in one of the bulls of Clement the sixth,
touching the year of Iubily, wherein he granted to all that had received the
Croysado, full power to deliver three or four such souls out of Purgatory as
themselves thought good. Howbeit the University censured not the mandate and
commandment which in another bull he gave to the Angels of Paradise: the words
whereof I will here set down. If any man be minded to come to the holy City,
we give him free liberty from the day of his egresse, to choose one or more
confessors, as well in his journey as elsewhere, to whom by authority
committed unto us, we give full power to absolve him in all matters reserved to
our self, as well as if we were there personally present. And further, we
grant to him that has truly confessed (if he die by the way) free pardon and
remission of all his sins, and do clearly quit and absolve him of the same.
And we further command all the Angels of Paradise, that they bring the soul
of such a man into the glorious Imperial heaven, quite exempting him from the
pains of purgatory, etc.

8 Besides, we have certain proverbs which have been current time out of
mind, which are pregnant proofs that the Cleargies credit was even then
cracked, and their reputation much eclipsed. For in our old and ancient
proverbs (which censure the vices and misdemeanors of men only in general)
the Church is ever the ringleader of the dance, as in this which has been
alleged in the former part of this discourse: Trou chooses sont tout d'vn
accord,
L'Eglise, la Cour, and la Mort.
L'Eglise prend du vif, du mort:
La Cour du droit, etc.
That is, There be things three do well agree,
The Church, the Court, and destiny,
For none will ought to other leave:
The Church from live and dead does reaue.
The Court takes both the right and wrong,
And death takes both the weak and strong.
And likewise in this: L'Eglise fait la teneur sans droiture,
Noblesse tient la contre sans mesure:
Labeur ne peut a la taille fournir,
Si le dessus ne vient a soustenir.
That is, The Clergy falsely sings the Tenors strain,
The Peers ylike the Countertenor sing:
The Commons toil the Tenors n'ote sustain,
Unless the Countertenor aid do bring.
As also in this proverb (for I hope I may be bold to give this name to the
common sayings which are or have been current in every man's mouth, though it
properly signify short and compendious pithy sentences) Depuis que Decrets
eurent ailes,
Et que les dez vindrent sur tables,
Gend'armes porterent des males,
Moines allerent a cheual,
Au monde n'y a eu que mal.
That is, Since that Decrees had wings ygot,
And dice upon the board were brought,
Sin^e Monks did fair on horseback trot,
And soldiers were with mailes yfraught,
The world has been too bad for naught.
In stead whereof Menot says, Since Churchmen wore great velvet coats. There
are also other proverbs which tax and censure their covetousness in
particular, one of which (taken out of Barelete) we mentioned in the former
chapter, viz. that Priests, Monks and the Sea are never satisfied. And of this
number is that which we formerly alleged, The Church takes both of quick
and dead. But we may not forget in the history of the Curate (of who^ we spoke
in the same chapter) that phrase which is used in way of a proverb, to
signify a thing which never was, and never should be: When Curates will take
no more offerings: which when stood a certain bon companion in good stead, who
writ long since in a certain pamphlet which he published, a prognostication of
a good time. For he says, that the good time shall be when women do whatsoever
their husbands will have them, without gainsaying. When drunkards shall hate
wine. When servants shall be loyal and faithful. When maids of fifteen
years shall refuse to marry. When bakers shall give away their bread, and
vintners their wine for Gods sake. When a Picard shall leave his lying: a
Normand his flattering: a rich Frenchman his haughtiness: and a German his
beastliness. When Lawyers cease to make five or six suites of one. When
France shall be rid of jealous persons, cuckolds and flatterers. Among the rest
this when is one (of which I have spoken) and this other which I may not here
omit: Quand vous verrez que les curez
Defendront d'aller a l'offrande,
Et porter escus, and deniers,
Voire sur peine de l'amende:
Et d'autre part, mais que l'on pende
Tous larrons priuez and estranges,
Bon temps verrez (quoi qu'il attend)
Accourir au trauers des fanges.
That is, When those good sirs that serve the Parish cure
Forbid repairing to their offering,
And charge that no man crowns or pence shall bring,
Upon the pain of some deep forfaiture:
And when all thieves foreign or neighbring nigh
On lofty gallow-trees shall hang on high,
Then shall you see (o who so long can (...)?)
The good days coming of the blessed tide.
There are also ancient proverbs which tax the whoredom and drunkenness of
the Popish Clergy, as also the place where the Popes Holiness makes his
abode: of which number this is one, Iamais ni cheual, ni homme,
N'amenda d'aller a Romme.
That is, Nor horse nor man ere turned home
Ought betterd by the sight of Rome.
Neither are there only prouerbiall sentences, but sundry songs and sonnets
also, made by our predecessors against the Popes Scuruinesse, one of which
begins thus: Le Pape qui est a Romme,
Boit du vin comm' un autre homme,
Et de l'ypocras aussi.
That is, His Holiness that at Rome does won,
Drinks wine full well, as his neighbors done,
And Ypocras as also.
This also is very ancient, and seems to have been borrowed from the words
of Christ. Loups rauissans and faux prophets,
Portent habits de brebiettes.
That is, False Prophets and rank wolves for need,
Can wear the sheep or shepherds weed.
For it was taken (if I be not mistaken) out of the words of Christ. Mat. 7.
Beware of false Prophets which come to you in sheep clothing, but inwardly
are ravening wolves. Which I do the rather think, because it has been used
against the Friars in particular (and namely against the Mendicants, but
especially against the Franciscans) who long since (as we know) were gibed and
gested at, being called disse^blers, bald shauelings, makers of apes faces, and
chatemites, which is as much as counterfeiters of lambs. And whereas they are
called ravening wolves, Saint Francis himself would (no doubt) have granted
it, at leastwise that they were wolves, considering he said to a wolf (as we
noted before) my Brother Wolf. Further, each of these 4. orders of mendicant
Friars has had his proper praise and commendation apart, even from our
Ancestors days. For we say prouerbially; a Iacobin in the Pulpit, a Franciscan
in the Quire, a Carmelite in the kitchen, and an Augustine in the stews. Which
notwithstanding ought well and warily to be understood: not as though the
Iacobins and Franciscans were not sufficient and able men to deal in the
occupation of the Carmelites and Augustines: but for that (besides their
sufficiency,) they do it with far better grace and dexterity: some of them
prating like Parots in the pulpit: and others roaring like bulls in the Quire,
lustily thundering out an Alleluiah. For it were plain heresy to say that the
Iacobins and Franciscans were not as valiant champions of the god Bacchus as
the Carmelites, considering the dittie which was sung ten years (I take it)
before my beldam was borne: Iacopins, Cordeliers, Carmes,
En beuuant iettent des larmes,
Disans, que c'est pour les ames, etc.
The Carmelite and Iacobine,
And their brethren Cordeliers,
When they have tipled in the wine,
Till it come out in tears:
Say straight, that is for the souls, etc.
And that they are likewise Venus darlings, their actions (heretofore recorded)
do sufficiently declare. This is the cause that makes me say, that it ought so
to be understood.

9 We read also in certain stories, of libels, which sundry sharp Satyrists
cast abroad against the Clergy, in the last centenary and in the age before;
as also of diverse ieasts and merry conceits which have been made of the sottish
superstitions of the Church of Rome: as namely of holy water (as they term it)
and Purgatory, called S. Patricius his hole, and by the common people S.
Patricks hole. As also of pardons or indulgences, and worshipping of Saints: in
all which, those merry grigs who have made collections of pleasant conceits,
have furnished us with examples. True it is indeed, they mention some libels
which do so gibe and jest at Popish superstition, that they pass all mean
and measure, and savor of plain Lucianisme. But leaving those of this
strain, I will allege some of another note, which now come to my mind. First
then I remember three merry ieasts, which were made of holy water: all of them
of a fine conceit, and excellent good grace. The first is of one who being
reproved for not vailing his bonnet when holy water was cast upon his head:
answered, that if it had that virtue that it could penetrate even to Purgatory,
there was no doubt but it would easily go through his hat. The second is of
later time, the author whereof was one Godon a Counselor of the Court of
Parliament in Paris, a man that had an excellent dexterity in breaking of a
jest. This Godon being one day in place where it was debated before King
Francis the first, what course were best for him to take to encounter the
Emperor, who was coming (as it was reported) with a great army, and hearing
one wish the King such a number of good Gascoignes; another such a number of
Lansquenets, (every man as he fancied:) Sir (quoth he) seeing we are all in our
wishes, if it may stand with your Majesty's pleasure, I will wish my wish also,
which shall be such a one as shall stand your Majesty in no charge, whereas
theirs will cost your coffers. The King having demanded of him what it might
be: Sir (quoth he) I would only wish to be a devil bu^ for one quarter of an
hour. To what end? (quoth the king.) I would (quoth he) straight to the
Emperor and break his neck. Verily (quoth the king) thou art a very sot to
say so, as though the Emperor had not store of holy water to drive away the
devil. Whereunto he replied, and said, Sir (if it please your highness to
pardon me) I think well that a young devil which is not yet his crafts master
would (...) for fear of holy water; but a devil which had been Godon
heretofore, would not fly for all the holy water his Holiness can make. The
third is later and of fresher memory, Lory the public notary being the author
thereof, who when a certain Cardinal made report of a woman possessed with a
devil, which by no means could be dispossessed: Why Sir (quoth he) it is an
easy matter: give her but a clyster of holy water, and the devil will be gone
I warrant you. There were also in old time many fine ieasts made of Purgatory,
as being in very deed a mere ridiculous invention. Two whereof (which now come
to my mind) I will here set down. When Pope Clement the 7. was besieged in his
castle of S. Angelo, and certain Prelates his friends with him, a gentleman of
Rome said, he was ever persuaded that the Pope could deliver souls out of
Purgatory; but seeing (quoth he) he cannot deliver himself out of prison, I
can much less think he should deliver souls from thence. The second was made
long since at Florence. A Florentine being importuned by the Franciscans of the
place to have certain Masses said for the delivering of his sons soul out
of Purgatory, answered them in this sort; Well, go your ways, and if you
deliver him by your Masses, I will give you a crown. The Friars had no sooner
sung their Masses, but they returned to him again, demanding their crown.
The Florentine answered, You must first make it appear unto me that ye have
indeed delivered him, before I part with my crown. In the end (after they had
a long time debated the matter and expostulated with him) they went to the
Duke, humbly desiring his Highness that they might have justice. The Duke
causing the party to be sent for, asked him why he detained from them that
which he had promised them. The man answered, that he promised them nothing but
upon condition, viz. that if it might appear unto him that they had delivered
his sons soul out of Purgatory, he would give them a crown. The Duke
hearing this his answer, turned to the Friars, and said, There is great reason
for it, and therefore see you make the soul which you have delivered, to come
unto me, and testify it own deliverance, or send me two other souls to
witness the same: or let it send me a word or two in writing, subscribed with
Christ's own hand, and then I will see you shall have the money paid you.
Another in France did the like. For certain Priests having asked money of him
for the Masses by which they had delivered a soul out of Purgatory, he
demanded of them, whether souls once let loose and freed from the pains of
Purgatory, were in danger to return back again or not? They answering, that
they were not: Why then (quoth he) it were folly to give you money for this
which is already delivered and in safety: it is more wisdom to keep it for
some other, which happily may be detained there hereafter. An Italian likewise
spoke as wittily and with as good a grace, when he told the Popes legate at
Venice, that if his Holiness had been well advised, he would never have said
that he could deliver souls out of Purgatory; but that he could deliver them
out of hell. For as for Purgatory (said he) there remain two things to be
proved: first, that there is such a place: secondly, that he delivers souls
from thence: whereas all men believe that there is a hell: so that there
remains nothing to be proved, but that he delivers souls from thence.

10 As for worshipping of Saints, it appears by certain ancient Proverbs,
that some demeaned themselves more discreetly therein then others. For example
This proverb, There is no miracle comparable to that which is wrought by an
old Saint, could not arise but from those which were of opinion, that they
ought rather to go to old experienced Saints then to young princocks and
nouices, which were but late vpstarts. For these they secretly condemned, at
leastwise showed they were to be suspected. But here is yet a further thing to
be noted, viz. that our ancestors never made so great account of their Saints,
but that they would both ring them a peale by threatening them, and grinne at
them (like a dog at a pitch-forke) when they thought they wronged them: wherein
they showed themselves more bold then their successors. Witness the Florentine
who said to the image of Saint John Baptist, The plague of God light on thee,
thou have always had a foul slanderous tongue, and therefore Herod cut off
thy head: The occasion of which speech has bin before remembered, where I have
also set down the Italian words wherein it was delivered. And in the same
book out of which I took that story, (entitled Piaceuoleze del piouano Ar
lotto) this is recorded which here follows, being in effect all one with the
former. There was a cook of Florence who was accustomed to come and say his
prayers, and to offer candles to the image of a young Christ (being about the
age that he was of when his mother found him in the Temple disputing with the
Doctors) and had continued in his favor for the space of twenty years and
more: after which time it happened that a tyle fell upon his sons head, and
hurt him so sore, that there was no hope he should ever escape: which he had no
sooner perceived but he went to his young Jesus, carrying with him a goodly wax
taper (whereas he was wont to carry nothing but candles) and began to pray
unto him in this sort. Dolce Signore mio Jesus Christo, io ti priego renda la
sanita, etc. That is, O my sweet Lord Jesus, I beseech thee restore my son
his health again, whom I do so dearly love. Thou know that I have
faithfully served thee, above these twenty years, during which time I never
requested the least favor at thy hands, now therefore I am come to commend and
commit my self and suit unto thee, my son being in such danger of death, who
is all my joy and hope, my comfort and content: so that if he chance to die, I
shall die shortly after for dolor and despair; at leastwise have regard to
the devotion which he always bare thee as well as my self. Having thus prayed,
he returned home again, where he found his son dead. Whereupon he went the
next morning, in great anger to his little Jesus, carrying not so much as a
candle with him, and neither kneeling down nor vailing his bonnet* began in
this sort. I renounce thee and utterly defy thee, and I promise thee truly I
will never come near thee, I have faithfully served thee above these twenty
years, during which (...) I never craved any thing at thy hands but this only
good turn, and thou have denied me. If I had made this request to the great
Crucifixe which stands by me, I know he would have granted it. I promise thee
faithfully, I will beware so long as I live, how I deal either with thee or
any other stripling, for thy sake; and for conclusion of all, he added this
Italian proverb, Chi S'impaccia con fanciulli, con fanciulli si ritroua. Which
story (being there set down at large, specifying the Church and place where
this cook dwelt) serves very fitly to exemplify the foresaid proverb, with
which that agrees well which was spoken by a good fellow who prayed to one of
our Ladies, holding her young babe in her arms. For having received such an
answer as pleased him not well, by one that stood behind the Image (as the
Florentine who stood behind John Baptists Image counterfaiting his voice) and
judging by the tone, that it was not the mother but the child which spoke,
said: Hold your peace you little lick-dish, and let your mother speak who is
wiser then you. But a Burgundian uttered far fouler words against a young
Crucifixe (son to an old Crucifix,) for hurting of him. The story is this. In
Burgundy near to a village called Chaseule, a country clown going through a
Church, enquired of the Ringers for whose soul they did ring. And he had no
sooner learned his name, but he fell straight on his marrow-bones, and began to
pa^^er over certain prayers for his soul before a crucifixe standing near
the belfry: which in stead of giving him a nod with his head, fell full upon
him and left him in such a pitiful plight, that the men were glad to leave
their ringing, to take him up, and carry him in all have home to his house,
where he remained long time sick and sore. Now after he was recovered again,
returning to the Church, and seeing a goodly young smiling crucifix in the same
place; (for you must note by the way, that the old crucifix had broken his
neck in falling upon this poor paysant:) he could contain no longer, but
began in this sort: Cast as good a countenance toward me as thou will, I
will never trust thee: for if thou live till thou be a man, thou will be as
unhappy as ever thy father was, who would have killed me. These 3. stories do
sufficiently confirm the truth of that which has been said, viz. that our
Ancestors made not so great account of their Saints, but that they would tell
them their lesson, and giere at them, when they perceived they offered them any
wrong: wherein they showed themselves more courageous then many since their
time; howbeit the boldness of my neighbors of Ville neuue S. George by Paris)
was far greater. For they not contented to rate and revile Saint George,
because that upon his feast day he suffered their vines to be nipped with the
frost: but having spoken all the villainy against him they could, they did him a
worse turn by casting him into the river of Seyne, where he was frozen with
their vines for company: their boldness being so much the greater, in that
they durst encounter him who is Mars the great God of war among the Saints.

11 Churchmen also were girded at in old time and flouted sundry ways, Monks
and Fries especially; who were not only branded with those goodly nicknames
before remembered (wherewith their hypocrisy was taxed and censured) but with
sundry others also: some ce^suring their gluttony, others their lechery, others
their stupidity. Among the rest, Laurence de Medicis was the man that knew how
to do them the honor appertaining to their holiness. For being asked by the
Turks Ambassador, what should be the reason that there were not so many fools
to be seen in Florence, as in Caire and other cities of Egypt? Answered, that
they kept all their fools fast locked up, some in one place some in another,
acccording to the diversity of their frenzies. And leading him out of
Florence, he showed him a number of Monasteries, and withal told him, that in
those houses they shut up all their fools, both men and women, whom they
called Monks and Nuns. But his tale had been much better told (in my
conceit) if he had said, that they suffered none but harmless fools to range
abroad in the streets, and that they kept their hurtful and knauish fools
within. But all that our Ancestors spoke against the Clergy is nothing, in
comparison of that which was spoken against the Pope, I mean against his
person and practice. For Pasquin girded at him long since, and that sundry
ways, giving him such privy nips and cross blows over the thumbs, that
better jests cannot be invented. Sundry poets also not long before our time
spared not the Popes one jot, as namely Pontanus, Sannazarius, and others. But
I will begin this discourse with the answer which a limmer made to a Cardinal,
who though he had drawn S. Peter and S. Paul so lively, that all which beheld
them, approved the work, yet was there a Cardinal who said he had espied a
fault in them, in that he had made them too high colored: whereupon the limmer
forthwith shaped him this answer: Sir (quoth he) this redness proceeds of
shame; for they blush to see the life which you lead, in comparison of that
which they led when they were on earth. Which answer of his agrees very fitly
with this Epigram made by a learned man yet living. Semiuiros quicunque patres
radiante galero
Conspicis, and rubrae syrmata longa togae:
Creed mihi, nullo saturatas murice vestes,
Diuite nec cocco pallia tincta vides.
Sed quae rubra vides, sanctorum cade virorum,
Et mersa insonti tota cruore madent.
Aut memor istorum, qua celet crimina vestis,
Pro dominis iusto tacta pudore rube^.
And this puts me in mind of the Preacher formerly mentioned, who began
and ended his Sermon with Fie Saint Peter* Fie Saint P^^l* I say he began and
ended therewith: for he spoke never a word besides* though he often iterated
them. But to return to Pasquin (who has so well rubbed and curried the Pope:)
by Pasquin, we are to understand (which I speak for the ignorant sort) many
excellent quick wits, who having composed libelling verses in Latin or
Italian* against any of the Popes, caused them to be fastened to an image
called Pasquin. No marvel then if Pasquin hit them so often over the thumbes,
and c^rried their cockscombs so well: seeing the inventions of many excellent
wits have bin fathered upon him. And yet I persuade my self he never did any
thing with better grace, then when he said that he was ready to die for sorrow,
in (...) such an injury had been done him, as pierced him to the very heart.
Whereupon when certain asked him, Friend Pasquin, what injury has been done
thee? has any man called thee thief, or murderer, or poisoner? oh no (said
he) but they have called me worse. What? has any man called thee sacrilegious
person, or parricide, buggerer or atheist? oh no (said he) they have called me
worse. And after they had instanced in sundry other the greatest indignities
they could imagine: alas (said he) you have not yet reckoned it, neither do I
think you will ever guess what it is. In the end, having been often requested
to utter his grief, breathing out many sighs with Alas, alas, he said that
they called him Pope. The same Pasquin declared also in a Latin Epigramme
(which he made since) what conceit we should have of the signification of this
word Pope, in these verses, Hic Carapha iacet; superis inuisus and imis:
Styx animam, tellus putre cadauer habet.
Inuidit pacem terris, dijs vota precesque:
Impius and clerum perdidit and populum:
Hostibus infensis supplex, insidus amicis.
Scire cupis paucis caetera? Papa fuit.
Hereunto also well accords the common saying, A good Pope, a wicked man. And
who so would know how the said Pasquin extolled the virtues of Popes, let him
read these verses: Sixtum lenones, Iulium rexere cinoedi,
Imperium vani scurra Leonis habes.
Clementem furiae vexant, and auara cupido.
Quae spes est regni Paul futura tui?
(Where I confess he has been somewhat bold in using Poetical license in the
quantity of Iulium.) There are also certain Epigrams which tax the
covetousness of some Popes in particular, as namely this which was written of
Alexander the sixth, Vendit Alexander claues, altaria, Christum:
Emerat ille prius, vendere iure potest.
That is, Christ, altars, keys, does Alexander sell,
Why should he not? perdy they cost him well.
Mantuan also has written to the like effect of the covetousness of Popes,
albeit in general: Or voulez vous sauoir quelle trafique meine
La marchande portant nom d'Eglise Roman?
Elle vend pour argent temples, prestres, autels,
Couronnes, feux, encen^, messes, and ioyaux tells:
Et en son avarice elle est si sort extreme,
Que vendre ell'ose bien le ciel, voire Dieu mesme.
That is, Then would you know the traffic and the wares
Wherewith this Marchandisse (hight Rome) does trade?
For money sels she Churches, Altars, Priests,
Crowns, incense, fires, and Masses: and what more?
Yea so excessive is her couetice:
Of heaven and God himself she sets a price.
The same author has likewise blazoned their other virtues in these verses: Le
saint champ du Seigneur est plein de parasites,
Et l'autel precieux ne sert qu'aux Sodomites:
Brief, les temples a saints vsages ordonnez
Par ces Ganymedes bougrins sont profanez.
That is, Gods holy field is full of Parasites,
The precious altars swarm with Sodomites:
The Churches that were made for holy deeds,
Are soyled by these buggering Ganimedes.
And what has Pontanus said of Alexander the sixth, in an Epitaph which he
writ of his daughter? Conditur hoc tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re,
Thais Pontificis filia, sponsa, Nurus.
Which Epitaph I find turned into French by two: one of which has turned it
thus, Ci gist le corpse d'vne certain dame
De nom Lucrece, and d'effect (don't ie tremble)
Du Pape fut ribaude tres-infame,
Espouse, bru, and fille tout ensemble.
The other thus, Ci dort qui fut de nom Lucrece,
De faict Thais, putain de Greece,
Qui iadis d' Alexandre fille
Et femme fut and belle-fille.
That is, Here lies Lucrece by name, Thais in life,
The Popes child and spouse, and yet his own sons wife.
The Poet Sannazarius also has written an Epitaph of this Pope; where having
declared these and sundry other villainies, he says for conclusion, And yet
has he bin Pope of Rome these eleven years. Go now, and speak of Neroes,
Caligulaes and villainous Heliogabali. But enough of such stuff (for I am
ashamed to name the rest:) yet what (I beseech you is the commendation of
Boniface in this Epitaph: Intrauit vt vulpes, regnauit vt Leo, mortuus est vt
canis: that is, he entered like a fox, reigned like a lion, and died like a
dog? And to the end we may see how that they which could not write to their
commendation in good Latin, have written in as good as they could, rather then
they would be silent and say nothing: I will here set down the Epitaph of
Benedict the twelfth, Iste fuit vero Laicis mors, vipera Clero,
Deuius a vero, Al. cupa.
turba repleta mero.
Neither did they write all these goodly Epitaphs of the Popes only; for some
have also blazoned the virtues of their Cardinals, Bishops, and other Prelates:
amongst which this has an excellent grace which was written against a Popish
Bishop, sometime a Franciscan. Nudipes Antistes, non curat Clerus vbi stes:
Dum non in coelis, stes vbicunque velis.
But (to hold me only to the Popes) the means which they used to avoid the
creating of a she Pope (as once it happened) in stead of a he Pope, has been
exceedingly derided of old. And hereof Johannes Pannonius has made an Epigram,
(wherein he rightly blazoneth their trumpery) which I have thus turned into
French, Null ne pouuoit iouir de saints clefs de Romme,
Sans monstrer qu'il auoit les marquis de vray homme:
D'ou vient donc qu'a present ceste pre^^e est cessee
Et qu'on n'a plus besoin de la chair percee?
C'est pource que ceux* la qui ores les clefs ont,
Par les enfans qu'ils font, monstrent bien ce qu'ils sont.
That is, Of old times, none Romes holy keys did ^eare,
But by some marks had first his manhood shown:
How comes this trial out of date whilere?
Nor needs no chair to make his secret known?
For that who ever now the keys have borne,
Have by their bastards proved their sex beforne.
And as for Popish laws and constitutions, we find that our ancestors opposed
themselves against them to the uttermost of their power: and forbear not to
cry out mightily against the Clergy for not abolishing them: but principally
against the forbidding of Priests marriages. Against which we find these verses
in the first place simply and plainly made. O b^n^ Calixte, nunc omnis Clerus
odit te.
Olim Presbyteri poterant vxoribus vti:
Hoc destruxisti tu, quando Papa fuisti.
Ergo tuum Festum nunquam celebratur honestum.
And others (after them) beginning thus, Prisciani regula penitus cassatur:
Sacerdos per hic and haec olim declinatur.
Sed per Hic solum nunc articulatur:
Quum per nostrum praesulem Haec amoueatur.
And a little after, Non est Innocentius, immo nocens ve^e,
Qui quod facto docuit, verbo vult delere.
Et quod olim iu^enis voluit habere,
Modo vetus Pontifex studet prohibere.
Gignere, etc.
Mantuan likewise condemns this Popish decree, where he says, N'eust-il pas
mieux valu suiure la droite voye,
Par ou la Loy de Dieu nous meine and nous conuoye,
En ensuiuant les pa^ des nos anciens peers,
Desquels la vie estoit chaste and sans vituperes,
Quand ils se contentoyent d'auoir chacun sa femme?
Helas, and qu'est-ce au pris du celibat infame,
Que maintenir on veut contre Dieu and nature,
Si non impiete pleine de forfaiture?
That is, Were it not better follow that right path,
Wherein Gods royal law does us conduct,
Pressing the footsteps of our ancestors,
Whose life was chaste and void of rightful blame,
When each man was with his own wife content?
Alas, what is this to that infamous life,
Which singly they against God and nature lead,
Full of lewd thoughts and many a beastly deed?
Neither was there so much as Master Allin Charretier, but cried out against
this Canon or constitution. For (as John Maire witnesses in his book called
the Exile) he writ against it as follows: There was long since a new Canon
confirmed in the West Church, seuering the order of holy Matrimony from the
dignity of Priesthood, under the color of purity and Chastity: but now
contrarily runs the Canon of Concubinage, with entisements to worldly pomp
and dignities, to sensual and fleshly sins; and (which is more) the Clergy
is grown extremely and unconscionably covetous, etc. A little after; What has
the constitution of forbidding priests marriages brought with it, but the
changing of lawful generation into adultery and fornication? and the honest
cohabitation with one only spouse, into multiplication of harlots and living
in hot and burning lust? And if I should say all that I think, I would say,
etc.

12 But a wonder it is, that our ancestors should not perceive the villainies
of that purple whore, the scarlet strumpet (which calls her self The holy
Catholic Church) seeing she never cloaked nor concealed them in the least
manner, but set them to the open view to all that would behold them: as namely
in the case of forbidding Priests marriages. For though Pope Hildebrand made it
a Cano^ and constitution of the Church, yet some of his successors (as stories
report) have been so far from keeping it, that they made no conscience to
marry their own daughters: witness the Epitaph of Alexander the sixth, made by
Pontanus: witness also the stories which have been written of his life. For
herein I suppose he followed the example of his predecessors, not to speak of
those whom historians (who have written of the lives of Popes) have severely
censured. And as he was emboldened to commit incest with his own daughter, by
the example of his predecessors: so by his example was Pope Paulus the third
heartened to do the like. For he entertained his daughter Constantia, and
perceiving that he could not have her at his whistle, and enjoy her company so
conveniently as formerly he had done (considering she was married to a Duke
called Sforza,) he poisoned her. I omit to speak how kindly he entertained his
sister, because this incest is not altogether so unnatural and brutish as the
former. And whereas he poisoned her also, because he saw that she took not so
great pleasure in him as in others, it is less then nothing, considering the
unconscionable largeness of Popes consciences: witness Hildebrand who
poisoned seven or eight Popes, that he might come to the Popedom. And which is
more remarkable, after they had used their daughters or sisters as whores (as
John the thirteenth did,) or other their kinswomen (as others have done) they
married them to Princes; as it is reported, that the forenamed Alexanders
Lucretia (I mean Lucretia who was his daughter, his daughter in law and his
whore, that is, with whom he lay, (notwithstanding she was his own daughter)
and his son also, who was her own brother) was married to three Princes
successively: first, to Duke John Sforce: next (he being divorced from her) to
Jews bastard son to Alphonsus king of Arragon: and lastly to Alphonsus d'Est
Duke of F^rrara. And yet these holy men (who have forbidden others lawful
marriage) not content to use the liberty which Jupiter used in such incestuous
marriages, would needs after his example have their Ganimedes also. True it is,
that some of them have had great Ganimedes, and others less. So that when
Mantuan speaks hereof in his verses which formerly I alleged, I cannot well
tell which of them he means: but sure I am that the Ganimede of Pope John
Maria de monte, called Julius the third, was in stature and feature like unto
Jupiter, somewhat resembling him in the proportion and lineaments of his face,
as Poets have described him; which thing I speak the rather, because my self
saw and advisedly beheld him, especially at once when he sat at table with his
Jupiter. But these earthly Iupiterizing gods (those I mean that tread in the
steps of Jupiter) may not have it laid in their dish for dispencing with
themselves in such a point, for which they would dispense with others also,
rather then for marriage. For I persuade my self, if priests after they were
forbidden marriage, had with common consent exhibited a petition to their
Holiness, (holding the supplication in one hand, and a bribe in the other)
that they might have recourse to the male sex seeing they would not suffer
them to use the female, they would never have denied them. And that which more
confirms me in this opinion, it, for that we read in the life of Pope Sixtus
the 4. how he granted liberty to the whole family of the Cardinal of S. Luce
to use carnal company with the male sex, during the three hotest months. As
also that which we read in the life of Pope Alexander the sixth, how he
permitted one Peter Mendozze a Spaniard and Cardinal of Valencia, to make a
Ganimede of his bastard son the Marquess of Zannet.

13 Now besides that these devout Churchmen committed their villainies openly in
the view of all men, as appears by that which has been already said, and by
sundry other places of this book; it is further to be observed that they make
but a mock at sundry things, which notwithstanding they cause the poor people
(silly souls) to hold and believe as articles of their faith. For when Pope
Leo the tenth was told by his Confessor that he needed to fear nothing,
considering he had the keys of heaven, and of the treasury of the Church,
consisting of the merits of Christ and of the Saints: he answered in this sort:
Thou know that he which has sold a thing, has no longer right nor int^rest
therein; therefore seeing I have sold heaven and all to others, I have nothing
to do there. The same Pope being reproved by certain Cardinals for his le^d
life, as being exceedingly changed since he was created Pope, answered: If I be
wicked, you are the cause thereof; for you have made me such a one as I am.
They wondering at this answer, and demanding of him what he meant thereby:
Because (quoth he) you have made me Pope; for it is not possible to be both a
Pope and an honest man. Nay they go yet a step further, in profaning those
things which they would have the world believe were holy and sacred: as when
Pope Julius the second cast his Saint Peter's keys into Tyber, and took Saint
Paul's sword, saying, Saint Peter's keys would stand him in no stead for the
wars, whereas Saint Paul's sword would help him well. Yet all this is nothing
in comparison of that which Pope Gregory the seventh (called Hildebrand) did;
who when his consecrated host (which the Popes creatures call the blessed
sacrament of the Altar, and the body of Christ) answered him not to his
demands, being angry thereat, cast it into the fire in the presence of many
Cardinals, who could not stay him from burning of his breaden God. The truth of
which story might well be doubted of, if the person from whom it originally
proceeded, were any way to be suspected: but the author thereof is Cardinal
Benno, who further adds, that John Bishop of Port (Secretary to Hildebrand,
and very inward with him) affirmed in a Sermon which he made in S. Peter's
Church in the audience of a multitude of people, concerning the profanatio^ of
the blessed Sacrament of the Altar:) Hildebrand (quoth he) and we with him,
have done such a fact, for which we deserve to be burned quick; and he that
will not credit this Cardinals report, may find it confirmed by other
testimonies. For my part I see nothing in this fact of Hildebrand, which is not
more then probable. For if we read his life, we shall find that he has
profaned his religion after another manner: I say that he has profaned his
religion: for according to true religion, the said consecrated host might have
been cast into the fire without any profanation at all; namely as a piece of
paste, and in the same nature that it is of when it descends into the bellies
not only of men, but also of beasts, and after into that place which for
modesty I may not name. But some may here happily say, that it is no wonder if
Hildebrand dealt in that sort with the sacramental host, considering he was a
Necromancer, as in his life is discoursed at large: notwithstanding I persuade
my self, that if he had asked counsel of him in whose school he learned the
black Art, he would never have advised him so: which I do the rather think,
for that the grand Negro of all Necromancers (who is also the great Sorbonist
of Sorcerers, and master of Magicians) will in no wise hurt this god of paste,
but very friendly and lovingly agrees with him. For proof hereof, in the year
1538. there were certain priests burnt in Sauoy for enchantments and sorcery,
one of which was burnt at Roll a town four miles distant from Lausanna, and
his whore with him for company, which was a sorceresse; who confessed that he
had been a sorcerer for the space of four and twenty years, during which time
he never left saying his ordinary Masses. Which makes me say, that there is old
acquaintance and good agreement between the god in the Mass, and the Be in
the box. For how else could this sorcering priest have been capable of this
high honor and dignity of singing Mass, seeing that before he came to be
initiated in the devils school and entered in his black book, he was to give
himself body and soul, tripes and all unto him: as also deny God his creator,
and renounce his baptism, as may appear by the arraignements, inditements and
condemnations of sorcerers and witches. And therefore the devil (in my opinion)
never gave Hildebrand that counsel to cast the consecrated host into the fire,
but he was horn mad for anger, in that it being called and reputed a god,
could not answer the questions which he demanded of him, as well as Apollo,
Bacis, or Pythias, who gave answers by their Oracles.

14 If any shall still doubt (notwithstanding the reasons that have been here
alleged, and elsewhere, as namely where I spoke of the Sacramental
empoysoner) whether there be indeed such good agreement and intelligence
between the devil and the breaden God, I will hear allege the testimonies
of his own priests, which shall likewise serve for the continuing of my
intended discourse, touching the foresaid profanation. And first I will
allege the testimony of a Priest of Sauoy, named dom Anthony Goetrew (Dom in
Sauoy is as much as Sir with us) who when he was chanting his Mass, perceiving
his gossip which help him to sing, stay too long before he answered Amen: Say
Amen (quoth he) in the devils name. And straight this gossip said Amen in the
devils name. True it is indeed that he was not a little moved, for to his Amen
he added these words; now a pox on thee gossip: for if thou had not called
so loud, I had taken a mouse. For you must note that he watched a mouse which
was come to hear Mass, or to eat the Massemongers god. For diverse of them
have played such pranks as we know: but see his own words, which have a far
better grace in their proper dialect. Amen, Le chancrou te rungzay compare: se
te n'ousse tan cria, zusson prey la ratta.

15 Further, concerning the good agreement which is betwixt this breaden god
and the devil, we have the testimony of a Priest who said, For my part (I
confess) I understand nothing of these Saints Masses: but I will tickle you
over an ordinary Mass in the devils name. And here I cannot omit a like story
of one, who chanting his Mass in a place where he might look into his garden;
and perceiving a boy in the top of one of his cherry trees, as he was lifting
up his breaden god over his head, cried aloud, Come down in a wannian, come
down: speaking it (as it is most like) as well to his god of past which he held
over his head, as to the boy in the tree. And he co^curres in opinion and
practice with the foresaid Priest, who said, Come and say Mass in the devils
name, for my master is angry. The same may be said of a gentleman of Lorraine,
who said to his son (which had no great devotion to hear Mass ( To Mass in
the devils name, to Mass. But here, it may be demanded how it should be, that
(seeing the devil and the god of pas^e do so well agree and are such great
friends) that Priests should so often threaten him with the devil? as a
certain Sir John in Lorraine did, who threatened to cast his poor god to the
devil. The story is this, A good fellow owing this Sir John a displeasure, and
resolving to beat him soundly where ever he found him: meeting with him in the
street as he was carrying his breaden god: Oh (quoth he) how I would curry thee,
were it not for the reverence I bear to god in thy hands. Whereupon Sir John
(thinking himself as good a man he) answered and said, If that be the matter,
it shall not hinder us to try the mastery, and whether of us shall bear away
the blows: see here is my God on the ground, (for he set him down to rest him
there, and to judge of the combat) and the devil take him if he deal on either
side. This question (to say the truth) is more then Sorbonicall: for many of no
greater moment have been debated in Councels. For seeing the breaden god and
the devil are such great friends, (as has been showed) how is it possible
that the god of past should stand in fear of him, as it is manifest he does,
at lestwise in their opinion who thus threaten him? Some may also object a fact
committed by a Priest of Sauoye about thirty years ago, (either Curate or
Vicar of a village called ^eling near to Bonne in Foussigns) to who^ his
parishioners came, to the end he might alay a great tempest (For he had bragged
that they needed not to fear either tempest, thunder, or lightning within the
parish, so long as he continued with the^) who used first a number of
coniurations which he had by (...), and after took out of his Per^uise and
Mass book the most horrible-terrible-words (being all this while shrouded under
a tree, which kept off part of the tempest, and holden by four or five for
fear of being overthrown:) but perceiving in the end that all was to no
purpose, and that he labored in vain, he brought forth his holy Sacrament,
that is, his breaden god* and spoke thus unto it, Cour (...) n'^ple ^or quo le
diablou, (...) deg^ian le pa^o. That is, by G (...)* if thou be (...) stronger
then the devil, I will cast thee into the dirt. Here is (I say) another story
liable to the same objection with the former: but because it would make my head
ache to resolve it, I will refer it to the next Counsel: except they will in
the mean time take this as a sufficient answer, that these breaden gods and
the devil play now and then the parts of Advocates and Atturneys, who in open
audience at the bar, look as though they would eat one another, crying
Haroll for justice on their Clients side: but as soon as they are gone from
the bar, shake hands and drink together at their clients cost. Wherefore it
may well be, that these gods and devils abused the priests with like policy.
At leastwise this is all that I can say herein for this present.

16 As for other prophanations wherewith the Massemonging priests (the Popes
creatures) profane that which they would have holden for a Sacrament, I will
here give some few examples, leaving the Reader to judge what reverend opinion
the poor Papists ought to have of other points of their religion, when the
Mass priests so notoriously profane this which is the very marrow of their
mattins. And first to begin with a priest of Lorraine, who holding a pixe (or
box) full of unconsecrated singing cakes (as they term them) shuffled the^
together saying, Ribaudaille, ribaudaille, Ye little whoresons, ye little
whoresons, which of you will be god to day? And from him I will come to a priest
of Province, who being reproved for lifting up his breaden god with his heels
upward, and his head downward: I did it (quoth he) for fear left his hose
would have fallen of his heels. After these, I will tell you of a priest of
Sauoy, who bragged that himself and his fellows played with the god in the
Mass, as the cat plaieth with a mouse, viz. that after they had sported with
it their fill, they devour it. I have heard also of other Sir John's who have
put or rather incorporated into their Masses other manner of stuff: for
hitherto we have only spoken of him that said to his gossip, Say Amen in the
devils name: and of him who lifting up his god over his head, called to one
whom he espied climing his Cherry tree, and bade him come down in the devils
name. Yet we have said nothing of the Chaplain of the late Marshall of Bie,
who calling (as his manner was) for a cup of wine for his breakfast or morning
draught, to one that help him at Mass, and having set it in an odd corner at
the end of the Altar (or there about) covered with a cloth, till such time as
he had mumbled over his Matins: so it was that one of the said Marshals lackies
having a months mind to visit this pot, took his opportunity when he saw the
priest in his Memento. But this gentle Sir John (for all his Memento) having
one eye on his Portuise, and another on his pot, seeing it to be in that danger
that it stood at the mercy of the lackey, added these words to his Memento, Let
it alone thou bastards brat, let it alone. But of him who slept in his Memento,
and when he awooke started up crying, The king drinks, (remembering the
Antheme he had song all the night long, which made his head to ache) we have
already spoken. Howbeit we have said nothing of that bon companion, who
thinking he had been still at cards, cried, I am flush. And I persuade my self,
they would never have inserted all these fo^d fooleries, had they not been in
sober sadness: witness that hedge priest by Paris, who having found in his
Almanacke Sol in Canero writtten in red letters, thinking it had been the name
of some Saint, took some pains to seek out the Mass that might fit it best:
In the end when he had turned his Mass book over and over, and could not find
him out, he made an end of Matins in this mad mood. Sol in Can^ro, Sol in
Cancrus, nec est Virgo, nec Martyrus: venite adoremus. It were endless to
allege all the examples of the ornaments of the massing Sacrifice: (for
considering what the Mass is, and not what the Popes creatures judge it to be,
I call that an ornament, which according to them I should call a profanation)
yet this one I cannot omit, the most famous of ten thousand, of Octauian of
Saint Gelais, Bishop of Angoulesme (and yet a translatour of Ouids books de
Art amandi.) This prelate had laid a wager, that whenever and wheresoever
any should speak to him in rhyme, he would ex tempore answer in rhyme again:
the wager being agreed upon, these three verses were propounded unto him whilst
he was dandling his little breaden God. L'autre iour venant de l'escole,
Ie trouuai la dame Nicole
Laquelle estoit de verd vestue.
That is, As I came from school alone,
There I met with mistress Ione
Clothed all in green.
To which, without interrupting his missificall devotion, he answered readily
in this sort: Ostez-moy du col ceste estole,
Et si bien tossed ie ne l'accole,
I'auray la gageure perdue.
That is, Take but my cloak some one,
If I kiss her not anon,
I leese the wager cleene.
Thus were their Masses garnished with merry conceits, uttered by the
massemongers mates; as when they cried out aloud (o most shameless and
impudent villains) To the offering Sirs, you that have any devotion, Come on
ye women, turn up your tippets. But it was no jesting if the Priest did not
post over his Mass as fast as they would have him. For then they were
horne-wood, as if the devil had been among them. Some crying, The devil take
thee Sir John: others, Haste thee in the devils name, for they will have broken
their fast before we come. A pox on thee Sir John (would another say) thou
can not read half fast enough. All which charitable and devout prayers are
nothing in comparison of that which certain French gentlemen said to a Priest,
who when he should have made an extraordinary short Epitome and abridgement of
the Mass, made it longer by the whole passion: but they may thank themselves.
For whereas they should have bidden him say a hunting Mass, they bad him say a
soldiers Mass, thinking it would have been much shorter. Whereupon the poor
Priest having dreamed a good while what Gospel made mention of soldiers, in
the end he stumbled upon these words in the story of the passion, cu^ fustibus
and armi^, and so put the whole passion into his Mass: in the mean time making
these galla^ts (who were all booted, and their horses in danger to be surfetted
at the Church gate) stamp and stare, and curse as well the Mass as the
Mass Priest. These examples (in my judgment) are more then sufficient to
prove my former assertion, viz. that she which calls her self the holy
Catholic Church, never so much as concealed from our ancestors the least
part of her lewdness, but laid it open to those that were not blind, and
proclaimed it to such as were not deaf. And verily they serve notably to show
how they profaned that which they held for the only true Catholic and
Apostolic faith and right Roman religion: (for of their wicked lives and
false doctrine, we have spoken at large before) But as for our ancestors,
where one of them complained of their false doctrine, a hundred complained of
their abominable lives: albeit the greater part found fault with them only for
toys and trifles: suffering them in the mean while to run riot into heinous
enormities, not once opening their mouths against them. As when they found no
fault with them for their lewdness in keeping of benefices in this or that
manner, but for enjoying of incompetible benefices, or for having over many. As
we read of king Lewis the twelfth, who when a Bishop begged a benefice of him,
(notwithstanding the great number he had already) answered, I shall (quoth he)
give thee so long, till the devil carry all away. Tot dabo tibi quod diabolus
portabit omnia, as Menot has it, who (good old Preacher) together with his
fellow Friars (so often before alleged) will furnish us with store of such
examples for the illustration of this point.

17 I come now to false miracles, some of which our predecessors discovered,
and others have been detected in our time: and I will first begin with Ioane
the holy maid of Kent. This holy virgin was a long time holden to be a Saint
and a Prophetess by the subtle device and cunning of the Franciscans, who
made the world believe that she descended from heaven: giving it out (to color
the matter with some probability) that she neither ate nor drank; albeit she
banquetted secretly, and played the strumpet stoutly with their ghostly fathers
holiness. Among other things, they made the poor people believe, that she
knew all men's sins: and the truth is, she told those that resorted unto her,
the secretest sins they had committed; but it was not without the knavery of
the false Friars, who suffered none to come to her till they had first shriuen
them. Her self also might easily hear every man's confession from the room
where she was: the Franciscans having chosen her a place very fit for the
purpose. In the end when the knauerie was discovered (after they had deceived
many thousands) she and the gentle Friars, authors of the miracle, were
executed. Some say the abuse was detected by a certain gentleman, who
suspecting the cunning packing of the Franciscans in acquainting her with men's
confessions, confessed certain things which he never did in all his life,
which being afterward told him again by her, the legerdemaine was espied.
Howbeit others say otherwise. There is also mention made of a crucifixe, which
the said Friars made to weep and to speak. As for the false miracle (or
rather false miracles) of the Iacobins of Berne and the Franciscans of Orleans,
I will content my self to put the Reader in mind of them, hoping it will not
be needful to make further recital thereof, considering these stories are in
print, and in every man's mouth. Only let us remember that the spirit of the
Franciscans of Eureux was before the miraculous spirit of the Franciscans of
Orleans, as has been said.

18 John Menard in like manner records another false miracle (though wrought by
no wicked spirit) in his book entitled A declaration of the order and state of
the Francisca^s. A pedlar of S. Anthonies relikes being to preach under a
walnut tree, had strewed gunpowder a little before in a Pies nest, which bred
in the tree, and having so done, he tied a small string unto it, putting fire
to the end thereof. Now whilst he was preaching his pardons, the Pie
perceiving the powder, began to make a great chattering. The Franciscan (who
listened to hear this sport) thinking it would not be long before it took fire
above, began in this sort, Thou naughty bird, which thus interruptest this
holy exercise, my Lord S. Anthonies fire will burn thee for this gear. He had
no sooner spoken the word, but the fire which had already seized upon the nest
by means of the string, burned both her and her young ones: which was not done
without a solemn shout, the people crying aloud, A miracle, a miracle; by
means whereof he got a good round offering. He further relates sundry like
stories which he had heard of these pedlers of reliks, S. Anthonies Questors,
as namely that their manner was to heat their little crosses or braze^ images
whilst the good wife went into the garner or celler to fetch them something,
and at her return would make her kiss the cross or image, and when she felt
it hot, they would exceedingly terrify and affright her, saying, that their
Lord Saint Anthony thereby showed that he was not well pleased with her alms:
whereupon the silly soul would go back again to fetch them more, and by that
time the image would be well cooled; which they would say was a sign that S.
Anthony was appeased. He writes also in the same place of a li^^e knauish part
played in Italy a little before (viz. about the year 1530.) by one of the same
craft, and servant to the same master, viz. how that this boute-feu being
angry for that the poor labourer with who^ he wrought, would give him nothing
for his pains, set fire on the house where his kine stood, which burnt not
only that part, but all the rest of the building besides, and all the goods
therein; making them believe that it came by a miracle wrought by S. Anthony*
but for all his cunning and knavery, the truth was afterward known. He further
adds a very notable story recorded by many of another of S. Anthonies
treasurers, who burnt a poor woman's piece of cloth, making the world believe
that it came by S. Anthonies means, who did it to the end he might be revenged
of her; which happened (as he says) in the country of Vaux, but as others
affirm in Calabria. The story is told thus: One of S. Anthonies treasurers
traveling through the country (with a good fellow who led the Ass which
carried the wallet) passed by a butchers house, where, as soon as his man had
rung the bell, the good wife forthwith opened the door, and having let them
in, went to fetch them a piece of flesh: in the mean while this false Friar
having marked two fair swine playing together upon the dunghill, turning him
at her return toward his knauish companion, said, Is it not great pity that
these two swine should die so suddenly* The poor woman listening to his
speech, questioned further with him thereof. Whereupon the ghostly father said
unto her, My good sister I can say nothing, but that I am very sorry that these
two swine should die so suddenly, and there is no man living that can perceive
it, except he be in the favor of blessed S. Anthony: howbeit there were some
hope, if I had but two of the acornes which our Priour halloweth every year.
The woman holding up her hands, besought him to give her some of them,
promising not to be unmindful of that good turn. He then casting his eye upon
his servant (who attended upon this trash and gain of the wallet) asked him if
he had any of the acornes left, which he gave at the village whence they came
last? The fellow having sought a good while, answered that he could find but
two, which he said he kept for their Ass which was often sick: Though our
Ass should die (quoth he) yet must we pleasure this good woman, whom I know to
be well affected to our order. Mean while looking with a covetous leering eye
at a piece of cloth which lay hard by, (continuing his speech) he said, My good
sister, I am so persuaded of your liberality, that you will not deny me a
piece of linen cloth for the poor sick folk of our Covent. She forthwith
offered him linen cloth or what he would demand, so he would speedily remedy
that evil. Then taking these two acornes in his hand, he called for a vessel
full of water, and cast therein a little salt; and putting off his cowle, began
to patter over a number of shor^ prayers (his man still answering Amen, and the
good wife with her children being solemnly all the while upon their knees;) and
having ended his devotions, he beat the acornes to powder, and cast them into
the water* and stirring them together like a mash, gave them the swine to
drink, making many crosses, and pronouncing as many blessings over their
backs, ever calling upon the good Baron S. Anthony for assistance in this
miracle. This done, he told her that her swine were in no danger. She therefore
to make good her promise, changed her piece of cloth for the grand mercies of
this ghostly father. But the good man of the house (her husband) coming home
shortly after, and hearing of all this pageant, as also how his cloth was an
actor therein: taking two or three of his gossips with him ran after them.
The Friar seeing them coming a far off with staves upon their necks, was
amazed like a cutpurse taken in the fact* howbeit he thought it his best course
to take an house (which was somewhat near) into which his man ran, and secretly
conveyed thence two quick coals, which he folded up in the cloth: and having
so done, they passed on their way, as though they mistrusted nothing. Anon the
butcher ouertooke him, and laying hold of his hood (after a rude and rough
manner) asked him for his cloth, calling him thief, with many other threatening
words. Sir quoth the Friar (very mildly) You shall have it with all my heart;
and God forgive you this wrong you offer me, in taking that from me which was
given me in recompense of a great good turn done at your house: it grieueth me
not that you take away my cloth, yet I trust the glorious Baron Saint Anthony
will work some wonder, and that shortly, to teach you how you entreat the
faithful servants and friends of God. The butcher nothing regarding vain
words, returned back, very iocund that he had gotten his cloth again. Howbeit
he was not gone a bow shoot from the Friar, but he smelt the burning of some
thing, and saw a smoke round about him; whereat he and his fellows were so
amazed, that they cast down the cloth, and cried aloud, S. Anthony the
hermit, S. Anthony of Padua. Which when the Friar and his varlet heard, they
came running to them like sly merchants with demure countenances; his man
presently putting out the fire, and the Friar discharging a number of blessings
over the heads of these simple suppliants (being on their knees) instantly
crying him and the good Saint mercy, till they were even hoarse withal. These
things thus p^ssed over, he carried them to the parish Church to Mass, where
the cloth being unfolded and well viewed (for so the story says) it was
solemnly auowed for a miracle. And it was enjoined the poor butcher in way of
penance, to accompany the Friar throughout all Calabria to witness this
wonder; who by this means did not only recover his cloth again, but gathered
a round sum of money (every man thinking himself happy that gave him any
thing:) whereas the poor butcher lost not only his cloth, but was further
endomaged as well with the expense of his journey as the intermission of his
trade.

19 From Calabria I will pass over into France, a country second to none in
fertility of false miracles: and will begin with Pudding Saint Peter in the
country of Berry, of whom this story is recorded. A priests maid (to speak
with reverence) having powered swines blood into a great latin basin, (which had
the Image of Saint Peter embossed in it, and wherinto the Curate was wont to
put his offerings, and to set it for a show upon the Altar;) it happened on a
time that a drop of blood was perceived upon Saint Peter's face; about which the
Curate made no small ado, not forgetting (among other ceremonies) to ring the
bells, as for a most certain and excellent well qualified miracle. Which caused
all the neighbor parishes round about, to meet there at procession; which
when his fellow Curat perceived, (being moved with envy) he made such diligent
inquiry, that he found how that certain drops of blood which the Curats maid
had put into the basin, were fallen into the concauitie or hollownesse of the
embossing, where it was not closely joined to the place, which being congealed
and frozen, continued until the thaw; and then running down, were seen upon
Saint Peter's face, which gave occasion to the rumor, that Saint Peter wept
bloody tears: which rumor (the knavery being well known) was afterward
turned into a matter of meriment and mockage of poor Saint Peter, who for this
accident was ever after called Pudding Saint Peter.

20 And to parallele it with one other like example (before I leave this
country) In the Church belonging to the Castle without Bourges, it happened
that a Bird (some say a Pigeon) bleeding of a wound, ^ested herself upon the
head of our Lady of Colwort, so that some of the blood ran down her face.
And then who for a penny could cry the loudest, a miracle, a miracle. But when
the kings Lieutenant had caused the head to be looked upon and searched, the
feathers of a bird and some of her blood were found in the crannies and
hollownesse of the Image; whereupon the miracle which had been before cried so
loud, was cried down again as fast.

21 I have also heard of one of our Ladies (called our new Lady) who being
miraculously discovered, wrought many miracles, at leastwise they made her
believe that she did them. They had hid her in a hollow vault under the
grass which they watered with salt water, which by the grasing of the kine in
that place, was discovered.

22 The deceit also of the Rood of Mu^e^ by Tholouze has bin very famous. For
they made this Crucifixe believe (about thirty year ago) that it wept, and
did many miracles upon the lame, the blind, and such like impotent persons, in
curing such infirmities as surpassed the Art of Physic. There are two
opinions touching the distilling of the water out of the Crucifix eyes, which
they call tears. Some say it was done by water mixed with oil; others, that it
was by the branch of a vine thrust into the head of the Rood, at what time it
puts out the sap, or weepeth, as others speak. But the miracle continued
longer then that season, and therefore though this device might serve them for
that time, yet it was necessary they should find out some other for the time to
come.

23 These were the means which they used to bring a Crucifix or Saint into
credit: but to the end it might hold the credit it had got, and increase it the
more, they suborned certain sturdy beggars to cou^terfeit the lame or the
blind, or to fain that they had been dangerously diseased, and afterward cured
thereby. Sometime they used this as a means only to make their Saint famous:
of which kind of cosenage we have sundry examples, three of which come now to
my mind. The first is of Saint Renaud at Paris in the suburbs of our Lady of
the fields, whom the Friars of that Covent would needs make believe that he was
become a Saint and the powerfullest wonder-worker within 50. miles of his head.
For effecting whereof, they suborned certain crafty knaves, to whom they had
given the watch word to counterfeit the lame, the blind, etc. One of which
affirmed that he was borne blind: who after he had taken many friskes in
leaping up and down, cried a miracle, a miracle, for that he was restored to
his sight. At which words a certain goodfellow who lay in the wind to watch
his opportunity to discover this abuse, hearing him say, he had recovered his
sight, showed him the colored lyning of his coat, and said: If thou never
saw in all thy life, and now see (which I can hardly believe,) Tell me,
what color is this? The counterfeit told him presently what color it was, in
the hearing of them all. The man having him where he would, said: See here my
masters, if he could never see before, how can he judge of colors? By which
policy this abuse was detected. The 2. is of the^ who faining the falling
sickness (called S. John's evil) went to him upon his festiual day, and having
fomed much with crying, o John, John, John, about his shrine or the place where
he stood, made the word believe that they were cured. In which was a manifest
and impudent deceit: since they which have the falling sickness neither speak
a word nor move a finger. The third is of the miracles wrought in Venice, about
thirteen years ago, by a Monk called Fra Matthio (as I remember) who was
almost as soon vncanonized as canonized* to whom beggars and rogues came
flocking thick and threefold, some counterfaiting the lame, others the blind;
some faining themselves sick of the palsy, others that they had lost the use
of their limbs, and others some other infirmity: which counterfeit companions
came not thither for nothing, for they were well rewarded for their labor by
the canonizing Monks. Oh (would some say at their return) how do I feel my
self eased of my pain? Another* that he was as whole as a fish, and as sound
as a bell, etc. Howbeit, this pageant was not played without great murmur: for
many that went thither to see this imposture (of which number my self was one)
could not but speak what they thought, pitying the simple seduced people; who
perceiving not that these vagabonds were suborned, were fully persuaded that
this false Friar was become a worker of wonders after his death. True it is
indeed, he was in his life time accounted a very holy man: and therefore the
people were more easily induced to believe that which was reported of his
working of wonders. Among other things, I heard this reported of him, that he
would inueigh mightily against the Court of Rome, when the toy took him in the
head, and use Dyogenick-like dealing in scoffing and censuring those that came
within his walk. And I remember what captain Franchot related to the now
deceased Odet de Selue (then Ambassador for the French king to the state of
Venice) concerning this gentle Sir John. I bade (said he) this Friar to dinner
one time in Lent, that he might serve as a fiddle to the company which I had
invited: (for I knew he could ^east and sport when it pleased him,) who needing
no great entreatie, came at the time appointed, and being set down at table
which was furnished with kiddes and sundry sorts of stued meats, (as the manner
is at Rome) plied his trencher and filled his panch as well as any in the
company, not showing the least dislike. True it is, we perceived he chopped it up
apace, as though he had been in great have, as well appeared afterward: for he
had made an end of dinner long before us, and rising from the table, left us
still at meat: and he was no sooner in the street, but we might hear one cry
with open mouth. The devil take all those that eat flesh in Lent: or, they
shall all go to the devil.
Allo inferno tutti quelli chi mangiano carne la quaresima; whose voice we
thought was very like the Friars, howbeit we could not imagine it should be he,
considering that in crying out against such as had eaten flesh in Lent, he
should have exclaimed against himself also. But as we looked out at the
window, we might perceive that it was he indeed. And, which does more aggrauate
his fact, the more he was entreated to be silent, the more clamorous he was; so
that we could devise no other means to make him hold his peace, but by
threatening to beat him. The captain having ended his narration, other like
stories were reported of him, suting the former in all points: by which we
might well perceive what humor it was that caused him to procure the foresaid
canonization.

24 Moreover, I remember I have heard of many false miracles about restoring of
children to life, which were still borne, at leastwise to some sense and
feeling, till such time as they had been baptized. And verily, it was the
easiest matter of a thousand, for the Clergy to make the poor people believe
what they thought good: for according to the common saying, It is an easy
matter to deceive him that thinks no hurt. And what great conscience they
made to think amiss of any thing they either said or did, yea to judge that
the knavery of the Clergy (though notoriously known) was plain knavery, may
well appear by sundry places of this book, and namely by that which has been
spoken in this chapter. Notwithstanding here is yet a further point to be noted
concerning the false miracles wrought by these impostors: how that they used
sometimes the help of charms; and sometimes again dazeled the eyes of the
simpler sort by diabolical illusions. Now he that would see examples of such
iuggling (to omit that which has been already alleged) shall find store of
them in the book of Conformities so often before alleged) where we find so
many to have been cured by S. Francis and his disciples, and raised from death
to life, that (if it were so indeed) we might well say they had all miracles at
command: and that to work a miracle (and namely to raise the dead) was as
easy a matter as to drink when one is dry. For what could not he do, whose
frock (or cowle) was such a worker of wonders, that it gave sight to three
blind folks, one man and two women? And how miraculously Friars breeches made
women's bellies (which were naturally barren) to swel and tympanize, not so much
as little children but have heard thereof: and verily such actions are there
registered for miracles, that a man would think the devil had employed all his
charms, sorceries and illusions therein.

25 To this knavery we may add the imposture formerly mentioned, practiced by
those hucksters who made the world believe, that the bones of the first
malefactor they met withal (for want of better) were the miraculous bones of
such or such a Saint; which they call relikes. And because there is a notable
example of this kind of cousinage, witnessed even by Popelings themselves (of
which as yet no mention has been made) I will here insert it. But forasmuch as
I have heard it told otherwise then Boccace has recorded it (albeit the
difference be in the circumstance and not in the substance) I will relate it
both ways, leaving the Reader to his choice. And first I will tell it as I
heard it. A peddler of Popish wares having pawned his relikes in a tavern, and
being not able to redeem them, bethought himself of this device. He took up
a coal in the presence of his hostess, of whom he had borrowed the money,
wrapping it up in a fair linen cloth. Whereat she began to mock and make
merry. Why hostess (quoth he) what is the matter? do you indeed make a mock
at my coal? I will make you kiss it for all this before it be night.
Whereupon she would needs wager with him, that he could not make her kiss it.
Well then (quoth he) let the wager be for so much as I owe you, upon condition
that if I win you shall deliver me my relikes again. The bargain being
agreed upon, this gentle Friar (whose wit was not gone of wool-gathering) went
to the Church, where he told the people that he would not show them the relikes
he was wont to show them, but one far more precious: and therewith unfolding
his fair cloth, he showed them his coal, saying, My good friends, do you
mark this coal? I tell you it is one of those coals, upon which the glorious
martyr S. Laurence was broyled; and it has a certain secret property; for no
maid that has lost her virginity, nor any houswife that has broken the bond
of matrimony, may come near to kiss it: for if they do, they will be in great
danger. He had no sooner spoken the words, but there was great thronging about
him; she thinking her self happiest which could first come to kiss it: every
silly soul, both maid and matron desiring to show openly that their
consciences did not accuse them secretly. His hostess on the one side well
perceiving that if she kissed it her wager was lost; and knowing on the other
side, that if she did not, she should be suspected to have played her husband a
slippery touch, and should not be believed though she made never such report of
the wager which she had laid; went after all the rest, and kissed this fools
babble. By this device this jolly Friar redeemed his relikes without disbursing
one penny, and increased moreover the number of them, by adding this unto the
old. Menot the Franciscan, whose testimony we need not to suspect (considering
he was made of the same mould, a Friar of the same fry) touches this story but
by the way, yet he agrees with me in this circumstance, that the relikes were
left in the tavern: his words are these: Fol. 41. col. 4. Dic de illis qui
reliquias suas in taberna perdiderunt, and stipitem inuentum in sudario, loco
reliquiarum suarum, dixerunt esse quo beatus Laurentius combustus fuerat. And
now you shall hear it as Boccace has it, but more briefly, yet so as I will
not omit that which may make for the understanding of the papisticall style,
which these Friar dockers observe. One of S. Anthonies religious pigs, called
Friar Onion, being accustomed to go to a village by Florence (called Certald)
once a year to gather alms, went one Sunday morning into the chief Church,
where both town and country was met to hear Mass: who when he saw his time,
began in this sort: My masters and dames, you have bin accustomed of your
special love and favor, to send every year to the poor which belong to my
Lord Baron S. Anthony, both wheat and oats, some more, some less, every man
according to his ability and devotion: that blessed S. Anthony should keep
your bullocks, asses, swine and sheep. Besides, you were wont (those especially
that are written in our fraternity) to pay that small duty which they pay
once only in the year. For gathering up of which things my Lord Abbot has
sent me; and therefore see ye miss not to come in the afternoon into the
Churchyard (when you hear the bells ring) where according to the custom I will
make you a Sermon, and give you the cross to kiss. Moreover, forasmuch as I
know you to be most devout servants of my Lord Baron S. Anthony, I will show you
of my especial grace and favor, a most holy and goodly relike which my self
brought long since from beyond the seas out of the holy land, being one of the
angel Gabriels feathers which he left in the virgin Mary's chamber when he
saluted her in Nazareth. And having thus said, he returned to hear Mass. Now
there were two merry companions in the company, who determined to show this
jolly Friar a trick of conueyance concerning the fether of the Angel Gabriel.
For watching their opportunity, they went and ransacked all his packet of
trinkets, amongst which they found a little coffer wrapped up in taffata,
wherein was a fether of a Parrots tail, which he would have made them believe
had been the Angel Gabriels feather: as he might easily have done without much
Rhetoric; seeing the most of them had not only not seen it, but not so much
as once heard of any such thing. Now when these good fellows had taken away
the feather (because they would not leave the coffer empty) they filled it up
with coals. After dinner when the time was come that he should show this goodly
relicke, he called to his man for the trash he had given him to keep, willing
him to ring the belles and call the people together. And when they were
assembled, he began his sermon entreating of that which he thought would fit
his purpose best in regard of his relick. In the end when he was come to the
point to show it, he first made a solemn and devout confession, and then
(having two lighted torches) he took off the taffata very gingerly wherein the
coffer was wrapped: and speaking in the mean while something in commendation
of the Angel Gabriel and of his relicke, he opened it. And perceiving the
trick which was played him (blushing at it no more then a black dog, nor
showing any sign of astonishment) he lifted up his eyes and hands to heaven,
saying, o God, praised be thy power for ever. That done, he shut his coffer
again, and turning him to the people, said; My Masters and Dames, you are to
know, that my superior sent me (when I was a young man) into the East country,
and it was given me in charge, etc. And making a long discourse of his
travail, he told them, that the Patriarch of Jerusalem had showed him (amongst
other relics) a little piece of the holy Ghosts finger, as sound and whole as
ever it was: and the snowt of the Seraphin which appeared to Saint Francis: and
one of the nails of the Cherubin, one of the sides of verbum Caro, the
abilliments of the holy Catholic faith: some beams of the star which
appeared to the three kings in the East, and a Phiall-full of the sweat of
Saint Michael when he fought with the devil. These are the relickes which (as
he said) the Patriarch showed him. But behold others which he did not only
show him, but also give him. One of the teeth of the holy Cross, a little of
the sound of the b^s of Salomons Temple, a feather of the Angel Gabriel, one
of the clogs of Saint Gerrard of Gran-ville. Besides all these, I have (said
he) some of the coals whereon the blessed Martyr Saint Lawrence was broyled.
All which I have brought into these parts in great devotion. Howbeit my
superior would never suffer me to show them, till he was fully resolved whether
they were true relics or not. But now being certified, partly by the miracles
which have been wrought by them, partly by letters from the Patriarch, he has
permitted me to show them. And because I dare trust none with them, I carry them
always about me: and for that I was afraid I should mar the Angel Gabriels
feather, I put it in a little box, and the coals whereon Saint Lawrence was
broyled in another; which boxes are so like one another, that I often take the
one for the other, as now it happens. For whereas my purpose was to have
brought the box wherein the feather was, I brought that wherein the coals were.
But I hope there is no hurt herein, sithence it is the will of God it should be
so, he having put the box of coals into my hands. And now I remember the
feast of S. Lawrence is to be celebrated within these two days; and therefore,
etc. I leave the rest to such as desire further information hereof: considering
that this story is enriched (as the rest of the same author) but with
accustomable lies, common and ordinary with these false Friars. For which cause
I would not omit them.

26 And thus thou see (gentle Reader) how their false miracles have been
discovered and laid open to the sight of the Sun, as well as their other
trumperies. But as blind Bartimaeus saw no more in the clear Sunshine then
in a gloomy day, nor at noonday then at midnight: so we are to think that
the silly seduced world had so lost the use of reason, and was become so
sottish and senseless, so blind and brutish in matters of religion, that none
of these gross abuses though committed before their eyes, were once perceived
by them. For it is well known how the heady multitude would break forth into
plain murmuring and mutiny against those that durst say, that that which they
held to be a miracle, was but a iuggling trick of a quacksaluing mountebanke,
albeit it had been discovered by the Magistrate of the place. Nay, they have
grown to harder terms; even to break open the prison doors where these
companions were kept in hold; yea after the knavery was detected. And here we
are to remember that which I touched before, how that that which should have
served them as a crystal, wherein they might have seen their cunning
conueyance, was so handled by them, that it was a means to keep them still in
their former darkness. And as they were as blind as beetles, so were they as
deaf as door nails: for we know what a silver trumpet Martin Luther was (to
say nothing of Wickleffe, John Hus, Jerome of Prague, and the like his
predecessors) and yet the shrill sound thereof spent it self and vanished
away in the air, and was never able to pierce their ears of a long time, they
were so thick of hearing. But in the end, the Lord who had sent this his
trumpeter, charmed these deaf adders in such sort, that he caused them to lend
their patient ear. But how (may some say) could churchmen maintain themselves
since the sounding of this alarm; especially since the coming of Antichrist
was proclaimed through the world, and that little children could see their
knaueries, and touch them (as it were) with their fingers? For answer
whereunto, let posterity know (how ever they may wonder to hear it) that they
have kept their kitchins hot, and fed themselves fat by other means. For when
they perceived that the truth of God made open war against them, and that it
got ground of them by little and little, winning from them now one piece, now
another: they showed themselves no less cruel and currish, fell and furious
against those that stood in defense thereof (if once they fell into their
clouches) then the Lion or Tygre, nay then the Lioness does against those that
rob her of her whelps, as shall be declared in the Chapter following.

CHAP. XL. Wherein is declared how that after posterity shall have wondered at
the long continued folly of Popish practices and abuses, it will further wonder
how the open discovering of them should have cost so many men their lives, who
were persecuted by the Clergy: and will judge this story no less strange
then sundry recorded by Herodotus.
IN the time of our Ancestors, whilst the folly of the former abuses was in
the ruff, the Clergy not content to be reverenced and adored of the poor
people, to have their purses at command when they thought good, and to terrify
them with their excommunications, came to this pass, even to set their feet
in their necks, not as it is commonly said by a figurative speech, but really
and indeed. Nay, one of their Popes was not ashamed to set his foot in the
Emperors neck. For it is a known and famous history (neither has it bin
forgotten by those that have written the lives of Popes) how that Alexander the
third having commanded the Emperor Frederick to prostrate himself, and ask
him pardon for his offense (before a multitude of people, in Saint Marks Church
at Venice,) the Emperor at his command kneeled down; whereupon this gentle
Pope, setting his foot upon his throat (or as some say, in his neck) said, It
is written, thou shall walk upon the Aspe and the Basiliske, the young Lion and
the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet. The Emperor highly offended at
this so great contempt and outrage, answered, I do not this to thee, but to
Saint Peter. Then he treading upon him the second time, said, ^oth to me, and
to Saint Peter. Now here it is to be noted, that the chief cause of this
Emperors coming, was, that he might be absolved from the Popes
excommunication. Further, we read how that the Venetians sent an Ambassador
to Pope Clement the fifth, called Francis Dandalus, to entreat for absolution
from the Popes excommunication (for he had excommunicated them again and
again, and cursed them with bell, book and candle; and (not content to
thunder out all sorts of Ecclesiastical censures) had caused the Croysado to
be published against them in Italy.) But he refused to absolve them, till that
the Ambassador (in way of honorable satisfaction) had put a dogs collar
about his neck, and therewith had crept upon all four, the length of the
great hall in the palace of Auinion: for which fact he was ever after at
Venice called dog. The said Pope walking upon a time through the city of
Bogenci, upon the river Loyre, in great pomp, had (amongst others) for his
attendants, or rather seruing-men and lackeys, the King of England and the King
of France, one upon his right hand, and another on his left; one of them
leading his horse by the bridle. We read also how the foresaid Emperor
Frederick attended upon Pope Adrian the fourth (this man's predecessor) like a
blew-coate; at least, that he held him the stirrup when he lighted off his
horse, by the same token, that in lieu of this so great humility, he got
nothing but a frumpe for his labor, and that by the Pope himself, for holding
the left stirrup in stead of the right. With which flout the Emperor being
somewhat moved, said, I was never brought up in such a trade: and thou art the
first on whom I have thus attended. And what arrogant speeches used Boniface
the eight to King Philip the fair, when he made no bones to tell him, that by
reason of his disobedience and contumacy, the kingdom of France was fallen
into the lapse, and deuolued to the Church of Rome? The said Pope having his
sword by his side, was not ashamed to brag and boast of himself (having
refused now the third time to give to Albert Duke of Austria the title of
Emperor of Germany) that himself forsooth was Emperor, and Lord of all the
world.

2 And suitable to that which has been said of the excommunication of
Frederick the Emperor by Pope Alexander the third, that is to be noted which
Machiauel says, that Popes become great by three things, by excommunications,
by pardons, by weapons; yea so great, that whereas in times past they were
subject to Kings in civil causes, now they are above them, and take upon them
to command them. For it is to be observed, that by reason of their pardons or
indulgences they were worshipped as gods, and gathered Peter's pence apace: by
reason of excommunication they were feared; whereof we may see infinite
examples in the lives of Popes. And these words thunderbolt and thundering
helped them well to play their parts with those who took the Pope to be the
man whom he affirmed himself to be. Yet I will not say, but that they have
enriched themselves by their excommunications. For as they forbad the use of
sundry things, to the end men might buy dispensations: so they excommunicated
men to the end they might buy absolutions. As we read how the foresaid
Emperor Frederick bought his absolution of Pope Gregory the ninth, at the
price of an hundred thousand ounces of gold. But what shall we say to Boniface
the eight, who not content to excommunicate the French King according to the
usual manner, excommunicated him and all his to the fourth generation? By which
we may perceive how at their pleasure they trod Kings and Emperors (as well as
meaner men) under their feet, openly mocking at the Lombard-like patience and
sottishness of the world. For what colorable excuse or pretense could his
Holiness have to excommunicate a man with all his posterity to the fourth
generation? The like mockage used the foresaid Pope, when to spite the
forenamed King Philip the fair, he nullified all the indulgences granted to
the French by his predecessors. For had these pardons had such virtue in them
as they were supposed to have, they should have delivered many millions of
souls out of Purgatory: whereas being manifested to be but trumperies and
mere nullities, it should follow that these poor souls were to return back
into Purgatory again. As a malefactor who having got out of prison by means
of the Princes pardon, if it so fall out that his pardon be reuersed or
repealed, there is no remedy, he must be cast into prison again.

3 Further, we may see how men excommunicate were driven to despair, and what
cruel revenge was taken of the Laity for offending and wronging the Clergy,
by a story recorded in the life of Honorius the third, where it is said, that
Anno 1223. Adam Bishop of Cathnes in Scotland, being burned in his own kitchen
by some of his diocese, for excommunicating certain of them, because they
paid not their tenths: this Pope was never at quiet till for this one he had
hanged four hundred of them, and gelded their children. Which history (to omit
other particulars) shows into what a desperate case poor souls were driven
by this means. For it is not probable that they which did so handle their
Bishop (who had excommunicated them) would have broken out into so great
outrage, but that formerly they had been instant suppliants and importunate
suitors for an absolution; which being denied, caused them to fall into this
mad mood.

4 Consider now (gentle Reader) how these Antichrists made all the world to
tremble under them: for if any shall reply and say, that al Churchmen were
neither Popes nor Prelates, to keep the people in such aw, and to be so much
feared: I shall desire him to remember what the proverb says, De grand
maistre, hardy valet. A great lord, a bold servant; which (if I be not
deceived) has been more truly verified, and better practiced by the^, then by
any men in the earth. For hardly durst a man look a paltry priest in the face,
for the great reverence and respect which was had of our holy mother the
Church. Besides, it is to be observed that their Lord and Master did not
reserve the thunderbolt of excommunication to himself alone, but affoorded it
them, when and as often as they stood in need: which they so little spared,
that for half a quart d'escu, yea for a matter of three pence (as Menot says)
they would not stick to excommunicate poor men, who were thereupon driven to
despair, as thinking themselves to be damned. And because the place in Menot
serves so fitly for this purpose, I will here insert it. He says therefore
fol. 143. col. 4. He that is excommunicated, is forsaken of God, and given up
into the power of all the devils in hell: and therefore it is a great and
grievous sin to put such a sharp sword into the hand of a foolish Prelat,
seeing it is no small matter to send a man to the devil. Suitable hereunto a
Caualier said upon a time to one of our order: Softly father, I would gladly be
resolved of you in a difficult point: I cannot sufficiently wonder at the
dealing which is practiced at this day in the Church, in that we secular men
send those whom we cut off with the stroke of justice to heaven: you Churchmen
send them straight to the devil. I will show you how: when we condemn any man
to death (which he has justly deserved) before we send him to the gallows, we
procure some good man to shriue him, and when he is led to the place of
execution, we comfort him and put him in good hope, and labor by all means to
work him to a good disposition, that so he may dye in a good mind: whereas you
Clergymen (who have the cure, and should have the care of men's souls) for
three single pence, or an old pair of shoes, send a man soul and body,
clothes and all to the devil: such great zeal you have of the salvation of
our souls. To which this ghostly father (as he confessed to me) could not
answer him with all his divinity, seeing his conscience told him that he spoke
nothing but the very truth: and he is yet to take counsel of his pillow what
answer to make him. If this poor Franciscan was constrained to confess thus
much, (who had affirmed a little before, that all that were excommunicated by
Priests, were no longer under the protection of God, nor in the bosom of the
Church, but were delivered up to Satan, in such sort, that even upon good
Friday, when men pray not only for Christians, but also for Jews, Pagans, and
other infidels, they pray not for them.) If (I say) his conscience enforced him
to confess this, in what a pitiful plight (may we think) were they, over whom
they did so tyrannize, by terrifying them with the thunderbolt of
excommunication?

5 And no marvel if they stood in such fear to be excommunicated by a Priest,
considering the opinion which they had of them (which was often beaten into
their heads:) I mean the opinion which they had of their power and authority:
for they would not stick to say, Potestas Mariae mayor est potestate
Angelorum, non tamen potestate sacerdotum. Which sentence is alleged by
Menot, fol. 107. And God knows what goodly lying legends they alleged to
prove the power, dignity and greatness of Priests. As when Barelete records
fol. 247. col. 3. that after that the Emperor Constantine had been baptized,
he sent back two Priests which came to him for the deciding of a controversy
which was betwixt them, and that he should say unto them, It belongs not to me
to judge them that are my gods. And what would we more? when they apply sundry
places of Scripture to their shauelings, which were written of Christ himself:
neither herewith content, forge sundry fables touching the strange torments
inflicted upon those that had any way wronged or offended Churchmen, or had
called them by any term worse then their names. And as for Priests, their
shaven crown (which might not be touched upon pain of excommunication)
exempted them from the jurisdiction and authority of the secular power (yea of
Kings and Emperors themselves) by many privileges of their Popes; in such
sort, that certain thieves (as histories report) would needs be shaven in the
Priests cut, that if they were taken, they might be sent to their competent
Ecclesiastical Judges, that is, might escape and be set at liberty as
themselves thought good. Notwithstanding, even those Churchmen which had not
their crowns shaued, but only some lesser mark and character of the beast,
would boast and brag of this privilege of exemption from secular power.

6 And touching their cosening conueyances, it is no marvel if they were so
plunged therein over head and ears, considering the fear they were in of
being excommunicated, if they did but once entertain any thing tending to the
prejudice of the least ceremony established or received in their religion.
Besides, they terrified them with the fear of certain torments which they
were to suffer in Purgatory or in hell, according to the quality of their
sins. As we read in the book of Conformities of Saint Francis with Christ,
of a man who having but once omitted to make a leg at Gloria Patri, did
undergo most cruel pain in Purgatory. They also alleged examples of
certain punishments which have been inflicted upon men in this life: of which
sort we read of one very ridiculous above the rest, viz. that in the days of
Pope John the one and twentieth, it was blazed a broad over all Saxony, that
there were certain which never ceased dancing a whole year together without
intermission (by virtue of a curse wherewith the priest had blessed them)
because they honored not the breaden god which he carried about with him.

7 We may also perceive how the poor people were nuzzled in ignorance, by that
which at the first they made them believe concerning the Lutherans (as they
term them:) for they were so far from letting them understand that they
were like unto other men, and that they had no horns, that they were such as
had been baptized, and armed themselves with texts of holy Scripture against
the Church of Rome: as that they made them believe, that in shape and figure
they differed from other men, that they made a mock of God and all religion,
that they had wives common; and in a word, that they were worse then Jews,
Turks or Saracens. It is further to be noted, that a great part of the simple
people knew not of a long time, whether a Lutheran were the name of a man or of
a beast. For it is reported of one who being called a Luthera^, asked his
friend what this name Lutheran meant, who told him that it was a disease ten
times worse then the Leprosy: which he did so firmly believe, that falling
sick not long after, he sent his state to the Physician, with this
commandment, that they should enquire of him, if he were not a Lutheran?

8 But at the last when their trumperies were so laid open, and their iuggling
tricks so well discovered, that even little children could laugh them to scorn,
it was necessary for them to devise some other means whereby to maintain
themselves. For how the Clergy terrified men with the thunderbolt of
excommunication (when as they of the same religion feared it no more then a
child's rattle, or the crack of a pot-gun) may appear by the Emperor Charles
the fifth (who was not only a fauorer but also a defender thereof.) for being
menaced with excommunication by Pope Paulus the third, if he would not yield up
Playsance into his hands (after the death of Peter Lewis,) he let him
understand by his Ambassador, that he would thunder and lighten with his
canons and artilery, if he would needs be thundering with his excommunications.
What means then used they (may we think) to stop up the light of the truth,
that it might not prevail against the darkness of their lying legends? Verily
the same that we find registered of Phalaris, Busiris, Nero and such of the like
strain. But what do I compare them with these gentle tyrants? For they never
thought of the tenth part of the cruelties which these hel-hounds have
practiced against those that maintained the truth, and armed themselves with
the word of God to uphold his credit and cause: for they chopped Logic with
them, and answered them again with fire and sword, and all kind of torments:
and in so doing were both parties and judges; taking it to heart as a matter
that did sit very near them, because they foresaw that this light which some
labored to give entrance unto, would in the end put out the great fire of their
greasy kitchen. And it was but lost labor to allege Scripture against them:
for their bellies (which made buttons already for fear of paying their
interest) had no cares, as we know no man's belly has, according to the common
saying. One brother was moved to accuse another, the wife to accuse her
husband, the husband the wife; parents to appeal their own children, yea to
be their tormentors, hang-men and executioners, for default of others. They of
the Inquisition (as they are called) had their spies abroad in all quarters, to
whom they gave the watchword. No witnesses might be refused though never such
thieves, murderers, malefactors (nay contrarily they often escaped scotfree in
recompense of their false depositions.) They gave their word to such as were
accused or suspected, to the end they might toule them in, but thought it a
sin to keep promise with them, alleging for themselves this goodly text,
Haereticis fides non est seruanda. Others were even half dead before they came
into the tormentors hands, coming forth of dungeons where they had been
encountered by toades and such like vermin: yea sometimes they came old men out
of prison, who were young when they went in. They that carried alms to the
prisoners, were permitted to relieve all, save those that were imprisoned for
matter of religion. And he that said, he pitied them, was in great danger,
though he had no more pity of them then of a dog. Whereupon I remember a
staff of a dozen verses made by a learned man endowed with rare gifts, which
yet do flourish in him, in which regard he is greatly beloved of the godly, and
extremely hated of the wicked.

Liset monte dessus sa mule
Trouue un pourceau demi brule:
Tout so^dain sa best recule.
Comme s'ell'en ^ust appelle:
En fin, tant y ^ut recule,
Que monsieur Liset en piquant,
Parcillement and quant and quant
Trencha un chemi^ tout nouueau.
Vicil pourri au rouge museau,
Deshonneur du siecle ou nous sommes,
Ta best a pity d'vn porceau,
Et tu n'as point pity des hommes.
That is, Liset mounted on his moyle,
As he went along the way,
Came where an hog on burning lay.
His mule began straight to recoile,
As if she did the fact detest,
Or feared to hurt her fellow beast.
So long, so far she backward fled,
That Liset spurd her till she bled.
Yet still perforce she drew him back,
Until he took another tracke.
Thou measell wretch, with sauce-fleume face,
Of this our age the just disgrace:
Thy beast cannot abide an hog should bren,
And yet thou take no ruth on living men.
And now that we are speaking of Liset, what will posterity say (think we)
when they shall hear of a burning chamber? We may assure our selves it will be
diversely construed. The greater part (no doubt) will judge it to be the name of
some chamber in hell, at leastwise in our Ancestors Purgatory. I omit to speak
of cruelties practiced in secret, as also of the confiscation of the goods of
the condemned, and often of those that were not condemned, yea sometimes of
such as were not so much as accused (so easy a matter it was to arraigne and
condemn them.) Notwithstanding, I may not with silence pass over a kind of
cruelty, which I am persuaded Phalaris himself would have wondered at, viz.
that they inflicted the last and greatest torment upon them by fire (as
Phalaris did,) but first they cut out their tongues, bereauing them of the ease
they might have by speech, which Phalaris permitted to those whom he tormented:
and not so only, but having cut out their tongues, they gagged them, that so
they might make no noise at all, but be as mute as fishes. Neither was it safe
for any to say, they pitied them, or to make any show or semblance thereof,
much less to commend the constancy of those who had the means left them to
manifest it in the midst of their torments.

9 Now when I say that they used such and such cruelty, it does not thereupon
follow but that greater is practiced at this day. But it is because this cruel
persecution is not so universal: seeing there is not in some places (God be
thanked) wood enough to be found, to continue the fires of former times. For
our Savior has given the same virtue to the ashes of these Martyrs, which
some affirm to be in the ashes of the Phoenix, and that in far greater
measure: seeing the ashes of a Phoenix engender but a Phoenix: whereas the
ashes of a faithful servant of Christ breeds and brings forth a number of
others.

10 Now then let posterity judge (which can better judge without partiality or
passion) whether Herodotus do record any folly so strange and extremely foolish
as the forenamed, practiced and endured by those who have so long lent their
ears (and do even at this day) to such abuses. And on the other side, whether
he report any thing half so strange or incredible as this, viz. that the
detecting of such abuses (like to young childrens sport) should cost so many
thousand men their lives. To conclude, I beseech God in the name of his son
Jesus Christ our Lord, that posterity (to whom I appeal as to my competent
Judge) may never see such abuses as these be, otherwise then in paper, as here
they are to be seen.

Finis coronat opus.
Faults escaped, thus to be amended.
Page 2 lin. 26. read, other translation. p. 5 l 41 his p. 6. l. 28. take
away, the. l. 4^. lies. p. 8. l. 12. but not any. l. 35. not able to beget. l
41. from him. l. 49. Cro^sus. p. 10. l. 42 have given. p. 1^ l. 4. (...). p. 19
l. 38. take away, set. p. 22. l. 21. word. p. 24 l. 32. she would. p. 25. l.
33. enforced, to make easy passage. p. 27. l. 10. had lived p. 29. l. 13.
against them. l. 35 discourses. p. 30 l. 8. To. l. 45. with Moors. p. 31. l.
49. his. p. 3^. l. 1. that (to avoid. l. 30. dedita. p. 33. l. 47. first to
that. p. 34. l. 11. vsura palliata. p 37. l. 9. take away, all. p. 38. l 34.
take away, the. l. 42. take away, the p. 39 l. 27. imprecations. l. 47 so
outrage. p. 43. l. 33. the short bu^s. p. 45. l. 7 take away you. l. 36. take
away, a. l. 37. ^ali^. p 46. l. 16. fol. 35. p. 47. l. 18. take away* the. l 41
take away, out. p. 48. l 9. both. p. 49. l 35 are caught. l. 41. in illis. l.
44. qu^nch. p. 50 l. 7. they. l. 10. keep. p. 51 l. 5. settled. l. 6 long ago.
l. 36. office. l. 38 He adds. l. 46 ^is. p* 54. l. 38. take away, shall p.
55. l. 15. would be. page 56. l. 42. Cansignore. l. 46. sons l. 47. him good
cheer. p. 57. l. 37. take away, the. p. 59. l. 5. put out, in times past. l.
46 less^ restrained. p. ^0 l. 36. put out, all. p. 61. l. 10. to stir. p. 63.
l 23. persuaded, at the last. l. 28 put out, to. l. 37. a punishment. p. 6^. l.
38. put out, but. p. 66. l. 14. in these days. p. 67. l. 18. ans. p. 68 l. 48.
and. l ibid. ^eate. p. 69. l. 31 companied. p. 70 l. 42. are they. p. 74. l. 8.
works. l. 44. put out, more. p. 75. l. 8. Will. l. 24 it is not* p. 77. l. 23.
fig^^. l 25. and. l. 40. his. p. 79. l. 13. put out, it. p. 80. l 25. of all
other vices. p* 81. l. 13^ put out* viz page 82 l. 7. Cau^^. p 83. l. 34. he.
p. 85. l. 11. at that (...). l. ibid. into. l. 16. had cried. p. 85. l. 30.
run. page 87. l. 7. Judges l. 28. he knew. page 88. l. 34. made. p. 89. l.
17. enough. l. 28. over against. l. 42. put out, that. p. 91. l. 5. of many. p.
92. l. 31 watching p. 98. l. 14. that kind. p. 103. l. 47. ^icke again^ very
softly. p. 106. l. 46 this. p. 1^5 l. 4. too far. p. 116. l. 7. take out, for.
l. 9 maids. p. 117. l. 19. opti. p. 118 l. 15. demeanor. l. 27. Mark l. 3^.
when. p. 120. l. 22. Hor^e. p. 124. l. 42. we may assure. p. 126 l. 16. of the.
p. 127 l. 41. but that he. p. 132. l. 21. For the. p. 139.13, less. p 141. l 4
murders. p. 144. l. 43. Selue. p. 156. l. 31. beads. p. 168. l. 29. he says.
p. 174. l. 2. put out. the. p. 175. l. 30. he drew. page 183. l. 31.
Maidenbradley. l 49. put out, have. p. 185. l. 9 (...). p. 188. l. 7. in puris.
p. 189. l. 14. the. l. 22. the. p. 196. l. 49. Noyon. p. 198. l. 7. repugnan^.
p. 203. l. 36 put out, as. p. 210. l. 46. accedet. p. 215. l. 43. death. p.
231. l. 42. should. p. 232. l. 14. like Kings. p. 234. l. 28. put out, the. p.
235. l. 15. Ruffianlike. p. 236. l. 47. decer^. p. 237 l. 27. who so shall. p.
238. l 1. Petar. l. 43. lui. p. 242. l. 5. put out, and. p. 246. l 46. Nan. p.
248. l. 5. (...). p. 252. l. 36. displing. p. 253. l. 431. p. 260. l. 1^.
Callistus. p. 264. l. 12. of the book. p. 265. l. 24. as that. p. 268. l. 21.
the. p. 274. l. 46. a supper p. 275. l. 43 put out, the. p. 285. l. 16. the. p.
287. ^. 42. in. p. 2^0. l 31. should. p. 298. l. 3. serve. p. 300. l. 7. put
out. viz.


