blazon or coat of arms The epistle of Erasmus Roterodamus, sent unto Conradus
Pelicanus, concerning his opinion of the blessed Sacrament of Christ's body and
blood.

Excusum Londinum aedibus ^ohannis Cawodi, Typographi Reginae Mariae.

Anno. 1554.

royal figure

THe power of ye gospel does not put away moral virtues. but makes the^
perfect. And ye know well enough, how far it does varye and differ, not
only from virtue (I say) but utterly from all humanity, to bewraye the
priuite and secret counsel of friendship. Forasmuch as we do curse eue^ them,
which blabbe out those things, that were spoken among friends, although their
friendship be broken, and they be fallen out. And they which be of a more gentle
nature, can not find in their heart to upbraid or obiecte unto them whom they
chiefly hate, any such thing, as they which were their friends before, have
told them of trust. I thought you to have been one of this sort, yt I might
safely have told you any secrets, nor I would not have choosen any other unto
whom I might have showed the secrets of my conscience. Wherefore I marueyl
more, what has chanced, yt ye have spredde abroad concerning me those
things, which I never nether said nor thought. And yt ye have priuelye
whispered into the ears of a certain honest young man, yt I was of the same
mind, that ye were of, concerning the Eucharistie or the Sacrament of Christ's
body and blood. Now should he have carried with him in to his country this
sting of sclau^der, which ye laid upon me, if by chance he and I had not
fallen in communication of the same matter. And yet I can not tell, whether he
be gone without all suspicion of me or not. Verily at ye first, when I herd
this young man. I thought yt ye did think none other thing then ye were wont
to profess unto me. Ye did condemn those which durst be so bold to profess,
that there was nothing else but bread and wine. Nor I did never think
otherwise upon you before our last communication, wherein ye seemed (as it were)
clean another man, and one that was inspired. and ye declared your full mind
wtoute any color. And now saying yt ye profess the same openly, ye goo forth
abroad, affirming that I and you be both of one mind, yea and that ye do so in
diverse places, yt your tale has made a common rumor, whereof every one
knows you to be the aucthor. And I do not doubt, but ye write the same in
like manner to your friends.

Verily as for me, I did never agree with you thoroughly, no not in your first
saying. For in yt ye did say, yt in the Sacrament was ye body of the lord,
but how and after what manner it was there, we should commit yt unto god, which
knows al thing: truly I added this more to yt your saying, yt I thought it
might be said so more simply, and diverse doubts might so be avoided, if it
were lefull for a christian man to swerve from yt, which was already approved
and allowed both by the authority of common councels, and also by the
agreamente of al churches and nations so many ages past. But more over I
always denied yt I could let that sink in my mind, specially when both the
writings of ye Evangelists, and also of the Apostles do so plainly name the
body which is given, and the blood which is shed. And seeing yt the same does
wonderfully agree with the unspeakable charity of god toward mankind, that he
would feed by an unspeakable manner with the flesh and blood of his son,
those which he had redeemed by the same body and blood. And that he would
comfort the^ by this secret presence of his son as by a pledge, unto such
time as he would come again glorious and manifest to al. These things would make
me more inclined to receive the sentence of the catholic church, yea if
nothing were determined nether of the one part nor the other. Now what a madness
were it, if I should not be afraid to pronunce, yt there were nothing else but
bread and wine. I am wont to common freely of every thing with my friends
which be learned (specially when ye weak be absent) some time for serching for
the the true the, some time to prove the^, some time for pleasure, being in
this be half peradventure more simple, then need were. But I will knowledge my
self worthy death, if ever any man heard this word of me, either in
earneste, or in bourdes, yt there is nothing else in ye Sacrament, but bread and
wine, or that there is not there the very body and blood of ye lord, which
thing some now a days by their books abroad do hold and defend. Yea I
beseech christ not to favor me, if ever this saying or thought did tarry in my
mind. For if any of these flying or waueringe thoughts did once touch my
heart, I did easelye avoid the^, considering the inestimable love and charity
of God toward us, and wayinge ye words of holy scripture, which words of
holy scripture did compel, yea Luther him self (whom ye do set more by,
and prefer before al schools, al bisshops, al men, of right opinion and
councels) to profess the same. which the universal church does profess,
although he is wo^t gladly to dissent from the same church. I know how little
ye do regard ye authority of the councels. Verelye as for me, I do condemn
no church, specially where it has al churches agreing with it. Paul does
think, yt an aungel is not to be hard, if he preach an other gospel. The
church has persuaded me to believe the gospel, and by her instruction also
have I learned to expound the words of the gopel. Hitherto have I worshipped
in the Sacrament Christ, which did suffer for me as al other christen men have
done, nor yet I never see any thing, wherefore I ought to go from this
opinion. No man's reason shall be able to carye me away from the whole sentence
and agreament of the christen world, for those five words, In the beginning
God made heaven and earth, be of more strength with me, then all the arguments
and reasons of Aristotle and all the other Philosophers, whereby they do teach
ye world to be without beginning. And now what do these men bring, whereby
I should be moved to profess this so ungodly and sedicious sentence or saying.
Their reasons be weak and of no streng the, such as these. He once took away
his flesh, less it should be offensive. The Apostles did not wondre at it,
nor did not worship it. We are commanded to be spiritual, as who say the
flesh thus given did hindre the spirit. The flesh is there, but not
perceptible by any sense, and yet the same is a pledge of the love of God
toward us, a comfort of our hope in god. The scripture does make for us, we
have in scripture, This is my body, which is given for you. This is my blood,
which is shed for you. Where do they read, this is not my body, but a token
and sign of my body? this is not my blood but a token and sign of my blood?
And when they have greatly troubled and payned the^ self, they can hardlye
teach by other places, yt the very name of the thing, ca^ be taken for the
sign and token of the thing. And yet they can not altogether plainly prove
that. We say when we behold a painted table, this is Hector which slew
Patroclus, yet every man knows, yt Hector him self is not in the table, That
may be true, whatsoever Christ says is. Now suppose, yt they may prove this
thing last aforesaid, that is, yt the thing may be taken for the sign or toke^
thereof, yet what strength or efficacy has this kind of reasoning, these
words may be taken thus, therefore they must be taken thus? To what purpose
does it make for them to recite the sayings of so many old catholic
auctours? howsoever they wreste them, color them, and wrappe up together al
their sayings, yet bring they no place which manifestlye speaks, that there
is not the body and blood of the Lord. They exhort and move men unto a
spiritual communicatyng of ye Lords body and blood. What meruell is it, if
ye be commended which is rather to be esteemed in yt receiving of it in either
kind, For if it be not received spiritually, the carnal receiving only with
out you other brings damnation. I pray you, what cause is here. wherefore I
should forsake and leave yt thing which ye universal church has used and taught
so many ages. Ye know yt Luther and I do thoroughly agree in no kind of
doctrine, saving yt, that he reproves ever truly of ye corrupt manners of men.
And now shall I depart from ye communion of the catholyke church, and fall to
the opinion of Carolastadins, who also has quaied from his own doctrine and
teaching? If I had revealed unto you, as to a friend, either aduoutrye or theft,
how much had it been against all the law of friendship to have blabled it out,
yea but to one man yt thing whereby your friend might have been in danger,
Now seeing yt ye sprede abroad among al me^ a crime most heinous of al other,
which my tongue (though it be fre and lyberal) never uttered, nor which my
mind never conceived. What name must we give yt which ye do, being an
Euangelical friend? do ye think to abuse ye authority of my name to persuade
your late begone believe? I pray you in christ, is this to be a follower of the
gospel to steyne so wicked and cruel a deed against a fre^d, whereby ye might
entice mo into a new sect, as though there were to few new sects? If yt opinyon
be godly which you do affirm, have ye no other means whereby ye may persuade
it, but by making the most false lie upon Erasmus, sayng, yt he and you be
both of one mind. And if my authority be so greatly esteemed among you, why
can it do nothing in so mani things, where in I disse^t from you. If your mind
do waver and doubt (as ye be wont to say) because that ye regard nothing at
al ye authority of the bishops and councels, yet hitherto my mind has
been stayed by the consent of ye universal church. If you be persuaded yt
there is nothing else in ye Sacrament but bread and wine, I had rather be rent in
sondre every part from other, then to profess ye same that ye do profess.
And I had lever suffer what soever it were, then to commyt such an abomynable
crime against mine own conscience, and so to depart out of this life. I do
not here dilate and set furthe with many words ye most rightuous cause of
expostulation, ye matter it self has trouble and co^tentio^ enough in it. If
ye have any crime of the spirit of ye Gospel, ye will heal again al those,
that ye through these most false feyned tales have infected. I am content and
can suffer, yt ye blabbe forth among al me^, whatsoever I have spoken in our
familiar co^municatio^ (yea although I were merye with drink) either in bourdes
or ernest But truly I can not suffer yt ye make me either Author of this
doctrine, or yet fellow with you in yt, which I never nether spoke nor thought,
so I pray God that I never be separated from Christ. Amen.

At Basyll. Anno. 1.5.2.6.
A plain and godly treatise, concerning the Mass and the blessed Sacrament
of the Altar, for the instruccion of the simple and unlearned people.
THe very holy new sacrifice of the new testament which the Church of
Christ has ever had in use and celebrate even from the beginning, is of the
old holy writes called (as it is at this day tho roughoute the Catholic
Church) by the Hebrew name Missa, Ambro^ lib. v. e^^stolaru^ epistol^ cxxiij.
August^^^^ sermo. (...) te^po. cc^
as it appear the right evidently by S. Ambrose in his. v. book of Epistles,
and the.xxxiii. Epistle of the same book and by. S Austine also in his.cc. li.
sermon De tempore. And this word. Missa has his original of the Hebrew word
(Massa) which signifiethe voluntarye or free oblacion or offering which is
offered up with the hand: or else (as some other do think) of the Hebrewe
word Masas, which sygnyfyeth to eleuate or lift up: and although the
old holy fathers did

(...)
