THE RVLE OF PERFECTION CONTAINING A BRIEF AND PERSPICVOVS ABRIDGEMENT OF ALL
THE WHOLLE spiritual life, reduced to this only point of the ( will of God.)
Divided into three Parts.

THE FIRST TREATING OF THE EXTERIOVR WILL OF GOD, CONTAINING the Active life.

THE SECOND OF THE INTERIOVR WILL containing the Contemplative life.

THE THIRD OF THE ESSENTIAL WILL CONCERNING THE LIFE SVPEREMINENT.

COMPOSED BY THE R. F. BENET CAPVCIN Preacher, of the holy Order of Saint
Francis, now of the Province of France, heertofore called VV. Fitch, of
Canfeld in Essex.

Vita in voluntate eius. Psalm. 29.

Printed at ROAN, By CARDIN HAMILLION.

An. 1609.

bookplate

APPROBATIONS OF THIS Rule of Perfection.
ASVVELLIN LATIN BY THE VERY words vvherin they were written, as also in
English; that so it may pass without suspicion, not only amongst those of the
English tongue, but also in Countries vvhear it is not understood; which so
much the more seems necessary, for that it is dedicated to those which live
in such Countries.
WE the subsigned Doctors in Divinity of the University of Paris have
diligently read the Rule of Perfection containing a brief and perspicuous
abridgement of the wholle spiritual life Active, Contemplative, and
Supereminent, all reduced to this one point of the will of God, composed by
the R. F. Benet Englishman, of the Order of Capuchins, and have approved it;
which no man will doubt to do, whoesoeuer following the way of life and of the
divine will of God shall practice this Compendium of piety, which though it
be brief yet is it most full of instruction.

Dated the 20. of September in the year of our Lord. 1608. GVYION Vicar
general to the Illustrissime Cardinal, and most Reverend Archebisshop of
Roan. BOVCHIER, Chanceller of the University of Orleans, and Vicar general to
the most Reave, Bishop of Orleans. The Kings Readers in Divinity, A. du VAL.
GAMACH.
P. L'ENGLES. C. le BELL. GESLIN. M. M. AVCLERC.


I Subsigned, B. Rapbael Provincial of the Order of Capuchins in the Province
of Paris (though unworthy) have most diligently perused this Rule of
Perfection, or brief and perspicuous abridgement of the wholle spiritual life
(to weet) Active, Contemplative, and Supereminent, reduced unto one point of
the only will of God, composed by the V. F. F. Benet of our Order; and have
fownd nothing in it contrary to the true faith and decrees of the Church; yea,
have most clearly seen it to be the solid food, and stable foundation of
piety, and a perfect Rule of the wholle spiritual life. Wherefore, it will be
most profitable for the piety and merit of all Christians, and the spiritual
advancement of Religious persons, and (particularly) will fully satisfy the
desire of such as aspire to true Perfection, and the practice of mystical
Divinity. It is (doubtless) a true guide for those which begin, for such as
have made some progress, and for those which have attained unto Perfection.

In testimony whereof, we have put to our sign, this Eeue of all Saints.
Anno. 1596. B. RAPHAEL,
as above.
I Subsigned, unworthy Prior of the Carthusians of Cahors, have perused with as
much diligence, attention of mind, and intention as I could, this Rule of
Perfection or brief abridgement of the wholle spiritual life, (to weet) of the
Active, Contemplative, and Supereminent, conform to the threefold will of
God Exterior, Interior, and Essential. I (certainly) admired to see the
holy secrets of the perfection of life gathered together, and expownded with
wonderful order and facility; insomuch as like unto that great Eagle in
Ezechiel, it may worthily seem to have carried away the pith of the mystical
Cedar, and esteem that the lecture thereof will be most profitable, seeing it
is in all points no less conform unto true Faith then to Piety, and most
fitting the capacity of devout and religious minds of Beginners, Proficients,
and of the Perfect, entering by order into the practice thereof, as Qweene Hester
passed through every door to the presence of King Assuerus,

Dated the 20. of September. Anno. 1608. F. A. Beaucousin.

I Subsigned Bacheler of Divinity in the University of Paris, do certify,
that I have most diligently perused this Rule of Perfection and perspicuous
abridgement of the wholle spiritual life (to weet) of the Active,
Contemplative, and Supereminent, reduced unto one point of the only will of
God, the which is most profitable to all Christians, and specially for the
advancement and merit of Religious persons; for, it lays open a most clear
way to the acquiring of perfection, in that it manifests diverse hidden
errors, which being to many a Rock of scandal, made some to leave of, others
to contemn, and some to sclander the spiritual life: seeing also that it
opens the most pure fountains of wisdom, explicating the excellent
super-anagogicall Doctrine, through ignorance whereof, some are damnably
infected with most corrupt manners; some do ignominiously betake themselfes to
the cisternes of heathen books, not hable to contain the waters of grace;
others as blind do doubt in the Catholic faith; others to their great shame
make little progress in the knowledge of God; others to no small detriment of
the hear ers do teath Divinity with great negligence; others adhearing to the
killing letter, and spe^ding all their labor in the outward bark of VVisdome,
neither go forward to reap the fruit thereof, neither hastening to the
Abnegation of themselfes, are viuified with the unitive spirit of God. All
which being in this Rule sweetly refrayned, truly directed, wisely illuminated,
deiformely perfectioned, it is worthy to be put to the Press, and published to
the glory of almighty God, augmentation of the Faith, to the conversion of
sinners, consolation of Religious, and perseverance of the perfect, in whoes
minds it ought to be day and night ruminated. Finally, it contains nothing
contrary to the Catholic, Apostolic, and Roman Church.

Dated the 8. of May 1596. Poullet.

APPROBATIONES REGVLAE Perfectionis.
NOS subsignati Doctores Theologiae facultatis Parisiensis, serio legimus
Regulam Perfectionis continentem breue and dilucidum Enchiridion vitae
spiritualis, Actiuae, Contemplatiuae, and Supereminentis (id est) Voluntatis
diuinae, a R. P. Benedicto Anglo, Ordinis Capucinorum compositum; and
probauimus: quod and plenissime faciet, quisquis breue hoc pietatis Compendium,
sed cumulatissime instructum, secutus viam Vitae and Voluntatis diuinae,
insistet.

Datum 20. Septem. An. saeculari sacro. 1608. GVYION, Vicarius Generalis
Illustrissimi Cardinalis, and Reuerendiss. Archiepiscopi Rhotomagensis.
BOVCHIER, Cancellarius Vniuersitatis Aurelianensis, and Vicarius Generalis
Reuerendiss. Episcopi Aurelianensis. Lectores Regij in Theologia. A. du VAL.
GAMACH.
P. L'ENGLES. C. le BELL. GESLIN. M. MAVCLERC.


EGO subsignatus F. Raphael Prouincialis prouinciae Parisiensis Fratrum Minorum
Capucinorum licet immeritus, breue hoc and dilucidum Enchiridion totius vitae
spiritualis (scilicet) Actiuae, Contemplatiuae, and Supereminentis, ad vnicum
instar solius Voluntatis diuinae directum, and a V. P. P. Benedicto nostri
Insti^uti compositum, diligentissime perlegi; nihilque in eo inueni quod fidei
Orthodoxae aut decretis Ecclesiae repugnet; quinimo illud cibum esse solidum,
stabileque fundamentum pietatis, and normam perfectam totius vitae spiritualis
clarissime comprehendi: vnde ad pietatem and meritum omnium Christianorum, and
ad spiritualem profectum Religiosorum conducet plurimum, eorum vero de siderio
qui ad vera perfectionem, and mysticae Theologiae praxim aspirant, abunde
quidem satisfaciet. Estsane Incipientium, Proficientium, and Perfectorum verus
praeceptor.

In cuius rei testimonium signum nostrum apposuimus, Vigilia omnium Sanctorum.
Anno. 1597. F. RAPHAEL, vt supra.

EGO subsignatus Cartbusiae Cadurcinae Prior immeritus, hoc breue Enchiridion
vitae spiritualis, Actiuae, Contemplatiuae, and Supereminent is, vnitrinae
voluntati diuinae Exteriori, Interiori, and Essentiali consonum, a V. P.
Benedicto Anglo, Ordinis Capucinorum D. Francisci compositum, quanta potui
diligentia, attentione animi, and intention perlegi. Suspexi vtique sacratiora
vitae perfectionis arcana miro ordine and facilitate deligi and delucidari, ita
vt quasi Aqui^a illa grandis in Ezechiele Cedri mystic^ medulla^ tulisse
meritissime videatur. Et quia non orthodoxe minus quam pie per omnia s^riptum
est, and ad piarum and religiosarum mentium, Incipientium, Proficientium, and
Perfectorum captum maxim accommodatum (dummodo vt Ester cum ad Assueri
conspectum, ingrediantur cuncta per ordinem ostia) summa cum vtilitate legi
posse censeo.

Datum 20. September. anno a partu virgineo. 1608. F. A. BEAVCOVSIN.

EGO subsignatus Baccalaureus in facultate Theologiae Parisiensi, certum facio
me breue hoc and perlucidum Enchiridion totius vttae spiritualis (scilieet)
Actiuae, Contemplatiuae, and Supereminentis, ad vnicum instar solius voluntatis
diuinae directae, diligentissime perlegi. Quod ad vtilitatem omnium
Christianorum, tum maxim Religiosorum pufectum and meritum confert plurimum,
and perfectioni acquirendae clarissimum praebet iter, cum peruios errores
occultos designet, qui suerunt permultis lapis offensionis derelinquendae,
nonnullis contemnendae, alijs etiam probris insectandae spiritualis vitae:
sapientiae limpidissimos fontes aperit, illustrem superanagogicam doctrinam and
veram Theologiam explicando, cuius ignorantia alii corruptissimis moribus
damnabiliter se coinquinant, alii ad cisternas librorum Gentilium (non valentes
continere aquas gratiae) turpiter secedunt, alij in fide Catholica mente capti
haesitant; alij in cognitione Dei cum magno dedecore minus proficiunt; alij
negligentius Theologiam cum magno detrimento pertractant; alij litterae
occidenti adhaerentes, and corticibus sapientiae insudantes, neque
progrediuntur ad illius carpendos fructus, neque ad suijpsorum Abnegationem
properantes, spiritu Dei vnitiuo viuificantur. Quae omnia cum in hoc Enchiridio
suauiter coerceantur, vere dirig antur, sapienter illuminentur, deiformiter
perficiantur; typis and omnium lumini mandari dignum est, ad Dei Omnipotent is
gloriam, Fidei augmentum, Peccatorum conuersionem, Religiosorum consolationem,
Perfectorum perseuerantiam; quorum omnium animis diurno nocturnoque labor
versari debet. Caeterum Fidei Catholicae, Apostolicae, Romanae, nihil
contrarium continet.

Datum 8. Maij. An. 1596. POVLLET.

Licentia Superiorum.
EGO frater Leonardus Parisiensis, Ordinis fratrum Minorum Capucinorum
nuncupatorum, in prouincia Parisiensi Commissarius (licet immeritus) potestate
ad id mihi facta a Reuerendo admodum Patre Siluestro ab Assisio, Ministro
nostro generali; facultatem concedo vt liber inscriptus Regula Perfectionis,
vel, Voluntas diuina continens tres parts; Item liber inscriptus Eques
Christianus, continens duas parts; Item denique, vt libri duo diuersorum
Opusculorum spiritualium, vnus Tractatuum, alter Epistolarum, a Re. Patre
Benedicto Anglo, Predicatore eiusdem Ordinis, and Conuentus Rhotomagensis
Guardiano, nec non Nouitiorum magistro, typis mandentur, grauium prius and
doctorum in Theologia hominum iudicio approbatus; seruatis insuper omnibus de
iure seruandis.

In quorum fidem, has litteras manu nostra subscriptas, sigilloque nostro
munitas dedimus. Rothomagi 23. Iunij. 1608. F. Leonardus, qui supra.

TO THE. R. AND MOST DEVOVT Lady Abbess of the Religious company of English
-women of the Order of S. Briget; to his tvvoe cosins (vvisemans) of the same
Order, and to all the rest of that holy family at Lysbone.
IF the light of Natures lamp has so shined in the obscure closet of a Pagans
breast, that thereby he brought forth this no less true then worthy sentence,
Non nobis solum nati sumus, sed ortus nostri partem amici, partem parents,
part emque patria vendicat, We are not borne for our selfs alone, but of our
birth our kinsfolk must have part, our friends likewise must have their due,
our Country also challenges therein her right; how much more ought the shining
Sun of Grace and Faith illuminate the Christian heart, whereby to bring forth a
like or better Sentence? as did he who said, Optabamego ipse Anathema esse a
Christo pro fratribus meis, qui sunt cognati mei secundum carnem, qui sunt
Israelitae, I desired to be Anathema my self from Christ for my brethren, which
be my kinsfolk according to the fleash, who be Israelites. And if Nature
could bind us with so strong a band to our Friends, Parents, and Country, how
much more should the link of Grace, and chain of Charity tie us thereunto?
Seeing then such is my Obligation, and that the revolution of some years
calls upon me for performance thereof, I was glad now to have fownd out a
means, whereby at once to discharge three duties, and by one payment to cancel
a threefold obligation; by presenting this Rule of Perfection to such a house
and company, which is composed of my deer friends, nearest kinsfolk, and
native Country. Not, for that I think the weakness of so small a matter can
have strength enough to dissolve so strong a band, or so small a present can
satisfy so great a debt; but that I hope you will take it as a token, and
messanger of a mind more willing then hable to perform her obligation; which
Rule I having squared out according to mine own interior practice since my
calling to Religion (though truly, with great negligence) and having
participated the same, and therewith informed others of my calling though not of
my Country; I thought good now to communicate it unto others of my Country,
though not of my calling; and for that purpose have translated it into English,
though with more difficulty then I writ it in the language wherein I made it.
For eloquent words and flowing discourse (I know) you expect none, as well
because that our calling auoideth curiosity and professes plain simplicity,
and that my so long discontinuance of the tongue can afford no smooth
discourse; as also (especially) for that in spiritual Rules, and docume^ts
touching interior exercise, it fares not as in other books which chiefly (or
at least, partly) tend to delight the ear by pleasant words, or move
affection by pleasing terms, but by plainness of Documents, and cleernesse of
Doctrine to lay open the way to Perfection, and an easy and familiar means to
practice the same. Thus heartily wishing your daily progress in all virtue, I
commend you to Gods holy protection, and my self (poor sinner) by your prayers
to his sweet mercy.

Your poor Brother and Cousin in Christ Jesus, B. Benet, called heertosore. VV.
Fitche.

TO THE DEVOVT RELIGIOUS English-vvomen of the Covent of S. Vrsula at Louayn,
and of S. Benet at Bruxells, and particularly to his devout Cosins VVisemans in
both houses, and to all other Religious of our Nation in Flanders.
DEVOVT sisters in Christ, and deer Cosins. Many years have passed since this
book was dedicated to the above said of S. Briget, but being twoe sundry times
put to print in England (whear I was then in Prison) it was both times taken,
though it does not in any wise touch either Controversies or matters of State.
Since which time has bein erected that your Religious house at Bruxells, and
as well the same as that of Louayne has bein better known unto me, for the
intercourse of letters betwixt you and me (my loving Cosins at Louayne) and by
your rendition (my good Cousin at Bruxells.) And because I owe you and your
howses the like office as to the above said (for the same causes of kindred and
Country) and that, as says the Philosopher, Bonum quo communius eo melius,
The good is so much the better, by how much it is more common: and (finally)
for that the subject of the book particularly fitteth those of your vocation;
I have thought good to direct it also unto you, the respect of the smallness
of the work dissuading therfrom, wayeng less in the one scale of the balance
of my consideration, then the ponderousness of the said causes put against it
in the other, especially the Balance being held in the hand of that charitable
affection which shall never cease to work, and do the office which kin and
Country call upon me to perform. And though the thing both in respect of it
self, and of so sinful and vile a wretch from whom it comes, be of so small
value and so unworthy the printing, that I have often times hindered the same
(howsoever the great persuasion of others, and due affection to the above
named, made me consent thereunto in England) yet in time perceiving it is so
acceptable in these parts to all sorts, as well of authority as of learning
and perfection; and seeing it so much published throughout France though
paynfully by writing; I have bein more encouraged to present the same unto you:
though for the third part thereof, it is not thought meet to be published, as
treating of matters somewhat high for the capacity of the common sort. And if
it bring you any spiritual profit, I beseech you recompense me with this
prayer, that I be not like the candle which whilst it lighteneth others
consumes it self; nor as the Conduict pipe, which conuayeth water from the
fountain to others, not retayning any for it self. Fare ye well.

Your poor Brother and Cossin in Christ Jesus, B. Benet, called heertofore VV.
Fitch.

TO THE READER.
GENTLE Reader, There is a certain book entitled the Method to serve God in
Latin, Franch, and English which in the beginning, speaks of the will of
God: Least therefore thou may think that this book be (as it were) the same,
or not much different, and so thy affection to read this be diminished, thou
shall understand, that they differ in all matters; in subject, method, and
pretended scope: For, that book has but some one Chapter or document of the
will of God, but this, three books or parts; that goes to other discourses
of virtues and vices, but this pursues this only point of the will of God;
that propowndeth it as the end of our actions, but this as the beginning,
progress, and ending, of the wholle spiritual life, giving precepts for every
one: Yea, that book in the place where it touches the will of God, shows
not how to know it, but this gives means how to know the same; that, speaks
of the will of God, without distinction, but this distinguishes it mystically
into three; Finally, that book speaks of the Exterior will, but this
enters into the knowledge, taste, and feeling of the Internal will as it is
spirit and life, yea, and essentially God himself, as is showed in the third
part. But it is needless to speak of all the differences which by reading thou
shall find to be such, as that there is no conueniencie betwixt them: only the
will of God which is here taught throughout the Active, Contemplative, and
Supereminent life, is thear touched in the beginning of that book of Active
life. And if this had affinity with that, it would never have bein so required
and published in France, especially so paynfully by writing before it was
printed, and (particularly) amongst religious Orders, whear that book is so
common. As for the other three books mentioned, they be not yet printed,
though ready to go to the prefle. And if this or they bring unto thy sowlle
any profit or consolation, I desire for recompense some memory of me in thy
holy prayers. Fare well.

Thine in Christ Jesus B. Benet.

THE RVLE OF PERFECTION CONTAINING A BREIFE AND PERSPICVOVS ABRIDGEMENT OF ALL
THE whole spiritual life, reduced to this only point of the (will of God.)
Divided into three parts.
THE FIRST PART OF THE EXTERIOR WILL OF GOD COMPREHENDING THE ACTIVE LIFE.
OF THE EXCELLENCY AND Utility of this exercise, compared with others.
CHAP. I.
HAVING well considered the diversity of ways, and multitude of exercises
fownd out and practiced by many learned and devout persons, for the obtaining
of true perfection; and in fine, finding that as they tend all to one end, so
in themselves they are not much different, but rather in substance all one,
how differet^ soever they seem; I have desired for the greater light and
profit of devout souls and more facility, 1. Abridgement of the whole
spiritual life.
to abridge and reduce them all to one only point, in which may shine and
clearly be seen all the others, and which (not withstanding such brevity)
might be easy to comprehend, and perspicuous to understand: to which effect I
could find no point so fit as this of the will of God; for though the perfect
soul and illuminated spirit clearly does see and discern all ways and
exercises in every one, and every one in all, principally in the highest and
most sublime; yet is this verified rather in this exercise and point of the
will of God then in any other; for that here in all the other exercises are so
clearly seen, that not only the perfect and illuminated person, but also the
beginner (if he will a little consider) may see them all, and how in the same
consists all kind of perfections of spiritual life, as in the next chapter
shall appear.

Secondly, 2. Brevity.
this exercise of the will of God shall be found without all comparison to be
more short then any other; for, that which others do effect by many
circumstances, multiplicities, changings, and degrees, this effects at once
by one only application of intention. As for example, one that following any
other practice would be humble, patient, obedient, or would be despised, to
imitate the passion of our Savior, would imitate the passion to be conformable
to the Son of God; would be conformable unto him to please God and do his
will; but according to this exercise he should at the first only apply his
intention to the said will of God. Likewise, he that would eschew evil
company to avoid temptation, would avoid temptation to fly sin; would fly
sin to escape hell; would escape hell to be saved; would be saved because it
is the will of God: but according to this exercise he should cut of all these
multiplicities and degrees, and even at first apply his intention to the will
of God, propownding and saying this in his heart; I will avoid evil company
because it is the will of God; whereby alone the soul approaches neeer to God
without comparison then with all the other good intentions together: whear many
may note and see their spiritual deceit, who doing any good thing spiritual
or corporal, do not at the first, nay nor scarce at the last apply their
whole intention to this will of God.

Further, 3. Meritorious.
the practice of this rule is more meritorious as shall be showed then the
others, yea though (without this will of God) they should join with other
spiritual exercises, fasting, discipline, lamenting their syns and such like,
although (perhaps) to some it seem not so, who measure merit by their
sensible devotion, and spiritual sweetness.

Moreover, End of others.
this rule of the will of God is the true end and scope of all others, those
serving but as degrees to mount, and as means to attain unto this, namely to
do the will of God: so that this will of God ought to be so much preferred
before other exercises, as the end before the means.

Again, Fit for all.
this exercise is more proper and conuement to all sorts of people then any
other, being fit as well for the perfect as the imperfect, for the spirit
illuminated, as for the obscured; because it is as well subtle and sublime as
simple and easy.

Also, without multiplicitie.
it is wholly denudated and void of all multiplicitie, diversity, and
curiosity of discourse or speculation of the wit, so that without difficulty
it may be practiced by the only fervent will.

It is likewise more assured from deceipts, Sure from deceipts.
because it is a continual abnegation of the proper will, fountain of all
errors, and root of all evils. Which abnegation though it be in all other
exercises, yet not so direct nor so strong and violent as in this, seeing
nothing is so contrary to the proper will as the will of God; the one being
common respecting the common good; the other proper seeking private gain. And
whereas in other exercises often times the curio^itie of Intelligence does
please, in this the feruency of the will must faithfully work; In others one
contenteth him self often with a feeble devotion sensible, but in this
operateth the strong Intellectual devotion.

But above all, The end and the means.
this point of the will of God excels all others in as much as it serves
for a rule, and for the end of our actions, whereas the others serve but for the
one or the other only: it is (I say) the rule of our actions, not only
exterior, but also interior, declaring by his rectitude the obliquitie as well
of the one as of the others: of the exterior, because it declares which are to
be done, and which to be lest undone, how and at what time to take anything in
hand, how and in what season to endure: of the interior, in as much as it
shows how to will and how to nill; when to desire and when to refuse; in what
manner to choose and accept; in what sort to omit and re^ect. To be brief,
this does level all our exterior, and illustrate our interior, rectifieng and
cutting of all the crookednes and tortuositie of our actions as well interne,
as externe. It is also the end of the same actions; end (I say) proportioned to
every man's capacity, showing it self to some as externe, to others as interne,
and to others as essential, which is God himself: end (I say again) to which
the soul commes and adheres, not by the interruptio^ of the means, but by the
continuation of the same; not as to another thing different from the means,
(as it happens in the other exrcises) but as to the same and one thing with the
means, which is proper to this exercise: Similie.
it being like a sea the water whereof is all one at the shore and beginning as
in the maine Ocean and end thereof, wherein our soul does nauigate and mount by
continuation of the same tract without any variation, change of object, or
multiplicitie.

And no less has it this excellency in particular above all others; 6.
Permanent.
namely, that whereas others are not durable, nor can be always used and
practiced during a man's whole life, but must be left and laid a side and others
practiced according as a man goes forward in perfection; this contrariewise is
permanent and serves a man, and is always continued as well in the active as
in the contemplative and unitive life without changing or interrupting his
course of exercise, or breaking the thread of his spiritual practice; which is
no little spiritual good nor small profit, seeing that thereby much
distraction and hndrance is avoided, proceeding from the change and
multiplicitie of exercise. Similie.
For, even as the child that goes from one book or school to another is much
troubled and new to seek; so is he which changes from one exercise to
another; yea, some times and that often, man that changes often, or has many
exercises knows not well how to practice any of them all, and that especialie
in time of temptation and spiritual war: Similie.
for as he which will learn to sense with many kinds of weapons, commonly is
not cunning at any, in so much that the enemy assayling him he is easily hurt
or killed for want of skill, so he that has diverse exercises, ordinarily
knows not the perfect practice of any of the^ and therefore the enemies, the
world, the flesh and the deuell assalting him, forthwith is either slain or
maimed. The reason is, because the soul having her will already infeebled by
the impulsion of the temptation flieng to her exercise and spiritual weapon,
and not being skillfull in handling the same, the enemy who sees and knows
it well, is more encouraged to pursue and follow the weakened will, and she
discouraged and unabled to resist. Yea, some men have so many exercises that in
time of battle they know not which to betake the^ to, and so many ways to
perfection that they follow none; so acco^plishing the proverb that says, Qui
duos insectatur lepores, neutru^ capit, He that hunteth two hares cacheth
neither. But otherwise it is with him that has continually one only exercise,
for that without distractio of spirit, or dissipation of se^ces here and thear
in diversity of exercises he remains always recollected, and his with all
his powers gathered together, and fixed in one, so that he penetrateth the
same even to the bottom and profunditie thereof, and so walks continually in
the light thereof, practicing the same and conforming his life thereunto, and so
when the enemy commes to assault him he is not unprovided of his weapons, nor
doubtful which to betake him unto, because he has but one at which he is very
cunning as being his daily practice. And finaly, is resolute and stable in his
way, and manner of the pursuit of perfection, as not knowing any but that by
which he runs the right way with all assurance. Heerin therefore does this
exercise in particular excel all others, because none of them may be
continually practiced all a man's life, but must be changed according as the
soul changes estate and arises in perfection, using some at the beginning,
others in the progress, and others in the end, but in this exercise a man must
begin, proceed, and end: so that this will of God is a spiritual Sea in which
each one may sail according to the burden of his vessel; so as the shallops
of the weak souls of beginners do flote in the road of the shallow waters
of the exterior vill; the barks of such as be adua^ced do hoist sail; and
la^che far there into the depth of the interior will;and the huge ships of the
perfectest sort having lost all sight of land are retired into the maine sea
of the Essential will.

And as this will of God is like the sea, Similie notand.
so the obscurity of our proper will is like the land; and as he which is in
the midst of the land sees not the sea at all, so he that is in the midst of
obscure proper will sees not this celestial Ocean. And as the greater and more
spacious the land is, so much farther one is from seeing the sea; so how much
greater is this proper will so much farther is he from seeing this will of
God. Again, as where the sea gains the land, there is nothing seen but the
sea, and as according to the measure that it ouerfloweth the land the sea
appears; so where the will of God gets the upper hand, there is so far
nothing but that will; and according as the will of God ouerfloweth the
darkness of our proper will, it takes place, and is plainly seen. Finaly, as
if there were no land at all thear would be nothing but sea; so if we had no
darkness at all of proper will, we should see nothing but the will of God; and
as he that is in the midest of the maine sea sees no land; so he that has
attained to perfection, and is in the depth of this will sees no darkness, but
in all things, times, and places, soeth this heavenly shining light, as in the
third part shall be showed.

Of the excellency of this exercise in respect of it self, vvher is shevved
how all other vvayes and perfections are heerin contained.
CHAP. II.
HAVING showed the profit and excellency of this will of God in comparison of
other exercises, it follows also that we briefly declare the same in regard
of it self, all which excellency is comprehended in this, that this rule and
exercise contains all others, and all kind of perfection.

For, 1. Renouncing of him self. Matt. 16. Luc. 9.
if one constitute perfection in the renouncing of him self as our Savior
teaches, Qui vult post me venire abneget semetipsum, He which will follow me
let him renounce him self, it is in this will of God; seeing one can not do
the same but by renouncing himself and his own will.

Secondly, 2. Resignation.
if one think that perfection consists in resignatio^, as Christ teaches,
Fiat volunt as tua, Thy will be done, it is in this exercise; because he that
does the will of God is resigned, Matt. 26.
seeing that resignatio^ is nothing else but a disposition and perfect
preparation to receive willingly whatsoever that divine will shall ordain or
dispose of himself, either in suffering or doing things hard or easy, pleasant
or bitter, honorable or dishonorable and abject, all which he must needs have
who accomplisheth the will of God.

Moreover, 3. Purity of heart. Matt. 5.
if you esteem purity of heart to be perfection, as it is written, Beati
mu^do cord, Happy are the pure of heart, it is here also; for what can make
the heart more pure then the will of God which so violently plucketh up, and
exstirpateth out of it the root of all impuritie, namely, proper will, whence
springs as from their Origin all affections, passions, and impurities, and
whatsoever other spiritual darkness: for, as two contraries can not be
together in one subject, as fire and water can not be together in the
samevessell, so can not proper will and the will of God be together in the
same soul; and no more then the obscurity of the dark night can abide the
brightness of the shining Son, no more can the dark night and obscurity of
proper will endure the splendor of this shining son of Gods will, but flies
as soon as it appears, and presently is dissipated and vanishes away.

Further, 4. Presence of God.
if perfection consist in the presence of God, Psalm 15.
and having him always before our eyes, as it is written, Prouidebam dominum
in conspectu meo semper, quoniam^^ dextris est mihi ne commouear, I always
have God in my sight because he assisteth at my right hand least I should be
moved; it is likewise in this will, because (as shall be declared) this will of
God is God himself; so that when by doing his will we have it present, we
must needs have God present.

Again, 5. Knowledge of himself.
if perfection consist in the knowledge of himself, which not only by the
Christian but by the heathen Philosopher is so much inculcated by this so
commonsentence, Nosce teipsum, know thy self; it is here most perspicious: for
by the straight line of this will of God we come to the perfect knowledge of
our selfs (that is) of our obsure passions, tortuous affections, inordinate
desires, and brutish motions, which before we could not see; for, as the staff
or chalked line seems wholly straight or little crooked until it be examined
by the Ioiners rule by which appears the crokednes thereof; so our will and
desire seems to be right or to have but very little obliquitie, but as soon
as this right rule of Gods will (the only lawful and approved measure of man's
desire) is applied thereunto, presently appears the disordered and deformed
obliquitie thereof. And by this will we may not only know our selfs as
touching the old man replenished with imperfections and darkness, but also as
touching the new, (namely) perfection and light; his will being that light and
perfection which communicates unto our soul all her lights and perfections;
so that by the one we see and know the other, for the great likeness and
sympathy which is betwixt them; a man being made by this divine will Nouus
homo qui secundum Deumc^ea rus est in iustitia and sanctitate veritatis, Ephe.
4.
A new man, created according to God in justice and sanctity of verity.

Also, Knowledge of God. Joan. 17.
if the knowledge of God be Christian perfection, according as is written,
Haeec est vita aeterna vt cognoscant te solum Deum verum and quem misisti Iesum
Christum, This is everlasting life, to know thee the only true God, and whom
thou have sent Jesus Christ, it is evident in this will, seeing the will of God
is God him self, as in the third part shall appear, so that who knows and
does his will, by consequence knows God, which perfection of the knowledge of
God, with the other of the knowledge of him self was so earnestly desired, and
deeply ingraffed in the heart of our father S. Francis, that he continued all
a night long in prayer, repeating continually these only two sentences, O my
God, let me know thee, let me know my self.

^Likewise, Annihilation. Psalm. 72.
if one desire to attain to perfect annihillation whereof it is said ad nihilum
redactus sum, and* nesciui, I am brought to nothing and knew it not, let him
embrace this exercise, for by the lively and efficatious operation of this
divine will, a man is reduced and brought to nothing, and that both in respect
of the old man and the new: In respect of the old, wholly and entierely, so that
he is no more; in respect of the new, so is he annihilated that he works no
more, nor produces any operation as of himself, but by God, with God and in
God, and does nothing actiuely but passiuely; for although what one does he
must needs do it himself, yet not as of himself though he that operates is
presupposed needs to operate, yet not as age^t but as patie^t (that is) that
though he has his will, act, and operation in the work, be it exterior or
interior, yet by this perfection of Annihillatio^ he sees they are not of
them selfs, but are acted and produced by a higher essence and power the^
the^selfs, which is God; yea, in the perfection of this annihilatio^ in this
divine will the soul is so abstracted and fixed in God, and so high lifted
above herself, that she feels not her own operation though most vehement,
but only the interior operation of God, and ouerflowing of those heavenly
influences and eternal lights, which are so mighie and have such power over
her, that in co^pariso^ thereof her operation is nothing; and so she is rather
said to suffer the do, and to be wrought the to work; and this especially in
the operatio^s intrinsecall: and though in the acts and operations se^sible and
exterior she does some thing, yet loses she not this annihilatio^, but
remains still annihilated, because (as is above said) she knows by the
light of this will that it is not she as of herself, but Christ that lives in
her that does those good operations, who said, Without me you can do
nothing.

As for the perfection of Vnio^ of which is written, Qui adhaeret Deo vnus
spiritus est, Union. 1. Corin. 6.
He that adhereth to God is one spirit with him; that shines clearly in this
will of God, because that by forsaking ones own will and doing his, we
adheare unto him, and become one will and spirit with him.

Touching the perfection of divine co^te^platio^ whereof the Psalmist says, 9.
Contemplation. Psalm. 54.
Quismihi dabit pennas sicut colu^ba, and volabo, and requiesca^? who shall
give me wings like a dove, and I will fly and repose; it is here in full
perfection, and that by a necessary co^seque^ce, as well because that (as is
said) this will purifieth the soul from all proper will, immortificatio^s,
passions, affections, and from all other darkness, blinding her clear sight and
detayning her flight of co^te^plation; as also because that (as is likewise
showed) this will is the very light of heaven and God himself, illuminating and
most admirablie eleuating and nobilitating the soul which it so possesses.

Again, 10. Love of God.
if you desire the true love of God and charity ( Quod est vinculu^
perfectionis) the bond of perfection; who so does Gods will keeps his
co^maundeme^ts, and so possesses the treasure of his love, Joan. 14.
himself saying, Qui amat me, ma^data mea seruabit, he which loves me, keeps
my co^mandeme^ts; and again, In hoc cognoscetis si me amatis, si mandata mea
seruaueritis, By this means you shall know whither you love me or no, if you
keep my commandments.

Finally, 11. Tra^sformation.
if perfection consist in the tra^sformation and total change of himself into
God, and putting on Christ, as the Apostle witnesses saying, Romans 13.
Induite Dominu^ Tesa^ Put on Jesus Christ, and, Coloss. 3.
Vos mortuvestis, and vita vestra abscondita est cum Christo in Deo. You are
dead and your life is hidden with Christ in God; and, Gal. 2.
Viuo ego iam non ego, viuit vero^ in me Christus, I live now, not I, but
Christ in me. This perfection (I say) is heerin contained: for that when a man
puts of his own will for the will of God, he puts of himself, and
puts on God, according to S. Paul saying, Ephesians. 4.
Exuite veterem hominem cum actibus suis, and induimini nouum qui secundum Deum
creatus est in iustitia and sanctitate ueritatis. Put of the old man with his
works and put on the new which is created according unto God in justice and
holiness of truth; for this will being wholly celestial and divine, so fills
and possesses the heart, penetrating the very bottom and most intimate part
thereof, and by an unspeakable sweetness, true taste, and perfect feeling of
eternal life, and of the delitious presence of the heavenly spouse, does so
draw, allure, entice, and melt the soul in the love and admiration thereof,
that as being molten, and as having lost all her forces, and languishing with
love, she remains ravished, lost, and drowned in the bottomless sea of
heavenly joys and eternal light, where she may justly say with S. Paul as
above said, Galas. 2.
Viuo ego iam non ego, viuit vero^ in me Christus. I live now, not I, but
Christ in me; God the father saying unto her, Haee est filia mea dilecta in qua
mihi been complacui. This is my loving daughter in whom I am well pleased,
Psalm. 131.
Haec requies mea in saeculum saeculi, hic habitabo quoniam elegi eam, This is
my resting place for ever, and here will I dwell because I have chosen her.

Thus then may appear how all the above said perfections are contained in this
exercise of the will of God, as also any whatsoever or wherinsoeuer the whole
or any part of perfection does consist; and therefore rightly and not without
just cause is this will of God so much praised, and recommended unto us in
holy scripture, at when it is said Joan. 4.
Meus cibus est vt faciam voluntatem eius qui misit me, This is my meat to do
the will of him who sent me; and Matt. 26.
Spiritus quidem promptus est, caro autem infirma, fiat voluntas tua, The
spirit is prompt but the fleash is infirm, thy will be done; and These. 4.
Haec est volunt as Dei sanctificatio vestra, This is the will of God your
sanctification; and Joan. 6.
Descendi de coelo non vt faciam voluntatem meam sed voluntatem eius qui misit
me, I came down from heaven, not to do my own will but the will of him who
sent me; and the Psalmist, Psalm. 29
Vita in voluntate eius, Life is in his will; and again, Psalm. 8^
Domine in voluntate tua praestitisti decori meo virtutem, O Lord in thy will
thou have given virtue to my beauty, And our Savior Mat. 12. Marc 3.
Quicunque fecerit voluntatem patris mei qui in coelis est, ipse meus frater,
and soror, and matter est, Whosoever does the will of my father which is in
heaven, he is my brother, sister, and mother. And although this will of God
be inco^prehensible in itself, yet being in our soul it is made
comprehensible; and though in it self it be hidden, yet being joined with ours
it is made known: for as God which was inco^prehe^sible, being in our fleash
was made comprehensible, and which was invisible, by joining himself with our
humanity was made visible; so it is of his will which is his spirit and
himself; for before it be in our will it is hidden and unknown, but being
joined therewith it is seen and manifestly known to the soul; and as before
the Incarnation he was only God, but after the union with our humanity was
God and man, so the will of God which was only divine, after the union with
ours is divine and human; and as that man by that union might say, I am God,
so the will of man by such an union may say, Epist. 1. ad Elidoniu^ inter pri.
and mid. August. lib. 1. de Trinit. 13. circa prin. tomo. 2.
I am the will of God, according to Saint Gregory Nazian. saying, Deus
humanatus est, homo autem Deificatus, God is made human, and man is made
divine; And Saint Augustine saying, Talis erat illa susceptio quae Deum hominem
faceret, and hominem Deum, That was such an assumption or conjunction, as made
God man and man God: for as when God was made man man was made God, so when
once the will of God is made the will of man, the will of man is the will of
God; and as the divinity was not obscu^red by, nor in, the humanity, so
neither is the will of God by, nor in, the will of man; but as the humanity
is illuminated, exalted, magnified, glorified, and deified by the divinity, so
is the will of man by the will of God: yet not that this union of wills is
hypostaticall as was that of those twoe naturs, but is made by the link of
love and light of grace: and heerehence comes it that the virtuous person
has the spirit illuminated, penetratiue, magnanimous, and courageous;
heerehence is it that his whole joy is in heavenly things; heerehence it
proceeds that he treads under foot as most base, that which before he
admired and aspired unto as his chief felicity; his spirit being no more
human but elevated and magnified in God and made one with him.

And though some things in this chapter will not be well understood by the
beginner until such time as he has practiced the third part, yet will he
understand it sufficiently for attayning to the knowledge of the end for which
I have written it; namely, to show the excellency of this Rule, and how all
other exercises are contained heerin. Neither ought any to think that we
attribute too much to this exercise or praise it beyond her desert, for that
not so much it praised, as the subject thereof (to weet) the will of God, as
most worthily preferred before all other points, as that where in succinctly,
plainly, easily, securely, and without change to any other, all other points
and exercises are fownded, and whereby we attain to all perfections, being
practiced as is breefly taught in this treatise following.

The sum or general practice of all this Rule.
CHAP. III.
HAVING seen the excellency and perfection of this rule of the will of God,
it follows that we now show the practice thereof, touching which we will
here at the beginning lay down an ample and general document, which briefly
shall contain the whole matter; The sum of the whole practice of this Rule.
namely, that we do all our actions only for the will of God and because he
will that so we do; I say (all our works and actions) as well to contain
corporal as spiritual; as well thoughts as words and deeds; no less the
resistance to temptations, then the acceptance of inspirations: In like manner
in casting of any vice or imperfection, as in laboring for any virtue or
perfection; as well in speaking, as in silence; in accepting labor as repose;
sickness as health; affliction as consolation; and finally, no less in doeng
the thing natural then supernatural; little then great; vile and base then
excellent and glorious; and in sum, whatsoever is done or suffered by any
part or power of the body or soul; all (I say) must be with this only end of
the will of God and with this sole intention, because God will so have it; and
this without any exception of thing, time, place, or person. This general
practice of the will of God comprehending all sorts of actions good and
evil, seems to be signified by that mystical nett of the gospel gathering
all kinds of fish good and bad, of which our Savior says thus The kingdom of
heaven is like a nett cast into the sea, And S. Gregory, Matt 13. Gregor. Hom.
11. in Euan.
that Regnum coelorum coelestis est disciplina, The kingdom of heaven is the
celestial discipline. Now, what other thing is this divine will ruling all our
actions, and mortifieng all our passions, then this heavenly discipline? and so
is like a nett cast into the sea (to weet) into this instable, wavering, bitter
and dangerous life, as a vast Oceane into which the good and religious
Christian by faithful practice casts this divine nett, which gathers
together all sorts of fish, which are our thoughts, desires, dissignes, and
actions which live, and have their moving in this sea of our life. He takes
them when by (application of intention) he casts it upon them, and gathers
them together, when (by diligent care) he chaseth them under the nett forcing
the^ to swim under this divine will: Which being full (by Action) he draws
it up (by Contemplation) upon the shore or bank of the solid earh (of
perdurable repose, according to S. Gregory) and sitting down, Greg. homil. in
loan. 21. Psalm. 45.
and resting after his trauail, and retiring himself from multiplicitie of
affairs, as the Psalmist counsaileth, Vacate and videte, Take ye leisure and
see, putting the good fish (of works and inspiratio^s) in theirvessell (of
hearts) and casting forth (by resistance) the bad. For, though this nett of the
will of God take as well the good as the bad fish, yet it does it with
contrary intentio^s; the good to be reserved for the suste^tation of the soul,
the bad to be cast out for her exercise; the one and the other in this divine
will which would so have it. The cause why we ought to do all with this sole
inte^tio^ of Gods will is, because it is better without comparison then any
other, containing all perfections and making ourworks more perfect,
meritorious, and agreeable unto God then all others, as by the second Chapter
before has bein showed, and as by this one argument may appear.

Our work takes her goodness of the end for which it is done, Argument.
having in itself no more good the^ it receaueth from her end, so that if it be
done for some end that is base, or of little moment, the work also is base and
of little worth if the end be high, the work is high, if it be higher and
better the work is higher and better; if finally, highest and best, the work
is best and most sublime. Now, so it is that a higher and better end thear can
be none them this of the will of God, nor any like unto it, and therefore a
better or nobler work thear can be none then that which is done with this end
of the will of God nor any like unto it; yea, as there is no end equal unto
it, so is thear no work comparable there unto. That no other end can be better
or equal unto this is manifest, because this end is immediately* God himself
which is Summu^bonu^, The foueraigne good; for which without any other end is
done immediately for the will of God is immediately done for God who has no
equal. A man may do his work for diverse inte^tio^s, as to exterminate vice,
to attain unto virtue, to avoid hell, to come to heaven, to imitate our
Saviors example all which are good though some more perfect then others: but
to do his work only for the will of God, and only to please him, is an
intention far excelling them all, the others having their end and object only
to the Creature directly, and to the Creator indirectly; yea so far excels
this intention the others, as he that does things natural with this intention,
as to walk, yea though they be pleasant, as to eat and drink, does more
merit and please God then he which without this end should fast, do penance,
discipline, or other painful works, with any other intention.

VVhear may be noted certain deceipts and abuses: 1. Deceit.
first, of those who measure all their works, and esteem their merit only or
principally by their exterior, they taking contrariewise their merit from the
interior, or end wherefore they be done.

Secondly, 2. Deceit.
by this rule appears the loss of merit, light, and grace, of the most part
of men which do their natural works naturally, and not supernaturally as they
might do by this intention, which makes such works natural and human,
supernatural and divine.

Thirdly, 3. Deceit.
of those which not only in natural things but also in supernatural and good
works, as alms, fasting, saying divine service etc, forget to address their
intention to God, (...) doing them either because they can not avoid them, or
else of custom not thinking wherefore.

Fourthlie, 4. Deceit.
of those which do their works for reward in heaven, for though they shall be
rewarded, and though it be good so to do them, yet is it better without
comparison to do them only for Gods will and to please him, not thinking (as
much as is possible) of any reward; and how much the less he so works, so
much the more shall he be rewarded, as approaching so much the nearer to the
nature of a Son; and contrariewise how much the more he so works for
reward, so much the less shall he be rewarded, as so much more approaching to
the nature of a mercenarie or servant.

Finally, 5. Deceit.
by this rule may appear the common blindness of men, who for the most part
do their works for other ends, and not for this of the will of God.

But some may here object and say; Objectio^.
that if so it be (as we say) that the work takes her merit only of the
interior, and that an ordinary and natural work with this intention of the
will of God is more noble and meritorious then the greatest work done with
any other intention, then consequently to receive that divine Sacrament of the
Altar or any other, is not a better work then to walk, eat, or drink.

I answer, Answer.
that in receiving the Sacraments thear be twoe things to be considered; one is
the Sacrament as a Sacrament instituted by God to confer grace; the other is
the simple receiving thereof, as being our work and we the Author thereof. If
then we have respect unto the first, it is a better work without comparison
then our ordinary works, having an excellency in it self as of it self; but
if we have regard unto the other, it is nothing better, having no excellency
in it self as of it self but is good, better, or best of all according to the
intention, yea evil also, for in Judas it was bad, 2. Objection.
and in the other Apostles very good.

If any one object that if the work take her merit only of the end, then at
least as touching the works of penance, as discipline, fasting, almesdeeds,
they are no better then ordinary works being done with this good end and
intention of the will of God as well as they. Answer.
I answer, that it follows not; for though the work take her merit only of
the end for which it is done, yet are not common works equal with the works of
penance if both have the same end, but the penal works merit more, because
that besides the good intention for which they be done, they contain and have
in them selfs both satisfaction for the synns past, for (as says S. Thomas)
Licet Deus non delectetur penis nostris, In supplemen. qu. 15. art. ^.
delectatur tamen ijs vt sunt iustae, Though God be not delighted in our pains,
not withstanding he is delighted in them as they are just; and are also a
preservation from the synns to come, for (as says the Philosopher) Paenae
medicinae sunt, pains are medicines. Wherefore, when we say that the work
takes all her good of the end, we mean all the good which it has more then
it had before in it self; so that, if two works de done for this will of God,
whereof the one is good in it self, as alms or fasting; the other neither good
nor bad in it self, as to walk or talk; the first of these works shall be the
better, namely so much the better as alms or fasting is better then walking or
talking; but if twoe works that be equal in them selfs be done, one for this
said end of the will of God, the other for another, as to go to heaven; the
first without comparison shall be the best: yea which is more, if twoe works
whereof the one is very good in it self, as fasting; the other neither good nor
bad, as walking, be done, the first for to avoid hell, or to come to heaven,
the other for the will of God and only to please him; this walking shall be much
more meritorious and agreeable ^o God then that sasting as is above said; for
though that work of fasting does much excel this of walking, yet this
intention of walning does much more excel that of fasting, and by consequence
makes the work much better; for even as a small quantity of gold excels a
great mass of lead, so purity of intention does far exceed the value of
corporal things, as penance which is great in show; though no man must leave
the better deed to do the lesser good under pretext of ^uch an intention, for
this were to deceive him self, whereof and of such like deceipts shall be spoaken
hereafter in the fifth chapter.

The division of this will into three parts.
CHAP. IIII.
BUT for the better understanding of this matter, and for more easy conceiving
of all the rest which shall be said in these three parts of this treatise, it
seems here necessary to make a division of this will of God, not an they
divide it in schools into the will present and the will subsequent according to
S. Damascene; nor into the will of the sign and the will of his pleasure
according to some others; nor into precept, prohibition, and counsel as it
pleases other doctors; nor finally, according to others dividing this will of
his pleasure into his will efficatious and permissiue: I mean not (I say) to
divide it into to these scholasticall divisions, but into a mystical division,
namely into the Interior, Exterior and Essential will.

The Exterior will is a light and rule vvherby (...) direct us in the Active
life.

The Interior like wise is a light and rule to direct our soul in the
Contemplative life.

The Essential, is a light and guide vvherby to direct our spirit in the
superemment life.

The first being active, the second contemplative the third, supereminent: the
first disposing to the second and the second to the third: the first is for
Beginners, the second for Proficients, the third for the Perfect. Neither is
this mystical, and threefold division new or without fundatio^, but is
grownded upon the doctrine of S. Paul, and seems rather his division then
mine whear he says, Romans 12.
Vt probetis que sit voluntas Dei bona, and beneplacens, and perfecta, That ye
may try which is the will of God, good, pleasing, and perfect. Upon which
words Lyranus says, Lyra. in Ro^. 12.
that, Voluntas Dei est bona, quantum ad (...), The will of God is good for
the Beginners, pleasing for the Proficients and perfect for the Perfect.
According whereunto the will of God which we call Exterior or Active is that
which S. Paul calls Good, seeing it is that wherein the beginners do exercise
them selfs: the will of God which we call Interior, or Contemplative, is
that which he calls Pleasing, seeing it is that which the Proficie^ts do
practice: And that which we call Essential, or Supereminent, is the same
which he calls Perfect, seeing that the Perfect employe themselfes therein;
though these three taken essentially as they are in God, are but one and the
same will, and God himself; but are here divided for the better understanding
of such as tend to perfection; for as in the triumphant church the superior
Angels receive a more ample and universal knowledge of the divine pleasure,
whereof their (...) our are not capable, till they divide, and proportion the
same according to their capacity, and so proportioned show it the^ (as says
S. Denise; so in the Church militant, De cael. hier. c. 15.
the holy and illuminated Doctors, receiving a more ample, and sublime
knowledge of the way of God, whereof we are not capable, have divided the same
and proportioned it to our capacity; S Th. in opd^hu. Christi post init.
And S. Thomas says: Lex diuinitatis, etc. God will that highest things being
made less, and proportioned, should dravv up those which are in the mean
degree; and those which are in the mean degree, should eleuare those which
are in the lowest, because this light is not equal in the inferior nature
and the^ superior; and the fore the guif^s asvvell natural as supernatural
are said to descend. For says S. Ieames, Iac. 1.
Every good and perfect gift comes from above, descending from the Father of
lights. Wherefore following this doctrine and example of the Fathers, we have
divided (as above said) this divine light and will; for though we be
altogether unlike to them in light, yet ought we to imitate them in
communication of doctrine, which though it have no proportion with theirs, yet
ought our method to be the same.

Of the Exterior will, what it is.
CHAP. V.
NOW to come to the definition or description of the Exterior will of God it
is the divine The exterior will.
pleasure known by the law, and by reason, being the rule of all our
thoughts, words, and deeds in the Active life. I say, it is (the divine
pleasure) because though God has no need of our good deeds as the Psalmist
testifies, Psalm. 15.
Quoniam ^onorum meoru^ non indiges, Because thou have no need of my good
works, nor has any loss if we do evil, nor gain if we do well; yet in
^is bounty and goodness he takes pleasure when we do well and keep his
commaun^^ements, as contrariewise by his justice he (...) displeased when we
break them. I say (it known) that is, not only he has a will and pleasure,
but he has made it known vn^^ us, having given us to understand wherein (...)
is will and pleasure consists. Farther, I say by the law) for thereby he
has made kno^en his will. I say (by the law) in general, (...) of God only,
to comprehend all kinds of ^^od laws, namely the law of God whereof (...)
written, Matt. 19.
Si vis ad vitam ingredi serua manda^, If thou wilt enter into life keep the
commandments; also the law of the Church, it being written, Matt. 15.
Si non uult ecclesiam audire, sit tibi ^ut ethnicus and pnblicanus, If he
will not hear ^e church, account him no better then an ^thnicke or Publicane;
likewise the law and commandment of the spiritual Pastor thereof is written,
Hebrae. 13.
Obedite praepositis uestris and ^biacete eis, Obey your superiors and be sub
^^ct unto them; Moreover, the law of Princes it being said, Luc. 20.
Reddite quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, Give unto Caesar that which is Cesars.
Further, the law of magistrates, Romans 13.
for, Non est potestas nisi a Deo, Thear is no power but of God; and Qui
potestatiresistit, Dei ordinationi resistit, He that resists the Power,
resists the ordinance of God. Finally, the law of every man's estate,
quality, and condition, be he Lord or subject, master or servant, Lay or
religious; Moreover, I say (and by Reason) which I add not without great cause,
for that in many things this will of God is not known by the law, thear
being many things which the law does not extend it self unto, neither
forbidding nor commanding them; as (for example) whither to take holy Orders
or not, to marry or to live single, to take a voyage or to stay at home, to
sit or to stand, to speak o^ to be sile^t, and a thousand other things which
daily come in practice neither commanded nor forbidden but left indifferent,
and a man knows not therein which is the will of God, which seems a
hindrance or let to our above said Rule, teaching that in all things we must
do it. In this case therefore, whear no law resolves the matter but leaves it
indifferent, Reason must bear the sway, by which word (Reason) is meant
Discretion, piety, and counsel. How in particular this Reason must resolve
every such doubtful thing, shall forthwith in the next chapter be declared.
Further I say, it is a (Rule) of all our thoughts, words, and deeds, because
that as the material rule is the thing whereby to draw a line straight, and
whereby we try whether any thing be right or crooked; so the will of God is
that whereby we may draw only the course of our life, and the intention of our
works, words, or thoughts, and whereby we may know whether they be straight
by right intention, or crooked by any blind affection. I say (in the Active
life) which comprehends not only the exterior action, but also the interior
intention; not only the outward conversation, but also the inward reformation.

If one say, Objection. Answer.
why then do you call it the will Exterior seeing it touches and reformeth
the interior? I answer, because it receives her light and direction from the
exterior; namely by the law, and so is most conversant in the exterior, in
doing things or leaving the^ undone, in accepting or rejecting according to the
same law, and finally, because though it be something interior by reason of
the rectifieng of the intention, yet may it be well called exterior, in respect
of the other twoe wills which are wholly conversant in the interior.

Rules how to know and practice this (will of God) in all things.
CHAP. VI.
IT is necessary that after having declared what this will is by the above
said definition in general, we show it in every thing by some rule more
particular, that so knowing what is to be done and what left undone, what to be
accepted and what rejected, we may in all things do the will of God as
before has bein taught by the above said general rule in the third chapter.
This particular rule is this, and may easily be gathered of that which is said.

All things whatsoever offer or present them selfs unto us to be done or
suffered, admitted or rejected, be they corporal or spiritual are of three
sorts, namely commanded, forbidden, or (...) indifferent, (...) neither
commanded nor forbidden; and nothing can come or happen but is contained in
one of these three kinds.

As touching the first kind, 1. Of things commanded.
if the thing be commanded, the will of God is known (to weet) that we do
it; we must therefore do it and that according to the above said general rule
(to weet) only because God will have it so, and for no other end whatsoever.

For the second sort, 2. Of things forbidden.
if the thing be forbidden, the will of God is likewise known that we do it
not; and therefore we must reject it and leave it undone, and this for the same
only intention of Gods will all other intentio^s rejected, and as much as is
possible forgotten.

As concerning the third, 3. Of things indifferent.
namely of things indifferent; they are of three sorts (to weet) agreeable to
nature or sensuality, as hearing, curious talk or news, viewing the beauty
of some person, stately buildings, and such like; or contrary to nature and
sensuality, as keeping silence, giving alms, fasting not commanded etc; or
in different to nature and sensuality, as to go this way or another, to sit
or to walk, or finally, whatsoever he finds no more inclination to do then
to leave undone. If the thing offered or that presents it self be of the
first kind, according to sensuality or affection; the will of God is, that
we refuse and reject it: if it be of the second, repugnant to sensuality or
affection; the will of God is, that we accept it: both which are Propositions
manifest by the scripture, every leaf whereof almost does exhort us to
mortification of the old man, as Mortificate membra vestra quae sunt super
terram, Coll. 3.
Mortify your members that are on the earth, Romans 8. When the thing is
difficile what is to be done.
and, Siautem spiritu facta carnis mortificaueritis, viuetis, If by the spirit
you mortify the act^ of the fleash you shall live, yet with this exception, if
true and unfeigned discretion require not the contrary, having respect to
health, person, quality, time, and place, with other like circumstances; but
if such be the circumstances and so indifferent the reasons on both sides, as
in verity a man knows not which to do or choose, either to do or leave
undone, to resist or admit the thing, then must he dispatche and choose the
one or the other, always with the intention above said of the will of God,
rather then with distraction, When the matter is of importance.
and breaking his brains, and loss of time, make too long discussion; except
(which happens seldom) the matter be of such consequence that it deserves
it, in which case he must use prayer and counfaile of godly men, and such as
are of mature judgment.

If the thing be of the third kind, namely indifferent, neither according nor
yet against sensuality to do or to leave undone; a man may choose which side
he will, always with this intention of the will of God, and saying in his
heart and mind unto him self; I will do or accept, or I will not do or
reject this for thy will and pleasure; which doing, the thing that so he shall
leave or do with this intention, shall be as well the will of God as if it had
bein commanded or forbidden: the reason is, because the work follows the
intention; so that such things not commanded or forbidden but in themselfes
indifferent, are made good or bad by their good or bad intention.

For better intelligence whereof must be understood, that as all the fruit of
the tree as well little as great appertains to him that is master thereof; so
all the fruits of works, words, and thoughts of a man appertain unto his Lord
and God; and by consequence he ought to do nothing be it never so little,
either in accepting or rejecting, consenting or resisting, doing or suffering,
but for him and his glory, Coloss. 3.
the Apostle saying, Quodcunque facitis in verbo aui in opere, omnia in nomine
Domini nostri Jesus Christi facite, Whatsoever you do either in word or work,
do it all in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Further, though all our life must be for God, yet all our life is not limited;
though all our works must be for him either in doing or suffering, accepting or
rejecting, consenting or resisting, yet has he not limited all, nor
commanded which we shall accept or reject, resist or consent unto, but has
left the most part of our life and works in our own choice, to do or to
leave undone, accept or reject without any sin; namely, all those things of
this class or order which here we call indifferent, as being free from
commandment or prohibition. Heervpon then, this our purpose is easily proved
(to weet) that by such intention these works indifferent are the will of God.

For, 1. Argument.
whatsoever God will have us know and do, he gives us means to know and
do the same; but in all these things indifferent he will have us know and
do his will as by the Apostle alleged appears, and has given no other
means to know and do the same but by our application of intention, seeing
they are not commanded or prohibited by any law; therefore this application of
intention in such things is the means to know and do the will of God.

Moreover, 2.
he does the will of God who exhibiteth unto him his honor in the best
manner possible; but in all these things indifferent thear is no better manner
to exhibit his honor unto him the^ by application of intention; therefore he
that in these things indifferent will use such application of intention to God,
shall (doubtless) execute his will.

Also, 3.
in all works that be lawful, such is the work exterior as God sees to be
the heart and intention interior; but God sees in these indifferent things
which be lawful, the heart interior thus directed to be according to his will;
therefore the work exterior is likewise according to his will.

Likewise, 4.
when in doing anything the will of God and ours pretend one end, the work is
done for the same end; but in doing these things indifferent the will of God
pretends his honor (as is proved) and by application of intention our will
prete^ds also the same; therefore in doing such things indifferent with such
application of intention they are the will of God.

Also, 5.
those things are the will of God which are don according as he demands of
us; but God demands of us that these things indifferent be done for his honor
(as is proved by the Apostle) and by such application of intention to God we
do the^ for his honor; therefore when we do these things indifferent with
application of inte^tio^ to God, they are the will of God.

Again, 6.
those things are the will of God in which Gods intention and man's are but
one; but in these things indifferent done with rectificatio^ of intention Gods
intention and ours are but one (to weet, his glory) therefore when in these
things indifferent we have this rectification of intention, they are the will
of God.

It is then plain that these works indifferent done with this end and
intention are as well the will of God as the things that we do because they
are commanded, or reject because they are forbidden, though in those our
intention must follow the work, but in these the work our intention; for in
things commanded or forbidden, our intention must be co^formed to the work
which the law has limited but in things indifferent the work must be co^formed
to our intention which the law has left at liberty. On which point I have
bein somewhat the longer, for that I have known some which doubted in the
practice thereof.

By this therefore you see the rule of things commanded, forbidden, and
indifferent, which are the three mystical days of which is said, Exodus 3.
Iter trium dierum ibimus in desertum, and sacrificabimus domino, We will go
tbree days journey into the desert, and offer sacrifice unto our Lord. For,
what is this journey else then the will of God by which a man trauaileth toward
Paradise and discovers the life eternal, Psalm. 49.
as is said? Illic iter quo ostendam illi salutare Dei, Thear is the journey
whear I will show him the salvation of God: and what may be these three days
of this journey but these three points wherein the will of God is fownd? and
worthily they are called (days) for the great light which they bring. This
desert is the penitent life, or voyage of the will of God in the light of
these three days as it is written; Psalm. 8^.
Domine, in lumine vultus tui ambulabunt, and in virtute tua exultabunt tota
die, O Lord, in the light of thy face they will walk, and in thy virtue they
will exult all day long: and during these three days, and by these three
things is offered (as is commanded) self will by mortification of the same, of
which sacrifice it is said, Sacrificium Deo spiritus contribulatus, The
afflicted spirit is to God a sacrifice, Psalm. 50.
which is more pleasing unto him, yea then the sacrifices of beasts; for (says
S. Gregory) In sacrificus aliena caro, in obedientia autem propria voluntas
mactatur, By sacrifices is offered the fleash of beasts, but by obedience
selfwill is killed.

Exceptions from this rule, and solutions of certain objections touching
things commanded, forbidden, and indifferent.
CHAP. VII.
IF one ask touching these things indifferent in respect of the law yet not
in respect of sensuality, I. Doubt, and the solution.
but are agreeable thereunto, whither one may not choose the side which is
according to sensuality, and so reject that which is bitter, and admit that
which is pleasant; I answer, if it be by true discretion, as for health or
otherwise, then it is no question but he may (as already is said) but without
such just occasion, though it be possible to do it for the will of God, yet
is it impossible to do it only and purely for the will of God, without sum
mixture of affection or sensuality; and so to do is very dangerous. I say
(it is dangerous) as well because in so choosing that side which pleases
sensuality, he does not mortify the same as he ought; as also because it is
to be feared that in so doing he deceives himself, doing the thing either
wholly or partly to please sensuality, though he both say and think to do
it for Gods will. I say it also (impossible) to do it simply and purely for
God, especially when deliberatly and of set purpose he so chooses according
to sensuality; because no reason can move him so to choose: for seeing a man
ought always to bend to mortification, what reason is thear why he should
willingly, wittingly, and deliberatly, without any respect of health or other
matter of discretion choose the things delightful to sensuality? and so doing
it not according to the true light of reason, it is impossible that his
intention should be pure and only for God, without some mixture of sensuality
or self love, though more or less according as the person is more or less
imperfect: yet if it be done by surprise, suddenly, or for want of taking
heed, it may be done for the only will of God; namely if remembering himself,
he thereunto purely and wholly address and level his intention.

As for the things commanded which seem agreeable to nature and sensuality,
2. Doubt, and the solution.
as to eat or drink, play or recreat himself, walk or visit some place or
person wherein he takes pleasure and contentment; as likewise for the things
forbidden disagreeable to sensuality and affection, as to leave of fasting,
working, discipline, or any other painful, bitter, difficile, or unpleasant
thing, a man must fortify and strengthen his intention, least it be
overthrown or wounded and weakened by the force of sensuality, or the
impulsion of unbridled affection; which he must do by producing contrary
acts, namely, by casting of and turning away his mind from the conte^tme^t and
pleasure of such a thing, and stopping all his spiritual powers and
understanding against the sensuality thereof; and contrariwise by fixing his
heart and mind and all his powers on God, and so offer himself unto him as his
vessel or instrument, whereby he may do that work only for his honor and
will, without any pleasure or proper commodity of this his creature; and so
doing it comes to pass in those that use it, that whereas before the soul
took her repose and delight rather in the sensuality and contentment of such
a thing, then in the will of God, after such a spiritual act, she takes her
whole joy and delight in the only will of God.

But some will demand, 3. Doubt.
if after such diligence he finds still himself drawn and allured by
sensuality or affection, what is to be done.

A man must proceed in another manner using more subtlety, Solution.
and making of necessity a virtue in accepting the same sensuality or
affection (which he can not be rid of) together with such a work even at the
hands of God as his will; not as a pleasure but as a pain, not as sensuality
but as the cross of Christ, as in very deed to such a soul it is.

For better intelligence whereof, because this point is of great consequence, as
being even the very knott of the spiritual life; and because it is a block
whereat many stumble, and a ditch which almost all fall into, not knowing how to
behave themselfes in this battle, I will say somewhat farther thereof.

We must then know and remember, Note well.
that thear be twoe parts of our soul, sensible or sensitive; and spiritual
or reasonable; whereof the one is always contrary to the other and have their
contrary desirs; the sensible part desiring sensible things against the
spirit, and contrariewise the spiritual part spiritual things against the
sensible, as says S. Galat. 5.
Paul, Spiritus concupiscit aduersus carnem, caro autem aduersus spiritum, The
spirit coueteth against the fleash, and the fleash against the spirit.
Moreover, that the one of these parts, namely the spiritual, is always in
our power to make it suiect to God and his law, because of her free will which
is natural, and grace which is all ways ready: but the part which is
sensible is not so always subject, nor in our power to make it obey God, and
follow that which is good, but often resists the good which by our reason
we would do, and follows the evil which we would not do; Romans 7.
wherefore S. Paul says heerof, Non quod volo bonum hoc facio, sed quod nolo
malu^hoc ago, I do not the good which I would, but the evil which I would
not, that do I.

Further, because God is not unjust, tyrannical, and cruel, but contrariewise
just, sweet and merciful, he has not commanded us things impossible and
above our power, or imposed a burden heavy to be carried, but contrariewise
has commanded that which is easy, 1. Joan. 5. Matt. 11.
as is said, Ma^data eius non sunt grauia, His commandments are not heavy,
And Iugum meum suaue est, and onus meum leave, My yoke is sweet, and my burden
light. And therefore by consequence though he has commanded us to keep this
spiritual part wholly subject to his law being (as is said) a thing possible,
yet hah he not commanded so to keep subject the sensible, being (as is
showed) a thing impossible, but only to keep it so much subject as we can, by
due mortification and by the rule of reason: wherefore this rebellion of the
inferior part is never any sin so long as the superior part does her endeavor,
and be the rebellion never so unreasonable, if it prevail not against reason,
it shall never be imputed to the party reasonable, 2. Tim. 2.
but contrariwise it shall be crowned, as having lawfully fought. Wherefore when
in these things commanded or in any other done by true discussio^, a man
feels any delight or sensuality little or great against reason and this
purity of intention of Gods will, and having resisted in bringing forth
contrary interior acts, and yet such motion or rebellion remains, he ought
not to despair or loose courage as many do thinking that all is lost, and
that he is not able to resist sufficiently; but (as is said) he ought with
courage to persevere, Great comfort for the tempted.
assuring himself that he shall not be overcome except he will himself by
consent of the party superior and spiritual. Therefore (as is above said) let
him take and accept such an interior battle as from the hand of God (that is)
as his will, and as the cross of Christ, knowing that his cross comes not
only by exterior injuries (as many think) but also by interior wars as here is
seen, and as he knew fullwell which said, Romans 7.
Video autem aliam legem in membris meis repugname^ legi me^tis meae, and
captiuante^ me in legem peccati, I perceive another law within me repugnant
to the law of my mind, and drawing me to the law of sin; and likewise he
which said, Job. 7.
Factus sum mihimet ipsi grauis, I am made burthensom unto my self.

But here again in this conflict against carnal and sensual motions thear
seems yet an other doubt and obscurity to be brought to light; 4. Doubt.
which is, that though by this which is said a man may know that if the party
superior consent not but do her endeavor, the rebellion or motion of the
party inferior can never hurt him, yet knows he not some times when it is
so, and when not. For, so great is the motion sensual or carnal that often
times it so troubles reason, and obscureth the light and serenitie of the
spiritual part, that she is not able to judge whether she has consented or
not.

I answer, Solution.
that neither is it necessary that we know it assuredly, but only probably,
for the better preservation of humility: for if we knew assuredly that we
had overcome it, we should be in more danger to fall by pride then before by
the fight, and were like by elatio^ of mind to loose more in peace then by
valiant fight we had gained in war: but yet may we know it as much as is for
our good, How to know if a ma have consented.
and as much as God sees to be healthful for us, namely by conjecture and
probability; which knowledge and assurance comes two ways; first, if he
have this firm purpose and general resolution habitualy, never at any time to
co^mitt mortal sin; secondly, if in his conscience he think that he never
gave over the fight but still resisted, though this resista^ce seemed not so
strong; for though it seemed weak, Tvvoe causes of weakness.
this weakness might come of twoe causes; first, for want of good will to
resist, and then it is in deed such as it seems, namely weak; and so is very
like to have offended. Secondly, this weakness may come by reason of the
impulsion of the temptation causing great feeling and delectation in the
inferior part drowning (as it were) the sensible feeling and knowledge, of
resistance, and goodwill; which notwithstanding lives and keeps entire in
the superior part, and then this want of resistance is not such is it seems,
but is in deed very great, and so he offends not.

But how shall I know (say you) of which of these twoe causes this feeble
resistance comes? 5. Doubt. Resolution.
I answer, by the above said habitual and continual firm purpose and
resolution never to commit sin; for if he be not accustomed to have this
purpose, he may know when he feels none or almost no will to resist the
temptation, that he has none in deed; but if he have this general purpose
he may verily think that he has resisted and kept pure his spirit and the
powers thereof, though like the three children in the glowing furnace, flaming
with the fire of concupisce^ce so heated by Nabuchodonosor the devil, Dan. 3.
king of all Babylon and confusion.

Moreover, it must here be noted that when we speak of things commanded or
forbidden, we intend not only the great things which were mortal sin to
committ them or to leave them undone, but also little matters which being
commanded were venial sin or imperfection to omit, or being forbidden were
the like to committ, for here we treat not only of the observing of Gods
commandments, but principally of the way to perfection, which consists in
avoiding of imperfections: and here also must always be remembered that (as is
above said) by this word (law or commandment) I mean not only the law of
God and of his church, but of superiors spiritual and te^porall, as likewise
of the order, state, and condition of every one, and finally of the
commandment or intention (not contrary to God) of father, mother, or any
other to whom we are bownd to obey; so that whenas by any of these kind of
laws, commandments, or intentions we ought to do or leave undone any
thing, he should much deceive himself which should do the contrary be the
thing never so small, though under pretext of perfection or co^templation,
because (as is written) Melior est obedientia quam victimae, 1. Reg. 11.
Obedience is better then sacrifices. And whoesoeuer should so do willingly
and wittingly, ordinarily is in great danger through inobedience by little and
little to fall into some great error and ruin of his soul; and also if he
were of any particular order of Religion, by such leaving of little customs and
ceremonies, to help (for his part) to ruinate his Order fenced in and defended
with such customs as a gardin with a hedge. Wherefore, I wish him to hear what
Ecclesiastes says unto him, Eccl. 10.
Qui dissipat sepem, mordebit eum coluber, He which pulls down the hedge,
the snake will bite him; and to receive this admonition from the wise man,
Prou. 28.
Ne transgrediaris terminos antiquos quos posuerunt Patres tui, Pass not the
ancient bownds which thy fathers have putt before thee. For, how can that tend
to perfection that nourishes proper will, and leaves of obedience? or how can
that tend to perfection that diminishes true performance of profession? But
what more diminishes true performance of his profession then to abandon the
good customs and constitutions of his Religion, which though they be not the
essential or very substance throf, yet are they the wall, trenche, Similie.
or bulwark to defend the same? For as no Captain of a castle or Governor of
a town is so foolish as to beat down the walls or bullwarks, or to fill up
the trenches or ditches of the same which defends the town, and makes the
enemy employ his forces and spend his munition, shot, and powder to win the
same, and to beat them down before he can assalt the castle or town it
self: so is he no wiser who beats down and abolisheth such ceremonies and
customs which keep in safety the essential of his Rule (namely his three
vows and other things commanded under pain of sin) and which make the
spiritual enemies to spend their forces in expugning the same before they can
come to that which is of greater consequence. For, as when such defenses of the
town be destroyed, the enemy layeng his seige against it forthwith planteth
his Canons and beats at his will and pleasure against the very howses of the
same even unto the heart thereof, and so it is in great danger to be taken and
subdued: in like manner when such ceremonies be abrogated, the enemy beseiging
the city of the soul, without any let lays on his whole forces, and with
his fiery arrows shoots full butt against the naked essential points and
vndefe^ded vows of his profession; so that he ought to be so far from such
contempt of those things, that though he were in great sublime contemplation,
yet if he knew that such things were to be done, he ought for the causes
above said to leave the same.

But herein lies the sore and imperfection in this case, that they think they
should be farther from God, and diminishe their spiritual light whiles they
are employed in the accomplishme^t of such little things and ceremonies; so
that they do not only omit them by frailty, but also wittinglie and of set
purpose. But ^f so it be that by these means they be seques^red from God, and
their light decreased, it is either because they do it unwillingly, namely
exteriorlie, and not in mind; which in effect before God who regards the
will, is as much as to leave it undone: or else if they do it willingly, it is
not (as here is taught) for the will of God only; for if this were their end,
so far should they be from being alienated from God, and their light
diminished, that they should thereby be nearer unto him, and their light much
increased; because this will (which is spirit and life) does illuminate,
illustrate, and so change the works, that of corporal they become spiritual,
of dark and exterior, clear and interior; and therefore of those that so do
them it is written, Psalm. 38.
Quia tenebraenon obscurabuntur a te, and nox sicut dies illuminabitur; sicut
tenebrae eius it a and lumen eius, Darkness shall not be hidden to thee, and the
night shall shine as the day; the light and the darkness shall be alike: Abac.
3.
and Egredietur diabolus ante ped^^ eius, The devil shall go forth before
his feef as being trodden under the same by such obedience, Ibid.
Ante faciem eius ibit mors, Death shall go before his face, as being beaten
away by the life (which is this will) and by the great light wherewith he is
clothed, and life wherewith his spirit is filled. And this is the true active
and contemplative life (to weet) not separated (as many take it) but joined
together, making of works exterior, interior* of temporal, spiritual; of
obscure, illuminated; and finally, which so ioineth in one and the same work
contemplation with the action, and that without prejudice or hinderance one of
another, whereof we will speak more amply in her due place.

How six degrees are contained in this Intention, that says; I will do this
for the only will of God. Of the first degree.
CHAP. VIII.
THIS rule therefore thus observed of things commanded, forbidden, and
indifferent, with those other observations thereunto adjoined, the will of God
shall every whear in all things appear most plainly; and so it rests that
we do the same by the practice of the above said general rule in the third
chapter expressed; namely, that we do all things for this end of the will of
God, and never begin any work, whether it be exterior or interior, corporal
or spiritual, in repelling vice or acquiring virtue; be it a thing commanded,
forbidden, or indifferent, be it natural or supernatural, little or great,
finally be it whatsoever; we never (I say) begin to do it till we have first
addressed our intention unto God, saying by word and thought, or at least by
thought from the bottom of our heart: O Lord, I will do this or I will
suffer, I will resist or will pursue etc. this thing only for thy will and
pleasure.

But that the purity and perfection of this intention may be the better
understood, and the devout soul may more clearly discern, and more easily
expel all impuritie, which no less secretly then commonly does contaminate
the same, we will declare it more plainly.

This intention therefore which says, I will do or suffer this or that only
for the will of God, contains six degrees or perfections (to weet) Actually,
Only, Willingly, Clearly, Assuredly, Speedily.

And this intention with these six degrees, has bein figured by the six
degrees of Salomo^s Throne in these words; 3. Reg. c. 10.
King Solomon built a Throne of Iuory, and covered it with shining gold,
which had six degrees, and the topp thereof was rovvnd in the hinder part, and
tvvoe handles on each side upholding the seat, and on each handle tvvoe lions,
and on each side of the degrees twelve little (...) such a work was not to
be fovvnd in any kingdom. This king Solomon is Jesus Christ, who worthily may
attribute unto himself this name Salomo^ which signifies (peaceable) seeing
he brings peace to the soul wherein he makes his abode, Psalm. 75.
for Factus est in pace locus eius, His dwelling is in peace. Now, in the soul
as in his palace he has made a throne of white Iuory of (pure intention and
divine will) large, to be capable of his divine majesty, garnishing it with
fine gold of (perfect charity) This throne has the six foresaid degrees, of
which we are to treat. The topp of this Throne or (complete perfection of
intention) is rownd without end or limit (to weet) Perpetual in the hinder
part, which looks toward the other world and life eternal: for though the
fore part of the Intention which regards us has a beginning, yet that which
is behind hidden from us which looks toward God and eternity shall never
have end, 1. Cor. 13
for Charitas non excidit, Charity has no fall. But which is the seat of
this the one wherein God reposeth himself, if not (constant perseverance?) of
which seat is said, Psalm. 44.
Seeds tua Deus in saeculum saeculi, Thy seat (o God) remains for ever. The
twoe handles which uphold the seat, are the twoe parts of strength, which are
(according to S. Thomas) Aggredi and Sustinere, 2. 2. q. 128 art. 4.
To undertake and sustain, or, to do and suffer; which handles firmly
support this seat of (Perseverance) not permitting it to fall. One was at the
one end, to weet (to Undertake) at the beginning; the other at the other end,
to weet (to Sustain) at the end. The four lions are the four Cardinal
virtues, or rather the four principal parts of the soul, the understanding,
the will, the powers irascible and concupiscible: the twelve little lions are
the eleven Passions of the mind with Discretion which does tame them, and of
lions and furious beasts make them domestical and serviceable. They were upon
the degrees, because (being well governed) they maintain and preserve them.
They were six on each side, because six of these passions have their residence
in the Concupiscible power, and six in the Irascible, placing thear Discretion.
Lo then this mystical throne: O glorious the one! o maiesticall seat! o
sublime intention! o divine work of great Solomon! It is not without good
reason said of thee, that no kingdom can afford they like; o throne which
beautifieth the soul giving her to understand this sweet inuitation of God
saying, Veni (electa mea) and ponam in te thronum meum, Come (my elect) and I
will place my throne in thee. Oh holy intention and throne of God, whear he
sits to renew in the soul all things therein contained, according as is
written, Dixit qui sedebat in throno; Ecce noua facio omnia, He who sat in
the throne, said, Behold, I make all things new. Let us consider therefore the
complete perfection of this throne, ascending by order the degrees thereof.

The first whereof is Actually, Actually, 1. degte.
by which is meant an actual remembrance of this will of God, which
consists in lifting up our mind to the same, and rectifieng our intention
according thereunto: by which degree of (Remembrance) is excluded all oblivion
of this will, Faults against this degree.
whenever we begin any thing spiritual or corporal; which is a common
fault, causing an infinite loss, and depriving us of an unspeakable treasure of
the light of grace, and of an unknown weight of merit. Yet to eschew this
extremity of Oblivion, a man must not fall into the contrary excess of
overmuch Remembrance, in multiplyeng so many acts, and rectifieng so often his
intention as to trouble the brain. And therefore when I say that a man must
direct his intention in all works, I mean not of every little action done by
every part and sense of the body or power of the soul, but of such works as
are distinguished and separated in them selfs; but particularly and above all,
we must not forget those which we feel to please or displease nature very
much; for it is thear (as they say) whear the Hare goes away, and wherein
consists true advancement.

Note also, that though always he ought so to direct his intention
whenever he begins to do or suffer any thing, saying, I will do or
suffer this (oh Lord) for thy will; this is to be understood of all those times
when he is distracted, and thinks not already of the same will, nor has his
spirit lifted up to God; and not when he has it so elevated as it may happen,
especially if he be diligent, and the work be short and not distractiue of
it self. For if after such direction of intention at the beginning he be
diligent in turning away his mind together with his eyes and other senses from
all exterior things, and fixing his spirit in this will and divine pleasure,
and be atte^tiue only unto God, he may still remain united unto him, until
he take in hand some other thing. Likewise, the work being soon done, or else
being not distractiue, but rather drawing the soul to devotion and toward
God, as in singing hymns or divine service; a man may have his mind still
lifted up, which if so it be, I say not that he direct a new his intention
taking in hand a new thing, but that he so still remain with his mind so
elevated unto God: for if he do otherwise, he should rather descend lower
then be raised higher, though (perhaps) this case falls not out often, but
that he has his mind distracted and the intention crooked, or at least not so
upright but that the mind may be more recollected, and the intention more
rectified. Nevertheless, a man must not be scrupulous if he fail in this
degree and some others, as though he had committed some sin, seeing the
desire he has to practice this Rule does add no new obligation.

Of the second degree of perfect Intention.
CHAP. IX.
THE second degree of this mystical Throne of pure intention and divine will
is Only (that is) that this will be their only, Only. 2. degree.
simple, and alone the end which moves the mind to do or suffer the thing.
Faults against this degree.
Which degree excludes all other ends and intentions whatsoever; and first
the evil and malicious intentions as to do the thing for pride, envy,
covetousness, gluttony etc. Secondy, all imperfect end and intentions, as to
do the thing for human respect, favor of men, self love, proper complacence,
servile fear, sensuality, particular profit, and the like; and (in sum) all
venial sins, and whatsoever is absolutely of her own nature imperfection.
Finally, heerby is excluded not only the evil inte^tion, and that which is of
it own nature imperfect, but also that which is of her nature good, but
comparatively bad, namely compared with a better, as to do penance,
discipline, fast, to eschew the pains of hell, to merit to be rewarded, to go
to heaven, and the like; which intentions though they be good in them selfs,
yet are they not so, compared with the only will of God which is far better
(as has bein showed) and are therefore here excluded.

Wherefore this degree and perfection especially appertains and is referred
to the mortification of all our passions and affections, self love,
intemperate desires, and all other imperfections; all which as bad weeds
springing up in the fertile grownd of our good works, are rooted out with this
fit instrument or degree of (Only) and as crooked boughs shooting out of the
straight tree of our intention, are cut of with the sharp sword of the only
will of God; the same being (as is said) a right rule to measure whether the
line of our intention be drawn straight or no.

Wherefore let the devout Reader take this for a general and infallible Rule,
that whenever in his work he has not this sole intention and only will of
God for his end without any mixture of other intention whatsoever, it has in
it imperfection be it never so secretly hidden, yea from the party himself;
but as soon as this only will bears sway and takes entire possession of the
heart, all darkness is discovered by the light thereof, and all obscurity of
imperfection is cast out by the shining brightness of the same. Oh how often are
we deceived for want of this light! how straight think we to be our
intention! how holy our desire! how excellent our work! how good an opinion
have we of our selfs! but as soon as this light comes, down must go the
Peacocks feathers seeing now her fowlle feet so soyled, and laden with earthly
affections, durtie passions, muddie propriety, and swinishe self love; for so
soon as this right Rule of Gods will is applied unto our intention, we see
the crookednes of inte^perance and disordinate desire thereof. All the world
goes awry, because they will not by this Rule square their intentions, nor by
this light examine their actions. In this point therefore let the devout person
labor, heerin let his whole studdie be, in this work let him recollect and
employ all his forces, namely in thus examining his intention in all his
affairs, for heerin consists all true spiritual profitt; this is the
infallible fowndation in the beginning, the secure way in proceeding, and the
consummated perfection in the end of all the Active life.

The third degree of perfect Intention.
CHAP. X.
THE third degree of this Throne is, Willingly, 3. Degree.
that this intention be willingly (that is) that the work be done not only for
Gods only will, but also willingly, and with full consent, with a certain
repose, peace, tra^quillitie, and spiritual contentment therein, that the soul
may be made capable of the presence of God and influence of his holy spirit,
Quia factus est in pace locus eius, Psalm. 75.
His place and abode is in peace (that is) in the soul not disquieted with the
noise of troublesome affections and contradicting passions, nor with the tract
of contrary desires drawing her another way.

By this degree therefore of willingness and contentment, Faultesagainst this
degree.
is excluded and shutt out all sadness, heaviness, and unwillingness in
doing, leaving undone, or suffering any thing commanded by any of the laws
above said, of what cause soever such unwillingness proceed.

Farther, this unwillingness and contradiction may spring of diverse causes,
The first kind of ^ontradiction in doing the will of God.
and namely of the thing commanded, as when it is base, abject, and vile, as
to visit prisons to attend the sick, or do the offices of the house: also
when the thing is unpleasant, sharp, and bitter, as discipline, abstinence, or
fasting: likewise when it is against our profit, as restitution, hospitality,
or almesdeeds; and finally, when it is against our worldly honor, as to support
patiently evil, spightfull, or slanderous words, reproaches, and all kind of
injuries.

Again, 2.
this Unwillingness may come by occasion of the party that commands, as
because he is, or is thought to be simple, poor, or unlearned; or that he is
his enemy or at least not his friend, or has done or spoken somewhat unkindly
to him.

Likewise it may come in respect of the time when he should do the thing, 3.
as when he is commanded to do it when he would rest, take his refection,
recreation, or do some other thing of his own; or when contrariewise he has
a mind to do it and is commanded to repose, eat, or rest from labor, or
should do some other particular thing then that.

Also, 4.
this Unwillingness may come in respect of the manner of the work, as when it
must be done speedily, laboriously, and diligently; or meekly, humbly, and to
his own confufion and to the abating of his pride.

Finally, 5.
it may happen in respect of the place, as when it is public, unpleasant,
loathsome. By all these occasions (I say) with the like, this sadness creeps
into the work when we do the same, though they all spring of one only cause,
namely proper will; and must be removed and cast out by this degree of
(willingness and contentment) remembering that such is the pleasure and will of
that sovereign will who for his own delight and service created ours.

Moreover, The 2. kind of co^tradiction.
thear is an other kind of wnwillingnesse in doing the will of God which is
more secret, and proceeds of causes less known, but no less contrary to
the same will of God and degree of (willingness) and these causes are
commonly covered with pretense of piety, as of prayer, fasting, teaching,
studdyeng, preaching, and the like; so that many when by their superior they
are commanded any thing which may interrupt their exercise, they do it not
willingly but unwillingly and with sadness, proper will persuading them that
they were better occupied before, and blinding them so, that they can not see
how much Obedientia melior est quam victima, 1. Reg. 11.
Obedience is better then sacrifices; nor know, that though in themselfes such
works be good, yet are they naught worth, done against the will of God
manifested unto us by his law, and the commanding or known intention of the
lawful superior, namely, so long as he commands not against the fame law.

A third kind of unwillingness arises from another cause yet more secret and
unknown; The 3. kind of contrndiction.
namely, when a man knows that it is the will of God, and also willingly
takes it in hand, but unwillingly bestows his spirit, his endeavor, and time
upon it to do it well and faithfully, but turning his mind from the same,
casts it on God and his will, and so neglects the work, making it not so
perfect as he ought; which is a notable and most secret deceit; for, casting
so his mind from the work to the will of God, he divides the said work and
will which are but one, making the work one thing and the will another: and so
when he seeks God but of the work, he seeks him out of his will; and
turning from the work, he turns from his will, casting of his mind from the
work he casts it from his will, and (finally) going out of his work he
goes out of his will and pleasure, because the work is his will; and though
still he does the work, yet if it be hot willingly, he does it not before
God, who sees the heart, and judges according to the will: and therefore how
much the more he so feeketh God, so much the less does he find him, because
God is never fownd by doing against his divine will; but the more unwillingly
he does that which he commands, and the more he turns his interior eyes
from it as being weary thereof, the more does he against his will, and by
consequence the less he finds him. But God is fownd only by his will (that
is) by doing that which he commands; in his will, which is his work; by
means of his will, which is by means of doing the thing which he wills,
and that willingly and with all our heart and all our strength, as we are
bownd to serve him which all our heart and our strength, not with slownes or
fastidiousnesse, Hier. 48.
for Maledictus homo qui facit opus Deinegligenter, Accursed is that man who
does the work of God negligenly; nor yet sadly, or (as it were) by constraint,
2. Cor. 9.
for Non ex tristitiae aut nece ssitate, Not with sadness or necessity, but
willingly and with contentment, Ibid.
Hilarem enim datore^ diligit Deus, For God loves a joyful giver; but (as is
said) he does not joyfully the work, who in doing it, unwillingly thinks
thereof: He does not (I say) willingly the will of God who doing the work
will not think thereof, but only of his will, as though his work were not his
will, or as if his will were other then his work; finally, as though his work
and his will were not one and the self same thing: so that when to think of
the will he will not think of the work, he thinks in deed neither of the
work nor of the will; and the soul that will be so out of the work to be in
God, is neither in deed in God, nor yet in his work.

Let us therefore lay down here for a sure grownd to build upon, for an
infallible Maxim to resolve this matter, and for a shining light to dissipat
and dissolve this cloud (namely) that when any work presents it self to be
done, following the Rules above said, the same very work it self, be it
corporal or spiritual, inasmuch as it appertains to me, is the very will
of God, and to me is spirit and life.

I say (the very work it self) to signify the thing done, and to exclude
all imaginations of any other thing, either in heaven, or in earth, or in our
soul, excepting as that thing it self is in our soul. I say (both corporal
and spiritual) that none may think the corporal to be less then the
spiritual; and to touch the deceit and common error heerin of many
spiritual men, which do more willingly the spiritual then the corporal,
esteeming the one kind more noble then the other, and deeming to find more life
and light in the one then in the other; which though it be true in respect only
of themselfes, and good so to do, preferring the one before the other when a
man has liberty to take his choice; yet is it otherwise when the will of God
inter poseth it self by means of any obligation or commandment; for then it
is ill done, and a man deceives himself in preferring the spiritual before
the corporal, obedience being (as is said) better then sacrifice. I say (in as
much as it appertains unto me) to exclude the substance of the thing be it
corporal or spiritual substance together also with all her Accidents, as the
whitenes, blacknes, and all kind of colors; sweetness or bitterness and all kind
of tastes; greatness, smallnes and all kind of proportions; and finally, all the
qualities and accidents, as not being this will of God, but as it appertains
unto me (that is) in as much as it ought to be in my soul, as being brought
unto the same by the corporal powers and five senses, Nihil est enim in
Intellectu quod non fuerit prius in Sensu, Thear is nothing in the
understanding which was not first of all in some of the five Senses; which five
Senses bring it into the three Powers of the soul, Intelligence, Memory, and
Will, which keep, retain, and (as it were) digest, work, and metamorphose
the same into another form by taking away the veil thereof, putting of the
corporal Image; and so bringing it to a pure abstraction does lodge it in the
essence of the soul: Thus (I say) the work is in our soul, and thus it
appertains unto us. Taking therefore the work in this forte, it is the very
will of God, and to him that so does it spirit and life. For, though thear be
some darkness by reason of the Image or imagination of the work in my spirit,
yet is the same turned into light by the fervor and light of this divine will,
whereby the soul sees, nor tastes ought else but God and his sweet will and
pleasure: and how much more willingly the work is done in this order (to weet)
in not dividing the work and the will, but esteeming the very work to be the
very will, so much the more clearly does the soul see this will, and
perfectly enjoy God; the work that seemed corporal being so turned wholly
into spiritual.

And note, that when I say one must not look on the will of God but on the
work, my meaning is (as I have said) that he ought not to look or behold the
will a part, as it is not; but as one and the self same thing with the work,
as it is; nor that he should turn his spirit and affection from the work,
but contrariewise fix it still in the same, yet always, as in his will.

VVhear is to be noted, that as some are in this extremity to turn their mind
from the work, and fix it on the will of God; so are they in far greater
number which lean to the contrary, turning their mind from the will of God
to fix it on the work; so that as the one (which be spiritual) find not the
will of God because they seek it not in his work; so the others (which are
the worldlings, and undevout) do not the work of God, because they seek it
not in his will: for, as we do but lie to God and in vain seduce our selfs,
in thinking to love his will and yet neglect his work; so do we no less,
when we think to do his work and yet neglect his will.

It is therefore evident, that to unite both these extremities, and amend these
twoe contrary imperfections, the will of God (according to the above said
Maxim) must be joined with his work, and his work with his will, and never
make them twoe, but perfectly one and the self same thing; acknowledging that
the accomplishing of the work is his very will, and that his will is the
very accomplishing of the work, though the reformation of this latter
imperfection of doing the work without having regard to the will of God,
appertains to the first degree of Actual remembrance.

Of the fourth degree of perfect Intention.
CHAP. XI.
THE fourth degree of this Throne, Assuredly, the fourth degree.
or persection of this intention is, Certainty, or Assurance, with which it
ought to be munited and fortified, namely, that when one has directed his
intention to do the work for the only will of God, he assure himself that
in verity it is the will of God.

By this degree and perfection of Assurance is excluded all doubts and
hesitations, Faults against this degree.
which because in this point they often intrude them selfs, to the great
prejudice of the true and faithful practice thereof, I will endeavor to resolve
them, by declaring and taking away the causes whereof they spring.

The first cause then, The first cause.
whereof these doubts do spring, is because in matters indifferent a man
knows not whether he has chosen that side which pleases God or nor, in
doing or leaving undone any thing; which happens because forgetting his rule
he knows not how to discern the matter, taking a wrong means of discerning
the same (to weet) in wayghing the exterior thing, and considering whether it
be more agreeable to God to leave or do it, to do this or to do that.

For remedy therefore heerof, Remedy.
he must know that this is not the means in things indifferent; but must
judge thereof by an interior discussio^, and not by the exterior thing, namely,
by a view or examen of the inte^tion; which if it tend directly to the will of
God, he has in verity chosen that which is his will; because in such
indifferent things the work follows the intention, and not the intention the
work.

The second doubt is in little matters, 2. Cause.
and proceeds from the smallnes and little value thereof, persuading some that
God esteems not such things, saying (as it were) in them selfs: God cares
much for this or that; or, has God need, or makes he account of these small
things?

The remedy whereof is, Remedy.
to remember that as we must not serve God only with a part but with all our
forces, so must we not only do some of our actions but all for him; and
therefore the little as well as the great. Also, that God measures the goodness
of the work, not by the exterior value but by the inward intention, and a
little thing in our eyes may be great before God: Simlie.
For, like as the garment of russet embroadred with gold and set with perles,
is richer then that of velvet without any ornament; the cloak lined with
velvet is more costly then one of taffata lined with searge; so the least work
exterior with perfect intention, is better then the greatest with an imperfect
intention. Finally, the remedy of this doubt is, to remember to what the
Apostle exhorts us saying, Coloss. 3.
Omne quodcunque facitis in verbo aut in opere, omnia in nomine domininostri
Jesus Christi facite, All whatsoever you do or say, do it in the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ: for, saying that all our works should be done for God, he
excepteth not the least work, yea includes the least word. And S. Augustine to
this purpose says, Aug. sup. Psalm. 46.
Thou do praise God when thou do thy busynes.

The third kind of things whereof these doubts and this hesitation comes; 3.
Causae.
are things pleasant and sensual, as eating, drinking, recreations, and the
like; because that being so agreeable unto nature and sensuality some will
think (perhaps) that they say not syncerely, but rather feign, and mock (as
it were) God, in saying they do them for his only will and to please him,
feeling that it pleases their nature and sensuality: which error proceeds
from the evil custom whereunto a man has given himself, to do such things
only by the motion, tract, and impulsion of pleasure and sensuality, without
intention or regard had to the will of God: for, having contracted such a long
custom to do them so, to satisfy their insatiable and brutish sensuality,
not lifting up their mind, nor looking up to God no more then hoggs in the
trowgh, they think such things should be no otherwise done, nor that in deed a
man has the power to rectify the same, and to do them for the will of God.

But to reform this error, and dissipate this obscurity, I referr the Reader
as well to the reasons above said against the second doubt, as also to the
express words of the Apostle saying, 1. Cor. 10.
Sieve manducatis, sieve bibitis, sieve quid alind facitis, omnia in gloria Dei
facite, Whether you eat or drink, or do any thing else, do it all to the
glory of God: And S. Augustine says to the sowlle well ordered, Thou do
praise God when thou take they refection, when thou do eat, when thou
do drink; thou do praise him when thou do repose in thy bed, thou
do also praise him when thou do sleep.

The fourth and last doubt and hesitation proceeds from natural things which
seem abject, 4. Cause.
and whereof a man has some shamefastness.

For remedy against which hesitation and error, serve very fitly as well all
those reasons against the second and third doubts, as also these words of S.
Paul which seems to touch the same, 1. Cor. 12.
Quae putamus ignobiliora a membra corporis esse, his honorem abundantiorem
circundamus; and quae inhonesta sunt nostra, abundantiorem honestatem habent;
that is to say, Those parts which we think to be the baser and most dishonest
members of the body, we cover and adorn with greater care and diligence; and
those that are our most dishonest parter are more sumptuously decked: wherefore
no man in such case ought to loose the presence of God, knowing that the Son
beating on the dunghill, is no more obscured then when it shines on the green
meddowe or fair field.

Of the fifth degree of perfect Intention.
CHAP. XII.
THE fifth degree of this Throne or perfection of this Intention is Clearly
(that is) that it be accompained with a lively faith, Clearly the 5. degree.
namely that according as one knows that the work so done is the will of
God, so with a lively faith, and a clear sight casting his eyes thereon, and
firmly fixing them in the same, he steadfastly behold it as the same very
will of God, which in deed in it self is no other but God himself. He must (I
say) in spirit behold the work, not as that work, but as this will; looking
not on the thing exterior, but on the divine pleasure interior; not as any
thing created, but as the will of God and God himself uncreated: for though
therein thear be something created, yet that is nothing in respect of him that
is thear uncreated; and though thear be both the one and the other, yet we
must not see both, but turn from the one, and contemplate the other; because
that as it is created and a human work, it brings no light, but as it is
uncreated and the will of God; so ought we not to fix our spirit on it as it
is a human work, but as it is the will of God; because our spirit can never
see the beauty, light, and perfection of the one, whiles it is clothed with
the obscure Image of the other: for though he see by this light of the will
of God, that he must do the work exterior or interior which it requires,
yet must he not fix his spirit in the work but in this will; for as none can
see the light of this will which will not do the work, so none can see the
same light which will only see the work; but as the soul is well inspired to
do the work by motion of that will, so is she well illuminated when fixed in
this will, she sees not the work as a work, but as the will of God.

Here how will say, Objection. Answer.
if she behold not the work, how can she do it well? I answer, that I say
not simply that she should not behold the work; but, that she should not
behold it as the work, but as the will of God: for as it is his will that
she do the work, so is it that she do it not as the work, but as his
will; and therefore in the work must only look upon his will.

But she cannot choose (say you) but behold the work in doing it, Objection.
though she do what she can to the contrary. Answer.
I answer, that though she cannot choose but see the work, yet can she
choose whether she will see it as the work or as the will of God, namely, by
this degree of lively faith: And if she do what she can, not to see the
work as the work, but to fix herself only in the will of God, all the rest
of the work which by imagination or otherwise remains in the mind is the
will of God who so will have it; and therefore as his will she must accept of
it, and as such behold it; and so doing she sees nothing but the will of
God. But of this has bein spoaken in the third degree.

By this degree which we call Clearly operating with lively Faith, Fault
against this degree.
is excluded all dullness or (as it were) sleepiness or slownesse of Faith,
which ordinarily heerin hinders us of much spiritual profit, and depriueth us
of great lightand knowledge of God: by which dullness of Faith I mean not a
total vnbeleiuing, as though one believed not that the work so done with such
direction of intention were the will of God, but I mean a certain drowsines,
slacknes, and negligence of spirit in producing aninterior act of the faith
which he has, whereby actually to behold and contemplat the same as the very
will of God, and not as any human operation and work of his own; so that
not practicing the faith which he has, nor extending the same any farther
then to human operation, nor lifting up his mind with full assurance to his
divine will, it happens that neither his Intelligence is illuminated by this
clear light, nor his will inflamed by this burning love, nor his soul allured
by this perfect beauty, nor enlarged by this gretnes, nor elevated by this
highness, nor innobled by this majesty, nor (finally) viuified by this qwickning
spirit of God; but for want of practicing that which he knows and exte^ding
actually his faith to that which he beleiueth, lives in the penury, poverty,
and obscurity of his soul; so being like to him that has a sword at his
side, Sim^lies.
but for want drawing it forth lets him self be killed; or to him who has
a sovereign medecineth his shop, but for want of applyeng the same dies of
his disease; or finally, who has provision sufficient in his house, and wine
enough in his celler, but for want of dressing the one starueth for hunger, and
of drawing the other dies for thirst. But contrary wise By this degree of
viuacitie or liuelines of faith, by this actual seeing, and fixed contemplation
and beholding of this will of God, all such misery goes away, all such
darkness flies away, all such obscurity vanishes out of sight, and the soul
remains united to his will and conjoined with God, illuminated, viuified, and
elevated in an unspeakable manner.

The sixth degree of perfect Intention.
CHAP. XIII.
THE sixth degree of this Throne is Speedily (that is) that this intetion
adorned with the foresaid sieve perfections be quickly directed, Speedily, the
sixth degree.
not at the end of the work, nor in the midst, but before we take the same in
hand. Faulter against this degree.
By which degree is excluded all slownes and slacknes of rectifyeng our
intention when we begin to do or suffer any thing; whereby until our
intention be rectified we are deprived some times of the profit and merit of
the work, as 1.
doing the same some times with some less intention then for the only will of
God, and some times 2.
with no good intention at all, yea and sometimes we demerit and offend by the
same, as 3.
doing or suffering it with an evil intention, and to an evil end and
purpose; and all for want of this diligence and speedines in directing our
intention at the beginning, as this degree requires.

Yet if so we offend against this degree, we must repair the fault as well as
we can, in directing our intention as soon as we remember our selfs.

Moreover, A man failing in the former degrees, must neds fail in the latter,
but not contrarievvise.
it is to be noted, that a man may fail or offend against some of these
degrees which be last in order, and yet not against others which are precedent,
as a man may be destitute of the greater perfection, yet not of the lesser; but
a man can not fail in any one of the first degrees in order, without failing
in all the rest which follow, because one cannot lack the lesser perfection
without wanting the greater.

And therefore our intention by slownes may offend against this sixth degree of
Speedines, being directed late, and toward the end of the work to the will of
God, and yet may be furnished with the other five.

It may also with this sixth fail in the sixth degree of Cleernes by a sleepines
of fay th, no beholding the work as the very will of God and yet maybe
fortified with the other four.

As it may also with the sixth and fifth degree fail in the fourth of Assurance
by hesitation not firmly beleiuing that the work done with the intention here
taught is the veri^ will of God, and yet may be furnished with the other
three, and so of the rest.

But contrariewise our intention can no fail in any of the degrees which are
first (...) order, without failing in all which followe^ for it can not offend
against the fifth without offending against the sixth; nor against the fourth
without offending against the fifth and sixth; and so forth unto the first
degree, which if it fail, all the rest do likewise fail: so as you may see,
thear is more danger and loss to fail in the first then in the last.

Now, if a man be fallen into any one of these defaults in the beginning of the
work, he must not persevere and cast all away, but rather remember the common
saying, Better late then never; and so at least in prosecuting or finishing the
work, he must rectify his crooked intention by these degrees, and by the
straight line of Gods love, cutting of every imperfection by the particular
degree against which it millitateth.

And heerin a man ought to employ all his spirit and diligence, Dew occupation
during the work.
all his care and vigilance during the work, examining and purifieng his
intention by these degrees, and to take heed if all be therein comprehended, or
whether for want of any of them it be contaminated with any spot of self love
obscuring her beauty, or vayled with any clowd of proper will covering her
radious splendor; whith examen and rectification of intention is so good, so
excellent, and so profitable an occupation of the mind, that I wish and desire
all that practice this exercise to employ themselves wholly therein; as being of
all others the most direct, short, and readiest way to all perfection, leading
us (as it were) by the hand to the knowledge of our selfs, and displayeng all
our hidden self love, bewrayeng all our secret passions, layeng open all our
enclosed affections, and poynting out as with her finger all our unknown
imperfections. And for want of this continual occupation of our selfs in our
interior, for lack of this due examination of our intention, and vigilant
watch over our heart, it harbors many passions judging them to be
inspirations, yeildeth to many affections thinking them to be holy actions, is
filled with self love esteeming it the love of God, and (finally) does the will
of the old man, yet beleiuing it is the disire of the new. Note.
In which examination of our intention I admonish this, that no man trust
himself, and believe his first sight or inspection into the same, nor think
that all goes well if at the first he see nothing amiss, because this comes
for the most part, not for want of fault but of light, nor for lack of
abundance of self love or proper will to be discovered, but for want of
knowledge and a sharp sight whereby to discern it; which sight and light he
shall (doubtless) have, who still will remain in his interior: for, Similie.
as he that comes from abroad out of the Sun into some obscure place or
chamber, sees nothing at the first, but if he remain thear awhile he sees
whatsoever is therein; so the mind that comes from abroad, and from exterior
affairs into the interior or inward closet of the soul sees nothing therein,
but stayeng thear while sco^reth whatsoever lies hidden imper^^: Lo then the
six degrees of this mistical Throne.

How to continue this purity of Intention.
CHAP. XIIII.
HAVING ascended by order all the degrees of the Throne, we must now consider
her topp and seat of stable Perseverance, wherein this great Solomon sits
and reposeth; and having seen how the mind is sixed in the only will of God,
we must know how it may preseuer therein; Tvvoe means to continue the purified
Intention.
which to effect thear be twoe ways and means, the first whereof is for
Beginners the other for those which have made some good progress, though (if
diligent endeavor supply the want in Beginners) both they and the others may
use both means, as their denotion shall serve them.

The first is practiced by diverse internal acts of the mind, Means.
as first by an act of filial fear or profownd reverence of God seeing himself
so near unto him, so illuminated by his presence, so environed with his
splendor, and) as it were) on every side compassed about with the bright
beams and illustration of his divinity.

Some times by an abyssall Humility and abasing of him self, seeing his misery
honored with the actual assistance, and his indigni^^ accompanied with the
true presence of God; and so rightly crieng out with S. Peter saying, Luc. 5.
Exi a me quia homo peccator sum (Domine) Depart from me (o Lord) because I am a sinful man.

Again, by a great Admiration, seeing God to cooperate so familiarlie with him
in that which he does.

Likewise, by an extreme Joy and exultation of heart, seeing himself made the
lively instrument and temple of God.

In like manner, by a sweet and amorous inclination toward the celestial
Bridegroom, tasting his great clemency and goodness.

Farther, by an inward Iubilation and hearty joy in the soul, perceiving her
self, to be delivered from the servitude of her self, and set free from the
bondage of proper will.

Moreover, by a total resignation and delivering up of the soul into the
hands of her spouse to enjoy him more fully.

Again, by acts of perpetual Abnegation of him self, as having fownd by
experience the perfect consolation, and happy fruit which immediately
springs, and infallibly comes thereof.

Also, by a true Annihilation of him self, proceeding from the propinquitie and
neernes of the Almighty and infinite essence of God.

In like sort, by holy and heavenly desires, wishes, and suspires, to be
always conversant in heaven; seeing now the chains of his proper will to be
broken which tied him so before unto the earth.

Finally, by a most intimate Love of God, feeling the ardour and sweet burning
flame of his divine love.

And to conclude, by an Attention to the straight union already made betwixt
God and the soul by unity of their wills in the work, entertaining,
nourishing, and cheatishing the same union by diligently hearing, willingly
obayeng, and joyfully following the tract of the same spirit of God.

The second and more essential means to conserve entier the pure and perfect
intention, 2. Means.
is to make an expropriatio^ of the work that is) ^that when a man has so
rectified and purified his intention according to these degrees, he ought to
put of (as it were) the work both exterior and interior, as not being his
own, but knowing that (in verity) after such rectification it is not his will
that does the work, but the will of God; nor his spirit, but the spirit of
God; and by consequence that it is not himself but God that does the same, he
being only the mere Instrument (though free) nay nor that Instrument neither as
of him self, but the same given him by God: and therefore (I say) he ought to
esteem, and firmly behold the very work so done, as the very will,
operation, and spirit of God, as has bein touched in the fourth degree. And not
only the soul must so esteem and behold it as the very will of God, but
also (all other things set apart) must adheare thereunto, and with all her power
remain recollected therein; so that being wholly established and immoueablie
settled in the same, keeping forth all bruit and noise of the world, and all
clouds of passions and distracting thoughts, she shall discover this light of
heaven in a quiet and profownd silence, and taste this very life, and viuifieng
spirit of Gods will in great abundance.

VVhear must be noted that we say (he must behold the work as the very
will of God, Note.
and not that he behold the said will in the work) and that to eschew many
errors, blindness, and deceipts, which proceed from such kind of speech and
practice.

For first, The first error.
we say that we must behold God or his will in our work or in our intention;
it is so conceived and understood, as if one should behold the same will as
contained and enclosed in the work, as in some vessel, place, space, or
circuit corporal, imaginary, or intellectual; he, nor his will having
neither place nor situation, as contained therein.

Secondly, 2.
in so saying, diverse do endeavor to see or consider the will and the work
both together, and not the will of God only and alone; and so (indeed) the
soul can not know nor taste the lively will of God; for it being spirit and
life, it is impossible that she should be capable thereof in any perfection,
whiles she is filled and possessed with the work be it exterior or interior,
but when she takes the very work for the very will.

Thirdly, 3.
by such an imagination of seeing the will of God in the work or in the
intention, is hindered the union with the same will, as making the will one
thing, and the intention another.

Finally, 4.
when so we consider or contemplate God or his will in our work or intention,
the same work or intention is the principal object of our contemplation or
spiritual sight, whereas (indeed) it should be the only will of God.

For these causes therefore I say not that we^ must behold the will of God in
our work or intention, but I say we must behold the work or intention as the
very will of God, which is God himself, who by his presence does anihillate
in this respect both the work, and intention or will of man; not that indeed
they are nothing (having always their essence) but that they are so little
that in comparison and the presence of God they are nothing; and though they be
some thing, yet must they not here be seen as such, but as nothing; because
though in it self the work be some thing, yet considered in the will of God,
it is nothing, but even the same will of God into which it is transformed, and
so of death and darkness is made life and brightne^s and that which in it self
was corporal, in the will of God is made spiritual.

Wherefore, so taking the work whether exterior or interior, not as his own,
but as the very pure will of God without any hesitation, excluding all other
thoughts and distractions, let the soul fix her self in the same with all her
forces, with all simplicity, constancy, verity, and viuacitie of faith; let
her adheare thereunto, enclose, plunge, and transform her self therinto, being
her light, life, peace, and joy, her center and repose; as being her rule and
perfection, her treasure and richesse, her beginning and end; and so shall she
accomplish the continuation of (...) six degrees of perfect Intention, and by
stabilitie of perseverance shall establish in her self this seat, and shall
make great king Solomon her celestial spouse sweetly repose therein.

How the celestial Bridegroom and his spouse in their Dialogue in the
Canticles make mention of this seat or spiritual Throne with her six degrees.
CHAP. XV.
OF this Throne with her six mystical degrees is made mention in the Canticles
of Solomon.

For, 1. Actually. Cant. 8.
of the first of Remembrance is spoken, when the celestial Bridegroom says
to his spouse, Pone me vt signaculum super cor tuum, vt signaculum super
brachium tuum, Put me as a signet upon thy heart, and as a signet upon thine
arm: for, a signet makes impression, and impression signifies Remembrance
against Oblivion; by the heart is meant the intention or affection; by the arm
the action; the heart and the arm together does signify the actual
intention. When then the bridegroom says to his spouse that she imprint him
as a signet, he will have her to be mindful of him: when he says to her
that she print him in her heart, he desires that she remember him in her
affection or intention: and when he wishes her to imprint him also on her
Arm, he will have her in her intention to have an actual Remembrance of him;
which actual Remembrance is this first degree called Actually.

The second degree which is Only, 2. Only. Cant. 1. and 3.
is touched when the Bridegroom speaking to his spouse says unto her, Oculi
tui columbarum, Thine eyes are like unto the eyes of doves; for, by the dove is
signified the soul; by the eyes of the one, the sight of the other; and by the
simplicity of that, the simple sight of this. Now, the sight of the soul is
her intention which is simple when it is not double; and it is not double when
it has not twoe objects, the Creator and the Creature, but one alone (to weet)
the Creator, for them the intention is simple when it has for her sole and
simple object God only.

The same is signified when he says, Cant. 4.
Vulnerasti cor meuin (soror measponsa) vulnerasti cormeum in vno oculorum
tuorum, Thou have wownded my heart (my sister, my spouse) thou have wownded my
heart by one of thine eyes: for, the soul having twoe eyes or sights, the one
seeing the Creature, the other the Creator, she seems exceeding fair in the
presence of God, when having put out that, she sees only with this; for then
she wowndeth his heart with her love. Of this only intention and simple
eyesight our Savior speaks, Matt. 6.
when he says, Sioculus tuus simplex fuerit, totum corpus tuum lucidum erit,
If thine eye be simple, all thy body shall be lightsome.

Of the third degree which is (willingly) is made mention when the spouse
says, 3. vvilligly. Cant. 5.
Pessulum oftij mei aperui dilecto meo, I vnbolted my door to my well-beloved;
for, which is this bolt which barreth our door against our Savior but our
proper will? and how is it taken away but by the renunciation thereof for the
will of God? and when is it taken away willingly, if not when the soul does
it herself? When then the spouse says that herself vnbolted her door to her
well-beloved, her meaning is, that renouncing herself she did willingly the
will of God, and not by constraint. The same are we given to understand when
The says, Cant. 4.
Vadam ad monte^ Myrrhae, I will go to the mountain of myrrh: for, by bitter
myrrh is represented unto us the bitterness of Abnegation, to do the will of
God: by the Mountain, the sublimitie of this Abnegatio^, eleuating a man above
himself in God, as is said, Thren. 3.
Sedebit solitarius and tacebit, quia leuauit se suprase, He shall remain
solitary and be silent, because he has lifted himself above himself. By that
which is said that she went, is signified that it was freely and of her own
good will, without any constraint, repugnance, or sadness, so willingly
renouncing herself for the will of God as he who said, Psalm. 53.
Voluntary sacrificabotibi, I will offer sacrifice unto the willingly.

The fourth degree which is (Assuredly) is touched by the spouse when she
says, 4. Assuredly.
Ego dilecto meo, Cant. 7.
and ad me conuersio illius, I belong to my well-beloved, and he turns himself
toward me: for, by the first part of this sentence she comprehends all the
degrees before rehearsed, and by the other she touches this degree of
Assurance; for in saying (I appertain to my well-beloved) it is as much as if
she said, I have purified my soul and intention, eleuating and addressing it
unto him actually without oblivion, only, without any other end, and willingly,
without sadness, and so I am wholly his, he entirely possesses me, he has
taken me for his own, Apoc. 21.
Sicut sponsam ornatam viro suo, As a spouse adorned for her bridegroom: and
as I am his, so reciprocally his conversion is unto me; as I am his, so
likewise is he mine; for the same internal acts which make me his, make him
also mine; as the bond or law of love does give me unto him, so does it give
him unto me; and as by the other degrees he has assurance of me, so by this
which necessarily follows them, have I assurance of him. Behold then
wherfored say, that Assuredly I belong to my well-beloved, and that his
conversion is to me; which I know, not only assuredly without hesitation, but
also see clearly without sleepines of faith, whereby I know him and see him,
which is

The fifth degree to which I did so ardently aspire, 5. Clearly. Cant. 1.
which so long time desired, and often demanded of my spouse saying, Indica
mihi quem dil (...) ima mea, vbi pascas, vbi cubas in meridie, O whom my soul
does love, declare unto me whear thou do feed, whear thou do repose at
Nooneday (that is to say) in the ardour and lively flames of love and meridian
light, whear by union with him I may be inflamed and burned with his divine
fire, lightened and illuminated with his celestial splendor. I say (whear does
he repose) for the great quietness which he has in my soul, when he is
thear by my absence, and makes his abode thear by my abnegation; for it is
then that he reposeth thear as in his bed, Cant. 3.
of which is said. En lectulum Salomonis sexaginta fortes ambiunt, Behold,
threescore strong men which compass about Salomons bed: this bed being no
other then my heart; for, Psalm. 72.
he is Deus cordis mei, the God of my heart, Psalm. 45.
and Deus in medio eius non common^bitur, God shall not be moved from the midst
thereof: and, to make me attain to this happy estate, and to the haight of
these degrees, Esdilectus meus loquitur mihi, Behold, Cant. 2.
my well-beloved speaks to me, and makes me hasten, inuiting me often, and
incessantly distilling these sweet words in the ear of my soul.

6. Surge, propera (amica mea, formosa mea) (...) veni. 6. Speedily. Cant. 2.
Arise, hasten (my dea^^ ^^y beautiful and come. In which gracious inuitation
(...) calls me sweetly to his fam^^ties, and will have me come unto him,
and to that end, first he wishes me^^ arise (to weet) from the base and
abject condition of my corrupt nature by these degrees asore said; afterward,
that I do it speedily, because they go not to him, which go with drowsines
or slownes, Ambr. hom. in Luc.
for Nescit molimina tarda sancti spiritual gratia, The holy ghost loves not
the slack operation. And therefore the mother of God having conceived him,
representing the soul which by inspiration does the same, Luc. 1.
Abiit in montana, went unto the mountain, which is Jesus Christ, in
perfection, Cum festinatione, speedily, which is the sixth and last degree.

And that we may not think that she has forgotten the seat of this throne,
The seat of continuation.
which is the continuation of all these degrees, whear she makes her spouse
repose after having fownd him so happily, behold what she says, Cant. 3.
Tenui eum, nec dimittam donec introducam in domum matris mea, and in cubiculum
genitricis meae, I have caught him, and will not let him go, until I bring
him into my mothers house, and into her chamber which brought me forth. I have
caught him, (to weet, by the six internal acts and degrees aforesaid) and will
not let him go (by my negligence and coldness) but will keep him with great
vigilance, and will cherish him by intimate affection and ardent love, until I
bring him into my mothers house (the church, by virtuous ^ife, good example,
or preaching) and ^^to her chamber which brought me forth namely, into my
particular Order, by a ^eligious life and celestial contemplation) and so
cherishing him daily in my soul, will make him repose on this seat of
Continuation, and I shall prepare this Throne, with the six degrees for my
^^rue king Solomon, Quem laudant simul astra maatina, Job. 38.
Whom the morning stars together do raise, Lo how this holy soul speaks
for the instruction, consolation, and encouragement of others which are not as
yet so perfect and so far advanced.

Neither ought any man to think that ^ee put or constitut too many degrees in
his intention, Why these six degrees be here putt devvne.
because that even of it self (being perfect) it has them all, and that
without them it can not be perfect: though in liew of their being thear
implicit or obscurely. 1. Cause.
we have declared them explicit and more clearly, to the end we may well and
perfectly discern of our interior, which is the point of greatest importance
of all, and for want of which, very spiritual men often remain in darkness; 2.
seeing also (2) they bring so great profit and light, eleuating the soul to
such a high degree as may appear by what is above said in this chapter; 3.
seeing finally (3) though we have thus distinguished them the better to
discern of the said intention and to examine the same thereby, yet
notwithstanding by one only fervent and vertuou act, they be all effected and
brought forth together; and that with the same facility and no otherwise,
then if we had not distinguished them.

How all mortifications and virtues, and the true imitation of Christ's life
and passion, are perfectly practiced by this rule and exercise.
CHAP. XVI.
CONCERNING the mortifications and virtues, and likewise touching the imitation
of our Savior in his life and passion (which are so necessary as without them
in vain a man aspireth to spiritual life) as the brevity of this abridgement
does not permit to treat of them directly, but only indirectly; so is it not
necessary, seeing they are clearly seen, and most perfectly practiced in this
will of God; which though it be manifest by the second chapter, declaring how
all perfections are heerin contained (every one whereof contains all
mortifications and virtues) yet for better satisfaction of all men that would
sollow this rule, Demonstrations by example.
it seems not amiss to show it by examples.

VVhoesoeuer then is greiuously and iniustly will of God who would have it
so; such a one shall mortify the passion of envy, practice the virtue of
patience, and imitate our Savior, who in like persecution had like patience.

Likewise, he that being mocked and with mocked of the Jews behaved him self
in like manner.





Gods will, answers not when he is falsely accused (discretion always
presupposed) shall mortify self love, practice the virtue of silence, and
follow heerin Jesus Christ, who answered nothing to the false witness
brought in against him.

will of God, he mortifieth the proper will, practices the virtue of
Resignation, and imitateth our sweet Savior who said, I come not to do mine
own will, Joan. 6
but the will of my father who sent me.

Behold then, how it appears that whenever a man does practice this
exercise or rule of life, he perfectly practices therewith all the
mortification, virtue, and imitation of the life and passion of our Savior
Christ, who in all things sought to do the will of his father.

VVhear is to be noted, Tvvoe things in general in the life of our Savior to
imitate.
that in the said life and passion of our Savior are twoe things (to weet) the
pains or torments which he suffered, and the end wherefore he suffered them;
namely, to do the will of his father; both which we ought to imitate as a
pattern and example of our life, himself saying, Joan. 13.
Exemplum dedi vobis, I have given you an example: and if it had not bein to
have given us an example, what needed he to have suffered so much, seeing one
only dropp of his blood, yea his only will had bein sufficient to have redeemed
us. Somefayle in the one, and some in the other.
Now, of these twoe things some want the one, and some the other. As for those
that want the first (namely) suffering with Christ; I wish them to hear the
words of Saint Peter saying, 1.
Christus passus est pro nobis, 1. Petr. 2.
vobis relinquens exemplum vt sequamini vestigia eius, Christ has suffered for
us, leaving to you an example that you might follow his stepps; and of S.
Paul, Romans 8.
St compatimur, and conglorificabimur, If we suffer together, we shall also
be glorIfied together: 1. Joan. 2.
and likewise of S. john, Qui dicit se in ipso manner, debet si^ut ille
ambulauit and ipse ambulare, Who says that he remains in him; will of
God, in that they do or suffer, they must know that they are not so perfect
imitators of Jesus Christ as (perhaps) they think, though they do or suffer
much, because they want one of these twoe things of his imitation (namely) the
end and intention, which is without comparison the cheifest of the twoe; and so
they follow the exterior works of his body, but not the interior acts of his
soul; and conform themselfes to the exterior humanity, but not to the
interior, nor to the divinity, partly doing or suffering that which he did
or suffered, but not as he did or suffered, enduring in some sort with the
Son here on earth, but not for the will of the father which is in heaven,
because they have not this end of Gods will, which is so excellent that the
Angels have no better, nor any other end then that; and is such that it makes
not only our prayers and painful works or sufferings agreeable to God, but also
our works that be pleasant and delightful (as is above said) being done
syncerely without all fayning for this end and intention.

Wherefore, when any hard thing presents it self to be done or suffered, let
a man do or suffer the same for this divine will; and so he shall cloth
himself with the Passion of our Savior, as being the same very will in such
things difficile; and shall perfectly imitate him in both the said points of
suffering, and of the true end of suffering.

A particular means for Beginners how to enter into the practice of this
rule, and how a man may keep himself therein, and greatly fructify and go
for ward in the same.
CHAP. XVII.
BUT because this rule and exercise consists chiefly in interior practice,
and in the discerning of the motions of our heart, which are hardly discovered
at the beginning; and because through slowth and forgetfulness as well the
Beginners as others let pass much time, yea sometimes many hours of the day
without practicing the same: Therefore as well to open the way to Beginners and
to make them an entrance to the practice thereof, as also to excitate the
slacknes, and help the forgetfulness of others, I will in few lines lay down
some particular means wherein all may profitably exercise themselfes, Means to
enter and continue in this practice.
as leading the beginners (as it were) by the hand, to the true knowledge of
their heart and interior, and to the perfect practice of the same exercise,
putting both them and the others in mind of their duty and fidelity, inciting
and spurring them forward to the faithful practice thereof.

Let him therefore that practices this Rule lay down a task every day,
binding himself thereto, not by the band of any kind of sin mortal or
venial, but by a full and resolute purpose to mortify, and renounce himself
for the will of God some certain times, as thrice, five, or ten times,
according to his seruour and devotion; which abnegations or mortifications
shall be taken or practiced by any sense, faculty, or power either of body or
soul: Practice upon the 5. Senses.
Of the body, as by the five senses, seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting, and
touching; by doing or suffering that which is contrary or unpleasant to the
same: as when he desires to see any curious thing, behold any beautiful
person, look on any delightful place, as pleasant gardins, fair castles,
sumptuous and costly buildings; or (finally) any other thing grateful to the
sight; yea, and when he desires curiously to cast his eyes this way or that
way, whereby he is distracted from thinking of God: in all which cases he
ought to mortify his sight by renouncing therein his will for the only will of
God.

In like manner, when he desires, to hear any pleasant music, sweet
instrument, delightful song, curious and strange news and reports, and
whatsoever is agreeable to the ear.

Also, when he would taste some delicate meats, delicious drinks, pleasant
fruits, or whatsoever he finds to be delightful to the taste, though in it
self the thing be not precious or rare.

The like we say touching smelling, to which a man ought to deny all
perfumes, and other extraordinary pleasant things.

In all which cases (I say) a man may have matter and take occasion, often in
the day to renounce himself for the will of God, in leaving the pleasure of
such things according to the Rules above said; offering them up willingly as a
sacrifice to God, saying with the Prophet, psalm. 53.
Voluntare sacrisicabotibi, I will voluntarily offer up sacrifice unto thee.

And the same we say of the things which are contrary to the said senses
(namely) which be unpleasant to be seen, disagreable to the ^are, noisome to
smell, unsavory to taste, rude and austere to touch. And to this purpose our
father S. Francis said, that he was so daily conversant with the leapers,
exhibiting unto them offices of charity, that both according to reason and to
his exterior senses it seemed to him a pleasant and sweet thing to be amongst
them, whose sight in the beginning he did abhor. S. Elizabeth.
And we read also of diverse Saints of both sexes, S. Catherine of Siena.
which did kiss and lick the sores and ulcers of poor men, though (perhaps)
these examples be left us rather to be admired then imitated except it be by
like particular divine inspiration: but although they do not serve us for
imitation, yet at least may they suffice for condemnation of the delicat
niceness, and also of the disdain and hard heartedness of those of this
time, who can not abide to see them, much less assist them.

Upon the powers of the Soulle.
one may likewise take there of his exercise of mortification; as of the
Intelligence, in renouncing for this will of God some curious discourse

of injuries, contempts, disgraces, and mockeries; as also of all dishonest
words, discourses, sports, pleasures, and pastimes, and all dishonest acts.

Likewise, by mortifieng the Will in all her Boett. de consol. Phil. Met. 2.
S. Tho. 1. a 2. (...)
Boethius and S. Thomas after him, do reduce to ^oure (namely) vain Joy, vain
fear, vain hope, and vain Sadness in these verses.

Tu quoque si vis
Lumine claro
Cernere verum;
Gaudia pelle,
Pelle timorem,
Spemque fugato,
Nec dolor adsit.
That is, if thou wilt clearly see the truth, drive away Joy, put of Fear,
fly Hope, and avoid Grief.

To this mortification of the will appertains also resistance to all
temptation of sin (to weet) of the capital sins with all their branches.
As of pride which is the head of all the other seven deadly synns; of vain
glory with all her branches, which are bosting, hypocrisy, contention,
pertinacie, discord, susurration, detraction, joy of the evil, and sadness of
the good of his neighbor; of wrath with her offspring of indignation, heart
swelling, clamor, blasphemy, contumely, debate, and fighting; of Sloth with
her progeny of malice, rancor, pusillanimitie, despair, negligence, and
distraction; of Covetousness with her evil race of treason, fraud in traffic,
violence, deceit in words, perjury, unquietness, and hardness of heart, of
gluttony with her children of foolish joy, scurrilitie, immundicitie,
babbling, and dullnes of wit; finally, of lechery with her unclean brood of
blyndnes of heart, inconsideration, precipitation, incontinencie, love of
himself, hatred of God, affection of this world, and horror of the next. Of all
which kinds of sins or temptations of them, one may take occasion to
renounced his will; and so upon all these matters rehearsed touching the body
or the soul, a man may have sufficient matter to practice this exercise; of
such (I say) and so palpable things, as the very Nouice and beginner can not
but find out, and clerly discern.

As Well therefore the Beginners for their instruction and entrance, as the
others for their excitation and diligence, must limit to themselfes every day
a certain number of mortifications taken of these things above said, and
especially of those wherein they find them selfs most weak, renouncing
themselfes therein for the will of God, not forgetting still to view and examine
in every one, if their pure intention (Throne of Iuory, whear God great Solomon
sits) be elevated and established on the six degrees above said. And so,
both the Beginners shall easily be brought to the true discerning and
knowledge of their interior, which is a thing of great importance and
altogether necessary; and the others shall be continually kept profitablie in
their exercise; and both the one and the other shall make great advancement and
progress in the same.

VVhear notwithstanding is to be noted, that our meaning is not by the
particular practice of this chapter, to acquit them of the general and
continual ^in all other things, as though it were suffi^tie^t for a man to
practice this rule only at those times, and in those things which he has ^in
this order limited out and bownd himself unto: for, our meaning is, that he
should continually in all things practice the same ((...) has bein taught) as
well, and as diligently as he can, and that over and besides that general
care, and practice incertaine and unlimited, he should have this particular
careful practice thereof, thus tasked and limited out, and that for the causes
in the beginning of this chapter above alleged.

Of tvvoe errors which may happen in this exercise, with their remedies.
CHAP. XVIII.
WE think it here necessarie^ to give an aduertisment of twoe errors, and
contrary extremities which may happen in the practice of this Rule.

Error.
of those which may be likened to Jacob, who as soon as he was married unto
Rachel figuring the contemplative life, despised Lia representing the active
life: for; seeing clearly and perfectly the whole active life so briefly in this
Compendium, they may easily comprehend the same, and so (perchance^ may think
that that suffiseth without any farther practice thereof. Again, seeing
themselfes so elevated even at the first true and saythfull practice of this
Rule, and transported (as it were) into the contemplative life, they would
willingly remain therein, for the sweetness they find in such contemplation.

For remedy whereof they must understand, Remedy.
that it is not enough to have the Active life by only speculation, but must
also have it by practice, and that it is not sufficient to know what they ought
to do, and how they ought to practice virtue or extirpate vice (which
knowledge by this Rule is easily had) but they must also put the same in
practice, by rooting but vice and planting virtue, until such time as they
have acquired some good habit thereof. For, though this Rule and way above all
other, gives a merueilous advantage and advancement both in the knowledge and
practice of the Active life, yet can it not make a man perfect therein, unless
he join thereto faithful practice. So that though by the ^ight of this
exercise a man knows the active life, and sees (as it were) presently a gate
open to the contemplative, for the great affinity and likeness of this kind of
active life with that which is comtemplatiue; yet must he not at the first
enter so far therein, as to cast of the active, as if he had not any more
need to practice himself therein; but must still pursue the mortification of
himself and his passions, which he shall more sufficiently and speedily do by
this rule then any other, the faithful practice whereof effects in twoe or
three moonthes, that which some others do not in so many years.

Error.
of those who being too much addicted to the administration of Mariea, will
not choose the better part with Martha, having so great affection to the
active life that they would not proceed to the contemplative, and all because
they know not the excellency thereof; whear we^ mean not only of the exterior
active life but especially of the interior, consisting in the acts of the
intelligence and of the will. For, some seeing themselfes draw (as it were) by
the hand out of the active life, and from their accustomed acts of discourses,
meditation, and aspirations, and (as it were) forced by this right Rule to fix
the full force of their mind in this only will of God, and wholly to adhear
thereto (wherein consists the pure and essential contemplation) they know not
whear they are nor how to behave themselfes, and so turn away and cast of such
naked and pure contemplation, esteeming that the spiritual practice of the
mind has neither profit, nor yet any verity, which is not accompanied with
such their accustomed acts, and discourses of the wit.

For remedy then of this error, Remedy for the Intelligence.
and for the casting of of these superfluous acts, and first for those of the
Intelligence, the practiser of this Rule must know that our interior is not
made perfect, nor the true contemplation gotten by such discourses and
speculation, which are the acts of the understanding, but by fervor, love, and
affection, which are the acts of the will, because that no speculation of the
Intelligence can possess or enjoy God, but the love of the will; S. Dionys 3.
ep. ad Caium Mon.
and therefore S. Denis says, Suppositae Deitenebrae cooperiuntur omni lumine,
and absconduntur omni cognitioni, and si aliquis videns Deum intellexit quod
vidit, non it sum vidit, sed aliquid quod est eius. The hidden darkness of God
(which he calls the abundance of light) are unknown to all lights, and kept
secret from all knowledge; and if any one seeing God has understood what he
saw, he has not seen him, but somewhat appertayning unto him; for, the
speculation of the Intelligence does proportion God almighty, infinite, and
incomprehensible to our small capacity; but contrariewise the will by love
proportioneth it self in some degree to the immensitie, infinity, and
omnipotency of God; so that the operation of the Intelligence makes God like
unto man, causing him (as it were) to descend unto us; but the love of the
Will makes man like unto God, eleuating the soul unto him. Finally, this
speculation of the Intelligence is a human thing, making us remain in our
selfs; but the affection of the Will is a druine thing, eleuating and drawing
us out of our selfs to be transformed into God. And therefore it is clear that
such speculations and discourses of the Intelligence, are not perfection no^
true contemplation, consisting in a certain kind of vision of God, so far as
this mortalltie permits, whereunto the speculation of the Intelligence is
prejudicial. And therefore the heavenly Bridegroom admonishes thereof the
spouse in the Canticle when he says Auerte oculos tuos a me, Cant. 6.
Turn away thine eye from me (that is) of curious discourse and speculation of
the Intelligence, Quia ipsi^e auolare fecerunt, Because they have made me fly
away (namely) from the sight and viey which obscured by such discourses can not
behold me. The same are we taught mystically by the Angel, Genes. 32.
who made Jacob lame of one of his legs; for, by the twoe legs are signified
the twoe principal powers of the soul, Intelligence and Will, where of the
one must be made lame (to weet) the Intelligence, that the soul may walk as
she ought toward God. The very same also is signified when the Bridegroom
says unto the spouse, Vulner asti cor meum (sor or mea, sponsa) in vno
oculorum tuorum, Cant. 4.
Thou have wownded my heart (my sister, my spouse) in one of thine eyes (to
weet) by thy Will enflamed, which is but one alone, when the other of the
Understanding is put out. Similie.
For, these twoe powers of the soul be like the twoe horses ofa coach, where of
the one is too slow, the other too swift, the Will being so dull and slow
for want of love, that it will scarce go, and the Understanding so swift and
speedy through curiosity that it will always run; so that the one has need
of the goad, and the other of the bridle. Wherefore it must be stopped, and his
curious course cut of, when by the tract of the holy ghost the soul is
drawn, and lifted up to the essential contemplation of God; and this is that
which S. Denis writing to Timothy says, Derelinque intellectuales operationes,
and omnia sensibilia, and sicut est pos^bile, ig note consurge ad eius visionem
qui est super omnem substantiam and cognitionem, Lay a side intellectual
operations and all things sensible, and a smuch as possible may be, unknown
arise thou to the vision of him which is above all substance and knowledge. Not
withstanding, I say not that at the very beginning of the contemplative life,
one ought wholly to cast of all discourses of the Understanding, this belonging
to the perfection of the supreeminent life; but I thought it necessary to
advertise this much thereof, that knowing that perfection consists not in such
meditations and discourses, a man should not wholly rely on them, and also
understanding that the pure and perfect contemplation is without such
imaginary discourses, he should not refuse the door to enter therinto when in
due time it shall be opened unto him, which is, when he has well practiced the
Active life; and that (finally) he shutt not the door against the holy
ghost, as some do who determine not to leave of such discourses for any better
thing which may happen unto them: And thus much touching the acts of the
Understanding.

As for the acts of the Will, they may also have their excess and extremity;
not that love and fervor can be too great, for they of never be great enough,
but that such fervor may be ill governed, and by too many acts much hindered,
as when the soul feeling the draught and attractio^ of the heavenly spouse,
she behaueth her self too actiuely in his presence, multiplieng acts, and
producing too many aspiratio^s, or little short prayers, and affection of the
heart, whereby the holy ghost can not so well enter into the soul, nor so
fully and wholly possess her, and by perfect union with her make his abode, and
take his peaceable repose in her; so that trusting more to the industry of her
own natural acts, then to the supernatural attractio^ of her spouse, she is
nei^ier drawn out of her self, and having more co^fide^ce in her own
operation then in the elevation of the holy ghost, she is never lifted above
her self, but remains still at one stay. For remedy therefore of this
inconvenience, Remedy for the will.
the devout soul must understand, that though generally such aspirations etc.
be very good, yet not so good, but that at some time, insom particular point,
thear is some other exercise better the^ they. And as their true and propre use
is in the active life, and at such times as we be in sterilitie, and without
ay de of the wind or tide of the holy ghost, so (speaking generally) their
infructuous abuse is in the conte^platiue life, and when the soul is already
inflamed with the love of God, and actuallie drawn by the holy ghost; and as
in time of sterility our coldness is thereby inflamed, so, used in time of
fervor, our love is thereby rather quenched; and as being used in our actio^,
they lift the sou le upwards to conte^plation, so being used in contemplation,
they draw her downwards to action, which always is meant when they are too
excessive or too frequent.

When therefore the conte^platiue soul shall find her self inflamed and drawn
with the soue and tract of her spouse, let her with all sweetness, and humility
follow the same, and giving place to the supernatural operations of God, let
her lay a side all these her natural operations and acts, excepting so far
forth as may only serve her to follow the said tract, and firmly adhear unto
her spouse, which she must do by such kind of acts as be much more interior
and spiritual then the accustomed, so to have correspondence as much as she
may, with the same operation of God, far more spiritual then her accustomed;
yea, so much more spiritual must they be and so far from sense, that the same
should make no noise in her interior, but remaining (as it were) in still and
profound silence, she should not so much work as be wrought, nor so much do
by and of her self as suffer the sweet operation of God, nor (finally) so much
speak to God, as to hear what God speaks in her saying, Psalm. 84.
Audia^^ qui loquatur in me Dominus Deus, I will hear what my Lord God speaks
within me; and so following the attraction of her spouse, and light of the
holy ghost, she shall be easily so far drawn out of her self, and so
highly elevated into God, as those which have not proved in by experience can
not conceive.

An Aduertisment touching Prayer.
CHAP. XIX.
WE will conclude this first part with an Aduertisment of the means how to
pray, according to the practice of this exercise. Four sorts of prayer.
A man therefore may choose any of these four ways agreeing to his
understanding and capacity (to weet) Vocal prayer, which is the most will of
by adhearing only unto him, which is the best kind of all, as being only
grownded upon and mayntained by the pure love and charity of God, and is fit
for those who have their spirit enflamed, simplified, and purged from all
images and imaginations, or for such as (perhaps) have not wholly attained
thereunto, but yet their courage and patience in exspecting the tract of the
holy ghost does supply their want. Those therefore which by their Confessors
or directors shall be judged to be such, let them take this last means, and so
they shall find themselfes suddenly illuminated, and elevated unto the true
and essential contemplation; neither let them lose courage, nor think it
idleness or time lost, so to exspect and remain in the presence of God, and at
the foot of the Crucifix; for so the soul profits more, bri^geth forth more
profownd and spiritual acts, makes a greater offering of herself, and a
sweeter holocaust of the whole man, and (finally) pleases God more then when
she flies through heaven, discoursing of divine and deep mysteries: and
whenever after such attending and due disposition, God shall come and visit
her, she shall be more illuminated at one time, then not doing so, in a hundred.
As for the others which are not as yet sufficient to practice this way, but
take some of the others according to their capacity, they must notwithstanding
always remember, that they use such means according to this Rule (namely) in
this only will of God as has bein taught (that is to say) that in all such
vocal prayers, meditations, and aspirations, they have this will of God so
fully, soly, and wholly for their object and hearts desire, that they feel no
will nor affection to be comforted, illuminated, or consolated in that their
prayer, but only as far forth as shall please God; which whoesoeuer will do,
shall find excessive comfort and joy, because he finds the will of God,
which is his only comfort and joy: and therefore so it comes to pass, that he
which seeks most his own comfort, shall least find it, and contrary wise
he that for the only will of God seeks it least, shall most amply find the
same.

Six points therefore or interior acts are necessary for them which make their
meditations, Six interior Poi^ts necessary for prayer.
aspirations, or contemplatio^s according to this practice.

The first is, 1.
to protest that they come to pray only for the will of God and to please him,
without seeking consolation, illumination, or any satisfaction: But here the
fearful and scrupulous souls must not think, that they are tied heereto under
pain of any sin either mortal or venial, because this protestation is in
nature of a good purpose, and not of any obligatorie promise.

The second, 2.
to reflect on their interior, and in sownding the depth thereof, to examine and
discern without any partiality, whether they have protested the truth or no;
in which examen they ought to be very diligent, and judges indifferent; and
he which shall be faithful in this point in sownding well his interior, shall
open the gate to perfect conte^platio^.

The third, 3.
to amend and correct what they find contrary to the said protestation,
maistering proper love, which solliciteth always to desire sensible
consolation, or at least spiritual.

The fourth, 4.
to rely continually on this divine pleasure, 4.
as on the grownd and principal end of their prayer, not caring so much to
make any curious discourses and meditation, nor to have feruours and devotions,
nor (finally) to make their prayer according to self liking, as to conform
them selfs to this divine will, and to be united thereunto by a total
resignation, to chearish the same in their heart with love, and to adore it
with profownd reverence.





And note, Once entered by abnegation, difficulty is taken away.
that the soul which is once well entered, and elevated by this means of
Abnegation for the will of God, both in and out of prayer, shall find no great
difficulty afterward, but shall at all times enter in again, as having undone
the knott, fownd the secret, and diued to the depth of this whole matter; and
as having by experience fownd God the true light, joy, and life, not whear she
thought, nor whear ordinarily men seek him (namely) in our selfs, or in our
own proper will, nor in seeking our own delight, joy, light, and comfort; but
whear she thought him not to be, and whear commonly men never seek him (to
weet) in renouncing our selfs, yea and our spiritual joy, consolation, and
light, postposing them all and putting them (as it were) out of mind for the
actual remembrance, and great joy which she has of the will of God and to
do his pleasure; for, the cause why we can not so renounce ourselfes
absolutely for the will of God, is for no other thing but that we think we
should so leave and loose both that which we desire, and our own contentment;
but when once by such experience the soul has fownd out the contrary, and
that by renouncing, yea and forgetting her own will and joy for the divine
will; her will and joy is not annihilated nor lost, but is fownd in God
according to his promise with an hundred times more; find she feels now no
more repugnance, nor sadness to renounce her self, and offer up to God her deer
and only son Isaac, her proper will and joy; knowing assuredly that though
^^ee be bownd, and laid upon the Altar of ^er heart, in the mountain of
prayer, and by the sword of Justice ready to be beheaded, and in the fire of
charity she be willing to consume him, yet shall he not die but live, and
according to his name, shall be changed into joy and laughter. And of this
subject of prayer, a man may see the little table or direction which we have
made for a method, and entry to Meditation.

A daily Examination to be made by the practiser of this exercise, vvherin is
contained the sum or abridgement of all this part, in as much as concerns
the practice thereof.
FIRST, let him examine whether he has governed himself, and ordered his
actions according to the Rule of things commanded* forbidden, and indifferent.

For the first sort; Chap. 6.
whether he has done the things commanded by any law, custom*
commandment, or intention of his superior^ master, father, or mother; and the
same we^^ say in like manner of things forbidden.

But as touching the third sort of things (namely) indifferent, being neither
commanded nor forbidden by any such law, le^^ him examine himself whether he
has done admitted, or received those which were against proper will and
sensuality, and contrariewise rejected and forsaken those which were agreeable
to the same, true discretion always presupposed.

Farther, Chap. 7.
touching things indifferent, asw^^ in respect of commandment as of proper
will and sensuality (as being neither commanded, nor yet contrary, nor
agreeable to proper will and sensuality) let him take heed whether he has
therein directed his intention according to this Rule, and not done them without
any intention.

For the things commanded which are pleasant to sensuality or self love, as
to eat, drink, to visit such places or persons as he desires, and the like,
let him examine himself whether he has produced interior acts of the will
against such pleasure and contentment. And the like touching the things
forbidden which are disagreable to sense, and self will, whether he has
produced such acts, and so has done the one, and left undone the other for the
will of God. But if after such interior acts, such delectation and contentment
remain; then whether he has still remained firm in the superior part of his
soul in doing the same for the will of God; and taken such pleasure for pain
and as the cross of Christ and true will of God, as is taught after the midst
of the seventh Chapter.

Moreover, Chap. 8.
let him examine him self touching the six degrees of the mystical throne of
pure intention; and first, if he have actually elevated his intention in all
these things, or whether he has forgotten the same, yet without his contrary
excess of multiplieng to many acts, to the prejudice of the stomach or
brain; also without troubling himself with scruples and anxietie of mind, as
though he had committed some great sin when he finds himself to have much
failed therein; for, this falte will happen very often.

Secondly, Chap. 9.
whether he has done them only for this will, or whether it has being
mingled with some other end, either bad or imperfect.

Thirdly, Chap. 10.
whether it has bein willingly with alacrity of mind, or with sadness and
heaviness.

Fourthly, Chap. 11.
whether it has bein accompanied with assurance, or whether with hesitation,
doubting whether the things so done were the very will of God, because it
seemed of small value; or else agreeable to sense; on (finally) because it seemed
vile and abject.

Fifthly, Chap. 12.
if he beheld this will of God clearly with a lively faith without dullnes,
or (as it were) sleepines or slownes of faith.

Sixthly, Chap. 13.
if all these degrees of perfection were speedily accomplished (that is) if at
the beginning of the work he thus directed his intention; or if not, whether
he did it as least before the work was finished.

Seauenthly, Chap. 14.
if by stable perseverance o^ this perfect intention, the soul has prepare^
in herself a seat for king Solomon her celestia^ spouse; and that by means of
the twoe waye^ laid down to that effect.

Also, if in doing or suffering the foresaid things, he employed himself in
examining his intention, sifting out continually the imperfections thereof; and
(finally) in viewing whether it was established on these six degres and thus
much touching the general and continual practice of this part.

Besides the which, Chap. 16.
let him examine whether he has taken in hand, and used the means taught in
the sixteenth chapter, whereby to enter the better into this practice, according
to which means let him see if he has stinted himself every day to a certain
number of mortifications, either touching the five senses of the boddie, or the
three powers of the soul according as is thear taught, taking those occasions
of this mortification which are thear laid down.

As touching Prayer, Chap. 18.
let him examine himself whether therein he has taken this only will of God
for the end of his intention, not seeking any proper pleasure or contentment.

And if any man at the first understand not, or in practice do not remember
any of the points of this examination, let him see it more at large in the
exercise it self, which he shall easily find out by the chapters here noted in
the margin.

Which examination whoesoeuer shall daily use, so exacting of himself
continually the due and faithful practice of this exercise* shall (no doubt)
in very short time attain to true perfection.

But it is a thing most assured, that by this examination a man shall find
himself to have often times failed heerin, in forgetting this will of God, and
not directing his intention in his works; yea, some shall find that all day
long they have very seldom so done, and very little practiced this exercise,
whereof (experimented practice in others affording foreknowledge) I admonish and
advise the Reader before hand, that when he finds it in hi^ self, he think
it not strange, nor be any whi^^ discouraged thereat; but with all constanci^
go forward, as well because that daily exercise will yield the faithful habit
of such practice* more familiar in him, as also because that though he so
often forget this practice yet shall he do much more good, and profit
spiritually by those few times in which he^ shall so direct his intention, and
shall be more illuminated in the knowledge of God and himself, then by any other
practiced all day long, by reason of the great merit of such (...) deiforme
intention, and the light therof^ which like unto a Son being in our interior
house, leads us unto the sight of God, and discovers all the fowllnes (...)
the passions, affections, and disorder of our soul.

Here ends the first part of the Rule of Perfection. Laus Deo.
THE RVLE OF PERFECTION^ OF THE INTERIOVR (WILL OF GOD.)
CONTAINING THE CONTEMTLATIVE LIFE.
THE SECOND PART.
WHAT IS THE INTERIOV^ will of God, and vvherin it differs from the
Exterior.
CHAP. I.
HAVING finished the first parts of this Rule, treating of the Exterior will
of God (namely) what (...) is, how to be known, and by when means to be
accomplished; it follows now that we likewise deliver the second part^^ the
which consists of the Interior will (...) God; showing what it is, the way
to know it^ and the means how to practice it.

This Interior will of God then, Description of the interior will of God.
is the divine pleasure known unto us by a perfect, manifest, and expert
interior knowledge, illumining the sowlle in the Interior or Contemplative
life (that is) when she sees and contemplateth her God, and inwardly
experimenteth, perceives, and tastes the divine will (to weet) the pleasure,
and contentment God takes in such or such a thing.

And to the end to diue lower into the depth of this will, and to discover more
essentially how this actual will, desire, and contentment in our works is
fownd in God, in whom is no Accident, and to whom nothing can happen a nue; I
say that it is by the means of man, God using human will; which will (as
touching good works) is common to God and man, by reason of the union of God
and man. God (I say) in this work uses humayne will, in as much as it is a
^nue will and desire, and humayne contentation as an Accident, or a thing nuely
felt or tasted; not that God himself has not also his will and contentation in
every work (as being the principal author thereof) but as such, this will is
not nue or accidental, or perceiuable of man; but is made perceiuable and nue
to the nue will and contentation humayne, conjoined and conformed to the
divine: by which conformity and conjunction, the divine external will and
contentation, communicates and manifests it self to the human and
temporal will and contentation; in such sort that man in this Interior will,
rellisheth no whit his own humayne will and contentation but Gods only, his
own being wholly swallowed up, and transformed into Gods: For, this
transformation requires that all the powers and forces of oursowlle be
absolutely employed in God, and consequently, not any of them upon himself; and
by another consequence (as so transformed) feels no will of his own but only
that of God: I mean, that by this Deiforme Intention and divine will, the
sowlle is so straightly united with God, and so replenished with spirit and
life, so elevated, magnified, glorified, and deified, brief, so drowned in the
abyss of the inaccessible eternal light, that she feels no will or motion
as her own, but only as Gods, in whom only she vieweth and feels her self,
and all her motions.

This will, The sueetnes of this will.
pleasure, and contentment of God, is so delitious a thing, and so pleasant to
the sowlle when so she tastes it perfectly, that it draws, illuminateth,
dilateth, extends, exalts, rauisheth, and inebriateth her in such sort that
she feels no more any will, affection, or inclination of her own, but wholly
despoyled of her self, and all self-will, intrest, and commodity, is plunged
into the bottomless gulf of this will and the abyssall pleasure thereof, and
so is become one and the same spirit with God.

The difference betwixt the Interior and Exterior will is, The difference
betwixt the Exterior and Interior will.
that the Exterior takes her light from abroad, and the Interior from within
(that is) the former is known by Exterior things, as by the commandments of
God, of the church, of the Prelate, by customs, etc. but the other by
Interior things, as inspirations, illuminations, eleuations, and other the
like attractions of God: The one is shaddowed with corporal things or by their
images, and the other is wholly discovered in spirit and truth; the one has in
it accidental things, but the other is in a manner wholly essential; the one
consists of the ryne and pith (to weet) both of the Exterior and interior,
but the other of the interior only. All which notwithstanding is meant
according to our capacity, (to weet) that the will divine is different, which
in it self is always but one and the same, as we have shown in the beginning
of the first part, Chap. 4. but that our capacity apprehends it so; and
that in such manner, and by such degrees it discloseth and manifests it self
unto us, as not hable to comprehend it at the very first otherwise, nor all at
once, for, Nemo repe^te fit summus, No man becomes perfect on the sudden
says Saint Bernard. S. Bernard.
So that this divine will and heavenly light descends unto us by degrees, and
we thereby ascend up to God by like degrees: and this is it which S. Thomas
says, In opusc. de humanit. Christi etc.
Sicut diuinum lumen gradatim decrescendo in nos descendit gradatim, it a
contrario modo per ipsum lumen, in Deum reducimur gradatim and crescendo, As
the divine light decreasing by degrees descends unto us by degrees, so on the
contrary are we drawn back into God by the same light increasing, and by
degrees; and that according to the Psalmist saying, They shall proceed from
virtue to virtue, Psalm. 83.
the God of Gods shall be seen in Sion (that is) in perfect contemplation (says
the Gloss) And in the Proverbs also, Prou. 4.
Iustorum semita sicut lux splendens procedit, and crescit vsque ad perfectum
diem, The way of the Just proceeds like a resplende^t light, and grows to
noone-daye; which day (according to the Gloss) is life everlasting. So that
this Interior will discovers not it self after one sort, but diversely and
by degrees, like as neither we do comprehend it all at once, but by little
and little and by the same degrees; whereof though one might set down a great
many, yet for brevity I will reduce them all to five (that is) Manifestation,
Admiration, Humiliation, Exultation, and Elevation.

Of Manifestation, the first degree.
CHAP. II.
AS touching the first degree then; Manifestatio^ the. I. Degree.
this Manifestation of the Interior will proceeds of the pure intention of
the Exterior will, It proceeds of a pure intention.
for the one springs of the other as the effect of the cause, and the one
follows the other, and is transported therinto immediately, if so be this
intention be truly pure, we doing our work with this only end of the will
of God, all other intents and ends (though good) set aside, and (in fine) if
it be accompanied with the six degrees specified in the first part. For, after
such purity of intention, it cannot be but the sowlle must taste of the
Interior will, and feel her internal touch, seeing it is a Maxim in
Philosophy, that Whatsoever is moved, is moved of her end: now, a man cannot
be moved of any end, but that he must needs see or feel that end; if then
he be moved by this only end of the will of God, he sees and feels it
within himself. Why it is not tasted.
But note this word (only) for if so be he be moved by any other end, not only
sinister, but good, he cannot feel it be it never so good.

And (lo) here the point wherein many fail, the ditch wherinto many fall, and
the rock wheragainst many wrack, the which so stops this spacious Oceane
of the will of God, and makes it so straight and vnnauigable, that the ships
of their sowlles cannot make sail therein (namely) because they have some other
end, although often times so secret, that they themselfes know not, neither can
discern it, the which abuse is manifestly displayed in the 9. and other
chapters ensuing of the first part.

But to the end to speak somewhat more essentially of this purity of
intention, which thus manifests the will of God; it is nothing else then a
pure, and free choice which the sowlle makes by her free will of this divine
will and pleasure, in steed of her own affection, passion, How this choice is
made.
or will, and also of her work; the which choice consists in an auersion
from the Creature, and in a simple conversion to the Creator; and is made by a
true, faithful, and simple regard of the will of God (that is) when in our
work, affection, or passion, we cast our thought and spiritual sight on God,
with all tranquillity and repose, sweetly, serenely, and without all manner of
stresse or violence; which thought or sight is free and in our power, seated in
the superior part of our sowlle amidst all our affections, passions,
afflictions, annoyes, and actions. And this ought to be a great comfort, Note.
and encouragement to all such as are combated with their passions, and
agitated with temptations. And now, by how much more quietly, simply, and
without multiplicitie we make and direct this respect, so much more manifestly
shall we see and taste this divine will; and also so much the sooner shall our
spirit be simplyfied, by loosing all impression of the passion, and image of
the work. And this point ought to be well and maturely considered, as being
the key to the contemplative life; wherefore I wish it may be well heeded.

Now then, The sovvlle must plunge her self more deeply in the will of God
having once fovvnd it.
having by purity of intention in the Exterior will discovered this Interior,
and the will of God being thus manifested unto the sowlle by his sweet and
secret touch, and (finally) being thus come to the first degree of
Manifestation, one ought not presently to start from thence, but to the end to
come to the other degrees, and more plainly and essentially discover the same,
he must diligently attend unto this secret operation and inward touch of God,
and withdrawing himself into his interior, endeavor to augment such sweet
attractions, by cutting of all superfluity of exterior and ineriour
occupation, together with all manner of motions, multitude and multiplicitie
of thoughts, the noise whereof may interrupt the repose of the spouse, and their
clam ours hinder the sowlle from hearing his sweet voice, his delicious and
mellifluous speeches unto her, or from rejoicing in his amorous and alluring
aspect, sweet kisses, chaste embracements, or (finally) from feeling this
efficatious inaction, and lively touch of his good pleasure and will, the which
he ought still to nourish, conserve, and chearish within him in obayeng and
corresponding to his attraction and illumination, until the sowlle attain to
see him (as it were) at Noone-daye, and that she being become and made the
self same with him, she may have no other will, joy, or life, then this will
of God, the which is the perfection of the Interior will: and by how much more
purely a man addresseth his intention in the Exterior will, so much more
profowndly shall he diue into the Interior will.

And therefore those that taste not this interior, Letts of the interior will.
ought to examyn and look how they behave themselfes in the Exterior (namely)
whether they have their Intention duly ordered (that is) whether they have not
any passion or affection in the work in hand; whether they do it merely for
that such is Gods will, without other end or intention whatsoever; in sum,
whether such their intention be accompanied with the six degrees taught in the
first part: And so shall they discover the impediments withholding them from
entering into the Interior.

Now (lo) this Manifestation and feeling proceeds from the purity of
Intention in this manner: How this degree proceedech from purity of intentsion.
Purity brings a mortification of passions and affections in the sowlle;
mortificatio^ breeds a great tranquillity, tra^quilitie a profownd silence;
and in this profownd silence the sowlle says, Audia^ quid loquatur in me
Dominus Deus, Psalm. 84.
I will hearken what my Lord God speaks within me: and withal hearing and
knowing like a true sheep his sweet voice, she cannot contain her but as his
true spouse, in abundance of hearts-ease breaks out and says, Cant. 5.
Vox dilecti pulsantis^, a^^eri mihi (soror mea, sponsa) Lo, the voice of my
deerly beloved knocking and saying, Open unto me (my sister, my spouse) And,
Sonet vox tua in auribus nostris, Cant. 2.
vox enim tua dulcis and faciestua decora, Let thy voice sownd with^n mine
ears, for (lo) they voice is sweet, and they face beautiful: And being (as
it we^e) inebriated with this sweet inuitation she ^nswereth him and says,
Psalm. 118.
Quam dulcia faucibus neis eloquia tua, super me^ori meo, How sweet are thy
words to my palate, more sweet then ^onny to my mouth; And again, Ibid.
Ignitum elo^uium tuum vehementer, and seruus tuus dilexit illud, Thy speech is
vehemently inflamed, and thy ^eruant delights therein. Brief, having well
known his voice and the sweetness thereof, she cannot refrain from breaking
forth into his praises, Cant. 5.
saying, Gutiur illius suauissimum, His throat or voice is most sweet; insomuch
that, Cant. 5.
Anima mea liquefacta est vt dilectus loquutus est, My sowlle did melt and
dissolve as soon as my beloved spoke unto me.

In like manner this purity of Intention brings with it (as is said) a
dissipation of passions and affections; and this dissipation works a
serenitie in the sowlle, which serenitie makes the Sun of Justice to shine in
our interior Horizon, and manifest himself unto us.

Again, this purity of intention does drive away the appetits and
concupiscences of our own will, which being cast of, their contraries take up
their place; so that whereas before a man had no appetite but to his own
perverse will, now rellisheth he nothing el^ then the will of God; and
therefore the Psalmist says, Psalm. 33.
Gustate and videte quam suauis est Dominus* Taste and see how sweet our Lord is.

Finally, this purity of intention perceth and beats down the wall of
self-will, behind which the spouse discrieth her heavenly Groom, as she
affirms saying, Cant. 2.
En, ipse flat pos^ parietem nostram, prospiciens per cancellos, respiciem per
fenestras, Behold, whear he stands behind our wall, casting his eye in at
the grates* looking in at the windows. For, what other ^word ^this thick wall
which hinders us to see God though near us, but our self-will which separateth
us from him, according as it is said, ^niquitates vestrae diuiserunt inter vos
and Deum, Isay. 59.
Your iniquities have made a division or a wall betwixt you and God? And what
are ^he grates in this wall through which he beholds the spouse, but the
breaches and gapps which she makes in this her self-will, by the heavy hammer
of Abnegation? Also what are these windows in the wall whereat ^ee vieweth her,
but pure intentions through brenunciation of all uncleanness?

It is then the purity of Intention that dis^ouereth God, and manifests unto
the soul and makes her taste his will; so as by this ^anifestation she
plainly sees, and experinenteth that which before she but only pos^essed:
she understands (I say) sees, and ^asteth this divine will in her own
capacity, ^yeng therein as in her own, and that with (...) much more pleasure
as she feels the one be more delitious, penetratiue, and ine^riating then
the other; and also plungeth, and transformeth her self therinto with so ^uch
more force, and violence of ardent ^oue, by how much she discovers it to be
^etter to live therein, then in her own will; the which having once taken full,
fast, and peacea^le possession of her, draws, exalts, raui^eth, and
co^ioyneth her inseparably to it self, and lifts her up as Amber does the
straw; and like a torrent of delights breaking out upon her and ouerflowing
her, does so water and inebriate her, and so wholly replenish her interior,
that like as melted and dissolved into a sea of sweetness, she remains so
clean deprived of her own forces and powers, that the divine will takes
plenary possession of her, through an absolute maysterie, and without all
manner of contradiction; impelling her onward to all goodness, and working in
her, by her, and with her, all these holy and amorous interior operations and
effects.

And note, that betwixt this Manifestation and purity of intention, thear is a
mutual augmentation and reciprocal increase; for* as that springs of this,
so this augmenteth by that; wherefore how much greater is the purity of
Intention, so much cleerer also will be the Manifestation; and how much cleerer
is this Manifestation, so much greater will be that purity of Intention; and
how much sooner the soul shall have attained this purity, so much the
speedier shall she likewise enjoy that Manifestation. Finally, when the sowlle
has once fownd this treasor and tasted this pleasure, it shall not be hard for
her to renounce from thenceforth her self, and to continue this purity of
Intention, seeing that a man easily forgoeth the lesser good and pleasure, to
enjoy the greater.

Of Admiration the second Degree.
CHAP. III.
AFTER this Manifestation of the pleasure which God takes in the execution of
his will, Admiration the 2. degree.
succeeds another degree (to weet) Admiration, It proceeds of 3. causes.
proceeding of three principal causes: the first whereof is the greatness of
God; the second a man's own Nothing; the third the admirable familiarity of
God with the sowlle.

As touching the first; The greatness of God. 1. Cause.
the unmeasurable greatness of God almighty begins here to discover it self
so wonderfully, that it wholly astonisheth the sowlle; for this interior will
by which she is absorbed, and with which she is become one and the self same
thing, gives her so true knowledge of God, that she knows and sees that
thear is nothing else but he, and that thear is but one being or Essence which
is true, and that all things else but it are nothing: which although they have
some certain borrowed being in the^, yet they have it not so, as that thear is
any comparison to be made betwixt their being and that of Gods, from which it
all proceeds; who should not be infinite if thear were any other then he;
for thear should he end whear that other should begin. Now then the sowlle
knowing, and seeing this verity by her own experience, she is so grownded
and established therein (not by particular discourse of the understanding, but
by a general and simple view and by her inheasion to God) as that she neither
sees, knows, nor feels any other thing then this infinite essence, and
incomprehensible beauty; wherewith astonished, she heerhence begins to taste
the immensitie or infinity which she had but only heard tell of before; and
this experimental knowledge of the infinity of God ingendreth this Admiration
in the sowlle.

Furthermore, Our nothing.
this Admiration is augmented by the contrary cause (to weet) our Nothing, 2.
Cause.
which is as great an extremity on the other side, and no less profownd gulf;
the perfect knowledge of which point comes by the knowledge of the other, for
Co^traria iuxta se posita magis elucescunt, Contraries set one by another are
more evident: so that like as black is more perspicuous set by white, so does
man's Nothing appear more clearly, being compared with the immensitie of God;
as also on the other side the immensitie of God, by comparison with man's
Nothing, yea, these twoe points are so incident one to the other, that without
the one you can not know the other, insomuch that a man can never see the
infinite Essence of God, till first he know his own Nothing; neither yet his
own nothing, before he have the true knowledge of this divine immensitie; but
the sowlle once knowing it, knows forthwith right perfectly her own Nothing;
the sight whereof putting her into an astonishment and admiration, makes her to
break forth and say with the Prophet, Psalm. 7 2.
Ad nihilum redactus sum and nesciui, I am brought to nothing and wist it not;
for why she has so long contemplated, and so intimately embraced this
infinite Essence in this will, that when she retorneth to behold her self in
conference, and comparison with this infinity, she acknowledges her self
mere vanity and a very Nothing; the which acknowledgement freeth her, and
gives her a frank access to God, and free egresse and regresse unto him at
her pleasure, as he himself witnesses saying, Egredietur and ingredietur, and
pascua inueniet, Joan. 10.
She shall go forth and enter, and shall find pasture.

But these twoe divine illustrations and operations are followed by a third (to
weet) by a great familiarity and sweetness which our Savior uses toward the
sowlle, whereat she remains yet more astonished, for that commonly, like seek
and accompany with their like, as Noblemen with Noblemen, gentlemen with
gentlemen, ploughmen with ploughmen, beggars with beggars, insomuch as to see a
Lord converse with a beggar, were a note of Heroycall and admirable goodness
in him; but if a king should be seen to do it, it would be reputed an
humility and condescent worthy of immortal memory: now what were all this
goodness and humility compared with Gods, who so vouchsafes to converse
with man? truly, nothing else but malice, and pride. If then it seems so
great goodness, one worm of the earth to converse with another, what bounty
(trow ye) is it to see the king of kings and God of Gods familiar with a
worm, Psalm. 49.
and which has nothing but comes from him? yea, which is most of all, with a
syn full sowlle and his enemy? seeking her, wooing her, chearing her, showing
her all lovely and gracious regard, and incessantly honoring her with some
particular grace or other; in fine, making show as though he had some
special need of her; yea seeking her grace with such instance, love, and
humility, as though all his good depended on her consent, and all his
felicity consisted in her favor.

The sowlle (lo) mounted to this degree, and seeing with an illuminat eye the
extent of so infinite goodness of God toward her, not only falls into a
profownd admiration thereof, but departs even out of her self through extreme
astonishment, so far forth as falling thereby as into a trance or Ecstasy, in
excess of love and joy she cries out saying, Cant. 2.
Fulcite me floribus, stipate me malis, quia amore langueo, Prop me up with
flowers, beset me rownd with apples, for (lo) I languish for love. If the
twoe Qweenes, Hester and she of Saba fell into an ecstasy, the one in
beholding the glory of king Assuerus, the other in viewing that of Solomon,
what marueill may it seem to the sowlle, to see so excessive love and goodness
of Almighty God himself toward her? But what are these flowers which may so
support and prop her up in her languishment, but the examples of Jesus Christ,
the which she desires to imitate? saying within her self: I desire to forgo
and renounce my own will by his example, for the will of God, and be obedient
thereunto until death as he was, and to annihilate my self like him, to the
end I may render some part of my debts to that unmeasurable goodness: I
languish of the wownds which love has made in my heart with the arrowe called
Sagitta electa the choice arrowe, Isay. 49.
the which that divine Archer (who is Charity) has shot into my heart
estosoones upon his Manifestation unto me, and who also like a good Archer
has followed his arrowe, so that both are fixed in my heart, and lodged in my
bowels as it is said, Psalm. 14.
Ad^eum ^eniemus, and mansionem apud eum faciemus, We will come, Luc. 12.
and will abide with him. Behold, this arrowe is all on fire, and never comes
but to kindle this fire in our land; the heat thereof burns me, the love
inflameth me, the ardour melts and dissolueth me like wax before the fire,
Psalm. 77.
consuming all my forces, and (in fine) makes me to die unto my self and live
to God; and how farther this arrowe perceth and my wownd is greater, so much
more incurable is my languor, and wholesome my hurt. And therefore is it that I
entreat you to support me with the flowers and examples of Jesus Christ, and
to strengthen me with the apples of odoriferant prayers; for (lo) these
flowers and fruits are as pillars whereon I rest me and ame borne up, as being
as hard as Adamant, high as heaven, of depth bottomless, of durance endless.

See here, how this holy sowlle speaks, rapt in admiration of this infinite
goodness, and wholly infiered and inflamed with the arde^t love of her
heavenly spouse; and not hable to contain any longer, breaks out through
excess of feruor into inward terms and boiling acts, terms and acts
understood rather of God then of herself; and is by this means highly lifted
up to God: and by how much the more she admireth him, so much more is her
elevation, and so much the cleerer and essential her discovery, and view of
the divine will and sweet pleasure of God; and by how much more she admireth
him, so much the higher is her elevation; and reciprocally how much higher is
her elevation, so much the more she admireth him, and is made thereby so much
the more capable of that goodness.

But note, These degrees be not considerations.
that I mean not that explicit the sowlle rest and stay on these three
points, nor that she practice them by way of consideration; but rather that
they present them selfs generally unto her as divine lights, she not leaving
of the Contemplation of the divine will to seek them, but wholly and
continually remaining fixed therein.

Of Humiliation, the 3. degree.
CHAP. IIII.
AFTER this Admiration ensues Humiliation, Humiliation. 3. Degree.
a degree which follows immediately after having discried and admired the
divine immensity and omnipotency, in that the sowlle has clearly seen that
God is every whear, as having seen him without and within her, above and
below her, on every side and rownd about her, and after having perfectly
perceived that God is more inwardly within her then she herself: moreover,
having known his goodness, tasted his sweetness, seen his beauty, enjoyed
his familiarity, and experimented in her his lively and efficacious Inaction,
his sweet and secret operation, his strong and violent attraction, and
(finally) after having compared her vilitie, her malice, her nothing, with the
immense glory and goodness of God, she begins to produce profownd (though
most secret and subtle) acts of humility, saying one while with S. Peter,
Recede a me quia homo peccator sum, Luc. 5.
Depart from me, for (lo) I am a sinful wight; And anon with S. Elizabeth,
Luc. 1.
Et vnde hoc mihi? Whence and from what goodness comes it, that God
vouchesafeth thus to come and visit me? Otherwhiles again with S. Peter,
Joan. 13.
Tu mihi lauas pedes? Come thou to wash the feet of my muddy and earthly
affections through thy heavenly and familiar condescent and chearishings? Apoc.
19.
thou (my Lord and God of all glory) wilt thou through the familiar and
delitious operation of thy divine will, thus daigne to disgust me of mine own
bitter and abject will? what! thou that art the king of kings and Lord of
Lords, wilt thou abase thy self so low as to conioyne thy will with mine, and
operate so familiarly with, in, and by it, and endure that it do one and the
fame act with, in, and by thy divine will. Lord, I am affrighted at this
novelty, astonished at this bounty, and overwhelmed with this glory and
majesty, and ame not hable to endure so great abatement of thy greatness, nor
sustain so great a flashe of thy splendure, nor comprehend such excess of
goodness, nor abide so strong assalt of so infinite love; Recede a me, Job. 10.
Lord, depart from me a sinner, Et dimitte me paululum vt plangam dolorem
meum, And leave me a while to wayle my sins; else, Joan. 13.
Non lauabis mihi pedes in aeternum, Thou shall not wash the feet (of my
passions and affections) with thy familiar blandishments and heavenly delices.
To whom as to her that understands not as yet that mystery, God answers,
Quod ego facio tu nescis modo, Ibid.
scies autem postea, What I do, thou know not now, thou shall know it
hereafter. As if he would say, My spouse, thou understand not the effect
and consequence of this my work; think not that I do it only to manifest
unto thee my benignity, but also to releive thy necessity, for why, Ibid.
Si non lauero te non habebis partem mecum, Unless I wash thee thou shall
have no part with me; if by the tract of my spirit I pluck thee not out of
thy flesh; if by the taste of my true pleasure I make thee not forgo the
false; if with the relish of my heavenly sweetness I make thee not distaste the
earthly; if by the peace of my will and pleasure I free thee not from the war
of thy passions; if by a joy in my will I make thee not forsake thine own; if
(finally) by a supernatural contentment and repose I make thee not cast of
that of nature, thou shall remain ever thine own, and always in thy self,
having the feet of thy affections still fowlle and soyled with earthly myer,
and consequently can have no part with me in that goodly City of mine,
Apoc. 21.
wherinto Nuliu^ intrabit coinquinatum, No defiled thing shall enter: and
therefore by this my lively, efficatious, sweet, and familiar operation in, and
with thee, it pleases me to wash and make clean thy feet (to weet) the
inferior part of thy sowlle, from all spot of passion and disordinate
affection, and radically to plant my will in thee, whereby to make thee my
lively temple, holy tabernacle, Paradise of pleasure, and (brief) to make thee
one spirit with me, yea mine own sweet spouse for ever and ever, Osee. 2.
for Sponsabo te mihi in aeternum, I will espouse thee for ever.

The sowlle thus seeing that such is his divine will, which is her only life and
joy, and to the which she aspireth from the bottom of her heart, with an
insatiable desire to resign herself wholly thereunto, Joan. 13.
answers, Domine non tan^um pedes meos, sed and manus and caput, O Lord, wash
not only my feet, but my hands and head also, that I may not only have clean
feet for to walk in thy ways, but also an illumined understanding to know thy
law, and innocent hands to do good works, whereby being wholly despoyled of
the old man, I may from henceforth say, Cant. 5.
not only Laui pedes meos, quomodo coinquinabo eos? I have washed my feet, how
shall I now fowlle the^ any more? but also, Exui me tunica mea, Ibid.
quomodo induam illam? I have put of my garment, how shall I put it on again?
whereunto the spouse answers, Joan. 13.
Qui lotus est, non indiget nisi vt lauet pedes, sed est mundus totus, He that
is washed, needs not but only to wash his feet, but is wholly clean: for, if
thou have no vain affections thou shall be clean all over, Et macula non erit
in te, Cant. 4.
And thear shall be no spot in thee: and therefore let me do my will in thee, let
me operate like a true spouse, let my spirit repose in thee, let me labor
together with thee, for that according to the word I have passed unto thee,
Osee. 2.
Sponsabo te mihi in fide, I will espouse thee in faith.

The sowlle having understood this mystery, as one wholly dissolved into
sweetness, and inflamed with love, Cant. 5.
says, Anima mea liquefacta est vt dilectus loquutus est, I was wholly
dissolved as soon as I heard my beloved speak; and goes on in spirit with the
virgin Marie saying, Luc. 1.
Ecce ancilla Domini, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum, Lo here thy handmayd (oh
Lord) be it unto me as thou have said. And heerupon, by such her sweet consent
and hearty resignation to the will of God, she becomes straightly united
thereunto, receives it into her, and (finally) is become thereby the mother of
Jesus Christ, for (quoth he) Quicunque fecerit voluntatem patris mei qui est
in coelis, hic frater, and soror, and matter mea est, Who so does the will of
my father who is in heaven, he is my Brother, my Sister, and my Mother. And
the sowlle having so spiritually conceived him, and being become great of him,
she charily keeps, cherishes, nourishes, worshippeth, and adoreth him in
her heart, like as the virgin Marie did in her boddie; and so (to be short)
she is blessed, not for being the womb which bears him, or the teates which
nurseth him, but for being she who has heard the word of God and kept it.
Luc. 11.


Now, This dialogue passes in spirit.
albeit this Dialogue pass not betwixt God and the sowlle in these express
and formal terms, yet silently and in spirit they pass in effect and
substance within the sowlle in this her desire of Humiliation; the which
spiritual effect a man cannot express but by such articulate words. And thus
by this degree of Humiliation ought the sowlle learn to humble herself amid
the familiar visitations and blandishments of her heavenly spouse (that is to
say) behave her with as profownd reverence toward that great majesty, as it
daigneth to stoop in so great familiarity to her; and ought to take great
heed not to render herself reciprocally familiar unto him as to her equal, for
so should she make of this familiarity a wall betwixt God and her, and a very
thick clowd which would hinder her from the clear aspect of the spouse, and
from wading forward into his greatness; a point wherein many spiritual persons
do very much prejudice themselfes, forgetting through Gods great familiarity
with them, to render unto him a due and profownd reverence.

The reason why such familiarity of the sowlle toward God is such an obstacle
and clowd, Why faemiliarity makes a wall bevvixt God and the Souls
is because that thereby she accomodateth the greatness of God to her
smallness, and his divinity to her humanity, and so sees almost nothing at
all out of her self, nor any greatness above her own; whereas by profownd
reverence she is raised up above her self to the greatness of God, and
proportionateth herself in some sort to him, and her humanity to his Dietie,
and so she sees things which are above her; in the one God is proportionated
to the sowlle, in the other the sowlle to God; in the one God is abased without
that the sowlle is any whit lifted up, in the other the sowlle is lifted up,
without that God is any whit abased: And so you see the one serves as a clowd
to veil the greatness of God from the sowlle, and the other as a light whereby
to discern it.

Of Exultation, the 4. degree.
CHAP. V.
EXVLTATION of heart ensues incidently the degree of Humiliation; Exultation.
5. Degree.
for, the same causes which do humble her, do like wise make her exuit,
VVherof it comes.
because her smallness which shows her that she is nothing of her self,
does likewise Exultation of the heart. The greatness also, and magnificence of
God as they do humble her, so likewise do they raise in her this Iubilation,
seeing herself made Jesus Christ causes this humility in her, and that
humility is accompanied with Exultation, insomuch as after that humble
conception she sings with the virgin Marie, Luc. 1.
Exultauit spiritus meus in Deo Salutari meo, quia respexit humilitatem
ancillae suae, My spirit exulteth in God my Savior, because he has respected
the humility of his handmayd. Finally, another more essential cause
Exultation, is, the marueillous and inseparable union of the spirit of man with
God: whereof for that I have already treated in the 2. chapter of the first
Part, I forbear here to speak, referring the Reader thereunto.

Of this Jubilee and Exultation of spirit spoke she who having tasted it
said, Cant. 1.
Exultabimus, and laetabim^r inte, memores vberum tuorum super vinum, We will
exult and rejoice in thee, remembering (that is) having experimented that thy
teates are better then wine: She says better then wine, Ephe. 5.
In quo est Luxuria, VVherin is Luxury, whereunto this Exultation is contrary,
Zach. 6.
as being Vinum germinans virgins, The wine which engenders virgins or the
celibate life, and making a man for the fruition of these spiritual delights,
to despise all the pleasures of the flesh, for, Gustato spiritu deficit omnis
Caro, The spirit once tasted, all flesh fails.

The effects of this Exultation are, The effects of Exultation.
that it withdraws us from all vagaries, retayneth us at home within our
Interior, asswageth the dolor of Abnegation, encourages Pusillanimitie,
commands affections and bridleth Passions; also, it is an oil which
suppleth the stubburnes of mind, sweetneth the bitterness of the heart,
sollageth the tediousnes of life, and rejoices the spirit; it is a saulce
which makes toothsome the unsavory morsel of mortification, a medicine which
heals the wownds of affliction; a water which strengthens the debilitie of
the spiritual sight: In fine, it makes us despise all carnal consolation,
forget all worldly delights, surmount our calamities, to sit at ease amid our
toils and trauayles, and to triumph over our infernal foes: it makes easy,
things seeming impossible, it gives courage to persevere, it opens Paradise,
and wafting the sowlle over a sea of miseries, lifts her up to heaven, as
she of whom is said, Cant. 3.
Quae est ista quae ascendit de deserto, de lit ijs affluens, innixa super
dilectum suum? Who is this that ascends from the desert, abounding in
delights, leaning upon her beloved, and firmly united to him?

Of Elevation, the 5. degree.
CHAP. VI.
AFTER this degree of Exultation succeeds the last of Elevation of the will
and mind into God; Eleuatio^* 5. Degree.
the causes whereof are all the former degrees (to weet) Manifestation,
Admiration, Humiliation, and Exultation.

For first, Effects. 1.
that of Manifestation shows the sowlle as far as her reach exte^deth the
will of God, and how she is in God, making her truly, really, and
experimentally to taste it in her own capacity (namely) that it is spirit and
life; a thing so surpassing all understanding, as that no wit or doctrine can
comprehend it, seeing that naturally none can exceed the bownds of Nature, but
to know what is spirit and life a man must be in spirit and life, which is
above nature and beyond the actiuitie of her Sphere, and so not naturally to be
known; but this degree of Manifestation discloseth unto us the will of God
(spirit and life) in that it lyfteth us up above nature; yet notwithstanding
forasmuch as this degree discovers not the will of God so plainly as the
others in their order, so neither does it lift up the sowlle so much as they,
but as it does but only begin the discovery, so does it but begin to lift up
the sowlle into God.

Admiration, likewise as is manifest, 2.
lifts up the sowlle, for that Admiration being nothing else but a total
extension of the sowlle, and all her powers upon an object beyond and above her
capacity, it must of necessity lift up the admiring sowlle, for that such
extension of her self, and total application of her powers to this will,
causes consequently on the one side an auersion from exterior things, by a
total intraction of her powers and senses, and on the other a perfect
inherence or adhesion thereunto whereby to comprehend it; the which auersion, and
conversion or adhesion to the supernatural object work this Elevation.

The like is of Humiliation, 3. Luc. 1.
eleuating the sowlle as is shown, Quia respexit humilitatem ancillae suae,
For that he has respected the humility of his hand-mayd: and a while after,
Et exaltauit humiles, And has exalted the humble: It eleuateth her (I say) not
only in grace, virtue, and favor of God, but also in actual Contemplation and
experime^tall knowledge of him; for that by such act of Humiliation (as is
showed) a man reducing himself with all other things to nothing, he sees God
in all things, or rather all things to be God, and consequently can see nothing
but God every whear; and this is the true Elevation.

Then for Exultation, 4.
the like also is of it; being but an excessive spiritual joy, the plenarie
abundance whereof replenisheth wholly the sowlle, and with her extreme sweetness
so inebriateth her, as that clean forgetting the world and all creatures, yea
her self, she remains wholly fixed in this fountain of joy (to weet) God,
who has totally seized upon all her powers, and so strooken and wownded her
heart, and taken a full possession thereof, that she having now no more
dominion over herself, follows his inflaming instincts and attractions all in
all, and (as it were) hand in hand, gives ear to his words, embraces his
doctrine, and (finally) gives herself wholly over unto him, submitting and
subiecting her to his good pleasure; follows him like as does the shaddowe
the boddie, adheareth to him like the Accident to the Substance, like the
Circumference to the Center, the member to the boddie, the branche to the vine,
and the part to the wholle; and so is perfectly become one and the same spirit
with God, Corin. 6.
for, Qui adhaeret Deo, vnus spiritus est, Who so adheareth to God, is one
spirit with him.

Thus then it appears how the Interior will of God comes not all at once
but by little and little, and how the sowlle feels it by degrees, she being
without this divine will likevnto the world, wholly repleat and covered all
over with the darkness of the night, and it on the other side like unto the
Sun or day, Similie notan.
the which as it approaches, expels and banisheth all that darkness,
leaving her like a little world all over illumined; but as the day comes not
all at once but by degrees, and successively, so likewise does this will: For,
1. Degree.
as in the morning the day begins to appear, and show it self by little and
little, so also does this divine will in the beginning of Pure intention.

After follows the dawne or break of day, 2. Degree.
which shows manifestly that the day is entered into the word; whereunto
resembles the degree of Manifestation, which in like manner manifests that
the will of God is entered into the sowlle. 3. Degree.
Then afterward the sun begins to rise, lightning the world somewhat more,
and this resembles the degree of Admiration, by which the fowlle apprehen death
more perspicuously the will of God, and is thereby more illuminated then
before. 4. Degree
After this the Sun dischaseth all the darkness of the night, the which is the
degree of Humiliation, whereby (namely) by the great abasement and annihilation
of the sowlle she discovers more essentially this will of God, and uniting
her self perfectly thereunto, disperseth all her spiritual fogg and darkness.
5. Degree
After all this, the Sun shows himself in his full and complete beauty and
brightness, such, as that thereby it cheereth and cherishes all creatures
both reasonable and unreasonable; which office appertains to this degree of
Exultation, wherein the will of God shows it self so fayer and admirable,
that the splendure thereof cheereth and rejoices the reasonable and
unreasonable part of man. Finally, 6. Degree.
the Sun after all the foresaid degrees, rises so high and very bright, that
thereby the world is likewise clean elevated out of the deep darkness of the
night, unto that splendure which we see at Noone day; the which represents
this last degree of Elevation; the will of God bringing at last so great light
and splendure with it, as that the sowlle is quite exalted out of the abyss of
her spiritual darkness, even to the perfect contemplation of God her true
Sun, with whom being arrayed like the woman in the Apocalypse, and, Apoc 12.
Amicta lumine sicut vestimento, Psalm. 103.
Clad all in light like as with a garment, the Angels fall on admiring her,
Cant. 6.
saying, Quae est ista quae progreditur quasi aurora consurgens, pulchra vt
luna, electa vt sol terribilis vt castrorum Acies ordinata? Who is this that
comes forth like the rising morning, beautiful as the Moon, choice as the
Sun, and terrible like an Armay in battle array?

Certain Aduises touching the premises.
CHAP. VII.
NOTE, Aduises. 1.
that I propose not these degrees as points or considerations to meditate upon,
but as effects which this divine will operateth in the sowlle, the same effects
not arriving so much by her own industry, as by the operation and
illustration of that will within her, she only disposing herself thereunto by
the cutting of of all affections and passions, and by pure intention, listening
in all peace and repose of heart, profownd silence, and tranquillity of spirit
to this divine will.

Moreover, 2.
thear are some who for being too active and exterior, attain only to the
active will, without tasting at all the contemplative or interior. 3.
Others some thear are that attain to so high degree, that they see almost
continually the interior will; and such see not the Exterior, because that
the Exterior they have made the Interior. Again, 4.
some have attained the perfection to abide in the supereminent will, and those
see neither the Exterior nor the Interior will, for, of both they have made
the supereminent; not that the one and the others do not the work contained in
the first part, according to the rules of things commanded or forbidden, for
that (lo) were a very gross error, whereof I have advertised you in the said
first part, as likewise do here again; but that they do those works
interiourly with an other manner of intention, and more eminent means.

To conclude, you must be admonished not to retain precisly in your mind the
Ideaes of those degrees and divisions of the divine will, to stay thereupon; but
as that will is in it self spirit and life without all manner of image or Idaea,
so and in such sort must ye endeavor (as near as may be) to conte^plate it,
these degrees and divisions serving only to help and make capable thereof, the
sowlles that have not yet tasted the same, and which without such division are
not hable to comprehend it, as is showed before in the first and fowrth chapter
of the first part; Similie.
for, as the light of the day may be distinguished by degrees, according to his
successiue and peece-meale coming into the world, and yet in it self is simple
and without distinction and multiplicitie; so the light of this divine will may
be distinguished by that it shows it self successively unto the sowlle, and
yet for all that is most simple, uniform, and void of degrees and
multiplicities; for like as the Sun shows himself in one degree of light at
break of day; at his vprising in an other, at Noone in another, and yet is but
all one light; even so this divine will discovers it self in one degree of
light to Beginners, in another to Proficients, and in a third to the Perfect.

Note also, that although I say, that you must feel and taste in your self this
will and pleasure of God, Note well.
yet must you never bide upon that feeling, yea though grownded on the
Abnegation of your own will, and upon the will of God; for, although it be
right good to take a taste and contentment in the abnegation of your self, and
in the will of God, yet must you not for all that insist and dwell upon that
taste and contentment, but merely in the will of God. For better understanding
whereof you are to weet, that in this act of Abnegation thear concur twoe
things, Renunciation and Contentment; on the first whereof you are to insist and
rest, but not upon the latter. So likewise in the act of Resignation unto the
will of God thear are twoe things (to weet) the Resignation it self, and the
Taste that one takes therein; on the former whereof you are to repose, but not on
the other. For defalt of which observation and due discovery of this deceit,
I have known some very much abused; and that so much the more, by how much
this error is subtle, and covered with a fayer pretext of Abnegation or
Resignation.

Finally, 7.
you must not think your self hable to attain to this second part of the
will of God, till you have first well and duly practiced the first by true
and long mortifications; as has bein touched in the 18. chap. of the first
part.

An Examination necessary to be used by the Practiser of this second Part of
the will of God.
CHAP. VIII.
AS for this second Part, Points to be examined.
it needs no exact Examination, for that it consists rather of effects of
the spirit then of any industry of ours; only it shall suffize to examine.

First, whether (having fownd by the first Manifestation this Interior will)
you have conserved, chearished, and entertained it, without being distracted;
rejecting all passions, and mortifieng all affections, so far forth as that
you have had no other joy, consolation, and life, then in the same.

If when you could not have this Manifestation

Furthermore, for as much as the degree of Admiration depends and proceeds
of three points (to weet) of the Immensitie of God, of his Familiarity, and of
our own Nothing, as has bein shown, examine whether you have duly
annihilated your self; for that, of this annihilation depends the perfect
familiarity, and knowledge of the immensitie of God.

Humiliation, you are to reuise whether toward the familiarity and
blandishment of the heavenly Spouse, your sowlle have carried and comported
herself humbly (that is) with as profownd reverence toward so great majesty,
as it has daigned to stoop so familiarly to her; or whether contrariewise
she have forgotten her self, in rendering him reciprocal familiarity as to
her equal, and so have made of such her presumption a wall (as it were)
betwixt God and her, or a veil or thick cloud, whereby she is hindered truly
to contemplate her Spouse, and diue into his greatness; a falte which many
spiritual persons commit to their great damage, not knowing with the
familiarity of God, to reserve and render unto him a due and profownd reverence.

Exultation of Spirit, in infu^ing and plunging your sowlle farther into the
will of God, and made use thereof toward a more intense and profownd
Renunciation of your self, in driving away all pusillanimitie and irksomeness
of mind, and all imagined difficulty of mortification, without reposing
sensually thereon. As for Elevation, that is a degree

Finally, whether you have continually borne in mind, that you are not expressly
to will of God, but rather whether you have endeavored according to your power
and capacity, to know and contemplate it such as it is in it self (to weet)
simple, and without all manner of image or division; though to declare it unto
you it has bein necessary to divide it as you have seen. Likewise, whether
you have

Here ends the Second part of the Rule of Perfection. Laus Deo.
THE COPPIE OF AN ADVISE TOUCHING PRAYER, given unto one, afflicted by reason
of the great sterilitie which he fovvnd therein.
THE first and principalln 3. Principal things in Prayr.
thing which a man ought in Prayer to

the inferior or sensible; and finding by the examen any of these things or
other whatsoever, he must reject it as a pernicious and venomous serpent, and
as opposite to the foresaid protestation and will of God. Now, this reflection
and examen is nothing else, How to examine the intention.
but to judge and feel whereto his mind is drawn, what he wishes, desires,
and takes pleasure in, or contrariewise in what he is displeased,
discomforted, and what he flies.

The third thing is, For prayr grovvnded upon the only will of God,
continuation of exame^.
the continuance of this examen and reflection, if so be that he takes only
for his Prayer and subject this will of God, to the end that the sowlle
remaining in her purity, discharged of all affairs, and not being hindered by
any other sight, may continually view, fixedly and soly contemplate, and
sweetly taste this pleasure and delitious contentment of God. For other sort of
Prayer, frequent reflection.
Or else, he ought often to visit it by a frequent reflection, if he take for
his subject meditations and aspirations; to the end that perceiving any other
thing to intrude it self into his interior, he may reject it as opposite and
contrary to this purity of intention, yea, the very desire of illumination
and of high contemplation: and this reiection must be no otherwise done then by
the same will, in turning by a simple conversion thereunto, and by a contempt,
auersion, and oblivion of all creatures.

And note, Secret deceptions.
that for the most part, the hindrance of the purity of intention, and
deception of well minded persons, are the good desires, which do hinder,
retain, and ruin so much the more this integrity of intention, by how much
the less they are discovered and held for such, as (for example) the desires
of fervor, devotion, tears, contrition, and illumination; for, inasmuch as
they are disguised with the cloak of piety, one takes no heed of them, so
that without suspicion, the desire of them enters into the bottom of the
heart, and wholly possesses and rules it, not leaving room for the will of
God, the which often times is quite contrary (to weet) that he be not
consolated nor illuminated, neither that he have tears and sensible devotion;
for, What is true devotion. 2. 2. qu. 82. art. 1.
true devotion consists only in contenting himself with this will of God, or
(as says S. Thomas) promptly to do that which appertains to his service.

This blindness continually comes, because (as is said) a man looks only
on the cloak and exterior of such desires, and not on their interior true
substance and effects, which indeed are nothing else but consolation and
illumination; yea, proper will, natural contentment, The grovvnd of all
perfecction.
and self love. For, you must know that the wholle stable sowndation and
grownd of perfection, is the will of God, which ought always to be seen and
shine in our interior, and never to vanishe away nor be left of either by
affliction or consolation; no more in ariditie, sterilitie, and contradiction,
then in devotion, consolation, and perfect resignation; because that this will
is a thing so celestial and transcendent, that it reformeth all deformity,
and rectifieth all crookednes, and as a thing firm and stable, dischaseth and
(as it were) absorbeth all vacillation and instabilitie, and is no less in our
poverty, sterilitie, and fragilitie, then in our abundance, devotion, and
perfection, though not according to sense, but to reason; whereof we are
assured by the divine power and providence governing all things.

Who then desires true contentment of mind, How to repose continually in
God.
and to live with quietness in God, it is necessary that he always
establish himself upon this immovable fowndation, and cornerstone of the will
of God, reposing continually thereon, and that, by way of Resignatio^. But as
this fowdation is not always sensible, but often has residence only in the
Reason, so likewise some times a man can not have this Resignation sensible;
but only the reasonable; the which he may always have, even when the sense is
quite contrary to the Resignatio^; for, one may be resigned when he has any
contradiction, sterilitie, or substraction of devotion, notwithstanding the
contradiction of the sense, all the which he may accept as the will of God:
yea, if he feel not in himself the courage so to accept it and resign
himself, he must mount higher, and take as the will of God this
Irresignation; and if yet the darkness be so great that he can not thus do,
he must also resign his darkness: if (finally) by reason of tediousness
he has not the will to perform any of these things, he must offer to God
this tediousnes and defect of good will, and take it at his hands as his will
in this manner, reducing to Resignation the letts of Resignation which may
occur; to the end that in this sort, always and incessantly the will of
God may (as is above said) devour all things, and that a man may dwell
always therein: and this kind of Resignation of Irresignation is far more
fruitful, A perfect Resignation.
meritorious, and sublime, and leading more directly to the true union with
God, mortification of himself, and transcendence over all things, then that
which is done according to sense; and a man may say that the one is simple, and
the other dubble; yea, that the one is so many times dubbled as it does absorb
and surmount intrinsecall obstacles.

And note, Note.
that this Rule of accepting all things at the hands of God is so general,
that it has no exception, in such sort that a man must accept not only the
extrinsecall crosses and afflictions of the world, and of his neighbor at the
hands of God, but also the very intrinsecall, proceeding from his
imperfections, for, Romans 8.
Omnia cooperantur in bonum diligentibus Deum.

The three points of this aduertisment are more particularly distinguished into
6. in the 9. chapter of this rule of Perfection, and are not only fit for the
perfect but also for the Beginners, that thereby perceiving the true end of
Prayer, they may tend thereunto by a more straight line; the want whereof causes
diverse (even spiritual men) to pass many years, yea some their wholle life,
not only without attayning to any perfection in Prayer, but also without
knowing the true end thereof, which is the will and pleasure of God.

A LETTER CONTAINING AN ANSWER TO A doubt touching the Object of the will of
God.
DEAR Brother; this present shall be for your satisfaction, and to resolve you
touching a certain doubt which you fownd in reading the exercise of the will
of God. And as concerning that which you say; first, that thear is great
difference betwixt God and his will; for my part I acknowledge no such: For, I
think that he which sees this essential will (to weet) considered only in
God, by consequence has seen God, and that as one and the same thing, not as
diverse; for in God thear is nothing but God. And touching this point and the
elucidation thereof, thear is nere a whole chapter in the third part, whear
thear are not too many arguments which prove it, and too many Doctors thear
alleged which with one consent affirm not the same: concerning which also, I
have had heertofore the advice of some Divines, though the thing be of it self
too clear, and likewise the Method says the same. But I see your error heerin
proceeds from this cause (to weet) that you have not well marked how I have
divided it into three sorts of wills, you having no respect to the difference
thereof; not that in it self, but in us it is distinguished. Now, you
notwithstanding write to me of the will of God in general, not expressing
which of the 3. you speak of. And it is no marueil if you know not the
sublimitie, and nuditie which I attribute to the essetiall will of God, seeing
you have not read what I have written thereof; and therefore you ought not to
condemn a thing which you never have but half seen. For, who so has read
the third part, I doubt, rather will reprehend the contrary fault (namely)
that it is too naked, abstract, and spiritual, and nothing else but God.

Now, you allege that this exercise admits some Object, whereof is no
particular one in God. To which I answer, that this word (Object) may be
understood twoe manner of ways; for a general, or for a particular object. As
concerning the general which is God himself, I answer that the third or
supereminent will admits also no other but him, though not so in the first
and second part, whear thear is some particular object which to the Beginners
seems to cause some difference betwixt God and this Will; but it is because
that at the first this divine will shows it self as exterior, and then after
as interior, and finally, as essential; not that in it self it is variable or
different, for that comes of our part who so do contemplate it
proportionably to our light which is small, and not wholly abstract from an
object in the Active life. Now, this light is greater in the Contemplative
life, and most great in the Superemine^t, whear this will is seen to be God
himself, which appears more plain by the similitude which follows.

You must know then, Similie notan.
that this exterior will is like a river which runs into the sea, for so
does this will carry our soul to God: and as the riuer-water is not called
the sea though it be the same water, so this exterior will is not properly
called God though it be but one and the same spirit; and as the limits only,
and not the substance causes it to be called a River and not the Sea, so the
limits of this will, and not the substance gives it the name of Will, and not
of God; and as the limits of the river have not their Original from the same,
so the limits of this will proceed not thereof but from our darkness; and as, if
thear were no land we should see no river but all sea, because thear would be
no limit, so if thear were in us no clowd of darkness, we should see no more
this will as such, but only God, as is declared in the ninth Chapter of the 3.
part: And as the shipp in this river being not hindered, necessarily is
transported by the stream thereof into the sea, so the soul having no
impediment, is carried by the course of this will unto the naked Essence of God;
and as when one is so led into the maine Ocean, he sees no more the river
(though the same in substance) but the sea, so he which is transported into
the essential will, sees no more this (as such) but God only.

If you demand why in the beginning a man takes not God for the Object of this
exercise without this will, I ask why does not one leap over the style
before he come at it? or why the ship which is at Roan does not ride in the
sea at Nevvhauen, rather then in the river of Roan? If you say because it is at
Roan and not at Nevvhuaen, I answer the like; that the Beginners are not in
this ample and spacious essential sea of God, but in this river of his will
which will lead the^ thereto. And I hold it a point of great indiscretion to
set a little bote on the maine sea, and a Beginner in the naked Ocean of the
divine essence. You may see therefore, why at the beginning I have not denudated
this exercise of an Object: you may also perceive in some sort that it was the
only, perfect, succinct point, and that which brings most light, which I
could choose wherinto compendiously to reduce the whole spiritual life,
without ever leaving it of, or seeking others, no less then the ship which to
go into the sea, never leaves the river wherein she rides. In the beginning
I only call it will and not God, because one of these twoe words fitteth
better the Active life the^ the other, because more properly we say in the
Active life; I will do this thing because it is the will of God, the^ to say,
because it is God: also that would be too sublime a doctrine, and (literally
taken) scarce to be admitted: likewise because all exercises, ways, virtues,
and perfections, are better reduced to this, then to any other point. In the
Contemplative life also or second part, I do not take this word God, because
thear is yet some image though very subtle and secret. Finally, in the
Supereminent life or third part, I do not alter this word will, fearing least
a man might think that I had changed the point or object of this exercise; but
I keep always the same word, keeping still the distinction of three Epithets
(to weet) Exterior, for the Active life; Interior, for the Contemplative, and
Essential, for the Supereminent; Which must be noted for avoiding in this
exercise both error and confusion. And thus much for the resolution of your
doubt.

From Orleans, this 16. of August. 1593. Your Brother in Christ Jesus B. Benet

FOrasmuch as the third part mentioned of this Rule, treats only of things
abstract, of high contemplatio^ of the Essence of God; it is thought unfitting
the common sort, and therefore not convenient to be published, unless
(perchance) hereafter upon some farher reasons or experience of these tvvoe
parts, it shall otherwise seem meet. Mean time these so abundantly, plainly,
and succinctly shevve the means and lay open the way to perfection that the
diligent Practiser of them, without the other shall quickly attain thereunto.


