A demonstration of the truth of that Discipline which Christ has prescribed
in his word for the government of his Church, in all times and places, until
the end of the world.
Wherein are gathered into a plain form of reasoning, the prooft thereof out
of the Scriptures, the evidence of it by the light of reason rightly ruled,
and the testimonies that have been given thereunto, by the course of the Church
certain hundreths of years after the Apostles time: and the general consent
of the Churches rightly reformed in these latter times: according as they are
alleged and maintained, in those several books that have been written
concerning the same.

Math. 21. 38. The husbandmen said among themselves, this is the heir, come
let us kill him, and let us take his inheritance.
Luke 19. 27. Those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over
them, bring hither, and flea them before me.
To the supposed Governors of the Church of England, the Archbishops, Lord
Bishops, Archdeacons and the rest of that order.
MANY and most evident have our declarations been concerning the truth of that
government, which Christ has prescribed in his word for the ruling of the
Church, which we have manifested unto you, both by our writings and speeches,
as occasion has been offered: never has any one of you taken in hand to say
any thing against it, but it has made his eyes to dazzle, as the clearest
Sun-shining, whereby he has been driven to wander hither and thither, groping
for euasions, and yet could not escape, but has fallen into infinite most
mostrous absurdities, and blasphemous assertions, (as by their writings yet
extant it may appear) so forcible is the truth, to amaze the painesayers
thereof, and so pregnant is falsehood to beget and bring forth thousands of
absurdities, and every one worse then other. And will you still continue in
your damnable, and most diuelishe course? Have you sold your selves unto
Satan, to fight for him until you be dammed in hell with him? Have you
morgaged the salvation of your souls and bodies, for the present fruition of
your pomp and pleasure, is it because you see not what you should do? It may
be so, for many are so blind, that they grope even at noone day: but me
thinks it can hardly be so, unless you be they that have eyes and see not,
for the cause has been (by the blessing of God) so managed, that many
plough-men, artificers, and children do see it, and know it, and are able by
the word of God to justify it, and condemn you to be adversaries unto the
Gospel in resisting it. But you think that government not so needful, and
your fault but small (if it be any) in continuing your course begun. The
necessity of the thing is many ways apparent, both in that it has so
plentiful warrant from Gods own word, (as the course of this book does
uidently declare,) and also in that the Gospel can take no root, nor have any
free passage, for want of it: and the greatness of your fault appears by
this, that in so doing, you are the cause of all the ignorance, Atheism,
schisms, treasons, popery and ungodliness, that is to be found in this
land, which we challenge to prove to your faces, if we may indifferently be
heard, and whereof in the mean while we will give you a taste: for the first it
is clear, that you are the causers of that damnable ignorance, wherein the
people are so generally wrapped, for that you have from time to time stopped
the streams of knowledge, in those places where the Lord in mercy bestowed
the same, and in steed of able and painful Ministers, have pestered the
Church, either with presumptuous proud persons, that are esteemed learned and
take no pains to bring the people unto the knowledge of Jesus Christ, or
(which is the greatest number) such ignorant Asses, and filthy swine, as are
not worthy to live in a well ordered commonwealth: and that you are the cause
of all Atheism, it is plain, for one may (as in deed many do) profess it,
and you say nothing to him for it. If the most filthy liver will fawn upon
you, and bribe your servants, you will not only favor him, but assist him
against any godly Minister or other: but if any that fear God, refuse to come
under the least of your popish ceremonies, he shall be molested, till his
purse be empty, or else by your tyrannous dealing, he have made shipwreck of a
good censcience. And are not you the cause of all schisms, that make a
hotch-pot of true religion and popery, and so give some occasion to fall into
this course, and others into that? And it is as clear, that you are so far
the cause of all treasons, as without you they had not bin: for if every Church
had had her government according to Christ's institution, our young Gentlemen,
and students, had not bin (for want of teaching and careful oversight) made a
pray unto the seducers, and consequently to those practices which have brought
the bodies of so many unto Tyborne, and their souls into hell: and who but
you be the causes of Popery, whilst you use them so well, let them do wat
they list, yea, and keep them in office and authority under you, yea (which
more is) give them such offices as none that is not popish can execute: I speak
not of the ignorance which by your means reigns every where, which (as they
confess) is the mother of their devotion, and you are the wretched fathers of
that filthy mother, whereby you must needs be grandfathers (at the least) to
all kind of popery. And who can (without blushing) deny you to be the cause
of all ungodliness, seeing your government is that which gives leave to a man
to be any thing, saving a sound Christian. For certainly it is more free in
these days, Omnia tum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
to be a Papist, Anabaptist, of the famely of love, yea any most wicked one
wahtsoeuer, then that which we should be, and I could live these twenty years
any such in England (yea in a Bishops house it may be) and never be much
molested for it, so true is that which you are charged with, in a Dialogue
lately come forth against you, and since burned by you, that you care for
nothing, but the maintenance of your dignities, be it to the damnation of your
own souls, and infinite millions more: Enter therefore now at the last, into
the serious confideration of these things: remember that one day, you must be
presented before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ, to be arraigned for all
the souls that have gone to hell (seeing you will needs be the rulers of the
Church) since the Gospel first appeared in this land, then shall you not be
excused with this, the Queen and Counsel will have it so: not with that, our
state cannot bear it. For it shall be said unto you, why do you not inform
the^ better of my will, why taught you them not to worship with trembling and
fear, and to kiss the son least he be angry: why did you not tell them,
that all states must be ruled by my word, and not my word by them and their
policies. When these things shall be laid to your charge, your consciences
shall answer: that if you had done so, you should have lost your dignities,
which you loved and sought for especially: then shall you wish, that the
mountains would fall upon you, and the hills cover you from the presence of
the lamb, and from the presence of him that sits upon the throne. And I am
persuaded, that you are in league with hell, and have made a covenant with
death: yea, you do persuade your selves, that there is no God, neither shall
there be any such day of account: or it were impossible, that you should give
your eyes any sleep, or take any rest in your beds, until you had unto the
Lord by repentance and the Church by confession, vuburdened your souls of
these hellish ways, wherein you have so long walked. Repent, repent, be not
ashamed to amend, though others have found you out the way, judge your selves
while you have time, least you be made fire brands of hell beyond all time.
Let our challendges that we have made in the name of the Lord be hearkened
unto: Let us be disputed with before indifferent Judges, let the holy word of
God be the touchstone to try our disputations by, and then shall it easily
appear, who has the Lord on his side, and who not. The truth will prevail
in spite of your teeth, and all other adversaries unto it, (for God disdaineth
to be crossed by dust and ashes.) Therefore be not obstinate so long, as until
you will be found fighters with God, but prevent his wrath, least it break
forth against you like fire that none can quench, because of the wickedness
of your inventions. Venture your Bishoprics upon a disputation, and we will
venture our lives, take the challendge if you dare. If the truth be on your
side, you may hereby be restored to your dignities, and be no more troubled
by us: but if the truth be against you, what shall it profit you to win the
whole world, and afterward loose your own souls. If you refuse still our
offer, then must you needs be guilty either of this, that you know your cause
will not abide the trial, or of this, that you will take no pains to confute
us that keep such a stir in the Church: do not think that because you have
humane authority on your side, therefore you are safe, for he whose authority
is on our side, is the greatest, to whose voice all the Devils in hell shall
stoup, much more the sielie arm of sinful flesh. Wet have sought to advance
this cause of God, by humble suite to the Parliament, by supplication to your
Convocation house, by writing in defense of it, and by challendging to dispute
for it, seeing none of these means used by us have prevailed: If it come in by
that means, which will make all your hearts to ache, blame your selves, for it
must prevail, maugre the malice of all that stand against it, or such a
judgment must overtake this land, as shall cause the ears that hear thereof
to tingle, and make us be a by-worde to all that pass by us. The Lord open
your eyes, that you may see the confusions whereof you are the cause, and give
you true repentance, or confound you in all your purposes, that be against him
and the regiment of his son Jesus Christ. The same Lord, for the love he
bears to his people, open the eyes of her Majesty, and the Honorable
Counselors, that they may see your godless practices, and in pity to Gods
people, rid us from you, and turn away his judgments, which the rejecting
of his holy yoke has deserved, not punishing them that mourn for the
desolation of Sion, with those that spoil and make havoc of the Lords
inheritance.

Amen.
To the Reader.
INfinite and unspeakable (Christian Reader) are the miseries from which Jesus
Christ our Savior has freed us, and the benefits and blessings, wherewith in
this life he begins and for ever will continue to adorn us. The
consideration whereof (if our unthankfulness unto his Majesty, were any way
proporcionable, to that which we endeavor unto toward men) should make us
continually to devise, and all the days of our life to study how we might
show our selves (at least in some sort) careful to glorify his blessed name,
above all things that we desire, by how much as his love toward us,
excels whatsoever can else (according to our wish) befall unto us: but if we
do with equal balance (on the other side) look into the course of man's
life, how well this duty is performed, we shall see, that men declare
themselves rather bent to spit in his face, and to defy him, then any way to
honor him as their head and Sovereign: for (to say nothing of the profane
life, and godless conversation, wherewith the general number, that professes
Jesus Christ, is wholly defiled (we see that many nations, people, and
languages are very willing to receive Jesus Christ as their Priest to
sacrifice for their sins, but that he should become their King, to
prescribe laws unto them, whereby they may be ruled, is of all other things
the most unsavory, yea (if it offered) the most grievous tidings, and
unreasonable request: wherein, albeit many nations that have renounced that
whore of Rome, are heynously sinful against his glorious Majesty: yet is
there none in the whole world so far out of square as England, in reteyning
that Popish Hierarchy, first coined in the midst of the Mystery of iniquity,
and that filthy sincke of the Canon law, which was invented and patched
together for the confirming and increasing of the kingdom of Antichriste:
Wherein as great indignity is offered unto Jesus Christ, in committing his
Church unto the government of the same, as can be, by mean underlings unto
a King, in committing his beloved spouse unto the direction of the Mystresse of
the Stews, and enforcing her to live after the orders of a Brothel house. For
the reformation whereof, while some have written, and others according to their
callinges, carefully stood, how heynously it has been taken, how hardly they
have been used, and what shameful reproaches have been offered (even unto the
course of the Gospel) for spite that has been borne unto reformation, almost
by all estates and degrees, lamentable experience has taught many of us: but
our posterity shall know it more particularly, and the Church throughout the
world shall discorne and judge of it more evidently, when their bodies are
rotten in the dust, and their souls (if they repent not) in eternal and
intolerable torments, who have rezected a request so holy, profitable and
reasonable, yea, and handeled the intreaters for the same so cruelly,
unchristianly, and unlawfully: but they would gladly persuade themselves (if
their conscience would let them) that they have only executed justice upon us
as malefactors, and they persuade men that we desire a thing, not warranted by
the word, not heard of in the Church of God, until within this fewyeares, nor
tolerable in any Christian Commonweal whatsoever: The which monstrous
slanders, albeit they have been many ways, and by many men of most worthy
gifts detected, and made known in those several books that have been
published concerning the same: yet have I thought it necessary (in an other
course) to write also of it. The course of my enterprise, is first in respect
of the favorers of the desired reformation: secondly of the adversaries of the
saeme: the favorers of it, are also of two sorts, Ministers of the word, and
private persons, and both I hope may have profit by it. Concerning the former,
when these woeful troublees that were renewed upon us (by that wretched
subscription, that was every where urged) did begin to increase, I thought it
meet to betake my self unto that which I had read, or might any way by study
find out, concerning the cause, and collected all into a brief sum, and
referred every thing unto some head, which being ever present with me, might
furnishe me to answer in the defense of the truth, though it were of a
sudden, by which (through the blessing of God) I found such profit in my
several troubles, that I thought it a course not altogether unprofitable for
others also, and upon that occasion betook my self unto a more serious
meditation about the matter, and communicating the thing with diverse very
worthy men, I found encouragement and heartening on, generally by all whom I
made acquainted therewith: so that I trust (the judgments, yea and wishes also
of others so iumping with mine) many Ministers that love the cause, and have
not so thoroughly studied as were meet they should, may reap some profit
thereby. Now concerning private men that love the cause, some have great
affairs in hand, and have no leisure to read the several books of this
argument: some when they read, are not of sufficient capacity to conceive the
force of a reason, or to make use of it, to inform themselves in the grounded
knowledge of the cause thereby: some (which is the general fault of our
religious Gentlemen) will take no pains to read, some are poor, and not able
to buy the books, which might let them see the cause, all these (I hoope) may
find help in some measure hereby. Now concerning the adversaries unto the
cause, they are of two sorts also, they that know it, and they that are
ignorant of it: the former, if they write any thing against it, are contented
to deal in so rouing a course as may rather arise unto great volumes, then
soundly to say any thing against the cause: Wherein D. Whitgift, but
especially. D. Bridges, have given us an evident example: and these with others
of their judgment (though none in these latter days have written more
unlearnedly then they, of any argument of divinity what soever) are contented
to make the world believe (if men will be so wilfully seduced) that our
arguments be no arguments, that they be grounded upon false foundations, and
that we are not able to conclude our cause in any form of reasoning. The
course that is here taken (I trust) shall show that they are liars: the other
sort of adversaries be they that be merely ignorant of any thing, either for
it or against it, and persuading themselves that the sway and show of the
world must needs carry the truth with it, do (like blind bayardes) boldly
venture to say any thing against it, and think they do well. Now of all these
sorts of people, I have to request some thing I hope I shall obtain my request
(at the least) at the hands of some of them. The first sort of favorers (which
be the Ministers) I entreat, that as they tender the glory of God, and honor
of the cause which they stand in, so they would diligently employ themselves in
this, that they may be found able to defend the same by sound and evident
grounds out of the word, and so much the rather, for that the adversaries do
greatly triumph, when they meet with one that professes the cause, and is not
able to defend it, and confute the gain sayers of it. The second sort of
favorers, be the private persons that love the cause, whom I beseech to be
careful (as of all other points of religion) of this, that they grow in the
knowledge of the word of God, whereby they may be able, upon their own
knowledge to defend the truth, and not give the enemy any occasion to think
or say, that they be of that mind, because such and such Ministers, whom they
do affect, do think so. Now concerning the former sort of adversaries, to
wit, they that know it, I pray them to look into their own hearts, and they
shall find they mislike it, either because it corrects their excessive pomp
and maintenance, or requires more travail in their Ministry, then they are
willing to undergo, or at the least, controlleth that dissoluteness of
behavior, wherein they willingly wallow: and if it would please God to bring
them to a serious meditation of this, that it is the will of the mighty God
(before whom they must be called to give an account) which they do resist,
they would (I doubt not) more carefully look about them. And lastly for them
that be ignorant of the cause, speak evil of that they know not: let them
(if they will be admonished) vouchsafe to read this little book, and wey the
reasons with an upright judgment, which shall cause them (at the least) to
suspend their sharp censures, which so usually appear in their ordinary
communication: and concerning us all, let us know (for one day we shall be sure
to feel it) that the controversy is not about goats wool (as the Proverb
faith) neither light and trifling matters, which may safely be followed or
rejected (as in deed the enemies of this cause do confidentlie affirm) but
about no less matter then this, whether Jesus Christ shall be King or no: For
if none is said to be a King but he that rules by the scepter of his laws,
the^ the turning out of these orders which Christ has prescribed in his word,
for the ruling of the church, is to give him the title, and deny him the
authority belonging to the same, and so (in truth) to make him an Idol,
making him to carry a show of that which he is not, and (with the crucifiers
of him) to put a reed in his hand, in steed of his iron rod, and crowning him
with thorns, in steed of the crown of greatest glory, which is the cause
that so many Atheistes spit in his face, and so many godless persons, do make
but a jest of him: but when he comes to show him self in his glorious
majesty, it shall be said unto all these sorts of adversaries: Those mine
enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and slay
them before me, Luke 19. 27. The which fearful sentence, that we may avoid,
let every one of us (ae may stand with our several callings) carefully
endeavor, to advance this kingdom here, which (among other assurances given
us from the Lord) shall be a testimony unto us, that we shall have part in that
glory, which shall be revealed hereafter. Now concerning the order of this
book, to direst thee (good Reader) unto thy further instruction, in the
points thereof: Thou have in every chapter diverse proofs out of the holy word
of God, which must be the things wherewith thou may safely inform thy
conscience: the^ shall thou find (also) arguments drawn from reason rightly
ruled by the same word: and lastly, (because our adversaries charg us, that we
desire a thing not known unto the old writers, nor agreed upon among the
new) thou have here the witness of them both, in so plentiful and uniform
wise as may plainly declare, that all godly learned men of all times, have
given testimony unto the truth of it. The most of the things that are here
expressed, I acknowledge to be gathered out of the books that have bin
published, and are extant (purposelie) concerning this argument, as may appear
in the several points, wherein thou art sent unto them. Now least either thou
should be deceived with a diverse impression, or think me to misalleadge
the authors, I am to show thee what bookees I have followed. The 1. book of
T. C. twice printed, I follow the latter, of Ecclesiastical Discipline I
follow the Latin, printed 1574. and the last book of D. Whitgift, which
contains all the former in it. The rest (as I take it) have been but once
printed, and therefore carry no doubt in them. If thou be satisfied herewith,
give God the glory: and promote the cause by prayer, and all other good means
that thy calling may afford: and pray for us, that we may never shrink, nor
be overthrown by the strength of them that fight against it.

A Table of Discipline, the particular heads whereof, are handled in the
several Chapters, according to the number wherewith they are noted as
follows.
The Discipline of the Church is, the order that God has prescribed in his
word^, for the ruling of the same. cap. 1. The offices and officers of which
are to be considered in General, the calling, whereunto to wit, to A certain
office, Chap. 2. Execute his office faithfully. Chap. 3.
how it must be by Election which must be done by The people, chap. 4.
Examination, chap. 5.
Consent (only) to a man fit for the place, chap. 6.
ordination By whom it must be: by the eldership, Chap. 7. The manner how, by
publik prayer with the people. cap. 8. laying on of hands, chap. 9.



Particular, the officers and offices, Simple by themselves, Bishops Pastors,
chap. 10. Doctors, chap. 11.
Deacons or church servants, Overseers, chap. 12. Distributers, chap. 13.

Compound the Synod Ecclesiastical, what Be the parties: Pastors, Doctors,
and Elders, chap. 14. Is the authority thereof, chap. 15.
wherein it consists: in placing and displacing, chap. 16. Ce^sures by Word,
chap. 17. deed Suspention, cap 18. Excommunication, cap. 19.







A DEMONSTRATION of Discipline.
CHAP. 1.
The diffinition of Discipline, contains this proposition holden by us.
THE word of God describes perfectly unto us, that form of governing the
Church which is lawful, and the officers that are to execute the same, from
the which no Christian Church ought to swerve. Admonition in the Preface:
Ecclesiastical discipl. fol. 5. T. C. first book, page 26. Counter-poyson
page 8 Discourse of government, page 1. etc.

The assertion of the BB. and their adherents.
THe word of God describes not any exact form of Discipline, neither are the
offices and officers, namely, particularly expressed in the Scriptures, but in
some points left to the discretion and liberty of the Church. Whitgift in
preface, and page 84. to the answer to the Abstract. page 33.

The proof of the former is the disproofe of the latter, which is thus
declared.

1 These things write I unto thee, etc. out of which place I reason thus. That
end which Paul respected in writing unto Timothy, 1. Tim. 3. 14. 15.
does the holy ghost direct all Ministers unto for ever, for it must be kept.
1. Tim. 6. 14. But he wrote to direct him in the establishing and building of
the Church. Therefore that word must direct Ministers for ever: and
consequently they neither may add to, nor take from it, but govern it only
by the rules that be there prescribed.

2 Every house ought to be ruled by the orders of the skill full, wise, and
careful householder only: But the Church is the house of God, and God is such
a householder: Therefore the Church ought to be ruled by the orders of God
only, which are no where to be had, but in his word.

3 That which teaches every good way, teaches also how the Church must be
governed: But the word of God teaches every good way: Pro. 2. 9. Pro. 2. 9.
therefore it teaches how the Church must be governed.

4 We cannot glorify God, but by obedience to his word, in all that we do, 1.
Cor. 10. 11.
we must glorify God. 1. Cor. 10. 31. Therefore in all that we do, there must
be obedience to the word, and consequently in governing his Church.

5 If meat and drink be not sanctified unto us, but by the word and prayer,
then much l^sse is any thing holy which is done in the government of the Church
besides the word: But the former is true by the testimony of the Apostle, 1.
Tim. 4. 5. 1. Tim. 4. 5.
therefore the latter must be true also.

6 All lawful things are of faith. Romans 14. 23.
Romans 14. 23. All lawful things that are of faith, have a warrant from the
word, for the word is the foundation of faith: therefore all things lawful
have their warrant from the word: and consequently every lawful action in the
government of the Church.

7 Either has God left a prescript form of government for the Church, under
the new Testament: or he is less careful for it now, then he was under the
law, for his care is in guiding it: But he is as careful now for his Church
as he was then: Therefore has he left a prescript form to govern it.

8 He that was as faithful as Moses, Heb. 3. 2.
left as clear instruction, both for the building of faith, and government of
the Church, as Moses did: But Christ was as faithful in Gods house. Heb. 3.
2. therefore he left as clear instruction for them both as Moses, but Moses
gave direction even for every particular, as appears in the building of the
Tabernacle, and order of the Priesthood: Therefore has Christ also given
particular direction for the government of the Church.

9 If the word of God have described sufficient Ministers and Ministeries, for
the building of the Church, and keeping it in good order, Romans 12. 5. 6. 7.
then is out assertion true: But it has set down sufficient for doctrine, 1.
Co. 12. 28
exhortation, ouerseeing, distributing, Ephe. 4. 11. etc.
and ordering of every particular Church or general Synod: Therefore is our
assertion true.

10 That government which the Apostles taught and planted, See Connterp. page 11
is expressed in the word of God: But the Apostles taught and planted, Pastors
and Teachers for instruction, Elders for oversight, and Deacons to distribute,
and that uniformly in every Church, as appears by their writings and
practices: Therefore a certain form of government is expressed in the word.

11 Every lawful office and action in the building of the church, is from
heaven. Mat. 21. 25. 26. Matthew. 21. 25. 26.
Every thing that is (in the ordinary building) from heaven, is revealed in
the word: Therefore every lawful office and action is revealed in the word.

12 If God continued (in regard of the substance) the Church administration,
as well as the things to be administered, then is the form of Discipline
described in the word: But the former is true, as appears by the particulars:
for Priests, Pastors: for teaching Levites, or Doctors of the law, Teachers:
for rulers of the Synagogue, Elders: for Leuiticall lookers to the treasury,
Deacons: for the Sanedrim, the Eldership: therefore the form of government is
prescribed in the word.

13 Every wise King that is careful for his subjects, sets down laws for
the government of the same, and will have them tied to none other: But Christ
is such a King unto his Church: Therefore has he prescribed laws unto his
Church, which none therein can alter or disobey: and consequently, the certain
form of government of the Church is described in the word.

14 That which the Ministers must teach the people to observe, is set down in
the word of God, for they may teach nothing but that which is there, Math.
28. 20
Math. 28. 20. But they are to teach them to observe, and be obedient unto,
the particular form of the Church government: Therefore the particular form
is set down in the word.

15 Every government consists in the governors, matter whereabout they are
to be employed, and manner of doing it: But in the word are described all these
particulars, as it is showed in the ninth reason: Therefore the word
prescribes a prescript form of government.

16 The Christian religion shall find, Cyprian in sermon de baptismo Christi.
that out of this scripture, rules of all doctrine have sprung, and that from
hence does spring, and hither does return, whatsoever the Ecclesiastical
discipline does contain.

17 We may not give our selves the liberty to bring in any thing that other
men bring of their will, Cyprian de prescrip. aduersus h^ret.
we have the Apostles for authors, which themselves brought nothing of their
own will, but the Discipline which they received of Christ, they delivered
faithfully to the people.

18 It is adulterous, Cyprian li. 1. Epist. 8.
it is sacrilegious, whatsoever is ordained by humane fury, that the divine
dispositon should be violated.

Therefore if Timothy was written unto, that he might be directed by the
word, The conclusion.
in disposing of the Churches: if the laws of God only being the householder,
must be followed in the Church, his House: if the word of God teach us in
every good way, whereof the government of the Church is one: if God must be
glorified in the ruling of his Church, which cannot be, but by obedience to
his word: if nothing be lawful, but that which is of faith, warranted by the
word: if God have showed himself as careful for his Church under the Gospel,
as under the law: if Christ was as faithful to give direction as Moses: if in
the word be described sufficient Ministers and Ministeries, to build up the
Church: if that government, which the Apostles taught and practiced, be in the
word: if every lawful office and action man ordinary building, be from
heaven, and revealed thence by the word: if God continued the same form (in
respect of the substance) in the time of the Gospel that was under the laws if
every wise careful King, do set down laws for the direction of his
subjects: if the Apostles have taught us to obey that which Christ commanded:
if both the governors matter of government, and manner of doing it be set
down in the word: if all that pertains to Ecclesiastical Discipline spring
from the scriptures: if we may bring nothing into the Discipline of the
Church, but that which the Apostles have delivered us. Lastly, if that be
adulterous and sacrilegious, that is not according to the word: then it must
needs follow, that God does describe perfectly unto us out of his word, that
form of government which is lawful, and the officers that are to execute the
same: from the which it is not lawful for any christian Church to swerve. And
contrariwise, that is a most untrue assertion to say, that the officers and
offices are not particularly expressed, but left to the discretion of the
Church. The reasons that they allege against this, are in effect none, and
their objections to these reasons, not worthy to be mentioned.

CHAP. 2.
Every officer in the Church, must be placed in some calling warranted by
the word of God, and some congregation must have need of such a one, before
he be called to any function. Wherein are these propositions.

1 No calling is lawful in the Church, The first proposition.
but that which is directly warraunted out of the word, unto him that
executes it.

The BB. and their adherents think otherwise, as their practice in ordeyning
Archbishops, L. Bishops, Deans, Archdeacons, Chauncellours, Officials, etc.
does plainly declare.

2 The name and office of an Archb. The second proposition
is contrary to the word of God.

3 No man may be ordained unto any office in the church until there be such a
place void as he is fit for: T. C. 1. book page 61.

They think otherwise, as their making of so many Ministers at once proves,
and as is holden, Whitgift, page 222.

1 The first is proved thus: Reason for the first proposition. Ioh. 1. 23. 25.
If John was constrained to prove his Ministry out of the scriptures when
the Priests accused him: then is no calling lawful, that has not his warrant
in the word, for if any be privileged, the extraordinary Ministers (whereof
he was one) are specially excepted: But he proves his Ministry by the
word, as appears by his answer unto them, in the 23. verse. Therefore no
calling is lawful in the Church, that has not his warrant in the word.

2 The callinges under the Gospel must have as good warrant as they had under
the law, because the light of the Gospel is (at the least) as clear as that
of the law. But there was never any lawful calling under the law (excepting
those that were by myraculous manner confirmed from heaven) which had not his
direct warrant out of the word. Therefore no calling is lawful in the Church,
which is not directly warranted in the word.

3 If Corath, Dathan, Numb. 16.
and Abiram (though they were Levites) were punished for that they had no
warrant for that which they presumed to take in hand, then is every lawful
calling, both in general warranted out of the word, and particularly laid upon
the parties from the Lord: But the former is true, as the History teaches
us: Therefore must the latter needs be true also.

4 That which gives comfort unto a man in the time of his troubles, must have
a warrant out of Gods word: But every lawful calling gives comfort unto a
man in the time of his troubles: Therefore every lawful calling has a
warrant out of Gods word.

5 That which helps Gods people forward in godliness, must have a warrant out
of Gods word: for God has promised a blessing to his own ordinance only:
But every lawful calling in the Church, helps Gods people forward in
godliness: Therefore every lawful calling has a warrant out of Gods word.

Therefore if John did prove his calling out of the Scriptures, The conclusion.
if every calling under the law, was warranted out of the scriptures: if
Corath, etc. were punished for enterprising that which they had no warrant for
out of the scriptures: if comfort in troubles comes only from the
scriptures: and lastly, if every help to godliness is warranted in the
scriptures: then, etc.

They confess all these reasons to be true, but do deny that the Archbish.
lord Bish. etc. be distinct Ministers from others. Whitgift page 303. which
we hold T. C. 2. book page 438. and prove it thus.

1 Those things that have diverse efficient causes, are diverse: Our BB. and the
Ministers of the word have diverse efficient causes, for the one is the
ordinance of God, the other the constitution of humane policy, as themselves
do confess: Therefore they are distinct Ministers from others.

2 A diverse form makes diverse things: the Ministers of the word, and the Lord
Bishops have diverse forms: for their ordination (even in the Church of
England) is diverse, seeing one Lord Bishop may ordain a Minister: But there
must be three to ordain one of them: therefore they are distinct Ministers.

3 Members of one division are distinct one from another: the L. Bishops and
ordinary ministers be members of one division: for usually the Ministers be
divided into the rulers, and them that are to be ruled: therefore they are
distinct Ministers.

4 The things that have diverse effects, are diverse in them selves one from
another: the L.BB. and other Ministers have diverse effects, for the one
effects rule and government, the other subjection and obedience: Therefore
they are diverse and distinct Ministers.

5 They that be employed about diverse things are diverse one from another: The
L.BB. and the ordinary Ministers, be employed about diverse things, for the one
is exercised in general view of many congregations, and the other in the
particular direction of one: Therefore they be distinct Ministers.

6 That which is perpetual, and that which may be taken away by men, are
distinct one from another: The office of the Minister is perpetual, Ephesians. 4.
13. and the Bishops may be taken away as themselves do confess: Therefore they
are diverse, and distinct Ministers.

Therefore if the Ministers of the word, and Lord BB. proceed from diverse
causes: The conclusion.
if they have their being by diverse forms: if they be members of one division,
which (in nature) cannot be one: if they produce diverse effects: if they be
exercised about diverse subjects: Lastly, if the one be perpetual, and the
other but for a time, then must it needs follow, that they are diverse and
distinct Ministers one from another.

The name of an Archbishop, The 2. proposition and reasons for the proof of
it. That the name of archb may be given no man. 1. Pet. 5. 4. Heb. 13. 20.
Acts. 3. 15. 5. 31. Hebr. 12. 2.
and also the office that he executes, is contrary to the word of God.
First the reasons that prove it unlawful to give the name unto any man in the
church, are these.

1 No man may have the name given him, which is proper to our Savior Jesus
Christ: But the name of Archbishop is proper unto our Savior Jesus Christ,
as appears in the places quoted: therefore no man may have the name of Archb.
given unto him.

2 If the name of Pope be therefore odious, because of that Antichriste, who is
entitled therewith, then must also the name of Archbishop, when it is ascribed
unto any mortal man, for so much as it is the title of a special member of
that kingdom of Antichrist: But the former is true even by their own
confession. Whitgift page 300. Therefore must the latter be true also.

But they object diverse things against this, for the proouing of the name
Archb. Objections for the name of Archb. and answers thereunto. VVhitegift
page. 318.
to be lawfully given unto some men, which together with their answers do
briefly follow.

1 Objection. Clemens allows of those names, as Polydor reports, lib. 4.
cap. 12.

Answer. Polydor is but the reporter, and M. Jewel has proved evidently
against Harding, that Clemens is counterfeite, and worthy of no credit.

Objection. Erasmus says that Titus was an Archbishop.

Answer. He spoke as the times were wherein he lived: but that proves not
that he held him one in deed, no more then our naming of the Archbishop of
Canterbury, when we speak of him, proves that we like and allow his
authority.

3 Objection. Anacletus says that James was the first Archbishop of Jerusalem.

Answer. He is forged (as our answers to the Papists have showed) but a
witness of better credit calls him only a Bishop, Eusebius. lib. 2. cap. 23. and
Simon bishop after him, lib. 3. ca. 22. And Iraen. says lib. 4. ca. 63. that
the Apostles ordained Bishops every where, making no mention of Archbishop.

4 Objection. The Council of Nice Canon 6. mentions a Metropolitan Bishop.

Answer. That proves nothing, for it was only as much as to say, the Bishop
of the chief city.

Secondly the reasons that prove the office of the Archbishop unlawful be
these: That the office of an Archb. is unlawful.


1 Every Ministry that is lawful, must be of God: The office of the
Archbishop is not of God, for that he is not described in the word, and them
selves confess that he is of humane policy: Therefore the office of the
Archbishop is unlawful.

2 That Ministry whose original is unknown, has no warrant from Gods
word, and consequently is unlawful: The original of the Archb. is unknown
as they confess, Whitegift page 351. Therefore it is unlawful.

3 That office which is needles in the church is also unlawful to be
exercised in the same: The office of the Archbishop is needless, for the
Ministry is perfect without it, as the Apostle proves, Ephesians. 4. 13.
Therefore the office of an Archb. is unlawful.

4 If all the gifts needful for the prefecting of the church, be appropriated
unto other Ministeries, then is his Ministry unlawful: But all the needful
gifts are appropriated unto Pastors, Doctors, Elders and Deacons, whereof he
is none: Therefore his office is unlawful.

5 That office is unlawful, which none may lawfully give: But none may lawfully
bestow the office of an Archbishop, because none can give any new gifts to
adorn him withal: Therefore his office is unlawful.

This reason being used of all found divines against the Pope, is of the same
value against the Archbishop.

6 If the office of an Archbishop be lawefull, then it is either in respect of
his excellency above other men, or the place whereof he is above other places:
But neither of these have ever been, neither hereafter can be: Therefore that
office is unlawful.

Therefore if the office of the Archbishop be not of God: The conclusion.
if the original of it be unknown: if in the Church it be needless: if all
the gifts that God has bestowed upon his Ministry be appropriated unto
those Church officers, whereof he is none: if none may lawfully bestow such an
office upon any: if it can neither be incident unto any one man for his
excellency, nor his place for pre-eminence: then must it needs follow, that
his office is unlawful.

Calvin in his Institut. book 4. cap. 11. sect. 7. alleges diverse reasons
to this purpose, and Beza in his book of Diuorcements, stretches the same to
all the inferior officers under him, saying: Officials, Proctours, Promotours,
and all that swinish filth, now of long time has wasted the church. So does
Peter Martyr upon the Romans 13. speaking against civil Jurisdiction in
Bishops, does by the same reasons condemn it in their substitutes.

But this being the corner stone of their building, they labor to support it
with many props the most special whereof are these.

1 Objection. Cypran says, lib 1. Epist. ad Cornelium, Objections for the
office of the Archb. and answers thereunto.
Neither have heresies and schisms risen of any other occasion, then of that,
that the Priest of God is not obeyed, neither one Priest for the time, and one
Judge for the time in steed of Christ thought upon, to whom if the whole
brotherhood would be obedient according to Gods teaching, no man would move
any thing against the College of Priests.

Answer. This place is alleged for the Pope, and the answer that M. Jewel
and others make to it, serves our turn: only let this be noted, that Cyprian
speaks of the people at Rome, that had received another Bishop (besides
Cornelius) who was an heretic: for all the course of his writings, condemns
this superiority. It is expoounded by M. Jewel, book 1. sect. 4. division 5.
of every Bishop: and so is it by M. Nowel against Dorman, book 1. page 25. and
also by M. Fox, tom. 1. fol. 93. See T. C. in his 1. reply, page. 98. etc.

2 Objection. The authority of the Archbishop preserves unity.

Answer. Cyprian lib. 4. Epist. 9. says that unity is reserved by the
agreement of Bishops, that is of Ministers, one with another.

3 Objection. It compoundeth controversies, that else would grow to many heads
without any special remedy.

Answer. Cyprian lib. 1. Epist. 13. says that the plentiful body and
company of Elders, are (as it were) the glewe of mutual concord, that if any
of our company be author of heresy the rest should help.

4 Objection. Jerome upon Tit. 1. says, that in the beginning a Bishop and
Priest (meaning a teaching Elder) were all one: but when men began to say, I am
of Paul, I am of Apollo, etc. It was decreed that one should be chosen to
bear rule over the rest.

Answer. From the beginning it was not so: the saying of Tertul. contra Prax.
is fit for this: that is true whatsoever is first, and that is false whatsoever
is latter: and Jerome says in the place alleged, that this authority is by
custom and not by any institution of God, if it had been the best way to take
away divisions, the Apostles (in whose times the controversies did arise) would
have taken the same order.

5 Objection. Calvin says that the Apostles had one among them to govern the
rest.

Answer. That was not in superiority, but for order to propound the matters,
gather the voices and such like, which is meet to be in every well ordered
meeting: but his authority is no more over the rest, then the speaker in the
Parliament has over the other knights and Burgesses.

6 Objection. Paul was superior to Timothy and Titus.

Answer. Paul and they had diverse offices, whereof the Apostles office was the
chief, the like is to be said of Timothy and Titus, having superiority
over the other Ministers, for that they were Evangelists, a degree above
ordinary Ministers.

Therefore if the place alleged out of Cyprian, The conclusion.
make nothing for the Archb. if unity be not preserved by him, but by the
Bishops among themselves: if his authority make nothing to the taking away of
controversies: if it be merely invented by man, and not from the beginning:
if it be by custom, and not by any ordinance of God: if neither one Apostle
over the rest, nor any of them over the Evangelists, nor of the Evangelists
over the Pastors and Teachers, will serve to prove their authority: then must
it needs follow, that it is utterly unlawful.

No man may be ordained unto any office in the Church, until there be such a
place void as he is fit for, The 3. proposition and reasons for it.
T. C. book 1. page 61. Whitgift, page 222.

1 As was the 12. place for Matthias, so is a certain church, to every Church
officer: But Matthias was not ordained unto the place of an Apostle, Act. 1. 20.
until Judas by hanging himself had made it void, Act. 1. 20. Therefore may
none be ordained unto any office in the Church, before the place where he may
be employed, be destitute of such a one.

2 As the Apostles did in planting of the churches, so must it be done in the
building thereof for ever: But they ordained neither Pastor, Teacher, Elder,
or Deacon, butto some certain church that had need thereof: Therefore may none
be ordained unto any office, until a place be void that has need of him.

3 Those things that be of one beginning, continuance, and ending, cannot be
one, before or after another: But a Minister, and the execution of his
Ministry in a lawful standing be so, for they be relatiues, and have
reference one unto the other: Therefore a Minister ought not to be ordained
before there be a Ministry whereunto he is to be allotted.

4 If none ought to be called to be a shepherd, that has no flock of sheep
to keep: neither any watchman, that is not allotted to some place to watch:
then may none be ordained to any office, before there be a place void for him:
for Ministers are in this sense termed shepherds and watchmen: But the former
is true, as every simple man can easily perceive: Therefore the latter is true
also.

5 To do contrary to the precepts and practice of the Apostles is unlawful:
But to ordain any officer, without a certain place wherein he may be
employed, is contrary to the precepts and practice of the Apostles, as it
appears, Tit. 1. 5. Act. 14. 23. Therefore to ordain any officer of the
church without a certain place whereunto he is to be allotted, is unlawful.

6 It was ordained that no Elder, Council Calced. ca. 6. art. 15.
Deacon, or any other Ecclesiastical officer, should be ordained a
Apolelymenos, that is loosely, or let at randone (but as afterward is
expounded) specially in a Church, city or town.

7 The ordination that is made without a title, Council Vrbanum test. Great. di.
70.
let it be void: and in what Church one is entitled, let him there remain.

8 He complains that Ministers were ordained, being chosen by no church,
and so went here and there, Ierom ad Nepotian.
having no certain place.

9 That action, which never is read to be practiced, but by idolators is
unlawful: To have wandering officers, is only found to be in idolaters, as
appears Judge 17. 8. Therefore it is unlawful.

Therefore, If the Apostles ordained not Matthias, The conclusion.
until the place was void: if in planting of Churches, they ever allotted
officers to their proper places, if Minister and Ministry be of one
beginning, continuance and ending: if it be with a Minister and his
ministry, as with a shephearde and his flock, that he cannot be the one,
but in respect of having the other: if it be lawful to transgress the
precepts and practice of the Apostles: if no Minister in the church be
ordained at randone: if the ordination that is without a title be void: if
Jerome complained of it, as a great fault in his time: if no example be found
of it, but in Idolaters: then it must needs follow, that to ordain any
Church Officer, until there be such a place void as he is fit for, is utterly
unlawful: and so the Bb. making of many Ministers at once, and licencing of
wandering Preachers, is contrary to the word of God.

They will have something to say for every action they do be it never so
shameful: that which they alleagde for this, is, that Paul and Barnabas did
wander.

The Apostles office (and so the Evangelists as assistants unto them) was to
preach the word, and plant Churches in every part of the world: but the order
that they left, is a president for us, which is that every Church have their
proper officers, and that there be no other else where to be found.

CHAP. 3.
Every church officer, Our assertion.
ought to execute the office committed unto him, with all faithful diligence,
and consequently be continually resident upon his charge, T. C. book 1.
page 65.

The deny not the proposition, Their assertion.
but the consequent that is inferted upon it, as appears by their writings,
Whitgift page 246. and by their daily practice in giving dispensations for
many benefices. The reasons we allege to prove the necessity of perpetual
residence, and the unlawfulness of nonresidence be these that follow.

1 A shepherd has a flock to the end to feed it continually: The Minister
is a shepherd, and his charge a flock: Therefore he ought to feed it
continually, and consequently to be perpetually resident, for how can he feed
them from whom he is absent.

2 Where God does place any man, there his continual travail is needful, for
God is most wise in disposing every thing: But God places every right
Minister over that people which is his charge: Therefore his continual
travail is needful there, and consequently he may not discontinue.

3 Flocks that are in danger, are (by careful shepherds) watched night and
day, Luke 2. 8. Every congregation is a flock in danger, for the enemy goes
about like a roaring lion, 1. Pet. 5. 8. and sows tares whilst men sleep.
Matthew. 13. 25. Therefore every congregation is to be watched night and day by
the Minister thereof, and consequently he may not be nonresident.

4 If his duty to them requires so much travail, as may continually set
him on work, then may he not be nonresident: But it is evident (that it does
so) to all them that either know by the word of God, what study, prayer,
doctrine exhortation, etc. be required of him, or makes any conscience of
giving account for the souls committed to their charge: Therefore may not they
be nonresident.

5 If the Minister cannot apply himself fruitfully, to the capacity of his
people, unless he have particular knowledge of their disposition, and
capacity, then is it not lawful for him to be nonresident: for by continual
residence among them, he may know them and not else: But the former is true, as
the small knowledge that the people get by general teaching, does evidently
declare: Therefore it is not lawful for him to be nonresident.

6 If the Ministers of the Gospel, be as narrowly tied to their charges, as
the Priests under the law, then may they not be nonresident: For they were
always ready in the Temple, to answer the doubts, 1. Sam. 1. 9. But it is
clear that they are, because men are now as hardly trained unto godliness,
and the enemy is as wrathful as he was then: Therefore they may not be
nonresident.

7 If the Minister must be an example to his people, then must he be daily
present with them, that they may behold him: But the former is true, 1. Tim.
4. 12. Therefore is the latter true also.

8 He whom the sheep are to follow in and out, and must know by the voice,
ought to be continually among them: A good Minister of the word is such a
one, Ioh. 10. 4. Therefore he must be resident among them.

9 None can be always ready to feed his flock, that is absent from it:
Every Minister must be always ready to feed his flock, because it depends
upon him, 1. Pet. 5. 2. Therefore every Minister is to be resident with his
flock.

10 He that must take heed to his flock, watch over it, and feed it, must
be resident continually with it: Every Minister must do so, Acts 20. 28.
Therefore, etc.

11 If Satan be the cause of nonresidence, then is it utterly unlawful: But
Satan is the cause of it, 1. These. 2. 17. 18. Therefore it is utterly unlawful.

12 That which abridgeth the love of God to his people, and comfort to the
Minister, that same is unlawful: But not to be resident does both: Therefore
it is unlawful.

13 That which hinders the loving familiarity that should be betwixt the
Minister and his people, that same is unlawful: But nonresidence does so, for
it makes them strange one to another, and argues small love in him toward
them: Therefore it is unlawful.

14 To be absent from them that have interest in us, and continual need of us,
is unlawful, which we can see to be true in our servants, etc. But the
congregation has an interest in the Minister, and continual need of him:
Therefore it is unlawful for him to be absent from them.

15 If the Priests might not dwell far from the Temple, then may not
Ministers be nonresident: But the former is true, as appears by this, that
they had houses builded close to the Temple, 1. Chron. 28. 13. Therefore the
latter is true also, seeing the residence of the one is as needful as the
other, as appears in the sixth reason.

16 Let no Clarke be placed in two charges, Council Ni. canon 15.
for it is filthy merchandise, and no man can serve two masters, and every
one must tarry in that place whereunto he is called.

17 Damasus compares them that set over their charges to others, Conc. to. 2.
to harlottes that put out their children, that they may give them selves to
lust the sooner.

18 It was ordained that none, Theod. lib. 1. cap. 19.
either B or Elder, should go from city to city.

Therefore, if a Minister have the charge of a flock committed unto him, The
conclusion.
to the end to feed it: if God place men, to the end to have them there
employed: if flocks in danger have need of continual watch: if the
Ministers duty to his flock requires all that travail that he can
perform: if he can not be fruitfullie profitable unto them, without continual
residence: if his residence be as strictly required as theirs under the law:
if he cannot be a pattern unto them without he be resident: if they can not
follow him, nor know him if he be absent: if he cannot be always ready to
feed his flock, unless he be there: if he cannot take heed to them, feed
them, and watch over them, without his presence: if Satan be the author of
nonresidencie: if his absence abridge Gods love to them, and comfort from him
self: if absence be an hinderance to the loving familiarity that should be
betwixt him and them: if they have interest in him, and continual need of
him: if he may no more be absent, then the priests dwell from the Temple: if
the Council of Nice did upon good grounds forbid it: if absence be like to
the practice of an harlot: if it be not lawful to go from place to place,
then is nonresidence unlawful, and the practice thereof contrary to the word
of God.

The belly (for which nonresidencie is defended and practiced) has no ears,
therefore it is that they hear not these evident soundes, yet have they very
little to say for it, so gross is the error thereof: so much as has any show
of reason, is here set down and answered.

1 Objection. Two parishes may be united, why then may not one have charge of
them both before, when they be two.

Answer. Because one shephearde may keep one flock though it be great, but
he can not keep two, being very little, and going in diverse pastures, again,
one man may have so many flocks as he can lead in and out every Sabbath, to
the exercises of religion, which is very plain that he cannot do, to more
then one Congregation.

2 Objection Parishes were divided by men, as especially by Denis the Monk,
Pope of Rome.

Answer. That is untrue, for the Apostles divided the Church into
Congregations, and placed Elders over every one of them, as the whole course
of the Acts and Epistles of the Apostles proves: and Whitgift confesses
page 250. Therefore these mistes, notwithstanding nonresidencie, must needs be
unlawful: and certainly those that have any sparkle of conscience, fear of
God, or love to their flocks, will never defend it, much less enter into the
practice of it.

CHAP. 4.
IT belongs to the Church, Our assertion.
to make choice of those officers which Christ would have placed in the same:
T. C. 2. book 1. part. page 193. Ecclesiast. Discip. fo. 40. and Whitgift
confesses it page 164.

They deny this, as their denying of all the arguments that be brought for it
does prove, Whitgift page 154. 166. etc. and their practice of allowinge
patrons, and also being such them selves does evidently declare.

If the former be proved true, then the latter must return to Antichrist,
which is thus declared.

1 That which was the continual and constant practice of the Church in the
time of the Apostles, that same is to be followed for ever, which appears by
this, that the ordinances given from God by Paul. 1. Tim. 6. 14. are enjoined
to be kept until Christ come to judgment: But it was the constant and the
continual practice of the Churches, them to have a stroke in the choice of
their own ecclesiastical officers, Act. 1. and 26. where the Apostles
presented two, to the peoples liking: whereof God was to be prayed unto, to
make one an Apostle, Act. 6. 3. where the Church is willed to choose their
Deacons, and Act. 14. 25. where they gave their consent in the choosing of
their Elders, by the stretching forth of their hands: Therefore it belongs
to the church to thoose their own Church Officers.

2 If the people had an interest in their liking of their teaching Levites,
Number. 8. 9.
(which were of the tribe of Aaron) then much more must the people now, for
there was greater likelihood, that they were sent of God, then any of the
common sort of men: But the former is true, as appears by the manner of the
setting of them aside unto that office in the law: Therefore must the latter
needs be true also.

3 That which partayneth unto all, ought to be approved of all the
Congregation: But every Ministry in the Church pertayneth to all the
congregation: Therefore, authority to approve of them, pertayneth to all the
congregation.

4 That election which is most effectual to bring the people to obedience, is
of all other the best, and to abridge it, is unlawful: But election by common
consent, is most effectual to bring the people to obedience, when they shall
see him teach or rule, whom they them selves have chosen: Therefore election
by the Church, is the best, and all other kinds of elections unlawful.

5 That election which procures greatest reverence of the people to their
Teachers and Rulers is meetest, and all others unlawful: But for the people to
consent in the election of their Gouuernours, procures greatest reverence, in
their hearts toward them: Therefore election by the people is the best, and
all others be unlawful.

Testimonies of the ancient writers.
6 The Minister should be chosen (the people being present) in the eyes of
all, Cyprian book 1. epist. 3.
and should be by the common judgment and testimony approved worthy and
fit, etc. Therefore this is the lawful vocation by the word of God, where
those which are chosen, be appointed by the consent and approbation of the
people. For which also, he brings diverse authorities out of the Scriptures.

7 That is truly and certainly a divine election of a Bishop, Ambrose epist
82. Jerome ad Ruffinum.
which is made by the whole Church.

8 Let the people have authority to choose their Clerks and Ministers.

9 They run (speaking of the life of the Clerks) to Bishops suffragans
certain times of the year, Ad Nepotianum.
and bringinge some sum of money, This is right our English fashion.
they are anointed and ordained, being chosen of none, and afterward the
Bishop without any lawful election, is chosen in huggermuger of the Canons,
or Prebendaries only, without the knowledge of the people.

10 In the Oration of the death of his Father, Nazianze.
approves the election by the people, at large, and confuteth them that would
hinder it.

11 When he appointed Eradius to succeed him, Augustine.
says, it was the approved right and custom, that the whole church should
either choose or consent unto their Bishop.

12 Antimius choosing a Bishop without the peoples consent, Basil. epi. 58
filled all Armenia with sedition.

13 Why did Peter communicate the election with the Disciples? least the matter
should have turned to a braule, Chrisost. in Act. 1.
and have fallen to a contention.

Testimonies of the general Councels.
14 It is meet that you should have power, Council. Ni. test Theo.
both to choose and to give their names that are worthy to be among the
Clergy, and to do all things absolutely according to the laws and decrees
of the Church, and if it happen any to dye in the Church, then those which were
last taken, are to be promoted, to the honor of him that is dead, if they be
worthy, and if the people choose them.

15 Let the people choose, and the Bishop approve, and seal up the election
with them. The same Conc test. hist. tripart. lib. 2.


16 In an Epistle to Damasus, Conc. constan. test. tri par. hist. lib. 9. cap.
14.
Ambrose, etc. says, We have ordained Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople,
etc. the whole city decreeing the same: and Fl^uianus was appointed Bishop of
Antioch, the whole city appointing him.

17 When he has bin examined in all these, Council. car. tag. can. 1.
and found fully instructed, then let him be ordained Bishop, by the common
consent of the Clearkes and lay people.

18 Let not him be counted a priest in the Church, Conci. Toletan. test. did.
51.
whom the Clergy, and people of that City, where he is, do not choose.

19 If any Bishop after the death of his predecessor, Council. Gabil. can. 10.
be chosen of any, but of the Bishops of the same province, and of the Clergy
and Citizens, let another be chosen: and if it be otherwise, let the
ordination be void and of none effect.

Testimonies out of the Emperors laws.
20 Following the doctrine of the holy Apostles, Iusti. in co.
etc. we ordain, that as often as it shall fall out, that the Ministers place
shall be void in any city, that voices be given of the inhabiters of that
city, that he (of three which for their right faith, holiness of life, and
other things, are most approved) be chosen to the Bishopric which is most
meet of them.

21 Being not ignorant of the holy canons: that the holy Church should use her
honor the more freely, Carol. magnus did. 63. sacroru^ canonum.
we assent unto the ecclesiastical order, that the Bishops be chosen, by the
election of the Clergy and people.

22 He decreed, that he should be Bishop of Rome, Lodouicus Caro. filius
whom all the people of Rome should consent to choose.

23 Lodouicke the second, Platina in vita Adriani secundi.
commanded by his letters, the Romans to choose their own Bishop, not
looking for other men's voices, which (being strangers) could not so well tell
what was done in the common wealth, where they were strangers, and that it
appartayned to the citizens.

24 Let the people (says Otho the Emperor) choose, and I will approve it.

The testimonies of the new writers.
25 The new writers, as Musculus, in his common places, in the title of
Magistrates: Bullinger upon 1. Tim. 4. Calvin Institut. book 4. chap. 3. sect.
15. Harmon. confess. Heluet. chap. 18. and many others are on our side in this
behalf.

26 If there be none that write against it, but the papists, and no arguments
used against it, but those which be borrowed out of the popish writers: then
does it belong to the Church, to choose their own Church Officers: But the
former is true, as all that do read them, that write of this argument do
know, and as is manifest, by comparing Pighius, Hosius, etc. with Whitgift:
Therefore the latter is true also.

Therefore seeing the interest of the Church in choosing of their
Church Officers, The conclusion. T. C. second book, 1. part. pa. 212.
is grounded upon the word of God, both in commandment, and continual
practice, both in the old and new Testament, seeing it is warranted by the
light of common reason, seeinge it is commended unto us by the manifold
practice of all ancient times, so long as any sincerity remained, not only
in the time of persecution, but also of peace: seeing it has bin confirmed by
so many general Counsels, and ratified by the decrees of so many Emperors:
seeing it has such a cloud of witnesses, both of ancient and latter times, of
the best approved writers: seeing none do set them selves against it, but the
papists, or they that invade it only with the same weapons that are fetched
out of the popes armorie: it must needs follow, that it belongs unto the
Church to choose their Church Officers: and that the taking away of this
freedom, abridgeth the liberty that Christ has endowed his Church withal,
and brings her into great bondage, as Musculus truly affirms.

Their objections against those things, are these:
1 Objection. They were then under the cross, few in number, and therefore it
was easily known who were fit.

Answer. The Gospel was dispersed through out all Asia, Africa, and much of
Europe, and they could less keep together, or meet, and therefore that makes
rather for us.

2 Objection. We have many hypocrites, to whom it were dangerous to committ
such weighty actions.

Answer. It is true, that we have many: but it is a principle in hypocrisy,
to be forwardest in such public actions, that they may get fame thereby.

3 Objection. They had knowledge to do it, but our people be ignoranted.

Answer. We should also find our people to have knowledge, if they had
teaching: but howsoever they choose, they can not have worse then ordinarily
are chosen by the Bishops and patrons.

4 Objection. The Church was not then established.

Answer. That is untrue, for though it wanted the help of Magistrates, yet
the Apostles could and did better establish without them, then we can with the
help of them: but if this order might be altered, it had been fitter then, for
now the Magistracy may compounde the differences of the Elders, which help
then they lacked.

5 Objection. Drunkards, papists, etc. will choose them that be like them
selves, and we know the best disposed be always the fewest.

Answer. Such are not of the Church, but without, 1. Cor. 5. 12. and
therefore are not to meddle in any holy action: but if the people should choose
an unmeet man, the eldershippe that governs the action, is to reform them:
besides this, if Gods order had her place, the schools of the prophets would
send them none, (for the ministers especially) to make choice of, but meet
men, that whomsoever they took, he should be found sufficient.

6 Objection. Paul commands 1. Timo. 5. 22. to lay his hands on no man
rashly: therefore one did it.

Answer. He teaches what to do for his part, and though others would be
rash, yet he should not join with them in it, as appears in the latter end
of that same verse, for that is asscribed unto him, which also belonged unto
others, because he was the director: Calvin and Musculus expound the place so.

7 Objection. The Council of Laodicea, decreed, that the people should not
elect.

Answer. That is, as Calvin takes it upon Acts 16. they might not elect
alone, without the direction of some grave and good minister, which should be
the manner in the elections, that (according to Gods word) we desire.

CHAP. 5.
NOne is to be admitted unto any public office in the Church, until he be
thoroughly examined by the Eldership, both concerning his state of Christianity,
and ability to that place whereto he is to be called, T. C. 1. book, page 38.
Disci. Ecclesiast. fol. 46. They think one may do it, as appears by the
book of ordering, etc. Whitgift page 134. and 135. and their slight passing it
over, through the Archdeacons hands.

The former is proved, and the latter disprooued thus:
1 Those that are to ordain, must have particular knowledge of the parties to
be ordained, (or else they break the rule prescribed them, 1. Tim. 5. 22.)
which cannot be without examination: But the Eldershippe is to ordain every
Church Officer, as shall appear in the Chap. of Ordination: Therefore it
belongs to the Eldership to examine, etc.

2 The matter of greatest importance in the government of the Church, must be
done by the most able gouuernours of the same: The approving or disprouing of
Church Officers, is the matter of greatest importance, because the consequence
of ruling well is the best, or ill the worst: and the Eldership is the Senate
of most able governors in the church, as shall appear in the chap. of
Eldership: Therefore the Eldership is to examine, etc.

3 The way whereby a man's insufficiency is best espied, and his ability
discerned, is the fittest to examine them that are to be admitted: But by the
Eldership (consisting of diverse) his insufficiency is best espied, and his
ability best discerned, for the common proverb tells us, That many eyes do
see more then one: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership. etc.

4 They are to examine Church Officers, that are least subject to be blinded
with partiality: But the Eldershipp is least subject to partiality, both for
that they be many, who are not so easily ouer-ruled by affection or favor, as
one, as also (and that especially) for that it being the Lords own ordinance
(as shall appear) we are to persuade our selves, that his spirit shall guide
them: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

5 The way that was used in the Apostles time in examining, is of us to be
followed, unless some reason out of the word to persuade the conscience, can be
alleged to the contrary, which none have ever yet done: But many used in the
Apostles time to examine, as appears in choosinge out one to be in the place
of Judas, Act. 1. 22. 23. and fit men for Deacons, Acts. 6. 5. whereof the
gouuernours especially were some, for that they were to ordain upon knowledge,
as is said in the first reason: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

6 They whose testimony the people may best credit, are to examine them that
are to be admitted: but the people may best credit the judgment of a company
of able and sufficient men, which the Eldershippe rightly established, must
needs be: Therefore it belongs to the Eldership, etc.

7 Examination belongs unto them which may most persuade the people of his
sufficiency, and so procure greatest reverence unto him in his place: But the
examination by the Eldership is such: Therefore it belongs to the
Eldershippe, etc.

Therefore if they that are to ordain, must examine: if it be a matter of
greatest weight in the gouuernement of the Church, and they the most able to
dispatch it: if by them his sufficiency or insufficiency be best found out:
if they be hardliest carried away with affection or partiality: if the
examination was such in the Apostles time: if the people may (in reason) give
most credit to the examination that is by such: if that kind of examination
persuade the people best of his sufficiency, and procure him greatest
reverence in his place: then must it needs follow, that it partayneth to the
Eldership to examine those that are to be admitted to any office in the Church.

There is nothing objected against this, that has any show of reason in it,
and therefore it were needles to set any thing down.

CHAP. 6
BEfore consent be given to any man unto any calling in the Church, it must
appear (by sufficient trial, and due examination) that he is qualified with
those gifts, that the word of God requires in one of that place, Discip.
Ecclesiast. fol. 44. T. C. 2. book, 1. part, page 368. and in many other
places.

They gainsay this in two points: first, in maintayning their reading
ministry: secondly, in gouerninge the Church, by their commissaries and
officialls: which both shall be overthrown, if we prove these two propositions
followinge, to be true by the word of God.

No man ought to be received unto the ministry, The 1. proposition.
but such as be able to teach the truth and convince the gainesayers.

The Church ought not to be governed by commissaries, The 2. proposition.
officialls and chauncellors.

1 He that may be received into the ministry, The 1. proposition is thus
proved.
must be able to teach the people, whatsoever Christ has commanded, Matthew.
28. 20. Only he that is able to teach the truth, and convince the
gainsayers, can teach the people whatsoever Christ has commanded: Therefore
none must be received into the the ministry, but such as be able to teach,
etc.

2 That which is to be done conditionally, may not be done, if that condition
be not kept: Men are to be received into the ministry conditionally, that
is, if they be unreprovable, Tit. 1. 5. 6. Therefore if they be not such as
be there described, they may not be received: and consequently, none may be
received, but such as be able to teach, etc.

3 That which cannot be done without the manifest breach of Gods commandment,
may not be done at all: To receive any that be not able to teach, is a
manifest breach of Gods commandment, 1. Tim. 3. 1. Tit. 1. 9. Therefore no
man ought to be received into the ministry, that is not able to teach, etc.

4 They whom the Lord refuses to be his ministers, may not be received into
the ministry: for the ministry being the Lords harvest, we may admit
none to labor therein, but only such, as he has given liking of, by the
rules of his word: The Lord refuses to be his ministers, all those that can
not teach, Hosea 4. 6. Therefore such as are not able to teach, may not be
received, and consequently none may be received, but those that be able to
teach, etc.

5 He that may be admitted into the ministry, must be able to divide the
word of God aright, 2. Tim. 2. 15. Only he that is able to teach and
convince the gainsayers, can divide the word of God aright: Therefore none may
be admitted into the ministry, but he that is able to teach, etc.

6 He that may be admitted into the ministry, must have a treasury,
furnished with old things and new, and must be able to bring it forth as
occasion shall serve, Mat. 13. 25. Only he that is able to teach, etc. is
such a one: Therefore only he may be admitted, etc.

7 He that can epsy the enemy, and give warning aforehande how to resist
him, may be received into the ministry, Ezekiel. 33. 7. None can espy the
enemy, and give warning aforehande how to resist him, but he that is able to
teach, etc. Therefore none may be admitted into the ministry, but he that is
able to teach. etc.

8 He that leads him self, and his people into hell, may not be admitted
into the ministry: He that is not able to teach and convince the gainsayer,
leads him self and his people into hell, Mat. 15. 14. Therefore he that is
not able to teach, etc. may not be admitted into the ministry.

9 He that preaches not, August. lib. de past.
but holds his peace, murdereth

10 He that preaches not, Gregor. 1. epist. 33.
is not sent, and so he begets no faith in man.

11 In that S. Paul requires that a Bishop should be wise, he barreth
those, that under the name of simplicity, Jerome ad Oecumen.
excuse the folly of ministers.

12 We condemn all unmeet Ministers, Confess. Heluet.
not endued with gifts necessary for a shephearde that should feed his
flock. Therefore, if a Minister must teach unto his people all that Christ
has commanded, if none may be made ministers, but conditionally, if they be
qualified with gifts meet for the same, if unpreaching Ministers can not be
made without the manifest breach of the commandment of God: if they may not
be made ministers, whom the Lord refuses to have: if every minister must have
a treasury well furnished, and be able to bring forth of it when need
requires: if every minister must have skill to see the enemy, and to give
warning aforehande how to resist him: if unlearned ministers draw their
people to hell after them: if he that preaches not, be a murderer: if he be
not sent, and so do no good: if he be barred from the ministry: lastly, if
he be condemned, as not to be in such a place: then must it needs follow,
that none many be received into the ministry, but such as be able to teach
the truth, and to convince the gainsayer.

Many are the arguments that be alleged to this purpose, and many more may be
alleged, (for the whole course of the scriptures tend thereunto) the
testimony of all sorts of writers, is very plentiful for this purpose: yea
of the very Canon law, (as the author of the Abstract has learnedlie
proved) and yet do not our Prelates rest in the same, but have set them
selves (though in a silly manner) against it, in this sort that follows.

1 Objection. There must be reading in the Church, therefore a reading
ministry, Whitgift page 252.

Answer. By that reason we must have an officer for every particular action,
for there must be breaking of bread in the Church, and pouring of water: but it
follows not, that therefore there must be one, whose office must be only to
break bread, or to power water.

2 Objection. It is better to have readers then none, for preachers can not be
had for every congregation.

Answer. It is not better, for if they had none, they would seek for him that
they should have: whereas now, they that have a reader only, think them selves
in case good inought; but if there be such want of preachers, why are so many
of the most diligent and able ones turned out?

3 Objection. It is impossible to have Preachers eueriewhere, and such as can
be had, must be taken.

Answer. Sometimes you say all is well: and is it now impossible that our
state should obey the Lords ordinances: this is the greatest disgrace to it
that can be: and yet it follows not, for no necessity may warrant us, to
violate the decrees of the highest.

4 Objection. It were uncharitableness to turn them out that be bare readers,
for so they, their wives and children might beg.

Answer. This is to sell men's souls for morsels of bread: shall we rather
fear the begging of three or four, then the damnation of 1000. but they may
be otherwise provided for: they need not beg, many of them may return to
their occupations again.

So that all these objections notwithstanding, the conclusion remains sure,
which is grounded upon so many certain and immovable foundations.

The Church ought not to be governed by Commissaries, and Officialls, and
Chauncellors.
1 They which are no Elders of the Church, The 2. proposition is thus proved.
have nothing to do in the government of the same, 1. Tim. 5. 17. These
Chauncellours, Commissaries and officialls, are no Elders in the Church:
whether we expound Elder for a minister, and him also, that is assistant unto
the minister in ouerseeing the Church, or for a minister only as they do: for
none of them be ministers, and if they be, they do not rule in this respect,
that they are ministers: Therefore the Church ought not to be governed by them.

2 They that must govern the Church of God, must have a warraunt for their so
doing, from Jesus Christ the head of the Church: But Chauncellors, etc. have no
warraunt so to do, from Jesus Christ the head of the Church: Therefore the
Church ought not to be governed by them.

3 Those whose names, office, and practice, be derived from Antichrist, may
have nothing to do in the gouuernement of the Church: for who will suffer his
wife to be gouuerned by the master of a brothelhouse: But the names, offices,
and practice of Chauncellours, officialles, and commissaries be such, which is
plain by this, that they have their ground in that filthy dunghill the
Cannon law: Therefore they may have nothing to do in the government of the
Church.

4 They that being inferiors, do proudly tyrannize over their superiors,
ought not to rule the Church of God, for it is meet it should be ruled by
modest, humble and orderly men: But such are they (for being inferiors to the
ministers of the word, as our adversaries do confess, and is plain also by
the cannon law, they crow over them as if they were their slaves:) and if
they do not so, they can do nothing: Therefore they ought not to rule the
Church of God.

5 They that live by the faults of men, are not fit to rule the Church of
God: for they will rather increase offenses, (that their gain may increase)
then orderly lessen them, as experience (also) proves: But such are all
Chauncellours, commissaries and officialls: Therefore they ought not to rule
the Church of God.

Therefore, if Chauncellours, commissaries, and officialls be no Elders of the
Church: if they have no warraunt from Jesus Christ, the head of the Church: if
their names, offices, and practice, be derived from Antichrist: if their office
compel them (being inferiors) to tyrannize over their superiors: if they
live only by the faults and offenses of men: then it must needs follow,
that the Church of God ought not to be governed by them.

CHAP. 7.
Every officer of the Church must be ordained by the laying on of the hands
of the Eldershippe, T. C. 2. book, 1. part page 274. Discip. Eccle. fol. 53.

They say it ought to be done by the Bishop alone, Whitg. page 196. their daily
practice does likewise show it.

The former is proved, and the latter disprooued by these reasons following.

1 As Churchofficers were ordained in the Apostles time, so must they be
continually, for they did lay the plot, according whereunto the Church must be
built unto the end: but they were ordained in the Apostles time by the layinge
on of the hands of the Eldershippe, Acts 6. 6. and 13. 3. Therefore the
Church Officers must be ordained by layinge on of the hands of the Eldership.

2 Church Officers must be ordained by them that have warrant from the word,
to assure the parties ordained, that they are called of God: Only the
Eldershippe has such a warraunt, 1. Tim. 4. 14. Therefore they ought to be
ordained by the Eldership.

3 Many of the sentences alleged before, out of Counsels, Emperors, laws,
histories, and sound writers, both old and new, for election not to be by
one, but by diverse: speak also of ordination, and so are forcible to this
purpose.

4 Euagrius came to the office of a Bishop unlawfully, Theodoret. book 5.
ca. 23.
because only Paulinus ordained him, contrary to the tenure of many Cannons,
which provide, that they should not be ordained, but by all the Bishops of
the province, or (at the least) by three.

5 When a Bishop is to be ordained, etc. one Bishop shall pronounce the
blessing, 4. Council. Carthag. cap. 23.
and the rest of the Bishops with the Elders present, shall all lay on their
hands.

6 When a Bishop was to be ordained, Cyprian li. 1. epist. 4.
the Bishops adjoining, did ordain him.

Therefore if Church Officers were ordained in the Apostles time, The
conclusion.
not by one, but by the Eldershippe, consistinge of many: if they be to
ordain, that have warraunt out of the word, to assure the parties ordained,
that they are called of God: if ordination by one Bishop be unlawful and
contrary to many canons of Counsels: if the Bishops and Elders were to lay
on their hands: lastly, if the Bishops adjoining were to ordain: then must it
needs follow, that Church Officers are not to be ordained by one man, but by
the laying on of the hands of the Eldership.

But they fight hard against this, because it strikes at a maine pillar of
their kingdom, their chief grounds be these:

1 Objection. Paul and Barnabas ordained Elders, where is no mention of any
Eldership.

Answer. They are said to ordain, because they being the chief, procured
it: so is Joshua 5. 3. said to circumcise, which was the Levites office, so
say we, The Queen has made a law, and yet not she alone makes any.

2 Objection. Though it were so then, yet is it not so required now, no more
then the co^munitie in the Apostles time.

Answer. There was no more community then (for they that think otherwise,
are in that point Anabaptists) then is to be required now, so that instance
makes for us.

3 Objection. Examples are no general rules to be followed.

Answer. Examples not contrarying any rule, or reason of the Scripture, be to
be followed, as if they were commandments, so that notwithstanding any
thing alleged to the contrary, it remains upon the former grounds most
steadfast, that it belongs to the Eldership to ordain those church officers
that are to be employed in the public service of god.

CHAP. 8.
THE ordayning of Church Officers must be done with humble prayer of the
Eldership, and the congregation, Discipl. Ecclesiast. fol. 50.

Their vnreuerent beginning and proceeding therewith in a corner, is contrary
to this: which is condemned by the proof of our assertion, by these reasons.

1 We are to behave our selves in these actions, as they by whom we have
direction to do them, have set us an example: But the Apostles and Elders,
when they ordained church officers, did always commend the action to God by
prayer, together with those congregations, over which they placed them, Acts
6. 6. and 14. 23. Therefore the ordayninge of Church Officers must be done by
humble prayer of the Eldership, and congregation.

2 The greater the action is that is in hand, the more careful must they be
that have it in hand, to humble them selves by prayer, for the Lords
assistance therein: but the ordayning of Church Officers, is an action of most
weighty importance: Therefore they that have it in hand (which be the
Eldershipp to ordain him, and congregation to receive him) ought to humble
them selves in earnest prayer before hand.

3 They that shall have part in the comfort or discomfort of the action, are to
join together in prayer unto GOD for the better event, and against the worse:
But the Eldershippe and people, shall both have part in the event of the
action: Therefore they are to join together in humble prayer before hand, etc.

CHAP. 9.
Church Officers must be ordained by layinge on of hands: in this they agree
with us, concerning the ceremony it self, albeit neither in the parties by
who^, nor on whom it must be conferred. The profit of this ceremony appears
in the reasons following.

1 That which stirs up every party, to pray with more feruencie, is
profitable to be used: But such is this ceremony, for it affects the
ordeyners, when they feel him for whom they pray: and the ordained when he
feels a calling and charge from God (as it were) sensibly coming upon him,
and the congregation, when they see him separated from the rest, by whom they
shall reap much comfort or grief: Therefore the use of it is very profitable.

2 That which helps forward the party ordained in his care, to walk with a
good conscience in his calling, is profitable to be used: Such is the
imposition of hands, for both it declares unto him, that he is separated of
God for that purpose, and also gives him hope, that his hand, who allotted
him thereunto, will always assist him in the course of that calling: Therefore
it is of a profitable use.

3 That which works a more acknowledgment of Gods ordinance in the hearts of
the people, is profitable to be used: Such is the layinge on of hands, for it
declares unto them, that the Lord has placed him in that calling over them:
Therefore it is profitable to be used.

Therefore seeing the ceremony of the laying on hands, The conclusion.
is forcible, to increase the feruencie of every party, when they pray: seeing
it assures the calling to the party ordained, and gives him an argument of
good hope, for the blessing of God upon him in the course of the same: and
seeinge it procures a more persuasion in the people, that he is allotted unto
them from the Lord him self: it is evident, that it is not a vain and idle
ceremony (as many do imagine) but of good and profitable use, in all
ordinations.

CHAP. 10.
THe Lord has ordained that there should be one Bishopp or Pastor (at the
least) president over every congregation, who are of equal authority in their
several charges, and in the general government of the Church, T. C. 1. book,
page 22. and 2. book, 1. part, page 515.

They mainteyne contrary unto this, these two.

1 That one may have two or more charges, Reasons against the 1. propofit.
and be absent from them, as their dispensations and practice do prove.

2 That one minister may have a Soueraingtie and Lordship over his fellow
ministers, which both being disprooued, the former assertion will remain
still sure.

1 One man may not have more charges then he is able in any measure to
discharge: No man is able in any measure, to discharge the duty that is
belonging unto more flocks then one, seeing he can not preach unto them, both
in season and out of season: Therefore no man may have more charges then one.

2 That which makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil, can not be
lawful: for one to have more charges then one, makes an open entrance for the
enemy to spoil, for the wolffe watches to devour, whilst the shepherd is
absent: Therefore no man may have more charges then one.

3 That which has neither precepte, nor president for it, either in Gods
word, or any approved writer, but only from Antichrist, is unlawful: But
such is the having of more charges then one: Therefore it is unlawful.

4 That which declares a minister to be more desirous of the fleece, then to
profit the flock, that same is unlawful: But such is the having of mo
charges then one, for were it not for the gain, they would think one a burden
as heavy as they could bear: Therefore it is unlawful.

5 All the reasons that be alleged in the third chapter, against
nonresidence, are forcible to this purpose, for if he may not be nonresident,
he may not have mo charges, unless he be willing to be quartered, that every
charge may have a piece of him.

He reckons them among thieves, and their action to be theeuerie, Hooper upon
the 8. commandment.
condemned by that commandment.

Therefore, if one man cannot in any tolerable measure discharge mo charges
then one: if to have mo makes an open entrance to the enemy to spoil: The
conclusion.
if it have neither precept, nor president for it, but only in the kingdom of
Antichrist: if it declare the practizers to be more desirous of the fleece,
then to feed the flock: if all the reasons that condemn nonresidencie, be
against it: lastly, if it be plain theeuerie, then must it needs follow, that
one may not have two, or mo charges.

Their objections (such as they be) are set down in the 3. chapter, and the
aunsweres unto them.

The second proposition that they hold is thus:
One minister may have a sovereign authority, The 2. proposition that they
hold, and reasons against it.
Lordship over his fellow ministers, which is thus disproued.

1 They that have their commission indifferently given them, without
difference between one and another, are of equal authority, and may not be
one over another: But such is the commission of all Gods ministers
indifferently, as appears, Mat. 28. 19. 20. Therefore they are of equal
authority, and may not have any dominion one over another.

2 That which Christ has directly forbidden, that may not in any case be
allowed, but is ever unlawful: But Christ has directly forbidden, that one
minister should have dominion over another, Matthew. 20. 25. Luke 22. 25.
Therefore one minister may not have superiority or dominion over another.

3 They that may not be Lords over the people of God, may much less be Lords
over the Ministers, for the Ministers be (in respect of the ministry) above
the people: But a Minister may not be Lordly over Gods people (as is testified
by him on whom they would father the greatest lordlines) 1. Pet. 5. 3.
Therefore one minister may not be Lord, or have superiority over another.

4 It is ordained, and is equal and right, Cyprian li. 1. Epist. 3.
that every man's cause be heard, where the fault was committed: and it is
meet to handle the matter there, where they may have both the accusers, and
witnesses of the fault: which shows that every minister had authority over
his own flock, and no other to meddle.

5 Bishops, wheresoever they be in all the world, Luther aduertus pap. etc.
are equal to our Bishops, or parish ministers and preachers: of none it can
be said one is Lord, another is servant: whatsoever belongs to the Church,
belongs equally to all, saving that some are of better gifts then others,
howebeit such gifts cause no inequality or lordship in the church.

6 In the Apostolic Church, Museul. lot. com. de minist. verbi.
the Ministers of the Word, were none above another, and were subject to no
head or president, etc.

7 The honor of a Bishop, being taken from the rest of the ministers, and given
to one, was the first step to papacy. Idem upon 2. These. 2.


8 Christ did most feuerilie forbid unto the Apostles and their successors,
primacie and dominion. Conf. Helu. cap. 17.


9 Equal power and function is given to all ministers of the Church, Idem ca.
18.
and that from the beginning, no one preferred him self before another,
sauinge only that for order, some one did call them together, propounded the
matters that were to be consulted off, and gathered the voices.

Therefore, if all Ministers have their commission indifferently given unto
them: The conclusion.
if Christ have forbidden, that one Minister should have dominion over another:
if no Minister may exercise dominion over Gods people: if authority to handdle
controversies, belonged to every several Congregation: if a Bishop and
parish minister be all one: if in the Apostles time, no minister was above
another: if the superiority of one above another, was the first step to the
papacy: lastly, if they have equal power and function from the beginning:
then must it needs follow, that no minister may have superiority, or
exercise dominion over another.

Their objections hereunto (so many as are worthy any answer) be these:

1 Objection. Christ, Matthew. 20. 25. forbids only ambition, and not
dominion, as Musculus expounds it.

Answer. Musculus his judgment appears in the 6. and 7. reasons, the place
is expounded against superiority by Calvin, Bullinger, Zwinglius, Gualter,
Hemingius, etc. But let it be so expounded: that dominion is ambition, because
it causes a man to aspire above his fellow ministers.

2 Objection. The Greek word signifies rule with oppression, which is the
thing that is forbidden.

Answer. That is not so, for Luke 22. 25. uses the single verb Keurieuem,
which signifies simply to rule: The sons of Zebedeus desired not to
oppress but to rule, which desire he reproved.

3 Objection. Christ says not, no man shall be so, but he that will be so,
desiring it.

Answer. But Luke says, Let the greatest be as your servant, and therefore
that is but a silly shifte.

So that their assertions being overthrown, A Bishop should be in every
congrega.
and their objections answered, it remains, that we prove yet more
directly, that the Lord has ordained, that there should be a Bishop
resident over every Congregation: which is proved thus.

1 If a Bishop and Minister be all one, then must there be a Bishop in every
Congregation, for every man will confess that every Congregation ought to
have a minister: But a Bishop and a Minister is all one, as appears by this
that Saint Paul describes not one quality for the Bishopp, but it is also
the quality of every good minister: and also in that he describes no other
minister but the Bishop: Therefore there ought to be a Bishop in every
congregation.

2 S. Paul's bishops and his deacons, were appointed to one place, as
appears both in the description of them, and the practice of the Apostles:
But the Deacons were in every congregation, which appears Phil. 1. 1. Act.
6. 2. that office being needful every where: and in that it continued so,
longer then the office of Bishops, Athanasius Apol. 2. Jerome contra
Luciferianos, etc. Therefore there ought to be a Bishop in every congregation.

3 That which Paul enjoined to Titus, is also to be practiced always in the
like case: But he commanded him to ordain Elders in every City, Tit. 1. 5.
which are expounded in the next verse to be Bishops: Therefore there must be a
Bishop in every congregation.

4 Every Church should have her Communion table, Ignat. ad Philadel.
and every Church her Bishop.

5 Where there was found any worthy to be a Bishopp, Epipha li. 3. tom. 1.
haere. 75.
there a bishop was appointed, and where there was not to furnishe both
bishop and preaching Elder, (he means the Doctor) there the Apostles made a
bishop* and left the Elder.

6 If a Bishop run into a slander, 2. Council. Cartha. to. 1. cap. 10.
and many Bishops can not suddenly be gathered, his cause shall be heard of
twelve Bishops, etc.

7 If an Elder be accused, 3. Council. tom. 1. ca. 8.
he may call six Bishops from the places hard by.

8 Stories make mention of Bishops of little towns, as Eusebius. li. 5. cap. 16.
Soticus bishop of the village Cuman: Theodo. lib. 5. cap. 4.
Mares, bishopp of a small town called Solicha: Socrat. 4, 26.
Gregory bishop of a small city, called Nazianzum: Quest. 16 dilt. ^0.
The bishop of a Castle.

9 A minister, that is to say, a bishopp, and (a little after) the Apostle
does plainly teach, that a minister and a Bishop is all one, and (upon
Titus) a bishop and a minister are the same: Jerome ad Euag^um.
and ( ad Oceanu^) with the ancient fathers, Bishops and Elders were all one.

10 D. Barnes (in his sixth article) says, I will never believe, Acts and
monumentes, fol. 216.
neither can I ever believe, that one man may by the law of God, be a bishop
of two or three cities, yea of a whole country, for that it is contrary to
the doctrine of S. Paul, who writing to Titus, commands that he should
ordain a bishop in every town.

11 It is pity to see how far the office of a Bishop is degenerated from
the original in the Scripture: Hooper upon 8. com. page 90.
it was not so in the beginning, when Bishops were at the best, as the Epistle
to Titus testifies, that wills him, to ordain in every city, etc. They
know the primitive Church had no such Bishops as we have, until the time of
Siluester the first.

Therefore, if a Bishop and a Minister be all one: if bishops were to be where
Deacons are, who were in every congregation: if Paul enjoined Titus to ordain
bishops in every city: and if every Church had her Bishop a long time after
the Apostles, as appears by the testimonies of Councelles, Histories, and
learned writers, both old and new: then must it needs follow, that there
ought to be a Bishop in every Congregation.

CHAP. 11.
FOr the further revealing of the truth, God has ordained, that there should
be in the Church, Doctors, whose office is to be employed in teaching of
doctrine, and is an office different from that of the Pastor.

The latter part of this proposition, is the thing which especially they do
deny, which is thus proved to be true.

1 Those which the Apostle (in speaking of distinct officers) does
distinguishe one from another, are several and distinct one from another: But
the Apostle does distinguish the Pastor and Teacher, one from another, Romans
12. 7. 8. and Ephesians. 4. 11. even as he distinguishes man and woman, Gal. 3.
28. See the Greek of them both: Therefore the office of Pastor and Doctor
are distinct one from another.

2 As are the gifts that adorn offices, so are the officers them selves, for
the execution of the office, consists in the employing of the gifts: But the
gifts of the Pastor and Doctor are diverse, as appears 1. Cor. 12. 8. and
by experience for some has an excellent gift in doctrine, and not in
application, and others excel in application and exhortation, that are very
mean in delivering of doctrine: Therefore the office of a Pastor and Teacher,
are distinct one from another.

3 Those that are to take a diverse course in teachinge, are diverse, and
different in their functions, for else why should they be enjoined to take a
diverse course: But the Pastor is to take one course, and the Doctor another,
for the one is to direct him self principally to exhort, and the other to
attend upon doctrine, Romans 12. 7. 8. Therefore the office of Pastor and
Doctor, be distinct offices the one from the other.

4 The ecclesiastical stories (especially speakinge of the Church of
Alexandria) do usually make a difference betwixt the Bishop and the Doctor.

5 Cathedral Churches have yet some show thereof left in them, who (besides
the Bishop) have also one that reads a Lecture in divinity.

6 If the distinguishing of them, make more for the building of the church,
then the uniting of them, then are they to be distinguished, and not made all
one: But the former is true, as appears by this, that hardly is a people
brought to a sound knowledge of godliness, by him that instructs in doctrine
continually, and as hardly are we stirred up to a zealous care of our
duty, though we be exhorted continually: which both should be with less
continuance, if one man were to perform all: Therefore they are to be
esteemed distinct offices, and not parts of one office, which one is to
perform.

Therefore, if the Apostle Paul distinguishes them one from another: The
conclusion.
if God do usually bestow doctrine and exhortation upon several persons,
wherein each is found to excel, and to be no body in the other: if the
Pastor be commanded to take one course in teaching, and the Doctor another:
if Ecclesiastical stories do usually distinguish them: if Cathedral
Churches have yet some steps left of the distinction: if to distinguish
them, makes more to the building of the Church, then to unite them: then must
it needs follow, that the office of Pastor and Doctor be distinct, and
different the one from the other.

CHAP. 12.
Every congregation ought to have Elders to see into the manners of the people,
and to be assistant unto the Ministers, in the government Ecclesiastical. T.
C. book 1. page 174. Dise. fol. 120. which they deny, Whitgift page 627. and
their practice in keepinge them out of the Church: but it is proved to be
true, by these reasons following.

1 That which the Apostles established in every Congregation, ought still to
continue, seeing the Church must be ruled by the same laws that it was ruled
by then, and needs as great furtherance now, as it did then: But the
Apostles established Elders in every congregation, Acts. 14. 23. which can not
be understood of preachinge Elders only, considering that the scarcity of
them was such, as Paul was constrained to send Timothy and Titus to great
cities, which he could hardly spare, as he often testifies: Therefore there
ought to be such Elders, as are only to assiste in gouuernement in every
congregation.

2 Those which God has ordained to help forward the building of the Church,
ought to be in every congregation, unless it may appear that some congregation
needs not so much help as Christ has appointed: But Christ has ordained
Elders in the Church, for the helping forward of the building of the Church,
1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore such Elders ought to be in every congregation.

3 That which being wanting, the body can not be entiere, that same must be
in every congregation: But the Elders can not be wanting, and the church be an
entiere body, Romans 12. 8. which every congregation should be, Romans 12. 4.
Therefore there ought to be such Elders in every congregation.

5 If the word of God do describe such Elders in the church, then ought they
to be in every congregation, which is clear by this, that every
Congregation has need of them, as well as any: and that every congregation
must have all the other officers of the church: and that every congregation is
of equal dignity in the body of Christ: But the word of God describes unto
us such Elders, 1. Ti. 5. 17. Therefore they ought to be in every congregation.

5 There is no Church that can stand without her Eldership or Council. Igna.
ad Tral.


6 It belongs only to the Bishop to baptize, Tertul. de Bapt.
and the Elder and Deacon may not do it, but upon the bishops license.

7 Neither Elder nor Deacon have right, Jerome contra Lucif.
but upon the Bishops commandment (so much as) to baptize.

8 Elders fell away thorough the ambition of the teachers. Ambr. upon 1. Tim.
5.


9 Valerius the bishop did contrary to the custom of the Apostolical
churches, in appointing Augustine to preach, Possidon. in vita Augu.
being but an Elder.

10 After that Arrius was convicted of heresy, Socrat. libr. 5. cap. 22.
it was decreed that Elders should no more preach.

11 The number of the Elders of every Church, Bucer de regno Christ.
ought to be increased according to the multitude of the people.

12 Speaking of the Elders that were to assist the minister, P. Mar. upon Romans
12.
he lamenteth that it is so fallen out of the church, that the name does
scarce remain.

13 Certain of the people were joined with the pastor, Idem, 1. Cor. 12.
in the government of the Church, because the pastor was not able to do all
him self.

14 There were Elders that did assist the Minister, Calvin Institut. lib. 4.
cap. 3. se. 8.
in the government of the church, etc.

15 Whitgift confesses, that in the primitive Church, they had in every
Church certain Seniors, page 638. Let it then appear out of the word, to
satisfy the conscience how it may be left out.

16 If the platform set down to Timothy and Titus be for all Churches, then
must Elders be in all: for these Elders are there described: But it is a
platform for all Churches, and that to the end of the world, 1. Tim. 6. 14.
Therefore they ought to be in every congregation.

17 That which is contained in every Ministers commission to teach and
practice, must be in every congregation: but the ordination and practice of
that office, is in every ministers commission, Matthew. 28. 20. or else they
ordained Elders without warrant from Christ, which none dare affirm: Therefore
there must be Elders in every congregation.

18 Wheresoever a Bishop must be, there must also the Elders be, which
appears by this, that where the one is described, there is the other also:
But a Bishop must be in every congregation, as I have proved sufficiently in
the 10. chap. Therefore there ought to be Elders in every congregation.

19 If the Apostles labored for uniformity in the least things, and
established in all Churches one order, then must there be Elders in every
Congregation, for they were in some, as all men do confess: But the former is
true, as not only the view of their practice declares, but also the Apostles
express words, Thus I teach in all Churches: Therefore the latter is true
also, that in every Congregation there must be such Elders.

Therefore, The conclusion.
if the Apostles established Elders in every congregation: if Christ has
esteemed their help needful to further the building of his Church: if
without them a congregation can not be entiere: if the word of God say, that
they ought to be in the Church: if it was continued so long after the Apostles
time: and be approved by the testimony of many very learned, both old and
new writers, and confessed by the greatest adversary unto them: if they be
within the compass of every ministers commission: if they are to be,
wheresoever a Bishop must be: if the Apostles established uniformity, even in
the meanest things: then must it needs follow, that there ought to be such
Elders in every congregation, as are to assiste the Minister in the
gouuernement of the same.

They confess it was so in the Apostles time, but seem to say somewhat that
it can not be under a christian Magistrate, thus:

1 Objection. God has given the sovereign authority over his Church to the
christian Magistrate, which these Elders would abridge.

Answer. No more then the Eldership abridged the souueraingrie of David oner
Israel, for his government is temporal, and theirs spiritual.

2 Objection. Gualter upon the 1. Cor. 5. denies it to be needful under a
christian Magistrate.

Answer. Gualter denies excommunication under a christian Magistrate, he is
as partial in this argument as Whitgift.

3 Objection. The Prince has the authority that the Elders had.

Answer. That is no truer, then to say, the Prince has authority to preach
the word, etc. for these be things, that his high authority must see done,
but he may do none of them him self.

But there be many reasons which may be alleged, Reasons proving elders as
necessary under a Christian Magistrate, as in the Apostles time.
to prove that they are (at the least) as necessary under a christian
Magistrate in these days, as they were in the time of the Apostles, as namely
these:

1 The less able that Ministers are to direct their people in the ways of
godliness, the more need they have of the assistaunce that God has allowed
them in his word: But Ministers are now less able (especially under
Christian Magistrates, when men are overtaken with ease and peace, which
quench good things) then they were in the time of the Apostles: Therefore there
is as great (if not greater) need of Elders now, then was in the time of the
Apostles.

2 If christian Magistrates be to maintain the order that Christ has set
down for the government of his Church, then must there be Elders in it under
a christian Magistrate, for Elders are appointed of Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 8. But
christian Magistrates are to maintain the order that Christ has set down
for the ruling of his Church, Isai 49. 23. Therefore there must be Elders in
the church, under a christian Magistrate.

3 If the rule of Christ can not be perpetnally observed, tell the Church,
unless there be Elders: then must there be such under a christian Magistrate:
But the former is true, for by the Church is there meant the Senate of
Ministers and Elders, as shall be proved in the chapter of Excommunication:
Therefore there must be Elders under a christian Magistrate.

4 If the whole government of the Church described in the Epistles to Timothy
and Titus, be to be observed until the end, then must there be Elders under
christian Magistrates, for they are contained in those Epistles: But the former
is true, 1. Tim. 6. 14. Therefore there must be Elders under a christian
Magistrate.

5 Where sinners are more outrageous, and the best most subject to wax cold,
there is greatest need of all the helps that God has ordained to punish
sin, and to cherish well doing: But so it is under a christian Magistrate,
especially in the peace of the Church, as Whitgift confesses, page, 643.
Therefore there is (at the least) as great need of Elders (seeing they are
helpers appointed of God) under a Christian Magistrate, as at any other time.

Therefore if Ministers be less able now, then in the Apostles time: if
christian Magistrates must mainteyne the order prescribed by Christ: if else the
rule of Christ (Tell the church) can not be still observed: if the whole
government described by S. Paul, must be kept for ever: lastly, if there be
(at the least) as great need of all the helpers that can be, as ever there
was: then must it needs follow, that Elders are as necessary in the Church
under a christian Magistrate, as in the time of persecution.

CHAP. 13.
THere ought to be in every congregation certain Deacons, endued with those
qualities, which the word of God describes: whose office is only in
receiving the liberality of the Saints, and distributing it unto the needy,
T. C. 1. book, page 190. Disci. Eccle. fol. 119.

This assertion has two branches, which both are gainsaide by our
adversaries, the first whereof is this: The first proposition.
The office of the Deacon, consists only in receiving and distributing unto
the poor, the liberality of the Saints, which they deny, Whitgift page
582. The book of ordering, etc. that makes it a degree of the ministry: but
the proposition being proved true, makes their opinion and practice appear
false, which is thus:

1 That wherein Steven and the rest were employed, is the office of a Deacon:
for the first institution of them by the Apostles, is in that example: But they
were only to attend upon the provision for the poor, Act. 6. 4. Therefore
the office of the Deacon, is only to attend upon the distributinge unto the
poor, from the liberality of the Saints.

2 That which the Apostle makes an ordinary and distinct office from others
in the Church, must be attended upon by them that are in the same office, and
not be mingled with any other: But the Apostle Romans 12. 8. makes distributing
in simplicity, such as office as it is expounded by M. Calvin, Beza, Bucer,
Martyr, etc. Therefore the Deacons office must be attended upon, and
consequently, it consists only in distributing etc.

3 That which the Apostles found them selves insufficient for, that can no man
now discharge in any tolerable measure, for they were more adorned with
gifts then any be now: But they found them selves insufficient for the
ministry of the word, and distributing unto the poor also, Act. 6. 2.
Therefore no man can in any tolerable measure discharge the office of a
Minister and Deacon also, and consequently the Deacon is to attend upon
distributing only.

4 If the ministeries of the word be perfect, without the Deacon, then may he
not meddle in the same, for how may one lawfully labor, in that wherein
there is no need of him: But such is the ministry of the word, where the
several ministers thereof are named, Ephesians. 4. 11. wherein the Deacon is not
contained, as Whitgift confesses, page 308. and 309. Therefore the Deacon may
not meddle with the ministry of the word, and consequently must be employed
only in distributing, etc.

5 If there be no quality required in the perfect description of the Deacon,
which is proper to the ministry of the word, then is not he to meddle with
the same: But the former is true, as appears, 1. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore the
latter is true also, and consequently, he must attend only upon
distributing, etc.

6 If it belong to the Deacons office, to meddle with the ministry of the
word and Sacraments, then is it greater then that of the Pastor, for that the
doing of both, requires greater gifts then the one: But it is not a greater,
but inferior office to the pastor, as appears by all those places wherein
they are described, that the Deacon is described after the Bishop: Therefore
his office is not to meddle with both, and consequently he must attend upon
distributing, 6. Council. Con. ca. 16. Council. va. Can. 4.
etc.

7 Deacons are ministers of tables, and not of holy things.

8 In the ministers sickness, the Deacons shall read the Homilies of the
Fathers.

9 The Deacons have need of great wisdom, Chrisost. upon Act. 6.
although the preaching of the word be not committed unto them: and further,
it is absurd that they should do both the offices of preaching, and caring
for the poor, consideringe that they be not able to do both thoroughly.

10 Although (the goods of the Church increasing) there were besides the
Deacons, Bulling decad. 5. ser. 2.
subdeacons, and archdeacons, yet the Deacons remained still in their charge
for the poor, and were not as yet mingled with the Bishops or priests, and
with the order of them which taught.

11 The office of Deaconship was religiously kept in the Church, Bucer de re.
Christi 14.
until it was driven out by Antichrist.

12 This office must of necessity be restored as it is described, Act. 6. if
England (for he speaks it in the behalf of our Church) will receive the
Discipline of Christ.

13 Speaking of these Deacons, P. Mart. Romans 12.
lamenteth that this order is so fallen out of the Church, that the name does
scarce remain.

14 Describing the Deacons of the Apostles time, Calvin in. li. 4. ca. 3. s. 9
says, that we after their example, ought to have the like.

15 The office of distributing the goods of the church, Beza confe. cap. 5.
se. 23.
is an ordinary function in a church lawfully constituted: the which, sect.
30. he calls the Deaconship.

Therefore, if Steven and the rest were employed, only in distributing the
goods of the church: if the Apostle makes the Deacons office, an ordinary
and distinct office from all others in the church: if the Apostles were not
sufficient for the ministry of the word, and distributing: if the
ministeries of the word be perfect without the Deacon: if in the description
of the Deacon, no quallitie be required, that is proper to a minister of the
word: if to deal in both would make the Deacon a greater officer then the
Pastor: if the Councels, ancient writers, and the sound writers of latter
times, do declare that the Deacons were to be wholly employed in the
distributing of the goods of the Church, then must it needs follow, that his
office is not to meddle with any part of the ministry of the word and
Sacraments, but to attend only upon the distributing of the liberality of
the Church, unto them that stand in need thereof.

Their objections hereunto be these two that follow.

1 Objection. Philip one of the seven Deacons, did preach, Act. 8. 8. Therefore
Deacons may preach the word.

Answer. Philip was a Deacon of the Church at Jerusalem, while they aboade
together, but now he was not any more so, but an Evangelist, as he is ever
termed after, by virtue of which office he did preach.

2 Objection. Steven, being a Deacon, preached, Act. 7. 2.

Answer. He preached not, for all that is there, was but his Apology at the
seat of judgment, which every man in the like case may do, and which many
of the Martyrs have done.

So that the former proposition being true, upon the grounds alleged,
notwithstanding these objections, we are to proceed to the second, which is
this:

There ought to be such Deacons (as are described in the former proposition) in
every congregation, which is thus proved:

1 That office which every congregation has need of, ought to be in every
congregation: But every congregation has need of the Deacons office, which
appears by this, that they have poor to provide for, (or else they must
regard the necessity of others) and the liberality of others to distribute:
Therefore Deacons ought to be in every congregation.

2 That which is indefinitely appointed for the good of the Church, belongs
unto every Congregation, as well as to any one: But such is the appointment of
the Deacons, 1. Tim. 3. 8. Therefore there must be Deacons in every
Congregation.

3 Every Church ought to have their office of Deaconshippe. Igna. ad Philadel.


4 All the reasons (or the most of them) that are alleged chap. 10. for a
Bishop in every congregation, and chap. 12. for Elders in every congregation,
are forcible hereunto.

Therefore, if there be the like need of Deacons in one congregation, The
conclusion.
that is in another: if they be appointed indefinitely for the good of the
Church: if every church must have their office of Deaconship: and lastly, if
there be like reasons to prove them belong to every Church, that be for
Bishops and Elders: then must it needs follow, that there ought to be Deacons
in every congregation.

CHAP. 14.
THere ought to be in every Congregation, an Eldershipp, consisting of a
pastor or pastors, Doctor (if there be any) and Elders, whose authority
Christ has ordained to be perpetual in his church, to gouuerne the same only
by the rules of Gods word, T. C. 1. book, page 175. Discip. Ecclesiast. 123.
which contains these 3. particular propositions, defended by us, and
gaynesayde by the Bishops and their adherents.

1 The Eldership ought to be in every Congregation. 2 The office of the
Eldership is perpetual. 3 The Church must be governed, only by the rules of
Gods word.
The first is denied by them, The proof of the first proposition.
Whitgift page 627. and by their practice, in tying the government of many
churches to the Bb. sea, it is thus proved:

1 Whatsoever Christ has ordained, as a mean, to keep men in obedience to
the gospel, that same must be in every congregation, for particular men are
in particular congregations: But Christ has ordained the Eldership for that
end, as appears, Matthew. 18. 15. etc. where Chrisost, expounds, Tell the
Church, that is says he, the Gouuernours of the Church: Therefore the
Eldershippe ought to be in every Church.

2 Where all sorts of Elders ought to be, there must be also the joining of
their offices in one, for the good of that congregation over which they are
placed: But all sorts of Elders ought to be in every congregation, as is
proved in the 10. chapter for Bishops, the 12. for Elders, etc. Therefore there
must be an Eldership in every congregation.

3 If no particular congregation have greater privileges given thereunto by
the word of God, then others have, then must there either be no Eldershipp at
all (which is false, in that Elders are proved to be by the word of God in
the Church) or else it must be in every congregation: But every congregation is
of like privilege, which appears by this, that it is a perfect body of it
self: Therefore there must be an Eldership in every congregation.

4 The same warrant that is in the word of God, for to have an Eldership in
one place, is a warraunt for it in all: for the word of God tyeth it, not to
Churches in cities, but indefinitely to the church: But there is warrant for it
out of the word to be somewhere, as appears by this, that the Apostles are
said to establishe it, and make mention of it: Therefore it must be in every
congregation.

Therefore, if the Eldership be ordained by Christ, as a means to keep men
in obedience unto the Gospel: if all sorts of Elders must be in every church:
if every congregation be of equal privileges: lastly, if there be the like
warrant for it in every church, that is in any: then must it needs follow,
that there ought to be an Eldershipp in every Congregation.

What soever is objected against this, that has any show in it, is answered in
the 12. chap. of Elders.

The office of the Eldership is ordained by Christ to be perpetual, The
second proposition.
and ordinary for the government of his church, T. C. 1. book, 177. denied
by them, Whitgift 627. and by their practice in keeping it out: but the truth
of it appears by these reasons that do follow:

1 If the causes why Christ would have an Eldershippe in his Church be
perpetual, See the answer to D. Bridges. page 132.
then must also the thing it self be perpetual: But the causes are
perpetual, which be to gouuerne the church by the rules of his word, and
that ecclesiastically: Therefore the Eldership is perpetual.

2 If Christ be the author of the Eldership, and left it by the Apostles to be
established in the Church, then it is perpetual: for his commission given to
the Apostles, is to be observed unto the end of the world: But Christ is the
author of it, as appears both by his giving of the gifts for the particular
members thereof, and the whole body of it. as also in that the Apostles did
establishe it in the church, who went not from their commission, 1. Cor. 11.
12. Therefore the Eldershippe is perpetual.

3 Whatsoever is the commandment of God, once delivered by him, is never
repealed again, and to be acknoweledged of every spiritual man: that same is
to be received by the Church of God to be perpetual: But such is the
government of the church by Pastors, Doctors, and Elders, and so of the whole
Eldership, as appears in that they are all mentioned in the writings of S.
Paul, which are so esteemed, 1. Cor. 14. 37. Therefore the gouuernement of
the Church by an Eldership is perpetual.

4 That whose several parts is perpetual, and which has perpetual gifts
given, for the furnishing thereof for ever: that same must needs be
perpetual: But the several parts of the Eldership, as Pastor, Doctor, and
Elders, be perpetual, as is proved in the 10. and 12. chap. Therefore the
Eldership is perpetual.

5 Whatsoever is grounded upon the general commandementes, and rules of the
Scriptures, that same is perpetual: But the governing of the church by the
Eldershippe, is such, as has partly bin proved in election and ordination,
and execution of the several Church-offices, which is the greatest part of
government, and shall further appear, in the censures of the church
hereafter: Therefore the government of the Church by the Eldership, is
perpetual.

6 What soever manner of government has sufficient power, and that from God,
to begin, continue, and strengthen, both the governors of the church in their
callings, and the people in the course of obedience unto Christ, that same
government is to be perpetual: But such is the government by the Eldership,
as appears by this, that the Apostles used no other: Therefore the
Eldershippe is to be perpetual.

7 That government which the 12. Apostles, and Paul, before they consulted
together, did uniformly agree in, that same must needs be of God, and
consequently perpetual, unless the repealing of it do appear: but such is
the gouuernement by the Eldership, (for all the adversaries thereunto, confess
that it was in the Apostles time:) Therefore it is perpetual.

8 Whatsoever has the same grounds, that the preaching of the Word and
ministration of the Sacraments have, the same is perpetual: But such is the
government of the Eldership, for it is grounded upon the commandments of
Christ, and practice of the Apostles: Therefore it is perpetual.

9 That which has the like grounds to be perpetual, that the Apostles,
Prophets, and Evangelists, had to be for a time, the same is perpetual: But
such is the government of the Church by an Eldership, which appears by this,
that they are therefore ceased, because their gifts of immediate calling, etc.
be gone, and the gifts of these, jointly and severally do remain: Therefore
it is perpetual.

10 Whatsoever is the perpetual and ordinary remedy to cure diseases of the
Church, and strengthen the health of the same, that same is perpetual: But
such is the government by the Eldership, as appears by the necessity, and
profit of the several offices thereof, and of this, that we are still to
observe in causes of extremities: Tell the Church, Matthew. 18. 17. Therefore it
is perpetual.

11 That government which was in the Church appointed of God under the Law,
and continued (in respect of the substance) by Christ and his Apostles, and
bettered (in respect of the accedents) by them, that same is perpetual: But
such is the government by the Eldershippe, as appears in the 12. reason of
the 1. chap. Therefore it is perpetual.

12 If there be any reason why this government should be alterable (being once
set in the church by Christ) it is either in respect of the extraordinary
offices ceased, or the addition of the Magistrate: But not of the former,
because the Church has never had any need of extraordinary gifts, but God
has given them, and so will he ever: nor of the latter, for that the
Magistrates office is to defend the buylding of the church by that order which
Christ has set down, and not to alter any thing therein: Therefore it is
perpetual.

13 Either this government is the best and perpetual, or else there is none,
and so Christ should be thought to have left his Church without a government,
which is disproued in the 7. and 8. reasons, in the first chap. for this was
once established by Christ, and so was no other: But some government must
needs be the best and perpetual: Therefore this is perpetual.

14 No man may justly forbid (speaking of the Church gouuernement) to return
to the old constitution of the Church of God, Co^fe. Heluet. Tigur. Bern.
Gene. Polo. Hun. Scotl. ca. 18.
and to receive it before the custom of men.

15 Experience teaches this order (speaking of the church government) was not
for one age, Calvin in. li. 4. ca. 3. s. 8.
but necessary to all ages.

16 Though the common wealth change her government, P. Mart. Romans 3.
yet the Church must keep hirs still.

17 Lamenteth, Bucer de re* Christi 15.
that some were found among them that are esteemed forwardest, which would not
have the same discipline used now a days, that was in the Apostles times,
obiecting the difference of times and men.

18 The Apostles have written these laws (speakinge of Discipline) not for a
day, M. Whitak. against Duraeus.
or for the first age, but to endure for all times to come: and therefore have
ratified them with a most earnest obtestation, 1. Tim. 6. 14. that these
commandments should be kept until the day of the Lord.

Therefore, if the causes of once ordayning an Eldership, be perpetual: if
Christ be the author of it, and left it in the Church by the Apostles: if it
be Gods commandment, not yet repealed: if the parts of it, and gifts for it
be perpetual: if it be grounded upon the general commandments and rules of
the scriptures: if it have sufficient power from God, to begin, continue, and
confirm a Church: if it was agreed upon by the 12. Apostles, and Paul before
they met together: if it have the same grounds with the preaching of the word:
if it have as good grounds to be perpetual as the Apostles, etc. to be for a
time: if it be the perpetual remedy against all the diseases of the Church:
if it was under the law, and enriched by Christ and his Apostles under the
Gospel: if it be neither alterable in respect of the extraordinary offices
ceased, nor the Magistrate added to the Church: if it be the only government,
that challenges authority from God: if no man may justly forbid it: if it be
necessary for all times: if the common wealth may change her government, but
not the Church: if the difference of times and men be nothing against it:
lastly, if the rules that the Apostles gave for it, be confirmed with a
charge, to be kept until the coming of Christ; then must it needs follow,
that the government of the Church by an Eldership ought to be perpetual.

They obiecte that many inconveniences would follow upon this government,
Objection against the perpetuity of the Eldership, and answers to the same.
which are severally to be answered.

1 Objection. By this every parish shall follow their Seniors, and then there
will be so many Elderships, so many diverse fashions, seeing one may not meddle
with another.

Answer. The government desired is uniform for every Church, and admits
no change, no not in outward ceremonies, without a Synod of the choice men of
several Elderships.

2 Objection If they being all mean men, choose an Earl, he may not refuse,
but be at their beck and commandment.

Answer. No man that is chosen is compelled to an office against his will, but
he that despises to consult with others in Gods matters, because they be
poor, reprocheth God that made them, Prou. 17. 5.

3 Objection. It ouerburdeneth the parrishe, to provide for the nourishment of
so many church officers.

Answer. It is not necessary that they should provide for any more of them,
sauinge those that are exercised in the ministry of the word, unless any of
the rest may need the liberality of the Church.

4 Objection. It brings in a new popedom and tyranny into the Church.

Answer. It is blasphemy to term the government of Christ so, because we
refuse the tyranny of the pope, shall we therefore do what we list, and not
yield obedience to the scepter of Christ.

5 Objection. It is a kind of Donatisme to challenge such authority over
Princes.

Answer. And it is flattery to suffer princes to do what they list: this is
the objection of Gualter, who is a professed enemy to discipline.

6 Objection. It takes away princes authority in causes Ecclesiastical.

Answer. No more then it did from David in his time, not so much as the Bb.
do now, for the prince requires but this, to see the Church well ordered,
which the Eldership allows and craves.

7 Objection. It transformeth the state of the common wealth, into a mere
popularitie, and will alter the government thereof.

Answer. It neither transformeth nor alters any thing in it, for let it be
showed what damage would come by this discipline to any Magistracy, from the
Princes throne, to the office of the headborow.

8 Objection. It will breed contention and partiality in judgment.

Answer. Where can be greater contention then the Bb. maintain for their
kingdom, or greater partiality then in them, to their kins folks,
servants, Sycophants, etc.

9 Objection. It will be contemned, and so good order neglected.

Answer. None ever deserved more contempt, then the Bb. and their officers
do, for all their pomp: but God whose ordinance it is, will procure
sufficient awe unto it: mark how these objections stand together, in the 4.
it was tyranny, and here it is too contemptible, these be contrary.

10 Objection. All alterations be dangerous.

Answer. Never (where we change from the obedience of Antichrist, to the
service (...) the living God) was it ever dangerous to amend thi^ ^amis^e,
by that course which is described of God: if it were, let the particular of it
appear: this might well have bin Steven Gardiners reason for popery, in the
time of King Henry the eight.

The Church must be governed only by the rules of gods word, this is in
effect the proposition of the first chap. The 3. proposition.
whereunto all those reasons there alleged may be referred: there is aduouched
generally, the certain grounds of the whole Discipline, against the imagined
liberty left to the Church: here is affirmed the particular direction of the
Church gouuernement, by the authority of the Eldershipp, to proceed according
to the rules of Gods revealed will, and not by that cursed and monstrous cannon
law, which is made manifest unto us by these reasons:

1 All governors are to execute their authority, by the same warrant from
which they have it: But the governors of the Church of God, have their warrant
to be governors only from the word, 1. Cor. 12. 28. Therefore they must
govern the church only by the word.

2 The Church is to be governed by that which the Ministers may teach unto the
same, for they are taught to the end that they may obey, and so be governed by
the same: But the Ministers may teach nothing but the word of God, 1. Cor.
11. 23. Therefore the church is to be governed only by the word of God.

3 That which makes the Church obedient unto Christ, must be the direction
whereby it is to be governed: Only the word of God makes the church obedient
unto Christ: Therefore it is to be governed by the rules of Gods word.

4 Every kingdom or household, must be governed only by the laws of the
King, or orders of the householder: The Church is the kingdom and house of God,
and his word is the only law that he has given for the same: Therefore it
must be governed only by the word of God.

5 That which was ordained to destroy the church of god, can not be a good rule
to govern the same by: But such is the canon law, for it was ordained to
strengthen the kingdom of Antichrist: Abstract. Therefore it can not be a
good rule to direct the church by, and consequently, it must be governed by
the word, for no other rule is offered unto us, but the one of these twain.

6 That which was invented by the Dragon, that persecuteth the woman and her
child, that same cannot be good for the Church, which is that woman: But such
is the cannon law, for it was invented by Antichrist, which is that Dragon:
Therefore it can not be good for the rulinge of the church, and consequently,
etc.

7 That which strengthens the power of darkness and ignorance, can not be
good to guide them, that must walk in light and knowledge: But the cannon law
strengthens the power of darkness and ignorance, for it increases popery, as
appears by this, that there is scarce an officer toward it, in these days
of knowledge, but he is a papist: Therefore it cannot be good to guide the
church of God.

8 That which destroys the church of God, can not be good to rule the same:
But the cannon law destroys it, for it crosses every faithful Minister in
the discharge of his duty, and every good christian, walking in the ways of
godliness, and nippeth in the head every good action, as experience teaches us:
Therefore it cannot be a good rule to gouuerne the church by.

9 That which has bredd more traiterous papists in England, then the
Seminaries at Rome and Rhemes, that same can not be good to govern the church
of God: But such is the cannon law, for it has kept out Discipline, nourished
ignorance, and fostered superstition and popery, in all estates of people,
that never came at those Seminaries: Therefore it can not be a good rule to
gouuerne the Church of God by.

10 That which nourished the hope of Antichrist, to return hither again, can
not be good to direct in the government of the church: But such is the cannon
law, for it keeps the cages for those unclean birds: as Archb. and L. Bb.
seas, Arches, Cathedral churches, etc. Therefore it can not be a good rule
for the direction of the church.

11 That which all the Churches have cast off, as unfit for the government of
the Church, can not be good for the same: But all the churches, that have
forsaken the pope (yea they that have not received the discipline of Christ
wholly) have cast off the cannon law: Therefore it can not be good for the
same.

12 Yea, we our selves mislike it, as appears by a statute made under Ed. 6.

Therefore, if governors are to rule by the same authority whereby they are
governors: if the Church must be governed, by that which the Ministers may
teach: if the word of God only, make the Church obedient unto Christ: if
every kingdom must be ruled by the laws of their King: and if the cannon
law be ordained to destroy the Church: if it was invented to persecute the
church: if it strengthen the power of darkness and ignorance: if it kill the
church of God: if it breed more traitorous papists, then the Seminaries at
Rome and Rhemes: if it nourishe the hope of Antichrists return: lastly, if
all the churches that have forsaken the pope, have cast it of also: yea if we
our selves do mislike it: then must it needs follow, that the Church ought
to be governed, only by that golden rule of Gods word, and not by that
leaden lump of the cannon law.

CHAP. 15.
THe office of the Church government, is mere Ecclesiastical, and therefore
the governors of the church may not meddle, but only in Church Matters, as
for example, vocation, and abdication, deciding of controversies, in doctrine
and manners so far as appertains to conscience, and the church censures, T.
C. book 1. page 206. Discipl. Eccle. 126. but they think that
church-gouernours, may also meddle in civil causes: Whitgift pa. 749. and
their practice, that take upon them to be Counselors of state, to judge
ciuillie, as punish with imprisonment, etc. But this is disprooued, and so the
former proved by these reasons:

1 That which our Savior Christ refused, because it belonged not unto him,
ruling and teaching the church, that same is not lawful for any
Ecclesiastical person to do: But Christ refused to divide the inheritance,
Luke 12. 14. only because he came to build a spiritual kingdom, for
otherwise he being God, had authority over all things: Therefore it is not
lawful for Ecclesiastical persons, to be judges of civil causes.

2 That which was forbidden the Apostles, is unlawful for every Ecclesiastical
officer, for they were the chief under Christ, and had (after a sort) all
offices in themselves, until they could plant them in others: But such
dominion was forbidden them, as the Kings of the nations, and other civil
Magistrates have, Luke 22. 28. which is, to rule ciuilly: Therefore they may not
exercise any civil authority.

3 If necessary duties are to be left, rather then our duties to the Church
should not be thoroughly discharged, then may not a church officer deal in
civil jurisdiction, which is less necessary unto him: But the former is
true, as appears by the words of Christ, to him that would have buried his
father, Luke 9. 59. 60. Therefore they may not exercise any civil authority.

4 If he that has an office, must atrende upon it, then may he not meddle in
another, for he can not attend them both at once: But the former is true, Romans
12. 7. Therefore may no Church Officer meddle with temporal jurisdiction.

5 As the Soldier is in his warfare, so are Church Officers, in the ruling of
Gods church: But the Soldier entangleth not him self in the things of this
life, because they are of another nature to his warfare: which place Cyprian
alleges against a minister, that became an executour to his friends will:
Therefore church officers may not meddle with civil offices, because they are
of another nature, then his calling.

6 Those things that in them selves are of contrary quallitie, can not
concur in one subject: But the governments of the Church and common wealth
be such, not only in this, that they are the next special members of one
general, but also, in that the one is spiritual, and the other temporal, the
one respects the soul, and the other the body: Therefore they can not be in
one man together, and consequently, etc.

7 If the government of the Church, both in every particular man's office, and
in the general Eldership, be a matter of great weight, and the ability of
man, very small in every good action, then may not a church officer meddle in
another calling, whereby he is made less able to discharge his duty: But
the former is true, as all men may see, that look into the word of God, what
is required of such men, and know by the same word, the manifold infirmities
and untowardness of man: Therefore the latter must needs be true also.

8 If the Apostles (who were the most able of all others) found them selves
unfit for two offices, which were both Ecclesiastical: then is the best
church-gouernour unfit for two, which be of more difference one from another,
as be the government of the church and common wealth: But the former is true,
as appears Acts 6. 2. Therefore the latter must needs be true also.

9 That which we justly reprove in the papists, must needs (if we do like)
be found more unlawful and intolerable in ourselves: But we justly reprove
the papists, for having in their hands both the swords, that is, the
Ecclesiastical and civil jurisdiction: Therefore it is more intolerable,
being found in any of us.

10 If it be lawful for an Ecclesiastical person, to exercise the office of
the civil Magistrate, then (on the contrary) it is lawful for the civil
Magistrate, to exercise the offices of Ecciesiasticall persons, for there is as
good reason for the one as the other: But the latter is unlawful: for who
would like of any L. Mayor, to step into the pulpit and preach, etc. Therefore
the first is unlawful also.

11 They may not entangle them selves with worldly offices, Can. App. cap. 80.
but attend upon their Ecclesiastical affairs.

12 None of the Clerks or Clergy, Conc. Call. cap. 3. and 7.
shall receive any charge of those which are under age, the cause of that
decree is there said to be, for that there were certain Ministers, that were
stewardes to noble men: and in the 7. cannon, that none of them should receive
any secular honors.

13 The Bishops shall only attend unto prayer, 4. Council. Cart. ca. 20.
reading and preaching.

14 He brings diverse reasons to prove, Calvin in. lib. 4. ca. 11. sect. 9.
that Bishops may neither usurp, nor take (being offered unto them) any
civil office.

15 He shows how the offices are to be distinguished, Beza confe. cap. 5.
sect. 32. and 42.
and in what sort it is said, that the fathers dealt in the things of this
life, and how the corporal punishments by the Apostles were particular and
extraordinary.

16 When both the offices meet in one man, P. Martyr upon 10. 13.
the one hinders the other, so that he that exercises the one, cannot
minister the other.

17 There is no man so wise and holy, Bucer upon Matthew. 5.
which is able to exercise both the civil, and Ecclesiastical power, and
therefore he that will exercise the one, must leave the other.

Therefore, The conclusion.
if Christ refused to judge in temporal causes, because it belonged not to
his office: if civil dominion was forbidden the Apostles: if necessary
duties are rather to be left undone, then our diligence in the matters of
the church should be lessened: if he that has an office, must attend upon
it: if we may not be entangled with any hinderance: if the civil and
Ecclesiastical functions, be of contrary natures: if every office in the
Church, be more then any one can perfectly discharge: if the Apostles found
them selves unfit for two offices of like nature: if we justly reprove the
papists for their two swords: if a Magistrate may not preach: if they may
not meddle with worldly offices, nor be tutours to Orphans, but attend only
unto the ministry of the word, etc. if they may neither usurp, nor take
(being offered) any civil office: if they be to be distinguished to several
persons, or else one hinders the other: lastly, if none be able to execute
both, then must it needs follow, that Ecclesiastical officers may not bear
civil offices: and consequently the office of the church-gouernement, is
mere Ecclesiastical.

Their objections hereunto be these:
1 Objection. Objections for civil of fices in Ecclesiastical persons.
It countenanceth and maintayneth religion, to have civil authority.

Answer. It is (in deed) the papists reason for their two swords, which M.
Calvin confuteth, Institut. book 4. cap. 11. sect. 9.

2 Obiction. It is good to punish vice by corporal punishment, that Gods word
may be the better obeyed.

Answer. It is good to preach Gods word to men, that they may obey their
Prince for conscience sake: may the Magistrate therefore preach? we may not
do every thing that is good, but only that which is agreeable to our callings.

3 Objection. Eli and Samuel, were both Priests and Judges.

Answer. They were extraordinary (for God separated those two offices in
Moses, and gave the one unto Aaron) and so was Eliahs killing of the false
prophets, and Christ's whipping of the buyers and sellers out of the Temple.

4 Objection. Peter killed Ananias, therefore Bishops may have prisons.

Answer. It was by his word only, and not by any civil punishment, if they
can do the like, Peter's example will serve their turns, if not, then must it
be (with the former) extraordinary.

CHAP. 16.
THe placing and displacing of Church Officers, appertains unto the
Eldership. This is proved in the 7. chap. and their objections are there
answered for the first part, which is the placing: but the latter part is to
be cleared by some more reasons, because the Bishops do displace the best
Ministers at their pleasure, which is proved to be a most wicked action, by
these reasons.

1 Those that are called unto the ministry by the Lord from heaven, and out
wardlie by the means of men, so long as they are blameles in doctrine and
conversation, 1. Tim. 3. 10. can not be displaced, without heinous wickedness
against the manifest will of God: But such are the Ministers that the Bishops
do daily displace, as they confess them selves, when (even) in their sermons
they justify their doctrine, in saying, that they differ only in outward
rites: and as their greatest enemies will say, when they are asked of such
men's lives: Therefore they can not be displaced without great wickedness.

2 Those that are careful to discharge the duty of Gods Ministers, both in
teaching, and giuinge example to their flocks, can not be displaced without
great impiety: Such are these Ministers, that are daily displaced, as
appears by this, that they preach more diligently then any other, and that
they follow not the course of the world, in adding living vnot living, but
many of them (being as worthy for their gifts, as the worthiest) live
poorly, rather then they will want the comfort of a good conscience:
Therefore they can not be put to silence without great sin.

3 To deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort, is a grievous and
horrible wickedness: To put such to silence as are before mentioned, is to
deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort: which if any man will deny,
all the godly where such a one dwells, shall tell him he lies: Therefore
to displace such Ministers, is a heinous and horrible wickedness.

4 That which gives occasion to the weak to stumble and fall away from the
Gospel, is a heinous and horrible sin: But such is the displacing of those
Ministers, as appears by this, that many doubt whether that which he has
taught be true, whom the professors of the Gospel do displace, and by this,
that many who had made good beginnings, by the discontinuance of their
Teachers, do fall away: Therefore to displace those Ministers, is a heinous
and horrible sin.

5 Those whose labors God does bless, can not be displaced without fighting
against God, and consequently great impiety: But such are the Ministers that
the Bb. do daily displace, as all that love the Gospel in every country, can
witness: Therefore to displace them is great impiety.

6 That action which gives the common enemy just cause to rejoice, and hope
to get the victory, is a heinous and horrible offense: But such is the
displacing of those Ministers as appears in every country, where such
Ministers are displaced, and such enemies do dwell: Therefore to displace
such, is a heinous and horrible offense.

7 That action that causes the doers thereof to be esteemed enemies to the
Gospel, must needs be a heinous sin: But such is the putting of those
Ministers to silence, for it makes the people that have any love to religion,
think that they are not of God in so doing, for say they, he that loves
Christ, can not cross the course of the Gospel, as these men do: Therefore
the displacing of them is a heinous sin.

8 That which lets in more wickedness at once, then the diligent preaching of
the word could drive out in diverse years, must needs be a heinous sin: But
such is the displacing of these Ministers: for, profaning of the Saboth, and
all disorder, comes into a congregation the same day that such a Minister,
that has long labored against it is displaced, as experience in such places
proves: Therefore to displace such ministers is a heinous sin.

9 That which interrupteth the course of the Gospel, without warraunt either
from Gods word, or the laws of the land, is a heinous and horrible sin:
Such is the displacing of those Ministers, as is proved in all the writings
on our side: and lastly, in the answer to D. Bridges: therefore to displace
such Ministers, is a heinous and horrible sin.

Therefore, if the Ministers that be usually displaced, be called of God: if
they discharge the duty of good ministers, both in doctrine and life: if the
displacing of them, be to deprive Gods people of their spiritual comfort: if
it give occasion to some to doubt of the Gospel, and to fall away: if God give
a blessing unto their labors: if the displacing of them, give the enemy
matter to rejoice, and hope to overcome: if it cause the displacers to be
esteemed enemies to the Gospel: if it let in more wickedness in one day, then
preachinge can throw out in many years: if it interrupte the course of the
Gospel, without warrant either from the word of God, or laws of the land,
then must it needs follow, that the displacing of those Ministers, is a most
heinous and horrible sin against the Lord.

CHAP. 17.
THe Eldership is to admonish every one, by whom offense appears unto them
to grow in the church: There is no question between us, about admonition it
self, but this they deny, that the execuion of of any discipline (and
therefore of this point) belongs unto the Eldership: which point is proved in
the several chapters going before: so that I need not say any thing of this,
saving with (a reason or twain) to show the necessity and benefit of it in
the Church of God.

1 That which private men offended, are commanded to seek unto for the
redress of the offendour, is a necessary, and an ordinary way for the
amendment of them that do offend in the Church of God: But such is the
admonition of those that are in authority, and carry the name of the church,
Matthew. 18. 15. see chap. 14. and the first proposition of the same: Therefore
admonition in such cases by the Eldership, is a necessary and ordinary way,
for their amendment that do offend.

2 That which is more auaylable to bring the offender to repentance, then
private admonition, either by one, or more, the same is very profitable and
necessary in the Church of God: But such is the public admonition by the
governors of the Church, as appears by this, that Christ makes it a
remedy, when the other two will not prevail, Matthew. 18. 15 Therefore it is
very profitable and necessary in the Church of God.

3 That which makes men more afraid to offend, then any admonition that
private men can give, is profitable and necessary in the Church of God: But
such is the Eldershipp, before whom men know they shall be brought, if they do
not amend: Therefore it is very profitable and necessary in the Church of God.

4 That which has a greater promise to do good, then private admonition, is
very necessary in the Church of God: But such is the admonition that is given
by the Eldershipp, because it preuayleth when the former does not: Therefore
it is profitable in the church of God.

5 That without which, all duties of charity can not be exercised toward
sinners, is needful to be in the Church of God: But without admonition by the
Eldership, all duties of charity cannot be exercised toward sinners:
Therefore it is needful to be in the church of God.

6 That which would bridle the outrageous sins of some, and keep in the
derision and mockery, that private admonitions do receive, is needful to be
in the Church of God: But this would admonition by the Eldership do: for if
men knew that they should answer unto the Church for their ill demeanor, to
them that rebuke them for sinning, they would refrain (at least for fear)
from such kind of outrage: Therefore it is needful to be in the church of
God.

Therefore, The conclusion.
seeing public admonition before the Eldership is to be sought, by those that
are offended, and cannot be satisfied: seeing it is more auaylable then private
admonition: seeing it makes men more afraid to offend: seeing it has a
greater promise: seeing without it all duties of charity, can not be
exercised toward the sinner: lastly, seeing it would bridle the outrageous
sins of many: Therefore it must needs follow, that it is very profitable,
and necessary to be in the church of God.

CHAP. 18.
THose that be not reclaimed from their faults by admonition, are by the
Eldershippe to be suspended from the Lords supper, or being officers of the
Church, from the execution of their office, until they do either give good
testimony of their amendment, or just cause to be further proceeded against.
Neither is there any controversy between them and us, about this point:
saving that (as in the former) they will deny it to appertain to the
Eldership, which is proved before. I will therefore (for their understanding
that desire direction in the truth) first, show that it is a course that
has warrant in the scriptures: secondly, that it is of very profitable use in
the Church of God: the first is thus proved:

1 Whatsoever is enjoined, as a duty to be done by every Christian, if he
leave it undone, Suspention warranted by the word being upon such grounds as
the word sets down.
he is to be compelled by the governors of the Church to do it, Luke 14. 17.
23. But if a man's brother have any thing against him, and he make no
conscience to leave his gift there, and be first reconciled, Mat. 5. 24. he
is to be compelled to do it: Therefore separation from the Lords Supper, is
warraunted by the word.

2 If that commandment of Christ, Matthew. 7. 6. give not that which is holy
unto dogs, can neither be properly understood of them, that were never of the
Church, nor them that be excommunicated, then is it a warraunt for such
separation of the unworthy, and consequently, that separation is warraunted in
the word: But the former is true, as appears by this, that the meanest of
the Jews did know, that holy things belonged to neither of them, and so the
commandment had bin needles: Therefore suspention is warranted by the word.

3 If there be sinners that are not to be excommunicated, and yet it were
offensive to give them the Lords Supper, then is this course warranted by the
word, for else should Christ have left his Church destitute of direction, in
common and usual difficulties, which is proved in the first chap. to be
otherwise: But such sinners there are, as the notorious sinner repenting: men
mainly suspected of notorious transgressions, etc. Therefore suspention has
his warrant in the word.

4 The course that God prescribed in the shadow, for corporal purifyings, must
in the body (in respect of the substance) be observed in the spiritual
cleansing of every member of the Church: But many were separated from the
public sacrifices for a season, by reason of their corporal uncleanness, who,
yet were not worthy to be excommunicated: Therefore must also some be kept
from the Lords supper for a season, who yet appear not so haynouslie to have
sinned, as to deserve excommunication.

5 The Church can not without great offense, suffer one that has fallen into
some open sin, or that is vehemently suspected, to have hayuouslie offended,
continue in the administration of any public function: But the Church cannot
justly displace such a man at the first, making show of repentance, or
standing upon his purgation: Therefore he must be separated for a time.

6 That which was commanded under the law to be done to the priest, that was
unclean in body, or suspected to be a leaper, that same must much more under
the Gospel, be done unto the Minister, or other Church officer, that has
sinned, or is suspected to have committed a great sin: But such a priest was
to be separated from offering of sacrifices for a certain time: Therefore much
more must the like be done to a Church Officer in the like case.

Therefore, if the Church be to compel a private man to do his duty: The
conclusion.
if give not holy things to dogs, be understood of them within the church:
if there be sinners that can not without offense be admitted to the Lords
supper, and yet deserve not excommunication: if for corporal uncleanness under
the law, they were to abstain a certain time: and if the church can not
without great offense, suffer him that has committed an open sin (though he
repent) or that is vehemently suspected of a notorious sin, continue in the
execution of his office, until the Congregation be satisfied: Lastly, if the
priest that was unclean, or suspected of leprosy, might not offer sacrifices:
then is it plain, that both the separation of some men from the Lords supper,
and other from the execution of their public function for a time, is a thing
warranted by the word of God.

The latter part, which is, that this kind of suspention has a profitable use
in the Church of God, is thus proved:

1 That which keeps the godly in more careful obedience, and keeps in the
hypocrites, that they break not out, is very profitable for the Church of God:
But such is the use of the separation from the Lords Supper, and from
executing public function in the Church: Therefore it is profitable in the
church of God.

2 That which remooueth (even) the appearance of offense, from the Church of
God, is very profitable for the same: But such is the separation: Therefore it
is profitable for the Church of God.

3 That which declares unto the world, that the Church of God is careful to
practice that which it professes, is very profitable: But such is this
separation, for it shows that they cannot away with ungodly life: no, nor
among them selves: Therefore it is profitable for the church of God.

4 That which gives occasion to the Church, to be exercised in the action of
religion, with more sound comfort, is profitable for the same: But such is
this separation, for every one shall see thereby, the unworthy (for whose
sakes, God might be angry with them all, Josh. 7. 11.) weeded from among them:
Therefore it is profitable for the Church of God.

5 That which is a special means to procure the Lord (in mercy) to continue
his word unto his Church, is profitable for the same: such is this separation,
for it is a notable means to keep men in obedience to that which they
profess: Therefore it is profitable for the Church of God.

Therefore, if separation of the known, or suspected sinner, from the Lords
supper, and such a Church Officer from the execution of his public function,
do keep men in obedience that be godly, and restrayneth hypocrites from
outrage: if it remove the very appearance of evil: if it let the world see,
that the Church labors to practice that, which it does profess: if it make
every member of the Church, to be exercised in the actions of religion, with
greater comfort: Lastly, if it be a special mean to procure the Lord in
mercy, to continue his word: then must it needs follow, that it is of very
profitable use unto the Church of God.

CHAP. 19.
WHen neither admonition, nor suspention will serve to reclay me the offender,
but that it does appear, that he abides in impenitencie, and is incorrigible,
the Eldership, after mature deliberation, and commending of the party unto the
prayers of the Church, (he yet remaining obstinate) is to proceed to
excommunication: which contains these propositions in question betwixt us and
the Bishops.

1 It may not be done, but upon great and weighty occasion. 2 It may not be
done by any one man, but by the Eldership, the whole Church consenting
thereunto.
The former is holden by us, T. C. 1. book, page 183. disc. Eccle. 130. and
denied by them in their practice, that send it out (many times) for not paying
of six pence. But our assertion is thus proved, and their godles practice
disproued.

1 That which Christ has ordained for the last remedy against sin, The
proof of the first proposition*
and only to be used when neither admonition, reprehension, nor separation
from the external communion of the Saints for a time will serve: that same is
not to be used, but upon great extremity: But such is excommunication, as
appears, Mat. 18. 15. Therefore it may not be used, but upon most weighty
occasion, that is in the case (only) of extremity, when no other means will
serve the turn.

2 That which cutteth a man off from the Church of God, and gives him over
unto Satan, as one in a desperate case, that same may not be used but in
greatest extremity: But such is excommunication, being used according as God
has left it unto his Church, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Therefore it may not be used, but
in greatest extremity.

3 That which a man will do in the cutting off, of his hand or his foot,
that same must the Church do, in excommunication: for it is the cutting off,
of a member: But a man will try all other ways, and will never cut of his
hand or his foot, until he see it incurable, and ready to infect the other
parts of his body: Therefore excommunication may not be used, but in case of
greatest extremity.

4 That which is contrary to natural affection, and works that which a
loving heart does tremble to think of: that same may not be done but in
greatest extremity: But such is the excommunication, for it depriueth the
party excommunicated of our love, and throws him into the most wretched case,
that can befall unto man in this life: Therefore it may not be done, but in
case of greatest extremity.

Therefore if excommunication be ordained of Christ, The conclusion.
as a remedy, only when all other helps will not serve: if it cut the
party from Gods Church, and give him over unto Satan: if it must be proceeded
unto, as a man does to the cutting off of his hand or foot: lastly, if it
be a work contrary unto the natural affection of man, and effects that
which a loving heart does tremble to think upon: then must it needs
follow, that it is to be proceeded unto, only in the cases of greatest
extremity, and after that all other means have bin used, and do appear not
to prevail.

The latter point (which is, The proof of the second proposition
that excommunication may not be done by one man, but by the Eldership, the
whole Church consenting thereunto) is holden by us, T. C: book 1. page 183.
Discipl. Ecclest. 130. etc. and denied by them, Whitgift page 662. and their
continual practice. But our assertion is thus proved, and their opinion and
practice, found to be erroneous and ungodly.

1 That which Christ commanded to be done by the Church, may not be done by
one man, unless you take my L. Grace for the Church, as Whitgift does, page
662. which needs no confutation: But Christ commanded that excommunication
should be done by the Church, Mat. 18. 15. Therefore it may not be done by one
man.

2 That which Paul enjoined the Church, when they were met together, to do,
may not be done by one man: But he commanded them to excommunicate the
incestuous person, when they were met together, 1. Cor. 5. 5. Therefore it may
not be done by one man.

3 That which has need of greatest advice, and greatest authority, may not
be done by one man: but such is the matter of excommunication, being the
denouncinge of that against a man, which he will most hardly believe, and
being the waightiest point of discipline: Therefore it may not be done by one
man.

4 Those must excommunicate, that are to deal in the other parts of
Discipline, as shall appear in the reasons following, and (as I think) no man
will deny: But the other parts of Discipline are exercised not by one, but by
the Churh, as has been proved: Therefore not one, but the Church is to
excommunicate.

5 As it was ministered among the Jews, so must it be in the Church for ever:
which appears by this, that it is translated unto us from them (as the Greek
word Synedrion, being by a corrupt imitation, called Sanedrim, by the Rabbis,
does import) and had nothing ceremonial in it: But it was executed among them
by the Church, and not any one, Ioh. 9. 22. Therefore the Church is to
excommunicate, and not one man.

6 Cyprian says, he would never do any thing in his charge, Cyprian li. 3.
epist. 10.
without the counsel of his Elders, and consent of the people.

7 The Elders, and other Church Officers, have as well power to absolve, as the
Bishop. Epist. 14.


8 For so much as absolution belongs unto all, Epist. 19.
I alone dare not do it.

9 If there be any that have committed such a fault, that he is to be put away
from the partaking of the prayers of the Church, Tertul. Apo. cap. 39.
etc. There do bear rule certain of the most approved ancients or Elders
of the Church, which have obtained this honor, not by money, but by good report.

10 It helps much to make the party more ashamed, Augu. lib. 3. cont. epist.
permen.
that he be excommunicated by the whole church: also in his books of Baptism,
against the Donatists often.

11 The Elders have interest in other censures of the Church, Ierom. ad
Demetriad. epist. 1. Bucer de regno Christ. lib. 1. cap. 9.
and the Church it self in excommunication.

12 S. Paul accuses the Corinthians, for that the whole Church had not
excommunicated the incestuous person.

13 The Elders had the gouuernement in excommunication.

14 It is very dangerous to permit so weighty a matter to one man, P. Martyr
in 1. Cor. 5.
and therefore that tyranny may be avoided, and this censure executed with
greater fruit and gravity, the order that the Apostle there uses, is still
to be observed.

15 He shows that it partayneth not to one man, Calvin. in. st^t. lib. 4.
cap. 11. se. 6.
that it is a wicked fact, that one should take the authority to him self,
that is common to others: that it opens a way to tyranny: takes from the
Church their right, and abrogateth the Ecclesiastical senate, ordained by
Jesus Christ.

16 The Bishops, Cha. 12, se. 6
when they excommunicated of themselves alone, did it ambitiouslie, contrary
to the decrees of godly cannons: See Bucer against Gropper, and upon Ephesians. 4.
De animicura, also Zuinglius in Ecclesiast.

17 It is plentifully forbidden (even) by that filthy puddle, See Abstract
page 165.
the cannon law, and therefore it must needs be a heinous sin, when it
finds fault with it.

Therefore, The conclusion.
if excommunication be to be executed (by the commandment of Christ) of the
Church: if S. Paul enjoined it unto the church: if it have need of greatest
advice and authority: if it belong to them that may execute the other parts
of Discipline: if it was so executed among the Jews: if to absolve, be as
well in the Elders power, as the Bishops: if Cyprian durst not do it alone: if
it was the action (in Tertullians time) of the most approved Elders: if to be
by the whole church, helps much to make the party more ashamed: if the whole
church have interest in it: if the whole Church at Corinth was reproved, for
not doing it: if it be to weighty a matter for one man: if the executing of
it by one, ouerturneth the order appointed by Christ: brings in tyranny:
maintayneth ambition: and lastly, be forbidden by the cannon law it self,
then must it needs follow, that it belongs not unto one man to
excommunicate, but unto the Eldershippe, and that with the consent of the whole
Church.

Their objections hereunto in defense of their own practice be these:

1 Objection. The right of excommunication, was in Saint Paul, and not in the
rest.

Answer. He gave only direction in that, as in all other matters, which he
wrote of unto them, but if they had not thrown out the incestuous person, he
had remained still vnexcommunicated, for all that which S. Paul had said unto
them.

2 Objection. Christ gave Peter and every Apostle power to bind, and lose in
earth and in heaven, which interpreters expound by Matthew. 18. 15.

Answer. That power was of denouncing Gods judgments, or pronouncing his
mercy in preaching, and not of this action: they are expounded one by another,
because of the ratifying of them both in heaven alike.

3 Objection. Paul did excommunicate Hymeneus and Philetus.

Answer. That is, being moderator of the action, he pronounced it, not that he
did it alone: The same answer is to be made unto the Fathers, as Ambrose,
etc. who are said to excommunicate.

Therefore upon these grounds of Scriptures, Fathers Councils, The conclusion of
the whole book.
Emperors, Laws, Histories, new Writers, and clear light of reason, I
conclude, that Chap. 1.
Christ has prescribed unto us an exact, and perfect platform of gouerninge
his Church at all times, and in all places: which is this, Cha. 10. and 11.
that there ought to be no ministers of the word, but Pastors and Teachers,
which are to be Chap. 4.
called by the people, and Chap. 7.
ordained by the Eldership, are of Chap. 10.
equal authority in their several congregations, must Chap. 10
with all faithful diligence imploye themselves, in the ministry of the
word and Sacraments, Chap. 1^
that there are to be in every Congregation, certain Elders, whose office is
to ouersee the behavior of the people, and assist their pastor, in the
government of the Church: also Chap. 13
Deacons, who are to be employed only in receiving, and bestowing the
liberality and goods of the Church, to the relief of the poor, and other
necessary uses: Lastly, Chap. 14.
that there must be in every Congregation, an Eldership, of Pastor, Teacher,
(if they can have any) and Elders, who are in common, to see that the Church
be well governed, not only in maintayning the profession and practice of the
word in general, Chap. 17
but also in admonishing, reprehending, or Chap. 18.
separatinge from the Lords Supper, them that walk offensiuely, and Chap. 19
lastly in excommunicating them, that by no other means can be reclaimed. So
that all and every government, contrary or besides this, whether in part or
in whole, swarueth from that order, which Christ has set down in his word,
and therefore is unlawful.

FINIS.

