A BRIEF FOVRME OF CONFESSION, INstructing all Christian folk how to confess
their sins, and so to dispose themselves, that they may enjoy the benefit of
true Penance, doing the worthy fruits thereof, according to the use of
Christ's Catholic Church. Newly translated into English, and set forth
together with certain other godly brief Treatises and Prayers, as is to be
seen in the side following.

ANTVERPIAE, Apud Iohannem Foulerum. M. D. LXXVI. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The Contents of this Book.
A Brief form of Confession. A Treatise to receive the B. Sacrament, made by
Sir Thomas More. Fol. 52. Certain Prayers and Meditations of his 67. An
Instruction unto true Charity. 72. An Exhortation in Latin. 74. The same in
English 75. A fervent calling for Gods help in all tribulation, gathered out of
certain Psalms in Latin. 79. Certain Prayers of Lodouicus Viues in Latin.
92. Prayers before and after the receiving of the B. Sacrament. 94. Item
certain Prayers of S. Tho. More, taken out of his Treatice upon the Pass^on.
100. The Golden Litanie. 106.
TO THE Right Honorable and Excellent Lady the Duchess of Feria her Grace.
IT has been long my desire (right honorable and virtuous Lady) ever sins I
did first see and know the right Noble and most worthy Duke your Graces late
Husband, to be able to do some service, or to show some token of duty to so
wise and so worthy a Personage as his Grace was. Whose virtues were such, and
his noble Qualities so great and so well known unto al (who neither for
sinister affection were blinded, nor for ignorance, unapt to esteem and see the
same) that I may well say and doubt, whether the Nobility of blood and
parentage (which was very high and ancient) were greater in him, or else the
virtues and qualities of his mind, the which alone had been meet and
sufficient, to have made him such, if he had not ben thereto borne by kind and
noble Race. For if true Nobility consist in the gifts of virtue, wisdom and
prowess, adjoined with some antiquity of famous and worthy Progenitors: I
need not but report the truth hereof to any that knew his Grace but a little,
whether he were not abundantly endued with all the same. The Antiquity of his
renowned Family and Offspring, the late Histories of Naples and Spain do
manifestly witness to the world. His liberality and passing Freenes in
succouring poor Gentlemen and other in necessity (the memory whereof is yet
fresh in the minds of many so succored by him) his Religious Devotion toward
God and his Catholic Church, his faithful counsel to his Prince, his true
and ready seruise in public affairs at sundry times employed, his valor and
prowess in Martial feats well tried: all these Noble Qualities of his Grace
being so well known and witnessed to the world, must needs confirm and prove,
that he was a very worthy and true Nobleman in deed.

For which cause (as I said before) seeing and knowing all these high gifts
of God and nature to be so plentifully in him, I did ever think my self bound
to be ready to serve him, to honor him and to bear that loyal affection toward
him, which true Nobility does of right require of al true honest hearts.

But now whereas it has pleased God, so sone to bereave your Grace of so Noble
and so dear a Husband, and al good men of so great and so hable a Patron in
their necessities, and that now the best seruise we can do him, is to pray
heartily for him: yet that former desire of mine is not thus quenched, nor dead
with him, but from him is derived to such as be leaft behind him, being most
nere and dear than unto him, and leaft now to us as matter, whereon still to
exercise our former seruise and duty.

And this very cause it was, which moved me of late, that whereas I had newly
set forth a brief Latin Chronicle (printed before at Paris) and had somewhat
augme^ted it my self, and among other things, made mention of the most
honorable Duke of Feria, both of that he did in England a little before and
after the death of Good Queen Marie, and now last, of his own death, in
departing out of this world in so good and so Godly Christian wise: all that
part of my labor therein, I have dedicated unto that Noble Impe your Graces
most dear and only Son, leaft now unto you for a very pattern and comfort
of his no less dear, than Noble Father. Which when I had done, yet was I not
so satisfied, but took it to be against all good manner, if in showing some
service and honor to the Son, I should leave alone the Mother not so much as
saluted.

And therefore, whereas I had also translated out of Spanish a short Treatise
co^teining a brief form or Doctrine of Confession, which has seemed to the
learned and virtuous of our Nation here a thing very necessary and profitable,
specially at this time in so great corruption both of true faith, and good
life: it came also to mind, that I should do right well, to dedicate the same
small labor of mine unto your Honor, for a further testimony of my foresaid
affection and duty, not only unto that most honorable Duke, who now (no
doubt) is gone from this transitory honor, to live in eternal Glory with
God. but also unto your Grace, unto who^ I beseke our Lord to send such
continuance and increase of worldly honor, and such comfort to mitigate the
dolor of his departing hence, that you may live both together again in that
life and glory that never shall decaie nor have end: and in the mean time
such good health and fortitude to bear patiently this loss and lack of him,
that those Noble virtues, which are in your Grace, be not let thereby, but
may be so exercised together with your Son, and in training him up in his
Fathers own steps, that as long as the Mother or Son shall live here, the
worthy memory of the Father shall never die in men's hearts.

From Louen the second of April, Anno D. 1572. Your Graces most ready
Seruitour, John Fouler.

To the Reader.
WHereas in this great corruption of Faith and good life, there is also great
want of good instruction for the amendme^t of both the same: and whereas yet the
blindness or malice of some me^ is so great, that the very same means leaft by
Christ and his Apostles in the Church for that end, they make so small account
of, that they both contemn, and condemn the same, and without al reason raise
thereat with full uncomely terms: it has seemed to many good and virtuous men
right necessary, to set forth some such Treatise, wherein briefly is contained
both the right use and end of Shrift or Confession and also the due order
that each Christian man ought to keep and observe in the same. Which whosoever
shall duly peruse and examine, shall soon see, how little reason or cause there
is, to make Confession a cloak or color of any vice and lewednes, since it is
purposely ordained for a mean and present Remedy against all vice and sin.

There is no time nor place now, to enter into farther dispicions with such
kind of persons, namely the same Argument being already handled by diverse
excellent great Clerks, both in Latin, and in English also.

Only this I had further to warn the Reader, that having translated this
Treatise into our own Language, and being exhorted to set forth the same for
the better information of all sorts in this point: it seemed also very
expediente, to add thereunto certain other godly Instructions, Meditations,
and Prayers serving all to the same purpose: that is, for the avoiding of
sin, and purchasing of virtue, in the exercise whereof does consist the whole
life of the true believer and follower of Christ. And this to be, and ever to
have been the Doctrine and practice of the known Catholic Church, not only
these present times, but al times and ages even from Christ and his Apostles
all along, have and do most manifestly testify and show.

A BRIEF FOVRME OF SHRIFT OR CONfession, according to the use of Christ's
Catholic Church.
The first Chapter. Of such things as the penitent sinner must understand, and
do, for and before he go to Confession.
HE that will well and duly make his Confession must first of al call himself to
acco^pte certain hours or days, according to the time that he has last been
shriuen, and so with all diligence call to mind and remembrance his own sins
and offenses.

And let him not go to the fete of his ghostly Father, trusting only upon that
which he shall ask or enquire of him. For a thing of such importance, as is
for a man to reconcile himself unto God, ought not to be done slightly, and
(as a man would say) at all adventure, or upon any sudden light occasion: but
of sad and set purpose, and upon good advise taken before, entering first into
particular account with God, and with a man's own conscience in his secret
chamber and closest place, considering, that there he goes to give account of
his life unto God, and unto the Priest in his name.

The which account cannot be made in such sort, as it ought to be, except
there go a diligent examination and discussing of the bonds and burdens,
charges and discharges of our conscience, the which are our sins. And
therefore the Priest, if he will do well his duty, ought not to admit and
receive any penitent that is unprovided in this poi^t, unless it be in extreme
necessity. For it is a plain contempt of the Sacrament of Penance, and of the
Judgment of God which is exercised therein. Now than for the better calling
to mind and remembrance of our sins, five things are principally to be
considered.

1. The time passed, sinse we were last shriuen and confessed. 2. The state of
our degree and person. 3. The office and daily exercises wherein we have been
occupied. 4. The places where we have lived and ben in. 5. The persons with
whom we have kept company and ben most conversant.
The second Point. Of what sins particular rehearsal and mention is to be
made in confession. Of Venial sins.
FOr to know and understand well, what sins are to be called to mind for to
repent us of the same, and to confess them: it is to be noted, that the
sins, which a man does commit of his own will, are of twoe kinds. The one
are Venial, the other Mortal. The Venial, are those sins and neglige^ces,
into which almost hourly and at every little occasion we do fall through our
weakness: as are jesting, lawghing ouermuche, idle talk, hastines and sudden
anger for a trifle, or to make a leasing without damage to our neighbor. And
generally, almost al ye evil motions that we have, being either without full
deliberation or consent: or at least without contempt of God, or any notable
irreuere^ce of him, or any notable harm of ourselves, or of our neighbors.

Al these, and such as these, are called Venial sins, for that God our
Lord having respect to our weakness, does easily pardon and forgive us
th^same, and does not bind us to any other then temporal pain for them. Of
such as these did Salamon say: That seven times in a day the just man does
fall. Prou. 24.
Signifying thereby unto us, that even the very just and righteous men do
oftentimes fall into them. And of these sins also did S. John mean in his
Epistle, 1. Joan. 1.
when he said: If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves.

And therefore, for that they are so daily, and so common through our weakness,
God has left in his Church, byside the Sacrament of Penance, many remedies for
them. And therefore it is not of necessity, to confess them, although it be
very laudable and meritorious to be shriuen of them also.

The principal remedies for these venial sins, are.

Pater noster.
Of the sins which are mortal, of the which it is necessarily required,
that particular mention and rehearsal be made in Confession.
IT remains therefore, y^ mortal and deadly syns only (or such as be doubtful
whether they be mortal, or no) be those, whereof we must make account
particularly in the Sacrament of Confession and Penance, to the end to repent
us of them, and to rehearse and open them in shrift wholly and plainly. And
although it be a very hard thing to know the same, yet as far as the matter and
present consideration can admit, it is to be understood: that that deed or
negligence is a deadly sin, in which of purpose and advisedly with notable
contempt of God, or manifest harm of our self or our neighbor, any of the
ten commandments are broken, or else when we do any thing against yt, which
our own conscience does teach us, in such sort, as is above said: as for
example, to despise God, and to despair of his mercy, to forswear, or swear
falsely, to steal any thing of value, not to give almose, if we be able, to
such as we know to be in necessity.

These and such like, which are manifest and plain mortal or deadly sins,
and also such as in respect of their quality or quantity are doubtful to the
penitent, or to ye Ghostly Father, so that they cannot well be judged, whether
they be mortal or venial, must of necessity, as we have said, be called to
mind and rehearsed of the party penitent, for to repent himself and confess
the same. For if any one of these be willingly leaft out in Confession, the
party penitent does hasard himself, in not making his shrifte in such sort
as he ought, and so should thereby commit a grievous sin.

And in all these sins, he must not only make rehearsal of such as he has
committed by deed, but also of such as he has committed by thought, or desire,
and by word, whereas God is also offended by each of these.

The third Point. Of the Circumstances.
Again, in this consideration and calling to mind of thy sins for to repent
thee and make due confession of them, thou must also rehearse and make
confession, not only of these sins, as they are alone, but also of the
circumstances that go with them, namely such as increase the sin in such
sort, that they change the kind and nature thereof, as when a man commits
any thing against his Parents, or spiritual Pastors, or sins in a hallowed
place. The most common circumstances, are seven.

1. Who. 2. How much. 3. Why and wherefore. 4. In what place. 5. At what time.
6. By what means and instruments. 7. How often, or how seldom.






In what place, that is to wit,

At what time, to wit, whether

By what means, and how

The fourth Point. Of the first part of Penance, which is Contrition
WHen the Penitent has thus considered and called to an account the enormitie
and filth of his sins, as is aforesaid, with the circumstances of the same:
it behooves him with true and hearty repentance thereof, to ask God forgiveness,
with all humility and hope to obtain the same: being sorry therefore most
intierly and earnestly, specially for having offended God, unto whom so great
service is due: putting no trust in himself, but trusting wholly in the merits
of Christ Jesus, the virtue whereof he shall now partake in this holy Sacrament
of penance. This sorrow and repentance of sins, to ye end it may be fruteful,
must be joined principally with five things.

1. With Faith, by which we believe both the threattes, and the promises of
God, and the virtue of this Sacrament.

2. With humility and submissio^ of our selves, wherewith the sinner does for
his part repute and think himself unworthy of forgiveness, or of any good
thing.

3 With hope of Gods mercy that he may obtain pardon.

4. With trust and confidence in the merits of Christ Jesus, by and through
whom all pardon is obtained.

5. With the love of God, that is to wit, that all sorrow and abhorring of
sin be principally for the honor of God, and for to accomplish the obedience
that is due unto him. And because this is the chief and principal part of
penance, it is very expedient, that the party penitent use al diligence to
procure through the help of our Lord, that he have no notable defect and fault
therein. And therefore he ought to further himself with all things that are
wont to stir up and increase in our soul this so necessary a fire of Gods
love, as for example.

1. The knowledge of ourselves, and of our exceeding and vile baseness.

2 The knowledge of the exceeding passing greatness of God, whom we have
offended.

3. The due pondering and thinking on our sins, and their filthiness, and the
euilles that they bring with them.

4. To think on the wrath of God, and on his judgment, and the pains that
our sins do deserve.

5. To acknowledge the inestimable benefits which we have received at Gods
hands.

6. To have before our eyes his passing manifold mercy and goodness, through the
which he casts of noman that does heartily seek him.

7. Last of al, the exercise of holy prayer, whereby the gifts of God are
obtained.

The fourth Point. Of the second part of penance, which is Confession.
IT behooves also for the perfiting of this Sacrament, to have full and earnest
purpose to confess al our sins, as is before said, with their circumstances,
namely such as do notably aggrauate and change the nature or kind of the sin.

And this confession must have five principal properties of conditions, that is
to wit:

1. That it be whole. 2. That it be plain. 3. That it be faithful. 4. That it
be discrete. 5. That it be humble.
1. That it be whole, is to be understood, that we confess al our deadly
sins, and those that seem doubtful to be such, not leaving out nor omitting
any one of purpose, or ill intent, or by any notable negligence. For, as holy
learned men do say, we must not hope for, nor crave pardon of our sins by
halues of God whose works are always whole and perfect.

2. That it be plain, is to be understood, that it be not done with words
that may hide and cover the substance and nature of the sin committed. For
else it were no Confession, but a cloking and covering: neither could the
sentence of the Priest have any place, because the judge cannot assoyle the
thing that he knows not.

3. That it be faithful, not telling one thing for another: and not to accuse
other, or excuse our selves, but faithfully to report the truth, as it was
done in deed.

4. That it be discrete, is to be understood, that we confess our sins in
such wise, that we defame no other persons, declaring more then we should in
confession, and that we leave not out, nor rehearse other impertinent things
that are to no purpose.

5. That it be humble, is to be understood, that we confess our sins with
shamefastnes and confusion, not as though we did brag or vau^t of our sins,
nor tell them as one that told some story, or tale, of things happened in our
life: but that we remember and consider well, before whom we stand and
confess the same.

The sixth Point. Of the third part of penance, which is Satisfaction.
IT behooves also, that ye party penitent, when he goes to the feet of his
Ghostly Father, do prepare himself to make satisfaction and do penance for his
sins. The which consists of two principal things. The one is, to avoid and
keep himself effectually from deadly sin, and from al dangerous occasions
thereof. The other is, to make recompense to such persons as he has offended,
humbling and submitting himself to the rules of good conscience and right, and
framing himself unto the quality of the offense and trespace, according to the
discretion and judgment of his good and wise Ghostly Father.

The first of these two must fail in no wise, neither can fail in him that is
truly contrite. For he that does heartily and effectuousely abhor his sins,
will also consequently avoid and shun the same. For otherwise when the
penitent himself, or the Ghostly Father sees that he that is shriue^, has not
done his endeavor to keep himself from sins, and from the dangerous and
nearest occasions thereof, whereas it is in his hands and freewil to abandon
and put away the same: he may well suppose and gather, that he that so shriueth
himself, has not true repentance: and therefore he ought not to assoile him,
but warn and admonish him, what is meet for him to do, whereas he is not
presently so disposed, yt he may be assoiled. For every mind and purpose to
forsake sin is not enough for him that will be shriuen duly, as he ought to
be: but he must have a full and perfect effectual purpose to sin no more. And
therefore let the party penitent do all that he can for his part, and al yt is
requisite to keep himself from sin, and from the evident dangers and
occasions thereof. As for example, such as have once promised to avoid their
sin, saying yt they were of mind and purpose to put away al occasion thereof,
and yet have not don so, as kepers of co^cubines, and usurers are wont to do,
and such as live by unlawful and ill trades: ye Ghostly father ought not to
believe nor assoile them, until they have in deed abandoned and utterly
forsaken those occasions that brought them in bondage unto that sin.

And he that should otherwise do (as many Ghostly Fathers do now adays) it is
plainly both to his own peril of damnation, and of the persons that come
under his hands to be shriuen. For he makes them believe, that they be at
peace and reconciled unto God, and thereby abuses them, and brings them into
a worse state than they were in before their shrift and absolution.

The other part of Satisfaction (which is a recompense and amends of the
sins and trespaces committed by the party penitent) must be done with full
intent and purpose to make satisfaction, and to do al kind of penance,
according to the counsel and advise of the good and discrete Ghostly Father:
doing for his part all that he can and certainly knows to be nedeful to be
done, for to make his Ghostly father understand, that the mind that he has to
do satisfaction and penance, is true and unfeigned. Wherein it is to be noted,
that satisfaction may be done to four kinds of persons, to wit: 1. To
God. 2. To our betters and Superiors. 3. To our equalles. 4. To our inferiors.


1. Unto God, satisfaction is due for every sin, (if we will wholly avoid his
wrath) by taking vengeance of our selves, or willingly bearing al tribulations,
penalties, or pains that shall come of him, or that shall be put upon us by them
who are in his stead and place, whether it be almosedeedes, or fastings, or
prayers, or pilgrimages, or other like pains, according as the quality of the
trespace shall require.

2. To our betters and Superiors satisfaction is done, by yelding due
obedience and humility unto them, namely when ye spiritual Rulers of the
Church have ordained any thing under the virtue of obedience, by
Excommunication, Interdiction, or any like ecclesiastical Censure. So that, if
the party penitent have offended his Superiors, and continues in
disobedience unto them, he may not by any prete^se be assoiled of such sins
except he be first reconciled unto them, in such order and means, as the
discrete Ghostly Father shall give him counsel to do, if he can not of himself
attain thereunto.

3. Unto our equalles we do satisfaction, by making them amends for any wrong
or harm that we have done them in body, or soul, in their name, or goods.
Wherein we must first do all that lies in us, for to be reconciled unto them,
and to make them amends before we go about to be assoiled.

And if the case be such, that it may be done commodiousely, it is very
expediente and requisite, to make all the amends that may be done touching the
case, before we come to the feet of our Ghostly Father, to the end to show
thereby an euidente plain declaration of our good mind and purpose, and so to
receive absolution in such sort as is due. For when we delaie such
satisfaction and amends till afterward, we do commonly either forget
the same, or else the good mind that we had to do it, waxes cold again.

And if so be the satisfaction and amends be such, that it is to be done by ye
advise and counsel of our Ghostly Father, ye most certain and surest way were
to ask counsel first of him, or else of some other discrete person, (as
touching our duty to be done in such case) before that we come to
confession. And that done, and al amends made for the time and place
requisite, than may we well come to receive the benefit of reconciliation, both
with God and the world, under the Sacrament of Confession. And this way is
none other but the same, which the Primitive Church did use of old time, that
ordinarily Satisfaction should always go before Absolution: and thereby was
both penance and repentance more truly and effectually used than, then it is
now: for that now by overmuch indulge^ce in giving of penance and in seeing
amends made, and by negligence of Ghostly Fathers, and such as have care of
souls, each man is suffered to live as he will, and not only to co^tinew in
sin, but also to justify himself therein, and to think he does well: as
though God would co^descend and frame himself unto our abuses and wicked
minds, Psalm. 140.
or else be beguiled by our subtle excuses of our sin. Let us beseke him to
remedy the same, as a thing longing to him alone.

Verily this order yt we now do here teach and speak of, is very agreeable
unto the Gospel, in which Christ himself our redemer wills us, that, Matthew. 5.
when we go to offer our oblation at the Altar, and remember that our brother
has some just quarrel against us: before that we offer the same, we first go
and be reconciled unto him, and so come afterward and make our oblation, the
which shall than be accepted of God.

4. To our Inferiors, our Yongers and Subjects, satisfaction is to be done in
such sort, ye the authority and office of the Superior be not thereby abated
or minished by overmuch submission unto the Inferior. And this is to be
understood, when as the wrong and injury done is not evident and great, in ye
good name, life or goods of the inferior or subject: wherein the advice and
counsel of the Ghostly Father is to be had and used with discretion. For if the
displeasure and offense be but mean, it shall suffice to cause them to
understand who seem to have been grieved with hard words or sharp punnishme^t,
or any like way, yt the same has been done or said, not for any hatred of the
party, but for the hate of his faults and offenses, and for the zeal of
justice.

The seventh Point. Of choosing our Ghostly Father.
AFter that the Penitent has thus disposed himself, he may go to confession,
and shriue himself unto his own Curate, yt is to wit, unto such as is
appointed by ye Prelate or Ordinary, or by any such way laufully admitted and
allowed to hear co^fessio^s, according to ye time and place. Neither let any
man ignora^tly adventure, to choose his ghostly Father after his own will and
pleasure. For he puts himself in great peril by neglecting ye care of his
own soul, if he look not who are appointed by the Bishops and Prelates in
each Parish, or in religious houses, by consent of ye Ordinaries. For to any of
such he may be bold to shriue himself, and to take for his ghostly father, ye
which in deed is ye surest way and most for his souls health. For he may not
seek, who shall sonest assoile him and most easily, but who ca^ do it best, and
most to yt quiet and profit of his own conscience: using therein al such
diligence touchi^g ye cure of his soul, as he would use in ye cure of his
body being dangerously sick.

And let not any man think, that when by any perdo^ or Indulge^ce it is
granted unto each man to choose his ghostly father, he has therefore free
choice to take whom he list, and so shriue himself. For that should cause a
confusion in the order of the Church, and lead sowles the next way to hell,
with no less peril and harm, tha^ if license were given in some common
wealth, that all the ideotes and ignorant persons that were therein, might take
upon them to cure al manner of disseases in any sick body, which thing is not
to be thought to be the mind and intent of Christ's high Vicar the Pope: and
therefore it is there said also, that the same ghostly Father must be mete and
sufficient. And whereas the ignorant person, that has no learning or
knowledge, can not judge the same: it remains, yt this judgment of the
ablenes and sufficie^cie of the Ghostly Father do reast in the will and
apointme^t of the Prelate, Bishop, or Ordinary, under whose charge and tuition
God has put the soul of the party, and by whose judgment the same party is
bound to be ruled in such like things, if he will walk the right way, and
proceed in due order as a Christian man should. And such as do otherwise use
these privileges, and procure the same, it is as much (to say in plain
language) as to put their souls in peril, as if they would live after their
own pleasure, and without good order, and in such wise as no man may call them
to account of that they are bound to do. And so is the state and order of
Christ's co^mon-welth which God has appointed in the Church, confounded and
utterly perverted, as we plainly see it is done now adays.

Howbeit when the penitent may duly choose his Ghostly Father, which we deny
not but yt in some case yt may fall, he may lawfully do: he must use all the
diligence therein, that is wont to be used in the election and choosing of such
things, as are of much importance unto us, forasmuch as this is one of the
same, yea and that the chief and most principal of al. And let him consider
that in such a Confessor that so shall be chosen, there must principally
concur four qualities, to wit:

1. That he be not let by any Ecclesiastical Censure, whereby he can not assoile
from sins.

2. That he have knowledge to discern between sin and sin, between leaper
and leaper.

3. That he be discrete and able to apply the remedies and good counselles
that are requisite, and to enquire of the penitent such things and
circumstances as are good and profitable to be known, as the case requires,
for behoof of his Ghostly children.

4. That he be of good name and estimation, and of good conversation of life,
to the end that his good counselles may take place, and also that he may thereby
help the Penitent with his good instructions and prayers.

And by this it may appear, how hard a thing it is, and in what danger he
puts himself, that will take upon him by his own judgment, to judge these
qualities (or the most part of them) whether they concur together in the
person that he woold choose for his Ghostly Father: whereas it is certain, that
few men are of so perfect judgment, yea and that few can judge their own
conscience, and know how to make a good confession of their own sins, or tell
how to say their Pater Noster aright, and so much less can choose their own
Ghostly Fathers. And therefore the surest way is, to submit themselves, both
therein, and in all other like things, to ye appointment of their Bishops and
Ordinaries. For which humble submissio^ and obedience of theirs in that case,
God will not fail to give them the more grace in the holy Sacrament of
Confession.

The second Chapter. Of Confession, and examining our Conscience.
The first Point. What is to be done before the particular opening of our
sins.
WHen the penitente sinner comes unto his Ghostly Father, he must first
kneel down on his knees with all humility before him, as before one that is
in Gods place, and so make the sign of the Cross on his forehead, his mouth,
and his breast, saying: In nomine Patris, and Filij, and Spiritus Sancti, Amen.
For that now, though he have never so good cause to be ashamed both of himself,
and his sins, yet notwithstanding al shame, he must truly with his mouth
confess unto God all that is in his heart and breast, whereby he has offended
him.

And then must he say, Benedicite, whereto as soon as his Ghostly Father has
said: Dominus sit in ore tuo, etc. Let him by and by say his Confiteor, in this
form or some like, until he come to the words, mea culpa, mea maxima culpa.

COnfiteor Deo omnipotenti, Beatae Mariae semper Virgini, Beato Michaeli
Archangelo, Beato Iohanni Baptistae, Sanctis Apostolis Petro and Paulo, omnibus
Sanctis, and tibi pater, quia peccaui nimis cogitatione, verbo, and opere: Mea
culpa, mea culpa mea, maxima culpa.

Which in English is thus much to say.

I confess unto almighty God, to the Blessed perpetual Virgin Marie, to the
Blessed Archa^gel Michael, to blessed S. John Baptist, the holy Apostles S.
Peter and S. Paul, unto all holy Saints, and to you my Ghostly Father, yt I
have over grievously sinned in thought, word and deed: through mine own
fault, mine own fault, mine own most grievous fault.

This done and said, let him by and by accuse himself, and confess first of
al, the lack that he has of full and perfect repentance and contrition, for
that he brings not with him such sufficient sorrow of heart, as the greuousnes
of his sins does require.

Let him also accuse himself of the negligence and slackenes that he has used
in amending his life, and in appliyng such remedies and means as were nedeful
to the amendeme^t thereof, as are, continual prayers, fastings, and such like.
Also for not having fulfilled his penance, or not fulfilled it well and duly as
it ought: and for neglecting the use of good and godly deeds, and for not
keeping himself and avoiding ye next occasions and prouocations of sins.
Likewise ye unkindness that he has used toward God, in falling often times into
the same sins, specially if maliciously and wilfully. And also for not having
made such due search and dilligent examination of his conscience, as need was:
for therein are contained ye defectes of all the three parts of penance.

And then let him forthwith particularly confess such sins as he has
committed against God, in breaking and offending his law: as far forth as he
can call them to mind by diligence before used, and as he shall find himself
culpable and guilty in each of the ten Commanadements, and other duties, the
which are here set forth for help of his memory and better remembrance thereof.

The second Point. Of the examining of our conscience through the ten
commandments of God, and of the understanding of them.
AL be it that the ten Commau^dements of our Lord be such, that some do forbid
us the evil, and some do command us the good: yet for all that, each Christian
man ought to know, that each one of the Commandments does both these two al
at once: that is to say, forbid vice, and command the virtue that is contrary
to the same vice. As for example: in the first Commandment written in Exodus,
we are forbid to make any Idolles, or to worship them: and so it seems, that
the abominable vice of Idolatry is there forbidden: how be it, it is withal
no less charged unto us, to honor, woorship, and love one only God above al
things: the which are virtues contrary unto Idolatry. Likewise in the seventh
Commandment, God forbids theft, and consequently he commands the
contrary virtue, which is liberality and free giving unto them that are in
necessity. In the fourth, he commands expressly, that we honor our
Parents and Superiors: where it is consequently to be understood, that the
contrary vice is forbidden us, which is, to dishonor and disobey them. And so
in all the other commandments the like is found: for that there is not one
among them all that commands, but that the same forbids also, nor any one
that forbids, but it also commands.

And therefore the penitent person shall do well, to keep this order in running
them over and in examining of his conscience, that he have regard in each
Commandment both to the one and to the other. For so is the perfection of the
Law of God to be understood, that we know how each precept and commandment is
fulfilled, and how it is broken, and what is therein commanded, and what
forbidden: forasmuch as the office and duty of the servant of God does
consist, not in the only avoiding to do ill, Psalm. 36.
but (as the Prophet David says) in doing good also to our neighbors when
occasion requires.

The third Point. Of the first Commandment, what is forbidden in the same.
THou shall make no Idols, nor other like graven Gods for to woorship them.

What is commanded therein.
THou shall love and honor thy Lord God only above al things, with all thy
heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy strengthes.

How the same is fulfilled.
THis commandment is fulfilled after this manner: to wit, yt there be in us no
love or estemi^g of any thing that repugneth and is against the love and regard
of God: and that we neither love nor esteem, nor honor any creature more, or
so much, as him: but that in him only we put our faith, hope, love and trust,
as in our last end and whole final bliss, loving him above al for his own
sake, and al other things for him. Putting our whole confidence in him, and
running unto him in all our needs and necessities, being thankeful unto him for
the benefits that we have received of him. To think well of him and of his
perfectio^s, to fear and serve him as our Father and only true Lord, to
believe all that holy Church does teach us in his name, and to confess the same
at such time as need is, to honor his Saints and friends, to have in due
reverence his holy Divine Service, and the Ceremonies of the same. Finally to
keep a due order in charity, giving the first and chief love unto God for his
own sake, and next to love our own souls for God, and then the souls of our
neighbors more then any temporal wordly goods.

What is against this Commandment, and how it is broken.
THis Commandment is broken two ways: to wit, by omitting and leaving
undone any of the things aforesaid in due time and place, and when reason ruled
by faith requires the same: and again by doing of things that are contrary
to these aforesaid: to wit, giving the honor that is due to God, (as high
sovereign homage, worship and service) unto any other creature byside him.
Also in not believing, in douting, or curiously searching the points and parts
of the Catholic faith. In communicating, taking part, or favoring them that
do such things. In crediting dreams, witchcraftes, enchantmentes,
southsayings, sorceries, ye vani^ies of Astrology, and to put any trust in any
contract or promise made with ye Devil. Also to put any fond trust in our own
merits as of our selves, or to trust in any earthly things and creatures: to
hope fondly in God, and not to put our own hand and labor thereto: to
despair of his mercy, to complain or find fault with his justice, to grudge
and murmur at his providence, to abuse and turn to evil, his long suffering
patience and mercy: to te^pt him, to blaspheme his holy name, or ye name of
his Saints and frindes: to be unthankful and unkind unto him, to run to some
other, rather than to him, specially in our adversities and needs, not to
behave ourselves in due manner and reverence in our prayers unto him, to set
light by and not regard ye Divine Service and Ceremonies allowed by holy
Church: to bear inordinate love and affection to these inferior creatures,
loving them for their own sakes, as our last end and bliss, and not in due
order of Christian charity.

The second Commandment.
THou shall not swear, nor take the holy name of God in vain.

What is against this Commandment, and what is forbidden therein.
TO abuse in evil and unworthy manner the Sacraments and Doctrine of Gods holy
Religion, and of Prayer, and of things properly belonging to his service. Not
to use al due reverence unto God, or to his Saints, and to holy Churches, and
places dedicate unto him. To commit outwardly by word or deed any
sacrilege, or vnreuere^t act. To swear often times, to swear without cause, and
use ye name of God or of his creatures with small regard and reverence. To
swear in doubtful things, to forswear, and to commit perjury. To promise
and vow evil things, or for evil intent and purpose. Not to fulfill, or to delay
(without necessary cause) any good vow or promise. To use any vain idle oaths.
To break the Commandments of the Church, and of our betters and Superiors.
Also if a religious person do not conform and frame his life to the rule and
order that he has vowed: or if any person do not qualify him self to such
state of life, as he has taken upon him. To blaspheme, to deny God, to curse
and banne Gods creatures. To be negligent, cold and indiscreet, to be
mistrustfull, to be overmuch dull and wandering in prayer, and in Gods service.

What this Precept commands and binds us unto.
IT binds us to the virtues that are contrary to all this aforesaid, chiefly
to the service and worshipping of God. To use our selves well and in due order
in all that pertains to the tongue and to talk: and to spend our time well, as
reason ruled by faith shall require. To use al due reverence unto al things
where the name of our Lord is called upon, as are the seven Sacraments, holy
doctrine and preaching, prayer, vows, taking of oaths, and al hallowed things.
To call on Gods holy name in our necessities, to give him thanks with all our
heart. To swear, when necessary occasion is offered, with all truth, with
reverence, with lawful cause. To do each thing well and duly, according to
the rule, state and office that we live in.

The third Commandment.
THou shall keep holy the Sonnedaies, and holy Feasts of the Church.

What is commanded in this Precept.
TO hear Mass from the beginning to the end devoutly, and the Sermon also, if
we can. To labor and occupy our selves on those days in reco^ciling and
disposing our selves well toward God. To keep us from sin. To bestow those
days chiefly in calling upon God, and commending our selves to him with our
whole heart. And to call to mind and remembrance his benefits toward us, and to
be thankeful to him for the same.

What is forbidden in this Commandment, and wherewith the same is broken.
THis Commandment is broken with all things that are contrary to these
aforesaid, namely by the exercise of handy crafts, and wordly affairs and
occupations, which tend and redound al to profit and temporal gain, when as
any part of our duty toward God and his holy Feasts is let thereby, except
there be some evident and manifest need that requires the same for order of
charity and help of our neighbor.

The fourth Commandment.
Honor thy Father, and Mother: that is to wit, thy natural Parents, through
whom thou wast borne and brought up in this world: and also the spiritual
Prelates, Bisshops, Pastors, Preachers, Doctors, Scholemaisters, and al such
as have charge of souls, and al temporal Governors, and generally al yt are
in Gods stead, as headdes appointed by him for our profit and government. And
by this honor toward them is meant, that we must think well of them,
reverence them, obey the^, help and succor them in their needs, wish them
well, and procure the same, and to pray God specially for the^: also to regard
and have in honor our Elders, and al aged persons.

What is forbidden in this Commandment.
IT is forbidden, to do ought that is contrary to this aforesaid, in time and
place when reason does bind and require the same: as to curse or speak ill of
our Parents and Superiors, not to help them, not to obey them, to give them
il answers, to mock and scoff at them, to murmur, grudge and think ill of
them, to dishonor, contemn or despise them.

The Parents also and Superiors do offend against this Commandment, when
they give not to their children or subjects, and to such as are under their
charge, that thing which is due unto them, as is good admonition, counsel,
teaching, good head and loking to the^, good example, and ordinate love toward
them, and to have a vigilant eye and care of them: and likewise the husbands
in using al these things toward their wives.

The fifth Commandment.
THou shall not kill. Thou shall neither do, nor desire to do any bodily harm
to thy neighbor, to wit, where there is no commandment of Superior or
Governor that requires the same, or public Authority that may laufully
command it.

How this Commandment is fulfilled, and whereunto it does bind us.
WE must be bou^tiful, gentle, meke, courteous, charitable and merciful both to
our frindes and enemies.

What is forbidden in this Precept, and how it is broken.
IT is broken in not doing this aforesaid at such time and place as is mete to
be done, and also in doing any of this that follows, to wit, killing,
wounding, stryking, cruel using, evil handling by force, and putting to shame
or villainy, or else in desiring, or procuring any of these things to our
neighbor. Also in giving of counsel thereto, or provoking the same and
stirring up any to do the like, and in dissembling and holding us still, when we
might let and stay the same. Also when he that is a Judge, does pass and
excede the order of justice, or has not a good and single intent. Moreover in
bearing hatred, malice, anger, wrath and rancour toward our neighbor, in
railing and using evil words and crooked language, or doing any thing that
makes debate and enmity, in piking quarrels, in taking parts and sides, and
giving occasions of harm and offense unto others, in stirring up braulings
and brablings, by stirring up of coals, when they were raked up, that is, by
ripping up of old sores, and renewing a strife which had been once appeaced: ^n
striving, or contentiousely mainteining and holding of opinions: in being at
open defiance, and in earnest and ouerlowd speaking and calling: in scolding
and open clamors crying out in rage of passions, whereby many times men fall
together by the ears, and lay hands one on another. Also in not giving
advise, warning, and counsel in such perilles as may fall on the persons of our
neighbor, on his body or goods, or any of his: also in tourneiments and
exercise of feats of Arms not to use discretion and wisdom, but dangerously
to be rash and hasty, or to use any wrath and hatred therein: Council. Trident.
Sess. 5. cap. 19.
to bid the combat to any person, or to do it, or to be present at it, or
giving ye ground where to fight it.

The sixth and ninth Commandment.
THou shall not commit adultery, nor any fornication, nor desire any other
man's wife, nor have any carnal access or behavior unto her.

What is commanded in this Precept.
TO be chaste, to be moderate and sober in eating and drinking, honest in
words and al outward gestures, to wear our clothes and apparel in all decent,
sad and grave wise, without wanton devises, and honesty, according to our
degree and calling. We are also here commanded, to procure and seek all the
means and remedies that we can, whereby to drive away and avoid the foul
sin of leacherie, and of al unclean and beastly vice, the which remedies are
these that follow.

The remedies against leacherie and uncleanness, and for the better keeping of
the sixth Commandment.
THe first mean and remedy is to refrain and put out of our minds al soul
and unclean thoughts and imaginations: to chasten and exercise the body with
labors and painful things, as fastings, watchings, visiting of holy places,
praying, disciplines yt is to wit, afflicting and putting the body to some
sensible pain, reading of good books, and ye examples and lives of Saints and
holy men and women: to flee idleness, and al ill occasions, and lewd wanton
companies and conuersations: and specially to use continual meditation and
thinking on four things: to wit, death, domes-daie and last judgment, hell and
heaven: and last of al, with the mortifiyng of our own desires and will.

What is forbidden in this Commandment, and how it is broken.
THis Commandment is broken, in having any carnal access and copulation, how
so ever it be, save with a man's own wife. And here the party penitent in his
confession must express, in what wise he has offended in this sin of
leacherie, in all that he shall find himself guilty and faulty against this
Commandment. And though he may not name any person particulerly with whom he
has sinned, yet he must particularly declare, with what manner of persons he
has offended our Lord. For the quality of the persons does alter the nature
of the sin: as if it be with one yt is a common woman, or otherwise a harlot
who is not assured by contract to any other man it is called Simplex
fornicatio, single fornication: if with a Virgin or maiden, it is deflouring:
if with a married wife, or an espoused woman, it is adultery: if it be done
with force and violence* it is rape: if with any of our kin within the fourth
degree of consanguinitie or alliance, it is called Incest: if with any that is
religious, or in a hallowed place, it is sacrilege: if it be with a beast in any
manner of wise, it is called the sin of bestialitie or beastlines.

Also a man sins against this Commandment in any accessories that go
before, or go together with it, or ensue upon such acts: as, in beholding and
casting of wanton looks, in touching and wanton handling in any manner of wise,
in sending messages and messengers to and fro, or letters, gifts, presents,
tokens, and such like inticementes, as apparel, or any thing longing thereto,
or in the wearing and using of his own clothes and garments to procure wanton
affection, in minstrelsie, songs, sweet savors and odours, or any like
inventions of amorours devises, that are but allurementes tending al to such
carnal delights and pleasures.

Again, this Commandment is broken in misse-vsing a man's own wife by
dishonest conversation with her, or committing any thing against the due order
of nature, or by using her any way perilousely while she is with child, or
within the time of her natural and monthly course, or on high Feasts and
Fasting days.

Again, in making any contract of Matrimony, or in making and celebrating
Marriage against the Orders and Laws of the Church, or against the Decrees and
Precepts of our Bishops and Pastors. Item by overmuch eating and drinking for
such fleshly purpose, or by eating of meats or taking of things that provoke
and stir up the body to such fleshly motions. Finally in leading or keeping
company with any person to any such act, or giving counsel, or dissembling
and holding our peace, or not letting and staying the same by any mean we ca^,
or helping toward any of all that aforesaid by deed, word, or by any signs: by
holding such persons known in house to that end, as brokers or baudes: by
holding our selves and our minds long with delectation in any like thoughts,
or consenting with our will to the same, and (to conclude) in all manner of
dishonestie, and uncleanness of fleshly lust and appetite, or any thing longing
thereunto, this Commandment is violated and broken.

The seventh and tenth Commandment.
THou shall not steal, nor desire any thing that is an other man's: that is to
say, thou shall not steal, nor possess, usurp nor withold ought that is an
other man's, without lauful cause and reason.

What is commanded in this Precept, and how it is broken.
THis precept commands to keep the virtue of justice and righteousness, which
does not usurp ought that is an other man's, and gives to each man that that
is his: also to be liberal and free, when God and reason demands the same,
specially toward the poor, if we have wherewithal: and if not, yet at least
with our good will and mind.

What is forbidden in this Commandment, and how it is broken in sundry wise.
THis Commandment is broken in leaving undone any thing of that aboue-said,
in stealing privily or openly by force and violence, or by taking part, or
concealing the same: in taking away hallowed things, or out of hallowed places,
or else in commanding or giving consent and counsel thereto, or helping any way
to put the same in effect, or in praising any such evil purpose, or not letting
the same, if it lie in our power, in not disclosing the same, in not restoring
by and by that which has been wickedly so taken away, if we have wherwithal.

Also he breaks this Commandment, that commits usury, or has a^y evil
trade or occupation wherewith he gets his living unlawfully, in using of
Simonie, that is, bying and selling of spiritual things, in selling above the
just and reasonable price, also in storing up of things, til they wax dearer,
in ouering the market, as some cornesellers do to raise dearth, in playing and
gamning with overmuch advantage, or using deceit and sleightes therein, or
gamning with such persons as can not laufully put away or alienate the same
that they play for, as with young men under government, with Receivers,
Stewards and such like, or in using great excess therein for great sommes, or
leesing and spending much time in play. For all these are certain spices and
kinds of covetousness.

Also this Commandment is broken in defrauding and not paying al due tributes
and customs to our Princes and Magistrates, in using false weightes and
measures, in selling false and corrupt wares, in abating and altering any wares
in substance, quanti^ie, or quality, when they are to be sold, or otherwise
exchanged. Also in not paying our debtes, if we can and may: or in not doing
our best to restore to the right owner any thing that we have found: in not
giving almose to the needy, if we can: in desiring or purchasing other men's
goods or lands to our self by any unlawful means: in making evil restitution
and payment of any thing borrowed, or occupying of an others: in not spending
freely and honestly according to our state and quality, and finally, in being
any way covetous, crafty and deceitful.

The eigth Commandment.
THou shall bear no false witness: that is to say, refrain thy tongue from al
harm and damage both of thy self and thy neighbor, and from al manner of
lying and il report or witness.

How it is broken.
THis Commandment is broken in bearing any false witness to the damage of
our neighbor, or in hearing the same with good will, or in procuring and
causing any other to do the same. Also in uttering and disclosing any man's
faults openly, whereas few men do openly know them, or in bewraying his
secret faults, in aggravating and augmenting his defectes and imperfections,
in hiding and dissembling his virtues, in belying any man, in praising or
commending ought without cause, and to no purpose and good end, or for any
evil intent and effec^: in angring or provoking any man to indignation without
cause or reason, in murmuring, grudging, lying, glosing, accusing, backbyting,
giving privy scoffs, defaming, il suspecting, in being curious and spying to
know other men's lives and secrets, and in bewraying the same, in
slaundering, and sowing tales to defame him, to empaire his good name, to
sprede abroad or to enlarge ill report of him, to judge ill of any man. Also in
hearing gladly and giving ear to other that do such like things, or in not
letting nor forbidding them if we may: in rejoicing at the ill report of our
neighbor, to be sorry that he has a good report and name, to be envious of
his gifts, graces, good qualities, and good deeds: not to give good counsel,
when we may do any good thereby, or to omit and refuse, or neglect to speak
well and give good witness of our neighbor, when time and place requires.

How this Commandment is fulfilled.
THis Commandment is kept and fulfilled by doing good to our neighbors with
our words, where occasion and need requires, and by doing the contrary
things of all that is before said, specially by using truth in all our doings and
sayings, and in such witnesses and testimonies as we shall give of our
neighbor, being glad to set forth his virtues, to cover and hide his
faults, to excuse his defectes and imperfections, and to construe and take in
the best part al things that are doutful, and may any wise be drawn to a good
meaning and likelyhod: to speak and think well of him, without contrarying or
gaine-saying ye manifest truth, to procure and endeavor, when it is in our
power, that other also do the same, and finally, to keep and have in us always
charity, the which (as S. Paul says) for that it is patient and gentle, x.
Cor. 13.
does suffer al, and cover al, and takes al in good part, except that which is
evidently il of it self, or has a spice and parttaking with ill.

Of brotherly warning and correction.
IT pertains also to the affirmative part of this Commandment, to admonish
and warn our brother charitably. Wherein there is some particular mention and
consideration to be had: and that is, that whereas the same is a medicine of the
soul, whereby our neighbor may avoid and come out of syn, or not fall into
it: it is requisite and behoueful, to be circumspect and wary in appliyng the
same to the party at such time and season, as we shall perceive it to take
effect and do good, or else see some likelihood, that it shall do no harm: and
then we are bound to use the same under pain of great sin. And whereas al
men in some respect or other are of duty bound hereunto: yet Prelates,
Preachers, Rulers, Magistrates, Householders, and men of age and authority are
more specially bound thereto, each one according to his degree and state.

The Commandments of the Church, which are six.
SIx Commandments there are in the whole Church, which are in manner general
the which we are bound to keep, each man in his vocation and degree, because of
the bounden duty we have to obey the Church, as our spiritual Mother, and
them that are Rulers and Officers in the same, for that they are in Gods room
and place.

The first.
THe first Commandment is, to hear Mass upon Sondaies, and al holy days
that are kept, according to ye custom of each Province and Diocese.

How this is fulfilled.
THis Commandment is fulfilled in hearing one Mass to the end, and (if it
may be) the High Mass, and that which is of the present day and feast: and to
hear the same with all reverence and devotion, and with good affections and
motions in our hearts, in desiring and calling for the grace of God, and fully
purposing to forsake sin.

How it is broken.
IT is broken, in not doing any thing of this aforesaid, or in doing the
contrary.

The second.
TO fast such days as the Church commands: that is to wit, the Lent, the
four Imber days, the Eues and Fasting days, and on Fridaies and Saturdaies
to eat like as in the Lent, conformably and according to the custom of the
Country and Diocese wherein a man lives.

This precept contains in it two things, to wit, Christian abstinence and
sobriety, which is, to eat once in the day measurably: the other is, the
appointment of such meats as are to be forborne, as flesh, eggs, cheese,
milk, or any of these, without necessity and license.

How this is broken.
IT is broken, by not fasting on such days aforesaid, without some reasonable
cause, and by eating more then once, by eating before noone some notable great
space of time, by eating ouermuche with some sensible excess, or with some
evident curiosity and delicatenes, by eating the night before with apparent
fulness to defraude the fast following. Also by fasting with indiscreet
abstinences to some evident harm of the body, by fasting superstitiously, and
Iewishly, by eating flesh, eggs, cheese, or white meats upon forbidden days
without urgent cause and necessity, and without leave of the ghostly Father,
or of the Physician, in case thou may have time and opportunity to ask leave
and liberty thereunto. By not absteining from sin on those days specially,
by not exercising our selves in good and virtuous deeds upon the same days,
namely in devotion and in prayer, whereby our fasting may be fruitful unto us.

Concerning the manner of observing the Saturdaies, it is to be noted, that
because there are diverse fashions according to the diversity of the Countries,
the well disposed Christian man must conform and frame himself unto the
custom of the Country where he is abiding, if he will live without offense of
others, according unto S. Ambrose rule. And therefore he must also confess
himself of any fault he has done against such customs, specially, if he did
it with contempt, or with offense unto others.

The third Precept.
TO pay our Tithes and offerings, such as of old customs have been wont to
be paid.

They offend this Precept, and are bound to restitution, who pay not the same,
and they that pay them with some defect, or with the worst, and they that pay
not tithes of al such things as the custom of the Country is to be paid of.

This Precept is fulfilled by doing the contrary of all this in due time and
order.

The fourth Precept.
TO go to shrift once a year at the least at Easter, and to be confessed to
our own Curate, or to such as ye Diocesan shall appoint, except we have
license to confess ourselves to some other.

How this is broken.
BY not confessing our selves at this time, by making a fained confession
without the necessary points belonging to the same, by confessing through
compulsion, and with an evil will, by not confessing to our own Pastor or
Curate, or to such as he shall appoint, except we have leave to choose our
Ghostly Father. And if we have leave, by choosing him of purpose that is unmeet,
or unlearned, indiscreet, perverse, of evil life, or not attending ye thing
that he does, nor giving head to his cure, as reason would he should.

This Precept is fulfilled by doing the contrary to all this, in due time and
manner.

The fifth Precept.
TO receive the blessed Sacrament at the time of Easter, or within eight days
before or after, being of lauful age and disposition to the same.

How this Precept is broken.
BY not coming to receive within eight days before or after Easter, without
the consent of our Ghostly Father.

Also by receiving and not confessing ourselves before, nor doing satisfaction,
nor repenting of our sins, and by not reconciling ourselves unto them that we
have offended, if we might conveniently have done it.

Also by coming to the Sacrament with little faith, or without due reverence
and devotion, or not being fasting from the midnight before, or by receiving at
the hand of any other than of his own Curat, except he have leave thereunto,
and in not giving account to his Curat how he has used himself, if he have
received in any other place for some occasion.

This Precept is fulfilled by doing the contrary of all this, in due time and
order.

The sixth Precept.
TO make or keep no weddings or Marriages at such times as are forbidden by
the Church, that is to wit, in the Aduent time, and from Ashewednsdaie until
Low-Sonnedaie, and from the Mondaie before Ascension day until Trinity Eve,
and upon other days that are high Vigilles, fasting days and solemn Feasts.

How this Precept is broken.
WHen weddings are kept upon any of these days or Principal Feasts: which is
to be understood, when there is no danger between married folk to fall into
any syn by leaving to satisfy this duty of Matrimony. How be it there is
never committed deadly sin hereby, except it he by contempt. Also they offend
against this Precept, yt will wed or marie, and not dispose themselves before
with prayer and good motions and devotion to receive duly the holy Sacrament
of Matrimony, and the blessings of the Church.

The third Capter. Of the seven Deadly sins, and remedies for the same.
Of Pride.
PRide is an inordinate desire of honor and excellency.

How is deadly sin committed herein.
BY not acknowleging God for the giver of the goodness or good thing that a man
has, and in being unkind unto him. Also for a man to pretend more his own
honor, than the honor of God, either in the good things that he does, or in
the evil that he refuses to do. In desiring Honors, Offices, Dignities,
Estates, and Preeminencies, to the intent to command, and to be had in
reputation, and to be worshipped, not having respect to his own worthiness,
aptnes, nor desert, nor to the means whereby he procures the same.

Again, to prease and thrust himself into such dignities and rooms, with
inuenting new devises, and attempting great enterprises without good ground and
assistence to the fame.

In holding opinion of himself, that he is singular and passing excellent in
his own good qualities, and that no man can match him, nor be found equal
unto him.

In despising or disdaigning his neighbors by word or deed, as the which
may not be compared unto him.

In attributing to himself, or rejoicing that other do attribute unto him
hon^^^s and dignities that are not convenient for him, in ^osting himself of
the same, or of any evil things that he has done, in bearing over great pomp
and countenance either in apparel, fare, or retinue, or in the behavior of his
own person, in taking indignation with his neighbors for that they do not
woorship and esteem him. In desiring to go before his equalles, or to make
himself equal and not to acknowledge his betters, in disdaining his inferiors,
to be sorry that they stand by him in ought that he does, be it good or ill.

To wax fond and vain glorious in prosperity, and to murmurre and grudge in
adversity, making no account: what he does deserve.

To disdain himself of the Office and Vocation that he has, thinking that he
is worthy of better.

To feign and counterfeit holiness when he has none.

To hide and cover his faults, when as he is bound to show them. Also they
offend in pride, that are wranglers and contentious persons, that will have
their own will and mind to take place, and they that are curious to know
strange and vain things, and they that will not frame and conform themselves
unto the judgment and order of their betters, and of wiser men, and they that
are disobedient to their Superiors.

How a man may avoid this sin and of the virtue of humility.
A man may avoid and shun this sin by the virtue of humility, which is the
beginning and foundation of the Christian building, and consists in a
certain true knowledge of ourselfe, and of God, in the will and desire to be
subject to God and to his Law, in obeying and following our Superiors and
such as have learning and knowledge. In not desiring to go before our equals,
nor to despice our inferiors, having such opinion of ourselves and our
affairs, as may stand with Christian modesty, exercising ourselves often times
in humble things, and breaking the stoutnes and excessive hautines of our own
will, having always before us the example of Jesus Christ, and of his Cross, and
the examples of his holy Saints for to follow them, and having always our own
defects and faults before our eyes, and how much we are bound unto our Lord
and Savior.

Of Ire or Wrath.
WRath is an inordinate desire of reuengement.

All the branches and particular members thereof are spoken of before in the
fifth Commandment, and therefore it shall not be needeful here to make any
peculiar consideration of the same.

The remedies of this sin.
THe remedies hereof are the very same yt serve for pride, and withal, the
virtue of patience, and continual consideration of the Cross of Christ, with
the which our pride and anger of heart must be crucified.

Of the sin of Envy.
Envy is a sadness and inordinate grief for ye prosperity of our neighbor, or
else inordinate joy of his harm and adversity.

This sin goes against the fifth, the seventh, and eigth Commandment. For
when the envy is against the goods of the body, it goes against the fifth
Commandment: and when it is in the goods of fortune, it goes against the
seventh: and when it is against the prosperity of good name, it goes against
the eigth. But when it is in the goods of grace, then it is a devilish sin,
which is against the holy Ghost. The Penitent must look well, what he can
accuse himself of herein, and the Confessor likewise, what he may enquire of,
touching the same.

Of the remedy of this sin, and the curing thereof with the power and virtue
of Grace.
THE wickedness of this more devilish then human sin, which does so much
abase and corrupt the bounty of man's heart, is cured with the virtue of
Charity, the most principal virtue among al virtues, and the which most of al
does make us like unto God, and does truly make him that has it, the true
scholar of Christ's schole, the which virtue is none other thing, but a
certain heavenly fire and heat, which enflameth the heart of man (being
capable of God) to the love of God for his own sake, and of our frindes and
enemies, and al other things, for him.

This virtue whereas it is the most principal fruit of the holy Ghost, we ought
as well for the having, as for the preserving of it, to crave the same of God
himself with often sighs, and fervent desires and continual prayers, saying
always heartily unto God: Adueniat regnum tuum, Let the kingdom, O Lord, of
thy holy Ghost come into us. For thy kingdom does wholly stand and consist in
the possession of this holy virtue Charity, the which does make, that no other
will remains nor reigns in us, but the will of God, and makes us apt and
able unto al goodness. For by it we suffer al, we believe al, we pass over and
endure al with quietness, and finally through it, we have all that ever is hid
and revealed in the holy Scriptures, as blessed S. Augustine does say: and
without it all the rest that remains, seem it never so much, is worth nothing
at al in deed, for any right that it has to heaven.

Of Leacherie.
LEacherie is an inordinate desire about bodily pleasures, and namely the
pleasures of touching. In the sixth Commandment we have at large spoken of
this sin, and of all the branches and remedies of the same.

Of Glotonie.
GLotonie is an inordinate desire about the pleasures of the taste.

Such folk do offend herein, that put ouermuche care and diligence in
seeking and providing for meats and drinks. Likewise such as eat and drink
more than is necessary for their good health according to their custom and
bringing up, and such as eat and drink more than is mete for their estate
and quality. Also they that eat and drink for some inordinate purpose, as
for carnal pleasure, or do seek for exquisite delicates to fill their
delicious appetite, having no need of the same.

Also such as feed with dishonest, uncomely, or foul gestures and fasshions,
mocking, scoffing, toying and such like manners. It is sin also, to mingle
any thing in meats that may make other to be distract and byside themself,
and to be a mean or cause that some other do any of these things: also to
break the fasting days and Vigils, whereof we have already spoken before.

Of Temperance and Christian fasting, which are the due and lauful remedies of
this sin, and his fellow, which is Leacherie.
THis beastly sin, and the sin of Leacherie that follows withal, may both
be expelled by their contrary, which is the virtue of Temperance, which
consists in the moderate use of eating and drinking, and of other things of
the taste, having respect to good health and disposition of ye body, custom,
estate, age and ability, according as reason, good discretion and wisdom
shall teach, without any notable excess or fault.

Of Christian Fasting.
ALso both these sins are orderly expelled with the exercise of Christian
fasting, which consists in chastening and bringing low the whole and lusty
body with abstinence of meats by good discretion, and without superstition,
making the flesh subject to the spirit, that it rebel not to the same.

Of the sin of Avarice or Covetousness.
AVarice is an inordinate desire of getting and keeping money and other worldly
goods.

Herein do offend Simoniacal persons, thieves and robbers, Churchrobbers, men
that use wicked and unlawful trades of unjust gains, as usurers, bands, and
such like: they that withhold that that is another man's: they that borow and
pay not again, when they can: they that keep back or deceive any body of a
thing laid to pawn or pledge, or a thing lost, or laid to keep and put in
trust with any man, against the will of the owner. Also they that do not spend
in due time and manner, as is mete for their estate. They yt are not liberal
toward ye poor in due order of charity: and they that put their whole mind
and study in getting or keeping these casual goods of ye world, forgetting
their own souls, and God.

The rest that touches this sin, we have mentioned in the seventh
Commandment.

This sin is avoided by the exercise of three moral ver^ues, Justice,
Liberality, and Mercy or Pity.

By Justice or righteousness, which is the virtue that gives to each man that
which is his, and withholdeth nothing that is another.

By Liberality, which is the virtue by which these temporal goods are bestowed
and spent, when, and how and to such as is convenient.

By the virtue of pity or mercy, which is a certain hearty compassion of the
necessities and miseries of our neighbor. Whereby the hardness of the mind of
the covetous man is mollified, and at last moved and drawn, not to set his
mind on these worldly goods, in getting or keeping of them in such wise, that
he leese God, who is our true good and treasure: but so to use them as they are
ordained, which is, to spend them as is convenient, to the service of God, and
the profit of our selves and of our neighbors.

Of the sin of Sloth.
Sloth is a slackenes or lothing in beginning and pursuing the things that
belong to walk in the way of God.

In this sin do offend the dull and weak sprited, which ever find lettes
and inconveniences in good things. Also such as are cold, luke warm,
negligent, in despeire, and ye wretches that will put themselves to no labor,
nor to nothing that good is: the slack delaiers who walk from day to day,
differring good things: such as have no regard of the good name of a Christian
nor of the duty of their own vocation in the way and service of God,
especially in prayer. Also they that put away from them inspirations and good
motions, and contemn the good counselles of God and the Gospelles, and the
examples of the Saints, and do not that which God and his Spiritual Officers
do command, for, and at such time as they command the same. Also they that
leese and spend their time ill.

Of the contrary virtue unto Sloth, which is Hope.
THis accursed sin is put away from the soul, by the exercise of the Divine
virtue of Hope, through the which a man does attempt things that are hard and
above himself, apperteining to God and his holy will. This virtue makes us to
set naught by travails, to pluck up al impedimentes and contradictions, and
to pass little on the difficulties that may come and fall in the way. Heb. 6.
S. Paul calls it the Anchor: and very well. For it works that effect in the
soul, which the Anchor is wont to do in the sea in the time of storms and
tempests: that is, to hold and keep the soul fast and immovable in her
purpose, which is, God, although unto the sense it seem most impossible or
hard, which we hope for, or though it shall be long delaied, or be yet far of,
which we look for. The which whereas it is the very fruit of the holy Ghost, it
cannot be gotten nor kept without continuing much in holy prayer. And therefore
it is necessary, that the same be much used in the whole process and course
of this perilous life, if we will not have the kingdom of sin to prevail and
keep us away from our beginning, which is God.

Of the sin against the Holy Ghost.
ACcording to the mind and definition of Doctors and learned men, the syn
against the holy Ghost is committed by one of these six ways, the which may
be reduced to the sins abouesaid, if they be well understood. They are these.
1. To despeir of Gods mercy. 2. To presume of our own good deeds and
merits. 3. To gainsaie ye known truth. 4. To blaspheme, attributing that,
which belongs to God, unto creatures: or co^trarywise. 5. To envy the grace
of our neighbor. 6. To be obstinate in having no will to do penance.


The syns mentioned of in Scripture the which do cry unto God for vengeance,
are four.
1. To shed ye blood of innoce^ts. 2. To oppress and persecute the fatherless
children and widows, and such as have no power to resist. 3. The vices of
uncleanness against nature. 4. To withholde the wages of an others labor.
The works of mercy are fourtene, seven bodily, and seven ghostly.
The seven bodily works, are these: 1. To give meat to ye hungry. 2. To give
drink to ye thirsty. 3. To cloth the naked. 4. To lodge the harbourlesse. 5.
To visit the sick. 6. To ransom captives and prisoners. 7. To bury the
dead.


It is to be understood, that we must use these works of mercy toward the
needy, when reason and charity binds us thereunto, and not to tarry til our
neighbor be in extreme necessity, as some stony hearted and wretched persons
do. For he that is come to such extreme necessity, can scant take any profit
of our charity. It is a sufficient bond for us, to know that our neighbor is
in peril to fall into some manifest great harm through such necessity, and so
to use our charity toward him according to our ability, and not to content
ourselfe in giving some small wretched alms, as men are wont to do. Al these
seven works of mercy are fulfilled with the virtue of charitable pity, the
which consists, as we have said, in having effectual compassion upon the
miseries and necessities of our neighbors, so far forth as we are able: and
if we can help them none otherwise, yet with our good will always to keep the
order which charity requires. And these are also specially fulfilled, in
keeping the fourth, fifth, seventh and eight Commandment, being well
understood, and so the Penitent may accuse himself of the same as he finds
his conscience guilty.

The seven ghostly works of mercy.
1. To comfort the sorrowful. 2. To instruct and teach the ignorant. 3. To
counsel them that have need. 4. To forgive the wrongs that are done unto us.
5. To suffer and bear with the faults of our neighbors. 6. To correct and
amend ye same. 7. And to pray unto God for them.
Al these are to be done in due time and place, when reason requires the same,
and namely by keeping well the fourth, fifth, and eigth Commandment, being well
understood.

Of the five wits and the inward and outward senses, and the two powers of
the soul.
Sin is also committed in the senses and powers of the mind: as 1. in
Seeing, 2. Smelling, 3. Hearing, 4. Tasting, 5. and Feeling.
Also in wandering of the fancy, and in the discourses and imaginations of the
mind, and in the two powers of the soul, which are, the Understanding and
Memory: not for that they are properly syns of themselves, whereas in their
own actions, they use no freewil, but sin is said to be in the^, when we
euilly apply them to unlawful uses. And so there needs not any particular
consideration to be made of them, more then that we have already in the ten
Commaundments and in the seven deadly sins. For concerning ye Sight, if it be
of things that belong to worldly pomp and pride, the desire to see such
things shall belong to the sin of Pride, which the Scripture calls the
Concupiscence of the eyes: 1. Joan. 2.
and if it be to see wanton things or women, for to desire them, it
apperteineth to the sin of fleshly lust, and to the s^xth and ninth
Commandment, and so likewise in smelling and touching. The exercise of the
most of these virtues, and the sins against the same we have already touched,
when we spoke of such sins, and the Commandments thereto belonging. And
so it needs not to make any particular consideration thereof, minding to be
brief in this Treaty, as we did entend.

The conclusion what is to be done after dew examination of our Conscience, and
confession of our sins.
NOw then, after the Penitent has made his Confession or shrift of al such
sins as he thinks himself guilty, and his conscience grudging at the same,
being truly and heartily sorry therefore, and with full purpose and mind to
forsake the same, and to avoid the very nearest occasions thereof, and being
presupposed also, that he is not in some such reserved case by some sin, but
that his ordinary Ghostly Father may assoile him, the which must be referred
to his judgment: the Penitent with all humility shall ask absolution and
penance of his Ghostly Father, who is there in Gods place and office, saying
after this manner.

And in what soever other manner I have offended our Lord and Savior, byside
that which I have here confessed: I would also gladly confess the same, if it
came to my mind and knowledge, as God does know, that I have many ways offended
him, which I do not now remember, and that other have also offended through
me, and by my negligence, of al which I cry God heartily mercy, and ask him
forgiveness, and do beseke the blessed Virgin Marie, and all the holy Saints of
heaven, that by their intercession they help me to obtain grace and
forgiveness of God, and that you my Ghostly Father, (who are here in Gods place)
will give me penance and absolution, and good ghostly counsel, and pray to our
Lord for me. And so make an end, adding at the last, the reast of the
Confiteor, thus:

Ideo precor Beatam Mariam semper Virginem, Beatum Michaelem Archangelum,
Beatum Iohannem Baptistam, Sanctos Apostolos Petrum and Paulum, and te, Pater,
orare pro me ad Dominum Deum nostrum.

After Absolution is given, which consists in these words: Ego te absoluo, in
nomine Patris, and Filij and Spiritus Sancti, Amen: receiving the same with
great faith and devotion, and believing steadfastly, that God works therein by
the merits of his most blessed and only Son, he shall hear the good
lessons and penance which the Priest shall give him, and without delaie, fulfill
the same, if he may conveniently, or else as soon as he can, giving always due
thanks to our Lord. And so from thence-forward he must with all diligence
procure the amendment of his life, asking with all his heart and most instantly
the grace and help of our Lord thereunto, without the which no good thing can
be done.

FINIS.
Visitatum and approbatum Louanij, 27. December. Anno D. 1571. J. Molanus.

My Flessh is meat in deed.
This is my Body which is given for you.

Treatise to receive the ^lessed Body of our Lord Sacramentally, and virtually
both: made by the excellent learned, wise, virtuous, and godly man, Sir Thomas
Moore Knight (sometime Lord Chancelour of England) while he was prisoner in the
Tower of London, Anno 1534. and 1535.
THey receive the blessed Body of our Lord both Sacrame^tally, and
virtually, which in due manner and worthily, receive the blessed Sacrament. When
I say, worthily, I mean not, that any man is so good, or can be so good, that
his goodness could make him of very right and reason, worthy to receive into
his vile earthly body, that holy blessed glorious flesh and blood of Almighty
God himself, with his celestial Soul therein, and with the Majesty of his
eternal Godhead: but that he may prepare himself, working with the grace of
God, to stand in such state, as the incomparable goodness of God, will of his
liberal bou^tie vouchsafe to take and accept for worthy, to receive his own
inestimable precious Body into the body of so simple a servant. Such is the
wonderful bou^tie of almighty God, that he not only does vouchsafe, but also
does delight to be with men, if they prepare to receive him with honest and
clean souls, whereof he says: Delitiae meae esse cum filijs hominum. Prou. 8.
My delight and pleasures are to be with the sons of me^.

And how can we doubt, that God deliteth to be with the sons of men, when the
Son of God, and very almighty God himself, liked not only to become the
son of man, that is to wit, the Son of Adam the first man: but over that in
his innocent manhood to suffer his painful Passion, for the redemption and
restitution of man.

In remembrance and memorial whereof, he disdeineth not to take for worthy
such men, as wilfully make not themselves unworthy to receive the self same
blessed Body into their bodies, to the inestimable wealth of their souls: and
yet of his high sovereign patience, he refuses not to enter bodily into the
vile bodies of those, whose filthy minds refuse to receue him graciously into
their souls. But then do such folk receive him only sacramentally, and not
virtually, that is to wit, they receive his very blessed Body into to theirs,
under the sacramental sign, but they receive not the thing of the Sacrament,
that is to wit, the virtue and the effect thereof, that is to say, the grace,
by which they should be lively members incorporate in Christ's holy mystical
Body: but instead of that lively grace, they receive their judgment, and
their damnation.

And some such by the outrageous enormitie of their deadly sinful purpose, in
which they presume to receive that blessed Body, deserve to have the Devil
(through the sufferance of God) personally so to enter into their breasts,
that they never have the grace after to cast him out: but like as a man with
bridle and spur rides and rules an horse, and makes him go which way he
list to guide him: so does the Devil by his inward suggestions, govern and
guide the man, and bridle him from al good, and spur him into al evil, til he
finally drive him to al mischief, as he did the false traitor Judas, that
sinfully received that holy Body, whom the Devil did therefore first carry out
about ye traitorous death of the self same blessed body of his most loving
Mais^^r, Johan. 13.
which he so late so sinfully received, and within a few hours after unto the
desperate destruction of himself. Matthew. 28.


And therefore have we great cause with great dread and reverence, to consider
well the state of our own soul, when we shall go to the board of God, and as
near as we can (with help of his special grace, diligently prayed for
before) pourge and cleanse our souls by confession, contrition, and penance,
with full purpose of forsaking from thenceforth, the proud desires of the
Devil, the greedy couetise of wretched worldly wealth, and the foul affection
of the filthy flesh, and be in full mind to persevere and continue in the ways
of God and holy cleannes of spirit. Least that, if we presume so irreverently
to receive this pretiouse margarite, this pure pearl, the blessed Body of our
Savior himself, contained in the sacramental sign of bread, that like a
sorre of swyne wrooting in the dirte, and wallowing in the mire, we tread it
under the filthy feet of our foul affections, while we set more by them,
than by it, intending to walk and wallowe in the puddle of foul filthy sin,
therewith the legio^ of Diuelles may get leave of Christ, so to enter into
us, Mat. 8. Mar. 5. Luc. 8.
as they gate leave of him to enter into the hogs of Genazareth, and as they
ran forthwith with them, and never stinted, til they drowned them in the
sea, so run on with us (but if God of his great mercy refrain them, and
give us the grace to repent) else not fail to drown us in the deep sea of
everlasting sorrow.

Of this great outrageous peril, the blessed Apostle S. Paul gives us
gracious warning, where he says in his first Epistle to the Corinthians:
Quicunque manducauerit Panem, and biberit Calicem Domini indigne, Cap. 11.
reus erit Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, Who so ever eats the Bread, and
drinks the Cup of our Lord unworthily, he shall be guilty of the Body and
Blood of our Lord.

Here is (good Christian Readers) a dreadful and terrible sentence, which God
here (by the mouth of his holy Apostle) gives against al them, that
unworthily receive this most blessed Sacrament, that their part shall be with
Pilate and the Jews, and with that fals^ traitor Judas, since God r^pute^h the
unworthy receiving and eating of his blessed Body, for a like heinous offense
against his Majesty, as he accompteth theirs, that wrongfully and cruelly
killed him.

And therefore to the intent, that we may avoid well this importable danger,
and in such wise receive the Body and Blood of our Lord, as God may of his
goodness accept us for worthy: and therefore not only enter with his blessed
Flesh and Blood sacramentally and bodily into our bodies, but also with his
holy spirit graciously and effectually into our souls: S. Paul in the place
before remembered, says: Probet seipsum homo, and sic de pane illo edat, ^.
Cor. 11.
and de calice bibat: Let a man prove himself, and so eat of that bread and
drink of that cup. But than in what wise shall we prove our self? we may not
go rashly to Gods board, but by a convenient time taken before. We must (as I
began to say) consider well, and examine surely, what state our soul
stands in.

In which thing it will be not only right hard, but also peradventure
impossible, by any possible diligence of our self, to atteine unto the very
full undoubted surety thereof, without special reuelacion of God. For as the
Scripture says: Nemo viuens scit, Eccles. 9.
vtru^ odio vel amore dignus sit. Noma^ living knows, whether he be worthy ye
favor or hatred of God. And in an other place: Si oculus meus fuerit simplex,
non cognoscet hoc anima mea I^ mine eye be simple, that is to say, if mine
intent and my mind be right, that cannot my mind surely know.

But God yet in this point is of his high goodness content, if we do the
diligence that we can, to see that we be not in the purpose of any deadly
sin. For though it may be, that for all our diligence, God (whose eye pearceth
much more deep into the bottonie of our heart, than our own does) may see
therein some such sin as we can not see there our self: for which S. Paul
says: Nullius mihi conscius sum, 1. Cor. 4.
sed non in hoc iusticatus sum, In mine own conscience I know nothing, but
yet am I not thereby justified: yet our true diligence done in the search, God
of his high bounty so farreforth accepts, that he imputes not any such
secret lurking syn unto our charge for an unworthy receiving of this blessed
Sacrament, but rather the strength and virtue thereof pourgeth and cleanses
that sin.

In this proving and examination of our self, which S. Paul speaks of, one
very special point must be, to prove and examine ourself, and see, that we be
in the right faith and belief concerning the holy blessed Sacrament it self,
that is to wit, that we verily believe, that it is, as in deed it is, under ye
form and likeness of bread, the very blessed Body, flesh and blood, of our
holy Savior Christ him self, the very self same Body, and the very self same
blood, that did and was shed upon the Cross for our syn, and the third day
gloriously did arise again to life, and with the souls of holy Saints set
out of hell, ascended and stied up wonderfully into heaven, and there sits on
the right hand of the Father, and shall visibly descend in great glory to
judge the quick and the dead, and reward al men after their works.

We must (I say) see, that we firmly believe, that this blessed Sacrament is
not a bare sign, or a figure, or a token of that holy Body of Christ: but
that it is in perpetual remembrance of his bitter Passion that he suffered for
us, the self same precious Body of Christ that suffered it, by his own
almighty power and unspeakable goodness consecrated and given unto us.

And this point of belief, is in the receiving of this blessed Sacrament of
such necessity and such weight, with them that have years and discretion,
that without it, they receive it plainly to their damnation. And that point
believed very full and fastly, must needs be a great occasion to move any
manne in all other points, to receive it well. For note well the words of S. Paul
therein: 1. Cor. 11.
Qui manducat de hoc pane, and bibit de calice indigne, iudicium sibi manducat
and bibit, non dijudicans corpus Domini, He that eats of this bread, and
drinks of this cup unworthily, eats and drinks judgment upon him
self, in that he discerns not the Body of our Lord.

Lo here this blessed Apostle well declares, that he, which in any wise
unworthily receives this most excellent Sacrament, receives it unto his own
damnation, in that he well declares by his evil demeanor toward it, in his
unworthy receiving of it, that he discerns it not, nor judges it, nor takes
it for the very Body of our Lord, as in deed it is.

And verily it is hard, but that this point depely rooted in our breast, should
set all our heart in a fervor of devotion toward the worthy receiving of
that blessed Body.

But surely there can be no doubt on the other side, but that if any man
believe, that it is Christ's very Body, and yet is not inflamed to receive him
devoutly thereby: that man were likely to receive this blessed Sacrament very
coldly, and far from al devotion, if he believed, that it were not his Body,
but only a bare token of him instead of his Body.

But now having the full faith of this point fastly grounded in our heart,
that the thing which we receive, is the very blessed Body of Christ: I trust
there shall not greatly need any great information farther to teach us, or any
great exhortation farther to stir and excite us, with all humble manner and
reverent behavior, to receive him.

For if we will but consider, if there were a great worldly Prince, which for
special favor that he bare us, would come visit us in our own house, what a
business we would then make, and what a work it would be for us, to see that
our house were trimmed up in every point, to the best of our possible power,
and every thing so provided and ordered, that he should by his honorable
receiving, perceive what affection we bear him, and in what high estimation we
have him: we should sone by the comparing of that worldly Prince, and this
heavenly Prince together (between which twain is far far less
comparison, than is between a man and a mouse) infourme and teach our self,
with how lowly mind, how tender loving heart, home reverent humble manner we
should endeavor our selves to receive this glorious heavenly King, the King of
al Kings, almighty God himself, that so lovingly does vouchsafe to enter not
only into our house (to which the noble man Centurio acknowledged him self
unworthy) but his precious Body into our vile wretched carcas, and his holy
spirit into our poor simple soul. What diligence can here suffice us? What
solicitude can we think here enough, against the coming of this almighty
King, coming for so special gracious favor, not to put us to cost, not to
spend of ours, but to enrich us of his, and that after so manyfold deadly
displeasures done him so unkindly by us, against so many of his incomparable
benefits before don unto us? How would we now labor and foresee, that the
house of our soul (which God were coming to reast in) should neither have any
poisoned spider or cobweb of deadly sin hanging in the roof, nor so much as
a straw or a fether of any light lewd thought, that we might spy in the
flower, but we would sweep it away?

But forasmuch (good Christen Readers) as we neither ca^ atteine this great
point of faith nor any other virtue, but by the special grace of God, of whose
high goodness every good thing comes (for as S. James says, Omne datum optimum
and omne donum perfectum, Jacob. 1.
de surfum est, descendens a Patre luminum, Every good gift, and every perfect
gift is from above descending from the Father of lights) let us therefore
pray for his gracious help in the atteining of this faith, and for his help
in the cleansing of our soul against his coming: that he may make us worthy
to receive him worthily. And ever let us of our own part fear our own
unworthiness, and on his part trust boldly upon his goodness, if we forslowe
not to work with him for our own part. For if we willingly upon the trust
and comfort of his goodness leave our own devour undone, than is our hope no
hope, but a very foul presumption.

Than when we come unto his holy board, into the presence of his blessed Body,
let us consider his high glorious Majesty, which his high goodness there
hides from us, and the proper form of his holy Flesh covers under the
form of bread, both to keep us from abashment, such as we could not
peradventure abide, if we (such as we yet be) should see and receive him in his
own form such as he is: and also for the increase of the merit of our
faith, and the obedient belief of that thing at his commandment, whereof our
eyes and our reason seem to show us the contrary.

And yet forasmuch as although we believe it, yet is that belief in many of
us very fame and far from the point of such vigor and strength, as would
God it had: let us say unto him with the Father that had the dumme son:
Credo Domine, Mar. 9.
adiuua incredulitatem me^m, I believe Lord, but help thou my lack of belief.
And with his blessed Apostles: Domine, adauge nobis fide^, Luc. 17.
Lord increase faith in us: let us also with the poor Publicane, in knowledge
of our own unworthiness, say with all mekenes of heart: Deus propitius esto mihi
peccatori, Mat. 8.
Lord God be merciful to me sinner that I am: and with the Centurio: Domine,
non sum dignus vt intres ^ub tectu^ meum, Lord, I am not worthy, yt thou
should come into my house.

And yet with all this remembrance of our own unworthiness, and therefore the
great reverence, fear and dread for our ow^e part: let us not forget on the
other side to consider his inestimable goodness, which disdaineth not for all
our unworthiness, to come unto us, and to be received of us.

But likewise as at the sight or receiving of this excellent memorial of his
death (for in the remembrance thereof does he thus consecrate and give his own
blessed Flesh and Blood unto us) we must with tender compassion remember and
call to mind the bitter pains of his most paineful Passion, and yet therwithal
rejoice and be glad in the consideration of his incomparable kindness, which
in his so suffering for us, to our inestimable benefit he showed and declared
toward us: so must we be both sore afeard of our own unworthiness, and yet
therewith be right glad and in great hope at the consideration of his
unmeasurable goodness.

S. Elizabeth at the visitation and saluta^ion of our blessed Lady, having by
revelation the sure inward knowledge, that our Lady was conceived with our
Lord, albeit that she was herself such, as else for the diversity between
their ages, she well might and would have thought it but convenient and meetely,
that her young Cosine should come and visit her: yet now because she was
Mother to our lord, she was sore a merueiled of her visitation, and thought
herself far unworthy thereto, and therefore said unto her: Vnde hoc, Luc. 1.
vt veniat matter Domini mei ad me? Whereof is this, that the Mother of my Lord
should come to me? But yet for all the abashment of her own unworthiness, she
conceived thoroughly such a glad blessed comfort, that her holy child S. John
the Baptist hopped in her belly for joy, whereof she said: Vt facta est vox
salutationis tuae in auribus meis, exultauit in gaudio infans in vtero meo, As
soon as the voice of thy salutation was in mine ears, the infant in my womb
lepte for joy.

Now like as S. Elizabeth by the spirit of God had those holy affections, both
of reverence, considering her own unworthiness in the visitation of the Mother
of God, and yet for all that so great inward gladness therewith: let us at
this great high visitation, in which not the Mother of God, as came to S.
Elizabeth, but one inco^parably more excelling the Mother of God, than the
Mother of God passed S. Elizabeth, does so vouchesafe to come and visit each
of us with his most blessed presence, that he comes not into our house, but
into our self: Let us, I say, call for the help of the same holy spirit, that
than inspired her, and pray him at this high and holy visitation, so to
inspire us, that we may both be abashed with the reverent dread of our own
unworthiness, and yet therewith conceive a joyful consolation and comfort in the
consideration of Gods inestimable goodness. And that each of us like as we may
well say with great reverent dread and admiration, Vnde hoc, vt veniat Dominus
meus ad me? Whereof is this, yt my Lord should come unto me? and not only unto
me, but also into me: so we may with glad heart truly say at the sight of his
blessed presence, Exultauit gaudio infans in vtero meo, The child in my belly,
that is to wit, the soul in my body (which should be than such a child in
innocence, as was that innocent infant S. John) leapeth, good Lord, for joy.

Now when we have received our Lord, and have him in our body, let us not than
letre him alone, and get us forth about other things, and look no more unto
him. For little good could he, that so would serve any geast: but let al our
business be about him, let us by devout prayer talk to him, by devout
meditation talk with him. Let us say with the Prophet: Audiam, quid loquatur
in me Dominus, Psalm. 54.
I will hear what our Lord will speak within me. For surely if we set aside al
other things, and attend unto him, he will not fail with good inspirations to
speak such things to us within us, as shall serve to the great spiritual
comfort and profit of our soul. And therefore let us with Martha provide, yt
all our ourwarde business may be pertaining to him, in making cheer to him, and
to his company for his sake, that is to wit, to poor folk, of which he
takes every one not only for his Disciple, but also as for himself. For
himself says: Quic quid vni^ ex istis fecistis in nomine meo, mihi fecistis,
That that you have done to one of these in my name, you have done it to my
self. And let us with Marie also sit in devout meditation, and hearken well
what our Savior being now our geast, will inwardly say unto us.

Now have we a special time of prayer, whiles he that has made us, he that
has bought us, he whom we have offended, he that shall judge us, he that shall
either damn or save us, is of his great goodness become our geast, and is
personally present within us, and that for none other purpose, but to be sewed
unto for pardon and so thereby to save us. Let us not leese this time therefore,
nor suffer this occasion to slip, which we can little tell whether ever we
shall get it again or never. Let us endeavor our self to keep him still, and
let us say with his two Disciples, that were going to the Castle of Emaus:
Mane nobifcum Domine, Mar. 14.
tarry with us good Lord: and then shall we be sure, that he will not go from
us, but if we unkindly put him from us.

Let us not play like the people of Genazareth, which prayed him to depart
out of their quarters, because they lost their hogs by him, when instead of
the hogs he saved the man, out of whom he cast the legion of Devils that
after destroyed the hogs. Let not us likewise rather put God from us by
unlawful love of worldly winning, or foul filthy lust, rather than for the
profit of our soul to forbear it.

For sure may we be, that when we wax such* God will not tarry with us, but we
put him unkindly from us. Nor let us not do, as did the people of Jerusalem,
which on Palm So^daie received Christ royally and full devoutly with
Procession: and on the Fridaie after put him to a shameful passion: Mat. 21.
On the Sondaie cried, Benedictus qui venit in nomine domini, Mar. 11.
Blessed be he that comes in the name of our Lord: and on the Fridaie cried
out, Non hunc, Luc. 19.
fed Barrabam, We will not have him, but Barrabas: on ye Sondaie cried, Ofanna
in Excelsis, John. 12.
on the Fridaie, Toll, toll, crucifige eum. Surely if we receive him never so
well, nor never so deuou^ly at Easter: yet when so ever we fall after so such
wretched sinful living, as casts our Lord in such wise out of our souls, as
his grace tarieth not with us, we show our self to have received him in such
manner, as those Jews did. For we do as much as in us is, to crucify Christ
again: Iterum (says S. Paul) crucifigentes Filium Dei. Heb. 6.


Let us, good Christian Readers, receive him in such wise, as did the good
Publican Zacheus, which when he longed to see Christ, Luc. 19.
and because he was but low of stature, did clym up into a tree: our Lord
seeing his devotion, called unto him, and said: Zachee, come of, and come
down, for this day must I dwell with thee. And he made haste, and came down,
and very gladly received him into his house. But he not only received him with
a joy of a light and soon sliding affection, but that it might well appear,
that he received him with a sure earnest virtuous mind, he proved it by his
virtuous works. For he forthwith was contented to make recompense to al men,
that he had wronged, and that in a large manner, for every penie, a groote, and
yet offered to give out also forthwith, the tone half of al his substance unto
the poor men, and that forthwith also, by and by, without any longer delaie.
And therefore he said not: Thou shall here, that I shall give it: but he said,
Ecce, dimidiu^ bonoru^ meoru^ do pauperibus, Lo, look good Lord, Luc. 19.
the tone half of my goods I do give unto poor men.

With such alacrity, with such quicknes of spirit, with such gladness, and
such spiritual rejoicing, as this man received our Lord into his house: our
Lord give us ye grace to receive his blessed Body and Blood, his holy soul,
and his almighty God head both into our bodies and into our souls, that the
fruits of our good works may bear witness unto our conscience, that we
receive him worthily, and in such a full faith, and such a stable purpose of
good living, as we be bounde^ to do. And than shall God give a gracious
sentence, and say upon our soul, as he said upon Zacheus: Hodie salus facta
est huic domui, This day is health and salvation come unto this house: which
that holy blessed person of Christ, which we verily in the Blessed Sacrament
receive, through the merit of his bitter Passion (whereof he has ordained his
own blessed Body in that blessed Sacrament to be the memorial) vouchsafe, good
Christian Readers, to grant unto us al.

FINIS.
CERTAIN Devout Prayers and GHOSTLY MEDITATIONS made and collected also by the
said Sir Thomas Moore, whiles he was prisoner in the Tower of London.
Pater noster. Aue Maria. Credo.
O Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three equal and
coeternall Persons, and one almighty God, have mercy on me due, abject,
abominable, sinful wretc^^: me^kely knowledginge before thine high Majesty my
long continued sinful life, even now my very chilhood hitherto.

In my childehood in this point, and that point, etc.

After my childhoode in this point, and that point, etc. and so forth by every
age.

Now good gracious Lord, as thou geuest me thy grace to knowledge the^, so give
me thy grace not in word only, but in heart also with very sorrowful
contrition to repent them, and utterly to forsake the^. And forgive me those
syns also, in which by mine own default through evil affections and evil
custom, my reason is with sensuality so blinded, y^ I can not discern the^
for syn. And illumine, good Lord, mine heart, and give me thy grace to know
the^, and to acknowledge the^. And forgive me my sins negligently forgotten,
and bring them to my mind, with grace to be purely confessed of them.

Glorious God, give me from henceforth the grace with little respect unto the
world, so to set and firmly fix mine heart upon thee, that I may say with
thy blessed Apostle S. Paul, Mundus mihi crucifixus est, Gal. 4.
and ego mundo. Phil. 1.
Mihi viuere Christus est, and mori lucrum. Cupio dissolui and esse cum
Christo. Give me the grace to amend my life, and to have an eye to mine end
without grudge of death, which to them that die in thee (good Lord) is ye gate
of a welthy life. Almighty God, doce me facere voluntate^ tuam. Fac me currere
in odore vnguentorum tuorum. Apprehende manu^ meam dexteram, and deduc me in
via recta propter inimicos meos. Trahe me post te. In chamo and fraeno maxillas
meas constringe, quum non approximo ad te.

O glorious God, all sinful fear, al sinful sorrow and pe^sifenes, all sinful
hope, all sinful mirth and gladness take from me. And on ye other side
concerning such fear, such heaviness, such consolacion, comfor^, and
gladness, as shall be profitable to my soul, Fac m^cum secundum magnam bonitatem
tuam, Domine.

GOod Lord, give me ye grace in all my f^are and agony to have recourse to that
great ^eare and wond^rful agony, that thou my sweet Sa^iour ^adst at the
Mo^^t of Oliuete before thy most bitter Passion, and in the meditation thereof
to conceive ghostly comfort and consolation profitable for my soul.

Almighty God take from me all vain glorious minds, all appetites of mine
own praise, al envy, covetousness, glotonie, sloth, and leachery, al wra^hful
Affections, al appetite of revenging, all desire or delight of other folks
harm* al pleasure in provoking any ^erson ^o wrath and anger, al delight of
exprobra^ion and insultatio^ against any person in their affliction or
calamity. And give me, good Lord, an humble, lowly, quie^, peaceable, patient,
charitable, kind, tender, and pitiful mind, with all my works, and al my
words, and all my thoughts, to have a taste of thy holy blessed Spirit.

Give me, good Lord, a full faith, a firm hope, and a fervent charity, a love
to thee, good Lord, incomperably above the love to my self, and that I love
nothing to thy displeasure, but every thing in an order to thee.

Give me, good Lord, a longing to be with thee, not for the avoiding of ye
calamities of this w^^t^h^d world, no^ so much for avoiding of the pains of
Purgatory, nor of the pains of hell neither, nor so much for the atteining of
the joys of heaven in respect of mine own commodity, as even for a very love
to thee.

And bear me, good Lord, thy love and favor, which thing my love to
thee-ward (were it never so great) could not, but of thy great goodness, deserve.

And pardon me, good Lord, that I am so bold to ask so high petitions, being
so vile a sinful wretch, and so unworthy to obtain the lowest: but yet good
Lord, such they be as I am bound to wish for, and should be nerer the effectual
desire of the^, if my manifold sins were not the set. From which, o glorious
Trinity vouchsafe of thy goodness to wash me with that blessed Blood that
issued out of thy tender body, o sweet Savior Christ, in the diverse torments
of thy most bitter Passion.

Take from me, good Lord, this luke warm fashion, or rather keycold manner of
meditation, and this dulnes in praying unto thee: and give me warmth, delight
and quicknes in thinking upon thee: and give me the grace to long for thy holy
Sacraments, and specially to rejoice in the presence of thy very blessed Body,
sweet Savior Christ, in the holy Sacrament of ye Altar: And duly to thank
thee for thy gracious visitatio^ therewith: and at that high memorial, with
tender compassion, to remember and consider thy most bitter Passion.

Make us al, good Lord, virtually participant of that holy Sacrament this day,
and every day make us al lively members, sweet Savior Christ, of thy holy
Mystical Body, thy holy Catholic Church.

Dignare Domine, die isto sine peccato nos custodire.

Miserere nostri Domine, miserere nostri.

Fiat misericordia tua Domine super nos, quemadmodum sperauimus in te.

In te Domine speraui, no^ confundar in aeternum.

Ora pro nobis, Sancta Dei Genitrix.

Vt digni efficiamur promissionibus Christi.

Pro amicis.
ALmighty God, have mercy on N. etc. with special meditation and consideration
of every friend, as godly affection and occasion requires.

Pro inimicis.
ALmighty God, have mercy on N. etc. and on all that bear me evil will, and
would me harm, and their faults and mine together, by such easy, tender,
merciful means, as thine infinite wisdom best ca^ devise, vouchsafe to amend
and redress, and make us saved souls in heaven together, where we may ever
live and lou^ together with thee and thy blessed Saints, O glorious Trinity,
for the bitter Passion of our swe^te Savior Christ. Amen.

LOrd give me patience in tribulation, and grace in every thing to conform my
will to thine, yt I may truly say: Fiat voluntas tua sicut in coelo and in
terra.

The things, good Lord, that I pray for, give me the grace to labor for. Amen.

Pater noster, etc.
Give me ye grace, good Lord, to set the world at naught.

To set my mind fast upon thee.

And not to hang upon the blast of men's mouths.

To be content to be solitary.

Not to long for wordly company.

Little and little utterly to cast of the world.

And rid my mind of all the business thereof.

Not to long to hear of any worldly things.

But yt the hearing of worldly fantasies may be to me displeasaunt.

Gladly to be thinki^g of God,

Pitiously to call for his help.

To lean unto the comfort of God.

Busily to labor to love him.

To know mine own vilitie and wretchedness.

To humble and meeke^ my self under the mighty hand of God.

To bewail my sins past.

For the purging of them patiently to suffer adversity.

Gladly to bear my purgatory here.

To be joyful of tribulation.

To walk the narowe way that leads to life.

To bear the Cross with Christ.

To have the last things in remembrance.

To have ever before mine eye my death that is ever at hand.

To make death no stranger to me.

To foresee and consider the everlasting fire of hell.

To pray for pardon, before the Judge come.

To have continually in mind the Passion that Christ suffered for me.

For his benefits incessantly to give him thanks.

To buy the time again, that I before have lost.

To abstain from vain confabulations.

To eschew light foolish mirth and gladness.

Recreations not necessary to cut of.

Of worldly substance, frinds, liberty, life and al, to set the loss at right
naught, for the winning of Christ.

To think my most enemies my best friends.

For the brethren of Joseph could never have done him so much good with their
love and favor, as they did him with their malice and hatred.

These minds are more to be desired of every man, than all the treasure of all
the Princes and Kings Christian and Heathen, were it gathered and laid together
all upon one heap.

An Instruction.
Bear no malice or evil will to no man living: for either the man is good, or
naught.

If he be good, and I hate him: than am I naught. If he be naught, either he
shall amend and die good, and go to God: or abide naught, and die naught, and
go to the devil. And than let me now remember, that it he shall be saved, he
shall not fail (if I be saved to, as I trust to be) to love me very heartily,
and I shall then in likewise love him. And why should I now than hate one for
this while, which shall hereafter love me for evermore? And why should I now
than be enemy to him, with whom I shall in time coming be coupled in eternal
friendship? And on the other side, if he shall continue naught, and be damned:
than is there so outrageous eternal sorrow toward him, that I may well think
my self a deadly cruel wretch, if I would not now rather pity his pain,
than malign his person. If one will say, that we may well, and with good
conscience, wish an evil man harm, least he should do harm to such other
folk as are innocente and good: I will not now dispute upon that point. For
that root has many more ^^aunches to be well weighed and considered, than I can
now conveniently write, having none other pen but a cole. But verily this will I
say, that I will give counsel to every good frind of mine, but if he be put in
such a room, as to punnish an evil man lies in his charge by reason of his
office, else leave the desire of punishment unto God, and unto such other folk
as are so grounded in charity and so fast clean unto God, that no secret
shrewde cruel affection, under the cloak of a just and a virtuous zeal, can
crepe in and undermine them. But let us that are no better than men of a mean
sort, ever pray for such merciful amendment in other folk, as our own
conscience shows us that we have need in our self.

VITA per offensam Dei seruata, erit ei, qui sic se seruauerit, odibilis. Nam
qui sic vitam tua^ seruaueris, tute postridie vita^ tuam odio habebis, and
dolebis vehementer, mortem te non pertulisse pridie. Nam restare tibi mortem
recordaberis, quae qualis futura sit, nescis, neque quam cito ventura, and
merito habes metuere, ne morte^ fic dilatam sequa^tur inferorum tormenta, vbi
desiderabunt homines mori, and mors fugiet ab eis, quum eam mortem quam
fugisti, Apocal. 9.
secutura fuerint aeterna coelorum gaudia.

Quam stultum est, vitando mortem temporaneam incurrere in aeterna^? nec
temporaneam vitare tamen, sed pau^^sper differ? Nam si inpraesentiarum morte^
vitaris, an perpetuo iam victurus es? aut alio tempore sine poena moriturus?
Immo continget tibi fortasse, quod diuiti longam sibi vitam promittenti,
Christus impendisse commemorat: Stulte, hac nocte rapie^t abs te animam tuam.
Caeterum hoc certe certum habes, quod and mori aliquando debes, Luc. 12.
and (quae est humanae vitae breuitas) viuere diu non potes. Denique nec hoc,
opinor, dubitas, quod quu^ fatalis morbus aduenerit, and appete^tis mortis
molestia coeperit ingrauescere, optabis te fuisse pride^ pro animae tuae
conseruatione, quantu^ms cruciabili morte, peremptum. No^ est illud ergo ta^
desperate metuendu^ tibi ne fiat, quod fuisse factu^, scis, te paulo post
exoptaturu^. Qui patiuntur secundum voluntate^ Dei, fideli Creatori co^mendant
animas suas. 1. Pet. 4.
Charissimi, Nolite peregrinari in feruore, qui ad tentatione^ vobis fit, quasi
nouu^ aliquid vobis co^tingat, sed co^municantes Christi passionibus, gaud^te,
vt in reuelatione gloriae eius gaudeatis exulta^tes. Pudeat bonos in bonis
timidiores esse, quam mali sunti^ malis. Audire siquide^ latrones licet
dicentes, ignauu^ esse eu^, qui refugiat septe^nij voluptate^, ne post patiatur
dimidiatae horae suspendium. Et Christianum homine^ non pudeat, potius aeterna^
vita^ and felicitate^ perdere, quam pati velit breue^ mortem paulo citius, qua^
tame^ scit se necessario passurum paulo serius, and nisi poenitear, a morte
te^porali ruiturum protinus in aeterna^ eaque plena^ torme^tis omni morte
molestioribus. Si quis vel vnu^ co^spicere posset ex daemonibus illis, qui
magno numero nos expectant, vt in aeternum crucient: omnes mortalium omniu^
minas vnius terrore floccifaceret. Et qua^to magis floccifaceret, si videre
posset coeios apertos, and Iesum frantem, sicut v^^it Beatus Stephanus? Actor.
7.
Aduersarius ve^^er diabolus, sicut leo rugie^s circuit, quaere^s que^ deuoret.
Bernardus: 1. Petr. 5.
Gratias ago magno illi Leoni de tribu Judah: rugire iste potest, mordere non
potest. Q^a^tum cu^que minetur, no^ simus bestiae, vt nos prosternat vacuus
ille rugitus. Vere bestia est, vere rationis expers, qui ta^ pusillanimis est,
vt solo timore cedat qui sola futuri laboris exaggeratione victus ante
conflictu^, no telo, sed tuba prosteruitur. Heb. 12.
Nondu^ restitistis vsque ad sanguine^, ait stre^uus ille dux, qui Leonis huius
nouerat vanu^ esse rugitu^. Et alius: Resistite inquit Diabolo, and fugiet a
vobis, resistite fortes in fide. Eos qui, Jacob. 4.
spe in Deu^ relicta, fugiu^t ad humanum auxiliu^, perituros ^dicit cu^ suo
auxilio. Esai. 31.


Sic perijt Saul rex, qui murmurans, impatiens, and desperans de Deo, quia non
statim exauditus esi, tra^s^ulit se ad consule^dam Phytonissam: quum prius
omnes Phytonissas edicto publico iussisset puniendas.

My firm hope is, that he, which so derely bought me, will not, without mine
own damnable fault, leese me to his most malicious enemy.

The Englissh of the Latin that went before.
WHo so ever so saves his life, that he displeases God thereby, shall soon
after, to his no little grief, full sore mislyke the same. For if thou so sauest
thy life, thou shall on the morrow so deadly hate thy life, that at the heart
full heavy shall thou be, that the day before thou did not leese thy life. For
that certaynely dye thou must, shall thou full surely remember: but how, or
how soon, that wotest thou not at all. And just cause have thou to fear,
least upon such delay of thy death, may happily ensue the everlasting torments in
hell, where men shall sore long to die, and death shall flee from them: Apocal. 9.
whereas by the enduryng of that death, which thou so much abhorrest, there
should have undoubtedly followed the everlasting joys of heaven.

What folly is it for thee than, to avoid this temporal death, as thereby to
fall in peril, to purchase thy self eternal death: and yet therewith not to
escape thy temporal death, but perhaps for a while only to delaie thy death?

For put case thou might for that while eschew the danger of death: art
thou sure therefore, either to continue thy life for ever, or at an other time
to die and feel no pain? Nay rather it may fortune to fare with thee, as it
fared with the rich man, that assuredly reckened himself to live full many a
year, to who^ Christ said: This night thou fool, Luc. 12.
shall ^^ey derive the of thy life. And again, this art thou well assured of, yt
both die ones thou shall, and also, for yt so shortly man's life here passes
away, that long here live thou can not.

Finally hereof, as I suppose, doubtest thou never a deal, that when the time
shall come, in which thou shall lie sick on thy deathbed, and therewith begin
to feel ye painful pangs of death so dreadfully drawing on: than will thou
heartyly wish, that for ye saving of thy soul, thou had died a most sharp
and cruel death many a day before. Than cause have thou none pardie, so sore
to fear that thing to fall, which as thou know thy self right well, thou
would within a while after have wisshed to have fallen unto thee before. Who
so ever suffer any trouble or adversity, according to the will of God, mu^te
wholly commit their souls into the hands of God their trusty and faithful
Creator. Be not discouraged, my well-beloved brethren, 1. Petr. 4.
says S. Peter, by reason of the extreme persecution that is amongst you
(which is sent you for a proof of your patience) as though some strange thing
were befalle^ unto you: but in as much as ye be partakers of Christ's pain
and Passion, full heartily rejoice, that you may likewise rejoice at ye
revelation of his glory.

Well may good men be ashamed, to have less courage to do good, than evil men
have (...) do evil. For a man may hear thieves not let to say, yt he has a
faint stomach, that will stick for ba^^e an hours hanging to live seven years
in pleasure. And what a shame were it than for a Christian man, to be content
rather to lose the life and bliss everlasting, than suffer a short death
somewhat before his time, which he is so well assured, that needs suffer he
shall, and that within a while after, and (but if he repent him in time)
straight upon his temporal death, fall into eternal death and the same so
horrible and paineful, that it far exceeds al other kinds of death.

If it were possible for a man, with his corporal eyes, to behold one of those
griefly friends, which in so great a number daily look and long for us in hell
for ever to torment us: the fear of him alone would make him not to regard a
rish, all the terrible threats that any manne could imagine. And how much
less would he regard then tha^, if he might possibly see heaven open, and
Jesus Christ there standing, as did the blessed S. Stephan?

Your adversary the devil, says S. Peter, like a roaring lion renneth about,
1. Pet. 5.
seking who^ he may devour. But hearcke what S. Bernard says: I humbly thank
that mighty Lion of the Tribe of Judah: well rore may this lion, but bite me he
cannot. Threaten he us never so much, let us not be such beastly cowards, that
for his only rude roryng we fall down flat to the ground. For a very beast is
he, and has no reason in deed, which is either so feeble sprited, that for
fear alone he gives over, or so discomfited upon a vain imagination of the
pains that he may hap to suffer, that at ye bare blaste of the trumpet, before
the battle begin, he is quite and clean overthrown without any stroke at
al. Ye have not resisted as yet to the sheding of your blood, says ye valiant
Capitain, Hebr. 12.
which knew right well, that the roaring of this lion was nothing to be passed
on. And an other says, Stand stiff against the devil, Jacob. 4.
and he will flee from you. Stand stiff, I say, with a strong and steadfast
faith: for Esaie gives us warnyng before, that they, that having no hope of
Gods help, flee for succor to man's help, shall both the^s^lues, and their
helpers with them, come to utter confusion.

So came King Saul to naught, who, because he was not by and by of God heard
at his pleasure, murmured, grudged, and dist^usted God, and so fell in
conclusion to seek counsel of a wy^che, whereas for the punishment of all
witches, he him self had given generally so precise commandment before.

Here follows a seruent Calling for the help of God against all trouble and
tentation, made and gathered out of certain Psalms by the same Sir Thomas
Moore in the time (as it may some) of his last trouble and persecution.
JMPLORATIO DIVINI AVXILII c^ntra tentationem, cum insullatione contra Daemones
ex spe and fiducia in Deum.
DOmine, Psalt. 5.
quid multiplicati sunt, qui tribulant me? multi insurgunt aduersum me.

Multi dicu^t animae meae, Non est salus ipsi in Deo eius.

Tu autem, Domine, susceptor meus es, gloria mea, and exaltans caput meum.

Ego dormiui, and soporatus sum and exurrexi, quia Dominus sus^epit me.

Non timebo millia populi ^ircundantis me: exurge Domine, saluum me fac Deus
meus.

Domine deduc me in iustitia tua propt^r inimicos meos: Psalt. 5.
dirige in conspecto tuo viam meam.

Quoniam non est in ore eoru^ veritas, cor eorum vanum est.

Sepulcrum patens est guttur eorum, iudica illos Deus.

Decida^t a cogitationibus suis: secundum multitudinem impietatum eorum expelle
eos, quoniam rritauerunt te domine.

Et laetentur omnes qui spera^t in te, maeternum exultabunt, and habitabis in
eis.

Domine vt* scuto bonae voluntatis tuae coronasti nos.

Domine deus meus, in te speraui, Psalm. 7.
^a^uum me fac ex omnibus persequentibus me, and libera me.

Nequando rapiat vtleo animam meam, dum non est qui redimat, neque qui saluum
faciat.

Exurge domine in ira tua, and exaltare in finibus inimicorum meorum.

Persequatur inimi^us animam mea^ vt co^prehendat, and conculcet in terra vitam
meam, and gloria^ meam in puluerem deducat.

Arcum suu^ tetendit, and parauit illu^: and in eo parauit va^a mortis,
sagittas suas ardentibus effecit.

Ecce parturit iniustitia^, co^cepit dolore^, and peperit iniquitate^.

Lacum aperui^, and effodit eu^, incidit in foueam quam fecit.

Conuertetur dolor eius in caput eius, and in verticem ipsius iniquitas eius
descendet.

Confitebor domino secundu^ iustitiam eius: and psallam nomini domini altissimi.

In pace in idipsum dormiam and requiescam. Psalm. 4.


Quoniam, tu domine, singulariter in spe constituis^^ me.

Miserere mei domine vide humilitatem mea^ de inimicis meis. Psalm 9.


E^ sperent in te, qui nouerunt nome^ tuum domine, quonia^ no^ dereliquisti
quae^etes te, domine.

Et factus est Dominus re^ugium pauperi, adiutor in opportunitatibus in
tribulatione.

Vt quid, ^omine, recessisti long, despicis in opportunitatibus in
tribulatione?

Quoniam non in finem obliuio erit pauperis, patientia pauperum non peribit in
finem.

Exurge Domine Deus, exaltetur manus tua, ne obliuiscaris pauperum.

Tibi derelictus est pauper, or phano tu eris adiutor.

Desiderium pauperum exaudiuit Dominus: praeparationem cordis eorum audiuit
auris tua.

Dominus in te^plo sancto suo: Dominus in coelo seeds eius.

Oculi eius in pauperem recipient: palpebrae eius interrogant filios hominum.

Propter miseriam inopum and gemitum pauperum, nunc exurgam, dicit Dominus.

Domine, Deus meus, in te speraui, saluum me fac ex omnibus perseque^tibus me,
and libera me.

Vsquequo, Domine, Psalm. 12.
obliuifceris me in finem? vsquequo auertis faciem tuam a me?

Qua^ diu pona^ co^silia in anima me? dolore^ in cord meo per die^?

Vsquequo exaltabitur inimicus meus super me? respice, and exaudi me Domine,
deus meus.

Illumina oculos meos, ne vnquam obdormiam in morte: nequando dicat inimicus
meus, Praeualui aduersus eum.

Qui tribulant me, exultabunt si motus fuero: ego autem in misericordia tua
speraui.

Exultabit cor meum in salutari tuo: cantabo Domino, qui bona tribuit mihi, and
psallam nomini Domini altissimi.

Conserua me, Domine, Psalm. 15.
quoniam speraui in te: dixi Domino, Deus meus es tu, quoniam bonorum meorum
non eges.

Perfice gressus meos in semitis tuis: Psalm. 16.
vt non moueantur vestigia mea.

Mirifica mi^ericordias tuas, qui salu^s facias sperantes in te.

Psalm. 15.
Prouideba^ Dominum in conspectu meo semper, quoniam a dextris est mihi, ne
co^mouear.

Propter hoc laetatu^ est cor meu^, and exultauit lingua mea, in super and caro
mea requiescet in spe.

Tu illuminas lucernam meam domine: Deus meus, illumina ten^bras meas.

Quonia^ in te eripiar a te^tatione, in deo meo tra^sgrediar muru^.

Deus meus impolluta via eius, eloquia domini igne examinata, protector est
omnium sperantium in se.

Quoniam quis Deus praeter dominum? aut quis Deus, praeter Deum nostrum?

Psalm. 21.
Ego autem sum vermis and no^ homo, opprobrium hominum, and abiectio plebis.

Omnes videntes me deriseru^t me: locuti sunt labijs, and mouerunt caput.

Tu es, qui extraxisti me de ve^tre, spes mea ab vberibus matris meae, in te
proiectus sum ex vtero.

De ventre matris meae Deus meus es tu, ne discesseris a me.

Quoniam tribulatio proxima est, quoniam no^ est qui adiuuet.

Tu autem, domine, ne elongaueris auxilium tuu^ a me, ad defensionem meam
conspice.

Et si ambulauero in medio vmbrae mortis, no^ timebo mala, quoniam tu mecum es.

Virga tua and baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt.

Ad te domine leuaui animam meam: Deus meus, in te, co^fido, Psalm. 24.
non erubescam.

Neque irrideant me inimici mei: etenim vniuersi, qui sustinent te non
confundentur.

Delicta iuue^turis meae and ignorantias meas ne memineris.

Secundu^ misericordia^ tua^ meme^to mei tu, propter bonitatem tua^, dn^e.

Propter nomen tuum, Domine, propitiaberis peccato meo, multum est enim.

Oculi mei semper ad Dominum, quoniam ipse euellet de laqueo pedes meos.

Tribulationes cordis mei multiplicatae sunt, de necessitatibus meis erue me.

Vide humilitatem meam and laborem meum, and dimitte vniuersa delicta mea.

Dominus illuminatio mea, and falus mea: quem ^imebo?

Psalm. 26.
Dominus protector vitae, meae, a quotrep idabo?

Si consistant aduersum me castra, non timebit cor meum.

Si exurgat aduersum me praelium, in hoc ego sperabo.

Vna^ petij a Domino, hanc requira^, vt inhabite^ in domo Domini omnibus diebus
vitae meae.

Vt videam voluntatem Domini, and visitem templum eius.

Exaudi Domine vocem mea^, qua clamaui ad te, miserere mei, and exaudi me.

Tibi dixit cor meum, ex quisiuit te facies mea, faciem tuam domine requiram.

Ne auertas faciem tuam a me: ne declines in ira a seruo tuo.

Adiutor meus esto, ne derelinquas me, neque despicias me, Deus salutaris meus.

Credo videre bona Domini: in terra viuentium.

Expecta dominum, viriliter age: confortetur cor tuum, and sustine dominum.

Ad te, domine, clamabo, Deus meus ne sileas a me: Psalm. 27.
nequando taceas a me, and assimilabor descendentibus in lacum.

Psallite domino Sancti eius, and confitemini memoriae sanctitatis eius. Psalm.
29.


Quoniam ira in indignatione eius, and vita in voluntate eius.

Ad vesperam demorabitur fletus: and ad matutinum laetitia.

Auertisti faciem tuam a me, and factus sum conturbatus.

Ad te, domine, clamabo, and ad Deum meum deprecabor.

Quae vtilitas in sanguine meo dum desce^do in corruptionem?

In te, domine, speraui, no^ confundar in aeternum: in iustitia tua libera me.

psalm. 30.
Inclina ad me aurem tuam, accelera vt eruas me.

Esto mihi in Deum protectorem, and in domum refugij, vt saluum me facias.

Quonia^ fortitudo mea and refugiu^ meu^ estu, and propter nomen tuu^ deduces
me, and enutries me.

Educes me de laqueo, quem absconderunt mihi, quoniam tu es protector meus.

In manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum redemisti me, domine, Deus
veritatis.

Miserere mei, domine, quoniam tribulor, conturbatus est in ira oculus meus,
anima mea and venture meus.

Quonia^ defecit in dolor vita mea, and anni mei in gemitibus.

Infirmata est in paupertate virtus mea, and ossa mea co^turbata sunt.

Super omnes inimicos meos factus sum opprobrium vicinis meis valde, and timor
notis meis.

Qui videbant me, for as fugerunt a me: obliuioni datus sum tanquam mortuus a
cord.

Factus sum ta^qua^ vas perditu^: quonia^ audiui vituperationem multoru^
co^moratiu^ in circuitu.

In eo dum conuenirent simul aduersum me, accipere animam meam consiliati sunt.

Ego autem in te speraui, domine: dixi, Deus meus es tu, in manibus tuis sorts
meae.

Illustra faciem tuam super seruum tuum, saluum me fac in misericordia tua,
domine non confundar, quonia^ inuocaui te.

Quam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae, domine? quam abscondisti timentibus te.

Ecce, oculi domini super timentes eum, and in eis qui spera^t super
misericordia eius.

Vt eruat a morte animas eorum, and alat eos in fame.

Anima nostra sustinet dominum, quoniam adiutor and protector noster est.

Quia in eo laetabitur cor nostrum, and in nomine sancto eius sperauimus.

Fiat misericordia tua domine super nos: Psalm. 33.
quemadmodum sperauimus in te.

Accedite ad eum, and illuminamini, and facies vestrae non confundentur.

Immittet Angelus domini in circuitu timentium eum, and eripiet eos.

Gustate, and videte, quoniam suauis est Dominus, beatus vir, qui sperat in eo.

Timete dominum omnes Sancti eius, quoniam non est inopia timentibus eum.

Diuites eguerunt, and esurierunt: inquirentes autem dominum non minue^tur omni
bono.

Iuxta est dominus his, qui tribulato sunt cord, and humiles spiritu saluabit.

Filij hominum in tegmine alarm tuarum sperabunt, Psalm. 35.
inebriabuntur ab vbertate domus tuae.

Quona^ apud te est fons vitae, and in lumine tuo videbimus lume^.

Dn^e, Psalm. 37.
ne in furore tuo arguas me, neque in ira tua corripias me.

Quonia^ sagittae tuae infixae sunt mihi, and confirmasti super me manum tuam.

Non est sanitas in carne mea a facie irae tuae, no^ est pax ossibus meis a
facie peccatorum meoru^.

Quonia^ iniquitates meae super gressae sunt c^put meu^, and sicut onus grave
grauatae sunt super me.

Putrue ^unt and corruptae sunt cicatrices meae, a facie insipientiae meae.

Miser factus sum, and curuatus sum vsque in finem: tota die contristatus
ingrediebar.

Quoniam lumbi mei impleti sunt illusionibus: and non est sanitas in carne mea.

Afflictus sum, and humiliatus sum nimis: rugiebam a gemitu cordis mei.

Domine, ante te omne desiderium meum: and gemitus meus a te non est
absconditus.

Cor meum conturbatum est, dereliquit me virtus mea: and lumen oculorum meorum,
and ipsum non est mecum.

Amici mei and proximi mei aduersum me appropin quauerunt, and steterunt.

Et qui iuxta me erant, delonge steterunt, and vim facieba^t, qui quaerebant
animam meam.

Et qui inquireba^t mala mihi, locuti sunt vanitates* and dolos tota die
meditabantur.

Ego autem tanquam surdus, non audiebam: and sicut mutus, non aperiens os suum.

Et factus sum sicut homo non audiens, and no^ habens in ore suo redargutiones.

Quoniam in te, domine, speraui, tu exaudies me, domine, Deus meus.

Quia dixi, Nequando supergaudeant mihi inimici mei, and dum commouentur pedes
mei, super me magna locuti sunt.

Quoniam ego in flagella paratus sum, and dolor meus in co^spectu meo semper.

Quoniam iniquitatem meam annu^ciabo, and cogitabo pro peccato meo.

Inimici au^t mei viuunt, and co^firmati sunt super me: and multiplicati sunt,
qui oderu^t me inique.

Qui retribuunt mala pro bonis, detrahebant mihi, quoniam sequebar bonitatem.

Ne derelinquas me, domine: Deus meus, ne discesseris a me.

Inte^de in adiutorium meum, domine, Deus salutis meae.

Dixi, Custodiam vias meas, vt no^ delinquam in lingua mea. Psalm. 38.


Posui ori meo custodia^, cu^ co^sisteret peccator aduersum me.

Obmutui, and humiliatus sum, and silui a bonis, and dolor meus renouatus est.

Co^caluit cor meum intra me, and in meditatione mea exardescet ignis.

Locutus sum in lingua mea, Notum fac mihi domine finem meum.

Et numerum dierum meoru^ quis est, vt sciam quid desit mihi.

Ecce me^surabiles posuisti dies meos, and substantia mea ta^quam nihilum ante
te.

Veruntamen vniuersa vanitas, omnis homo viuens.

Veruntamen in imagine pertransit homo, sed and frustra conturbatur.

Thesaurizat, and ignorant, cui congregabit ea.

Et nunc quae est expectatio mea? nonne dominus? and substantia mea apud te est.

Ab omnibus iniquitatibus meis erue me, opprobrium insipienti dedisti me.

Obmutui, and non aperui os meum: quoniam tu fecisti, amoue a me plagas tuas.

A fortitudine manus tuae ego defeci, in increpationibus: propter iniquitate^
corripuisti hominem.

Et tabescere fecisti sicut araneam animam eius, veruntamen vane conturbatur
omnis homo.

Exaudi orationem meam, domine, and deprecationem mea^, auribus percipe
lachrymas meas.

Ne sileas: quonia^ aduena ego sum apud te, and peregrinus, sicut omnes patres
mei.

Remitte mihi, vt refrigerer, priusqua^ abea^, and amplius no^ ero.

Psalm. ^9.
Beatus vir, cuius est nome^ domini spes eius, and non respexit in vanitates,
and insanias falsas.

Multa secisti tu domine, mirabilia tua, and cogitationibus tuis, non est qui
similis sit tibi.

Tu autem, domine, ne long facias miserationes tuas a me, misericordia tua and
veritas tua susceperunt me.

Quoniam circundederunt me mala, quorum non est numerus: co^prehenderunt me
iniquitates meae, and non potui vt viderem.

Multiplicatae sunt super capillos capitis mei, and cor meum dereliquit me.

Complaceat tibi, domine, vt eruas me* Domine ad adiuuandum me respice.

Exultent and laetentur super te omnes quaerentes te, and dicant semper,
magnificetur dominus, qui diligunt salutare tuum.

Ego au^t mendicus sum and pauper, dominus solicitus est mei.

Adiutor meus and protector meus tu es, Deus meus ne tardaueris.

Quemadmodu^ desiderat ceruus ad fontes aquarum: Psalm. 41.
ita desiderat anima mea ad te, Deus.

Sitiuit anima mea ad Deum fontem viuum: quando veniam, and apparebo ante
faciem Dei?

Fuerunt mihi lachrymae meae panes die ac nocte, dum dicitur mihi cotidie, Vbi
est Deus tuus?

Haec recordatus sum, and effudi in me animam meam, quoniam tra^sibo in locum
tabernaculi admirabilis vsque ad domum Dei.

In voce exult^tionis and confessionis, sonus epulantis.

Quare tristis es anima mea? and quare conturbas me?

Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor illi, salutare vultus mei, and Deus
meus.

Ad meipsum anima mea conturbata est: propterea memor ero tui de terra
Iordanis, and Hermonij a monte modico.

Abyssus abyssum inuocat, in voce cataractarum tuarum.

Omnia excelsa tua and fluctus tui super me transierunt.

In die mandauit Dn^s misericordia^ sua^, and nocte canticu^ eius.

Apud me oration deo vitae meae: dicam Deo, Susceptor meus es.

Quare oblitus es mei? and quare contristatus incedo, dum affligit me inimicus?

Dum confringuntur ossa mea, exprobrauerunt mihi, qui tribulant me, inimici mei.

Dum dicunt mihi per singulos dies, Vbi est Deus tuus?

Quare tristis es anima mea? and quare conturbas me?

Spera in Deo, quoniam adhuc confitebor illi, salutare vultus mei, and Deus
meus.

Deus noster refugium and virtus: Psalm. 45.
adiutor in tribulationibus quae inuenerunt nos nimis.

Propterea non timebimus du^ turbabitur terra: and transferentur montes in cor
maris.

Sonuerunt and turbatae sunt aquae eorum: co^turbati sunt mo^tes in fortitudine
eius.

Fluminis impetus laetificat ciuitatem Dei: sanctificauit tabernaculum suum
Altissimus.

Deus in medio eius non commouebitur, adiuuabit eam deus mane diluculo.

Miserere mei Deus, Psalt. 50.
secundum magnam misericordiam tuam.

Et secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum, dele iniquitatem meam.

Amplius laua me ab iniquitate mea: and a peccato meo munda me.

Quoniam iniquitatem meam ego cognosco: and peccatu^ meum contra me aest semper.

Tibi ^oli peccaui, and malu^ cora^ te feci: vt iustificeris in sermonibus
tuis, and vincas cu^ iudicaris.

Ecce enim in iniquitatibus co^ceptus sum and in peccatis concepit me matter mea.

Ecce enim veritatem dilexisti: incerta and occulta sapientiae tuae
manifestasti mihi.

Asperges me hyssopo, and mundabor: lauabis me, and super niuem dealbabor.

Auditui meo dabis gaudiu^ and laetitia^: and exultabu^t ossa humiliata.

Auerte faciem tuam a peccatis meis: and omnes iniquitates meas dele.

Cor mundu^ crea in me Deus: and spiritum rectum innoua in visceribus meis.

Ne proijcias me a facie tua* and Spiritum sanctum tuum ne auferas a me.

Read mihi laetitiam salutaris tui* and Spiritu principali confirma me.

Docebo iniquos vias tuas: and impij ad te conuertentur.

Libera me de sanguinibus, Deus, Deus salutis meae and exultabit lingua mea
iusti^^am tuam.

Domine, labia mea aperies: and os meu^ annuntiabit laudem tua^.

Quoniam si voluisses sacrificiu^ dedissem vtique: holocaustis non delectaberis.

Sacrificium Deo, spiritus contribulatus cor contritum and humiliatum, Deus non
despicies.

Benign fac, domine, in bona voluntate tua Sion: vt aedificentur muri
Jerusalem.

Tunc acceptabis sacrificium iustitiae, oblationes and holocausta: tunc
imponent super altar tuu^ vitulos.

Exaudi, deus, oratione^ meam, and ne despexeris deprecationem mea^, Psalm. 54.
inte^de mihi, and exaudi me.

Cor meum conturbatum est in me, and sormido mortis cecidit super me.

Timor and tremor veneru^t super me, and co^texeru^t me tenebrae.

Et dixi, Quis dabit mihi pennas sicut columbae, and volabo and requiescam?

Iacta super Dominum curam tuam, and ipse te enutriet.

No^ne deo subiecta erit anima mea? Psalm. 61.
ab ipso enim salutare meu^.

Nam and ipse Deus meus, and salutaris meus, susceptot meus, no^ mouebor
amplius.

Quousque irruitis in hominem? interficitis vniuersi vos, ta^quam parieti
inclinato, and maceriae depulsae.

Veruntamen Deo subiecta esto anima mea, quoniam ab ipso patientia mea

Quia ipse Deus meus, and Saluator meus, adiutor meus, no^ emigrabo.

In Deo salutare meum, and gloria mea, Deus auxilij mei, and spes mea in Deo
est.

Sperate in eo omnis congregatio populi, effundite coram illo corda vestra,
adiutor Deus noster in aeternum.

Semel locutus est Dominus, duo haec audiui, quia potestas Dei est, and tibi
Domine misericordia, quia tu reddes vnicuique iuxta opera ^ua.

Deus, Deus meus: ad te de luce vigilo. Psalm. 62.


Sitiuit in te anima mea, quam multipliciter tibi caro mea.

In terra delerta, inuia, and inaquosa, sic in sancto apparui tibi, vt videre^
virtutem tua and gloria^ tuam.

Quoniam melior est misericordia tua super vitas, labia mea laudabunt te.

Sic benedicam te in vita mea, and in nomine tuo leuabo manus meas.

Sicut adipe and pinguedine repleatur anima mea, and labijs exultationis
laudabit os meum.

Sic memor fui tui super stratu^ meum, in matutinis meditabor in te, quia
fuisti adiutor meus.

Et in velamento alarm tuaru^ exultabo, ad haesit anima mea post te, me
suscepit dextera tua.

Ipsi vero in vanum quaesierunt animam meam: introibunt in inferiora terrae,
tradentur in manus gladij, parts vulpium eru^t.

Rex vero laetabitur in Deo, laudabuntur omnes qui iurant in eo: quia
obstructum est os loquentium iniqua.

Deus misereatur nostri and benedicat nobis, Psalm. 66.
illuminet vultum suum super nos, and misereatur nostri.

Vt cognoscamus in terra viam tuam, in omnibus gentibus salutare tuum.

Confitea^tur tibi populi, Deus: confiteantur tibi populi omnes.

Laetentur and exultent gentes, quonia^ iudicas populos in aequitate, and
gentes in terra dirigis.

Confitea^tur tibi populi, Deus, confiteantur tibi populi omnes: terra dedit
fructum suum.

Benedicat nos Deus, Deus, noster, benedicat nos Deus, and metuant eu^ omnes
fines terrae.

FINIS.
PRECATIOnes Johan Lodouici Viuis.
PRO ECCLESIA Sancta Catholica.
O Amicissime nostri Christ, o Sponse, cui est vnice chara tua Ecclesia,
quique pollicitus es, te illi nu^quam defuturum, auge eam, and fac laetissimam
bona sobole patris simillima, nempe tui: fac nos omnes idem and de te sentire,
and in te, vt simus vere vnu^ corpus illud, cuius tu es caput, conglutinati and
compacti charitate mutua, de tuo illo perpetuo igne accensa, qui ita nos
amasti, vt sanguinem and vitam tuam pro nobis impenderes. O Christ, author and
suasor charitatis, pacis, beneuolentiae, emolli durissima nostra pectora, and
plane fertea, calefac corda nostra glacie concreta and durata, vt mutuo been
cupiamus, quo agnoscant omnes, discipulos tuos esse nos and iam nunc incipiamus
vitam illam coelestem exprimere, in qua nulla est dissensio, nullum odium, sed
pax and and amor omnium inter omnes.

Pro pace and coadunatione populi Christiani.
VNum corpus est Ecclesia, a Christo capite per membra omnia descripta, and
coagmentata compagine charitatis mutuae membrorum inter se, and cum ipso
capite, grande mysterium diuinae bonitatis. O caput, o parens noster, tibi vni^
^ae suppetunt vires, quibus quodcunque cordi tibi fuerit, perficias.
Congreganos dispersos, co^iunge tot opinionibus dissidentes, dissectosque. Vni,
quos odia and inimicitiae reddu^t diuersissimos: fac vt nos omnes, qui
Baptismate nominis tui regeniti atque innouati sumus, vere in vnum corpus
coe^amus, dignum te tanto capite, quo vel fingi nihil potest melius, aut maius:
vnum sentiamus omnes, vnum sapiamus, nempe te vnum Deum omnipotentem, and
nostri beneuolentissimum, hominem mansuetissimum, affixum cruci propter scelera
nostra, redemptorem humani generis, instauratorem mundi vniuersi. Seda Domine
tot fluctus, quibus nauigium hoc tuum ta^ vary impetitur and concutitur.
Expergiscere, Christ Jesus, serua nos, quia instat atque vrget naufragiu^
atrox: nullae iam hominum vires, nulla sapie^tia, nullae opes possunt opem
far, nulla restat remedij spes, solus aspectus tuus propitius procellam hanc
saeuissimam serenare potest, and tranquillare.

PRO IIS QVI nos regunt.
REgentium omnium tu es solus, Domine, exemplar quod aemulentur, quod studeant
refer, quippe qui es optimus, ac sapientissimus, eaque de causa nec errare
potes, nec alia facere, qua^ bona. Eos, Christ, quos tuo loco regendis tuis
populis, tanqua^ ouiu^ pastores dedisti, lumine tuae claritatis illustra, igne
tu^ amoris accende, vt luce praeeunte, quae sunt optima videant, and amore
sancto incensi ea concupiscant, in teque vnum semper intenti, non quod ipsis
collibitum sit sequantur, sed quod tu praecepisti, omniaque sua ad te
propofitum exemplar dirigant, vt and ipsi probe fungantur munere abs te
mandato, and nos sub illis quietam piamque vitam transigamus.

A Prayer to be said before the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
I Adore and worship thee, and give thanks unto thee (my most loving Lord
Jesus Christ) for thy innumerable benefits and gifts given unto me most
unworthy. All those I yield and offer unto thee, into an everlasting laud and
praise. I give unto thee thanks for all ye goodness, that ever thou did show,
or ever wilt show unto any reasonable creature. I give thee thanks for all the
mercies of thy most sweet goodness. I give thee thanks for thy holy
Incarnation, Nativity, Infancy, Childhod, Manstate, labors, sorrowful cares,
Passion, Death, Resurrection, and thine Ascension. I most humbly thank thee,
that thou have vouchsafed, to admit me most vile sinner to the noble and
lively feast of this thy holy table. O gracious Jesus I beseech thee, for that
love that in manner constreigned thee to be incarnated, to suffer and to die for
me, that thou will make me fully clean from all sin, and make me to please
thee in all thing. Adorn and garnish my beggarly and poor soul, with thy
mercies and virtues.

Grant merciful Jesus, that I may with most humble reverence, with burning
desire and chaste affection, receive the most venerable Sacrament of thy
blessed Body, in memory of all those things, that thou have vouchsafed to
do, to speak, and to suffer for my salvation. Grant, good Lord, that I may
perform this thing most purely, to the everlasting glory of thy name, to the
honor of thy most sweet Mother and Virgin Marie, and to the honor of thy
blessed Saint N. to the honor of all thy blessed Saints and Angels of heaven,
Name the Saint of that day.
to the soul health of me, and of N. and to the souls health of all Christen
people, quick and dead.

Have mercy, good Lord, have mercy upon thy Church, have mercy, good Lord upon
this place and this company. Grant that here be always humility, peace,
charity, chastity, and clennesse. Grant, yt we all may worthily amend and
correct our selves, and that we fear thee and serve thee ^aithfully: and that
we may love thee, and please thee. I commend unto thy mercy all our business,
and al our necessities: be merciful unto all those, for whom thou have shed
thy precious blood. Grant unto the quick forgiveness and grace, grant unto
the faithful departed, reast and light everlasting.

AMEN.
Another Prayer before the receiving of the holy Sacrament.
O Benign Jesus yt would suffer so many grievous pains, yea death it self
for the love of mankind: great and marvelous is thy charity. O good God for
that thy charity, and that thou vouchesafedst with thy precious blood to wash
away our sins, I pray thee gracious Lord, that thou forgive me all the
sins that I have done, thought, or said, in pride, in wrath, in envy, in
covetousness, in glotonie, in sloth in lechery, in uncleanness of body, and of
soul, in mispending of my fine wits, in breaking thy commandments, in
wasting the time of my life in vice, in yt I have not followed virtue, nor done
those ghostly deeds that I might and ought to have done. O merciful Jesus
with that precious blood yt thou did shed on the Roode for our salvation,
wash all the syns away that I have done since my birth, comfort and make me
hoole with the holy Sacrament, which thou have ordained and left here on earth
to be our medicine, and life, through which we should live after thee, and with
thee, and thou in us. For, good Lord, thou said at yt holy work when thou
made it and gave it to thy Disciples: Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est,
Johan. 6.
pro mu^di vita: qui manducat me, ipse viuit propter me, ipse manet in me, and
ego in eo. O thou holy mightiful Priest and Bishop, yt by thy divine might
made the worthy Sacrament of thy precious Body in form of bread, give me
grace to receive it this day with purity of heart, and cleannes of soul, with
love, dread and steadfast belief. O benign God, I acknowledge and confess to
thy high goodness, that I am not worthy to come unto thy boorde to be fed with
so royal meat as is thy blessed Body. But gracious Lord, I believe verily,
yt thou may make me worthy who haste made al thing of naught, and of sinful
have made righteous and holy. O almighty God, for this thy great might I pray
thee, that thou make me worthy and hable to receive thy precious Body devoutly
with all reverence, with perfect mekenes, and holiness, with full contrition, and
tears of devotion, with spiritual comfort of gladness of thy presence. O
blessed Body in form of bread, come and enter into my mouth and heart, that
by thy divine presence my soul be fed, yea and fastened to thee with perfect
charity. O Lord, fill me with grace, and strengthen me, that I may ever
herafter live after thy will, and that I may live in thee, and thou in me. Jesus
for thy great bounty save me from al perils, teach and comfort my soul in
all doubts and dreads, cleanse me from all vices, suffer nothing to abide in
my heart, but only thy self which are my souls life and leach. O heavenly meat,
o joy of Angels, o souls strength, o precious Body that geu^th endless
help, merciful lord Jesus, thus did thy self say, Ego sum panis viuus qui de
coelo desce^di: si quis ma^ducauerit ex hoc pane, Johan. 6.
viuet in aeternum. O thou Bread of life that did desce^de from heaven, who
yt eats this bread, shall live everlastingly: O blessed Jesus, make me now at
this time worthy to receive this Sacrament, that is thy precious Body, yt I may
live everlastingly with thee in thy presence, and see thee face to face, ever
to joy in thy goodness in bliss everlasting.

AMEN.
A Prayer to be said after the receiving of the Blessed Sacrament.
I Adore and worship thee, and give my humble and hearty thanks unto thee,
most merciful Lord Jesus Christ, which have vouchsafed to admit me most vile
sinner, unto the noble and lively feast of thy most holy table. Alas for me
wretch. For I have received this most venerable Sacrament to to unworthily.

Lord, have mercy on me, Lord forgive me. I commend that, which I have done,
unto thy Divine heart, there to be amended, and to be made perfect. Receive (I
beseech thee Lord) these most holy mysteries of thy blessed Body, which I have
received to the everlasting glory of thy holy name, to the honor of thy most
sweet Mother the Virgin Marie, and to the honor of thy blessed Saint N. to the
honor of all thy blessed and holy Saints and Angels of heaven, Name the
Saint of that day.
for my soul health, and for the soul health of al Christian people quick and
dead. Receive (good Lord) this most excellent Sacrament, in full amendment,
purgation, and satisfaction for all my sins and negligences, and for the
sins of all the world. Restore by it, and make up again al my ghostly ruins
and decaies, and supply my needy poverty. Mortify by it in me, what so ever
does displease thee: and make me one according to thy hearts desire. By it,
make my spirit, my soul and my body, conformable to the spirit, the soul
and body of thy holy Humanity: and lighten me altogether with the light of thy
Divinity.

Grant by it, that I may be stablished in thee, that I perfetly with
perseverance love thee, that I may be incorporate unto thee, and most nerely
united unto thee: and that I may be changed all whole into thee, to the laud
of thy blessed name.

Convert (Lord) miserable sinners, call again heretics and schismatikes.
Lighten the infidels that know not thee, help all that be in any necessity and
trouble, help all them that have commended themselves or desired to be
commended unto my prayers. Have mercy upon my parents and benefactours. Have
mercy upon al them, for whom I am bound to pray, and that thou would^st be
entreated for. Have mercy on this place and company.

Grant, that here be always humility, peace, charity, chastity, and purity.

Grant, that we all may worthily amend and correct our selves, that we may
fear thee, and serve thee faithfully, and that we may love thee, and please
thee. I commend unto thy mercy all our businesses, and all our necessities.
Lord, be merciful unto all people, for whom thou have shed thy precious
blood.

Grant unto the quick forgeuenes and grace, and unto the faithful departed,
reast and life everlasting.

AMEN.
Another Prayer after receiving of the Sacrament.
Thanks be unto thee, O holy Father, God almighty, that thou did
vouchesafe of thy great pity to send thy only Son from thy high Throne into
this vale of woe and misery, here to take our nature and shape, and in the same
to suffer most sharp pains and bitter death to bring our souls to thy
kingdom, and to leave that precious Body here to be our strength, and
comfort: I thank thee most merciful Lord Jesus with all the might and
strength that thou have given me: I offer to thee thanks, that thou this day
have fed me with thine own precious Body, by which I hope to have health of
soul, and everlasting life, with joy when I depart hence. O holy Ghost come
good Lord and inflame my heart with thy brenning beams of love, and make me
with virtuous swetenes continually to yield acceptable thanks to the holy and
glorious Trinity. O ye three Persons and one God, glory, laud, and honor,
with all reverence be offered to you of all creatures without end.

Amen.
Here follow certain Prayers taken out of the Treatice upon the Passion of
Christ, made by Sir Tho. More Knight. while he was prisoner in ye Tower of
London. 1534.
Ecce Homo.
Behold the Man.


The first Prayer or Meditation, of the fall of the evil Angels, and
confirmation of the good.
O Glorious blessed Trinity, whose justice has damned unto perpetual pain,
many proud rebellious Angels, whom thy goodness had created to be parteners of
thine eternal glory: for thy tender mercy, plant in mine heart such mekenes,
that I so may by thy grace follow ye motion of my good Angel, and so resist ^he
proud suggestions of those spiteful spirits that fell, as I may through the
merits of thy bitter Passion, be partener of thy bliss, with those holy
spirits that stood, and now confirmed by thy grace, in glory shall stand for
ever.

The ij. Prayer, or Meditation of the Creation and fall of Mankind.
Almighty God, yt of thine infinite goodness, did create our first parents
in ye state of innoce^cie, with present wealth and hope of heaven to come, til
through ye devils train their folly fell by sin to wrechednes: for thy tender
pity of yt Passion that was paid for their and our redemption, assist me so
with thy gracious help, yt unto the subtle suggestions of the Serpent, I never
so incline ye ears of mine heart, but that my reason may resist them, and
master my sensuality, and refrain me from the^.

The iij. Prayer, of the determination of the Trinity for the restauratio^ and
Redemption of Mankind.
O Holy blessed Savior Jesus Christ, which willingly did determine to die
for man's sake, mollify mine hard heart, and soupple it so by grace, that
through tender compassion of thy bitter Passion. I may be partener of thine
holy redemption.

The iiij. Prayer for the fruteful reading or hearing of the Gospel of Christ's
Passion.
GOod Lord give us thy grace, not to read or hear this Gospel of thy bitter
Passion with our eyes and our ears in manner of a passetime, but that it may
with compassion so sink into our hearts, that it may stretche to the
everlasting profit of our souls.

The v. Prayer, for the true receiving of the spiritual Paschal Lamb, the very
blessed Body of Christ.
GOod Lord, which upon the sacrifice of the Paschal Lamb, did so clearly
destroy the first begotten children of the Egiptians, that Pharao was thereby
forced to let ye children of Israel depart out of his bondage: I beseech thee
give me the grace in such faithful wise to receive the very sweet Paschall
Lamb, the very blessed Body of our sweet Savior thy Son, that the first
suggestions of syn by thy power killed in mine heart, I may safe depart, out
of the danger of the most cruel Pharao the devil.

The vi. Prayer, for to end this life well.
GOod Lord give me the grace so to spend my life, that when the day of my
death shall come, though I feel pain in my body, I may feel comfort in
soul: and with faithful hope of thy mercy, in dew love toward thee, and
charity toward the world, I may through thy grace, part hence into thy glory.

The vij. Prayer, against the following of evil counsel.
GRacious God, give me thy grace so to consider the punnishment of that false
great counsel, that gathered together against thee, that I be never to thy
displeasure partener, nor give mine assent to follow the sinful devise of any
wicked counsel.

The viij. Prayer against Couetice, and for setting the world at nowght.
O My sweet Savior Christ, who^ thine own wicked disciple entangled with the
devil, through vile wretched couetice betrayed, inspire I beseech thee, the
marvel of thy Majesty, with the love of thy goodness, so deep into mine
heart, that in respect of the lest point of thy pleasure, my mind may set always
this whole wretched world at naught.

The ix. Prayer of Christ's true love toward us, and that we may truly love
him again.
O My sweet Savior Christ, which throwgh thine undeserved love toward
Mankind, so kindly would suffer the paineful death of the Cross, suffer
not me to be cold nor luke warm in love again toward thee.

The x. Prayer, for keeping of Christ's holy Law, and following his example in
compting our selves but pilgrims on earth.
Almighty Jesus Christ, which would for our ensample observe the law that
thou came to change, and being maker of the whole earth would have yet no
dwelling house therein: give us thy grace so to keep thine holy Law, and so to
reckon our self for no dwellers but for pilgrims upon earth, that we may
long and make haste, walking with faith in the way of virtuous works, to
come to the glorious country, wherein thou haste bought us enheritaunce for
ever with thine own precious Blood.

The xi. Prayer, against Pride, and for mekenes and charity toward frind or
foe.
Almighty Jesus my sweet Savior Christ, which would vouchesafe, thine own
almighty hands to wesh the fete of thy twelve Apostles not only of the good,
but of the very traitor to: vouchsafe good Lord of thine excellent goodness,
in such wise to weshe the soul feet of mine affections, that I never have
such Pride enter into mine heart, as to disdain either in friend or foe,
with mekenes and charity for the love of thee, to file mine hands with
weshing of their feet.

The xij. Prayer, for true faith, fervent devotion, and fruteful receiving the
ghostly Food of the Sacrament of Christ's own blessed Body and Blood.
Our most dear Savior Christ, which after the finishing of the old Paschal
sacrifice, have instituted the new Sacrament of thine own blessed Body and
Blood, for a memorial of thy bitter Passion: give us such true faith therein,
and such fervent devotion thereto, that our souls may take fruitful ghostly
Food thereby.

Sir Thomas More made no mo Prayers upon the last points of the Passion, as he
did hit^erto upon these first.
Hereafter follow certain devout and godly Prayers, commonly called The
Golden Litanie.
The Golden Litani in English.
LOrd have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us:
and grant us virtue of soul and mind in earth and above earth, that we may
serve thee after the pleasure of thy will.

God everlasting Father, by thy heavenly virtue, have mercy upon us.

The Son of god Redemer of ye world, have mercy upon us.

The holy Ghost, by thy goodness, have mercy upon us.

God ye increace and undivided Trinity, have mercy upon us.

By thy Divine nature, have mercy upon us.

By thy infinite meekenes, have mercy upon us.

By thy self and all goodness that in thee thou beholdest, have mercy upon us.

By the creation of heaven and earth, and all things that in them are, have
mercy upon us.

By thy goodness yt did creat Angels, have mercy upon us.

By the love that thou had when thou createdst man to thine own
similitude, have mercy upon us.

By the great love that thou had to redeem man after his fall, have mercy
upon us.

By that ineffable love that thou had, when thou did choose the worthy
Virgin Marie to be thy Mother, have mercy upon us.

By the holy name of Marie, have mercy upon us.

By the Conception of the Virgin thy Mother, the which was sanctified in her
Mothers womb, have thou mercy upon us.

By the holy Nativity of her, have mercy upon us.

By the perfect purity and mekenes of her, have mercy upon us.

By the most humble affection, which she took of thee in the lap of the
Father, in her Virgin Womb, have mercy upon us.

By the mekenes of thy high Majesty, that thou disdainedst not, to descend
into the Womb of the Virgin Marie, have mercy upon us.

By the fraise nature of ours that it pleased thee to take for our sin, not
abhorring the same, have mercy upon us.

By thy holy Nativity, that thou would vouchesafe to be borne of a Maid,
have mercy upon us.

By the ineffable joy, which thy Mother had in thy birth, have mercy upon us.

By the cold Cribbe, in the which with vile clothes thou were wound and put,
and nourished with maide^s milk, have mercy upon us.

By the joy of the shepherds, which honored thee in the Cribbe, have mercy
upon us.

By thy painful Circumcision and shedding of thy precious Blood, and by thy
holy Name Jesus, and by all thy holy Saints, have mercy upon us.

By the oblation and prayer of the three Kings, have mercy upon us.

By the oblation, wherewith thou were offered up in the Temple, have mercy upon
us.

By thy fleeing into Egypt, and by all the necessity that thou suffredst there
with the Virgin thy Mother, have mercy upon us.

By thy going again from Egypt into Nazareth, and obedience that thou were
under thy parents, have mercy upon us.

By thy humble and meke conversation, that thou had on earth in the time of
three and thirty years that thou were conversant, have mercy upon us.

By thy meke obedience and pains, have mercy upon us.

By thy holy meditations in word and work, have mercy upon us.

By thy Baptism, and appearing of the holy Trinity, have mercy upon us.

By thy holy steadfast contem^lations and knelings, and ouerco^ming of the
fiendes tentation in deserte, have mercy upon us.

By thy thyrst and hungre, cold and heat, which in this vale of misery thou
suffredst, have mercy upon us.

By the sorrow of thy heart, labor and wearines, have mercy upon us.

By thy great poverty and contemplation, have mercy upon us.

By the obtrectation of thine enemies toward thee, have mercy upon us.

By thy watchings and prayers, have mercy upon us.

By thy wholesome doctrine and benefits, and strength of resisting, in that thou
yeldedst not to thine enemies, have mercy upon us.

By the tokens, wonders, and miracles that thou did, have mercy upon us.

By thy meke, sweet, and holy co^uersatio^, have mercy upon us.

By thy holy tears, and thy meek entering into Jerusalem on Palme-sonday, have
mercy upon us.

By the inflamed desire that thou had to redeem us, have mercy upon us.

By thy meek washing of thy Disciples and Judas the traitors feet, have
mercy upon us.

By thy most loving institution of the worthy Sacrament of thy blessed Body
and Blood, Lord have mercy upon us.

By the profound love, in that thou sufferedst thy Disciple S. Ihon to rest on
thy Breaste at thy last Supper, have mercy upon us.

By the peace that thou did give to thy Disciples, have mercy upon us.

By thy holy Words and sermons, have mercy upon us.

By thy passing great heaviness that thou had, when thou did pray to thy
Father in the garden nigh to the Mount of Oliuete, have mercy upon us.

By the virtue of thy prayer yt thou offeredst up three times, have mercy upon
us.

By thy painful and fearful death, have mercy upon us.

By thy agony when thou offredst thy self willingly to ye death, in obeying
thy Father, have mercy upon us.

By the sheding of thy Blood for anguish, have mercy upon us.

By ye mekenes, in that thou woldst be comforted of the Angel, comfort me in all
times, and have mercy upon us.

By the triumphant will that thou had, when thou wentst to mete them that
sought thee unto death, have mercy upon us.

By the fearful taking and violent laying on hands of the Jews, have mercy
upon us.

By thy immutable goodness that thou refusedst not to take ye kiss of Judas the
traitor, and that thou healedst the ear of the Bishops servant, that was
stricken of, have mercy upon us.

By the holy Bonds in the which thou were taken, and led away, and by the
braids in which thou were made weary yt night, have mercy upon us.

By the buffet which thou suffredst at the Seat of Annas the Bishop and other
unknowing thee, have mercy upon us.

By the love and charity that thou had, when thou were led bounden before
the Bisshoppe Cayfas, have mercy upon us.

By the false witness and lies by which thou were unjustly condemned, have
mercy upon us.

By the vile spittings and illusions, have mercy upon us.

By thy buffettes and stripes, have mercy upon us.

By the blindfolding of thy holy eyes, and other reproaches that thou suffredst
that night, have mercy upon us.

By thy gracious beholding that thou beheldest Peter, and by all that labor and
secret unknown torment, which thou sufferedst that night, have mercy upon us.

By thy presentation, and accusation which they brought against thee before
Pilate the Judge, have mercy upon us.

By the despising and illusion that thou sufferedst before Herod, and the
white vesture in the which he sent thee to Pilate, have mercy upon us.

By all the labors yt thou sufferedst in going from one Judge to an other, have
mercy upon us.

By thy great patience and stillness, have mercy upon us.

By the shameful pulling of thy clothes and hard binding of thy body to the
pillar, have mercy upon us.

By the hard beating of scourges, have mercy upon us.

By ye innumerable wounds of thy precious Body, hugely shed out, have mercy
upon us.

By all thy pains, dolours, cold and shaking, and the glad shedding out of
thy blood, have mercy upon us.

By the purple vestement, and the crown of thorn, ^hrust fast upon thy
Blessed Head with violence, have mercy upon us.

By the innumerable pains that thou were tormented when they smote the croune
of thorn with the Kings scepter, and by the great effusio^ of thy precious
Blood, have mercy upon us.

By the scornful honoring and saluting of the Jews, when they said: Hail
King of the Jews, have mercy upon us.

By their vile spitting on thy divine face together with hard strokes, have
mercy upon us.

By all the pains and heaviness of heart that thou had, when Pilate led
thee out unto the people bearing the Crown of thorn, and the purple
vestement, and said: Behold the Man, have mercy upon us.

By that dreadful sentence of death, and vile name, leading thee unto the mount
of Caluarie, have mercy upon us.

By the love wherewith thou did bear the Cross to ye place of pain upon
thy back, have mercy upon us.

By the labor, anguish, shame and beating, which thou suffredst by the way,
have mercy upon us.

By all thy hard steps that thou had, bearing the Cross when thou wentst
to thy death, have mercy upon us.

By the great wearines of thy shoulders, on which thou did bear the Cross
unto the time thou failed for weakness, have mercy upon us.

By the compassion of heart that thou had in meting of thy sorrowful Mother,
and in bearing of thy cross, have mercy on us.

By thy heavy loking and ascending up ye high Mount of Caluarie, on which thou
were crucified, have mercy upon us.

By the stripping of and spoiling of thy clothes in most confusion in the sight
of the Virgin thy Mother and all the people, have mercy upon us.

By thy being naked, full of wounds, laden with great sorrows, enduring the
cold of the wind, til ye Cross was made ready, have mercy upon us.

By thy painful stepps, when thou wentest nere to the Cross, and thereon was
fastened with boysteous nails, have mercy upon us.

By thy tender tears and weeping, have mercy upon us.

By the ache of thy veins and sinowes and al thy members on thy Cross, have
mercy on us.

By the thyrling of thy right hand, and shedding of thy precious Bloodde,
Lord make us clean from all sin, and have mercy upon us.

By the thyrling of thy lift hand, and by the holy Wound of the same, and thy
holy Blood, save us, and have mercy upon us.

By the sore dryuing of the nails into thy holy Feet, and by the wounds of
the same, and by the flowing out of thy precious Blood, purge us, and reconcile
us to thy Father, and have mercy upon us.

By the lifting up of thy most holy Body on the Cross, and by the violent
pains wherewith al thy holy members were rufully pained, have mercy upon us.

By the heaviness of thy heart and all the strengthes of thy soul, save me,
defend me, and have mercy upon us.

By the division or parting of thy vestures, and the lot which they cast on
thy cote without seame in thine own sight and beholding, have mercy upon us.

By the love that thou had hanging three hours on the Cross alive, have
mercy on us.

By the reproaches and words full of confusion that thou heardst ha^ging on the
Cross, have mercy upon us.

By the blaspheminges and curses and shameful reuiling that thou suffredst on
the cross, have mercy upon us.

By all the dolours that thou suffredst in thy ribs, loins and shoulders
crucified, have mercy upon us.

By all the pains that thou had being spread on the Cross in thy sinews,
veins, fete and al thy me^bres, have mercy upon us.

By thy great meekness in praying to thy Father for thine enemies, have mercy
upon us.

By thy mercy, by which thou promisedst to the thief paradise, have mercy upon
us.

By the care that thou had of thy Mother in thy torment, commending her to
thy beloved Disciple, have mercy upon us.

By the sword of sorrow that went unto thy Mothers heart, and the compassion
and tears that she shed out for sorrow standing under the Cross, have mercy
upon us.

By all thy holy Tears on the Cross, and in all the time of thy life, shed
out for the world, have mercy upon us.

By thy thirst, gall and eysell with vinegre, give me to taste of thy sweet
Spirit, and have mercy upon us.

By all thy holy Words by thee pronounced both upon the Cross, and in all thy
whole life, have mercy upon us.

By the weeping and cry, in the which thou did commend thy Spirit to thy
Father, that our souls may be commended to thee, have mercy upon us.

By the separation of thy holy Soul from thy blessed and divine body, have
mercy upon us.

By the enclining of thy holy Head upon thy breast, incline sweet Jesus unto
us, and have mercy upon us,

By the huge dolefulnes of thy death, and intolerable brusinges, in which thy
heart was broken, have mercy upon us.

By the opening of thy side, and the read wound of it, and the precious Blood,
good Lord, pearce our heart with the spear of thy love, and have mercy upon
us.

By the precious Blood and water that ran out of thy holy (...), wash and
make us clean in the same holy Water and Blood from all our sins, and have
mercy upon us.

By the mercy that thou shewedst on the Cross to the Centurio, and all the
mercy that ever thou shewedst to man, have mercy upon us.

By the descending of thy holy Soul to Limbo Patrum, have mercy upon us.

By ye virtue of thy holy soul, wherewith thou brakest up the gates of hell,
and deliueredst out the souls of thy friends, have mercy upon us.

By ye taking down of thy holy Body from the Cross, and the solemn Sepulture
of it, and the lame^ting of ye Virgin thy Mother and Marie Magdalen, and other
of thy frinds, have mercy upon us.

By all the labor, wearines, sorrow, and heaviness that thou suffredst from the
day of thy Nativity unto the hour of the departing of thy holy Soul from
thy body, have mercy upon us.

By thy glorious and virtuous resurrection in Body and Soul, have mercy upon
us.

By the ineffable joy of thy Mother, and other of thy frindes, and the glory
of thy Resurrection, have mercy upon us.

By the grace yt thou apperedst to Marie Magdelen and other women, and to thy
Disciple in thy impassible body after thy resurrection, have mercy upon us.

By thy m^ruelous and glorious asce^sio^ comfort us Lord in all our needs, and
have mercy upon us.

By the divine consolation and sending of the holy Ghost into thy Disciples,
glad us, sanctify us, and strength us in faith, hope, and charity, and have
mercy upon us.

By thy glorious and divine majesty, and the virtue of thy holy name, keep us,
govern us now and ever, and have mercy upon us.

By the Son in thy holy Godhed together in thy Manhod hidden, have mercy upon
us.

By thy self, and al goodness and merits that in thee and in thy Mother thou
did behold, have mercy upon us.

By thy celestial Ministers Michael and Gabriel, keepers deputed to me, and al
other thy heavenly Spirits, have mercy upon us.

By the intercession and merits of S. Peter, S. Paul, S. John the Evangelist,
and other of thine Apostles, have mercy upon us.

By the merits and intercession of thy holy Martyrs S. Stephan, and S.
Laurence and all other, have mercy upon us.

By the virtues and merits of the holy Fathers and Confessors S. Augustine,
S. Hierome, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and al other, have mercy upon us.

By the merits and prayers of holy S. Anne, S. Katherin, S. Barbara, and all
other holy Virgins, and holy widows and chaste women, have mercy upon us.

By the merits and prayers of al thy holy chosen Saints, yt are, were, and are
for to come in heaven and in earth, have mercy upon us.

Succor us, sweet Jesus, in the trembling and strait day of Judgment, and
grant us in this exile and tra^sitory life those things that be necessary to
the health of our body and soul, and after this life to live in joy with the
everlastingly without end. Amen.

Lord hear graciously my prayers, and let my cry come to thee, etc. Pray we.

LOrd give to ye quick grace, to the dead rest, in especial to the^, yt I am
bounde^, N. and to the Church holiness, peace and concord. And that thou will
vouchesafe, to take this prayer to the honor and glory of thy holy name, and
that thou will vouchesafe to have mercy upon us, and to forgive us al our syns:
and grant everlastingly, that we may persevere in all goodness, and that we may
serve thee. And after this life, we may deserve to reign with thee, in
everlasting glory and life without end.

FINIS.

