CERTAIN LETTERS DECLARING IN PART THE PASSAGE OF AFFAIRS IN THE PALATINATE,
from September to this present Month of April.

Together, With the Articles of Agreement between the Princes of the Union and
the Lord Marquis SPINOLA.

AT AMPSTERDAM Printed this present Month of April. 1621.

CERTAIN LETTERS declaring in part the passage of affairs in the Palatinate,
from September. to this present month of April.
COunt Henry of Naffaw with 36. companies of the States horse, assisted with
4000. Musquitiers out of Gulick conducted the Lord General Sit Horatio Vere.

On the 15. day of September we drew near to Coblens with a resolution to
pass over the Rhine, and to go to Frankford. The Town of Coblins showed us
their good will in shooting with Musquits at us, but our far distance kept us
from hurt, though some were hit with fowling bullets. The Prince Henry not
withstanding commanded boats out of Coblens for our transport, threatening to
burn their village if they should refuse to send them. And soon the 16 and 17.
days of September we passed the Rhine some two miles below Coblens, and
taking our way through Naffaw toward Hannaw which lies on the North about
Frankford, we lodged both horse and foot the 21. and 22. day in two Dorps
called upon Marlow and nether Marlow. We had before sent 95. of our sick
men, among whom were Captain Rhae and Captain Dexter with some of our baggage
from Coblens by boat to Bracrack, where they arrived the 21. of September,
being thursday, and the 22. they together with the Town were taken by such as
Spinola sent thither, and there they yet remain till their ransom be paid
(which is now in handling) all save two or three that are dead, and three that
were disarmed and stripped, brake away, and brought us this news to Worms.

While we came to nether Marlow Count Henry Vandenbergen drew all the enemies
horse out of the camp at Oppenheim and 4000. foot with some artillery, with
intent to cross the Maine betwixt Ments and Frankford to surprise us the same
night of our ariuall there, whither we came tired with a long march and hunger,
not doubting any such attempt. God only saved us at this time from the enemy.
For the enemy having passed all his horse at a foord, and drawing out his
munition and foot, was suddenly recalled by Spinola, being himself present at
the drowning of some of his foot, carried away by the force of the stream, and
some of his munition.

We marched from nether Marlow on Saturday the 23, And on Sunday the 24* we
marched to the Maine side, nearer Hannaw then Frankford, and passed the river,
the horse and wagons over the foord, and some foot, the rest by boats, and
lodging in a dorpe, had two false allarmes of Spinola his approach, which our
men took with excellent silence and courage.

The next day we marched almost 20. English miles, and got Vinstall a Town in
safety from Cammissados, by which diligence Spinola who sent to interrupt us,
fell behind our Rere; but by this long march many of our men became weary and
sick, who being left there, have since gotten to us as they recovered. We
sent to Heidelberg for their recovery. God showing us this mercy, that few of
our men do die, though many fall sick; whereas of Spinola his army do every
day as is thought 60. die a days From Vinstal we cose on Tuesday, and quartred
in a dorp, from whence the next day we got into the straights and mountains
of the Pallatinate, and lodged at Bensheric, about eight miles from Worms on
the North. Thus in a month space our journey to the Pallatinate was ended; in
all which time we had fair weather, and not so much as one hours rain.
Victuals in the Bishoprics of Ments, Tryer and Cullen were by the command of
the Bishops, as was discovered, kept from us what they could, through we
offered to pay and did pay for what they sold unto us: but as necessity made
new laws unto our men, so the providence of God watched over us, that sometime
their swine and their cattle came out of the woods into our quarters, and at
one time of our great need came 500. sheep out of the jurisdiction of Ments,
from the wood thereof, when our men with a long march and want of meat were
almost discouraged: with this we feasted at nether Marlow, where we should have
been stain, being by the enemies appointed as sheep to the slaughter. At
Bensherie we rested all Saturday to repair our solues and our arms, where on
Saturday the 30. of September we marched and lay within two miles of Worms,
unto which we marched on Sunday, the Princes of the Union viewing us twice in
those two days march, with great content, the people with new hopes, and so
day at the Dorp called Houenhein about 7 miles from the enemies camp at
Openheim, and near to the quarter of our friends, on the West side of Worms.

From Houenhein we marched the third of October toward Altzen, and loged that
night within two miles and a half of that Town into which Spinola had put
200. horse and 1800. foot, and some artillery, and an old Commander called
Bellanzoom to secure it, and had also fortified, the town, but especially the
Castle. The purpose of the Princes was to take this town again, to which end
their army, all save 4000. foot and 1800. horse lest to command Worms, were
drawn near to it, the English nearest of the foot.

But on Wednesday morning the Princes sat in counsel, and by Count Henry
advised rather to turn back to Openheim to brave their enemy, then to hazard
there their foot in so cold a time, for the regaining of a town so well
manned, which being got, must either be left again with scorn to us at our
departure, or kept with a stronger garrison then might be spared. Hereupon we
rose to go toward the enemy; a bruit being first spread amongst us, that
Spinola was marching toward Worms, which made our men rise with readiness
and without dispute why they went not to Altzen.

By this advice given by Prince Henry, and seconded by the Lord General Vere,
we snare our selves, and had cast it unawares on our enemies necks, though
we made no great advantage of it: for Spinola supposing us busied about
Altzen, marched toward Altzen with his whole army, hoping to surprise the
foot before they could be entrenched, the very night after their coming
thither, which could not have been auolded, our horse being dispersed as they
must. Thus God brake that snare, and delivered us. The same day we marched
toward the enemies camp, not of knowledge of purpose to meet him, but only
to brave him and provoke him to sight, which was supposed he would refuse.
About noone came word that Spinola was marching toward us, which put so much
life into our noble General as I never saw in him before, and generally in all
our troops, for we marched in Battallion, the English in the Van next after
the guard of the Princes, the Dutch foot next after ours, who with ours made
up the number of 6200 foot. About half an hour past two we came in sight of
some of our enemies troops, and perceived some skirmishing in a bottom, in
which we after heard of four of our horse and two of our men shot, but we
did not know what damage they did. On we marched; but Spinola rewarding him
very royally that brought him the news of our marching, smiling his stick on
the ground, saying, Battalio, Battalio, yet upon view of our coming upon him,
and of the number of our horse, which were one third part more then his, as his
foot was almost a third more then ours, he drew back almost two miles, and
within two of Openheim placed himself in Batalio horse and foot upon a hill,
whither by reason of a deep valley we could not approach but by one passage
of but reasonable width, in which he planted his artillery, which that we
might know to be there, was discharged eight times at a cornet of horse that
lay under a wood, and slew a dog, or else did not hurt Right a against this of
his we planted our artillery on another hill, embatteld our horse, drew our
foot into the valley before it, where the Dutch guard pleased to glue our
English leave to take the Van: by this time it was 3 of the clock; and thus we
stood at a mile and half us distance facing one the other, still expecting
order to charge, till the night and the news of an impassable way took off
our hopes. There also took I upon me to go to the heads of our English
troops, to every division apart, to encourage them, which they received with
much affection, and generally showed the brauest resolution to fight that could
be seen or wished of men. It was the hand of God that did strangely disappoint
us of that work, by which if it had succeeded, this poor afflicted people
might have been relieved, and the war in a manner ended in one day, or at the
least Openheim and the bridge might have been taken, yea, without stroke of
battle, if we had but put our army betwixt Spinola and it, which was moved by
some, but not followed. Count Henry and General Vere as loath to ouergage
their horse too far, and distrustful of the foot, being most High Dutch,
and unexperienced, though well disabled. The Princes of the union which had
lain about Openheim, remembered not the passage in time, till the advantage was
lost. The night came on, at the approach whereof Spinola was retired without
sound of drum or Trumpet, and shouted for joy when they had thus escaped; and
leaving us in the field all night, returned to his quarter, never (I suppose)
more glad of any escape, which has rather taken from his glory, then added to
ours. It is true, that when we came after the day to discover our
possibilities, we are much more ready to censure our greatest Commanders for
that oversight of advantage, then to acknowledge their foresight for our
preservation.

The opinion is, that except the Prince foot be reinforced by more English,
of whom they have a great opinion, the Princes will hardly give battle to the
enemies, and consequently the poor people be eaten up as well of their friends
as enemies.

The Towns which Spinola has taken are of no strength, and yielded without
any stroke, also did also some strong forts possessed by the Boores, whom the
very name of a soldier conquered. In the mean time God pursues our enemies
with mortal sickness, and judging them fit to be punished, but not by us:
nor do I marvel at this our outrage considered; for even we that in respect
of the cause fight for God, do in our behavior fight against him, I speak
not of all, but of many of our troops, who do plead greater abuses in other
instead of their own virtues, and reckon some deboyses to their callings,
which only spring from their own personal wildness.

Since the fourth of October, we have twice removed, and now lie at Nitersein
between Worms and Frankindal, uncertain whether we shall be called to
business or garrison. On the morrow after our return, some went to Arwen, the
place where our enemies stood, and there found some 7. or 8. Italians and 26.
Spanish women, which Captain Proud took there prisoners. The same morning
Spinola sent certain troops of horse to observe our rising, whereof 600. were
charged by the Duke of Brundswicke, and Sir William Dalford with 300. of our
horse, who also cut off and took six of the enemies.

Frankindale, January 9. 1620.
COncerning the late lamentable defeature of the King of Bohemia his army, I
suppose you have heard enough, perhaps more then truth. The loss of men was
little, for on both sides there fell not above 22, hundred, insomuch as some
did blame the cowardice of our party, which others called treachery. The loss
of honor, munition, of treasure and baggage was great, but the loss of the
Kingdom much greater, which except one place of strength, is said to be
revolted to the stronger party, though of that so ill entreated, as if occasion
were, they would quickly show to whom their hearts were subject, even the
Romish part it self.

The King (and Queen great with child) having received the oath of Allegiance
from those of Silecia, and promise of their uttermost assistance, as being
firm in their Religion, have retired themselves into the country of
Brandenburg, together with the Prince of Anhault, and there both of them (the
Queen especially) do make all comers to be witnesses of their singular
moderation, patience, devotion, and confidence in God. And this I would have
you to believe, that the world in many ages did hardly see such a pair of that
rank, and surely this tribulation shall do them good.

A report was spread in these parts that the Queen was dead in child, bed a
month since, but I spoke with one that came from her presence within these
nine days, and and left her in good health, and daily expectation of
deliverance, which God grant, and I trust we shall hear well.

Bethlem Gabor beheaded the General, and some other officers of those forces
he sent into Bohemia as soon as they returned into Hungaria, for their
cowardly running away; and threatened that if hereafter any of his made the like
fault he would raze out their posterity: those troops were 10000.

We say without variance, that he prepares to aid the King of Bohemia with
30000 men, which he may the better do; because the Polanders which found him
work at home, have bin lately broken by the army of the Turks, and
Tartarians, which lately, slaughtering 20000 of them, have succeeded far into
that kingdom, and are like to possess it. A remedy worse then the disease.

There is much speech here of the King of Denmark his purpose to show him
self in person, and with an army for the King of Bohemia, and some hopes they
have that England will help to repair that loss, of which the world makes it
too blame, whiles the treatise of peace foreslowed some helps for it, and
shadowed the resolution of the enemy but this perpaps is but a part of that
liberty which men take to judge of colors by candlelight.

Before that late battle by Prague was fought, one Pr^torius Minister of
Adorpe in the Palatinate called Treshiem, addressed himself to the Kings
Council at Heidelberg; and persuaded them to hasten a Post to the King, to
wish him to shift for himself, for within eight days Prague should be taken,
(which indeed fell out) adding that the King in or before 1623. should with an
army recover that kingdom, and be made Emperor. Of the latter men think the
more, because the former fell out so right.

In the Palatinate the distress is great, and greatned by scare that the
Empererours forces left in Bohemia will make their way through the upper
Palatinate unto Spinola in the lower, and (if Bethlem Gabor divert them not by
invasion of Bohemia or Austria; it is probable.)

The bishop of Tryer has reedified a sort upon the Rhine beyond Tryer, which
the King of Bohemia had some four years since suddenly in one night
surprised. This is now finished, and furnished with 3000 men and sixteen
pieces of Ordinance, and lies sit to cut off all succors which might from
those parts come to us, or to be a bridge for the enemy into that part of the
Palatinate which lies on the East side of the Rhine, and is yet untouched.

Count John of Nassaw who commanded the natives of this country and the
trained Boores, is censured for suffering this work, but he discharges
himself on the Princes of the Union, in that he did weekly advertise them of
it; therefore the people do blame and boldly call their fidelity into
question, not considering that if they had sent forces convenient to stop that
work, they should have exposed the City of Worms, Frankindale, and other
towns near the enemy; to apparent danger, their at my being weak enough to
encounter the enemy when it was all together.

The Dorpes are miserably taxed and forraged by the enemy, and almost as much by
their own horsel, whose outrages have darkened those of our troops, and
gotten us reputation.

Our troops have bin very disorderly and vile in pillages and quarelling
amongst themselves, and chiefly in swearing and drunkenness, against which the
noble General and some of his Officers and my self in my place have made what
resistance we could, my self with some danger; and though we have not bin able
to stem the current yet have we by Gods mercy much prevailed of late so we
labor with much grief and some hope, Pray for us, and for me.

God has also set upon us, for about 300 of ours are dead of a contagious
Fever, which as our wine and drunkenness thereby abounded, did increase both
in quantity of infection and mortality of disease, and on some persons by
botches and spots appeared to be the Plague. Those which by example or
tolleration of their Captains were most notorious, have borne this stroke in
proportion; among whom this also fell out, that some of the first disordered
with drink, fell even then into madness with their sickness, which even
arrested them, and never left them till they died; which being observed, and by
my self publikly pressed, caused some to haste from us into England with their
faults on their backs, and some others by Gods mercy do scare and refrain.

This rod of God is in a manner removed, for sew fall sick of late, and of
them scarce one dies, yet have we not bin smitten as our enemies, for of them
we have of certain, that 10000 are wasted, and most by sickness.

Three thousand of Spinoldes men lately returned into Flanders, being those
which were last sent upon Count Henry's coming and ours they in their return
summoned Fryburg an Imperial City (as stake in Nassaw) took it by
composition, and after (contrary to promise) carried thence fifty pieces of
artillery and great store of come down the Rhine, which caused them of
Frankford to abhor the rendering of the City into their enemies hands to which
they were before inclined. How good is he that draws good out of evil?

Our troops never came to blows, but are eager of it beyond all belief, and
now by daily experience well brought to know their weapons. Or their valor the
Country takes general notice, and namely of their defending thirty of them,
an open Dorpe from the forraging of 200 horse of their own party, wherein the
English repulsed them stoutly, and made them retire with loss. Oh if God would
give us more to fear him, how would he honor us? By this you see what need I
have of many prayers, and this poor people also: and how it concerns our
nation to yield what comfort they can to this afflicted state and Church, to
which God enlarge all men's hearts.

Frankindale, January 29. 1620.
SInce our coming Spinola has bin stopped, and himself three several times
bin forced rather to retraite then join battle with us: so far has God
blessed our small ^roupes, and made them defenders, though not deliverers ^of
the Palatinate. And though our troops by that mortality we had, and by the
departure and running away of many, were much lessened, yet are they filled up
with such, as from under Coronell Gray and others have come to us out of
Bohemia, so as with Officers and all, we are not less then 2000 men, who
being exercised with the use of their arms, will be unto us twice themselves,
if God will use them. You have a contrary opinion of us in England, but this I
say is true.

The Princes of the Union are wonderfully cheared with the money and message
which his Majesty sent them by Sir Albertus Mourton, and are now drawing
toward Holbrun, where their diet is appointed on the 28 of this Month to
consult of further courses.

Some conceit they have of peace, but besides our Kings, mediation for it, I
hear not of any ground they have unless the working of their desires, which
you know produces oftentimes the fume of false hope, no hope indeed

In Bohemia Count Maunsfield has taken some small Towns, and assured some
others to the King; and Prague it self is so weary of their curb, that if any
mean succor be sent them, it is probable they will, it is certain they desire
to shake it off.

The King and Queen of Bohemia do bear their afflictions with such patience
and piety, as have added more true honor to them then victory could have done;
and makes me hope that God will in his time lift them up again, to the
astonishment of their enemies, and joy of his people. From them lately came a
command for a solemn day of fasting and prayer, besides their monthly bid
days, and daily Church-prayers, which was accordingly performed January the 14.

The Queen was brought to bed of a young Prince the sixth of January, and
baptized the eight of January, 1620. his name is Mauricius.

Bucquoy is past through Morauia without resistance, and is as they say
resisted by Bethlem Gabor in Hungaria.

For repress of swearing in our army, our worthy General has caused
memorable punishments to be executed on them, as boring through the tongue, the
Strapado, and banishment.

Your loving friend, I. B.

Frankindale the 26 of February, 1620.
BY letters written the 29. of January last, I hope you understand are this how
things then stood in the Palatinate.

About that time the Princes of the Union met at Helbrun in the Dukedom of
Wittenberg, where they yet remain in consultation, and amongst them the
Margraue of Ausburg, General of all their forces in the Pallatinate, and some
other chief Officers, Count Solms being left to command in chief at Worms
in their absence. Spinola taking the advantage hereof, did with some of his
troops assault in the night a walled Dorpe called West Oven some five English
miles from Worms, and did the next day about noone take it, and in it 300
foot soldiers there quartered and thirty horse, with loss of 50 of his men.
The soldiers spoiled of their arms, were the next day put to their choice, of
returning to the Princes, or serving the enemy. The one half returned, the
other revolted. This was done the fifth of February, at which time the town
was put to ransom of 10000. Count Solms took the alarm, and drew out the
horse troops, when all was done: so he only ouertooke and took some six of
their straggling horse prisoners. Upon this occasion the Margraue of Ausburg
was suddenly recalled to Worms, but after few days went again to Helbrun,
and in his stead came the Marquis of Bauden, who lies now at Worms full of the
gout, but a valiant Prince.

On the 23 of February the foresaid town of west Oven and East Oven by it were
both burnt to the ground, being each of them bigger then Bromingham, by command
of the Marquis, upon intelligence that the enemy had designed to lodge his
men, and there to watch his opportunity of assailing Worms or Frankindale,
which he might from thence have done in three hours march.

This thing though necessarily done for the safety of the rest, yet has
brought a marvelous fear upon this people: every man either pitying the
misery of those many ruined in habitants, or fearing that his own turn is not
far off to be undone.

We have had many alarmes, and have bin drawn out of our garrison sundry
times, but to no use, only our troops have had the opportunity of showing
their alacrity and willingness to sight, which is admired of this people.

Count John of Nassaw who commanded the natives of the Palatinate, being
threatened with the loss of his own country, unless he would quit his
service, has now withdrawn himself, and left his name to construction.

It is much feared that the Princes will provide for their own peace, and
abandon this poor country, which is like to be left upon the merciful hand
of God, who is able to deliver them, and in his good time will do it, though we
yet see not the means.

Mean time in Bohemia Count Mansfield has rifled much, and taken sundry
towns, and is like enough to recover Prague, if he had but means enough to
pay his men, which he utterly wants.

Coronell Grays regiment being reduced to 300, was lately besieged in a town
of Bohemia, and did in three assaults repulse the enemy bravely.

In Morauia Bucquoy his forces have lately received two great overthrows by
Count de Turn assisted with Bethlem Gabors troops, in which the Imperialists
are said to have lest 27 or 28 Ensigns.

The Emperor has put out the Banne against the King of Bohemia, the Prince of
Anhault the Marquis of Brandenburgh, and all the Kings assistants.

Our troops continues 2000. by the supplies we have met withal, and are much
better disciplined and ordered then they were before, and some there are whom
God I trust has effectually called by his word and rod unto true grace.

Our noble General (thanked be God) is in good health, and grows in all
goodness, etc.

Thus beseeching God to bless you with all yours, and praying you to stir up
all the prayers you can for the distressed people of God here, and even for our
troops, and for me, that I may do the great work of God faithfully and
fruitfully in this emploiment, I take my leave, and remain

Yours, much bound and much affectioned to you, I. B.

Frankindale, 31 of March 1621.
SIr, I received your second letters the 23 of March, and thank you heartily
for them. News out of any far country brings some delight, how much more out
of a man's own country, when he is far from it, and specially when it is all
very good, or not very ill. From hence I shall not be able by exchange to make
retribution to you, not because I am unwilling to do it but because the
exchange goes so low at the present. But take it as it is.

We yet are and have bin a month in treaty of truce for six weeks. This day
the Margraue of Ausberg and Spinola, with the Bishop of Ments and Count de
Ormstat (which two last have bin interposers for peace) do meet at Ormstat, a
days journey from Worms, to finish this Treaty, in cessation (as is hoped)
from arms for two months: upon which, Spinola, with most of his, will look
back, not so much for love of Flanders, as for fear of the States army now
drawing forth.

The French King has lately encouraged the Princes to hold their union, with
promise of aid; whether really; as jealous of the Austrian greatness, or more
maiorum that with less distaste of these Princes he may afflict his of the
Religion, pendre le temps.

Bathl. Gabor is said to be off his treaty with the Emperor by the Venetians
persuasions, and in arms upon the reuolters of Morauia with 30000 men.

From the Kings of Denmark and Sweden, and the Duke of Brunswick and Haunce
towns, 3000 men are in readiness, if not already in their march, for the
Kings aid; but whether here or in Bohemia, is yet unknown to us, because both
ways reported.

Count Mansfield grows daily in strength, and has recovered the seven pieces
of Cannon left by Prague. The great Turk is expected in Polonia this Summer in
person with 300000. Al which things will in likelihod move the Imperial party
to take thanks for giving that peace in the Palatinate, which they might
better have given thanks to take: if that point had been stood upon. But in
appearance God will give this poor and good people peace, which shall be to
them the best. And blessed be the peacemakers. This being all that I have for
the present, I commend you Sir to the protection and blessing of God our
Father, and remain

Your loving brother and friend, I. B.

Articles of Agreement, by the mediation of the Lords the Princes the Elector
of Ments and Lodowick the Lantgraue of Hassia, and concluded betwixt the Lord
Marquis Spinola Captain General of the army of the Emperors Majesty in the
Pallatinate on the one part, and the Lord Ioachim Ernest of Ausburg General of
the army of the Euangelik Union, and John Frederick Duke of Wittemberg, as well
for themselves as other Princes and States united on the other part.
FIrst of all it is agreed betwixt the said Princes and States henceforth wholly
to forbear all hostility betwixt the^, so as the said Princes and States of
the Vnio^ and their army shall at no hand from henceforth impeach the Lord
Marquis Spinola, nor his forces or places which be in his power, nor any other
comprised in this treaty, or their lands or dominions: neither shall assist
Frederick the Palatine with money, men, or by any other means directly or
indirectly by themselves or by others means: and shall not proroge their union
formerly made, neither in favor of Frederick the Palatine, nor against the
Imperial Majesty make a new one, but before the expiration of the term of the
Union, that is to say, the 14 day of May next com^ing, all their forces as well
private as common shall draw off out of the Pallatinate of other place seized
on for defense of the Pallatinate, and cause the same to depart, and shall
continue themselves faithful and obedient Princes and States to the Emperors
Majesty, as they have often before this time professed to do.

On the other side the Lord Marquis Spinola shall from henceforth attempt no
hostile thing against the Lords and States united, their persons, soldiers,
officials, subjects, castles, cities and lands, neither by pillages, exactions,
excursions, nor by any other means.

And in this Agreement are comprehended as well those mentioned in the concord
of Vlmes as other Electors, Princes, States and Nobles of the Empire, whether
of the Catholic or Euangelick Religion, yet so that the parties aforesaid
mean not in this place to determine any thing concerning the land of Iulier.

And as concerning the Palatine Frederick (whom the things forespoken touch
not) the said Lord Marquis Spinola, at the request of the King of Great
Britain, has promised from henceforth until the foresaid term of the 14 of
May, not to proceed in the execution of the Pallatinate, to him committed, but
for so long to suspend the execution, yet on the condition, that the Princes of
the Union shall provide so, that the proper forces of the said Palatine,
whether being in the said Palatinate or the bordering places, practice no
hostility against the said Marquis Spinola nor his army, or the places which
he has taken, or others the loyal States of the Empire, their ministers or
subjects.

And to the end that the neighbor Princes and States, and their subjects and
others resiant in their territories, may not be grieved or indammaged by the
soldiers of either party, the aforesaid Chiefs of both armies have promised
seriously and faithfully to procure that all excursions, pillages, and other
annoyances in their territories and provinces shall be wholly restrained and
forborne, and safety of the ways and traffic advanced.

For the better assurance of all which promises, they often forenamed Princes
of both parties, together with the Princes Intervenneng have confirmed this
same with their hands and seals; and Marquis Spinola shall with all speed
procure that the same shall be ratified by the sacred Imperial Majesty and
the Lord Archduke Albertus.

Acted at Ments the 12 of April 1621. Ambr. Spinola, Io. Ep. of Ments, Lod.
Landgr. of Hassia, Ioach. Ernest Marg. of Ausburg, Ioh. Duke of Wittemberg.

FINIS.

