ANTI-DVELLO. THE ANATOMY OF DVELLS, WITH THE SYMPTOMS THEREOF.

A Treatise wherein is learnedly handled, whether a Christian Magistrate may
lawfully grant a Duel, for to end a Difference which consists in Fact.

Also, The manner and form of Combats granted, with the several orders
observed in the proceeding thereof, with the list of such Duels, as have been
performed before the Kings of England.

Truly and compendiously collected and set forth By Mr. JOHN DESPAGNE, for the
good of Sovereign and Subject.

Published by his Majesty's Command.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for B. Fisher, Dwelling in Aldersgate Street
at the Talbot. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST NOBLE, ROBERT, EARL OF CARNARVON, LORD
DORMIR, BARON OF Wing, etc. M. of the Hawke to his Majesty.
As also, TO THE TRVELY, Worthy, Virtuous and Learned Gentlemen, M. Andrew
Pitcarne, Master Falconer to the King; M. Patrick Maulle, and Master James
Leuiston, Esquires; Grooms of his Majesty's Bedchamber.
Right Noble and truly Worthy,
UNDER whose protections could I more meritoriously commit this Dedication then
to you, whose Noble hearts are so deeply stamped with the true mark of
untainted honor, that your fair Names in the front of this Book, will be to
it a strong Buckler, as well as a singular Ornament; For it is not the eminency
of your greatness; that induces me to this Dedication, but your admired
goodness, and sweet affability, most rare, in this Iron age, but still
inherent and abiding in your Illustrious blood. Vouchsafe then now, out of your
noble disposition, and usual, favor, to learning and good endeauours, to
honor with a kind acceptance this poor oblation; consecrated to your VVorth:
For such courtesies from you, will make you live again and flourish in your
graves, Laurel springing from your ashes; while the disdainers of the Muses
(which do abound in this degenerated Age, and like Worms in Libraries, seem
only to live to destroy, root out, and banish Learning) will lie witherd,
neglected and forgotten; Therefore as the Poet has, Let not our Worthy think,
it is in vain,
They by this means eternal Names do gain,
The Muses do such Honor to them give,
That when they dye, their virtues most do line:
But the enemies of learning, when they die,
As in oblivion shut forgottenlie.


Were it not for the Muses, our Names and Lives should at one time depart; and
when fair Virtues worthy lovers dye, then do their memories survive
eternally; Our gilded Monuments do soon decay,
But Fame thus sounded shall endure for aye,
Muses embalme our names with sweet perfume,
Times Odor, which no time can e're consume.


Accept then (most Noble and Worthy) of this small scantling of the Muses
services, by this Dedication, as courteously, as officiously it is humbly
Dedicated and Consecrated upon the Altar of your Divine Virtues.

A Discourse wherein is discussed this question, viz. Whether a Christian
Magistrate may grant a Duel, for deciding of the matter when the true author
of some fact committed cannot evidently be discovered.
GENERAL principles and common notions, by which a man distinguishes what is
just and what is unjust, are of themselves so perspicuous, that it is in vain
for any man to bestow pains in the proof of the same; But, particularities,
on which the eye of Justice ought to reflect, are often times accompanied with
sundry apparances, and are thereby rendered disputable: so, we say in a general
proposition, that Murder is unlawful, but yet in some particular case,
General principles are not to be gainsaid, but particularities are subject to
argumentation.
it may from circumstances receive such a qualification, that it may be
esteemed a lawful action; Universal maxims are like to Stars, their place
certain and their motions regular and within their general extention, they
comprehend inferior propositions. The Law eternal of God and of Nature, are
two great lights which impart luster and vigor to all the rest, but, when we
come to Hypotheses, then a man descends (as it were) to the elementary region,
where all things are changeable and turbulent, and where one shall encounter
and meet with a perpetual conflict of reasons as with so many counterbuffs of
contrary winds. One disputes concerning an exild man, a Banditti, to whom one
promises pardon, in case he bring the head of one of his Comrads, he brings
the head of his own father, that was one of the number, the question is,
whether he ought to have the benefit upon the faith of the State assured and
promised him, or be punished as a Paricid: If a man found asleep be charged to
have committed a murder, there is required a very serious disquisition and
waighing of circumstance and reasons before he be either condemned or acquitted.

Now, if the question of Right (concerning what is just and what is unjust) be
entangled with so many perplexities, that of Fact (concerning what is true and
what is false) is infinitely more obscure and absconded. It has been seen,
that two men have so simmetrically resembled each other, that all the kindred
of the one, and his very wife also, being mistaken, has entertained the
impostor into a place wherein he had no interest, and yet when the true
husband has come and presented himself, the subtilties of the other were so
quaint, and his answers so pat and comformable that they have made the Judges
to stand astonished; The eyes of all Europe were a long time intent upon that
pretended Sebastian of Portugal, and they that were most clear sighted were
deceived in him: Oftentimes both Fact and Right, are liable to disputation, as
in the cause of divorce between H. 8. and Katherine of Arragon.

If the question be then of a fact which cannot be proved by any ordinary
way, what shall the Judges do to find out the truth? We have not Moses
resident on the earth, who could consult with God himself, when he knew not
to whom Ancient courses to find out facts, which could not be proved by an
ordinary way.
the right of a controuerted succession belonged: Nor the Pectorall of
judgment upon the habit of the great Sacrificer: Nor the water of malediction,
which discovered the innocence or guilt of women suspected of Adultery: Nor the
eye of Seers or Prophets, how gave answer themselves concerning smaller
matters, as Saul searching his fathers asses, went to Samuel to hear some
tidings of them: Nor that Spirit, by which Elizeus discovered the avarice of
Gehazi, and S. Peter, the lying of Ananias and Saphira.

I will not speak at all of those unlawful ways, which many have late held
to attain thereunto, no man would bring again into use, the proof by
scalding water, wherein the Liuonians put the hand of the accused party, or
the Unlawful ways used for that purpose.
iron red hot, upon which one of the greatest Princess of Europe, offered to
march naked, for testification of her chastity; or the profanation of those who
abuse the Sacrament of the Eucharist, to know if a man be innocent, and give it
him in this manner: The body of our Savior Jesus Christ enable thee to prove:
More tolerable was that course which a Judge took to end a controversy
betwixt three brethren, who were at variance which of them was the more
legitimate, he caused the body of their dead father to be unburied, gave them
in their hands bows and arrows, and adiuged that he of the three that shot
nearest his heart, should be held legitimate: Two shot, the third said that
he had a great deal rather forgo his title, then to gain it at such a
price; The succession was adjudged to the last, and if the proceeding were
barbarous, the judgment was commendable. But these impious courses, which the
Sun of Justice has chased into Hell, ought now thence to be called back
again.

Let us see then, if there rest any other extraordinary way, which may hold the
place of proof: We find that in such cases, some have used casting Lots, and
such as approve of a Duel, do easily allege this reason: That the Duel is
one Lotts.
kind of Lot, and by consequent practicable. Indeed thereby occasions wherein
the Lot may take place; If two brothers have an inheritance to be divided
betwixt them, and after each portion being equaly divided, yet they may try by
Lot to see which of the two ought to fall to the one or other. In a Senate if a
place fall void, and many Citizens expect it, being of equal capacity to
execute the same, the claymes of these competitors may be tried by Lot, for
auoidance of many mischiefs: So did the Romans use to do in allotting their
Provinces, and still to this present, many Common wealths follow that course,
in disposing Offices and dignities.

In time of persecution, the Ministers of a Church may cast the Lot, to know to
whom amongst them it shall fall to stay, or go; the examples wherewith holy
Antiquity does furnish us, to this purpose have some thing in them of a high
strain, then the simple nature of a Lot can well bear; as one may see in the
division of the Land of Canaan, and in the inauguration of Saul, in whose
election it pleased God they should deal by Lot. But the matter which is
properly in question is this; If a man may this way serve his turn, to find
out the truth of a fact which is unknown unto us; and here again we have
examples, but they are such which exceed the nature of a Lot. In ancient times
amongst Gods people, when it was evident that some crime was committed amongst
them, the author whereof was not certainly known one cast Lots among the
Tribes; from the Tribes, he came to the Families; and lastly it fell upon some
one single man; so was he convicted that had taken things forbidden at the
sack of Iericoh; so Jonathan was found out, having done contrary to the
command of the King his father: so the Mariners came to the knowledge that
Jonas occasioned the tempest; If we were assured to find out matters so
happily, or if God had given us his warrant, I could admit of casting lots in
this nature, but we have no more certainty to build upon, but the incertainty of
the Lot. And yet this makes nothing in favor of a Duel; for the manner of
proceeding by Lot, is not to send two men to slay one another, and generally
the Lot touches but one, but the Duel endangereth both, one whereof is
innocent.

We will then now speak of the Duel; and to the end, that no man may imagine
Duel.
that possessed with a preiudicate opinion, we condemn it only, in regard of
the name which makes it odious, we will accurately weigh all the kinds and
differences; I well know that we are not to treat here of the fights wherein
Gladiators and Fencers exercise themselves, for recreation of spectators;
Moreover, we handle not that unheard fury of those, who to fulfill their
particular revenge, or for some imaginary puntitio of honor, have waded so
far in the effusion of blood; and sent so many souls to Hell: But the
question here is of a Duel warranted by the Laws; agreed unto by the
Sovereign, adjudged necessary in default of other proof, for the making
manifest of some fact in question of consequence to the State; and for the
decision of a difference of great importance; but this is the very thing which
we argue, to wit, if Superiors may in good conscience decree a Duel at their
motions, for the determination of their difference.

And that I may anticipate and obuiate many pretenses, which might divert us
from the state of the question: I acknowledge, that upon certain occasions the
Duel is disputable, and upon others altogether necessary; See some examples:

When an innocent man oppressed by the calumnious accusation of his adversary, is
like to be condemned, in case he justify not himself by combat; some hold, it
shall be lawful to accept this way; there being none other way left him to
support his innocence. But, this proceeding cannot justify the Judges; for if
they have found him guilty, will the Duel make him innocent? and finding
naught to convict him, are they not bound to acquit him? Why then will they
expose him to the hazard of his life, whom they are not able to pronounce
guilty?

The Duel whereto a man is constraind by the violence of one that sets upon
him, is not of this nature. He that is assailed, may repel force, with force;
it is a principle in nature and a privilege granted by the Laws; for the
party assailed is not in case to inuoke the assistance of a Magistrate, and
the Magistrate is not in place to repel that oppression. But, what relation,
or analogy has this defense with the Magistrates absence rendered necessary,
and which he ought to have forborne, if he had been in place with a Duel,
which the Magistrate will authorize either by his presence, or by his
approbation?

Nor makes it to the purpose to allege the Duels which have been fought
between Princes, which have determined their quarrels by the monomachy of man
to man. The Crown of England was sometimes in that sort disputed, between
Edmund Iron-side, and Canute the Dane: Edward the third offered as much to the
King of France; the French King to the Emperor Charles the fifth, and Henry the
Great, Father of our most Illustrious Queen, made offer to the Duke of Guise
his competitor, to put a period to their difference by point of spear, his
person against his, six against six, or hundred against hundred. I will not
say, that it is lawful to a Prince so to hazard the head of the Commonwealth,
and in his person, all the body of his Estate; but when this way is permitted
them, it is, because Sovereign Princes have not any Judge above them who can
do them right, so that to obtain reason from their hands, who are elevated to
as high a pitch of dignity as themselves; there is not any other way, but by
arms; and these their doings have an outward show of charity: for a Prince
will say, that he likes better to expose his own person to danger, then to
see a bloody war that should swallow up many thousands of men, and give
occasion of an infinite slaughter.

And it may be that some people desirous to avoid a general conflict of
nation against nation, have sometimes remitted their quarrel to a certain
number of men, to be chosen by either side by them to be decided by combat. So
three hundred Lacedaemonians fought against a like number of the Argiens; three
Romans against three Latins; and when David and Ishboseth, stood competitors
for the Royalty; the two Generals Ioab and Abner, caused a combat between
twelve Soldiers of the Tribe of Judah against twelve of the Tribe of Benjamin.
This kind of Duel is as it were an abridgement of the war, and yet not very
justifiable.

There is more appearance in this case, then in any of the cases before
mentioned. Two Armies are ready to fight, he that has the right on his side,
finds himself inferior in forces, so that if they come to handy-stroakes we
must all die of necessity: The enemy makes an offer of a single fight one to
one, and offers to stand to the event of this Duel; why should we all perish,
and not rather make legal of this way and expedient, which perchance may give
us the victory, or at least will save six thousand men's lives, and there can
but one be slain?

But this example has no correspondence with the Duel, whereof we now treat,
and one may not draw into consequence particular actions which are exployted in
war, or in the consequence of war; especially in heat of bataile, as H. 7.
slew Richard, that enjoyed the Royal throne: and Adolphe de Nassau, died by
the hand of Albert of Austria.

Moreover, it matters not to allege that famous example of David against
Goliath, of a young infant not having for defensive Arms other then his
Shepherds staff, and for offensive but a sling and a stone, against an old
warrier, monstrous in stature; armed at all points, his spear and lance of a
prodigious bigness, like the rest; had not David had in this particular an
assurance of Gods pleasure, it had been an extreme rashenesse to enterprise
it, and to hope to overthrow so great a Colossus. Also that action is numbered
amongst the miracles, but miracles are not wrought to serve as rules for our
imitation, and we must consider the quality of these two Champions, and the
occasion of the Duel: The one was an Israelite, the other a Philistin; they
engaged themselves in the quarrel of two nations, and not for their particular
interest; they were subjects to two several Princes, and of a contrary
Religion, it was in the view of two Armies, and that of the Infidels was to
yield themselves conquered, if the Giant were slain: In a word, beside that,
it was supernatural, it was an action of War, and consequently lawful.

Now, to come to the scope of my intent, we must remember that all manner of
difference, consists either in Fact, or in Right. As concerning the question of
Right: I no more like that it should be decided by the sword; otherwhiles this
bestiall custom has past as a Law, that the better title of Competitors
consists in force, so that brothers entered not often into their Fathers
inheritance; but by way of parricide, upon the dead carkasles of their nearest
kindred, and with violence to some of their own blood: Sons themselves have
been unnatural to their own Fathers, and constrained them to seek succor
by Arms. But, let us see if a Duel may have place in the question of Fact.

To prove the affirmative, these reasons following are alleged; That the war
is without comparison more universally bloody and pernicious, then is the
combat of a few particular men, the death of one or two has no proportion with
the butchering and massacre of many thousand persons; the slaughter of infants
and old folk, the desolation of widows and orphans, the spoil of tillage,
demolishing of houses, ruin of villages, pillages and violence, which convert
into a wilderness the most flourishing Kingdoms; and in a word all the
mischiefs which war engenders, and yet is by natural Right, That a Duel
for proof of actions obscure and doubtful, has been adjudged necessary by
antiquity, which has made the Laws, and approved by the suffrages of a great
many nations, that the Christian world has happily put it in practice, for no
short space of time: That many differences cannot be otherwise determined nor
many secret injuries come to light, but by this expedient.

I acknowledge that war is one of the scourges of mankind, and may be of all
others the most horrible: And those which have authority to make war, are
bound to seek out all ways for agreement before they enterprise war, to
employ the mediation of their allies, and to bring down their demands to an
indifferent equallity. But, when one is forced to enter into war all lamentable
events, which accompany war are to be imputed to that party that has compelled
the other to such a necessity; especially, if the war is defensive, for he
that fights only to defend himself, is not guilty of the miseries which may
follow. For offensive war, oftentimes it is not necessary: a Prince or
Estate, from whom a duty is detained have right to regaine by this way. In the
first war that was in the world the Patriarche Abraham armed all his house,
to set at liberty his friends and kindred: War then is made warrantable by
the law of necessity; now this necessity proceeds (as we have before specified)
heere-hence, because Sovereign powers are exempt from justifying their actions
before any Tribunal.

There is not a Judge established amongst Kings to decide their differences, so
that he which is offended by the other, can have no recourse but to the justice
of arms. But it is not so amongst private men, for God has given them Judges,
and yet not permitted such Judges, who are no other extirpers of Battle, to
grant the same to two parties at variance, to the end that they may do Justice
by their ownhands.

We must mark also that war is not made to know which of the parties has
the right; for he that enterpriseth a war, ought first to be well assured of
the justice of his cause; for otherwise it is not a war, but a public
robbery, but in the Duel, two men are made to fight, who it may be kill one
the other, without which one knows not which had the wrong.

To conclude, war is authorized in Scripture by express ordinances, furnished
with many rules, blessed by Moses prayers, practiced by Prophets and Kings;
approved by the Forerunner of Christ; honored by the presence of the Arc;
and governed by a Chiefetaine, that calls himself the God of Battles. But
after a Duel we find not so much as the bare name mentioned.

Concerning the Laws, upon which some found this Duel; we ought first to
know, if such Laws themselves be lawful. A wicked Law, says an ancient
Father, is no Law, but a corruption of Law; Laws have enacted wciked things.
and a bastard law cannot legitimate an action, nor make a proceeding
justifiable: otherwise, Why curse we the ancient Almains, amongst whom, theft
has its approbation, as an exercise of virtue? Why condemn we the Scythians,
who imitating the West Indians, have their servants buried alive with them, yea
and their own wives? Why have we abrogated so many ancient Laws, made by our
ancestors, and that have continued in use many ages? Is it not for that some of
them are contrary to the Law Divine; others of them repugne the Law of Nature,
and savor more of barbarousnesse, then humanity? The Law which decrees a Duel
in default of proof, is found amongst the ancient constitutions of the
Seliques Allemans, Danes, English, Normans, and other people of the west; from
whom it is said to take its original. But, what were these Lawmakers, that
have made this Law for us?

Were they not such themselves, who decreed human Sacrifices to their false
Gods, and spared not the offering up in Sacrifice of their own Infants? Were
they not such who accounted those unfortunate men and women, to have an
heroical resolution that died by their own hands? Were they not such which
approved incestuous copulations, and that in a word made laws as it were in
despite of God and Nature? But we are not to wonder if they decreed a Duel,
in the question of Fact, seeing that the greater part of those nations, do
hardly take any other course in affairs where the right is controuerted, which
notwithstanding is by all found fault with at this day. Froton King of
Denmark, commanded that all differences arising in his Kingdom, should by
combat be decided, and that is the reason, Why the Scythians who maintain
their right by force, and have no other Religion, Law, nor Justice then the
sword; have accustomed to plant their grounds with trees, whereof they made
their spears, and to adore them as a supreme Deity. Contrariwise, the Eastern
people, whose moral Virtues and Ciuility we imitate; The Assyrians,
Egyptians, Persians, Hebrews, and also the Greeks and Romans, never admitted
of the Duel, but in fact of good war: This Law then ought to be examined by
that which is the rule of all others, as being derived from God, for we speak
not of particular ordinances which were in use only in the commonwealth of the
Jews, but of that eternal Law, expressed in the Sacred Writ, which remains
in perpetual strength, and binds all kinds of nations, and when there happens
a doubtful cause, if Judges would preuentthose resentme^ts which their
consciences will make them feel, they cannot know a better way then this, to
wit, To judge an other by the same Law, which shall judge them all at the last
day.

The examples of Duels cannot be of better regard then the laws which produced
them: England has seen many fight in case of accusations of treason, and it
matters not to bring many instances of this nature, whereof Histories are full:
Francis the first, King of France, would never condescent that two Noble men of
his Court should fight in single combat, although they greatly desired it,
saying, that a Prince ought to suffer a thing whereof can come no good. His
successor H. 2. (who dyed after by a blow received in Tournament) granted a
duel, but amongst a thousand of these combats one shall hardly find two which
have brought to light that which was sought after, to wit, the manifestation of
the Fact, the truth thereof being stifled in the blood of the Duellists, so
that it is oftener an act of Tragedy, then of true Justice.

Before I answer the Objections, which may be alleged, we will encounter this
Duel with these arguments following.

1. Section, It is certain and cannot be gainsaid, that this way is casual
hazardous, and by consequent deceivable, I acknowledge that humane actions
which are various, contingent and infinite cannot prove themselves with so much
certainty, as can Mathematical conclusions, which have infallible
demonstrations; ever some incertainty goes a long with proofs. One and the
same action shall oftentimes be disguised in so many several shapes, that the
Eye of Justice cannot discern the true figure, the witnesses may be liars;
Oaths, false; Writings, counterfeit; Judges, corrupt; and the parties own
confession, oftentimes betraies their own innocence: It has been seen that
some weary of an irksome life, have voluntary accused themselves of crimes
which they never committed; the Torture has sometimes caused men to say that
which never was; and many also daue endured it, which have stood in maintenance
of deeds as false, as falsenesse it self: What then can Judges do always
groping in the dark, and when the brightest lights, which they can bring,
cannot find out the illusions, which lie hidden in these obscurities? I answer,
that so long as they go a regular pace and that they contain themselves within
the bounds by good Laws prescribed, they cannot err, when upon the deposition
of two or three witnesses, not to be excepted against; it chances that an
innocent is condemned: the conscience of the witnesses is guilty, not that of
the Judge, for he has proceeded, according to Laws Divine and Natural; but if
such a mischief happen through his steering other courses, then such as the
Law of God has commanded him, how can he hope that that Law will serve to
warrant his proceeding; And besides, the testimonies and circumstances, which
often are suborned, yet have a natural relation with the Fact; but things in
their own nature casual, cannot give any intelligence hereof: What a brutish
proceeding then is it to casheer Justice, which is Sacred; for to entertain
the vanity of a thing contingent casual and abusiue? Is it not just as if one
should put all to chance, as the Democritusses of our age use to speak?

2. Section. This proceeding is contrary to the fundamental principles of
Justice, which adiudge the right not to him which has the stronger body, or
which has more dexterity in his weapon; but to him that is known to maintain
a just cause, yet it is a thing thereby and conformable to the order of Nature,
that the strong should overcome the weak, so as it happens the weaker man
though innocent, is conquered by the power of his stronger adversary. All the
precautions which may be used (as the giving them arms alike, and the taking
away of all advantages from either party) cannot so perfectly equalize their
forces, their dexterity, their spirit, their courages, but there will ever be
an inequality. And moreover, a man is not at all times in like strength and
during the passage of such an action a beam of the Sun; the shaking of a
leaf, a little sand blown in the eye, or under the feet, a sudden object, a
cloud in the air, a fright, a thought may undo one of the parties: but
letting pass all this is it not always a course opposite to Justice, to judge
a man more by the success of his sword, then by the goodness of his cause?

3. Section. And to answer to the objection, that the cause is a doubtful
cause, and that the single combat is decreed to dilucidate and manifest the
same; let us see what will be the event herein: Either the two combatants
escape, or both of them stay upon the place, or only one of the twain, if it
chance they be separate upon equal advantage, what proof will the Duel
afford us? Shall the truth of the Fact be for ever unknown? Then to what
purpose served it to endanger their lives, when some other way of atonement
might have been found out? Had it not been better to have taken this known
course, then to rejoice in their destruction, and engulph them into danger? And
if both remain dead in the field, what proof will that make? How shall truth
appear to us, when their misfortune is equal? Shall we attend till their
ghost, from beneath, rise to accord matters after their death? Or if the one
terrified over his adversary and having his dagger held at his breast confess
himself guilty, who can assure us, that this acknowledgement is wrung from
him, more by the force of virtue, then by the fear of death? Or if he that
lies groueling on the ground, weltering in his gore, nor hoping ought, nor
fearing ought in this world, persevere in the protestation of his innocence, and
dye making such assertion, what shall we judge in this case? The Judges give
their suffrage to the conqueror; but I believe in their consciences they adiuge
the right to the vanquished. A dying man's last words are of more validity, then
many witnesses; it is not to be presumed that a Christian would stain his life
with so criminal a falsity and ad to the overthrow of his body, the perdition
of his soul also; It remains that we hold it not strange, though God permit
the innocent to be vanquished, who though for ought besides he be not guilty,
has deserved this chastisement, for defending his innocence by this unlawful
way; but this excuses not the Promouers or Directors of this action, but more
aggrauates their fault.

4. Section. For as it is certain, that of two contending, the one of
necessity must be innocent; his life is equally endangered with that of the
guilty: Equity, and humanity direct us that it were better to pardon a guilty
man, then endanger an innocent, but we see both are obnoxious to the same
danger. As a Turkish Sultan, that cut up the stomach of thirteen of his Pages,
to know which of them had taken and eaten a certain Melon, and would have
exercised that barbarous cruelty upon threehu^dred more of that band, if in a
good hour for them, that fatal fruit had not been found in the stomach of
the fourteenth man.

Some will say, that they condemn them not to dye; But at least it is apparent
that they adiudge them to enieopard their lives; which if they escape, that is
no thanks to the Law, which bound them to run the hazard; for that bloody Law
it self ordains, that the vanquished, if he dye not by the hand of his
Antagonist, be dispatched by that of the Executioner. When one enioines a man
to fight with Lions, or Bulls, upon condition to acquit him, if miraculously, or
by some extraordinary relenting or gentleness, he free himself from the
paws of those furious Beasts; is not this nevertheless a condemning a man to
the danger of death? Or when one experiments the force of a poison upon the
body of a guilty man, with a promise to grant him his life, in case the
strength of his complexion surmount that of the poison; is not this a kind of
condemnation? In the Duel, then two men are exposed to undergo this danger;
is not this a monstrous injustice? For ordinarily a man is condemned, because
proof is brought in against him; but here quite contrary, a man is condemned;
though nothing be proved against him: one is condemned, I say, to hazard that
which no man can restore again, I mean, his life; If any man object that in
war, a Soldier who stands suspect of some fault, is commanded to be the first
that should scale a breach, orto seek out some dangerous place, or to undergo
some other service full of danger; I answer, if that man be in fault, the
ordinance cannot be taxed of injustice, that assigns him such an expiation;
but if he be innocent, yet is there no wrong done him, in so much as the law of
arms may command men of more eminent rank; who are bound to sacrifice their
lives for the good of the common weal. And therefore we must again be
mindful of the difference betwixt a Duel, and those actions; which are
atcheiued in the wars. Moreover, a Soldier, or Officer being suspect, or
accused of treason; there can no better course be taken to know the truth, then
to make a trial, by some service; which may either manifest his
perfidiousnesse or loyalty; for such actions disclose the inward intentions of
a man, by a natural dependence, and produce effects of like nature unto the
Fact, which cannot be certainly decided: But in a Duel there is no jot of
likelihood, that any proof should appear thereby amongst such as profess
themselves men: for can we in any reason draw this conclusion, that one man is
a traitor, because an other has killed him.

It may be too, some will say, that this Duel is not by command, but only
upon sufferance, that the two parties themselves request it, and they being
agreed, there is no wrong offered them, seeing, it is their own will and
seeking: To which I say only this, that it is the office of the Magistrate to
cohibit and restrain the passions of particular men, and not to comply with
their desires of killing one another. In ancient time, in some Commonweals,
there was an ordinance made for the disparagement, and disgrace of such that
kill themselves by their own private authority; and the purport of the Law,
was, that if any one desired death, he should make his repair to the
Magistrate, who having heard what he could say; judged if his request to dye
were reasonable, and it being granted so to be; gave him leave either to hang
himself, or cut his own throat; otherwise, it is a crime to dye without
leave. But the public Magistrate ought rather to reine in the fury of the
enraged, then give them a pastport to slay one another; otherwise, to permit a
murder, is to commit it.

5. Section. Now, as we know that the intention of each of the two, is to kill
his adversary, in case he deny not his words; if it chance that this fatal Lot
fall upon the innocent; can the Conscience of the Judges find reasons
sufficient for their excuse? Shall not the blood return upon their faces, and
they never be quitted of this aspersion: And it will not serve their turns, to
say they had no such intention, for they cannot deny to have exposed the
innocent (which soever of the two he were) to a desperate condition, to have
engaged him in a Combat, and to have given authority to the hand that
perpetrated the murder.

6. Section. Nay, I say more, that if two criminal persons, duly attainted and
convicted be condemned to death, the Magistrate cannot in good Conscience
assign a Duel, that they may slay each other, for that were to make them
executors and homicides of themselves: but in a Duel (whereof we treat) it is
far worse, for here the innocent shall be the butcher of the nocent, or
(which is more horrid) here the guilty shall put to death the innocent, or,
which falls out there, they are both in peril to be butchers of each other.

7. Section. To say that in a Duel, we await what success God will send, is a
frivolous excuse; ill proceedings have sometimes good success, but that is by
accident: We are not bound to Pilate for having condemned Jesus Christ; hoping
that God will pardon our proceedings. And more, who has told us that God will
adiudge as we desire; to wit, to the advantage of the innocent? Think we that
God is bound to conform himself to our intentions, and to execute our
sentence? Or if it be only to see what he will do therein, is not this
impudently to tempt him, and to make an encrochment upon his hidden judgments?

8. Section. But it is yet more cruel; To what danger are their two souls
exposed? If one of the two be slain in the field, what shall become of that
soul, which departs out of this World: also swollen with vengeance, all set on
fire with deadly rancour, fretting in his own gall and thirsting after the
blood of his neighbor? Is it likely to be received into the bosom of the
Patriarks? Why then do we hazard so swiftly the salvation of a soul, which
the Son of God bought so dearly, and which cannot be bought again; but at
the price of so many tears, which he has shed with great cries, and of so
much blood he has shed to wash it? Think we not that he will demand it at
our hands?

9. Section. Let us oppose to this barbarous law, the stipulations of Christian
Divines, who call this Duel, an invention of him that has been a murderer
from the beginning, who when in effect there were but two brethren in the
world, instigated the one to kill the other. Let us oppose against it the
Canons and Law of the Church, which have thundered forth Anathema's, and
Excommunications against these bloody homicides; and which have prosecuted
their very ashes, denying them Christian burial, and condemned their memory as
abominable and worthy to be execrated.

10. Section. Finally, let us not oppose the Laws of God, which have
vouchsafed to descend to actions of less consequence. These holy Laws forbid
to speak wrong of a deaf man, to lead the blind out of the way, to mouzell
the Ox that treads out the corn, and many other ordinances of like nature;
But how comes it that we find not any rule, in a matter so important as is the
Duel? Judicial proceedings are there well prescribed at large, and in diverse
places; and upon what proofs Judges ought to found their judgments. The same
in Fact of accusation, and touching Delators. The verbal deposition of two or
three witnesses, specially in a matter of life and death, Deuteronomy. Chap. 17. verse.
6. The Oath, which the Holy Ghost affirms to be an end of Controuerfies,
Hebr. Chap. 6. verse. 16. And an Oath is ordained in case of goods deposited,
Exodus Chap. 22. verse. 8. Writings and Seals in matters Civil, Ierem. Chap.
21. The confession of the guilty, Joshua Chap. 7. ver 19. Presumptuous and
strong conjectures; as when Solomon adjudged the Infant to her that was more
willing that another woman should enjoy him all, then to suffer him to be cut
into halfes; But concerning proof, or decision by Battle, our Savior has
not advised thereof, so that he has made no rules concerning Barriers; the
equality of the Arms, the calling to the Combatants; the going down of the
sun, the silence of the Spectators, and other circumstances. In a word, this
fighting reduced into an art is none of his invention. Also amongst all the
Great courages, which the Holy Story commends to us; and amongst them, which
often had many particular quarrels to fight; we cannot find the practice of
this Duel.

David had an enemy in the Court of Saul, to wit, Doeg the Edomite, who forbore
not to accuse him before his Prince, breaking out defiance, and outrage in his
hearing; But David did never demand the combat to right his innocence, and to
make this impostor swallow his lie; for, as concerning what he did against the
Giant, we have seen, that that action was of another nature; and from this we
may conclude, that the Duel is a crime, for whatsoever we find unwarranted by
precept or example in the Scripture, is without Faith; now whatsoever is done
without Faith, is a sin.

11. Section. Let us add to this, that when the truth of a Fact, cannot be
manifested by lawful means it is a tempting of God to be obstinately bent by
fiery force, to know that which he would have hid from us; but it is a bloody
boldness, to seek for the truth in the blood and in the heart of a man, like
those wretched souls, that sacrifice humane Creatures to know by their
entrals, and shall often get nothing, but resentment and repentance upon the
whole matter, if it chance the fact be manifested afterward, when the mischief
is past repair: as has been seen in the famous example of two men, one of
which charged the other to have committed theft; they fought in single combat;
the party accused was slain; some short time after, the theft was found in
the hands of a third party that was guilty thereof. The Judges cannot now
raise again the poor innocent, but must suffer the sting of Conscience, all
their life long.

12. Section. And lastly, let us see if a Duel be to any purpose, for the
determining of a difference; what inconvenience can ensue upon a difference
undecided? It may be the two parties may be fighting continually; Is it then
fit to make them kill one another to day, to the end, they may not do it at
another time? or is it better they should be slain with ceremony to the end,
they may dye by privilege? The remedy is worse then the mischief, and it is
worth laughing at, were it not an offense to God. If this way of a Duel be
lawful between two persons, why shall it not be used between two families
upon like occasion? and evermore the most barbarous never liked that
Magistrates should permit a Combat between two kindreds or two families, the
consequent would extend to the whole commonwealth; and lastly, one part of the
Estate would destroy the other, which would prove the Forerunner of desolation:
In a word, this course would extirpate all Seats of Justice, and overthrow all
order and polity.

What then is the duty of Judges in such like occasions? I say not that they
should do as that Judge, that being not able to give his resolution in a
Capital matter; and fearing to do wrong to the one, or the other, would not
give a definitive Sentence; but decreed only that the parties should appear
within a hundred years, to abide what should be judged to be right: A term
long enough and such as would free them from Court, and process unless some
other Judge had interposed himself in the matter. But to speak seriously, the
Judges cannot be ignorant what is prescribed unto them by good Laws, to wit:
That in every doubtful case, the Accused ought to have the advantage, and that
he must pronounce in his favor: That the Accuser not proving the crime
objected; the Party charged ought to be acquitted. This rule of Law is
equitable and approuable; If he err in steering other course, pure Innocence
shall reside in more security in the Dens of Lions, in the Forests, or among
the Dragons of the Wilderness, then in the Palace of Justice. There is nothing
so easy as to accuse, and calumniation with a brazen forhead, an impudent
throat, and audacity to persist in leasings, are such things as ever over
whelme the modesty of the innocent.

Yet nevertheless, I acknowledge that when a crime touching the Estate in
question, many reasons there may be, wherefore one ought not ever to bind the
Informer to all the stricktnesse which are used to accusers that fail to prove
their accusations; if a crime of this nature come to my knowledge and I
discover it not, I make my self guilty; and if the fact come to light, at any
time, by another means; my silence will be enough to hang me. It stands the
State upon, that there be a moderation used in this behalf: To impose silence
at all times, to Delators, that are not able to prove; would Produce but bad
consequences, for many conspiracies would be plotted, with more audacity and
security. In all Estates it is permitted to whomsoever he be to discover
crimes, by a secret way: hence it is that an Informer, or Delecter of some
Crime, write down in some scroll (without telling his Name) the Crime, the
Authors and Confederates, and all circumstances, which are come to his
knowledge; he cast this scroll into a Trunck, which is placed within certain
Churches for that end; the Magistrates coming to see the Trunck, find many
relations, which serve them to discover great mysteries: Now though this way
be not free from inconveniences, and that there can be no proof made thereby
(the informer being unknown) this good comes thereby, that many hidden
practices, which otherwise had not been brought to light, are by this
discovery divulged. The Prince makes his observations of things thus
discovered, and the discouerer being unknown, remains in security; I
conclude, that a wise Prince having regard to the condition of the parties, to
the consequences, and other good respects may conserve unstained both the
honor of the one, and of the other.

The greatest difficulty, seems to be this, In two contradictories, the one
being necessarily false, how can one acquit the accused, without making the
accuser give himself the lie, and by consequent to surcease, but this
moderation may be used, to wit, that one content himself to say; That he may
not go forward in a fact without proof, yet it were fit to enjoin perpetual
silence, and never more to complain under a great pain.

Be it as it will, of all expedients, which one can take, the Duel is the
worse. This way is practiced by men barbarous and unnatural; it is casual and
deceitful: It profanes the Sacredness of Justice: It overthrows universal
Maxims: It produces no certainty: It puts in ieopardy the Innocent, as well
as the guilty: It tempts God many ways: It makes men slayers of their
neighbors and themselves: It cozens men of salvation, and carries their souls
to the Gates of Hell: It is condemned by the wiser part of Christians: It is
not warranted by the Law of God: It is without example, from the practice of
the faithful. To conclude, it is a poisonous antidote, more pernicious then
the mischief, which one should prevent. And when it produces the fruit
desired, it is wretched fruit must be purchassed at such a price. David in his
sickness earnestly desiring to drink of the Wels of Bethlehem; two Soldiers,
would have hazarded their lives to fetch some, he protested he would not
drink the blood of those men. Nothing is so sacred as the blood of a Man, and
the blood of Beasts is not employed but in Sacrifices. Let us not forget the
Law expressed in the 21. Chap. of Deuteronomy. concerning the manslaughter unknown,
and the expiation thereof in the stony valley. The solemn prayer which was made
in that ceremony, may be applied to the subject of our discourse: O Lord be
merciful unto us, and lay not innocent blood to the charge of thy people.

THE MANNER AND form of Combats anciently observed before the Kings of England.
WHen upon the exhibit of the Bill in Court before the Constable, the Appellant
fails in the proof of his Appeal, and cannot by witness nor any other
manner of way make the right of his demands appear, he may offer to make
proof of his intent upon the Defendant with his body by force: And if the
Defendant will say, he will so defend his honor, the Constable, as Vicar
general in Arms (for so is my Author) under the King, has power to join his
issue by battaill, and to assign the time and place, so that it be not within
forty days after the issue in that manner joined, unless the agreement of the
parties give themselves a shorter day. And upon the joining of the issue by
Combat, the Constable shall signify to them their Arms, which are, a Gauntlet
and short Sword, and a long Sword and Dagger: And then the Appellant and
Defendant shall both find able pledges for their appearance at a certain time
and a day set, before the Sun be come to some one degree certainly named, to
acquit their pledges, and the Plaintiff to make proof of his charge; and the
Appealee to make the best defense he can for his honor, and that in the mean
time neither of them, by themselves, nor by any well-willers of theirs, shall
lie in ambush to assault or work any grieuance to the other.

The King shall find the field for performance of the Combat, which must be
sixty foot in length, and in breadth forty.

It must be a hard, and firm ground, nothing stony, and listed about, by the
advice of the Marshall, with good and serviceable railing. There must be two
doors, the one in the East, and the other in the West; each of them of the
height of seven feet or more, so that a horse cannot leap over them; and these
doors are to be kept by the Sergeant at Arms.

On the day of the battle the King shall sit in a Chair mounted on a
scaffold, and a low seat shall be made for the Constable and Marshall at the
foot of the descent from the scaffold; and sitting there, they demand the
pledges of the Appellant, and Defendant to come into the lists, and render
themselves the Kings prisoners, until the Appellant and Defendant are come in,
and have made oath.

When the Appellant comes to the field, he shall come to the door in the East
armed, and so appointed as the Court did order, and shall there attend the
coming of the Constable, to bring him in.

And the Constable shall demand of him, who he is that comes thus armed to
these lists, what name he bears, and the cause of his coming.

The Appellant shall answer, I am such a man, A. of B. Appellant, who am come
mounted and armed as you see, to the door of these lists, to demand an entry,
to make an endeavor to prove my intent against C. of D. and to acquit my
pledges.

Then the Constable, taking up his Beauer, so assuring himself he is the same
person who is the Appellant, shall throw open the door, and bid him enter in
his Arms, with his victuals, and other necessary attendance, and his Council
with him, and shall then bring him before the King, and thence to his seat
where he shall attend until the Defendant come.

Then the Appellant shall make a request to the Constable and Marshall to
discharge his pledges; and the Constable and Marshall shall inform his
Majesty, that since the body of the Appellant is entered the lists to make
proof on his Appellee, his pledges by Law ought to have a discharge. And after
leave granted by the King, the Constable shall discharge them. If at the time
appointed, the Defendant comes not in to his defense, the King does command
the Constable to call him by the Marshall; And the Marshall shall command the
Lieutenant; and the Lieutenant shall command the Marshall of the Heralds of the
South; If it be in the March of Clarencieux; and if the Marshall of the Heralds
of the king of the South be not there, then a Herald of the March of King
Clarencieux shall call him. And if the performance of the Battle be on the
North side of the river of Trent, in the March of king Norrey, the Marshall of
the king of the North shall demand him: And in his default, one of the Heralds
of the March of King Norrey shall call for the Defendant, thus:

Oyes, oyes, oyes, C. of D. Defendant, Come to your action which you have
undertaken this day, to acquit your pledges in the presence of the King,
Constable, and Marshall, and defend your self against A. of B. in that he
shall question and charge thee.

And if he appear not, he shall be in like manner thrice demanded at the four
corners of the lists; only the second time he is proclaimed; at the end the
Herald shall say, The day is far passed. So at the third time, the Herald at
the half hour after three of the clock in the afternoon, by the commandment
of the Constable, shall thus summon him.

C. of D. Defendant, save your honor, and come in to the action you have
undertaken at this day; the time is far gone, the half hour is spent; come
into the lists upon the peril that shall follow thereon, or else you come too
late.

Then when they have both appeared, the Register of the Constables Court shall
in writing observe their entrance, the order, and time, and the manner, whether
on foot or mounted, their Arms, the color of their horses, and how their
horses are harnessed, lest their horses, or their harness should be changed,
or otherwise imbezelled.

Then the Constable shall know whether it will please the Kings Majesty to
appoint any of his Nobles to counsel and advise them.

The Constable shall employ two Knights or Esquires to the Appellant, to keep
his standing, and to care that he observe no charm, spell, or other ill Arts,
until he has made oath; and with the like charge, two others shall be
dispatched to the Defendant.

And when the Constable has asked his Majesty's pleasure, whether his
Highness will receive their oaths in person, or that the Constable and
Marshall take them in the lists, calling for the Appellant, with his Counsel,
he shall demand of the Counsel, if they will make any further protestation,
that they should now put them in; for this time is peremptory, so as hereafter
no protestation shall be received.

Then the Constable shall have a Clerk ready by him with a book; and the
Constable shall cause his Register to read the whole Bill to the Appellant, and
shall say to him,

You A. of B. do you know this to be your Bill, and the complaint which you
exhibited in Court before me? Laying your right hand upon this book, you must
swear the truth of your Bill in all points, from the first to the last charge
in it, and that it is your intent to prove upon C. of D. the contents thereof
to be true, so aid you God.

The form of it is thus, Thou A. of B. this thy Bill is sooth in all points
and articles contained therein from the beginning to the end; and it is thine
intent to prove them this day so to be, on the aforesaid C. of D. So God thee
help and hallow.

This done, the Appellant is remanded to his stand.

The Defendant shall be in like manner sworn upon the truth of his defense.

And this their first oath they ought to take kneeling; but by the favor of
the Constable and Marshall they sometimes do it standing.

Then the Constable shall by the Marshall, call the Appellant before him, and
tender him his second oath, which (if the Constable give leave) he may take
sitting.

A. of B. laying your hand on the book this second time, you shall swear that
you come no otherwise appointed then as by us the Constable and Marshall has
been assigned; that is, with a short Sword, and a Gauntlet; a long Sword, and
a Dagger; that you have not any knife, or any other pointed instrument or
engine, small or great; no stone, no herb of virtue; no charm, experiment, or
any other enchantment, by whose power you believe you may the easier overcome
your adversary, who within these lists shall oppose you in his defense; and
that you trust not in any thing more then in God, your body, and the merits of
your quarrel; So God you help.

Then being conducted to his place, the keepers of the lists shall be put out,
and the Defendant in the same manner shall be demeaned.

Then the Constable and Marshall shall send for them both before them, and the
Constable shall name the Appellant and Defendant, and shall say to them both
thus;

Take ye each other by the right hand, and I command that neither of you be
so hardy as violently to handle one another, upon your peril; and laying their
left hands on the book, the Constable shall say,

I charge you A. of B. Appellant, by your faith, and your right hand, which is
enclosed in the hand of your adversary C. of D. that you use your power, and
make use of all advantages to make good your appeal upon C. of D. your enemy,
the Defendant, to force him to a rendering of himself into your hands by
demanding of a parley, or with your own hand to kill him before you depart out
of these lists, by that height of the Sun, and age of the day you have
assigned you by us the Constable and Marshall, by your faith; And so God you
help.

The same form shall be observed on the part of the Defendant; and then they
shall be brought each of them to their places, the lists cleared of the
Council and servants on both sides.

The oaths thus past, an Herald by the command of the Constable and Marshall,
shall make Oyes thirce, and shall say,

We the Constable and Marshall in the Kings name charge and command every man
of what quality or condition soever he be, that he approach not within four
foot to these lists, nor that he speak any word, make any noise, give any
sign, nor by his countenance or otherwise direct either of these parties, A.
of B. or C. of D. Appellant and Defendant, to take any advantage the one upon
the other, by any sign so given, upon pain of life and member, and the
forfeiture of his chattels.

Next, the Constable and Marshall shall assign the place where the king at
Arms and the Heralds standing may have a full sight of the action within the
lists: for now they are to attend the Appellant and Defendant, and minister to
them in what they shall command them; and if either of them faint, or have
either desire to eat or to drink of their victuals they bring with them into
the lists, it is the office of the Heralds to be attending upon them. If the
Appellant will either eat or drink, he must first desire the good leave of the
Defendant, which shall be by a king at arms signified to the Constable and
Marshall, and they to attend his Majesty with the desire of the Appellant, and
the consent of the Defendant, and pray his Majesty's allowance of it. And if
either the Appellant, or the Defendant have a necessity to do any other thing,
the Heralds and the Pursuiuants shall attend them.

After this the Constable and Marshall freeing the lists from people of all
conditions, except a Knight and two Esquires of the Constables train, and the
Lieutenant; a Knight and two Esquires of the Marshals retinue, which shall be
in Armor, bearing Lances in their hands, which are not to be barbed with any
iron, to part them when his Majesty shall give the word.

These Knights and Esquires are neither to bring swords, knives, bows, nor
daggs into the lists.

They of the Constables side are to keep one corner of the lists, and there
lay themselves flat on the ground: and in like manner shall they of the
Marshals side bestow themselves at another corner of the lists; for none may
appear upright within the lists save the Constable and Marshall.

And if the King be not present, then the Constable and Marshall shall sit in
the place of the King, and the Lieutenant be within the lists.

But if the King be present, then the Constable sitting upon a seat before the
King within the lists, as the Kings Vicar general, shall command his
Lieutenant to accompany the Appellant, and the Marshall or his Lieutenant with
the like respect shall accompany the Defendant.

And the Constable sitting at the foot of the seat Royal, shall speak with a
loud voice; Let them go, let them go to do their endeauours.

This said, the Appellant going to the Defendant (standing in the presence of
the King) shall with all his strength assault him; and the Defendant shall be
as wary as he can in his defense.

The Constable and Marshall, or their Lieutenants, ought to be within hearing,
and also within sight, if in case either of them speak, or make any sign he
will renounce his quarrel; or if the Kings Majesty say but Hoe, or give any
other signal, then they who are within the lists with the Constable and
Marshall, throwing their Lances betwixt the Appellant and the Defendant, and so
parting them, they shall not give way to either of them to assault the other,
until the King command they be free, or that the Constable declare his
Majesty's pleasure to be so, by saying, Let them go, the King wills it.

Notwithstanding that the Constable has given the Defendant a set time to come
in to his performance, yet, in case he comes not according to the appointment
of the Constable, of right, judgment shall not pass against him upon his
default, until the first half hour after three of the clock be clearly
passed, let the cause be treasonable or otherwise.

But the Appellant whose suite it is, ought to be there at his precise time,
when the Constable shall first demand him, else his pledges have forfeited
their security.

The Appellant and Defendant shall be searched by the Constable and Marshall,
their weapons and arms questioned in all points, that they be auowable, and
no engine or device not honorably justifiable in them. And if they find any
such practice, the party shall be outed of that weapon: for, reason, ciuility,
and the law of Arms will upon no condition, in acts of this high performance,
admit of treachery, or base conspiracy.

The Appellant and Defendant shall, as they themselves agree, cloth their
bodies; for that is left to themselves, only the Constable shall examine that
they both have the same Armor, or other defense upon his body.

If one of them desire his sword to be shortened, so that it be shorter then
the measure of the standard, the other is not bound to abate the length of his
weapon: But if they once agree to fight with swords longer then the standard
allows, at the day of the action within the lists, either of them may demand
to have his weapon made to answer the standard, and the other is in honor
bound to make his conformable, being a demand lawful, not upon fancy, and
tasting of no private way or advantage.

Now the Constable and Marshall are to beattentiue to the King, if his Majesty
shall please to command the Combatants should be parted to take breath, or for
any other purpose; and in any case they must have especial care how they part
and divide them; and that at the time when they interpose, they be both of
them in the same degree or possibility, and neither of them in the mercy nor in
the hand of the other.

The Constable and Marshall shall not suffer them to whisper, or have any
private discourse; for they are the witnesses, and in their breasts lies the
record of their words, and in no other place.

And if the battle be grounded on a cause of treason, he that is convicted
and discomfited, shall be disarmed by the command of the Constable and
Marshall, one corner of the lists broken down in disgrace of the party
becoming recreant, and being fastened to a horse, shall be dragged from the
place where he so lost his Arms to the block, and have his head severed from
his body, or be hanged by the neck, or otherwise, according to the several
vsages of the Country.

It is the office of the Marshall to accompany the party to the place, and
there in his view to see execution done, and all the sentence performed, and
that as well of the side of the Appellant as the Defendant. For good conscience,
equity, and the law of the field do exact, that the Appellant if in case he be
convicted, and becomes a man vanquished in his proof, that he incur the
same pain and hazard the Defendant should have done:

But if the cause be any other crime then treason, he that is so by the body
of his adversary convicted, shall lose his Arms within the lists, and thence
be led out to the place of his suffering, which is directed by the usage of the
Country; and this as well of the Appellant as the Defendant, as aforesaid; only
he shall not be dragged, nor the railes broken, unless it be in case of
treason, and not otherwise.

But if it be merely an act of Arms, a trial by challenge allowed by the
grace of the King, Constable, and Marshall; he that in such a Combat confesses
himself vanquished, shall be disarmed, degraded, and being led to the skirt of
the list, he shall be tossed and thrown over the bars, without any further
punishment.

If it please the King to take the difference, and the judgment thereof into
his own hand; and command them to be friends without any further
controversy: Then the Constable taking the Appellant, and the Marshall the
Defendant, shall bear the^both before the King: And the King shall by the
Constables signify his pleasure unto them; Then they shall be both of them
lead together unto one of the gates of the lists, and be so conveyed out of the
lists, in all points as they entered the lists; and shall be so conveyed out of
the lists, in the same Article of time, that of them no man may say, A first
was out, or A last within the lists: For, since the King has into his own
hands taken the consideration of the quarrel; it were dishonorable that either
of the sides, in a Battle withdrawn by the word of a King, should suffer any
dishonor, the one more then the other. And the ancient tenet and opinion has
been, that he that is first out of the Lists suffers a diminution of honor, the
field being his in honor, that is last possessor of it; For, he makes it good.

There ought to be double lists for the servants of the Constable and Marshall,
and for the Sergeant at Arms of the King, who are to attend, and defend, that
no offense, affray, outrage, or other misdeameanor against the Cries, made only
in Court be committed or suffered, or any affront that may be meant against the
Kings Majesty, or the Laws and honor of Arms. These men ought to be in
complete Arms.

The Constable and Marshall, may bring what power they please with them into
the field, and those either Armed, or otherwise, at their Election.

The Kings Sergeants at Arms shall be the keepers of the Doors, and Portals
of the Lists; and they are to make all Arrests by the Commandment of the
Constable and Marshall; and such so arrested to assure.

The fee of the Constable is their steeds, and Arms, and all that they bring
with them into the lists, save only those wherewith they fight; And of the
party overcome, all his Arms and other things of Combat, are the right of the
Constable.

The fee of the Marshall, is only the Lists, Bars, Seats, and other works
for that spectacle.

A CATALOGVE OF CERTAIN COMBATS, GRANTED BY THE KINGS OF ENGLAND.
EDMUND of the Race of West Saxons, fought in Combat with Ganutus King of
Denmark, for the possession of the Crown of England. In which fight both the
Princes being weary, by consent parted the Land betwixt them. Anno 1016.

Robert Mountfort accused Henry of Essex of Treason, affirming, that he in a
Journey toward Wlaes, near unto Colshill, threw away the Kings Standerd,
saying the King was dead, and turned back those that went to the Kings
succor. Henry denied the accusation, so as the matter was to be tried by
Combat: The place appointed for fight, was a little Isle near unto Reading. In
this Combat, Henry was vanquished, and fell down dead, and at the suite of
friends, license was obtained that his body might be buried by the Monks of
Reading. But it happened that the said Henry recovered and became a Monk in
that Abbey. Anno 1163. In the reign of King Henry the second.

Henry Duke of Hereford, accused Thomas Mowbray Duke of Norfolk, of certain
words by him spoken, as they rode between London and Brainford, tending unto
the Kings dishonor. Thomas Duke of Norfelke denied to have spoken any such
word, but Henry affirming his accusation, the King granted the Combat, to be
performed at Couentry the seventh of September, 1398. Anno Rich. 2. but the
Combat was not performed, for the one, and the other party was banished the
Realm.

A combat was fought at Westminster in the Kings presence, between John Ansley
Knight, and Thomas Catrington Esquire, whom the said Knight had accused of
Treason for selling the Castle of Saint Savior, which the Lord Chandos had
builded in the Isle of Constantine in France: In which Combat the Knight was
victorious. Anno 1374. Rich. 2.

A Combat was granted unto an Esquier borne in Navarre, to fight with an
English Esquire called John Welsh, whom the Nauarrois accused of Treason. But
the true cause of the Nauarrois, his malice was, that the said Welsh had
dishonored his wife as (being vanquished) he confessed. The King gave sentence
he should be drawn, and hanged. Anno 1344. Rich. 2.

A Combat was fought between Sir Richard Wooduile, and one other Knight borne
in Spain. After the third blow given, the King stayed the fight. Anno 1441.
Henric. 6.

A Combat was granted unto John Viscount borne in Cipres, and Thomas de la
Marsh Natural son unto Philip King of France, in the Reign of King Edward
the third at Westminster.

There was also another Combat, granted by the said King Edward, which was
fought near Barwick, betwixt Sir John de Sitsilt, and Sir John de Faukenham,
concerning those Arms borne now by the honorable Family of the Cecils; The
Coat was challenged by Sitsilt, but worn by Faukenham; They began the fight,
but it was soon determined by the King.

FINIS.

