A PLEASAVNT DIALOGVE, Between a Souldior of Barwicke, and an English
Chaplain. Wherein are largely handled and laid open, such reasons as are
brought in for maintenance of popish Traditions in our Eng. Church.

Also is collected, as in a short table, 120. particular corruptions yet
remaining in our said Church, with sundry other matters, necessary to be
known of all persons.

Together with a letter of the same Author, placed before this book, in way
of a Preface.

1. Cor. 6. v. 15. What concord has Christ with Belial?

1581.

To my Reverent Fathers and Brethren in Christ, Master Couerdale, May. Turner,
M. Whittingham, M. Sampson, M. Doctor Humphrey, M. Leauer, M. Crowley, and
others that labor to root out the weeds of Popery: Grace and Peace.
BEcause we are created for Gods glory, and the edification one of another in
Christ, and are all bound to serve thereunto by wealth or woe, life or death:
and chiefly they, to whom God has given the greater gifts, and whom he has
called to greater rooms, are most bounden to be zealous for gods glory, with
godly jealousy to present the church and spouse of Christ under their charge, a
pure Virgin to Christ her husband: and that by no subtlety, as the Apostle
warns, they should be corrupted from the simplicity in Christ. Therefore I
nothing doubting of your zeal and diligence, my reverend Fathers and dear
Brethren, who being in authority, are first called to the battle to strive
for Gods glory, and the edification of his people, against the Romish
relics and rags of Antichrist, but that ye will courageously and
constantly in Christ throw out these rags of Gods enemies. And I do further
require you in the name of God (so far as my simplicity may be bold to
require your wisdoms) that ye will by this occasion, lay open other as great
enormities, that we all know, and labor to race out all the dregs and
remnauntes of transformed Popery, that are crept into England, by the too
much lenity of them that will be accounted the Lords of the Clergy. And for
my part, by the grace and power of my God, though I sinful wretch have no such
gifts nor authority, as can much further the cause or comfort you in your
godly travails: yet shall I and many more with me, A good desire.
pray for you, and with our simple gifts will desire you, that we may join
together with you, to suffer together in so good a cause, that is so much for
gods glory and the edificatio^ of his Church, in the pure simplicity of
Christ's word and Sacraments, wherein our enemies and persecutours are
strau^gly bewitched, I wot not by what diuelishe cup, that they do make such
a diversity betwixt Christ's words and his Sacraments, that they can not
think the word of God to be safely enough preached, and honorably enough
handled without cappe, Cope, or surplesse: but that the Sacraments, the
Marrying, the Burying, the Churching of women, and other church service, as
they call it, must needs be declared with Crossing, with Coping, with
Surplessing, with kneeling, with pretty wafer kakes, and other knackes of
Popery. O Paul that thou were alive, thou durst tell these politic
gentlemen, that there has bin to much labor bestowed upon them in vain. Thou
durst say unto them as thou did to the Corinthes, That they eat not the
Lords supper, but play a pageaunt of their own, to blind the people, and
keep them still in superstition, far from the simplicity of Christ's
supper: to make the selie souls believe, that they have an English Mass: and
so put no Too true.
difference betwixt truth and falshoode, betwixt Christ and Antichrist,
betwixt God and the Devil. They are straungly bewitched, I say, that will
bind their English priesthood and sacraments to garments: but much more
enchaunted, that can find no garments to please them, but such as have bin
openly poluted with Popery, superstition and Idolatry. But most of all in
this point shall their madness appear to al posterity, because they make these
Antichrists rags Causa sine qua non, in Christ's holy Ministry: so that
these shall make an English Priest, be he never such a dolt or villain: as we
have very many, and without these Romish relics not Paul him self (as one
of them did blaspheme) and the rest in effect do plainly affirm. Well, by
Gods power we have fought with the wolves, for these and such like Popish
chafe, and God has given the victory: we have now to do with the Foxes,
let us not fear. There is no craft, cunning, or policy against the Lord.
Our B. are Foxes.
We have Christ and his Apostles, and all the Prophets ever stryuing against
the hypocrites of their time, on our side. A straw for Popish policy. We
have the word of God to warrant us to root out all monumentes of superstition
and Idolatry: and are charged to abhor them, to count them accursed, and to
defye them and deteste them, as a menstruous cloathe. They have not the word
of God. And what wisdom is in them says God by his Prophet Jeremy? They
talk of obedience and concord, but there is no obedience against the Lord, nor
any concord to be desired, but where Gods glory and verity is preferred.
Else better to have all the world to run in hurly burly, and heaven and
earth to shake, then one jot of Gods glory should decay, so far as in us
lies. We have their own laws and proclamations to root out all monumentes
of superstition and Idolatry, and their own words are contrary to these
their own doings. They repent the reformation proclaimed, as did the
Israelites. They build again that which they once destroyed. And this do they
openly, that all the world may wonder at their folly. But what they do
secretly, God will one day have declared openly: yea they make the name of God,
and his doctrine that we profess, to be evil spoken of already by many of
their doings. Their judgment hastes, that for such causes persecute Gods
true Preachers. Wherefore let us not fear their threateninges. There can none
persecute us for this trashe, but such as are neither whot nor cold; and then
they shall be vomited out, unless their zeal increase, or they that are
Atheistes, such as have no god before their eyes, but their god is their belly.
And those are worldpleasers, or open Papists, whom God has given up to a
reprobate sense. Wherefore we must thus take it, that they are gods rods for
our sins, because we have bin no more zealous in Gods cause, nor careful to
seek his glory. That wolf winchester, and his butcher Boner fought once
against us. for the grounds of this gear: but lo, how the Lord, within two
or three years overthrew them all to give us courage to go forward. We are
to slack and negligent: That monster remains and is fed, as the Papists
say, for their sakes. And we grant that his pau^che is fed for some secret
purpose. We do cry, kill this traitor, enemy to the Crown, to the Realm,
to god and man, which burned Gods holy Testament, and murdered his Saints
and servants. We have the law of god and man for us. We are answered. Nay
your selves shall be compelled to turn your cloathe, your coats and cappes, and
to get you into his liuerie, and to be like him in his garments. O Elias that
thou had lived, or that thy spirit were amongst us. The Papists which are
in the countries glory in their assemblies, that the whotte gospellers, shall
now be driven to wear their attyres. Let us never give them any cause of joy,
though we should dye for it. Moses will not yield a hoof of a beast in Gods
business. He will not leave a loupe of a Curtayne unmade, nor make a butto^ or a
claspe more or less. Eleazar would not dissemble by eating of unlawful
meats. The faithful Israelites would not receive so much, as an Iuey bushe.
Co^trariewise, Origin carrying a branch, and professing that he bare it for
Christ at the first, was compelled afterward to open Idolatry: So cursed a
thing it is to give any place to the wicked. All the Papists that say, they
worship Christ in the cross and God in the Sacrament, do still under these
words continewe in Idolatry. Beware of deceytfull words that cover wicked
purposes to draw us from Christian simplicity. And let us stand constantly
against all abuses: repent for our former coldness in Religion and other sins,
and call for help from above. For the arm of our Lord is not shortened. We
are assured that we seek Gods glory, and our adversaries may see if they can
see any thing, that this thing which they seek is not for Gods glory: seeing
the Papists the enemies of God, do so desire it, and glory in it, that we,
whom they most hate, can not be safe, but under their garments. We are assured
that we seek Gods glory, when we follow Christ, his Apostles and
Prophets, who ever despised these Pharisaicall outward faces and visardes.
Christ Mat. 15.
finds fault with the garments of the Pharisees. Paul counts all his
Pharisaicall show to be dounge. Zachary says, that the false Prophet
Phil. 3.
shall be ashamed of his prophecy, and forsake his garments, wherein he
deceived. And shall the Zacha. 13.
true Prophets be feign to creep into their cowles? For by the same authority
that the Queen commands one, she may command any piece of Popery, so that
she name it policy. But Ezechias and Josias knew no such authority. They
say, that it is for policy, and I do easily believe it, that they do care,
less for Christ's Religion, than for policy. But let them beware that they
follow not Jeroboam, that made such like Priests for policy, as would do as
he commanded them. Achaz of policy brought such an Altar into Jerusalem 1.
Reg. 12.
as he did see at Damascus, where he had overcome the Idolaters and their
Idolles. But cursed was 2. Reg 16.
his policy, and so are they all, that will retain any thing of their old
Idolatry. Nabuchodonozors Idol was set up for unity and policy: But
without Daniel. 3.
the warraunt of Gods holy word, there is neither good unity nor policy.
That godly Father Bucer calls the Tenthes and first Fruits, sacrilege and
robbery, though they be kept still for policy. The Cross and Candlestickes
upon the Queens altar, are superstitious, though they be kept there I wott
not for what policy. The adoration of the Sacrament, in the Countries where
they knock and kneel to a wafer, is a Popish policy. That Women baptize,
that pluralities, tot quots, impropriations, non residences, dispensations,
suspensions, excommunications, and absolutions for money are granted, it is
evil, like as are many other enormities borrowed from Rome, which remain in
the name of policy. All these things were abhorred as Popish, superstious,
and Idolatry among our English Gospellers, both Bishops and others, when
they were under Goos rod in poverty. But they have now learned Courtly
Divinity, to ground all upon policy. Humble them again (O Lord) that
they do not forget thee nor thy poor people: whom thou have so dearly bought,
which by these their policies are blinded, and cares for no more, but that
they may have this superstitious show, which is still so maynteyned. Let him
mumble as he list, if he be thus apparelled, all his service is good enough,
otherwise it is nothing worth. Thus cause you them to perish, by your
policies, for whom Christ has dyed. Furthermore, if Popery be superstitious
and Idolatrous, evil and wicked, as yet there was never a worse thing in the
world, then are we commanded to absteyne from all participation thereof, and
from all the show thereof: Ab omni specie mall, that is, from all show of
wickedness. These garments were the show of their blasphemous priesthood:
herein they did sing and say their superstitious Idolatrous service: they did
sense their Idolles and help forward their Idolatrous Masses. What policy
can it be then to wear this gear, but a superstitious, wicked and Popish
policy? They do it for policy, they say, that their Priests may be known
and magnified of men Did not the Pharisees use the same policy, to do all
their works and make all their garments, both Philacteris upon their heads,
and their wide and side Robes and borders, that they might be more aspectable
and notorious to the people? but their woo is threatened above all other
sinners. To such hypocrites, as being void of all true holiness, delight in
all outward shows: their curse is most inculcate. Their policy is, that the
Priests shall wear white in the Churches, to signify their virtue, their
pureness, and holiness: and when they go forth of the Church, they must wear
black gowns and black horns, for contrary policies, and for diverse
significations. Our Master Christ's policy was expressed in one word,
Feed, Feed, Feed: and the Prophets before, and the Apostles afterward. If
Christ be the wisdom of the Father, the true Ministers shall be well enough
known, by that one mark which he gives: And if he have not that mark,
better unknown then known, both for him self and others: therefore let them
not say for shame, that they seek gods glory, Christ's will, or the
edification of his Church, by their policy. Whiles they threaten and stop
the spreading of Gods word and feeding of Christ's flock, commanded by
writing to excommunicate the most faithful laborers in the planting of the
gospel, because they will not wear the rags of Popery, to expulse the most
valiant Soldiers against the Romish Antichrist: the most earnest
ouerthrowers of the kingdom of Satan, which stands in sin and blindness. O
beware you that will be Lords over the flocks, that you be not sore punished
for your pride toward your brethren, and your cowardlinesse in gods cause:
that for Princes pleasures and pompose livings, do turn Popery into policy,
and to become our persecutours under the cloak of policy: It were better to
loose your livings, then to displease god in persecuting of your brethren, and
hinder the course of the word. But as our duty is, we will pray for you,
and for all our Brethren in the Ministry, that God of his grace would grant
us more zeal for his glory, than any of us has had heretofore: more desire
to edify Christ's people in pure simplicity, to present them a chaste Virgin
unto Christ, then hitherto has appeared, that when the head shephearde shall
call to account, we be not ashamed: but being found perfect in all good
works, may receive the Crown prepared. As for you dear brethren, whom God
has called into the brunte of the battle, the Lord keep ye constant, that ye
yield neither to tolleration, neither to any other subtle persuasions of
dispensations, or licenses which were to fortify their Romish practices: but
as you fight the Lords fight, be valiant. God will not leave you, neither
forsake you, as you seek gods glory: god will glorify you: and as by you
Christ's Church is edified, comforted and confirmed in Christian simplicity,
so shall you receive comfort by Christ your head Captain, when you shall be
called to give accomptes of your stewardshippes, and to be rewarded for your
fidelity. The matter is not so small as the world does take it: It will
appear before all be ended, what an hard thing it is, to cut of the rags of
the Hiora of Rome. It is beautiful, but poysonfull: there is no dallying with
such a mounster, beware of looking back to Sodom, or delight any whit in there
garments of Babilone: neither once touch the poisoned Cup, though it be of
gold or glittering. Let us repent of our former sins unfeignedly, and then
shall we abhor and stamp under our feet these rags that were appointed to
superstition and Idolatry. Let us hate the blasphemous Priesthood, so
injurious to Christ's priesthood, that every patche and token of it, be in
execration, detestation, and accursed: and take no part of it upon our heads
nor backs, least we be accursed as it is. Let us not make the heritage of god
as a bird of many colors, holding of diverse religions. Let us not mix the
Jews with the Gentiles. Let us not in no wise mix this our Religion with any
thing of Antichrist: Let us not confirm the blind in their blindness,
neither the weak in their superstition. But rather let us take away, if we
can, the names, memories, and al monuments of Popery, and that Antichrists
priesthood. Let us open our windows with Daniel, and profess what we are:
their cruelty shall be our glory. Let us follow Paul, that knew that the true
gospel could not be retained, if any Iewishe ceremonies were maintained. Let
us rather never wear any garment, then we should wear those, whereby our
brethren should be weakened, offended, or boldened to take part with the
Idolaters, and so through our hautines in knoweledge, our weak brethren
perish, for whom Christ dyed. Behold and mark well, how they fall
backewarde that yield in any jot, and see how they are edified, and increase
in godliness, which hold that right way that you go, in the which the Lord
increase you, and us all, and strengthen us with his holy Spirit, that we may
continewe to our lives end, always both by our thoughts, words, and works, to
advance his glory and honor, daily more and more, now and for ever, Amen.

A. G.

Miles Monopodios the Soldier, to his Captain Cornelius Theophilus.
THERE be great controversies here abroad (God turn them to good) about the
displacing of godly Preachers. Upon the which occasion, I (falling in talk
with Bernarde mine old fellow soldier, who is now a Lords Chaplain)
thought it at the first lawful, as Horace teaches: Ridentem dicere verum:
with mirth to have passed over this lamentable matter, and so to have made, but
a light skirmishe. But when I was once entered, our communication waxed more
earnest, and there followed some bitter words. Afterward we had such
arguments, that Sir Bernarde was almost ready to forsake his benefice, as a
great sort of that order would do, if they knew where to find so easy
liuinges: they are so despised of all the world, and some of them so troubled
in conscience. I send you the whole discourse, something (I grant) enlarged:
publishe it, if you please. For whosoever other men think lightly of it,
this displacing of Christ's true Ministers, for Popish trashe, does so grieve
me at the heart, that I can not but speak against it. And so would I have all
men to do, that are touched with any godly zeal: so shall we not be guilty
of other men's faults, through our silence.

So long as the Parliament endured, we all had hope of amendment, and kept
silence: but now that it is ended, and all hope of man is past, we must turn
to God by prayer, and that which we can do by words and by writing, let us do
it. Let us not cease to fight against the remmanauntes of the Roman
Antichrist, and to labor to break down and abolishe (if it be possible) all
his ensigns. For it is of necessity, that his laws should cease, seeing his
blasphemous priesthood is renounced. Let us do our diligence in driving away
all Popish trashe, and leave the success unto God. Our fathers have fought
the bloody battle, and some of our own brethren do fight against us.
Howebeit, we are yet but in a light combat: more is to be feared, Let us
resist the beginnings.

In this Dialogue that I send unto you, if I do seem sometimes pleasant,
know that it is not, without some bitterness of mind, as had the Prophets,
when they had to do with halters and neutrals: whose foolishnes being counted
great wisdom in the world, they did thus deride. If I seem to angry, and
to whote and earnest, consider that it is not in mine own cause or quarrel,
but in Gods cause, in the cause of his servants, in the common cause of this
whole Church of England: For which, how can we be to much careful, earnest,
and zealous? And I do think assuredly, that God does call us all by this
controversy, to a reckoning, for our cold and careless trifling in Religion:
by the which Atheism, Papisme, and Lutheranisme, strive against us fainte
soldiers, hoping for the victory. Therefore whom the Lord finds, neither
cold nor whote, he will surely vomit out. He that is not with me, is against
me, does he say. But happy shall he be, that fights manfully under his
Captain Christ, against the patched Antichrist: whose dregs who soever
drincketh, he is incountinently drunken therewith, be it little, be it much
that he tastes: as we may see, by the Lordly Bishops, who now for the
dregs and patches of Popery, despise their fellow ministers: and persecute
those same persons, whom of late they loved as brethren, and bare Christ's
cross with them, in the late persecutions.

But if this Popery continewe, they will be young Popes doubtless, and popery
it self will grow up again: The wound of the first beast will be healed in
that, that the second shall do the same things, which the first has done.
Therefore, let all good men labor all that they can, to pluck up these wicked
weeds of Popery, the remmenauntes of superstition and Idolatry. For Christ's
garden can never be purged clean enough from such poison. For if any little
twiste, of Antichrists inventions be left, the body will grow afterward.
It did so creep up at the beginning, like a little Iuie stalk, eating out the
hearts of the great Oaks, Kings and Emperors, and destroyed the Christian
congregations.

We Christians are commanded to absteyne from al show of evil: and we are
straightly charged, to have no part with the whore of Babylon: neither to have
any fellowshippe with the fruitless works of darkness, but to reprove
them. And if they will not do so, which will be counted the Pastors, the
Doctors, and leaders of the flock, God can and will raise up others, to pity
his cause, and to purge his Temple: as he has done many times heretofore. For
in the clear light of the Gospel, God will have Bishops or Ministers, that
shall be discerned from the people, by doctrine and conversation, and not by
garments of strange fashion. The people are now to be instructed, and no
longer with rags to be mocked. Neither must a Priest of clowtes any longer be
set before their eyes: but the messengers of God must be sought, to power Gods
word into their hearts: the course whereof, whosoever stops or hinders, he
shall bear his judgment what soever he be. Play you therefore the part of
Cornelius, as you have done heretofore. Call your servants and soldiers to
the knowledge of Christ's Gospel. Chearishe the true Preachers, of whom this
world is unworthy: and though they should be murdered, as they are now
robbed and imprisoned, yet let us with honor bury their bodies, as Joseph did
their Masters.

From LONDON, The x of May, Miles your old

A pleasant Dialogue containing a large discourse between a Soldier of
Barwick, and an English Chaplain, who of a late soldier, was made a Parson,
and had gotten a plurality of Benefices, and yet had but one eye, and no
learning: but he was priestly apparailed in all points, and stoutely maintained
his popish attire, by the authority of a book, lately written against London
Ministers.
This Dialogue was written almost seven years ago, but because there was hope
of reformation soon after, therefore was it of charity by the writer
suppressed. But now that no hope remains, it is thought good that the folly
of the persecutors be made known unto all, that will see it, or read it.

The Speakers.
Miles Monopodios the Souldior, lame of one foot. Sir Bernarde Blynkarde, a
formal Priest, and a Lords Chaplain.
Miles. WHat Bernard mine old companion? Well met. I skarce knew thee, thou
art so disguised and changed. Thou did iette up and down so solemnly in
the Church, and so like an old popish Prelate, that a great while I doubted
of thee: what man? art thou so strange? have thou forgotten me? Thou haste a
good mark whereby I must needs know thee: and if I had not bin, thou
should have had none eye this day to see withal.


Bern. Yes Miles I knew thee, and remember that thou wast ever an honest
fellow toward me, and thou sauedst my life then, I confess.


Mil. But Bernarde, I pray thee tell me of thine honesty, what was the cause
that thou haste bin in so many chaunges of Apparel this forenoone, now
black, now white, now in silk and gold, and now at the length in this
swouping black gown, and this sarcenet flaunting tippet, wearing more horns
also upon thy head, than ever did thy father, unless he were a man of the
same order? I pray thee, of good fellowship tell me how thou art come to this
change, since thou leftest our company? for surely I have gotten nothing by
my long service but stripes and wounds, and now I must needs leave of this
trade, because I want my legs, and ashamed I am to beg. I would therefore
very feign, enter into this thy glorious trade, wherein thou art so well
trimmed and apparailed, if I might do it safely. Belike thou want none
other thing, for one quarter of thy gown would make me a coat, and a sleeue
of thy surples would make me a shirt. There must needs be plenty, where there
is so great superfluity. And I that have lived in scarsitie, in peril and
labor all my life long, would now in my old age, find some ease and safety:
as for our learninges, they are both like, thou know, unless of late thou
have bin at some University.


Bern. No, I have bin at no University, but in my Lords house a year only,
and I know, that thou have more learning then I. But I must admonish thee of
two things, the one touching me, the other thee: in thy talk thou must use me
more reverently, and tie a Sir by your girdle when you speak to me.


Mil. What in the weinyard, are you entered into the order of Knighthoode? you
were of late in the order of the four and twenty, amongst the number of other
good fellows.


Bern. You may not thus jest with me, I am with in the holy orders of
Priesthood.


Mil. Is it even so Sir? Then will I pose you. Of what order I pray you? of the
order of Aaron, or of Melchisedecke, or of the Popish order? There was but one
after the order of Melchizedeck, and the other ceased at Christ his coming: so
that it were a denial of Christ to renew that order. Therefore I suppose you
are of the third, even of the Popish order, and so me thought by your attire.


Bern. Nay I would thou knew it, I defy the Pope, I am none of his order, I
know not what he is: whether a man, a woman or a beast. No nor I care not, for
I had none orders at his hand. Therefore I am no popish Priest, if thou list
to take it so.


Mil. Why sir? where the Devil then gate you your orders, having so small
learning?


Bern. Where? Of my Metropolitan, my Lord of Cau^turburies good grace. God
save his grace, for he helps many such as I am, forth of the brieres, with
his licenses and dispensations.


Mil. God send him better grace, and pardon him of his manifold sins, that
promoteth you and such companions to this state.


Bern. Why man? thou know not what a state this is, for though he find us
never so very dolts, yet can he and the other Bishops by the laying on of their
hands, give us the holy Ghost: for so said they to me and my fellows, Hold,
take the holy Ghost: So that I am no more of the lewd laity, but of the holy
spirituality, and I have gotten a good Benefice or twain, and am called
master Parson, and may spend with the best man in our town, and do keep
company with Gentlemen of the country, in hauking, hunting, dicing, carding,
and take my pleasure all the day long: so that I do come to the church sometime
in the morning, and read a little whiles dinner be made ready.


Mil. This is an easy order, that thou talkest on, if it be as good as it is
easy: and I pray thee, how might I come into the same order and state with
thee?


Bern. I will tell thee all for old fellowships sake, and I will help thee to
auowe some for money: and that is the surest way. But if thou have no money,
then must thou fawn upon some Gentleman, that either has some
impropriations, or other Benefices in his hand, or else by other means, to
seek some little gain by it, or has some in his gift. Get his letters to
the Bishop, and thou need not to doubt of orders.


Mil. Yes, peradventure the loss of my leg will be a hinderaunce, yet I
think there be thousands in England, of whom beuefices are worse bestowed,
for I will fight for the realm, and the holy church, as lame as I am.


Bern. I tell thee, thy fighting will not serve thee, so much as the want of
the comely wearing of thy gown: thy coape, and thy surples will hinder thee.


Mil. Why say thou so? Such swouping clothes will hide my stumpe foot.


Bern. Nay I tell thee, my Lords the Bishops, will have all things comlie,
and thou can not go in them, but thou will swinge them on the lame side
evil fauouredlie.


Mil. Why fool, all the grace is in swinging, and swingeing of them, and I can
do that decently. But I marvel how thou wanting thy finger and one of thy
eyes waste admitted, for by the Popes law thou should not have bin received.


Bern. Yes, by dispensation for money, and now is less danger, for there is
no lifting, and therefore less money will serve.


Mil. But what is that I yray thee, whereof thou saydst thou would admonish
me, concerning my self? for I see that thou art come into an high estate above
me, and have gotten some other spirit, and therefore know much more now,
then when thou wast a poor soldier.


Bern. Thou do use to much to scoff at our priestly apparel, and our
Church gear. This must thou leave, or else can thou neither have benifice
thy self, nor be welcome to any man of worship, that takes Note this.
profit by benifices. No thou can come to no company to be quiet, for there
are very few that can agree to the Geneuians fashion, to have nothing in the
church but naked walls, and a poor fellow in a bare gown, telling a long
tale, and brauling and chiding with all his auditorie. Nay my Lord my M. will
none of that. As for my Lord, I heard him say, that he could never go, to any
of these Geneuians Sermons, that he came quiet home, but that there was ever
somewhat, that pricked his conscience, he thought always, that they made their
whole Sermon against him. But in the hearing of Mattins, euensong and pricksong
at Paul's, or in my reading of my service in his chapel, he says, he feels
no such thing, for he is never touched, but goes merrily to his dinner.


Mil. Thus said wicked Ahab, by the good Prophet Michaiah, but as for me, I
use to say nothing, but that I have heard good Preachers teach openly in the
Pulpet, that all popish Priests apparel are supersticious: and such church
ware as they did wear is iufected with idolatry. Wherefore as the idolles
themselves were detestable, and the Pope to all christian men, and to all true
English hearts execrable: So all the monumentes of idolatry, and all the usual
liueries and garments of the idolatrous Priests, and Popes Chaplains, ought
to be rejected of the Servants of Christ, as abominable. And all that you say
against the Geneuians, might be brought against Christ and his disciples in
the same words and sentences.


Bern. I know that you have learned this lesson of the London Ministers. But I
have read a Book of late, written by a Proctor for our english Priesthood,
which calls them stark fools, and answers them (I warrant you) in all
points: I warrant you Miles he is a man of great authority, that dare so
boldly revile them, and handle them like abiectes, and my Lords the Bishops
do take our parts, against those busy fellows, and keep some of them in
prison, and put other from their liuinges. And I may tell thee in secret, if
we had not found such a master to maintain our ceremonies, and also unless
the Bishops had playde the Lords in deed, these prating Preachers would have
made some of us, to have turned our tippets, and for very shame to have
forsaken our Benifices, yea, if they had had liberty, but a little longer,
they would have disgraced my Lords Grace, the Archbishop of Caunturburie,
and have made all England to believe, that our gracious Metropolitan (whose
glorious Grace, long might it last, for we poor ignorant priests shall never
fail, unless he fall) had bin but an idol sheaphearde, and an English Pope:
and (which grieved the other Bishops at ye hearts) they began shrewdly to shake
ye lordly state of all the Clergy. They would not have a Bishop nor a
Minister known by his apparaile, but by his preaching. A shameful heresy.
They cry, Pasce, Pasce, A perilous heresy.
Pasce, I cannot tell what they mean. They would have men such fools, to turn
to that poor beggarly estate that was amongst the Apostles, and always toil
and travail with the people, and braule and chide when any thing is amiss.
But I tell thee plain, they had then lost the greatest part of their number, a
iolie sort of gentlemen swouping in their sarcenets, and many other good
fellows too. Therefore I do accounte (with master Examinator) all these
poor beggarly London Ministers, stark doltes, and chrise fools, for their
preachinges, their writings, and their beggarly living in their offices. I tell
thee, my Lords the Bishops that were their fellows beyond the Seas in Queen
Mary's days, are now ashamed of them, and care not for their companies, they
are so beggarly, so busy bodies, and will allow nothing but Gods word in the
churches.


Mil. As for the Bishops, they are not all so far gone, I trust in God, but I
pray thee sir Bernards, in what part of his Book, does your M. Examinator call
them fools?


Bern. Marie at the first word, and applies Solomon very eloque^tly (as I
heard Master Doctor say) to serve his purpose.


Mil. Is this M. Doctors eloquence* he had need to have great corners in his
cappe to hide his asses ears. Let him not begin his Oration thus among
soldiers. But what is the cause I pray you, that you, and your master of
Ceremonies, dare so proudly (at the first choppe) call Gods Ministers and
faithful teachers of his holy word in London, fools? Let me talk with you a
little for old fellowships sake. Is it because they have labored so
faithfully, to feed the flock of Christ (which you mock with Pasce, Pasce)
that few can be named comparable to them, in pains, in travails, in perils
and diligence? M. Examinator (whosoever he was) should not thus against
reason, have railed on such, whom their very enemies the papists do
reverence for their payns, their care and diligence. Ask at the Churches of
Antline, Peter, Bartholmewe, and at other Churches also, what painful
travails from time to time, they have sustained: what perils* in the plague
they adventured. Have not the poor sick persons and prisoners by them bin
comforted, and the people most diligently instructed? If this be true (as it is
most true) for the reverence of him, whose servants they are, they should have
bin more gently handled, and more brotherly answered, then thus to have bin
called fools, at ye first word, though in some points they had failed as men,
and not satisfied the great wisdom of M. Examinator. Nether does the
Rhethoricall Art of your M. teach him thus rudely to begin, with them whom
he should persuade: neither Christian charity (if either of you were ever
entered into that School) does permit you to call your Brother Fool, as you
may read in our Savior Christ his first Sermon, Math. 5. which he begins
with blessing and not with brauling.


Bern. Master Examinator is a wise Gentleman, and he saw some cause, why he
called them fools, I warraunt you.


Mil. I grant that it is counted a fault amongst the wise of the world, to
be so earnestly and diligently occupied in preaching. And for this cause the
wise kinsmen of Christ, called him mad, and would needs bind him: and
therefore your high Priests, who are the accusers, Iaylors, and Judges to these
persecuted persons, preach so seldom. But the Spirit of God gives an other
commandment, saying: I charge thee 2. Tim. 4^. 2.
therefore before God, and his son Jesus Christ, which shall judge the quick
and the dead at his appearing, and in his kingdom: Preach the word, be
instant in season, and out of season: improve, rebuke, exhort with all long
suffering and doctrine. This, and such like commandments of God, has caused
these good men, and many others of their sort, to take their lives in their
hands, as Job speaks: some to lose their lives, and all to yeoparde their
lives in that late plague of London, when you (Four horned Gentlemen) fled
from your cures, and hired Iornemen in your places. At what time these men
showed the^ selves the good sheepheardes, ieopardinge their lives for the
sheep, and you were found hyreliuges, taking still the gain, but flying from
the perilles.

Is this say you the cause? Or is it rather for that they rebuked Popery,
Idolatry, and all kind of sin so sharply, and were so fervent and zealous?
With the which earnestnes against sin, superstition and hypocrisy, the
halting gospellers, and luke warm worldlinges must needs be offended, and
count them fools and mad men, as Festus did Paul, and the old world the
Prophets. For the wisdom of God in his servant, has ever in this point,
by ye world bin counted folly. And always the politic wise gentlemen, count
it their safety, to be like in religion, with the multitude. And therefore are
bold to mix together many religions of Christ and Antichrist, of God and the
Devil: yea and some of them dare say, that both were good, and both in their
times to be obeyed. O miserable blindness, that now, when light is come into
the world, men will not cast away the works and fruits of darkness and
repent of them.

Either is this the cause, that (when the people have bin taught these thirty
years in England, that the Pope is the Roman Antichrist, whose name ought
not to remain in our books, nor to be spoken with our mouths, unless it
were in detestation: now after so long travail against this enemy of Christ,
by their fathers, their Brethren, and themselves, they seeing few or none going
forward, to root out the remnaunts of Antichrist, but many stand at a stay,
many casting away their weapons, so that the Enemy gathers courage, many
soldiers to shrink back* not only wearing Antichrists liueries, but
following that Romish A lamentable defectio^.
Balaams covetousness, and that old popish pomp, with other his cursed
conditions) these faithful Ministers will not be partakers of their sins,
least they receive part of their plagues. Lo this is the crime, this is the
fault: lo this is the foolishness, wherewith your wise and prudent Examinator
is able to charge these true and faithful Ministers of God.

If I knew what your proctor were, whether he be a priest of ye popish order,
or of the English order, or a man of the lay and lewd sort, as the papists are
wont to term them, I could show in him greater lewdness, and more folly,
than you or he can prove in the^. But because I do not know his person, I will
answer the cause of Christ's servants, and let him and you alone to your Lord
and Master: giving you both warning, that you shall give an answer before ye
great Judge, for that which you do or say, against these his little ones,
whom you call fools. But to the matter, answer me plain. Is it not meet
that they, which should bring others to the obedience of Christ, should first
practice in themselves the same obedience? and that they should do nothing
without the warrant and commandment of Christ? that so not only by doctrine,
but also by their example of obedience, they may teach their auditors only to
depend upon Christ.


Bern. No man will deny this thing to be meet and reasonable.


Mil. This is the sum of the request and supplication of the Godly Ministers
of London (as far as I can hear) that after so long preaching of Christ in
London (almost these thirty years) they may put in The request of the godly
ministers.
practice, the doctrine of Christ, and minister his holy sacraments in that
simplicity, that Christ and his Apostles has left the^, without the
ceremonies and garments abused by the papists (the enemies of Christ's his
Gospel) which cannot in any wise, make for edification in Christ: and that
seeing their Fathers and Brethren, and they with their own mouths, have so
long cried out against all popish Ceremonies: as kneeling before the sacrament,
whereby much idolatry has bin and is committed: as the ministration in the
wafer cake, whereby the people has bin brought into vain imaginations, and
have not felt the comfort, that our Savior Christ would have sensibly to be
presented in the usual bread of many grains, and many crummes, making one
body, and being the usual food: as also against other monumentes of
superstition and idolatry, as the garments of the popish priesthood, and of
the popish Mass. Now (I say) at the length, after so many years teaching,
and so much blood of Gods Saints sheade for the abolishing of Antichrist, they
themselves should not be compelled, to give any signification in their own
persons and bodies, that they have any concord or agreement with that Roman
Antichrist, but that they go before their flock, to practice in work ye
thing, which they have taught in words, for the banishing from their own
bodies at the least, such things as they know not grounded on Gods word, but
man's mere inventions, superstitions, idolatrical, papisticall, and therefore
very hurtful to Christ's flock, committed to their charge, because that such
traditions are only cloakes to the transgression of Gods commandments.

Now must we the servants of Christ, reason with you, the proctors of
Antichrists inventions, what foolishness you can find, in this their request.
And that we may agree, what is Wisdom, and what is Folly, and so judge who
is the Fool, and who is Wise: let us first consider your own texts of
foolishness, that your Proctor begins his preface withal. Answer not a
fool according to his foolishness, least thou also be like him: which may be
understand that thou may not be like the fool neither in word nor deed.
Now if I can prove the Papists in their religion and their apish apparaile
to be fools, then I trust also, I shall obtain, that I may neither defend
their cause by word nor deed, and he that does defend them, answers to
their foolishness, and is partaker of their follies. If the text be
understand, that we may not rail against the raging Fool (as also the
scripture gives) by this text, then may we learn to give place to those,
that rail against Christ's ministers, and not to handle them as their folly
deserves, but yet to warn them of their peril, and to desire them to beware
that they be not wise in their own conceits, for then is there more hope of
a Fool then of such Wisardes.


Bern. I cannot reason with Scriptures (fellow Miles) but me think that they
are stark fools, that will loose so good livings, for a cappe of two
shillinges, or a Surples that shall cost them nothing.


Mil. Oh, old Bernarde, thou speak grosely, according to thy capacity. But
by the same chapter of Solomon, we that fight against Antichrist, may exhort
you, that you be not like dogs, turning to your vomit of beggarly
traditions, and popish trash, for so use the fools to return to their
foolishness, says Solomon. And we counsel you eftsoone, to learn of the
word of God, what is the true wisdom, and to embrace this wisdom once
known, and to strive for it unto the death: as the scripture exhorts in an
other place, for has not God made the wisdom of this world foolishness?
Does he not say, that he will cast away the wisdom 1 Cor. 1. 19. 25. 26. 27.
of the wise, and destroy it? and that he will take the wise in their own
wilines? and that the foolishness of God, is wiser than men? and God has not
called many wise after the flesh, but has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise, and the weak to confound the strong, and vile
things in the world and despised, that no flesh should rejoice? Wherefore
we must seek first of all the true wisdom, which rests not in man's brain,
but in Gods breast, which he has by his word uttered unto man, and is
otherwise altogether hid from him, as the Lord speaks by his Prophet Isaiah,
saying: My Esa. 55. 8. 9.
thoughts are not your thoughts, neither my ways your ways, says the Lord,
for as the heavens, are higher then the earth: so are my ways higher the^ your
ways, and my thoughts above your thoughts. Then must we run to the word of
God only, to know which is the Wisdom that God allows, that is, to hearken
unto the laws and ordinances that God does teach, and to put nothing to his
word, nor take any thing therefrom. Therefore cries this wisdom of God by
Solomon: O ye foolish, Pro. 1. 22.
how long will ye love foolishness, and the skornefull take pleasure in
skorning? etc. Because they hated knowledge, and did Pro. 1 29. 30. 31.
not choose the fear of the Lord, they would none of my counsel, but despised
all my correction: therefore shall they eat of the fruit of their own ways,
and be filled with their own devises. Behold, it is the word of God, and
therefore the true wisdom, that the London Ministers do follow. But you and
the Papists following your own devises, are filled therewith, and content
your selves, and so are ye given up to maintain superstitious vanities, but
such God hates. And for these London Ministers, may I say as Paul said to
the Corinthians: You suffer fools gladly, because that you are wise. etc. You
are the Ministers of Christ, (I speak it as a fool) they ^. Cor. 11. 19 23.
11.
are more: in labors more aboundaunt, in stripes above measure, in prison more
plenteouslie, and in death often. I could say more.


Bern. It was never good world with us Priests, since every soldier and
every Seruingma^ could talk so much of the scripture: and these foolish
Ministers are the cause thereof, which would make all men as wise as themselves.


Mil. Of your state, and such as you be, (which can only be known by cloutes
and garments, and neither can teach nor will learn) we will speak anon. But
mark thou this matter that we have in hand. This is the true wisdom allowed
before God and all good men, to seek counsel at Gods word, and to suspect
our wits of foolishness, according to the saying of Solomon: That the wise
man hears counsel, though the fool seek no further, but think his own way
right. Again says he: Hear counsel and receive instruction, that thou
may be wise in the latter end. For many devises are in man's heart, but the
counsel Psalm. 19. 7.
of the Lord shall stand. It is the counsel of the Lord and his word, that
brings wisdom to the simple, says David. This counsel of the Lord
teaches the young man to direct his ways, and makes the child wiser than his
teacher, that knows not Psalm. 119 9.
the will of the Lord. For as this is the only ground of true wisdom, to
know gods will, and therein to rest: So is it the cause of all folly, to
swerve from the same. And this is the cause, that the fool makes a mock of
sin, and that he walks in darkness. And the fool thus walking by ye way,
thinks al other to be fools, says Salomo^ afterward. Even so do you
foolish priests, and foolish maintainers of superstitious vanities, because
you have none other ground, but your own brain, your own will, and your own
good intentes. You think that the London Ministers, and we that take their
parts, are so foolish as your selves are, ye we should only stay upon our own
wits and wills. Nay we settle our consciences herein, upon the express
commandment of God, and the examples of the most godly in all ages, and
especially upon our Master Christ and his Apostles. And as poor and
unlearned a soldier as I am, yet shall thou know, that I have enough to say
against them. And as the christian soldiers, under Julian that wicked
Emperor, would not yield to any show of superstition, not so much as in the
taking of their wages, to burn a little incense, nor to wear a garlande upon
their heads, because the christian soldier is commanded, to abstain from all
show of evil, and to sight and strive against the works Fevv such Soldiers.
of darkness, and to reprove them, and so striving as he ought to do,
wait for the Garlande: So rather would I sterue under Barwick Walls, than do
as thou do, and haste counseled me to do, either in taking of a Benefice
by such unlawful means, or to enter into the popes liuerie, my sworn enemy,
because I am an English man, and to me most detestable of all other earthly
creatures, because I am a christian man, for I know, and am fully persuaded by
the word Mark this, O ye Conformatistes.
of God, that the Pope is ye very Antichrist, the son of perdition: against
whom, with heart and hand I do think my self most bound to fight. Therefore
my heart arises in my body, when I see thee and thy fellows clothed like his
Chaplains, that burned the blessed Bible, and our faithful fathers, and dear
Brethren in our eyes.

You say that it is great wisdom for you, to wear this Popish gear, and
call other men fools that will not do it. Then was there greater wisdom (say
I) in the Pope and his Priests, that have taught you thus to do. So may men
say of a hundred points Mark this.
of popery, that you maintain, buying and selling licenses, dispensations,
pluralities, absolutions, and other merchandise of that Roman Antichrist. And
I do ask you all, as you will answer before God, what do you by these your
deeds, but approve that Romish beast, and labor to heal his deadly wound,
and so to make a mock of a reformation of religion: But God will not be mocked.
There was never yet any reformation begun, and after repented, but it was
terribly punished. It is better not to have known the way of truth (says
Peter) 2. Pet. 2.
than after they have known it, to turn from the holy commandment. You
began to run well (says Paul) what carnal imaginations have hindered your
course? Seeing we have begun the true Religion, by casting away man's
traditions, worshipping God in spirit, as our Savior Christ has taught us, he
will not be content that you maynteyne, these carnal, beggarly, Antichristian
pompes, rites, laws, garments and traditions. Therefore like as Paul cries
out, against the Galathians, and calls them fools, and counts them
bewitched, for turning back, but to Iewishe ceremonies: So might I call thee a
foolish Papiste, bewitched by Antichrist, that thus raylest against the
Ministers of Christ, for the maintenance of thy fools bables, borrowed of the
Papists.


Bern. I do call them none otherwise than all the world calls them. And thou
should do me great injury, if thou did so call me, neither would I bear
it at thy hands: for it might put me in hazard of my living, if I should yield
to be a papist: neither does the garment make a man otherwise then he is, as is
the old proverb.


Mil. No, but the Garmente gives men great occasion to guess what he is, or
how he would be counted, a Courtier or a Carter, a Collier or a Soldier, as
thou and I were wont to wear Skarfes, Harquibushes, or Halbertes to signify
what we were, and thou know that if we see a man in a Friars garment, or a
Fools coat, either we say he is so, or else he would be so counted. If he
wear a Hares skutte, or a horn, we call him a Hunter. If he wear the weed of
a regular, we call him by his order, Monk Friar, or Hermit. If he wear this
secular Weed, men have hitherto counted him a secular priest, for this was the
plain difference amongst the^, that their secular priests forth of the
Church, should wear this apparaile that you do: and in the Church, at the
least, they should wear a surples also, as you do. The other Sects had
likewise their Suits: some Cattes tails, some graye Amices, some Lambeskinnes,
some white Miniuere, some black, some blew, some chaungeable Sarcenet, as you
have yet in your Monasteries, and Cathedral Churches. The which Fools hoodes
are but a vain pharisaicall pomp: then uttering pride, when they should be
most far from pride, when they appear before God in prayers.

And therefore all these popish fooleries should be banished from Christ's
church, for Christ our Savior (if he had thought them decent for his religion)
would have commanded them, but he forbids us such Pharisaicall shows,
and his father will not now be worshipped as the Jews did then, or as the
Idolaters have done at any time. And Peter and Paul with all the other
Apostles, and faithful Ministers of Christ, as they were otherways known, then
by garments: so needed they no commandment for garments: neither gave they
any commandment for their successors, but only to be known by the careful
feeding of Christ his flock, and such other marks as Paul names in the sixth
chapter of the second Epistle to the Corinthians. But that proud Pope (who is
that cursed idol sheapheard) that he might be contrary to Christ and his in
all things, and that he might have sure Note this, ye Magistrates.
marks, and evident knowledge of his traiterous brood in all countreies, caused
al his sects and sworn soldiers, men and women, to change their liueries,
from the Kings liege people wheresoever they dwelt. So that no King nor
Emperor had any authority over them, in any that took this Popish attire
upon their backs: they had so many privileges and immunities. Wherefore if
Princes will suffer still, those that should be their subjects to wear such
Popish weeds, they shall not want Popish practices, of such as delight in
their old Fathers liueries, by whom they had so many commodities.


Bern. If Master Examinator say true, these ministers are worse then the
Papists, for he calls them Shrinkers, Schismatikes, Bellygods, Deceauers,
Flatterers, hastening to the sect of Anabaptists and Libertines, little
differing from Donatistes, Disturbers, Factions, Scoffers, Biters, Snappers at
Superiors like Pelagians, like Andians, Rogatians and Circumcellians, and
smell of the Papists.


Mil. What? Of the Papists? All is like true. Would to God none of your side
did more smell of Papistrie, nor of the other vices. Are they Shrinkers, that
willingly give their bodies to the prison, rather then they will depart from
the simplicity of Christ his gospel? was Paul a Shrinker, that would not
circumcise Titus for ye false brethren? Nay they are Shrinkers, that turn
back, as your men have done. Eleazar was no shrinker, that would not eat swines
flesh: neither the Mother nor the seven Brethren, nor yet Daniell, nor yet
Moses, that would yield nothing for commandment. As for Schysmatikes they
cannot be, that cleave so fast to Christ, that they will suffer nothing of
Antichriste to come upon their backs: and they hold only of their head
Christ. How far they are from Belly gods, all that know them can witness,
and their deeds do testify. And if you would put of those poisoned popish
weeds, we would ask none other witness but your own selves: who when you
went apparailed as they do, thought them as honest and godly as any of you
were.

Cast off therefore this bloody Beasts gear, yt makes you so cruel against
your Brethren, and call them no more, by the odious names of those monstrous
Heretics, Donatistes, Andians, Rogatians, and Circumcellians, whose Heresies
your own consciences must needs confess, that these true Preachers of Christ
do hate: but consider deeply in your hearts, and know assuredly that there is
one Lord and Judge of you and them: before whom this matter must once be
tried, and all men that know them, and have heard their doctrine, shall be
compelled to clear them before this heavenly Judge, of all these vile
slanders. Who has spoken or written more plainly, against the Anabaptists,
the Libertines, and other fond sects, than they have done? who has more
evidently taught, and oftener called upon the true obedience to their
superiors? Do they require any thing but only the same, that Bucer, Martyr,
Alasco, Calvin, Bullinger, Beza, Viret, Gualter, Musculus, and all the reformed
Churches do practice? How can they then be called Anabaptists?


Bern. They call the London Ministers, either Anabaptists or Iohnabaptistes.
It is the one I am sure, I cannot tell what they mean.


Mil. They cannot be without great malice called Anabaptists, who have written
and preached so plainly and purely against that perilous sect, against the
Rebaptizing of children, against ye Justification of works, against their
fond Community, against their lawless life, that they call Spiritual,
against their denial of Christian men to bear rule: for these are the chief
of their opinyons, against the which, these godly men have co^tinuallie
preached, and these errors will now spread doubtless, seeing that so many
good Preachers are put to silence. How be it in very deed, there is some
cause, why they may be likened to John Baptist, for he, though he were of the
Priests lineage, yet did he renounce all their glorious garments, to begin
our Christian Religion, in all poverty and simplicity, and herein our men
follow his example evidently.


Bern. But they say, that your men deny to obey Magistrates, as do the
Anabaptists.


Mil. Nay there is great difference. The Anabaptists deny all power and
government of civil Magistrates, as a thing unlawful. Our Ministers say that
this power and government, is an Ordinance of God most necessary, and most
lawful* therefore they quietly suffer all evil at the hands of the
Magistrates, only refusing to do evil at their commandment. Thus did John
Baptist, thus did Peter, and John the Evangelist, professing that they must
obey God, rather then man. Now God commands that we shall not do like the
Idolaters: (which caused Eliah and all the good Fathers to have their
sacrifices and Ceremonies apart) but to cause them to turn to us, and not we
to turn to them, to abstain from all show of evil, which caused Daniell to
open his windows, and Eleazar to forbear the eating of lawful flesh. Yea
God commands to root out the monumentes of superstition and idolatry, and
not to spare the Idolaters themselves. This caused Iehoiada the Priest, to do
that which he did. God will have the idolatrous Priests and their names to be
abolished. God will have the false Prophets ashamed of their garments, wherein
they have deceived. Now though some Bishops, or some civil power will
command these Ministers to do the contrary, they do not resist the powers,
but only answer with the Apostles: whether it be right in the sight of God,
to obey you, rather then God, judge ye.

Howbeit, this is the old craft of satan, to charge Gods servants, as
factious and seditious. Elijah, and Elisha, Michaiah, Isaiah, and Jeremiah, and
all the true Prophets have thus bin charged, and when the priests could not
cause the Princes to imprison the^, or to slay them, yet would they charge them
as Amaziah did Amos, and Caunturburie of late did Leauer, yt they should not
preach near the court, and the great City, where the Prince was. Yea Christ
and his Apostles, who preached most perfect obedience Look to this, O ye
Magistrates in time.
to God and to Gouernoures, were counted blasphemers of God, and despisers of
superiors, Samaritanes and workers with Devils. Therefore they must be content
to be rayled upon, and reviled in this world, by pharisaical hypocrites, as
their Master was before them, and all his faithful servants. As for them
they follow their M. Christ and his Apostles, in all simplicity and purity of
life and doctrine, praying for their enemies, and still going forward in the
Lords business, whereas you follow the Phariseies and Papists, counterfeite
hypocrisy and cruelty against Christ's servants. They cry, Come out from
that Romish Babylon: look not back to that 2. Cor. 6. 17. Esa. 52. 11.
spiritual Sodom, flee from thence, touch none of that polluted ware. The
Pope is Antichrist, and all that popish trash is poison. Antichrist and Christ
can have no agreement, neither can their servant have any concord.

Your men soberly say, that the Bishop of Rome may not be openly professed nor
prayed against, and therefore you have put out of your Letanie the prayer
against the Bishop of Rome, and his detestable enormities: but yet his
liueries may be worn, and many of his laws and traditions must needs be
retained. Christ's ministers do cry with their Master Christ, Pasce, Pasce,
Pasce, which you grant Sir Bernard, that you understand not. But your
Archeprelate of Caunturburie (as all England supposes by his doings) judges
this precept plain folly. They cry with the Apostle Peter, to all pastors
and Curates, Pascite, Pascite, feed 1. Pet. 5. 2.
as much as lies in you the flock of Christ: Your side say, Read by thy
self, or by thy Good stuff for the Popes church.
Iorneyman, or thy hireling that may serve two or three parishes, singe in a
Surplesse, ring two or three peales at the Burialles, play upon the Organes,
chaunte in the Quire. etc. This gear is easily done, and pleases well the
multitude. The Apostle Paul says of himself, in the respect of all Christ
his true Ministers, that he has a Stewardship committed unto him, and
therefore cries: Woe unto me, If I do not preach the Gospel. As for you
and your side, you think this is a very small matter, and suppose that this
may be done, Per se, vel per alium: though GOD says playnelie, Thou thy
self shalt tell them of their sins, or else will I require the blood of
them that perish, at thy hands.

Again Paul says: preach tempestiue, intempestiue, in season and out of
season. You say four times in a year will serve to hire a preacher, or at the
least to read Homilies. And where God by Malachie commands, that the lips
of the Priest should keep knowledge, and that the people shall require the law
at his mouth: You require little or nothing of your English Priests, but to
say the Catechism, and to wear a Cappe, Coape, and Tippet. God says by
Solomon: Where there is no Prophecy, the people perish: But you say, many of
us cannot prophecy, nor instruct the people: nay many will not take much
pains that way, and some dare stop the mouths of the true Prophets and
Preachers, because they labor to root forth the remnaunts and relics of the
false prophets. Peter cries to his fellow Elders, to be examples of the 1.
Pet. 5. 2. 3.
flock, not following filthy lucre, nor showing themselves as Lords over Gods
heritage. What filthy gain seek you, and how many ways? How are you Lords
in names, in commandments, in spoiling and robbing true preachers, and
casting of them into prison. Our Master Christ says, you shall not be such.
Run not headlong Luke 22. 26.
with the popish Prelates and sworn enemies, from Christ and your Brethren.
Are those papisticall Garments so poisonfull, that of persecuted Paul's, they
can make persecuting Saules, if they be once cast over your shoulders? Abhor
such poison all you that be of God.

Diverse of the Bishops that now be, did once love and cherish their Brethren,
and bare the cross of Christ with them, whom now they molest and persecute,
joining hands with the wicked worldlinges. What is the cause of this change?
In whom is this mutabilitie? The one sort remains the same men, in
Apparaile not altered, nor in hearts changed, but in word and deed, as they
are wont to do, detesting sin and wickedness, preaching the Gospel, with all faithful diligence. Let them take heed, which forsake the fellowship of
such, to ioyn themselves with the contemners of the gospel, the fornicators
and the covetous, with Papists, or with others, that walk not with straight
steps, but by their halting are turned out of the way, and which showing
themselves neither hot nor cold must be vomited out.

These Godly Ministers call upon the Mark this good Reader, and pray for the
same with us.
high Prelates for eccleasistical Discipline, and to have the Church reformed,
as our Master Christ appoynteth. Your proctors and maintainers, will have none
other Discipline than the Pope had, which was gainful to the purse, and so
grows the corruption of manners worse and worse. These cry for the election
of Ministers by their learning and manners, according to Paul's rule: and that
the drunkards, and filthy covetous, the perjured, the blasphemers, and such
like be not suffered in the Ministry: your side will not be so rigorous, for
then they could not have such chopping Chapleins, neither As Dios, and Grauet,
and such like.
could they themselves keep in their hands so many Benefices.

To make an end of a matter that is infinite and endless, these Ministers of
Christ, as they themselves are faithful Laborers: so teach they that he that
labors not, should not eat of the fat of the flock: your proctors approve
and maintain you that be loiterers, to devour the church goods, the sweat of
poor men's labors, and do allow proprietaries and improprietaries, drones to
suck the Honey comb, yea they maynteyne hogs, dogs, Wolves, Foxes, Symoniaks,
Such as Parson Tailor, Parson. Buffin, and such like.
Usurers, men, women and boys, to spoil the poor lambs of Christ of al
food, both spiritual and corporal, and under the cloak of a few popish
ceremonies, they cover all carnal filthiness, as though god could or would be
satisfied with ceremonies and trifles. This is the wisdom wherein your side,
against Christ's Ministers have to glory, and if this be wisdom that you
follow, than are the other in great folly. But I do fear that M. Examinator
and his side, must hear: Apage Satan, ea quae sunt hominu^ no^ Dei sapit. Your
humane wisdom that you boaste of, is not of god, and therefore it is devilish.


Bern. Did not I tell thee before, yt thou could be welcome to no good
company, neither that thou can get any substanciall living, unless thou
leave this railing?


Mil. I know the old Proverb, that flattery gets friends, and truth
gets hatred, and that the greatest part, call good evil, and evil good,
But I care not for such good company, with whom, whosoever are partakers, to
communicate with the^ in their sins, they shall have their portion also of
their plagues. Thou and I have bin wretched sinners in our youth, and God has
spared us long, and many times, and now has set his marks upon us, to call us
every hour to repentance: and shall we provoke him, with new and strange
sins, that where strength of body fails, that we can no longer follow the
lusts of the flesh, we should join our selves with the Papists, the
spiritual Sodomites, to tempt God worse ten times then before?


Bern. I pray thee Miles hold thy peace, thou make me tremble with thy
terrible words, and by calling old things to remembrance. And I tell thee that
though the Papists were Thieves, and Robbers, and Sodomites, and soul
quellers, and what thou will, yet are we none such, for we do all for policy.


Mil. Nay all your doings are not policy. Have you no religion? your church
service is not policy, and in the Archebishops aduertisements, you have laws
temporal, mere ecclesiastical: your fasting days are not mere policy, for
your Archbishop grau^teth dispensations, for forty shillinges, that men may
eat flesh in the days forbidden Sana conscientia: as though he had authority
over men's consciences, unless they have his license. And (unless hypocrisy
may be counted policy) there be many things in your reformation, that will
be found fond policy: for what is this, that both the physician of body and
soul must be consulted Mark this pretty stuff.
withal, before you may eat flesh? was not this once plain popery? And what
is the common babbling of the Priests, that cannot read to edification, and
therefore make all the English service, like the old Mattins and Mass? Is it
not that which Esaiah speaks? Because this people come near me with their
mouths, and honor me with their lips, but have removed their hearts from
me, and their fear toward me was taught, by the precepts of men: therefore
will I work a wonder amongst this people, for the wisdom of their wise men
shall perish, and the understanding of their prudent shall be hid.

And let us consider to whom God speaks, by his Prophe tthese words. Is it
not to a people that had no open Idolatry at that present? neither yet mumbled
their prayers in a tongue not understood, as did the papists? But to ye Jews
that read and song the psalms and scriptures in their own Mark well.
mother tongue, howbeit they babled only with the tongue like hypocrites, and
the words were, as it were, of a book fast sealed. Such trifling is now
amongst you English Chaplains. For when you have read over one place of the
Scripture forty times, yet you and your hearers are never the wiser. You say
you have done your service, as said the papists. Now (if you keep this
hypocritical show, only for policy, and make it to serve you politikely to
win your livings, or for to keep the people in some fear, as Machiuel that
Italian dog does teach) you may perceive by this Text of Isaiah, that Gods
wrath will be the reward of your policy. Likewise you keep Bona ecclesiae by
policy, and do no part of your duty. Is not this theft and robbery? Does not
Christ call them al Thieves, that enter not in by him, but for their own gain
to rob and to steal? And will not they, and all men count him as a thief
(good Bernarde) that takes great wages of a towneship to keep their Kyne,
their Swine, or their Sheep, and suffers their cattle to stick in the mire,
to perish in the ditches, their sheep to rot and to run astray, where they
list, and pulls their fleeses of from their backs, and spends all that he
can scrape from the flock, upon his own belly?


Bern. Yes marie, that were a thief indeed.


Mil. O Bernard, Bernard, this spiritual Spiritual thieves, the vvorste
thieves.
thief is worse by far, who robs souls and bodies, and by his evil
example makes the poor sheep to think, that there is none other world, no
God to punish, and therefore as he robs from them, so they may without peril
rob from him and al others. That filthy Rome is called the spiritual Sodom,
Egypt, and Babilo^, whom we should abhor, and from whom we must fly, so that
we may touch no unclean thing that comes from thence. But what are all your
policies in Religion, but patches plucked forth of that Puddle? Your Lordely
Bishops in names, in manners, in attires, and all their offices, fetch all
their pomp from thence. Your Deanes, Archdeacons, Subdeacons, Chauncelors,
Officials, and your Curats, and al their deckings and doings, and all your
courts and consistories depend of popish laws. Your fasting and your feast
days, smell of that old superstition and idolatry, and the prophets strengthen
the hands of the wicked, that none can turn from his wickedness. They are all
unto me as Sodom, and the inhabitauntes thereof as Gomorrah, says the
Prophet Jeremiah. They are not ashamed of their sins, they hide them not, yea
they publish them and boast of the^, says Esaiah, yea they call them good
policy, so did Sodoma.

Take heed. A great light shines unto Be warned, O England
England. Beware least it be not more easy at the day of judgment to the
Sodomits, then to the English mock-gospellers. But whereas you said Sir
Bernard, that you do all for policy, I will tell you what me think were a good
point of policy: The Pope and the papists count him an Apostata, and a
renouncer of their faith and Religion, that wears not such attire as they
prescribe for the priest secular and regular. Therefore seeing the priests and
people of England, do profess with mouth, that they renounce the Good
counsel, and the best policy.
Popes religion, this seems right policy, to cast away these garments, in
sign of full detestation, that both word and deed may consent together. Thus
have good men before us, given us a pattern of perfect policy. And what a
policy would they that have Abbeyes, call this, if the Friars and the Monks
should come again to their houses in their old popish apparaile, and claim
their lands and liuinges, and say they would be no papists: they would say
their Mattins and Euensong in English, as the secular priests do: how would
many of them, like of this policy:


Bern. My Lord my Master will like it never a whit.


Mil. What if the cross and Candlestickes, the Images and the Banners, and
other popish trash (which are no worse then these things which you have
already) should be offered you under ye name of policy: were this any other,
tha^ to bring in an english popery?


Bern. Nay the Bishops will never suffer this.


Mil. That old Doctor Turner (reverend in other nations abroad for his great
learning, and amongste the Godly at home, for his great zeal, his travails,
his perils so long sustained, and his great constancy) did almost thirty
years ago epsy, and bewray unto the world, the craft of Satan, that
labored to make popery policy, and so to go about to cure the wound of
the beast, which being in it self incurable, should yet in another beast be
cured: who should do all things that the first beast could do before him,
and so, after a sort should cause men to worship the first beast, whose deadly
wound, was in this second healed. His invention was pretty and pleasant, of
the The name of D. Turners Book.
croppeeared Fox, who now was become the Kings beast, and the Kings game,
that no man might hunt it: wherein he worthily reproved that foolish policy.
Steven Gardener in his book of diuelishe Sophistry, makes the substance of
popish religion to stand upon Garments, and such other Popish inventions,
even as the rich Merchauntes substance stands upon farthinges. Is it a good
policy (I ask thee Bernard) to maintain the Popes substance, and to defy the
Pope:


Bern. Nay, fie on that policy.


Mil. The Pontifical (which is the book whereby the Priests were made)
calls these garments vestitum religionis: Not only putting holiness in the
garments, but also meaning, that he receaueth that Religion, whose garments
he wears. But our religion left us by Christ, and practiced by his
Apostles, is none such. It stands not in Visars, shows nor garments, but
in the power of Gods spirit, and the faithful uttering of his holy word. The
beauty of Christ his Church is inward: his Priesthood is spiritual: the
Ministration of his Sacraments must be simple, without pharisaicall show,
as he and his, have left them unto us by writing.


Bern. But Miles, I pray thee, Is it not a comely thing, to have some fair
and costly garments, in the ministration of the Sacraments?


Mil. No, Bernarde, for that were either Iewishe or Idolatrous. And in these
outward shows, they both would exceed us, Note.
for their riches and wealth: and because they put therein their holiness,
which we may not do. But we must follow our Master, and not go before his
wisdom. The garments and Ceremonies which once were glorious and commendable
in the Church, because they were appointed of God for a time, did our Master
Christ abolish at his coming, and appointed another manner of worship, than
was either in Idolatrous Samaria, or amongst the Iewishe at Jerusalem. And
where does he give leave to Peter, or to Paul, or to man, or Angel, to
appoynte new garments to serve him in, or to minister his Sacraments
therein: And if he give no leave to any in his Church (whom he will have to
be kept as a chaste Spouse to him self) to add, or to diminish his doings,
in ceremonies or garments: who is hec that dare take leave to himself, but a
companion of the Romish Antichrist? Neither can these things rightly be
called mere policy, which were a part of the popish religion, and now is
counted, causa sine qua non, in the ministry and in the sacraments, the
chief points of our religion. Are not all deprived of the Ministry, that
will not be thus disguised? May any other man minister the sacraments but in
this popish apparaile? Is not the course of Gods word stopped, that these may
have place? Do not the people think, that neither Marriage, nor Baptism,
neither The more is the pity.
the supper of the Lord, can be rightly ministered without a surples? And what
policy call you this, to maintain so fond opinions of the people?


Bern. The Queen does command it for policy, not for any Superstition,
howsoever the fond people do abuse it.


Mil. Ah that your political Proctors eyes are so blinded, that they cannot
see, that so long as the supersticious things remain, that superstition which
has bin so long rooted in the hearts of the people (whereunto man is so prone
by nature) can never be taken away. And therefore it were a most necessary
policy for the Queens Majesty, and all Christian Princes, to root out from
the eyes of the people, all the monuments of superstition and Idolatry,
according to gods commandment, and the words of the first Injunctions. Thus
Moses, Ezekiah, and Mark this, O ye christian Magistrates, and frame your
policy to christianity
Josiah, destroyed the Idols, and the Idolatrous monumentes, even the Serpent
set up by Gods commandment, a sign of Christ, and a Sacrament of Gods favor
and mercy. And Iehu kills the Idolatrous priests in their priestly
garments. For none of these good Rulers could think, that their commandment
was able to turn superstition into policy: neither had they any such power or
authority, because God had commanded the contrary.

Besides this (to look upon the matter rightly) there is nothing that touches
Christ's religion more near, than the manner of making of Ministers, and the
form of the ministering of the Sacraments. Wherefore nothing is further from
policy: like as in the appointing of these twain, Christ's simplicity is
clean contrary to humane policy. Therefore is it no marueyle, though man's
wisdom do not like it. I have also read in a Book of that Godly Father
Martin Bucer, (whom your side boasts of so much) that the tenthes and the
first fruits, taken from the Benefices, are sacrilege and robbery, though
they be called mere policy. All is not good policy, that bears the name
of policy, For these wicked impropriations, pluralities of Benefices,
adoration of the Sacrament, excommunication and absolution for money, and many
more popish practices, have now the name of policy. But cursed is that
policy, that maynteineth any popish polling, idleness, superstition, or
Idolatry.


Bern. Why? may not a King co^manud such things for good purposes, that the
Pope has abused?


Mil. Both the commander and the obeyer Note this.
have their limits, in Christ, not against Christ, in the fear of the Lord,
not against the will of the Lord, to edification not to destruction. Howbeit,
it were too long to answer all that may herein be said, and the evils are
too evident, so that much needs not. But this must all Christian Princes
know, that the King him self is bound to have Gods book hy him continually,
and thereby to direct his policy, that he turn neither to the right hand
nor to the left. For when he casts away the word of God from his policy,
there is no wisdom therein. I could tell you further of licenses and
dispensations, and Look in the end of this Book.
other Popish Laws, which are covered with the cloak of policy. Howebeit,
all this is but a cropping of that Romish Rainoldes ears, and so to bring in
an English Popery.


Bern. Nay Miles, you are far ouerseene, to call this an English popery. For
you are bound, not only to obey your Prince, for fear of punishment, but also
for conscience sake.


Mil. This sentence of the Apostle, does bind us in conscience, to have a love
and reverence unto our Prince, as unto Gods Lieuetenaunt, and of a faithful
heart and conscience to obey him and to assiste him with our bodies, and to aid
him with our goods, so long as he does this office, in maintening good things
and good persons, and punishing evil men and wicked doings. For this cause do
we pay tribute, says Paul, that the Prince may be able to maintain the
good, and to punish the evil, as Gods Minister. For example. All the people
were bound to assiste Moses, in destroying the Idolaters, and that Idol in the
wilderness, and to help him with their goods, in the making of the
Tabernacle: and to aid Iehu, in destroying the Idolatrous priests, and Temple
of Baal: and to obey Hezekiah and Josiah, in the destroying of the Idolles and
Idolatrous monumentes in their times. But no man was bound to obey Jeroboam,
Ahab, Iehoram, Ahaz, or any of ye wicked kings, commanding any superstition or
idolatry: though for conscience sake, because GOD places evil men over us
for our sins, we may never cease to do our duties toward them: which is,
first to give unto God our selves wholly: then, to give unto Caesar that which
apparteyneth unto him, such tribute and service, as is requisite.

As concerning wicked commandments, we must say, That we must obey God
rather Act. 4. 19.
than man. For Israel is sore threatened, that Gods wrath shall come upon them,
because they walked after the commandment of the King. And though Josiah had
taken away, all the Idolatries and superstions, which Manasseh his Graunfather
had set up, and his Father Amon had maintained: yet was it so far of, that
the commandment of those two wicked Kings, could excuse the people, that
notwithstanding some repentance in the days of Josiah, the Lord turned not
from the fierce wrath, where with he was angry against Judah and Jerusalem, but
put them forth of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh: Whereby we may see,
that we may not obey any wicked commandment of any Prince, unless we will
expose our selves, to Gods heavy displeasure, as that people did, which
obeyed the commandment of Manasseh.

Wherefore as our conscience does bind us to obey the Prince commanding good
things, and punishing the evil, so does our conscience (which shall accuse or
excuse, at the great day) teach us, that without any resisting, even praying
to God for the evil Prince, we may disobey any such commandment, as may in
any wise withdraw us from our duty toward God, as we have a manifest
example of Daniel, and his three companions, refusing courtly delicates, and in
other their acts afterward. As also we have this plain commandment, to
abstain from all show of evil. Yet do we grant, as I said before, that
in all Godly policies, we do owe obedience in the bestowing of all that we
have.


Bern. What call thou Godly policies?


Mil. All Godly policies are furtherances to the keeping of Gods commau^dme^ts,
wherein the chief and first is, the precise honoring of the true God, and
therefore the abolishing and abhorring of all Idols, and of all their monuments.


Bern. Is not love, charity, and concord, the fulfilling of the law? And these
are made for love and concord, therefore this is a policy furthering Gods law
and commandments, and so I heard Master Doctor reason with a Minister.


Mil. Sir Bernard, I did marvel where you had gotten this Logic and
Divinity. But first I do answer, that for the keeping Mark well this and
bear it away.
of the first table, the love of God that I spoke of before, and therefore the
detestation of Idols and al idolatrous monuments is necessary. And all Princes
are bound to make such Laws, as serve hereunto. Then follows the love of
our neighbor, as the rule of the second, which love yet must be in GOD, in
Christ, and in verity. For cursed is that concord that is in falshoode, in
hypocrisy, in Idolatry, or briberie. Yea cursed is that concord, and cursed
is that Policy, that has not Gods word to warrante it. For it is darkness
and vanity. What fellowship has light with darkness? Righteousness with
unrighteousness? What concord has God with Beliall? Christ and Antichriste,
the sincere Gospeller, and the polluted Papist? Wherefore separate your selves
from them, touch none of their filthy gear, so have you a promise, that God
will receive you, and be a father unto you.

There is no such warraunte of your Proctors policies. And how can this be
a good policy, to compel the Ministers of God, against Gods warrante, to be
like the Idolatrous Priests, and to wear their garishe gear? How can they
be like that blasphemous Priesthood, which fight with all force against
that Priesthood, and labor by all means to abolishe it? Or how can this be
a good policy, to bring Gods plagues upon England to set Godly men at
variaunce, to stay and hinder the course of Gods word, to cause the enemies,
Harding and his fellows to triumph, and to wait for an overthrow of both
parts? But the mayntenaunce of these supersticious and idolatrous monumentes
causes all this, therefore there is in them no good policy, but a manifest
hastening of Gods great plagues, that have so long hanged over England.


Bern. I can see no cause why Gods plagues should come upon England for this,
seeing the most part of popery is put down, and we live quietly.


Mil. Is not this a great plague of God Those that know not God his will,
be blind, and see nor know nonothing.
think thou, that the cheifest Gospellers are together by the ears? one
spoileth another of liberty and living, and the papists true quietly indeed,
and laugh in their sleeves. Is not this a plague, that where there be so few
Preachers of Gods Gospel, in so great a realm, the most paynefull laborers
are put to silence by them, that should seek for laborers? And as the
Israelites destroying many of the Amorrhites and Canaanites, according to Gods
commandment, yet living quietly for a while with the rest, and leaving some
relikes and remnaunts of the^, by their own negligence, fond affection, and
foolish policy, were continually corrupted, polluted, and plagued with these
wicked remnauntes, by Gods just judgment: So is it to be feared here in
England, that the abolishing of much Popery according to Gods will, and the
reserving of some superstitious and idolatrous relics of the same by
negligence, affection, or policy to have quietness, should cause this realm
still, to be poluted, corrupted, and plagued with papists and popery.


Bern. If you could prove these things supersticious and idolatrous, you said
somewhat to the purpose. But that I cannot see.


Mil. Was there any thing more idolatrous Unless me^. will be blind, they
must confess this.
or superstitious about the Idols, than the disguised garments, the Coape and
the Surplesse, wherein they were censed, and served? Were not they so misshapen
and altered in form, from all other garments, that they were in fashion
monstrous, to any other use, but about those Idols combersom and superfluous?
Will thou be blind within and without? Haste thou not seen them occupied about
the idols an hundred times? Again, to prove them superstitious or idolatrous,
small disputation serves to the^, that will grant popery, to be superstition
and idolatry. For wherein played the Papists all their popish pageauntes, but
in this garishe gear? And David counts himself poluted, with the naming of
the Idolles. Therefore would he never command Psalm. 16.
any of his subjects to wear any of their garments.

The serpent was accursed, because it was an instrumente of Satan to tempte
Genesis 3. 14.
man to sin, and so is this garishe gear, that has tempted man to
superstition and Idolatry. Not, but that the serpent, and the Devil also, the
idol, and the Idolothite, the Coape or Surplesse, and the matters whereof they
are made, are good by creation, but in that all these are altered from their
creation, to be the instruments of sin, they have gotten strange names and
forms for the Idols (and so the Devil to be scrued therein) so are they
superstitious, Idolatrous and abominable. And for their Cappes and Tippets,
were they not for that idolatrous and blasphemous Priesthood, and them that
take profit by the same, as they are now appointed for you English Chaplaynes?


Bern. Nay man thou wotest not what thou say, for many young Scholars did
wear the^ in the Universities, that were no Priests at all.


Mil. Though young scholars in the Universities Mark this, ye University men.
were compelled to wear them as Nouices in the Popes School and religion, and
were for the most part sworn to the Pope, by the order of their houses: yet
when they were once married, and so paste Popish priesting, were they
Bachelors, Masters or Doctors, they ceased by order to wear them. Thus at all
times the idolatrous Papists appointed this your political apparel, for
their own sworn children. For this cause it is said, that Bonner was much
agreeued at those men, which were not of his religion, and yet would wear
these garments and apparaile. For said he, they are Ornaments belonging only
to our Religion. And therefore after his scoffing manner, he counted them the
honester men, that would not wear them, nor challenge that to themselves
which was none of theirs. If any did forsake the Pope, were he Bishop or
Archbishop, they plucked these rags from him with all violence, as they did
from Cranmer, Ridley, and Hooper, So that it is no good policy, for this
Realm of England that are enemies to the Pope, and the Pope unto it, to leave
so many Soldiers in their enemies liueries.

Neither is it good policy of the Gospellers that wear this gear, to
continue in that liuerie, forth of the which of necessity, they must be
turned, by their own band, if any Queen Mary (which GOD forbid) reign over
us.

But consider betimes, you that maintain this filthy ware, that there be many
that wait for it, which will rejoice to see you stripped out of these cloutes,
as they have done at your brethren: and that is ye cause, that they hold what
they can, of their pope, and sow sedition amongst the Gospellers. Therefore I
can see small policy, and less safety, to join with such false fellows in
so fond apparaile. And I would be loath to be matched with such companyons in
my charge at Barwick. I cannot hate the enemy, Outvvarde notes to know
Papists.
and love his Ensigns, and what plainer Ensigns have we of the popish
priesthood, than these garments that you would thrust upon the backs, necks,
and heads of christian soldiers? I abhor them to the Devil, as his
undoubted instruments, to hold the people in superstition, to cloak a
filthy life, and to sow discord amongst brethren.


Bern. But I trow that I have read in Saint Paul, that we may not always
use our liberty to the extremity, but must do some things, for fear to
offend other men's consciences: which seems good policy.


Mil. It is true, the holy Apostle Paul says in this manner: Whatsoever is set
before you, eat, asking no question for conscience sake. But if any man say
unto you, this is offered to idols, eat it not, because of him that showed it,
and for the conscience sake, the conscience (I say) not thine, but of the
other. These words make clean against you: for first he tells not (as you
aleadge) what we must do, but what we must leave undone, for other men's
conscience. For he teaches that we may not use these Idolothites, that is,
things belonging to the Idols, to offend any man's conscience, but rather
abstain from such liberty, and neither eat flesh, nor do any thing that may
offend our brother.

Now mark this matter that we have in hand. These popish gear were
Idolothites, things belonging to Idols, in the wearing whereof, many good men's
consciences are offended, and they openly tell you, that they were things
wherein the Idols were served, and that they are grieved to see you wear such
liueries of Antichriste, and so they are offended in charity, and can not use
you as Brethren as they were wont to do. Again, the papists, and the weaker
sort, that have not bin fully taught, do still think and say, and teach
others, that these are the things that belonged to their Mass, and to other
popish idolatry, and therefore al their popery was not evil, seeing Christ's
Ministers and Sacraments cannot be without them. Thus their weak consciences
are offended in faith, and think their old idolatry good, and therefore
cannot repent of it. Wherefore for the consciences of others (if there were no
cause else) you should abstain from this liberty, that you chalendge to your
selves, in these idolatrous garments, like as Paul affirms, that he would
never eat flesh, rather than he should be thought, willingly and wittingly
being once warned, to eat any meat dedicate to Idols.


Bern. But hereby thou do to much restrain our christian liberty seeing our
conscience is free.


Mil. Although I might answer thee with the saying of Ambrose, It is lawful for
thee and with safe conscience, thou may have a wife, yet if she play ye
harlot, she is to be rejected, and cast away from thee. Even so the meat
(says he) if it be offered to an Idol, must be spit out. This sentence of
Ambrose agrees with the decree of the Apostles, commanding to abstain from
idolothites. But Paul declares that in common usage, where no man is offended,
we have a liberty to use things that are offered unto us, by the course and
necessity of this life, as the creatures of GOD without doubtfulnesse.
Therefore I do grant, that the Surplesse or such like, may be used in common
businesses, as to make The Surples may be used for a Porters vveede, or such
like necessary garment.
it a Porters weed, or to lap some course thing therein, as did Epiphanius
with the veil at Anablata, or to give to some poor man or woman, that want
clouthes for their children. But to use it in the Sacraments in Gods
business, is to make all the world to think, that we which would seem
reformers of Religion, do but trifle in Gods matters, and that we neither do
abhor Antichriste, nor his hypocrisy. Therefore, as Iehu did well, in
turning the Idolatrous Temples, into iakes, and in polluting the garments,
with the blood of the Priests: So should we proceed in true reformations, and
all the faithful Ministers of God, should be Trumpets to stir us forward,
and not clogges to draw us backwarde.


Bern. What, you are to whote and to hasty, you think that Rome may be
builded upon one day. There be many yet infirm and weak in England, with
whom the Governors must bear for a season, until they be stronger, and that
is very good police, seeing they cannot reform all things at once. And
because such things have bin creeping in by little and little, and have now
bin long used, they cannot be taken away, but by a long continuance.


Mil. Now I do ask thee in Gods name, if thou do think, that they go about
to build Rome again, or to destroy it? A thing is much sooner destroyed
then builded: or canste thou tell me this, how long they will be weak? or
when all will be strong? It is almost forty years, since the Pope and
popery has bin so long written and spoken against, and about thirty years,
that his name (as a thing most odious) was commanded by law of parliament, to
be razed out of all Books and places in England, and the Testament of Jesus
Christ has bin so long restored and published aamongst us. Now if men be not
yet confirmed in the knowledge of Christ, against that Roman Antichrist, the
Pope and his blasphemous Priesthood, when will they be confirmed? when they
are fifty or threescore years old peradventure, and have bin taught so many
years. But you know that the most part die before forty, and who shall
answer for them? Either how know thou that Gods word shall continue in
England ten or twenty years longer, until men be no more weak? Either
will you tarry till men learn it in another world? Either is God so bound to
England, that he will not forsake England, as he has Remember Qu. Mary's
days, O England, and repent in time.
done his own people, and many other Nations for the greatness of their sins?
Nay, thou murdering England, that have slain so many of the servants of
God, which called for the fruits of the Lords Vineyarde, and haste yet
showed no true fruits of repentance, but sworn and forsworn thy self in
sundry Parliamentes, and delightest still in thy dregs, and hate them to
this day, that faithfully do their office: thou ^ust hear and feel this
terrible judgment, that the Lord will let out his Vineyarde to others, that
will deliver him, the fruits in due season: and that also which he spoke to a
people of greater holiness, than thou art, The Kingdom of God shall be taken
away from you, and given to a nation that shall bring forth the fruits
thereof. And O ye time takers, and time waiters, which can find no time to do
well, alleging the weakness of others: beware that it be not your own
weakness, which would feign please both God and the world, and therefore swim
betwixt two waters. Is it not yet time to build and purge Gods house, when you
have already builded, ceeled and Look to this, O ye L. Bishops.
trimmed your own houses? Behold and you may see, in very short time, where
zeal and care of religion is without halting, al things are easily reformed
after the word of God, and reverently received. Beware therefore, that it be
not of your own weakness, that have not yet learned rightly to hate those
vain traditions and superstitious shows of the popish priesthood, but are
content to be in such flauery your selves, and so would have all others,
rather then you will suffer any thing for the furtheraunce of the simplicity
and sincerity of Christ's Gospel.

Again, O ye politic Gentlemen, you are marueiloustie deceived in this point
of policy, that you would have the truth to creep in by little and little, a
little in a long Mark this* O ye Gentlemen.
time, as the snaile creeps or the Serpent, because that after such a fly
sort, came in Popery, superstition and errors. For truth and error are of a
nature far contrary, for if we doc not receive the truth and embrace it
readily, and openly profess it at once, the longer we tarry, the more are we
in danger to lose it: Violentirapiunt illud, the violent pluck it unto them
by force. Wisdom cries and thou will not hear, but make a mock thereat:
she will laugh at thy destruction, and mock when thy fear comes. Thou shall
call, but she will not answer. Thou shall seek her early, but thou shall not
find her. And I pray you must Antichrist so sit, in Christian men's
consciences, that they should make any delay, to receive Christ purely, and at
all times, and defy all the inventions of Antichriste? Or can men say for
shame, that they abhor that blasphemous Priesthood of Antichrist, unless
they abhor all the parts and the appurtenaunces thereof, garments, gestures
and ceremonies? Is he a true Christian man that does tarry thirty or forty
years to see whether the world will change or no, before that he will change
from the traditions of Antichrist? Or is he a faithful servant to his Lord
or Master, that does think himself honored, and not dishonored, Mark these
similitudes.
with the wearing of the liuerie of the manifest enemy to his Lord and
Master? Is he a good natural brother that resoyseth to go in the same
disguised garments with the murderers of his brethren, and wherein yet his
brethren are persecuted? Or is he a loving son to his Father, that will make
himself like the mockers of his father, and deck his body with that attire,
wherein his father was customably derided? Nay doubtless, if we either love
Christ, or hate Antichrist, if we either love God, or his true Ministers, or
bear any affection toward our persecuted brethren, we must be more zealous.
Wherefore after that it has bin now, for a long space preached against these
relikes of the Roman Antichrist, they ought utterly to be abolished and
abhorred: As the Apostles, after that they had preached in Antioche, did
plainly forbid the filthiness of Idols. And if the higher powers will not do
it, yet they that have knowledge, and have preached against such filthiness,
ought by their deeds to confirm their words, and to keep their own bodies
pure, from such superstitions, as they blame in others: and they that have bin
converted from Idolatry and superstion, have done this at all times. Surely
it is a taken of great weakness of faith, that men are so slack to abolishe
these Idolatrous garments. And much more weakness appears, when the
Preachers themselves, do maintain by their doings, that, which their words
denies.

Furthermore, we do see the fruits of faith very slenderly to appear,
amongst the greatest mainteyners of this hypocritical Look into all other
reformed churches.
gear: and that all things do proceed more lively both in faith and in
manners, where the weeds of Popery are utterly abolished. And surely, if
we rightly consider it, we ought not to bear with, nor to suffer any token of
Antichrist, any more than Moses, Joshua, or Josiah did of the old Idolaters,
because there may be no concord, no agreement, no communion, no partaking
betwixt Christ and Antichriste, the faithful and the infidel, God and the
Devil. For whilst the Gospellers do use such popish trashe, they confirm
the ignorant in their errors, and they comfort the maintainers of such
fooleries, and they hurt the faith of the weak. All this is to provide for
your own quietness, your own safeties, and your What is this but hypocrisy.
own bellies. For many of you would else do otherwise, yea and privately
will not stick to wish them at the Devil. And thus do you gratify Christ's
enemies, and such as are but shrinkers and traitors unto Christ's cause. For
doubtless there can none other but such strive and contend so bitterly, for
ye retayning of any popish trifles. Although I do grant, that some of
simplicity, or for the want of the true zeal of Gods glory, may for a space
bear with such apish toys. But to deprive, and to spoil of their liuinges
and liberties, any one faithful preacher for the refusing of these, does
declare playnelie, that there is no love of Gods word, nor of Gods Messengers.
And this may justly bring Gods wrath upon all the commanders and consenters
thereunto: but especially upon the Lordly Bishops, the procurers and
executioners of such commaundments, which they should cheefely repulse, to
defend the faithful Preachers, though it were with the loss of their liuinges
and their lives.

O Bishops, are ye not in this point, those servants whom the Master of
the household has appointed to give meat to their fellow Servants, in due
season, and they like evil servants, neither will give them food
themselves, as they ought to do, (I speak of the chief persecutors) nor suffer
such as would to do it, but smite their fellow servants, which would feign
feed Christ's flock, taking part themselves with them, that are drunken with
popish traditions, with the adulterers, open and known enemies to Christ and
his Gospel? Does not our Master Christ speak of such? saying: The Master of
that Servant will come in a day when he looks not for him, and give him
his portion with Hypocrites: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.
Repent ye proud Prelates, and join hands once again, with your poor
persecuted Brethren, to root out all popery, or else your fall will be
perilous.


Bern. I tell thee man, thou art so hot and raging, that I am weary of thy
talk: But if thou will read Master Examinators Book, it will calm thy
warlike spirits.


Mil. If a Soldier ought to be hot and earnest for his Captain and his
Country, I know my Captain is Christ, and my Country is above, for the
which I can not be to zealous. And as for the Sophistry and proud words,
that your Master brings against the London Ministers, they can not beguyle
me. And I suppose that his examination, is examined already. And if me^ may be
permitted to examine it, by Gods book, it will soon be found faulty.


Bern. Well, yet me think, that he has one argument (that the Ministers must
all be in like garments, for concord and amity) which can not be answered.


Mil. It is the likeness of manners, not of garments, that makes concord and
unity, says Cicero. And Paul requires of the Ministers like doctrine. A
man and his wife need not to be put in one garment, neither may they so be,
though in them be required most perfect amity. Much less needs the Lamb
and the Wolf, the sheep and the Butcher, the Christian and the Papist, the
loyterer and the labourer, to be so matched together, yt one can not be known
from the other. For this is confusion and no good concord. Therefore the Lord
commands, that we should not match together unequal things, as the Ox and
the Ass, nor to sow the ground with diverse seeds, nor to wear a garment of
linen and woollen. All the which things are written to teach us to beware how
we do mix and match together, things that have no concord, as true and
false religion, which can have no more unity, than light and darkness.
Ephraim may not mix his religion with the Gentiles, says Hosea. No more may
the true Ministers of Christ, and the Idolatrous priesthood of Antichriste
agree together in any wise. The holy Apostle S. Paul, having regard to such
matters, writes thus, as was before noted: Be not unequally yoked with the
infidels. For what fellowshippe has light with darkness? 2. Cor. 6 14 15. 16.
or, Righteousness with unrighteousness? What concord has Christ with Belial?
or what part has the believer with the infidel? etc. Wherefore come out from
among them, and separate your selves, says the Lord, and touch no unclean
thing: So will I receive you, and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be
my sons and daughters, says the Lord. Lo, in refusing the fellowshippe, in
flying from them, and touching no unclean thing of theirs, we have God ready
to receive us, and to show himself a father unto us. Therefore to obtain
this assurance, we must defy the concord with the papists, and the amity
with all Idolaters, and cause them (if it be possible) to turn to us, but we
may turn to them in no case. For therefore was Jeremiah the Prophet
forewarned, that he should stand against them like a brazen wall, and that he
should not fear their faces. So ought we to stand against all this
Idolatrous gear, which yet bears the marks, the names, the forms and
fashion of the Idolatries and superstitions, wherein, by that blasphemous
Priesthood they were abused. And, how do you stand against them? Or how do
you fly from them, when you are feign to hyde your selves under their
Idolatrous Garments? Or how can the true Christians be at concord with them,
who have a contrary commandment? And what concord I pray you, was there at
anytyme betwixt the true and false Prophets? as betwixt Michaiah, and them of
his time: Isaiah, and them of his time: Elijah, and the Priests of Baal.
Eliiah would needs have his Altars and ceremonies aparte from them, and
derided their doings, and caused the people to kill them. Jeremiah and the
clawbackes, that then lived, had Examples of holy me^, which detested
Idolaters, and their fashions and rites.
small concord together. Amos, and the high Priest Amaziah were at great
variaunce. Paul and his fellow Phariseis, had small amity or concord
together, after that he once came to Christ, for they persecuted him in all
places, and beat him, even at the judgment seat. Finally, this is evident
to all Christians, that there was no concord betwixt Christ and the
Priests, the Scribes and Phariseyes of his time. And are not the Papists
worse than any of these? Can we have no concord, which are of Christ,
unless we creep under their Coats, and hide us under their Coapes, Caps and
Tippets? Yes doubtless, in me you shall have peace says Christ.

Let all Christ's faithful soldiers, follow Christ their Captain therefore,
in all simplicity, and defy that concord with Antichrist. The day shall
come, that our Christ shall scourge out these Popish John 2. 15.
Chapmen, like Dogs, then shall these haltinge Neutralles, hyde their heads,
which fondly patche Christ his Religion, with the Popes, and make an English
Bishop and an English Priest of these two orders, joining fire and water,
heaven and hell together, to make a concord. And mark the Monks and Friars,
and those close Masters, that dwell in the Monasteries and great Churches,
which are bound so straitelie to keep conformity in garments, and thou
shall find amongst the finds of hell, no greater hatred, nor more diuelishe
discord. Now contrariwise, these poor persecuted men, keep concord so much as
in the^ lies, with all men, and follow the rule of Augustine, which is, that
whosoever (as far as he is able) does correct that, which is amiss, or that
which he can not correct, without disturbance, does exclude it, or that which
he can not peaceably shut forth, yet with his equity and well doing, does
disalowe it: such a man is peaceable, and free from the curse. And this in very
deed, is the office of all true Preachers, when they can do no more, yet to
reform them selves, and by their vprightnes, to give example unto others.


Bern. Well Miles, I do warn thee as a friend, to beware what part thou
take: for my Lords the Bishops, and the other Prelates, that wear this
gear, do count you all Schismatikes, because ye depart from them: and if
ye will not return to concord, and agree with them, they will trounce you all.
They will not lose their credit, nor yield to a sorce of beggars.


Mil. Thus Christ always, and his poor little ones are despised of the
world, and they never feel the power of faith, that stand upon their honor
and credit: and we depart not from them, but from their popish trashe. But we
reverence them, and would feign join with them, to the furtheraunce of the
Gospel: notwithstanding yt in this point, we can not allow them, as also we
have testimony of them selves, that herein they mislike their own doings. And
we ask this question of them, with what assurance of conscience, they do
depart from the simplicity One principal question.
in Christ, wherein they lived with us heretofore, to take unto the^ again
these known liueries of Antichrist? As also how they will answer at the day
of judgment, this spoil of our Preachers, and this stopping of the course of
Gods Gospel, and why they do oppose them selves, and strive against us, who,
in their own conscience, do seek to banishe the Roman Antichriste, and all
his relikes forth of Christ's Church, which is both their and our duties? And
therefore we do admonish them in the Lord, that they do not depart from
Christ and his members, neither separate those from their companies, whose
doctrine they know and confess to be sincere, whose life also they cannot
reprove. So neither they nor we shall be found schismatikes, but we both
shall come to the true concord, whereof we are assured, whilst we draw
nearer and nearer to Christ, and fly further and further from Antichriste, a
great deal of whose dross and tirannie lies yet hid in their Courts, Coats
and Titles, and tirannical oppression of their brethren.

We desire a concord in Christ with you all, but not without Christ: in
verity, but not in popery. And we do marvel how you dare depart from the
liberty and simplicity, that Christ taught his scholars to use in the
ministry and sacraments, to this servile slavery, to be bound to
Antichrists traditions, to cause ye poor people to think, that the supper of
the Lord cannot be celebrated without kneeling, and without Wafer cakes, and
that his Ministers can have no ornaments, but Popish caps and tippets,
idolatrous coapes and surplesses, plants which ye heavenly father never
planted, which should be rooted out now when the Gospel has bin so long
preached amongst us, or else doubtless this gospel will be taken away from us,
and given to the^ that will bring forth better fruits, both in ye weeding out of
such wicked weeds, and also in the exercise of christian life. O Lord what a
heap of antichristian laws, customs and traditions, are yet retained by the
Read the Tables in the end of this book.
Bishops? And yet they sweruing from christ, in so many things, dare call
their Brethren Schismatiks. But I do ask thee Bernard, if yt John Baptist were
a schismatike for departing from the Leuitical priesthood, being born of ye
order? or brake he any good order, because he would not minister Baptism (ye
first sacrament of our religion) in an Ephod, or some other Priestly Garment?
Or was ye baptism of John, or of Philip, or of other ye Apostles worse,
because they ministered it in their usual garments? Either is baptism or any
other ministry, higher in the church than ye preaching of Gods word? which
yet your selves will not tie to these garments, as you do the sacraments? What
Egyptian blindness is this? Again, was Paul a Schismatik, for departing from
the Scribes and Phariseis? were ye Apostles schismatiks, for refusing the
washing of ye hands, and other traditions of the Governors? I trow not.
Neither then are we Schismatikes, for departing from the blasphemous
priesthood of Antichrist, the popish Pharisees, go we never so far from
them, the further, and faster that we depart from them, the more happy we are.
And let all men consider, that we depart in nothing from the godly
Bisshoppes, and other learned Brethren, but whereas they do lean to them,
which are their and our enemies. And surely, he is accursed of God in this
point, that either for fear, or favor, will maintain any of that Romish
harlottrie, to the offense and molesting of his brethren. Wherefore, I must
needs here speak, to all that unfeignedly love Christ, which can not but hate
Antichriste.

O ye flock of Christ and faithful soldiers of that heavenly Captain, Fly
from this painted harlot, and give her double Reave. 18. 4.
for that, which she has done to you. Delight not in her garish gear. Gods
terrible judgment, shall shortly be executed, upon this spiritual Sodom,
and upon all that remain in it, and upon them that look back thereunto,
because they will not receive naked Christ, but that colored harlot: bringing
shows, and trifles, to deceive ye world, which can have no concord, with the
chaste spouse of Christ, no more than can be, betwixt a pure Virgin, and a
filthy harlot, betwixt the mild Sheep, and the cruel Wolf. If the Aposile
Paul called it Concision which was Circumcision: and said unto Peter, that he
walked not uprightly, as did become the truth of the Gospel, for the using of
a Jewish ceremony: can they imagine that they walk without halting, that use
yet many popish Ceremonies? and still iet up and down like the Popes Churchme^,
in ye Romish rags abused to Idolatry? You ran well once when you ran from
them, as Paul says to the Galathians of the Jewish ceremonies. Therefore do
you run wrong, when you run to them again. If you build that which you have
destroyed, you show your selves transgressors. Who has called you back that
you do not obey the truth? This persuasion comes not of him that called you.
A little Leaven corrrupteth the whole lump. These cursed patches of Popery
and Idolatry, make all your doings unsavory. You grant, the Masses,
Mattens, Diriges, and whole Priesthood of the Papists, to be detestable and
accursed. Therefore their Altars, Altarcloathes, and all their instruments,
and garments, are under the same detestation, as the accursed leaven of that
blasphemous priesthood. The gold and silver and other ornaments are
forbidden to be brought into your houses. And may you wear them with safe
consciences, upon your backs? May you not bring them into your houses? And
shall they be ornaments in Gods house, to his Ministers, and holy Sacraments?
No, no. We are commanded, not to serve the Lord our God, as others did their
Idolles. Finally, did not God flaye with the sword of their enemies, his own
people, for this only cause, for that they kept about them, things belonginge
to the Idolles of the Iamnites.


Bern. Tushe, these old histories are for the Jews: they belong not unto us.


Mil. O blind Bayarde, have thou never read nor heard, That whatsoever is
written, is written for our learning? For these Jews are dead, and they that
live now, are out of Gods favor, so that these histories must teach us
Christians, what God hates. And can we imagine, that God is changed? or that
he hates Idolatry, or all that to it belongs, any less now since
Christ came into the world, than he did before? or can thou, or any of
thy side, show any cause, why God should hate it less now under the sight of
the Gospel? Wherefore if God so hate it now, as he did then, he abhors
yet still all the monumentes and instruments of the Idolatrers and Idolles, as
he did then. And therefore does require all them that will be accounted his
children, to do the like.


Bern. Why sir, if you be so scrupulous, you must burn and consume al with
fire, as Israel did the groaues, the altars, and other things about the
Idolles.


Mil. The Textes of Moses and Isaiah, before alleged, do bind our
consciences to abhor the Idolles, and their ornaments, as things polluted,
by the abuse, and abhorred of God: so that we may not have them in honor and
estimation, in the service of the true God, as the Idolaters had the^, in their
Idol service. Although, as the earth is the Lords, so may we make all things
to serve our necessity, doing al in the fear of ye lord, without offense, as
Paul does expound this doubt unto us. And though in the old law, the
outward work of destroying of the Idolles, and all their appurtenaunces, was
chiefly commanded to that people, and to their Governors, yet the full
detestation of all Idolatry, and of the monumentes and names of idolles, is a
law that must last for ever, in the hearts of the children of God, because God
their heavenly Father, hates it, as a denial of his Majesty, and calls the
creatures serving thereunto accursed, not in their nature, but in their abuse,
which corruption and curse, can not but remain, so long as the same in form,
fashion, and name, do remain, to a church service, as they did before. Now
seeing that we know, these popish garments obtruded to the church, to be such
as served to popish Idols, and to bear the name still, and the form of the
same, which Antichrists order has used, and are ye known garments of that
idolatrous priesthood, in the court and the country: have we not just cause
to abhor the^ as filthiness? To defy them as pollutions? To detest them as
Idolatrous? For does not Augustine, writing of like matters, say thus: I do
charge you before God and his Angels, that you go, neither to those devilish
feasts, which are in the church, and at the Fountains, or in the groves, and
if any thing be sent unto you from thence, abhor it and detest it, as though
you did see therein, the Devil himself and refuse it so wholly, that you
suffer nothing of that accursed feast to be brought into your house. For the
Apostle says, that yo cannot drink the cup of the Lord, 1. Cor. 10. 21.
and the cup of the Devils. Now these Popish garments, are patches left of
an idolatrous feast, worse in this point, than the flesh of the old feasts,
or the Fountayns, or the Trees, because the forms and names of these things,
were not changed. Wherefore if we may not bring them into our houses, our
Ministers may not wear them, in the administration of Christ's sacraments.


Bern. Why Miles you are too straight. Christ and his Apostles did come into
the churches both of the Jews, and of the Idolaters. Therefore S. Augustine,
will permit more, than you say.


Mil. I would wish them to come to the churches, as Christ did, to whip out ye
wicked: or as Paul did, to preach against their idolatries.


Bern. But it seems by your former communication, of the full abolishing of
things abused, to the Idols, that you would also have the churches destroyed.


Mil. In the days of King Henry the the eight (the hammer of the papists)
they began this thing, well in my judgment. For they defaced and destroyed
at that time all the Churches that were principally appointed for Idolles, as
Walsingham, and such Chappelles, and Abbey churches, as were not builded for
the administration of Christ's Sacraments, but for superstition and Idolatry.
Yet suffered they to stand still, such as were joining upon the same walls,
as in other places also, such parish Churches, as were appointed for the
assembling of the people, for prayer, and the Sacraments. In the which, though
all was corrupted, yet because of the necessity, that such places must be had:
Now when true prayer is, or should be restored, and the Sacraments reformed,
the true Christians may enter into these Churches, that were founded for
Christian people, as into their own goods, holden from them by thieves and
robbers, even as, after the same sort, we do pluck with violence unto our
usage, the books of the scriptures, which the papists did hide from us. And
thus do we enter into our own possession, and put out the thieves mark, that
had stolen these things from us. And that is the cause, that we may leave no
mark nor monument of superstition, or idolatry, in vestures, or gestures
amongst us, whereby those usurpers might renew their claim in any wile.
Thus did Moses, Ezechiah, and Josiah, and others, that are commended in the
scriptures. For the very names (and therefore all the garishe shows of the
Idolles) have always bin abominable to the servants of God, as David in the
person of the faithful confesses. And the Prophet Zephanaiah pronounces, yt
God will cut away from his people, the very names of Chemarims, and the
Idolatrous priests, and the remnau^tes of Baal. So that we have plain words,
for the destroying of all the remnaunts, especially the Idolatrous garments.
For of them speaks ye same Prophet by name also afterward: like as Isaiah
named the Ephod which was the priests garment: and Moses commands to
overthrow the Altars. Isaiah bids beat the^ in pieces, like chalk stones.
And God himself by many of his servants teaches to root out Idolatrous
monumentes.


Bern. Nay, but these are now no Idolatrous garments. For the Idols are
already taken away, and destroyed, and these garments are now commanded, to
be the liueries of the English Priests, and to be their ornaments, to decore
the church service, and the sacraments.


Mil. And I pray you what was Baals Altar? What were Baals Garments? What
were Baals Priests, after that Idol Baal was destroyed? Ceased they then to
be idolatrous Garments? They were at the least the remnauntes of Baal,
whereof Zephanaiah speaks. What is the Popish Altar, the Pixe, and
Superaltar, and such other monumentes of the Mass (I pray you, now when the
Mass is put down) but idolatrous monumentes, or idolatrous remnantes at the
least? What are the Massing gestures, and massing vestures, but open shows of
Idolatry? And shall these be ye ornaments of those christian ministers, yt have
abolished the Mass, and all Idols? Eliiah the Prophet, caused ye people in the
kings presence, to kill all ye priests of Baal. And think you that that King,
either would or could cause Eliiah straight ways to use, either the Gestures
or Vestures of those Idolatrous Priests? That good Priest Iehoiada, caused No
Idolator or his Garments to be suffefered.
the people also, to destroy the Altar of Baal, and slew Mattan the chief
priest of that Idol, upon his own Altar, and who durst command Iehoida,
to wear that priests gear for an ornament? Now, by what right then, may any
of our faithful Ministers be commanded, to wear any liueries, or tokens of
that Antichriste, whom they labor to abolishe, or of those Idolles, which
worthelie are destroyed? unless it be for the same cause, for the which Iehu
gives so great a charge to bring forth ye garments, and so to try who will
wear these poluted garments, and then to destroy them that will thus
dissemble, in their popish attire and ornaments.


Bern. Nay, God forbid, thou art to cruel, thy hand has bin to often in
blood. And do thou not see, that these garments do make the Ministers to
be reverenced and honored?


Mil. O Bernard, thou lackest more eyes than one, that talkest on this fond
fashion. I would be no more merciful, nor cruel, tha^ God him self is: who,
if he will have any sin terriblie punished by death, it is Idolatry. For
there is none that he more hates, or for the which he has given greater
charge to root out all remnauntes. And this is most plain to them, that have
eyes to see it, that there can come no more reverence, nor honor, to any of
Christ's Ministers and Sacraments, by these popish vestimentes, than to Eliiah
or Iehoiada, by the garments of Baals priests.

All the Papal ornaments, are none other things else, but the Ensigns of
his proud tyranny. And double wicked are they in this point. First, that
without Gods warraunte, they will wear these garments. Secondly, that herein
they seek their own honors, wherein they would show their holiness, and
show themselves most pompous, where they should appear most humble and abject.

Thus without Gods word, if our English gospellers, will needs follow the
popish pompous Priests, which were but Apes to Aaron, and to other garishe
Priests of the Idolatrers, for to win the^ honor, they shall be Simiarum
Simiae, the most foolish Apes of all other, who having Christ and his
Apostles lively set before To many of this opinion.
their eyes, still yet will follow counterfeites, forfaking light for
darkness. Finally, if any honor be obtained, it is this, that the
ignorant people is made to believe, that the old blasphemous Priesthood,
with their Mass, and the English priesthood with their communion, are both
one. And so it does maintain, the honor and dignity of the Popish
Priests, and their Sacrifice, but it dishonors Christ's true Ministers and
Sacraments. Christ our Savior and perfect scholemaster, forbids his, to
seek honor by pharisaicall shows. And must our Ministry seek honor and
credit, by popish shows and garments? As for Christ's holy Sacraments, they
can be made more honorable, by no man's inventions, much less by such
garments whereby they have bin so dishonored and defaced by the papists.


Bern. Though they bring none honor to our priesthood, (which I must needs
confess convicted by thy arguments) yet can thou not deny, I trow, but
that they bring a comely order.


Miles. Thou and thy fellows can nothing skill of Christ's Religion, whose
decency and order is not outward, in pomp, in garments, and in outward
shows, as is the Papists ordure: (to use Soldiers French) for then naked
Christ in ye cradle, his poor Baptism in the River, his poor last Supper, of
so few dishes, with his poor Apostles, his naked hanging upon the cross,
should be without order and despifed: and so they are contemptible, to ye sense
of the flesh, and judgment of the world. But the comelines, in Christ's
religion (my friend Bernard) stands in ye renouncing of al ye garish shows,
of the vain world, and in an inward holiness of ye mind, which brings forth a
modesty, and sobernes toward our Brethren, and a zeal, feruencie, and
diligence in doing our duties toward all men, without any confusion or
tumulte, as our vocation and place serves. And our master Christ therefore
takes away all those outward trifles, that were before his time, as things
uncomely and unmeet for his religion. For what a thing were this, to put on a
glorious coape for decency, or a fine rotchet of rains, when a man must go to
prison or burning? Christ's Apostles, and his true servants, are ever ready
to suffer with Christ, sharp bonds: and therefore will not mock the matter
with silken tippettes, and stoles about their necks, as do the papists. So
that I do much marvel, what decency, comelines, or order you do call it, yt
the Master must be tied with hempen coardes, and the servants must iette up
and down in flaunting silks, and sarcenettes. I pray thee Bernarde,
aunsweare of thy conscience: Had this bin a comely sight to see Christ on the
cross, or tied to a pillar, with hempen coardes, mourning for our sins, and
Peter and John shaken their silken coapes, rotchettes and tippettes in the
wind, and saying, Lo, we are Christ's Disciples and Scholars?


Bern. Nay, as thou say, that had bin a mad sight, and men would rather
have thought them to have bin Jewish priests, Scribes or Pharisees.


Mil. Thou say true. For these only were they, that sought comelines by
outward shows, to please the foolish world, which ever delights in
trifles, and they were against Christ, because he spoke against such things.


Bern. Yet must they be borne with all for a space, hereby to give milk unto
children, say they.


Mil. O my friend, al is poison that plucketh us from the simplicity in Christ
and his poverty. Therefore is al popery not milk, but poison, the root, the
stalk, and branches. Therefore it must be clean weeded forth of Christ's
garden, or else will it grow again, and choke the good herbs: as we have to
much experience. And we have borne so long, that England waxes worse and
worse in life, and in religion.


Bern. Paul did be are yet with the Jews a long season.


Mil. It is a good saying, to this purpose, that the old mother Synagogue, was
to be buried with honor. But we owe no such honor to the Roman Antichrist.
God did appoint Circumcision and other Ceremonies to the Jewish church: but
that where of Babylon, that made all the Kings of the earth drunken with her
golden cupp and painted colors, appointed these trifles, to her bastardly
brood. And yet Paul rebuked Peter for using these ceremonies with ye Jews:
and he him self refused to circumcise Titus, when the false brethren sought to
restrain his liberty, and to bring him into bondage. To such would he not
give place one hour, Gal. 2. 11. And must Christ's Ministers give place
thirty years to Antichrist in his traditions? or yield so many years to
them, that labor to heal his wound? God forbid. And Paul did never yield, nor
Peter neither to any Idolaters, whom they converted to Christ, to wear their
garlandes, or other priestlie attire, to win any of the^: but always cried,
We come to call you from these vanities, to turn to the living God, and to
Christ crucified, and to the receiving of the spirit, that ye waske no longer
in carnal ceremonies, concision, or other beggarly works, elements of this
world, precepts of men. etc. And the way to win the Idolaters, is (as
Augustine says, and experience teaches in many places) to forsake their
solemnities, and let go God grant we may do this from our hearts.
their toys. Then if they agree not to our truth, let them he ashamed of
their fewnes. Thus have they worn out the papists, in many reformed
Churches, and their garments also: where (by our staggeringe stays, now
forward, now backewarde) they that bear the faces of papists, swarm
amongst us, and draw many backwarde, to their madness.


Bern. But this seems a strange thing to many, that men make this crime so
grievous now, whereas in K. Edwardes days, this apparel was used of godly
men.


Mil. That was but the first show of the light, whereof thou talkest. We
must grow to further perfection. How be it, even then, good men also did
refuse it, as Hoper and Latimer, Bradforde, and many others, though not so
famous. And These Popish Garments refused in K. Edvvardes time.
Ridley him self (which for a space, by simplicity was deceived, as he in
part confesses in his Epistle to Bishop Hoper) at his death calls them,
abominable and foolish, and to fond for a vice in a play. And how
violently and disdainefullie, were all good men, by disgrading, turned forth of
those rags, so soon, as the patched Papists, came in place? Again, the
manner of fast which John's disciples used, becing good men (though it were not
Idolatrous, as these things are) was not therefore to be exacted of Christ's
disciples. But rather, for that it was an observation of man's devise,
corruptelie abused by the Pharisees, no more meet for the sincerity of the
Gospel, than old barelles for new wine, or new clothe, for an old garment,
our Master Christ did reject it. So now the filling in, and clowting up of
old popish apparel, to the new pureness of the Gospel, must either cause
corruption, to burste and to lose the liquoure that is received, or else
separation, to make the renting of the old from the new more evident.


Bern. Master Examinator says, that you have none learned of your side, but
such as have bin brought up in profane occupations.


Mil. He is to impudent, that is not ashamed so to report, seeing it is so well
known that there be of our side, which are notably well learned, some having
few fellows, or none in England, which may stop the mouths of such
slaunderers. Yea there is a great number, that will not fear to defend this
cause against him, if he will set aparte his popish arguments, sword and
power. Besides that, we have the example of all the Those that have eyes to see,
let them see.
reformed churches, and of all the great learned there. And there is none of
our side, (God be praised) but that he has some co^petent knowledge, of the
scriptures, and in life very honest, in comparison of your number: who for the
most part, can not read a true sentence, and are either popish priests, or
Monks, or Friars, or Alehouse haunters, or boys and laddes, and drunkardes,
and dolces, that will wear a fools hood for livings sake. As for ours, they
do know Christ, and labor to do so, more and more. Ours do hate the Roman
Antichrist, and labor to pluck out, all those wicked weeds, which yours in
corners do chearishe, all that they can, seeking nothing but like greedy
dogs, how to fill their idle paunches: And where the wicked number take part
wholly together, in any controversy, the matter is much to be suspected. Let
us have seven godly, as his name be praised, we have seven hundred, that join
with us. And therefore are not afraid to enter into the Arcke at Gods
appointement, and to forsake the wicked multitude, that do but halte in Gods
business.


Bern. O Miles, thou may not talk thus against my Lord of Canturburies good
grace, nor us his ministers. Though many be unlearned boys, and such as thou
haste said: yet come they into their benefices orderly, either by the Bishopp
of the Diocese, or by my Lord of Canturburies good grace his dispensation and
license.


Mil. I will not now treat, what is the true order of the making of Christ's
Ministers, of their vocation, probation, and election, by the rule of Gods
word, and the order of the primitive Church: but with that old Bishop of
Lincoln, called Robertus Old Robert Bishop of Lincoln.
Lincolnie^sis, Robert of Lincoln, that wrote more than three hundred and
twenty years ago, before any Lord Bishop, or Bishops grace was named: and
reasoned against the Pope, and proved him an heretic, for doing the like. I
will reason thus with thee Bernarde, against thy glorious Bishops grace. And
I demand first, what call thou heresy?


Bern. Heresy is an opinion invented by man's fantasy, being contrary to the
holy scripture, openly taught and stoutelie mainteyned.


Mil. Thou say well. Now consider what follows. To commit the cure of
souls to a Boy, or to a wicked or unlearned They swarm throughout the la^d,
God redres it when his will is.
dolte, is the opinion and the pronounced sentence of thy Bishop of
Canturburies grace. It is invented by man's fantasy for money, and it is
against the Scriptures, and it is openly taught and published. For it is with a
solemn seal, carried abroad in writing, and confirmed, and it is stoutelie
maynteyned. For no man may withstand it, but he shall be suspended and
excommunicate. Therefore to who^ this definition of Heresy pertayneth, he is an
Heretic, whether he be Pope, or Archbishop. This good Bishop Robert of
Lincoln says furthermore, That those Priests or Pastors, which come as it
were, in ye place of christ, and do not preach the word of God, although
they had no further wickedness, yet are they Antichrists, and Satan
transfigured into the Angel of light, thieves, and robbers, the killers and
the destroyers of the Sheep, making the house of God a den of thieves.


Bern. Indeed I cannot well deny this, that thou say: that many of us are
worse learned, and that is blame worthy in us. But I have read that obedience
is better then Sacrifice, and we are more obedient, and this is your great
fault, that you will not be obedient to the higher powers, in these policies
and such like.


Mil. That Text of Samuel is wrong wrested, and makes sore against your
side, for it is, the precise obedience, to Gods word, that is there
commanded, and to add nothing thereunto, by our foolish intents (as king
Saul did) are we there charged. Now, for obedience to policy, I do answer
that the popish priesthood, and the Evangelical Ministry, and the making
and appointing of them, and the form of the Sacraments are not belonging to
policy, but ad cultum Diuinum, only and wholly. In yt which, he that passes
Gods word, deserves Gods wrath, as Saul did, not only by the leaving of the
remnauntes of the Amalechites, but also because he was to bold in Gods
business, touching the Sacrifice.


Bern. Yet seeing some men (which be now counted amongst these Ministers)
did in King Edwardes days, use this apparel, having then a feruente zeal and
good conscience, and now refuse it: it seems not that they are moved with
zeal and conscience, but with contention, desire of novelties, and
singularity.


Mil. Paul served GOD with fervent zeal, and a pure conscience from his
progenitors, yet coming to more knowledge, did find and confess those
things, to be hurtful and vile, which he had esteemed and used as
profitable. And albeit that he had circumcised Timothy, yet would he not
suffer Titus to be circumcised. Eue^ so some such as proceed in knowledge and
experience, do find this apparaile hurtful and vile, which before they
thought profitable, or at the least not hurtful at all. And albeit charity did
move the^, to bear with the weak, as it did Paul to circumcise Timothy, yet
faithfulness to keep the truth of the Gospel, where it has bin longer
preached, causes the same Preachers not to yield, to any force or
importunity, after the example of Paul, that would not circumcise Titus, not
of any singularity, and desire of novelties, but of faythefulnesse, zeal,
and good conscience.


Bern. Yet the Bishops being tried men, of great zeal and knowledge, think it
meet, that your Ministers should follow them, or else be put to silence.


Mil. The Apostles of Christ, seeing a man casting forth Diuelles in the name
of Christ, would have forbidden him, because he followed not them. But our
Savior Christ says: Forbid him not. Now these our Ministers follow
Christ and his Apostles. Who then dare forbid them? The Apostle Paul says,
That some preach Christ through envy and strife, to increase my bands, and
some of good will. What the^ says he? Yet Christ is preached all manner of
ways, whether it be under a pretense, or sincerely, and I therein rejoice,
yea and will rejoice. Thou may see therefore (O Bernarde) that they are lead
with a contrary spirit, that put them to silence, who preach Christ as
purelie as ever men did, since the time of the Apostles: the very Bishops
their enemies, being All upright men confess this to be true.
taken to witness. What though they will not follow them in popish trifles?
Is this a just cause, why Christ by them should not be preached? Was there
ever the like example in Christ's Church, that none should preach Christ,
unless he would wear such a cappe and a tippet, such a Cope and a
Surplesse? Of Antichrists munckerie, or other corrupt times we talk not,
neither in a Christian reformation, may they be once looked back unto. Let
them repent therefore, that hinder the preaching of Christ, for any such cause.
For Christ will not suffer it vnaduenged.


Bernarde. Yet because al Bishops in England, and many good Preachers which
once had refused this apparel, yet now by occasion, have received it again?
and but a few there be, that yet still refuse it: Therefore it seems to be
more expedient, and less danger of offense in the Church, to bring a few of
small estimation, to a conformity with the Bishops, and their great number
so esteemed, than to suffer inferiors, to differ from the Bishops, and
chief Prelates.


Mil. When Peter and Paul were at Antioche, they both did eat meat with the
Gentiles. But at the coming of certain from James, Peter fearing them of the
circumcision, withdrew himself, so that other Jews there, and Barnabas also,
were brought into the same dissimulation. Then Paul withstoode Peter openly,
as worthy of reproach, for giving of an example to the Gentiles, to keep
Jewish observations. Wherefore if right proceeding in the truth of the Gospel,
have made both these parties once to agree, in leaving of Popish apparaile, as
it did Paul and Peter, in leaving of Jewish rites, and then fear and respect
of some persons, move now the one part, (as Peter was moved) to shrink back
to rites rejected: in such a case, the most expediente way, to avoid all
danger, is without regard of person, multitude, fear, or favor, to keep
and maintayn the truth of the gospel with sincerity and liberty, inseperable
from the same, as did Paul at that time.


Bern. But christian obedience, requires the observation of all things
indifferent, commanded by authority. And these things (they say) are
indifferent.


Mil. Washing of hands amongst the Jews, was a thing much more indifferent
of it self than this apparaile, and not so much Of indifferent things note.
abused of the Pharisees, as this of the papists. Yet this being commanded
and urged by them, that had authority, our Master Christ defe^deth the not
observing of it, and charge the maintainers of it, with the breaking of Gods
commau^dements, for their own traditions, and with hypocrisy, and the blind
leading the blind. And so concludes (as may appear evidently) that the
authority, and obedience of christians, stands neither in commanding, nor
observing, but rather in rooting up all superstitious abuses.


Bern. But the case stands thus, that authority will not. Now if the Prince
might be thereto persuaded, the Bishops seem, that they would be glad, to
abolishe these Garments, and all such as thou speak of. But if the Prince
will force al Ministers to receive them, or else put them from their livings
and ministry: then it seems better to keep the ministry and livings, and
the liberty of sincere doctrine, with this apparaill, than without it to lose
all, and to leave the church destitute, and so sore offend the Prince, that
has restored the preachers and the preaching of Christ's Gospel.


Mil. Thus have the London Ministers, the hearts and consciences of the
Bishops, of their side, by thy grant. Now if ye Bishops and preachers,
respecting God and the cause only, have wished and persuaded not to use this
apparel, as Ioab did, not to number the people: and yet respecting ye Princes
commandment, contrary to their former mind should yield indeed, as Ioab
did, then were it to be feared, such sequel of plagues over ye people, with
great grief to the Prince, as was then in Judah. These things thus considered,
move many good preachers, to be co^stante and sincere, as in mind and
doctrine, so in conversation and manners, reproving and refusing all popish
trashe, especially the furniture of that Idolatrous, blasphemous, and
traiterous priesthood, most pestilent enemy to al christian authority, and
Princely dignity. And therefore many good Preachers, A Christian aunsvvere,
and ought to be practiced of al true Preachers.
be rather resolved, for preservation of the Prince, and people, from the wrath
of God, by losing of livings and lives, to confirm their doctrine, truly
taught, than keeping livings with flattery, endaungering the Prince and
people, to build and bring again yt, which by faithful preaching they have
destroyed. So can not such preachers be put to silence, their deeds still
declaring and co^firming their doctrine: nor ye church by the^ destitute, who
are so ready to confirm true doctrine with sincere rites and manners, which
ought to give no offense to a godly Prince or people, whose safety next unto
gods glory is chiefly herein sought.


Bern. I heard M. Doctor say, that ye London ministers made many arguments,
but they could not prove their Minors. I pray thee what meant he by that
word, for I understand him not. And what were their arguments tell me, if thou
know. For I do not so much mislike your side, as I did: thou do answer
me so fully to al yt I demand.


Mil. I will plainly tell thee, some of their arguments: and thou shall find in
the^ so good reason, that thou shall not be able to deny them, whatsoever M.
Doctor or M. Proctor do say. They reason thus, as thou may see in this Table:
where thou may perceive the first sentence of the argument, to be called the
Mayor, and the second the Minor. And the Minors for the most part, are open
to the senses, and experience of all men, that will not be blind of
wilfulness, so that they need no further demonstration, but only
Geometrical, such as master Beza uses with that Ass Heshutius. As for the
first Minor, that this Popish ordure does not edify, we have the experience
in all men's sight, by Paul's Church in London, and the glorious shows there,
like as in all the Cathedral Churches in England, where these things are most
used, the people are least edified in Christ, because they continewe ignorant
of Christ, being satisfied with their old superstitious shows, and therefore
are most unready, and unmeet to receive any profit, by Christ's words and
Sacraments. Where contrariwise, in all such Churches, where these things are
cast away, the people grow more in knowledge, and come by greater numbers,
and with greater reverence, to receive the holy Sacraments.


Bern. I hear many say so, I can not deny.


Mil. But learn once to see, with thine own eyes. Whether do thou think,
that the Copes, and the Surplesses, the Piping and the singing within Paul's
Church, or the preaching only, without this gear, in the Churchyard, does
more edify?


Bern. Truly no man dare deny, but that the word does more edify. But
these things also do edify.


Mil. To popery peradventure, which was the use whereunto they were ordained.
And therefore in Christ they can not edify, as by thine own answer (seeing
they have Gods word within, and without ye church, and that which is without,
having no popish ordure, does more edify) it follows by reason, that these
popish things do not edify. Like as also to know, what can edify, and
build any thing, it is necessary, to bring things of like substance. For
chafe, straw, and stubble, can not build nor edify with any precious
metal: carnal things can not make the perfect building of things
spiritual. These things are chafe, and the word of God is pure wheat. What
has chafe and wheat to do together? Christ is the Spiritual Rock and
foundation, unto whom we must be edified by spiritual means, joining
spiritual things to spiritual, as the Apostle says. And do thou not
believe, that Christ our Savior knew what could edify, and that also, he
would have appointed us these things, if they could edify?


Bern. I have a good opinion of our master Christ.


Mil. O Bernarde, it is but an opinion in deed, and no perfect faith; that any
can have that will not rest upon Christ wholly, and think his doctrine and
doings sufficient, for our instruction in all things. But lo, here is the
table of some of their arguments.

Mayor. Al things in the Church ought to edify. 1. Corin. 14. Al things ought
to be done to edifying. 2. Cori. 13. According to the power which the Lord
has given me, to edify and not to destroy.
Minor. These things do not edify They hinder the simple, Bucer in Epist. Page
7. They make ye papists more obstinate, Bucer in 18. Matthew.
Therefore they ought not to be in the Church. Precepts of men must not be
received in religion and worshipping of God Isaia 29. Because this people draw
near me with their mouth, etc. Mat. 15. In vain do they worship me, etc.
Mayor. These are precepts of men They were taken from the Jews or Gentiles,
Glossa ordinar. in Ezekiel. 44. Durand. ration. divine. 3. Plati. in vita Siluest.
Poli. li. 4. Mani. Cu. Minor. Therefore they ought not to be received in
Religion, and worshipping of God. Offenses and superstitions ought to be
avoided. Matt. 18. Whosoever shall offend. etc. 1. Cor. 8. If the meat
offend thee. etc. 1. Cor. 10. All things are lawful, but. etc. Ro^. 14. It is
good neither to drink wine. etc. Isa. 52. Depart, depart ye, go out from
thence, and touch no unclean thing. etc. 2. Cor. 6. What concord has Christ
with Belial? Reuela. 18. Go out of her my people. etc.
Mayor. Minor. These orders offend, and are superstitious. Bucer in 8. Math.
The suke warm gospellers know well enough, that Antichrists Ceremonies, that
is to say, such as have bin brought in besides the word of God, are of no
force. And because they are externe things, wherein we have liberty, they will
use them still: not regarding that many things are laweful, which are not
expedient: and that your liberty must serve others, whom they offend, and
also obscure ye glory of Christ. For they confirm the ignorant in error.
They make bold the defenders of the^, the professes enemies of Christ: and
they overthrow the faith of the weak. Therefore they ought to be avoided.
Mayor. Christian liberty must be retained Gala. 2. To whom we gave not place
by subjection for an hour, that the truth of the Gospel. etc. Galat. 5.
Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and
be not intan. etc. Colos. 2. Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the
ordinances of the world. etc.
Minor. These are against Christian liberty Bucer. in Epist. page 2. Item in
18. Mat. Augustine. in Epist. 119. says, That men's presumptions are more
intolerable, the^ the burdens of the Law. Therefore they must be rejected. I.
j. Mayor. No Idolatrous remnauntes nor momuments may be retained. Exodus 34.
Deuterono. 7. Deutero. 12. Deuteron. 13. Iosu. 23. 2. King. 23. Isaia. 27.
Isaia. 30. Ezekiel. 6. Zophon. 1. August. tom. 10. Sermon. 6. The Christians are
bound to do, as the Jews were commanded. Deuteronomy. 7.
Minor. These are Idolatrous monumentes and remnauntes The popish Priesthood
was Idolatrous, whose garments these were, whereby they are known Idolatrous
remnauntes. Therefore they may not be retained. Nothing may be thruste into the
Church, contrary or besides the Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 4. Ye shall not add. etc.
Deuteronomy. 5. Ye shall not decline. etc. Iosue. 1. Neither to the right hand. etc.
1. Sam. 13. Thou have done foolishlie. etc. 1. Sam. 15. To obey is better. etc.
Iere. 23. What is ye chafe to ye wheat? etc. Ezec. 13. Thus says the Lord.
etc. 2. Timoth. 3. All Scripture. etc. 2. Epist. Johan. If any bring not. etc.
Mayor. These are contrary and besides the Scriptures. Deuteronomy. 12. Thou shall
not do so, to ye lord. etc John. 4. Neither in this mountain. etc. 2. Cor. 6.
Be not unequally yoked. etc. Act. 15. That they abstein from filthiness. etc.
Gal. 5. Stand fast. etc.
Minor. Therefore they may not be thrust into the Church.


Bern. I thank thee heartily, I never understood so much Logic, nor so much
of this matter before. But yet me think the Minors are not so evident as the
Majors are, Therefore I pray thee Miles, declare them a little further, and
more evidently unto me.


Mil. I will do it willingly. For I would feign call thee and all others, to
the simplicity of Christ's gospel, from this hypocrisy of garments.


Bern. Why call thou it hypocrisy? Thou speak far worse of it, than
the London Ministers do.


Mil. I speak rudely, like a blunt soldier, but yet truly. For
undoubtedly, to make a show of their profession, how holy The Apostles
never sought to bring any estimation to theword by apparel.
folks they were, or to get them reverence by garments, it was a point of
the Pharisees, or of the Idolaters, of the Chemarims, of Cybeles Priests, of
the fond Philosophers, as the Cinici or Stoickes, or finally, of the
Heretics, as the Manichees, the Montanistes, or the Nestorians, and
Nouatians. But the true Saints never did it, that we can read. And our
Master Christ, his Prophets and Apostles, were most troubled by such, as
most main tayned this outward gear: as now are in England his chief
servants, and most worthy, faythefull and paynfull Ministers of his holy
word: with whom I, and many other that fear GOD, desire to have our
portion, rather than with ye proud Prelates, that persecute them, unless they
do right speedily repent.


Bern. No more of this gear, it is odious. But tell me more of this first
Minor, how these things do not edify.


Mil. Though ye proof should be required rather of thee, and thy side, that
hold the affirmative: yet lo, I refuse not. And thou may perceive by my
talk, and by all these bruites abroad, and by the bitter contention that is
fallen amongst the learned, that these things do not edify. For such things
as raise contention in the Church of Christ, do not edify. These rags have
raised such a contention in England, as never was, since the gospel was in
England. Therefore they do not edify. They choke the synceritie of the
gospel: they stay and stop the course of the gospel: they declare them to
be halters that we are them: they join hands, and draw the yoke with the
wicked Papists: they declare no true sigues of repentance, whylest they are
not ashamed of the shows, of their old whorishe superstitions: they give
Christ a reed in his hand, and attire him with a crown of thorn, as though
he were unable to appointe his Ministry and Sacraments without men's
devises: they The defenders of these ceremonies have their own consciences to
witness these things to be true.
take away the difference of the old and new Testament: they keep the people
in blindness, and in the heavy clogge of conscience, that they think still,
that no Sacraments are rightly ministered without them: they cause Christ's
servants, the true Preachers, to be evil spoken of, as the traditions
aforetime, did Christ and his Apostles. How dare any man affirm then, for
very shame, that these rags do edify? And if they do so, they must bring
more, than their own bare authority, least they be found subject to this
sentence of Isaiah, Woe unto them, that speak good of evil, and evil of good:
which put darkness for light, and light for darkness. Woe unto the^ that are
wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own sight, which build again
ye things that they have destroyed, and make themselves transgressors.


Bern. I pray thee refrain from these raging heates, so can I like thy talk
very well.


Mil. These are no carnal passions, nor rages as thou supposest. But as my
sayings have their ground of Gods holy word: so, None ca^ be to earnest in a
good cause, for God and his Church.
I thank God, I do feel the zeal of gods glory, and the love of my
Brethren, lead me thus to speak. And the very hatred of that Roman
Antichriste, and the grief of heart, to see the godly Preachers, by this vile
occasion, persecuted, spoiled, and prisoned by their brethren, and rayled upon
by the papists and Neutralles, and their places occupied by such, as will
only wear Papists and the veriest asses most ready to the rags of Rome.
the garments, may trouble any Christian conscience. And mark who are the
most ready to wear this popish gear. Even the papists, the most enemies
of the Gospel: for they would never yet refuse them, but by their crafty
packing, have caused many other, that have no courage for the truth, but go
backwarde not forward, to turn to them, contrary to the precepte of God by
Jeremiah: Let them return unto thee, but return thou not unto them. And I will
make thee unto this people a strong brazen wall. They shall fight against thee,
and not prevail. etc. Behold what the way is to edify: to turn wholly from
the wicked unto God only: as the Lord says again by Jeremiah: O Israel,
if thou return, return unto me. Shall my Heritage be unto me, as a bird of
diverse colors? O says the Lord by his Prophet Hosea, Ephraim has mixed him
self among the Heathen. Israel is as a cake on the hearth not turned. Again,
They return, but not to the most High. They are like a deceytfull Bow.
Whereby we may learn, that the whole turning unto God, from all
superstitions, and not the patched turning is, that which does edify.

The way to edify in Christ's Kingedome, is described in these words: In
that day (says the Lord of Hosts) I will cut off the names of the Idolles
out of the land, and they shall be no more remembered. And I will cause the false
prophets, and the unclean Spirits to depart out of the land. And when any
shall yet prophecy, Christ's church can not away with names of Idolatries,
much less with their ceremonies
his father and his mother shall kill him. And in that day the Prophets shall
be ashamed of their visions, neither shall they wear, their roughe garments
to deceive. Behold now that the spreading of Christ's Kingdom, is to take
away the very names, and all monumentes and remembraunces of the Idolles, and
to make the false Teachers ashamed of their Garments, wherein they have mocked
God and his people.

Thou may easelie perceive hereby (Bernard) that to appointe these garments
as ornaments for Christ's Ministers and Sacraments, is not the right way to
edify Christ's people: no more than a skarre Crow can geather Crows, or a
Wolves skin, can please the sheep. Our Savior Christ, took away the
Garments, appointed by his father, because in his spiritual kingdom, they
could nothing edify. And shall Antichrists Garments and toys therein
edify? Christ rejects all the outward form of worship, both of the Jews
and Gentiles: and says, That his father will from thence forth be worshipped
in Spirit and truth. And he knew the best of al others, what could edify.

Furthermore, thus bitterly to strive for the mayntenaunce of Popish
garments, after the Pope is banished: for massing garments, after the Mass
is abolished: for the rags of that Idolatrous and blasphemous Priesthood,
where we say, It is detested and abiured, it is a great madness. Therefore it
can not edify.

And this mayntenaunce of the monuments of their old spiritual fornication,
does declare that men have not yet repented of their old spiritual
fornication. Wherefore this does not edify. No (of the contrary) it makes
to edification, to bring the popish priesthood into full detestation. But
that can never be, so long as their garments are appointed by authority, to
bring honor and reverence, to Christ's ministry, and Sacraments: the
strumpettes garishe gear, to attire the most chaste Virgin: Antichrists
whorishe smock, to Christ's pure spouse, how can this edify?


Bern. Stay thy self, thou will never have done. Go now to the second, that
these are precepts of men.


Mil. Why? doubtest thou of that? They are not of God. For it is not written in
Gods book, that the Ministers of GOD, should wear the garments of the
Idolatrous priests: but the contrary, as is partly declared, and shall be made
more plain hereafter. Therefore not being of God, they must either come from
man, or from the Devil, or from both together.


Bern. Nay, there be many things, that are left indifferent: as all the
creatures of God, may be indifferently used, or not used. And therefore by
authority may be commanded.


Mil. Besides that in matters of Religion, Indifferent things made
intolerable four vvayes.
men's commandments are vain: There be four things which may make things
indifferent by creation, not indifferent to be used of Christians. The first
is, If that they 1
bear the marks of the Idolles, as strange forms, only used to yt purpose:
or strange names used only in the idolatrous service, as Cope, or Surplesse.
The second, if they be by usage superstitious: so that unto them 2
is attributed any kind of holiness, as though without them, the sacraments
could not be ministered. Thirdly, if they be commanded 3
against christian liberty, to bring Christian men into bondage, that they may
not refuse such things, as are against their conscience. Fourthlie, if they
give any offense. In the which four things, against 4
these garments, we may take exceptions. And for these and such like causes,
the Apostles forbadde both Jews and Gentiles, even all the Christians, things
offered unto Idolles, in their first Decrees: to teach by their factes and
deeds the same, that they had spoken in words: that the Idolles and all that
to them belonged, ought to be abhorred of all true Christians. And therefore in
the same place, it is called (...), the filthiness of Idolles.


Bern. Paul gives leave to eat ye meat offered unto Idolles, afterward.


Mil. Yea, after this there arose a doubt amongst the brethren, whether they
might eat such flesh, as was sold in the market, and so eaten at the tables
amongst other meats, unknown to have come from any Idol. Which was a far
other thing than the using of these things about the Sacraments. To this the
Apostle answers, that as the earth and all that therein is, belongs to the
Lord: so may man use al meats, and creatures, receiving them with thanks
giving, at the Lords hand, to his glory, without any further care, whence
they come, so that none be thereby offended. But if any man do tell thee, that
it is a thing once dedicate to the Idolles, thou may not use it. And hereby
it appears, that the creatures (though they have bin abused) that bear no
name, nor form of any abuse, neither give Note this.
offense by the using of the^, may be retained. But if they have the form,
show, or name of things Idolatrous, they are to be abhorred for two causes.
The one, least we should seem, to have any part or communion with 1
the Idolaters: which were against the glory of our God. The other, least the
weak brother be boldened, to use the things sacrificed 2
to Idolles. And so thy weak Brother perish, through thy knowledge, for whom
Christ died.

Thus may we note two sorts of Idolothites, or things belonging to Idols,
Some Two sort of Idolothites.
have their names and forms changed from common usage, and so by form and
name, do retain, the memorial of the idolles: whose 1
names and memory God will have to be abolished. Such are properly called the
momuments of Idolatry. These ought by Gods law and man's law, here in
England, to be done away, or with dishonor, at te least, to be defaced. The
second, are such, as neither are altered in form nor name, the which 2
may still be used: as the flesh sold in the market, and eaten at the table,
and these may Nota.
be called indifferent: so that in the use of the^, no brother be offended, nor
against his conscience urged. But the creatures that are called gods, are
accursed and may not be used. All the Idolles were creatures, yet by Moses
and Paul they are called Devils. Therefore the partaking with them, is the
partaking with Deuilles: and the very places, where the Idolles were
worshipped, were detestable, and are called hell afterward. Their great Idol,
whereunto King Ahaziah sent, in honor called Baalzebub, by his worshippers,
was, by the godly Jews that hated Idolatry, called the chief of the
Deuilles, and so his name continued. Such hatred did they bear to all things
apperteyning to the Idolles. Therefore bids Moses to destroy all those
Idolatrous monumentes. And Isaiah bids us to count their idolatrous Ephod
(which was ye chief garment of their Priest) as a menstruous cloute, and
utterly defy it. Therefore this gear, that bears the names and forms
still of their Idolothites, can not be named amongst the things indifferent,
though we grant the substance, and matter of them, of it self indifferent:
neither can they be commanded to be used in the ministry or Sacraments,
which are matters of Religion in any wise.


Bern. Yes, If the Prince command it.


Mil. Gideon was a Prince, who made and commanded an Ephod, a rich robe, or
garment for a Priest, and appointed it for his city Ophra. But this was the
cause of the destruction of him and his house. For as we read Abimelech, the
son of his Concubine, did usurp the Kingdom, and did slaye seventy and
niene of his brethren, the sons of his Father Gideon, upon one stone. Then
this Abimelech, after he had Good intenrs without vvarra^t displease God.
thus cruelly slain his brethren, and his Mothers kindred that had set him
up, and destroyed the City Shechem, that had made him King, he had his
deaths wound by a Woman, yet would he have his Page to run him through,
with his sword most desperately, and so the whole family perished most
miserably. And no man can allege any other cause against Gideon, but only
that which the holy Ghost gives, that he made this Priests garment, and
appointed it for his City, without any warraunte of Gods word, of a good
intent only. So sore and perilous a thing it is, to deal in Gods matters, by
man's fantasy.

Nadab and Abihu, for the taking of fire, which God had not commanded, were
sodenlie burned with fire from heaven. Vzza was suddenly slain, because he
would help forward Gods work, by his good intent, without Gods warraunte.
King Saul deals in sacrifice (a matter of religion) without Gods
commandment, but (by ye same wise policy, that is alleged for the
garments) to reteyne the people together: yet for this cause loses he his
kingdom. Also King Vzziah is stricken with Leprosy, and cast out with shame,
because he deals in sacrifices (matters of Religion) without gods word, by
his Princely authority. Thus God will have the Princes to know, that they
are but men, and therefore that they may not meddle in his matters, without his
word and commandment. For as Samuel said to Saul, so says he still unto
all: Has the Lord as great pleasure in Sacrifices, as when his voice is
harkened unto and obeyed? Behold, to obey is better than sacrifice: and to
hearken, is better, than the fat of Rams. For transgression and rebellion
against Gods word, is as witchcrafte and idolatry. Wherefore thus says God
by his servant Moses, to Kings and to al others: That which I do command
thee, that only shall thou do: thou shall put nothing too it, nor take
nothing from it. Lo, this is the ground of true Religion.

And in matters of policy also, there must be some discretion. For the Prince
commanded the two Captains and their hundred soldiers, to fetch Eliiah unto
him, a thing that may seem indifferent, but the fire of God devoured them. So
Kings have their law how far they shall command. And the subjects by the
same may know, how to obey. For God when he sets up Princes, has not
given over his own right and authority. They are but his stewardes and
Bayliues, to see his will executed, in all things, not their own lusts and
pleasures. In evil commandments therefore to disobey them, is none injury
unto them.


Bern. Me think I smell a ratte in this gear. All is not gold that
glittereth. But I pray thee tell me, how thou do prove them, precepts of
men, as thou waste about to do.


Mil. I say they have no ground of gods word, therefore they are precepts of
men. God never limited any several garment for his Ministers to be known
by, in the new Testament, therefore they are plain precepts of men, and
plants by the heavenly Father not planted. The papists them selves will
grant them to be precepts of men. Me think therefore, the gospellers should
not deny it.


Bern. They deny that they are such precepts of men, as Christ speaks of,
to be brought in, for Gods service in religion.


Mil. Amongst the papists, they were brought in, and are used for his
service, in religion, as their own books and doings do testify. Now the
papists are men: who according to ye diversity of their sects, Regulare and
irregulare, appointed the diversity of garments: some for the church, some
for holy water, as the Surplesse, Stole, or Tippet: some for censing the
Idols, as the Copes: black for the dead: read for ye Martyrs: white for the
Virgins. Now all these superstitious trifles, are precepts of evil men:
therefore of men.


Bern. But not in Gods service and religion.


Mil. I do grant. For God will not be served by such things: neither will
Christ allow them in his Religion. And therefore are they precepts of men,
having no allowaunce of Gods word: nor of Christ's Gospel, who neither cares
for these garments: nor any other popish shows, in the ministration of his
holy Sacraments, or any action of his Religion. Neither do they set forth
the glory of GOD, nor his word, nor profitte, but hinder the souls of men
from the true service of God in Spirit and truth. And as always, wicked men
have most urged their own precepts: These traditions more urged then God his
commandments.
so at this day these precepts are more urged, than Gods holy
commandments. Would to god there were not to many examples, both in the
Cities and in the Countries, to prove this matter true. To wear a vestiment,
is a precepte of men. And why not a Cope? An Albe is a precepte of men: and why
not a Surplesse? A Stole is a precept of men: and why not a Tippet? etc. Al
patches of Popery, are precepts of men. Therefore the priesthood, being
taken away, (as the Author to the Hebrews says) it is of necessity, that
the laws pertaining to the Priesthood, should be taken away. So that if
this were a law pertaining to the popish priesthood, to wear a Surplesse at
the ministration of the Sacraments, and at the saying of their Mattins, or
their Euensonge in their religion, now should it cease from amongst them,
which have renou^ced that popish and blasphemous priesthood, and that false
religion: whose body and substance (if they wholly hate) they must needs
abhor all the patcheries that appertaigne to ye same religion. For the
popish priesthood is like the lousy and patched cloak of a filthy beggar.
Patcheries of popish remnaunts a^to be cast off with the Pope him self.
Now, what a fondnes were this for two wise men, or for thee and me, that
pytying a poor beggar, had pulled off his patched cloak from him, to give him
a better: and afterward we twain should fall together by the ears, and the
one cast the other in prison, for the refusing to wear, those lousy rags:


Bern. Surely I would be loath to be in thy company, if thou should wear
any patches of that lousy gear: therefore I would be loath to co^pel thee to
it by prisons.


Mil. Lo, here is the strife, betwixt our Gospellers. They have put down that
patched popish Mass, yet will they have lousy patches of it. For the
Surplesse is a Massing garment, by the Papists own books. They have put down
that Antichristian priesthood, and they will fight for his coats. They are
far more foolish, than our fellows the soldiers, that when they had
killed Christ, cast lottes for his coat. And I tell thee, Bernarde, thou
say that thou should loath my company, if I did wear the lousy patches
of some beggar: and so I tell thee playnelie, that I do loathe thee and all thy
company, when I do see you, in the lousy rags of popery. Yet do I not
hate you, for the^ would I let you alone But I tell you my mind plainly,
because I love you, and seek to do you good.


Bern. Fellow Miles, I thank thee heartily, for I trust thou haste done me
good. I have marked some things, that I shall never forgett, which I never heard
nor understood before. But how do thou prove the third Minor, that these
garments give offense:


Mil. Did thou not hear me say, that they cause me to loath thy company:
and so be sure they do offend many others: who so soon as they see you in
these garments, their blood is up, remembering how they burned the book of
God, and that such they were, that burned their brethren of late, and murdered
ye souls of their fathers before.


Bern. Tushe, this is but your heat, and the offense is taken by you, not
given by us.


Mil. Yes, yes. You give offenses in faith, and offenses in charity also.


Bern. How prove you that?


Mil. You draw men from the stabilitie in Christ, and from the synceritie of
the Gospel, whylest you cause the ignorant to believe, that Christ's
appoyntement of his Ministry and Sacraments, are not decent enough without
some of the Antichristian leaue^. Again, thou boldenest others, to occupy
other patches of popery, while it thou use these, and buyldest them up to
superstition again. And ye give them to think, that you do not abhor that
blasphemous and Idolatrous priesthood, whose garments ye wear. Yea the
Bishops com^el men to wear these things, against their consciences: and
therefore sinning thus against their brethren, and wounding their weak
consciences, they sin against Christ, as Paul says to the Corinthians,
and give great offenses. Again, your offenses in charity are manifest. For
besides the men that you spoil of their livings, how many women and children,
have cause to be offended with your cruel commandment about this gear: And
all that be grown to full strength in the gospel, and have their senses
exercised, to ye discretion of good and evil, are grievously offended, when
they see them that have so long a time bin teachers, and preachers against
Antichriste, not only wear such superstitious apparel, but compel others
by tyranny, to come into the same bondage.

Moreover, you give offenses both of faith and charity, when as you stablishe
the Papists in their old erroures: and cause them to say, That the
Gospellers, can not minister their Sacraments, nor have any ministry at
all, but of their leauinges.

And as Hardinge testifies to the Queens Majesty, It hardens their hearts,
and causes them to look for more at our hands. Even as it is reported that
Butcher Boner said: They begin to taste of our Pottage, they will shortelie
fall to the flesh. Thus they are most offended with this Popish ware, that
best do like it. For they are confirmed in their malice, and superstitions:
and are boldened to do that, which is without faith (and therefore is sin)
and which is without the warraunt of Gods word, and therefore must needs be
done with a doubtful conscience. Thus Papiste and Gospeller, weak and strong
are offended, some in faith, some in charity, by these patches of popery, and
lousy Romish rags.


Bernarde. Thou use thy terms to spitefully, yet thus to call them. For if
they were lousy, I would not wear them, I promise thee.


Mil. They are worse than lousy: for they are sybbe the sarcke of Hercules,
that made him tear his own bowels a sunder.


Bern. Let go these words, and come to the fourth point, how these things
are against the Scriptures, or beside the Scriptures.


Mil. They are beside the scriptures, because that no manner of appointed
apparel for Christ's Ministers, nor any sacramental garments, are once named
in the new Testament: which is a book all sufficient, to instruct us to all
well doings. By the which we may learn, what Christ required of his Apostles,
and what simplicity they used in their garments, and ceremonies, and usage of
their sacraments. And this is most plain, that they borrowed no garments of
the Idolaters, that they had converted unto Christ: which is the scope of our
Disputation. For this is the question, as it is now in controversy: Whether
it be against, or besides the scripture for them to wear the garments of
idolatrous priests, that have bin the means, to beat down their Idols, and
to banishe their Idolatries? The question also may run further: Whether any
true Bishop of Christ, may compel his fellow Bishop, and fellow
Minister, by prison so to do? But this declares Rome to be come home to our
gates, and Christian liberty in this point, to be utterly banished. Therefore
I will not now meddle with it. How beit, I do answer to yt former, that, if
Paul called all the carnal and outward holiness, and all that he might trust
in, concerning the flesh, under Moses law, donge, loss, and dross, for
Christ's sake: then must all yt Idolaters (be they papists or others) count
all their hypocritical show of holiness, dunge and dross. And that they
should do so, GOD by his Prophet Isaiah does teach the^, to deteste and
destroy into powder, those things that were about the Idols most precious. And
says, that this shall be the token, and fruit of the taking away of their
former sins, when they shall make all the stones of the Altars, as chalk
stones, broken in pieces, that the Groaues and Idols may not stand. Again
says he: Pollute the covering of the Images of silver, and the Ephod of the
image of gold: and cast them away, as a menstruous cloute, and say unto it:
Get thee hence. Wherefore I ask thee, if thou think of conscience, that
Isarah could suppose, that the little rags of the Idolles, should be kept in
reverence, for comeliness, and to beautify the ministry and sacraments,
when he had given such terrible charge against the greatest?

Now furthermore, because these priestlie garments were carnal shows of the
papists, they are dunge and dross, and so beside the scriptures. But as they
are Relics and rags, belonging to the most blasphemons Altars and Idols,
so are they against all the scriptures, that command the utter abolishinge of
Idolatrous remnauntes: whereof I could allege many places. Therefore as the
wearing of the garments, of the Chemarims, of the Priests of Baal, or of
Mahomet, in the ministry, and in the sacraments, were besides, or contrary
to the scriptures, if any of these should be commanded, for decency and
order. So these popish garments, are besides, and contrary to the
scriptures, because the Idolatry of the papists, has bin as wicked, and
abominable before God, as any of these. God also says by his Prophet
Zephanaiah, that he will cut out, the remnaunt of Baal, and the names of the
Chemarims, and the priests, and all those that are clothed with strange
apparel. Therefore it is besides or against the scriptures, to mainteyne such
remnauntes of such priests, and such shows of strange apparel borrowed from
the Idolaters. The Prophet Hosea teaches, That the people of God, may not
mix their religion with other people. Therefore it is besides, or against the
scripture, to mix our true religion and sacraments with the doings of the
papists. Zachariah says also, That the false prophets shall be ashamed of
their visions and garments, wherein they have deceived.

Therefore it is beside, or against the scriptures, to compel Christ's
Ministers to wear them. And though some liberty be permitted by the
scriptures, for the Church to appointe some orders, yet are the bounds so
limited, that all must be, to the glory of God, and to edification, nothing
superfluous or triflinge, nothing superstitious, nor idolatrous. For such
things, are against Gods glory, against the scriptures of God. and contrary
to edification, as thou have heard.


Bern. If thou be able to prove, the commandment of these things, so
playnelie to be against Christian liberty also, which is the fifte point,
thou will almost persuade me, to speak no more against the London Ministers.


Mil. That is a thing most evident, and therein I doubt not but that we shall
agree: For to bind a man to do against his conscience, is against Christian
liberty: but thereto are many driven, by this commandment, therefore it is
against christian liberty. The conscience must have Gods word to warraunt
the actions. But Gods word does not warraunte us to use these idolatrous
gear, but playnlie forbids the same. Therefore man can not have his
conscience persuaded, that this stands with christian liberty. Again, to
command men, to abstain from such things, as were known to belong unto
Idosles, which are called, Idolothita, was the advouchinge of Christian
liberty, and the declaration, that they were no longer under that Idolatricall
slavery, wherefore the Apostles commanded it at the beginning. Therefore to
be bound to use these things, is against christian liberty. As for the use
of the matter, or substance of such things, either unknown or of some
necessity, I have told thee before, that so the creature is indifferent. And
to know this, is one point of Christian liberty, like as to fly from
Idolatrous bondage, and to teach others to do the same, is the practice of
true christian liberty.

Furthermore, to bind men upon the peril of living and liberty, to wear
those garments, wherein their heavenly Father has bin blasphemed, Christ's
death derided, his Sacraments polluted, their Brethren deceived and murdered,
in souls and in bodies, declares a very small semblance of Christian
liberty. The holy Apostles, command men to absteyne from the filthiness of
Idolies, meaning by that word (Filthiness) that they could have nothing to
do with any thing belonging to the Idolles, but that they should be defiled.
So does Paul call the Idolles, Deuilles, and says, that they that eat of
their tables, are partakers with the Deuilles, and counts them partakers of
the altar, and ye same religion, whereof they are partakers, in the Idolothites.

Now, these garments which in popery have belonged to Idolles, are filthy
Idolothites, that served unto Diuelles. Therefore are they against Christian
liberty. Again, to bind men to eat Idolothites, were against Christian
liberty: therefore to bind men to wear the Idolothites, is against
Christian liberty. To command them to wear Garlandes, Palms, Hattes, or
eareringes, like the Idolatrers, were against Christian liberty. Therefore to
bind them to cover all their bodies with Idolatrous garments, is against
Christian liberty. To bind men to observe Iewishe Ceremonies, were against
christian liberty. Therefore are such commandments, in the ceremonies, of
Antichrist, against Christian liberty. Popery is bondage and slavery. And
the binding of the Ministry, and the sacraments, to such prescript apparel,
was part of the things, whereby men were chayned in popery: therefore are
they against Christian liberty. Wherefore we must stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and fly from the yoke of
bondage, of that Roman Antichrist. We must go out from that whore of Babylon,
that we be not partakers of her sins, lest we be partakers of her plagues,
and give her double, for that she has given us. Lo, this becomes christian
liberty.


Ber. Why? Think thou Miles, yt every one that wears these garments, shall
have a portion of the plagues with Antichriste?


Mil. Yea surely. Every one shall have his portion, much or little, that hold
any thing of him. And though I doubt not, but that many of the Bishops, and
sundry of them that wear this gear, hold Christ the foundation, yet must
needs this chafe and dross (as they them selves call it) be burned from them,
by the fire of Gods judgment. And so by faith and repentance, they may be
saved: howbeit not without some smell of the fire, as God by his wisdom shall
measure it.


Bern. But I am loath to come into that fire of Gods judgment.


Mil. Prepare for it then betimes, and renounce al superstitious gear, and
learn by the word of God, what it is to be a true Minister of Christ.


Ber. I pray thee tell me that, for I would feign learn, if I wiste how.


Mil. O Bernarde, thou spakest a word in the beginning scoffinglie, which is
thy whole charge, Pasce, Pasce, Pasce, feed my sheep, feed my flock, feed
my Lambs, if thou love me, says Christ to Peter, and to all that take charge
of any congregation. Therefore does Peter deliver the same charge over unto
others, whom he calls fellow Elders, and admouisheth them to feed the
flock of Christ, as much as lies in them. And Paul counts all that are
called to this state, the Ministers of God, and the Stewardes and Disposers of
his treasures, and says in his own person, that which he will have to be
understand of others: Woe unto me, if I do not preach the Gospel. For a
stewardshipp is committed unto me. Therefore says he to Titus, that a
Bishop or a Minister of Christ (for these two are confounded in the
scriptures) must be Gods steward, holdinge fast the word of faith, according
to doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and
improve them that say against it.

Lo, Bernard, this is Christ's first mark of his Ministers, that they feed
his flock, with the wholesome doctrine of his word. Secondly, it is
required, that they which must reprove others, must be unreprovable them
selves, that they be watch full, modest, herborous, apt to teach, etc. as
Paul writes to Timothy. These be Christ's liuerie garments. And what
pitious case is this, in Christian churches, to see men thrust out of the
doors, and robbed of living, and liberty, that have all these marks and
liueries? And to have such men called in and chearished, that have none of
these, but only can read a little in the Churches, and iett up and down
idellie in the enemies liueries, as thou may perceive (dear friend) by thine
own self.


Bern. Why my friend, must every Minister or Priest be a Preacher? Must I be
a preacher also?


Mil. The scriptures of God, admit none other, as thou have partly heard,
and more evidently may be proved, how the lips of the Priest (as Malachi
says) must keep knowledge, and they shall seek the Law at his mouth: For he
is the messenger of the Lord of Hosts. Lo, thou and every one, that takes
this office in hand, are appointed messengers of the Lord of Hosts. If thou
either know not this message: or canste not speak it, or wilt not do it, what
a messenger art thou? Do thou not on Gods part (whose glory, power,
justice, and mercy, thou should preach) deserve sharp punishmente? And of
the part of men, over whom thou haste charge, and to whom thou art sent as
messenger, thou deseruest that their blood should be required at thy hands.


Bern. This is sore gear. Thou make me to tremble at it.


Mil. O would to God, that thou, and all thy fellows, would turn wholly to
Gods word, and leave your triflinge hipocriticall shows. So should GOD be
glorified, and Christ's Congregation edified, which now by the displacing of
the godly learned Ministers, is pitiefullie molested and daungered. What a
Decree is this, That no man shall be admitted, a Minister of Christ, unless he
will admit also and Subscribe to some, yea and many of the misorders of
Antichriste? And as I heard a Bishop say, If it were Paul himself, he
should not here be suffered, unless he would be conformable to this gear?


Bern. Durst any man speak that blasphemy?


Mil. Do they not fulfill the same in their deeds? What was Paul? What was
Apollo? But the Ministers of Christ, and the fellow laborers with others that
truly and purelie preach Christ: although his spirit were more excellent.
Paul spoke most frankly against all superstitious ceremonies. So do these.
Paul was counted a fool in ye world: so are these. Paul counted all the
pharisaical shows of garments, and al other traditions of his fathers, dunge
and dross: so do these. So that they have one common cause. Paul was
persecuted of his brethren, fained christians: so are these. Take heed now
Bernarde, whether thou will join with the proud persecuting, or the poor
persecuted Ministers of Christ.


Ber. I would feign take Paul's part.


Mil. Then must thou leave thy pharisaisme, thy shows of garments, as he did.


Bern. Ah, then must I leave my Benefice.


Mil. God will send thee some other service. Thou were better to become a
soldier again at Barwick, for defense of thy country, (for it is a state
allowed by Christ, by John Baptist, and by Peter) than to continewe in this
state, wherein thou heapest so much blood upon thy head, through thine
ignorance, and deceauest thy self and others, through thine hypocrisy.


Bern. I will take more aduiseme^t, before I forgo my good and rich livings.


Mil. O how hard a thing is it, for the^ that have riches, to enter into ye
kingdom of heaven, says our Master Christ. And Hierome sateth: Fly thou
like as from the pestilence, the chopping Chapleyne, that of a beggar is made
rich, and from a base state, becomes glorious. But Bernard, thou know
some thing, what does belong to the Queens Lieftenaunt, or Captain of
Barwicke, how that he, for that same little Town, must be watchful night and
day. He must have an eye to the enemies, an eye to the walls, and both his
eyes bent continually, upon his souldioures, to find all the means that he
can possible, to keep them in order, to have them expert, every one in his
trade, how to handle his weapon, how to save him self, how to encounter with
the enemy, and to be always in readiness. Therefore does he oftentimes give
his charge, provoke with benefits, and with threatenings, and some times
tries by alarummes, who are the paynefull soldiers.


Bern. What meanest thou by this?


Mil. Thou haste taken upon thee, to be and Captain of a Town of war, more
whotelie besieged, tha^ ever was Barwicke, whose enemies are ever about it.


Bern. I know not what thou meanest: for I have given over such matters.


Mil. No, no. Thou art entered into a greater charge. Do not all men in their
Baptism promise to fight manfully, like faithful soldiers, under Christ's
Standard? Do not thou in the ministering of Baptism, as Christ's
Liefetenaunt, and Captain of his soldiers under thee, take their solemn vow
and promise to that purpose?


Bern. I grant that I so do. But what then?


Mil. And art thou thus watchful, and careful, as thou have seen thy
Captain there?


Bern. Nay, I need not, we dwell not so near the Scotts.


Mil. But Paul says, That ye Christian man, has a greater fight, than with
flesh and blood, even with the Principalities and powers, the worldly
governors, the princes of the darkness, of this world, which are above us in
the air. Therefore we must take against them all the armor of God. Know
thou what yt is Bernard?


Ber. Nay surely, (as I said) I know not what thou meanest. I understand thee
not.


Mil. Ah, how shall thou teach others, to play the good soldiers, when thou
know not, the names of thy weapons? nor of the armor that thou and they
should wear? neither yet can feel any strokes, when thou art deadly
wounded? Nor know thine enemies, when thou and all thine, are in their hands
enclosed? There is not one Legion, but whole armies of Devils, devouring this
Town, where thou haste charge, by ignorance, superstition, Idolatry,
blasphemy, contempt of Gods word, his Sacraments, his Sabbaothes, given to
Drunkenesse, riott, dissolutenes, pride, covetousness, adultery, and infinite
crimes. So that they fight upon the Deuilles part, against Christ: and yet
thou their Captain, can not epsy it: or will not, by the sword of the
spirit (which is the word of God) fight against this enemy, ye thus does
invade thy cure: but the blind leading the blind, both perish together.


Bern. O, now I do some thing understand thy meaning, and I would feign that
all were well. But thou requirest a thing impossible, that all should be
Preachers, that have the charge of souls in all the Parishes, thoroughout
England.


Mil. I require nothing, but that Christ, which has so dearly bought the
souls, with his own blood requires, and that which God the Father requires
in the old and new Testament, and the Primitive Church did continually
practice, until that blind time, that the Massing priests did creep in,
under the Roman Antichriste. And yet in Gregory's time, when there was great
blindness, he him self can say, that he is a dead Priest, (and therefore no
priest, no more than a dead man is a man) which does not preach. For he
kindles the wrath of the great Judge against him, if he walk without the
sound of preaching: Furthermore he says, That you priests increase your
own sins, with the death of others, and that you kill, and murder so many,
as you see daily, without al care, holding your peace, go toward their death.
Lo, here is other gear to be urged, than surplesse matters. It is not enough
to be a priest of cloutes, or a dumb dog that cannot bark.


Bern. But yet I do ask thee, how it can be possible, to get so many
preachers?


Mil. No doubt, this popish ware (as thou see) does drive out many
preachers, and stops many good men (that I know) from coming to the
ministry. Therefore one ready way to get more Preachers, were to take it
away: otherwise there may be found many, if GOD give grace to seek them.
But as thou demaundest of me, How is it possible, to get so many preachers,
for this Ylelande: so might Titus have demanded of Paul, in the first
planting of Christian Religion, where he should have found, so many preachers,
and of so good qualities, in the Ylelande of Creta, as Paul appoynteth. But
Paul and Titus both depended upon Gods providence, knowing that God is rich
enough, to furnishe his own house and family, and the spouse of his Son
Christ (which is the Church) if it be not, through man's negligence. Therefore
does Paul give no leave, nor Titus demand any leave, to place dumb
dogs, such as were not apt to teach: much less could they have thought it
meet, to place wolves in the steed of sheepeheardes. No, Paul urges this
point unto Timothy, charging him before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, and
his elect Angels, not to lay hands unadvisedly of any, to be partaker of
other men's sins: as those Bishops now do which admit a sort of popish
Asses, which were wont to say Masses, and such others, as neither have
knoweledge, nor fear of God: which will wear any thing, or do any thing,
for an idle living.


Bern. I heard my Lord Bishop say, that they are feign so to do, or else
they should not have Priests enough, for the Countries. For yet one does
serve two or three churches.


Mil. That is a mad service, to serve two or three masters, for the gain of
proling proctors. And I think the parishes, would not be content, with such
a swineheard.


Bern. What then? shall they call forth Cobblers and Taylours, that every
parish may have one, and so place in men of handiecraftes, and occupations?


Mil. Yea a great deal better were it so to do, than to place popish
Priests, the deuourers of Christ's Lambs. For their priest craft, was the
wickedest occupation, that ever was in the world, and the most crafty. And
as Celestine says truly: It is no maruayle, though those that grow not
up in the Church, but have crepte in at the back door, bring strange
gear, into the Church, which they had in their other trade. For by these
Popish priests (which never were of Christ's Church) comes in this popish
trashe.

But thou may perceive by this, that I have said before, that I would have
none admitted, to this holy State, but such, as are well instructed, in
Christ Jesus already: And the Lord our GOD, without them and their trashe,
can furnish his Church, (which is his own house and family) if we could
turn to him vnfeignedlie, by Godly prayer: as our Savior Christ teaches:
That we should pray the Lord of the Vyneyearde, to thrust forth laborers,
into his Vineyard. Which he grant of his great mercies, and turn their
hearts, or stay their enterprises, that strive against Gods business, either
of malice, or of ignorance, AMEN. AMEN.

But now (fellow Bernarde) that thou may know, that the London Ministers,
and other their Brethren in the Country, have just cause, to speak and
preach as they do, against the Popish trashe, that yet remains, here
may thou read in this Table following, more than an hundred points of
Popery, unreformed in England. So that popery (having yet so many sprowtes
and branches amongst us) will surely spread again, if these and such like
faythefull Ministers, be put to silence.

They were godly men (and are so counted now after their death) that heawed
down, the great trees of Popery. And shall these be judged evil men, that
would dig up the roots and sprowtes of Popery, to cause it never to grow
again, if it be possible? It is not only for the Cappe and the Surplesse
that they contend, but against all these points of Popery, whereunto they
are urged, to subscribe, by general terms. So that the Gospel should be
tied, by their Subscriptions, to spread no further, neither for the
reformation of the Ministry, nor for the recovering of true Discipline, nor
for the abolishing of such wicked superstitions, as these be which do follow.

An hundred points of Popery, yet remaining, which deforme the English
reformation.
1 First, the Popish names and offices. The Archbishop, or Primate of
England, whose office stands not so much in preaching, as in granting of
Licenses and Dispensations, according to the common law, etc. 2 Seco^dlie,
that he is called Lords grace, or, Gracious Lord, contrary to the
commandment of Christ, Luc. 22. 25. 3 Thirdly, that the other Bishops, are
called Lords, have dominatio^, and exercise authority over their Brethren,
contrary to the commandment of our Savior Christ, Mat. 20. 25. 1. Pet. 5.
verse. 4. 4 That they have the honors of County Palatines, etc. contrary to
the example of the Apostles, and the Aposto like preachers, both of old times,
and of our times, in all reformed churches. 5 The glorious Chauncelor, and his
crafty courts. 6 The proud Deane, and his office. 7 The Subdeane with his. 8
The Chaunter. 9 The Cannon. 10 The petty Canon. 11 The Virgerer. 12 Rector
Chori. 13 The Epistler, that does read some patche of the Epistle. 14 The
Gospellar, that does read some piece of the Gospel. 15 The Querister. 16 The
Quier or Cage, wherein they do separate them selves from the Congregation, and
cause the word not to be understood of the people. 17 The singing Clearkes. 18
The Organiste. 19 The Organ Blower. 20 The Commissarie and his court. 21 The
Summoner or Apparitor. 22 The Parson. 23 The Vicar. 24 The Chapleyne. 25 The
idle Reader 26 The Parish Priest. 27 The Prebendarie stipendaries, Pencioners
that sell benefices. 28 The Beadmen at burialles, and afterward. 29 The hired
Mourners, in their mourning garments, etc. So that here is nothing taken of
Christ, nor his Apostles, neither concerning names, nor office, but only of
the Pope, that Roman Antichriste.
The Court of Faculties.
1 LIcenses to marie in times forbidden, as in Lent. 2 In Aduent. 3 In Gange
week. 4 In Imbring days 5 Item, Licenses for marriage to persons forbidden,
which co^teineth many points 6 Licenses to marie in places exempt. 7 Popish
diuorcements licensed. 8 Dispensations to eat flesh. 9 And those writings
have this point of Popery, Sana conscientia, as though they had authority
over men's consciences. 10 And all this for money, and such a sum of money,
as the poor men ca^ not reach unto. 11 Dispensations for boys and doltes, to
have benefices. 12 Dispensation for non Residentes. 13 Dispensations with them,
that do not preach. 14 Dualities. 15 Trialities. 16 Tollerations. 17
Pluralities. 18 Tot quots. 19 A Lordshippe over the whole Clergy, and all
their Courts. 20 Excommunication for fees not paid. 21 A sale of Absolutions
for money. 22 Both the Physicians spiritual and corporal, must be consulted
withal, before you may have license to eat flesh. Which high point of
Divinity, was learned forth of Boston pardon. 23 Buying and selling of
aduowsons. 24 The absolution of one man for another. 25 Full power to dispense
with all causes, that the Bishop of Rome could dispe^se with, the Prince
excepted, which co^prehendeth manifold points of poysonfull Popery. 26
Briefly, the popish enormities, and deformities of this Court, are
innumerable. Wherefore we will labor no longer to account them.
The Commissarie his Court.
1 THis robs the Church of her government, used both in the old and new
Testament. 2 Secondly, this is contrary to Christ's commandment, Dic
Ecclesiae, and to the example and doctrine of Paul, to excommunicate alone. 3
Thirdly, to absolve alone. 4 To sit in judgment alone. 5 To retract the
sentence, that with the invocation of the name of God he has pronounced. 6 And
to do this for money. 7 To excommunicate for money matters, and for trifles. 8
To absolve without manifest repentance. 9 To pole something of every
parish. 10 The poling of the Priests. 11 The light punishment of adultery.
12 The open, known, and continual perjury, of the Churchwardens, committed
in that Court. 13 The committing of penance, the Congregation not being
satisfied. 14 Dispensations for the times of Marriage forbidden, and for not as
king in the church. 15 The poling of the Proctors. 16 Of the Registers. 17 Of
the Apparitors. 18 Of the Clearkes, for writing of Bills. 19 Of the briberie
in selling of books. 20 The Priest must be sworn to his Ordinary. 21 The
new come Priest must pay ten shillings, for the sight of his letters of
orders. 22 All sentences, for the most part, are to be given by popish Canon
laws, which are intricate and infinite.
So that he that will wade further herein, shall enter into a sea of popery,
and shall see the decay of Religion and godliness, creep in by this Court,
and that this is nothing, but a pack of popery, and a pudle of corruption.

Gross points of popery, evident to all men.
1 Old Monks, and Friars, and old popish priests, notorious idolatrers,
openly perjured persons, haltinge hypocrites, manifest Apostates, are allowed
in place of true and faithful Pastors. 2 An other sort of vagabounde
ministers of no place. 3 Thirdly, the running and ridinge to be made Priests,
and to prole for benefices. 4 The common Symonie of the priests many ways. 5
The spoil of benefices by Patrones. 6 Impropriations. 7 The Parson robs the
Parish, and the poor Vicar must serve the cure, and do the duty. 8 The
Parson may lie abroad without check, and do no duty to the parish. But he
that does the duty, shall be bound to the Popish attire, and what soever it
pleases the ordinary. 9 Ministers made, neither in election, vocation, nor
approbation agreeable to Gods word. 10 Boys, papists, drunckardes, idiots,
Idolles, as Zachariah calls them, Zachar. 11. 11 Eleuenthlie, learned
Ministers may not preach, without new licenses, although in the ordeyning of
them, they are commanded to preach the gospel. 12 Some may preach, and not
minister the Sacraments. 13 Deacons made to other purposes, than Scripture
appoynteth. 14 They may minister Baptism, but not the Communion: they may
minister the Cup, not the bread. 15 The Images of the Trinity, and many
other monuments of superstition, generally in all church windows. 16 The holy
Sacraments, mixed with men's traditions. 17 The want of examination, before
the receiving of the Lords Supper. 18 In many places it is used like a Mass.
19 The want of true Discipline for the whole congregation. 20 The popish
apparaile of the Archbishop and Bishop, the black Chimere or sleeueles coat,
put upon the fine white rotchet. 21 The great wide sleeued gown, commanded
to the Ministers, and the charge to wear those sleeves upon the arms, be the
weather never so hot. 22 The horned cappe. 23 The Tippet. 24 The Surplesse in
little churches. 25 The Cope in great churches. 26 The Lordly power of the
Bishops and their Princely Parkes and Palaces. 27 Their riches gathered
together by popish means, Procurations, Synodalles. etc. 28 Their pompous
train of proud idle swingebreeches, in the steed of Preachers and Scholars.
29 Their temporal offices. 30 Their want of exercise in learning. 31 The
want of Discipline in the ministry. 32 Furred hoodes in Summer of their
great Doctors. 33 Silken hoodes in their quiers, upon a Surplesse. 34 The gray
amise with cattes tails. 35 The Organes playing away half of the psalms. 36
To swear by a book in their common courts. 37 To save a thief if he can
read latin, because he is one of them, Legit vt Clericus. 38 The common
swearing by our Lady, not reproved. 39 And the observing of the Ladies days,
and Ladies feasts, which are co^firmations to such oaths and swearers. 40
Faires and markets upon the Sabbath days. Lewd plays on the same days. 41
Putting of the caps at the name Jesus 42 Crossing the corpse with linen
clothes, and such like. 43 Ringing of handbels in many places. 44 Crossing of
themselves in their prayers. 45 Ringing of Bells in the place of preaching,
when the Priests take possession of their benefices. 46 Ringing of Curfewe
upon hallowe euens. 47 Ringing three peales at the burialls. 48 The
visitacions of the Bishops and others, only for money. 49 Dispensations with
the rich men for all things: but not with poor men that have no money. 50
Offerings at burialles, and the offering of the woman at her churching.
The church service, and chief show of holiness.
1 FIrst, the only reading in the place of feding, by the applying of the word
to the conscience, is rather an English popery, than a true christian
ministry. Christ commands his to feed. So does Peter exhort his fellow
ministers. Paul commands to choose such and none other. 2 The whole form of
the church service is borrowed from the Papists, peeced and patched without
reason or order of edification. 3 In the common prayers the priest prays for
the Queen, and the people answer of another matter. 4 They pray also that
all men may be saved without exception: and that al travailing by sea and by
land, may be preserved, Turks and traitors not excepted. etc. 5 They pray to
be delivered from lightening and tempest, when there is no danger of it. etc.
6 All these church prayers and Sacraments, are tied to a popish Surplesse. 7
Their Saints days, and their prescript service. 8 Their wakes and idolatrous
bankettes 9 Their Lent still observed in the same time and manner. 10 The
Imbring days. 11 The hallowe Euens. 12 The Fridrayes and Saterdayes. 13 All
their fish fastes. 14 The crossing in Baptism. 15 That the godfathers and
godmothers shall promise, that the child does believe, and does forsake the
Devil. 16 The necessity of Baptism. 17 The Lords Supper in time of
necessity, to be ministered to one alone. 18 The private Baptism. 19 The Ring
in marriage. 20 The Churching of women with this Psalm, that the Sun nor
Moon shall not burn them. 12 The confirmation of children, by laying on of the
hands of the Bishop, to certify them of Gods favor, by this sign of man's
invention. 22 The making of the Ministers, by laying on of the hands, and
saying, Take the holy Ghost. 23 The ministration in a Wafer cake. 24 The
kneeling before the Cake.

Ber. Peace, here be to many. But me think Miles, that there be some points
here reckoned, that are smallie to be accounted of, and are but very trifles.


Mil. That is true, for all popery is but trifles. But what has Christ's
Church to do, with the poysonfull leaue^ of popish trifles? Christ with Antichrist?
A little leaven corrupts ye whole lu^pe. A little poison, ye whole pottage. And
many small make a great heap. And how can we accounte it a good reformation,
where so many points of popery do remain? Or why should men in pain of
prisonment, or loss of living, be bound to subscribe and allow all these
points of popery? But because thou and thy fellows should not quarrel,
about the smalest trifles, I do give thee seven score to the hundred. And
wherefore is the glorious glass of the Gospel, by Gods mercy set before our
eyes? but that we should wipe away, all these popish blemishes, from the face
of our English Church, in the which we do boast of a reformation. God for his
mercy grant, that we may once see a right reformation in this church, to the
glory of his name here in England, AMEN.


1. Corinthians. 4. The fire shall try every man's work, of what sort it is,
whether it be gold or silver, timber, straw, or stubble.


Note that the Annotations and Cotations in this book, were not put too of the
Author, nor the Table following.

Here follows a Table of the bringing in of diverse of the popish and
superstitious toys, yet remayninge, as before said. The Authors names: The
years of the Lord: The Popes names, and the stuff it self, as appears,
with the holiness attributed thereunto.
Also a short Prayer of the Author himself, that wrote this Dialogue.
The Table.
PLatina and Sabellicus write, that in the year 147 Pius primus brought into
the Roman church, The coniured Founte.

Sabellicus, Polidorus, D. Barnes, these do write, that in the year 143 Pope
Higinus brought in Godfathers and Godmothers.

Gratianus, Fasciculus te^p. Polidorus. D. Barnes, these write that in the
year 198 Victor primus ordained Women to baptize children. This mainteyneth
the heresy, that children dying without baptism, are condemned.

Distinct. 5. de consecra. cap. De his vero. is written, that in the year 310
Clemens primus brought in, Confirmation, or Bishopping of children. This Pope
Clement affirmed, that he was no christian, that wilfully left this undone.
Pope Melciades came after, and affirmed it to be a more worthy sacrament, than
the sacrament of Baptism.

Volateranus, Platina, Sabellicus, Polidorus, these do write, that in the year
404 Pope Anastasius brought in, Standinge at the Gospel.

Platina, D. Barnes, H. Pantateon, these do write, that in the year 530 Pope
Bonifacius ordained, To divide the Chauncel from the body of the church.

Platina, Durand. D. Barnes, H. Pa^tateon, these do write, that in the year 603
pope Sabinian brought in Belles.

Virtue attributed to Belles.

First, they stir men to devotion.

Secondly, they preserve the fruits.

Thirdly, they keep both the minds and bodies of the faithful, from al
dangers.

Fourthly, they put to flight the hoastes of our enemies, and dispatche all the
subtilties of their evil willers.

Fifthlie, they cause the boisterous winds hayle, and all sharp storms, the
violent te^pestes, the terrible thu^drings, to cease.

Sixthly, they drive away, all wicked spirits and Deuilles.

Chronica Chro. Volateranus, Platin. these do write, that in the year 653 Pope
Vitalianus brought into ye church, Orga^nes.

Christianus, Massaeus, Chro. mundi. these do write, that in the year 796 pope
Adria^ ordained the Surplesses.

Durandus, Platina, Volateranus, Polidorus, these do write, that in the year
653 pope Gelasius brought in Prickesong. pope Gregory Playnesong. pope
Vitalianus Descant.

Platina, Sabellicus, Polidorus, Gratianus, these do write, that in the year
119. pope Alexander ordained unleavened bread, or round Cakes, small, saying,
this oblation, the less it is, the better is it.

Also, why it is round like a penie, Antonius says, Because Christ was
sold for thirty pen. Durandus says, that it is made round, because the
earth is round. And another says, that the outward sign may signify him,
that wants both beginning and ending.

Durandus, Polidorus, Pantateon, these do write, that in the year 375 pope
Damasus brought in the church, The first prescript order for the service in
the Quier.

Durandus, Chroni. Chron. these do write that in the year 1073 pope Gregory
the seventh brought in, The prescript number of psalms and lessons.

Platina, Massaeus, Polidorus, Pantateon, these do write, that in the year 444
pope Leo, or as some write, pope Hilarious ordained the Gange days, or
Rogation week.

Durandus says, that pope Gregory, or Gelasius, ordained the Collectes
ordinary.

Chroni. Achil. Fasciculus temp. these say, that in the year 737 pope
Zacharias ordained priests Gowns, Tippettes, and Four horned Cappes. Have at
our English prelates of pride.

Sabellicus writes, that in the year 251 pope Stephanus ordained Coapes and
Vestimentes.

This man appointed no garments to be used in the church, but hallowed
garments.

In Chroni. Graftoni is written, that in the year 871 Pope Nicholas and
Conciliu^, did forbid Marriage in Lent, and at all other times.

Paul calls it the doctrine of Devils.

Decreta. lib. 3. titul. 1. cap. 10. Pa^tateon, they say, that in the year
1214 Pope Honorius ordained, Kneeling to the sacrament. Here the sacrament was
made an Idol, as Jewel says in his first book against Harding.

Sabellicus, Polidorus, Lib. Conciliorum, Eusebius, these do write, that in the
year 139 Pope Telesphorus ordained Lent to be fasted before Easter.

Distinct. 76. cap. Tenui, Platina, Sabellicus, Polidorus, D. Barnes, these do
say, that in the year 206 pope Calixtin. ordained Imber fastes.

Platina and Volateranus do write, that in the year 315 Pope Bonifacius
ordained, Wednesdayes, Frydayes, and Saterdayes, fastes.

Polidorus and Pantateon, these do write, that in the year 425 Pope Bonifacius
ordained Saints eues fasted.

Mat. 26. 63. says, that Caiaphas the high Priest, would have Oaths ex
officio, to wit, to make men swear to accuse them selves.

When Caiaphas could not get that which would suffice him at the false
witnesses mouths, to put Christ to death, then he adjured him by the living
God, to tell, if he were Christ.

Thomas Rudb. and Johan. Capg. these do write, that in the year 1098 Pope
Vrbanus ordained, Caunturburie to be the chief patriarchal Seat.

All popish holy days had the like beginning, as by Thomas Beacons book of
Relics, is to be seen.

All these Popes were Antichrists one after another, and there are none of
these Ceremonies and Monumentes of Idolatry, but came all from these
Antichrists, besides the Lordly government of Bishops, Popish
Excommunications and Absolutions, Pluralities, Trialities, Tot quots, with such
other Dispensations and Licenses, Institutions, Inductions, Proxies, and
Senages, etc. These all fill the purse, and were devised of Antichriste, to
hold up his kingdom. All these do the Tradicioners still mainteyne, directly
against the commandments, which Samuel (as before is said) does
affirm, to be wickedness and Idolatry.

The true Discipline, by Gods word, without the which, no true Religion can
be, and which true reformed Churches do hold and mainteyne, have the
Traditioners utterly excluded. And therefore they can not truly affirm and
say, That they do deteste all Antichristian Idolatry: neither yet that they
consent in all points of true doctrine, with all godly reformed churches,
when these mischiefs are maintained, and true discipline banished, which of
necessity must be joined.

A Prayer for the Faythefull.
O Lord God, and most merciful Father / we beseech thee / for the honor of
thy holy Name / to defend us from that Antichrist of Rome / and from al his
detestable enormities / manners / laws / garments / and ceremonies: Destroy
the counsel of al Papists and Atheistes / enemies of thy Gospel / and of this
realm of England. Disclose their mischiefs and subtle practices: confound
their devices: let them be taken in their own wylinesses: and stre^gthen all
those that maintain the cause and quarrel of thy Gospel / with invincible
force and power of thy holy Spirit: so that / though they be destitute at
any time of worldly aid and comfort: that yet they fail not to proceed
and go forward toward that true godliness commanded in thy holy word /
with all simplicity and sincerity: to thy honor and glory / the comfort of
thine elect / and the confusion of thine enemies / through Christ our Lord
and Savior. Amen. Amen. And say from the heart / AMEN.

FINIS.

