BACCHVS BOVNTIE,

Describing the debonaire dietie of his bountiful godhead, in the royal
observance of his great feast of Pentecost.

Necessary to be read and marked of all, for the eschuing of like enormities.

Faecundi calices quem non fecere disertum?

By Philip Foulface of Ale-foord, student in good felloship.

AT LONDON Printed for Henry Kyrkham, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
little north door of Paul's Church, at the sign of the black Boy. 1593.

To the right worthy, and renowned Roister, Sir Richard Swash, Lord and
Master on mount Maluorn, chief controller on Salisburie plain, keeper of
Accounts-in the Cart-way, chief Foster in the forest of Dalamere, high
General of the Downs, Baron of Birlip hill, Sergeant of the Shoares and Sea
side, and Vicar of the Valleys: your daily Orator Philip Foulface, wishes all
health, wealth, might, long life, and prosperous success, in all your affairs
and enterprises where so ever.
WHen Jupiters head was great with child, and the time of travail nere at
hand: he skorning to complain, yet put to his shifts, was feign to send for
Vulcan the Smith, to crase his crown with a downedriuing blow; not only to
cause the swelling to cease, but also to provide passage for the birth of his
babe. Which thing when Vulcan had performed in giving him a sound pat on the
pate, out start Pallas at the opening of his head, and danced before him so
maiden-like, that the present sight so pleasant, expelled all former pains in
the birth. Even so (most worthy sir) when the confused Chaos of this matter
following, was first inhabitant in my witless head: then feared I no such
swellings, as since I did feel, nor regarded those throws, which now are
ouerpast. Nevertheless, when my brains fell to their business, and began to
beat as tho my head had been ready to burst, disdaining withal the help of
mother Crackfart the Midwife; Juno Lucina was as deaf as a dishclout, so that
Volens nolens I betook my self to the herb Hellebore, whose pleasant
operation produced so present a purgation, that forthwith there followed a most
speedy deliverance, excluding cares, renewing joy. This young impe thus borne,
being brought to the font, was named Bacchus Bounty. Which Bounty I willingly
offer unto your worthiness; doubting not at all, but that you will highly accept
of him; not only because he is a bonny boy, and the gift of a welwiller: but
also because he was begot by Bacchus your well-beloved friend; conceived by me,
and nourished ever since with the juice of the grape. From Ale-foorde this 9.
of December. Anno Dom. 1592.

Bounden to your bigness, Philip Foulface.

Philip Foulface to the courteous Reader.
SO many men (some say) so many minds,
The brauest Gnatho cannot but offend:
Men's minds do waver like unconstant winds,
Hard then sometimes to please our dearest friend.
Some hungry curre may bark above the rest,
But please, or displease, I have done my best.
He that delights to hear of mortal wars
Is too austere to read this little book:
But he that joys to hear of good ale iarres,
I license him with leave herein to look.
Here (gentle reader) may thou find great sport
To ease thy cares, if hither thou resort.
And welcome all, which read and mean none ill,
No further ill than I, and welcome all:
A merry mind to mirth enclineth still
If weighty causes do not backward call.
Be merry then: read here, and do not spare,
And welcome still: here is no better fare.
FINIS.
Philip Foulface.

BACCHVS BOVNTIE,
Describing the debonaire dietie of his bountiful godhead, in the royal
observance of his great feast of Pentecost.
Quint. Allicit externas praesuaui nectare gentes.
Polit. -- non mollia pleno
Desunt vina cado.

THe groutheaded Graecians, especially the anointed Achiues, I mean the
Beziladistes, those devout doctors of Lob libers can, these (I say) with
their knightlike crew, thought it an high assumption to be as fathers in a
frolic feast, or as base borne brothers, in bickering with the broth of
bountiful Bacchus. Which coppernosed crew, the Knuckledebunions of Rome* so
assaulted with a fresh Canuazado the city of Vinosa, that the alarm of the
Romans brake Nectars neck, head, and shoulders; in so much that Vesta in great
outrage rushed out of a rock, and dedicated to sweet father Bacchus as Crimson
a color as was then seen in her peereles peticote, most fragrantlie fuming up
unto Bacchus; and likewise into the nostrills of all his nosled nouises
wheresoever.

This newfound Sacrifice in this sort offered to this bursten-bellied God; lent
such a sweet sent to the rest of the gods and goddesses, especially to
platter-faced Jupiter, that presently he appeased their fury, mitigated the
before offered injury, renewed Nectar to former iollitie, and sent out Mercury
as Ambassador, to parle with Neptune rector of the Seas; that Triton his
trusty trumpeter should sound along from shore to shore throughout the whole
world the blessed bounty of Bacchus.

Mercury discharging himself, and Triton by commandment of his king, tied to
the aforesaid chardge, with clattering clang he thundered out such joyful
news, that not only mount AEtna yielded forth fiery flames in signification
of sudden joys: but also Olympus merrily mounted, in hope that Permessus that
pleasant spring, should be somewhat tainted with the sweet taste of so lovely
a liquor.

The decreed tidings of Jupiter are word by word in effect as follow.

Pass Mercury to Neptunes brinish bowers,
My wish, my will, in have to him unfold;
Let Tryton scale those hiest fleeting towers,
In Bacchus praise let all his tale be told.
Let him command, the Curists change their lives,
In vain strives he, with Bacchus brood which strives.
The Bacchanals hence forth shall bear the sway
With help of Hypocrites they shall do well,
This gift I give, it shall be as I say,
Their forwardnes in fraies shall bear the bell.
I give them right to swear it out with words,
I give them might to swash it out with swords.
I will that these the ancient order hold,
The Order of knighthood never to decay:
The greatest soakers shall be least controulde,
Each Tyro shall of Nectar make his pray:
And whose conceits God Bacchus deemes the best,
Shall have a rich reward above the rest.
Come Ganimedes, come with crystal cups,
Some nappie Nectar bring me here in place,
Accursed be he which Nectar only sups,
And turns not over pot by pot apace.
Accursed be he which after Ceres gapes,
And shunnes to suck the sugared sap of grapes.
In grief live they with carkes of cares oppressed,
Which leave their liquor and away depart,
Till Bacchus have them crowned with his crest,
Whose force expelles all sorrows from the heart.
With Viuat Bacchus, let the Ocean ring
The same let Africa, Asia, and Europe sing.
Now Echo, the babbling nymph at the sound of Trito^, having intelligence
hereof; resounded this decree so mightily toward the maine, that it easily
entered into the hearing of all the inhabitants in every haven. And even as at
the bellewing of the bonnie white Bull, the ardent heates of Pasiphae were more
and more increased; in so much that one horn of his head, was more precious in
her precise imagination, then all her former sacrifices dedicated as dainties
to delectable Diana: even so as soon as the brute of most bountiful Bacchus
was blazed abroad, Tom Typsay, an english tapster, wel-nere choked with a
marvelous dry heat, which he of late had got by lifting ouerlong at old
mother Redcaps; this Tom Typsay, I say, with a well tried tankard trailing at
his tail: the more he thought of Bacchus bounty, the more he desired to try
the experience: and the further he labored after his liking; the longer he
lusted after his liquor: wishing at every foot, the worthy presence of so
gracious a God.

Thus Tom Typsay, not only in hope to tipple with the best, but trusting to
merit a further reward: fell flat down on both his maribones, holding up his
hands on hie toward the heavens, and made his Orison to the renoumed god
Bacchus, as hereafter follows.

BOnny Bacchus God of wines,
Chief maintainer of our vines,
Sucker the soul, in grief which pines,
Water to drink, I hold not good,
Thy juice oh Bacchus breeds best blood.
Nectar ( good Bacchus) Nectar send,
Brave Bacchus do thy bounty lend:
Unto Tom Typsay stand a friend,
And so thy fame shall never end.
Nectar, sweet Nectar, is my wish,
Behold my tankard, and my dish,
As for my plate I have it sold,
And for pure broth my money told;
Yet once again let me behold,
Every morning warm or cold,
Nappie liquor stout and bold
Commended and boasted
In a pot trimly toasted,
The pots feet finely roasted
In a worthy fire.
And first of all for my part,
To besiege and sack the quarte
Till it warm me well at heart,
And then do it feel
Sincke down into my heel:
And so next to take the pains
To pass upward through the veins,
And soake withal into these brains,
Which witles now alas remains
For want of good liquor.
Scarce had he ended this his petitory prattle, but Bacchus as willing to lend
him a long ear to hear, as he to open a wide mouth to ask: and as desirous
to fetch him in for a foot man, as to turn him off his trusse, and as ready to
feed him as fat as a fool, as to teach him the trick to shue the go^se:
presently he roused up his moysty head, and from a muddie mufe so cleared up
his cherilike countenance, that the majesty of his nose seemed as the beams
of the sun shining along throughout the coasts of Archadie. But missing the
sight of him whom he lately heard, forthwith he tumbled upon his tun, and
standing bolt upright, through the merueilous influence which to him was
imparted by Euriopazeus; he saw Tom Tipsay in an exceeding quandary, in so much
that Bacchus for very pity, through the might of his deity, so curiously
soared through the airie region, that in a moment he descried this perplexed
Tapster, and drawing nere him, he hailstd him after this manner.

Whereas (my friend) thy groans are so great and grievous, that they have
ascended the hiest clouds, which cry out in thy behalf for my accustomed
clemency, and pierced withal into my bountiful tun, which now troubled with
the sharpnes of thy speech, threats out a danger to her former swauitie:
behold Bacchus, Bacchus I say, thy best beloved god, ready pressed to perform
what thou art willing to demand.

Say on therefore boldly and fear not: and withal know this, that Bacchus
has not only a care to keep his clients in safety, but great cause (no doubt)
to preserve them in felicity: for who is he that has ever heard, much less
seen, that any of the gods, at any time so tendered the welfare of their
suppliants, as from age to age, both daily and hourly been seen in me. The
tyranny of Jupiter is testified by his threatening thunderbolte: the malice of
Mars is expressed by his bloody blade. The outrage of Pallas is dissembled by
the book; but evidently perceived by the piercing lance. The broils of Pan
are performed by the crook. The fury of Syluanus is known by the Clubbe: the
dismal decrees of Diana are noted by her darts, and to be brief, all the
other gods and goddesses, Hercules like are cloyed with such choleric clubbs;
that their mouths taste nothing saving words of wrath, and their deeds seem
indecent, unless they smell of revenge.

But Bacchus that brave god, whom thou see here present, abhors that his
wightes should be wearied with the weight of such vnweildie weapons. No, no, I
bear (as thou may see) a beautiful branch of goodly grapes in token of
joy and gladness: whereas the terror of other gods, to the grief of many, does
prognosticate sorrow and sadness.

Now therefore Tapster, if thou will be as ready to make trial of my bounty,
as I willing to inuit thee to my banquet; behold, Whilson-weeke is near at
hand, then are my feasts called Bacchanalia; then resort together the whole
band of Bacchus in their chiefest bravery, amongst whom (if it so please
thee) thou shall be entertained as a guest most welcome to Bacchus.

Tom Typsay hearing so courteous a discourse, as a man marueilously amazed for
joy, stood a long time staring in Bacchus face, not able poor soul (as then)
to make a reply. But Bacchus, a perfect physician willing to preserve his
patient in so pitiful a plight, revived his spirits with the sweet moisture
of his tun, and refreshed his brains with the juice of his grapes. Hereat
Tom Typsay awaking as it were from a drousie slumber, yielded to his god
Bacchus a tub full of thanks, and promised at the time appointed to be there
with the first. Yet because he knew not the place, he demanded of him thus.

Since your worships godhead has vouchsafed to command my company to so
famous a feast; let it not displease your majesty to put me in memory of the
place: else by the mass, I promise you, I fear me, I shall never find out
your honors house; I pray you sir how do you call it?

To resolve this doubt (quoth Bacchus) understand therefore, that my mansion
house is called Alepotto, situate on the south side of Quaffington, enquire
for me at the sign of the scarlet nose, and from thence shall thou be set
aright into Beerebury lane, so that being there, thou can not miss to find
out my palace, for thou shall plainly see it before thine eyes.

Hereat Tom Typsay made a long leg, vowing to be there without fail, and
Bacchus willing to dismiss him, blessed the Tapsters tankard with part of his
bounty, and thereupon departed.

Thus the Tapster in great haste hies him home as merry as any hare in the
month of March. For whereas before this so comfortable a conference, he was
so lazy, that every foot seemed to have a leaden heel: every leg in such
a quandarie, as though they had took some new acquaintance with the gout; yea
his very head so heavy, as if it had been harnessed in an horse-nightcap: and
his whole body so distempered, as though he had been pricked to the very heart
with a belclapper: behold, now the case is altered, and he is altogether
become another man: for now is he as nimble as a dogs tail, as courageous as
a butterfly, and as merry at the heart, as the best pair of bagpipes in all
the country.

But as times are altered, so diverse accidents are inferred. Happy was Midas
when it was granted unto him, that all which he touched should be gold: but
soon haples again, when his meat was metamorphosed into metal, and he with
his wish ready to starve. Glad was Acteon at the sight of Diana, when she
bathed her self amongst her nymphs: but luckles was his lot, when shortly
after he became himself a present pray to be devoured of his own dogs. And
joyful was Tom Typsay in remembrance of the bounty of his god Bacchus, but
sorrowful alas at his return when first he came within the view of his
wife: for she (as is the manner of all headie huswiues, whose tongues are more
ready to rave, than their hands to work) not sticking one jot to teach him a
new lesson, took him roundly by the topping, and welcomed him home after this
manner.

Ah ah sir, I see by Astronomy that the Moon is even now at full, and the
sign settled just in the nose: in so much that (as by all mathematical
probabilities I do conjecture) back and belly may this year both go bare,
so that there be no want of harnes for the head. Well, well I need not to tell
thee what thou art, the gilding of thy nose sufficiently bewraies thy good
behavior. In so much that either Luna has come down alone, and in taking
thee for her old Endimion, has made thee her new Moon face: or (as thy
tottering too and fro does plainly testify) thou have had some long tariance
at Simon Soakers house, the coppernose smith, your ever assured friend. But one
thing assure thee, for so am I certainly persuaded, that as the devil has
already dubbed thee for a drunkard: so hereafter, one time or other, but never
too late, Don Tyburne will inuit thee to a liueles feast, and teach thee the
cross caper in an halfepennie halter. And thus in a fustian fume flung away.

If true it be, as many report, that a cursed queanes tongue is as sharp as a
razor: experience then proves, that this poor shaueling needed no better a
barber. How ever it be, I will refer it to their rehearsal, which have had
their crowns smoothed as well with a crabtree comb, as those which have tried
the sharpnes of the sisers.

But even as the clap of the thunder the greater it is, the sooner it cease:
and the blastes of Boreas the more furious they are, the less while is their
continuance: so likewise, a woman's mouth the more full it is of words, the
less it is of force, and sooner it wastes into wind. The falling out of
lovers is the renewing of love, and the bitterness of the tongue is easily
seasoned with the sweetness of the lips: for what with pleasing speeches,
sweet conceits, the clinking of the pot, and the drinking of new Nectar,
these two sweet souls became both as one, and the heat of their former
furies were frozen up as it were into a lake of everlasting love.

Thus whiles this couple continued in solacing themselves to their hearts
content, behold Whitsontide drew on: and to be brief, away they both do walk
to the banquet, but because these guestes were wrapped up in their chiefest
roabes; it will not be a miss to describe them in their cheifest bravery, as
they passed along on their journey.

THe Tapsters hat was all in blew:
Beseeming well his nut-browne hiew:
His nose was ruddy as I ween
And bending as the Faucons been.
His thin-set heir along did sit
Which represents a woodcocks wit,
Yet bald withal was Tipsay found
With ears side hanging like a hound.
His eyes were fiery on each side
His mouth was open gaping wide,
His lips great as cable rope,
His teeth white as washed in soap.
A bristled beard did flower his cheeks,
His breath was sweet as unset leekes.
Upon his chinne a wart did grow
Bacchus thereby might well him know.
About his neck he wore a ruff
A quarter long, which was enuffe.
His iacket gray, well faced with furre,
His voice was like a barking curre.
His shoulders did like horseloues stand,
As pillars to uphold his band.
His back was ridged like a boar,
His belly like a tun before.
There hangs a tap between his legs
From whence he turns forth his dregs.
On either hand was placde a cuffe,
And bravely was he breecht in buffe.
His legs they were so crooked seen
A yoked hog might run between.
One foot was of the largest sice
The other clubbed crabtree wise.
And here described is the guest
Which Bacchus bad unto his feast.
Now as concerning the costly attire of the Tapsters wise, because I am in have
at this time, I am rather willing to slip over so cumbersome a matter with
filence, than to trouble idle heads with matters of so great importance.

As they thus traueled together, at length they obtained their long desired
haven, and entered into the Palace of god Bacchus, where they were, so
worthily entertained, that the sun in his midday sphere shining out most
brightlie, does scarce half represent such glory, as was by report seen in
this feast. For whereas commonly now a days, we either inuit them of our
acquaintance, or such whose newfound friendship may be as means to cure old
soars: this mighty god Bacchus, to the wonder of the world, inuiteth not
only such as be his familiars, but men altogether unknown, as well the poor
as the rich.

See then the goodness of this so gracious a god, al ye, which in the driest
drought of summer had rather shroude your throats with a handful of hemp,
then with the expense of an odd Crinclepouch wash your selves within and
without, and make your selves as merry as dawes: yea learn ye niggards at god
Bacchus to be lively; whose especial favor spreads out it self so far, that
every nation does magnify his name, every country speaks in his commendation
and all people paint him out with pen and pensill, in so much that Jupiter
himself does wonder at his worthiness.

But to return from whence I came, their entertainment I say was such, that
they rather thought themselves transported into Paradise that place of
pleasure, then remaining in any earthly habitation: for there they saw a royal
resort as well of all lands and languages, as of all degrees and callings
whatsoever.

There was Ganimedes sent from Jupiter, to employ his service at Bacchus table,
there was halting Hebe sent by Juno to furnish this feast with all solemnity.
There was Sylenus, a stately seruitour, waiting at every wink, and preventing
every want. Yea such was the bounty of Bacchus, that he sent down to Plutus
prince of hell, and craved the company of diverse his acquaintance, which Plutus
performed accordingly.

Thither rode great Alexander upon the back of prauncing Bucephalus, bravely
accompanied with Sardanapalus king of Assiria, queen Semiramis and Ninus her
son, first founders of Babilo^.

After these came Claudius Tiberius, the Roman Emperor, who for the zeal
he had to the vintree, was merely termed Caldius Biberius mero: with him came
Caligula, Nero, and Heliogabalus, Anthony, Cleopatra, and such like.

After these again came stumbling in blind Homer the grecian poet, and with
him came Aristophanes, Menander, and others: and along with these came Virgill,
Horace, Ovid, old father Ennius, Geffery Chaucer, Lydgate, Anthony Skeleton,
Will. Elderton* with infinite mo, whose several names to rehearse, were no les
labor then to make a mouse to piss over Poules, or a louse to leap over the
high tops of Maluerne hills.

Moreover after these came young Cicero, who for the large loose that he had in
turning down his liquor, was called Bicongius; with him came the blockheaded
Balatronus, and Vibidius, Mecenas trencher-mates: and that old huddle and twang
Aristodemus, the shadow of Saint Socrates.

And Proserpina the infernal queen, willing to honor Bacchus in what she
might, releaseth Tantalus from out of the river, causes Sysiphus to cease from
his tumbling task, sets Ixion free from his torture: calls down Prometheus,
and compels the vultures, devouring his heart, to cease from their pray, and
for the tune only that Bacchus feast continues, she does license them al to
depart.

Glad were they to be released tho but for a time, and glad was Bacchus that it
was his lot to welcome such willing guestes.

As Bacchus was thus most busy amongst his friends, behold a reverend route
resorted towardst his court with a trumpet before them sounding most
melodiously in token of great joy, for that they were so nere the pleasant
paradise of god Bacchus. Who they were, from whence they came, and in what
manner they appeared in presence, follows as thus.

First of all came David Drie-throte, from Lesbona in Portugale; in his hand
he held a piece well filled with wine of Canary, which with cap and knee he
presented to god Bacchus, and gave place to the rest.

Secondly, came Alexander Addlehead, from Dun Baur, a Scot, who offered to his
god a dozen of red herrings to season his mouth before he sat down to taste
his liquor.

Thirdly, there skipt in a Spaniard, of the city of Logronio, named Blayner
Bloblip, who gratifying his god with two limons, and an orange pill, with a
most lowly leg he lept aside.

Fourthly, came wallowing in a Germane, borne in Mentz, his name was Gotfrey
Grouthead; with him he brought a wallet full of woodcocks heads, the brains
thereof tempered with other sauce, is a passing preservative against the
ale-passion or pain in the pate.

Fifthly, came posting in one Peers Spendall from Brundusium, an Italian friar,
with a pot full of holy water, sprinkling to and fro, and round about him, to
drive away the devil, least he should chance to come invisible and deceive
them of their drink.

The 6. was one Frauncis Franckfellow, a Corinthian in the the coasts of
Achaia, with him he brought a box of oil, that Bacchus therewith might baste
his belly, when it was ready to crack, with licking up over lauishly the small
crumbs that tumbled out of his tun.

The seventh was one Simon Swil-kan, he came from Colops a city in Africa, and
presented to Bacchus a buttock of Bacon: which broyled on the coals, and so
eaten, will set a man on longing for his liquor before sun shine, be the
morning never so moysty.

The eight was of Capsa, a town well known in Numidia: his name was Geffery
Gooscap, and with him he brought a night cap for god Bacchus great godhead,
least through his hot compotations in the day, his head should crow with cold
consumptions in the night.

The 9. was a jolly gentlewoman, named mistress Merigodown; she came from
Archelais, a city in Cappadocia, with a fan of feathers in one hand, and a
looking glass in the other: which both she gave to Bacchus: the one to gather
wind, least his breath should fail him when he blew a long blast in a wine
pot: the other to see to his nose, least continuing ouerlong in a fiery
color, it should chance to be changed into a Carbuncle.

The 10. was one Phillip Filpot, brought up in Varica a city of Iberia, and
one of the sect of Saint Sinckator. This Philip was a physician, and brought to
his god Bacchus a certain potion, merueilous in operation, of which who ever
he were that did drink after he had been well whitled, by virtue thereof, if
he once were a sleep, should never awake till he were wiser.

The 11. was a Jew borne in Ioppa, he had to name Christopher Crabface, a man
famous in Astrology: he brought in his hand a Prognostication newly composed,
which he bestowed on god Bacchus. In which book he had largly set down
diverse detriments accidental this year: Especially this I noted, that many
drunkards whiles they looked upwards on high toward the man in the Moon,
shall break their necks downwards below in the bottom of a ditch.

The 12. was Gilbert Goodfellow, from Arbila, an Assyrian: this Gilbert was a
butcher, and brought with him an hoggs head, a sheep tongue, and a calves
chauldron; the hogs head for harness against entreatie: the sheep tongue to
temper his own the better in telling of a true tale, and a calves chauldron to
wrap up his noddle, least in the end of a banquet his inward heat should fume
out with a farewell to all good fellowship.

The 13. came from Choka a city in Arabia, named Nicholas Neuerthriue; he
brought with him a pudding pie, prettily powdered with such hot spices as his
country plentifully does afforde: which being once tasted, does
maruellously increase a moystie appetite, which Bacchus received very
thankfully.

The 14. was called Hodge Heauie-breech, he came from Miserga a city in the
confines of Persia: Hodge by his occupation was a Cardmaker, who for the zeal
he had to god Bacchus and al good fellows, offered up to him that renowned
ruffler the knave of Clubs, with a box of trim trillilles, commonly called the
dice: the one to aid him in a needeles combat, the other after his loss, to
serve him in stead of recreation.

The 15. was one Maudlen Moonface, a merry gentlewoman of Dublin, a city in
Ireland: with her she brought a glass full, nose high of Aquauitae, the
operation where of is no less monstrous than m^rueilous, for being drunk in a
morning it so warmeth the heart, as if the body were in a bath, whose inward
heats when they begin to budforth, transform themselves into gosbery grapes to
be seen most plainly as under a vizard of glistering glass.

The 16. was a pleasant Parthian of the stately city Catompylon, called
Loblurchall; this youth was a feate fellow, and a fine faulkner, with him he
carried a water Wagtaile, ready to fly at the fairest goofe in Winchester:
which present god Bacchus accepted very gratefully.

The 17. was borne in India, at a fair city called Tyndis, this forsooth was
a coy dame, called Cate Crashpot, she came clincking a quart pot for sweet
music, in stead of the ta^^ret, to which manner of melody god Bacchus listened
exceedingly.

The 18. was one Baudwin Barrelbely from Ormusa, a place sufficiently known in
the i will of Cyprusse, with him he brought a firkin full of wine of Basterdes:
assuring god Bacchus on his fidelity, that so many as he made thereof
partakers with him, as long as they applied themselves to the hearty carouse,
should never be daunted by death, and fail footing.

The 19. came from Garma in Aethiopia, called Goody Goodale: she (in token of
pure devotion) delivered to Bacchus a ^ack full of groute, and a sack-full of
hops, standing stoutly in this opinion, that the barley broth above all other
did bear away^th bell, and that neither grape nor very might in any respect be
compared to the majesty of the malt.

The 20. was a worthy yeoman, one Tom Tospot, he came from Friburgum an
Heluetian, he as willing to pleasure himself, as to honor his god, presented
to Bacchus, a dainty devised compound, of sundry simples pastiewise, as the
trimming of tripes, the fat of chitterlings, and the marrow of sweet souse,
lapt up altogether within the crusty walls of paste royal, in so much that a
world of be^ly cheer was contained therein, which god Bacchus received with so
great thanks, that he promised to honor the eating thereof, with the best
increments of his ouer-flawing tun.

When these had ended their devotion, they were placed all in order, and used
as most welcome guests: busy was Bacchus in uttering his bounty, and the rest
of the seruitors no l^sse diligent, so that no man wanted his wish, nor
deprived of his will.

Scarce had they tipled gyrum wise, as commonly the sect of the Surratims use
to do, as only of trial to wet their whistles: but in comes Bat Barlycap, a
merry musician, ready with cap and knee to give them a song: which proffer god
Bacchus accepted gladly; whereupon M. Barlicap tempered up his fidle, and began
as follows.

THe Gods of love
Which reign above
Maintain this feast:
Let Bacchus find
Their hearts most kind
To every guest.
And long may Bacchus brave it here
in pleasures to abound,
That wine and beer, and belly gut cheer,
with plenty here be found.
I pray likewise,
That ere you rise
You drink your fill,
That no man want
Nor find it skant
Whereof to swill.
Then may you all carouse in bliss,
and bid farewell to woe,
Who lives in this, he cannot miss
but straight to heaven go.
Be merry all
Both great and small
Be merry here,
And with your liquor
Sweetly bicker,
Do not fear.
Wash well your throats which now are dry,
and spare not you for cost,
I tell you true, no shot is due
where Bacchus rules the roast.
Sadness and grief
Bring no relief,
Bid them adieu:
In pain none pine
Which love strong wine
I tell you true.
Then learn to laffe, carouse and quaffe,
and spare not while you may.
Hey dery dery, my masters be merry,
and look for a joyful day.
This song thus ended, the whole hall for joy did ring out a loud laffing
peale, and thanked the fiddler for his mirth. Bacchus made him drink, Silenus
bad him not spare, so Barlicap did drink till his eyes did stare.

Thus every man falls to his task, and he happy that is able to stand
stoutly in the forefront, to give the brauest onset.

Whiles thus they tipled, the fiddler he fidled, and the pots danced for joy the
old hop about, commonly called Sellengars round: every man set to his foot,
there was not whip snatch and away, but plain rack and manger, where every one
drank himself out of danger: cups and cans went clip clap, the guests were al
welcome, their tongues ran at random, sir Prattle kept a wrangling, and dame
Tattle a great iangling, each one was merry, and no man wanted words to solace
his next neighbor: to be brief, heaven was here, and hell where they were
not, yea who but the guests of god Bacchus.

Amids these only pleasures, and joys incomparable, Jupiter sends down
Mercury to make them pleasant: and Venus the queen of love, sent also her son
Cupid to creep in amongst the^ for kindness, and to lead them along blindfold
unto lust and loathsome self-liking.

Then Pluto the master devil of hell seeing fit opportunity and place
convenient, sent amongst the joyful guests of this feast, the furies of hell,
who with all speed posted to god Bacchus palace, to exercise their hellish
outrage.

Now Cupid lingered not out his time, but did drive his darts amongst the^ with
such force, that some for pure love wedded them selves to wine: some became
sworn brethren to the beer pot, other some matched themselves only to
Metheglin, one liked this, another that, all was wonderful to behold.

Bawdwin Barrelbelly was greatly grieved with love gripes, especially through
the desire he had to goody Goodale the Ethiopian.

Kit Crabface so ardently burned in the love of Maudlin Mooneface, that well
nere he burned himself to ashes.

Mercury he cast his eloquence amongst them by horse loades at once, so that
large promises with no performance, were as easy to be heard, as small bells
in a morris dance.

Medusa, Megera and the rest of those furious hags, fly al at once in amongst
them, and sets their teeth on edge to practice villainy, one against another:
one pulls his fellow by the beard without cause; another crackes his next fellows
crown with a quart pot, one flings a glass in another man's face, another
makes a buckler of his hat to save himself before, whiles another with a black
jack breaks his head behind: one cries down with him, down with him, not
able of himself to kill a louse, another lies lurking under the table
altogether speechles.

Here David Drithroat gathered up his teeth, which Pierse Spendall the Friar
had lately struck out, because David like an unmannerly knave, presumed to
piss in the holy water pot.

There Gotfrey Grouthead begins to fume, and fometh at the mouth like a savage
bore, he falls at variance with mistress Merigodowne, and hales her along by
the hair of the haead: in so much that (thou knave) was as common amongst them
as cartway, or probo in the schools: and (thou whore) as usual a term, as
hait hary in the mouth of a carter.

Whiles thus they lay on heaps, one on the neck of another, some spurning
others with their heels, some scratching their heads where they itched not, some
sprauling underneath most glad to rise up again, some wiping the blood away
from their faces: some rubbing their shinnes which they burst on the frames:
some gaping for wind, almost choked with flies, while these, I say, did lie in
this so great disorder, the gods above were constrained to wink at their
follies, and the devils below rejoiced at the view of this our mortal
wretchedness.

Thus Bacchus arose, with the rest of his Barons, and dismissed every man very
bountifully: who after long stumbling, at the last returned from whence they
came. And Bacchus himself retired to Archadie, whereat this day, for his
singular liberality, and bounteous behavior toward all inhabitants
travelers and passengers, he is of power to make a greater company of able
men then any man of his degree.

Et largas epulas and bona vina dedit. FINIS.

