AN Epitome of Frossard: OR, A Summarie Collection of the most memorable
Histories contained in his Chronicle, chiefly concerning the State of England
and France.

Wherein the famous Wars and Conquests of king Edward the third, with the
honorable atchieuements of the Black Prince, and other his sons, both in
France, Spain, and Portugal, are compendiously described.

Entermixed with other historical occurrents of those times, very worthy, and
profitable to be had in remembrance.

Compiled in Latin by John Sleydane, and translated into English, By P.
Golding.

AT LONDON, Printed by Tho: Purfoot, for Per: Golding. 1608.

Cum Priuilegio.

An Epitome of Frossard. OR, A summarie collection of the most memorable
histories contained in his Chronicle, chiefly concerning the state of England
and France.
The first Book.
PHillip, surnamed the fair, King of France, had three Sons, Lewis,
Phillip, and Charles, and one daughter. The two eldest succeeding one another,
and deceasing without issue, left the kingdom by descent to their brother
Charles. This Charles had a Son, but he dyed very young during the life of
his Father. The daughter of Her name was Isabell.
King Phillip and sister to Charles, was married to Edward the second King of
England, who begat of her a Son named Edward, of whose most noble
disposition, stout courage, and princely virtues, honorable mention is made in
many places of this work.

There is a saying in Homer, that Children for the most part prove, worse then
their parents, seldom any better, but in this King it fell out otherwise: For
his father was a man of evil disposition, much given to riot and excess, and
greatly led by sicophants and flatterers, of which sort the principal were
two Noble men of the house of the Spencers. These so bewitched the Kings
mind, that by their counsel and instigation he put to death some two and
twenty of the chiefest Barons of England, and not so contented, banished also
his Wife and her Son wholly out of the Realm. But the Queen at length, through
the assistance of her faithful friends being brought back with her Son
into England, not only exacted most severe punishment upon those flatterers
the Father and the Son, but further for diverse grave and weighty
considerations, by authority of Parliament removed her husband from ruling the
state as a person unfit for government, and restrained him to safe custody.
Which done, the worthy Prince Edward (a most virtuous Son of a most vicious
Father) who before had lived in exile with his Mother, as is already declared,
was crowned King of England at London by the name of Edward the Third, in the
Sixteenth year of his age, and the year of our Lord 1326. He took to Wife
1326.
Phillip the daughter of William Earl of Henault and Holland, whom he had
formerly begun to fancy amongst the rest of her Sisters at such time as he came
with his mother as a banished person out of England into Henault.

But the Peers of France after the death of King Charles, would in no wise
admit his Sister (matched to the King of England) to the succession of the
crown, because it was now of old received as a custom in that country, not to
leave the charge of so great a Kingdom to be managed by the discretion of
women. Whereupon they likewise renounced Edward the Third, her Son and
Grandchild to King Phillip as descending of the female line: and so with one
consent they gave the scepter and sovereignty to Phillip of Valoys, cosen
germain to King Phillip deceased.

Upon this occasion ensued most cruel wars and bitter enmity, Edward the
Third presuming that he had more rightful interest, and a better title to the
kingdom of France, then Phillip of Valoys.

And to further this quarrel, it so fell out, that a certain Noble man of
great account called Robert of Artoys, one Robert of Artoys comes into
England, and the occasion of his coming.
who had been long of singular respect and estimation with King Phillip, at
length falling in his disfauor, was banished the Court, and could be suffered
to rest in no place by reason of the kings displeasure. This man after many
wanderings, at last arrived in England where he found quiet harbor and
abiding: and being by the King entertained as a counselor, ceased not by his
persuasions to provoke and stir him up to arms against the French King.

King Edward purposing to war upon Phillip, solicited the frendshippe of
the Flemmings, at that time remaining scarce in due obedience of their Lord:
whereof the French King having intelligence, by the help of the Earl of
Flanders the^ soiourning in his Court, he procured certain places of Flaunders
to be fortified, where the English men must of necessity pass when they
should come into France. The King of England sent his forces against them and
in a pitched field the Flemmings were over thrown and chased.

And further for the better dispatch of his affairs and to compass the favor
of the German Princes, the King of England came himself to Antwerpe, where
he entered into a league of amity with the Dukes of Gelders, and Iuliers, the
Archbishop of Colen, and diverse others. And that the Emperor should take no
offense thereat, it was concluded, the Duke of Iuliers should be addressed unto
him in the name of the King of England and the rest, to acquainte him with
these proceedings. The Emperor was so far from dislike of the matter, that
he also created the King of England Lieutenant General of the Roman Empire.

The chief cause why Lewis of Bauier the Emperor, so highly honored the King
of England, was for that he hoped during the tumults of the wars, he might
happily take some opportunity to recover again the City of Cambray, which
being indeed a City imperial, was notwithstanding withheld from him by the
French men.

The French King in the mean while contracted a league with David King of
Scotts, who for the same purpose came with his Wife to Paris. He sent also a
power into Scotland to molest the English at home, that thereby their forces
might be more weakened, and the King of Englands puissance abated.

The King of England proceeding in his purpose, with the power of his
confederates besieged Cambray to recover Cambray besieged.
it again to the Empire. But the City was so well provided both of munition
and victual, that he attempted it in vain: wherefore abandoning the siege,
he passed with his forces into France.

As Soon as the English army was entered into France, the Earl of Henault, who
of late succeeded in the room of his deceased Father, and had been present at
the siege of Cambray (as a matter of duty in regard it concerned the Empire)
refused now any longer to serve the King of England for fear of displeasing
the French King, because he thought that in this war the King of England
rather intended his own business then the affairs of the Empire.

The French King at such time as his enemies forces were advanced against him,
and that the armies on both sides stood ready raunged in order of battle,
albeit he had a far greater power then the King of England, (as having in
his army above an hundredth thousand men,) yet notwithstanding, partly
persuaded by his Lords, but principally terrifyed by the letters of Robert King
of Sicill his near kinseman an excellent Astronomer, he withdrew himself and
departed without giving battle. And so the King of England returned into
Braband, and the French King into his own Country, much displeased with
himself that he had refused to fight. The King of England shortly after being
well assured of the faithfulness of his confederates, passed over into his own
kingdom.

About this time in the City of Gaunt, a certain person of the baser sort
named Jaques of Arteuill, purchased himself such estimation among the commons,
that in continuance of time there was none able to withstand his bold attempts,
no not the Earl of Flaunders himself. The King of England to procure the good
will of the Flemmings, allied this fellow unto him, as one that might afford
him much help in his wars hereafter. Of this Jacques henceforth we shall
often have occasion to make mention.

The King of England before he returned into his own conntrey as is a little
before declared, had obtained a grant of the Flemmings to aid him in his
wars, whereby himself might not only assail his enemy with the greater
force, but they also recover their lost towns, as Lisle, Tourney, and certain
others holden at that time by the French. But the Flemmings pretended great
difficulty in the matter, before they would conclude this league with the
English. For they had formerly couenanted with the French King, and bound
themselves upon the forfeiture of twenty hundredth thousand crowns, never to
bear arms against the King of France, and these conditions were ratified by
the Bishop of Rome. Hereupon they persuaded the King of England to take upon
him the arms and style of the Realm of France, and in so doing they thought
themselves discharged of their oath. The King after much deliberation King
Edward takes upon him the title of France.
condiscended to their requests, and so the league was established between
them.

The French King having intelligence of the matter, practiced with the
Flemmings by some friends of his, as it were in the name of the Pope, to
forsake the King of England and adhere to him again, adding large promises of
great reward: all which notwithstanding they refused, whereupon presently
ensued the Popes thunderbolt. It made the Flemmings shrewdly afraid, but the
King of England so encouraged and hartened them by letters and messengers, that
they brookt the matter with the better patience. Then began the wars to
grow hot between the Flemmings and French men, and the King of France sent
his eldest Son as General, who with a puissant Army marched through the
country even as far as Henault.

Whilste William Earl of Henault for the establishing of his affairs,
travailed first into England, and afterward to Lewis the Emperor, the French
men in his absence did meruaillously afflict his country by making continual
incursions upon it. But the Earl at his return out of Germany, having
associated himself with the King of England, the Emperor, and diverse Princes
of the Netherlands, raised a mighty power, and being also aided by him, who in
a manner had the hearts of the Flemmings at command, I mean Jacques of
Artevile, enforced his enemies to retire.

So the Armies on both sides being prepared to fight, the Earl of Henault was
very desirous to come to the encounter: but the Duke of Braband was of another
opinion, and with weighty reasons dissuaded him from hazarding the battle
till such time as the King of England were returned, whom they accounted as
General of this war.

As Soon as the French King understood the King of England was departed into
his own country, he gave commandment that a fleet of Ships should
presently be rigged and put forth to Sea, to attend his coming back, and
then to assail him with great violence, and bend all their forces to empeach
his landing. But the King of England encountering them in his passage, put them
valiantly to the worse, and with fortunes favorable assistance arrived safely
in Flaunders.

Robert King of Sicill of whom we have formerly spoken, foreseeing by the Art
of Astrology, that the kingdom of France should sustain great damage by
the English men, for the great affection he bare to that Realm, travailed
himself to Auinion, and there made earnest suit to the Pope and College of
Cardinals, that they would set an atonement between those two puissant
Princes. They promised to employ their endeavors, so the minds of the kings
were disposed according.

About this time the Brabanders, Flemmings, and Henowaies, entered into a most
strict league among themselves, in such sort that if any of those countries
should happen to be molested with war, or afflicted by any other means, the
rest were bound to succor and assist them: And if any dissension or variance
chanced, they should arbitrate the matter among themselves, or else if the
case were such that they could not decyde it, then it should be determined by
the discretion of the King of England, into whose hands they were all sworn to
put the controversy and to abide by his arbitriment.

The King of England associated with the aid of his confederates, besieged
Tourney with a strong army. Many assaults Tournay besieged.
were given, but they prevailed not by reason of the valiant defense made by
the Townsemen, who were furnished thoroughly aforehand, both with men and all
things needful to offend the enemy by commandment from the French King,
who was ptiuie to a great part of the devises and consultations among his
enemies.

During the siege before Tourney, the French King sending certain companies
into Scotland, ernestly entreated the captains left there in Garrison for the
safty of their country by King David, to make some invasion upon the English,
that by this means his enemy might be enforced to raise his siege and
return for the defense of his own country: promising moreover that he would
send them store of soldiers whose service they might employ in that action.
The Scots stoutly undertaking the matter, won certain holds and much
endammaged their enemy.

The French King in the mean while levied a great army to raise the siege
before Tourney. There came to his aid Charles King of Boheme, the Dukes of
Burgoine, Britain, Burbon, and Loraine, the Earls of Bar, Sauoy, Geneua,
Alauson, and Flaunders. And besides these, the kings of Navarre, and Scotland,
the one as confederate, the other as feudarie to the crown of France.

That the Earl of Flaunders followed the French King as we have declared,
whilste the Flemmings took part with the English, let it not seem strange to
any, for thus stands the case. This Jacques of Arteuill whom we spoke of
before, was become so popular and grown to such authority amongst the
commons, that the Earl himself could find no safe abiding in his own
country, but was constrained for that cause to commit himself to the
protection of the French King.

The siege of Tourney continued some three months, A truce taken for twelve
months.
during which space Jane os Valoys the French kings sister, and mother to the
Earl of Henault, labored very earnestly to procure a composition. At length
she obtained thus much, that a day was appointed for a meeting to be had
between the Lords of France and England, where they agreed upon a truce for
twelve months space, with condition that each party should hold whatsoever he
had gotten by battle. Herevppon the armies were both dismissed. And this
further was concluded, that at a certain time prefixed within the year,
another treaty should be had at Arras, where commissioners from both Princes,
and from Pope Clement should meet together, and this likewise was performed.
There the English men demanded much, and the French men proffered nothing, save
the Earldom of Ponthiew, which was given before in dowry to King Edwards
mother, when she married into England. More Prolonged for twelve months more.
then thus was nothing done in this treaty, only another year added to the
truce, and the King of England returned into his Country.

When things were thus set at a stay, and that the Duke of Britain prepared to
return into his own country, he The occasion of the wars in Britain.
was seized upon in his journey by a most violent sickness, whereof in short
space he dyed, leaving behind no lawful issue male to succeed him. He had two
brothers, of whom the one which was Earl of Mountfort, was his brother only
by the fathers side, the other both by father and mother, but he died before
him leaving issue one only daughter, whom the Duke of Britain in his life
time joined in marriage to Charles of Bloys sisters Son to Phillip the French
Charles of Bloys.
King. For the Duke fearing it might so fall out, that after his decease his
brother the Earl of Mountfort would seize the seigniory of Britain into his
own hands, and by that means dispossess, and as it were disinherite the
lawful daughter of his brother by the whole blood, thought good to provide a
stay for the Lady by marriage, and therefore his desire was the rather to match
her to the kings nephew, because if the other should make any attempt
hereafter, he might the easilier be resisted. And so it came to pass. For the
Earl of Mountfort had no sooner understanding of his brothers death, but that
partly by force, and partly by composition he possessed himself of the greater
part of Britane. And then the better to supporte his cause and stablish his
estate, he went over to the King of England, where relating the whole discourse
of his proceedings, he received from him the inuestiture of his dukedom. And
the King of England considering that by this means he might have a ready
passage through Britain into France, promised both his council and
furtherance to the new Duke against his enemy, whether it were the French
King or any other whosoever. For he had lost the French kings favor before,
ever since he brought in the Germans to serve in his wars, upon whom he
had spent such a huge mass of money, without accomplishing any notable
enterprise. And this is the true cause and original ground of this war.

Charles of Bloys being advertised of the proceedings and enterprises of
Mountfort, made great complaint of him to the French King. After consultation
had, the King commanded that the Earl should be summoned to the Parliament of
Paris. The Earl came, and after some debatings on both sides, he was enjoined
by the King not to depart the City for a certain season. Nevertheless he
conveyed himself secretly away, and so sentence was given with Charles. It was
a great blot in Mountforts case that he had been invested in his Duchy by the
King of England. And thervppon the French King denouncing Charles to be
rightful heir, encouraged him with his own mouth to recover by force of arms
the seigniorie due unto him both by judgment of law and right of inheritance:
promising not only his own aid, but procuring other Lords also to assist him
in the maintenance of his rightful quarrel. The war was undertaken (in the
behalf of Charles) with the power of the Peers of France his friendly
assistants. Besides other, at length the City of Nants (the principal in
those parts) was forced by assault. There Mountfort himself was taken
prisoner, and from thence conveyed to Paris to the King, by whose commandment
being cast in prison, he there ended his life. His Lady in the mean time
bearing her fortune with a true manlike resolution, encouraged the fainting
hearts of her people, and both fortified with Garrisons and furnished with
victuals; the rest of the holds yet untaken by the enemy.

Upon conclusion of the truce between the kings of England and France, and
dissoluing the siege before Tournay, the King of England returning home,
perceived what great annoyance the Scotts had wrought to his country in the
mean while: whereupon he assembled an Army. The Scotts being pressed with
great extremity in the absence of the King, purchased a truce of the English
upon condition, that if within four months space the King did not provide
for the rescue, they should yield. This was signified to the King of Scotts,
who therevppon returned, and being aided with foreign power, won certain
holds from the English. Amongst other the City Durham take and sacked by the
Scottish.
of Durham was one, where no mercy was shown to no sex, age, nor order
whatsoever, but the very churches and all were consumed with fire. Afterward
perceiving that by further prosecutiug his enterprise, he did but lose his
labor, and understanding moreover that the King of England approached with a
mighty power, upon deliberation with his counsel, he retired: In the mean
while ministering proffers of a truce which notwithstanding he had no intention
to admit till he had first taken advise of the French King with whom he was
formerly confederate.

The Lords of France departing out of Britain for no other respect but
because the winter whether compelled them, returned again with their forces in
the beginning 1342.
of Summer, purposing to bring the rest of that Duchy in subjection. Whereof
the Lady of Mountfort being advertised, she sent ambassadors to the King of
England, requiring aid upon this condition, that her Son whom she had borne
by the Earl of Mountfort, should take to wife some one of the kings daughters.
But the succors which he sent for, the space of well nere two months
together were tossed upon the Seas with storms and contrary winds, in such
sort as they could by no means attain to their desired port, so that in the
mean season certain places were recoured by the French men. But it is
admirable to relate with what courrage and stowtnesse the Lady Mountfort
demeaned her self: Fot she was not only content to fortify strong holds,
and encourage her followers The gallant carriage and warlike behavior of the
Lady Mountfort.
with comfortable speeches, but she also put on armor herself, and attended
with a troop of horse, came into the open field and provoked her enemy.
Moreover being besieged in a certain Castle and put to great distress, when
for the most part all that were about her persuaded to yield, she alone
(amongst men) persisted in opinion to the contrary, and with this resolution
held it out so long till at last the English forces which had wandered a great
while upon the Seas, arrived to her rescue.

A certain French captain called Lewis of Spain, took the City of Dinant
in Britain by composition, the Citizens having slain their governor in the
market place, because he refused to yield it. Another City near adjoining
named Gerand, was taken by the same Captain by force; where not so much as
Children and little infants, nor the Temples consecrated to Gods service, could
escape the uttermost rigor of war, but were all destroyed with fire and
Sword. The Duke was much displeased with this impious cruelty, and worthylie
caused the authors of such wickedness to be hanged. He also received the city
of Vannes upon composition without consent of the captain, and many other
places besides. To be short, diverse encounters passed both by Sea and Land
with variable fortune on both sides. A town and Castle in those parts called
Hamibout, was assaulted with great violence, but defended with more valor, for
therein at that time remained the Duchess of Britain whom we spoke of
before. The French men perceiving they spent their time in vain, and that
Winter began to approach, persuaded Charles of Bloys to dismiss his Army, and
withal to take a truce, and place his soldiers in Garrison. It was so done,
and the Duchess sailed over to the King of England, who sent an Army into
Britain against the French men.

About this time, the noble men of England counseled their King to take a
steadfast truce with the Scotts for three years space if it might be: showing
how great a burden it would be to him to supporte so huge a charged of wars
round about him, in Scotland on the one side, in France on the other.
Herevppon Ambassadors were sent to the Scottish King, but nothing could be
effected, for he would determine upon nothing without the French kings
counsel. The King of England moved therewithal, raised a mighty power in
purpose to bring the Scotts to utter subversion. But in the mean time, by the
mediation of good men a truce was obtained and stablished. The English Army
which we spoke of erewhile, met with the French kings fleet well appointed,
upon the coast of Britain. There they encountered one another and continued in
fight till within the evening. Somewhat before midnight there arose a very
dangerous tempest, which scattered them in such sort, that they were separated
more then an hundredth miles asunder. In this conflict also, the Countess of
Mountfort her self performed knightly service. At length the English men
recovered a haven not far from the City of Vannes, at that time in possession
of the French men, where putting on land their forces, they valiantly approached
the City. And in conclusion dividing their army into three parts, with two of
them they fiercely assaulted the town in two several places in the night
season, and whilste al men resorted thither to make resistance, they brought
the rest of their forces to a place unfortified and so entered the Vannes wone
by the English.
town, putting all that were in it either to the Sword or to flight.

There were two French Lords which had the custody of this town, whom it full
sorely grieved to see the City thus taken. Therefore assembling such forces as
they could Recovered again by the French.
raise upon the sudden, they gave a fresh assault to the town and so
surprised it agine from the enemy. In these conflicts Robert of Artoys admiral
of the English fleet, and General of the war, was wounded: who being
conveyed to London for the cure of his hurts, in short space after there ended
his life. Whereat the king of England conceived The death of Robert of Artoys.
so great grief and displeasure, that of purpose to revenge the death of so
worthy a man, so dearly esteemed, he himselse sailed over with a mighty power
of shipping into Britain.

So great was the number of the English forces, that at one instant they
besieged three of the most puissant Cities in all that country Renes, Vannes,
and Nants, where Charles of Bloys with his wife at the same time remained:
besides the town of Dinant which they took by force.

Charles of Bloys wrote to the French King concerning the state of his
affairs, the arrival of the English, the besieging of his towns: earnestly
requiring that he would succor him in this great distress. The French King
sent 1343.
his son the Duke of Normandy: who with an Army of some forty thousand,
took his way directly toward Vannes at that time very streytly besieged by
the English. And had not the winter season brought great impediment to their
purpose, it had surely come to a field battle. But at length through the
intercession of two Cardinals sent from Pope Clement, a truce was agreed upon
for three years, and a solemn o the taken of the Princes for the due A truce
for three years.
observation thereof in the mean space. So the King of England returned into
his own country.

Whilste the wars were yet open, the Englishmen had laid siege to the City
of Vannes lately before recovered by the French: and it was stoutly defended
by two noble men, the one called Lord Clisson, the other Henry of Lion. It
was these men's fortune in a certain light skirmish to be taken prisoners by
the English: and because there was a Lord of England also remaining among the
French, upon conclusion of the truce, communication was had for the exchange of
prisoners. The King of England for the redeeming of his, delivered to the
French men the Lord Clisson, detayning the other still prisoner. Herevppon as
is most likely, some emulous obseruers of Clissons carriage, raised a suspicion
that he should be secretly affected to the English, and that for this respect,
he rather then the other obtained his liberty. To be short, this jealousy
increased so far, that he lost his head for it at Paris. And for the like
cause diverse other noble men suffered the like punishment. Sure it was a
lamentable spectacle, especially considering that Clisson in the recovery of
Vannes from the English, had so honorably performed the office both of an
excellent Captain and valiant soldier.

This act of the French kings was taken in so ill part by the King of England
(esteeming it done in his reproach) that he commanded Henry of Lion to be
presently set at liberty, and freely forgave him his ransom: only
enioyning him at his return to signify to the French King, how he interpreted
these proceedings no otherwise then as intended to his dishonor, and that
thereby he held the late truce to be violated: wherefore he should expect no
other from him but as an enemy. This message was delivered to the French King,
and the King of England sent an army into Aquitane, with certain other forces
to succor the Lady Mountfort.

The Englishmen were entertained with great applause Bayon and Bordeaux receive
the English.
at Bayon and Bordeaux. Afterward laying siege to Bergerat, a town near the
river Gerond, they received the townsemen to mercy, the English Captain taking
their oath of fidelity in the name of the King his Master. They took many
other places also partly by composition, partly by force of arms. Amongst
other they won the Castle of Auberoch, a place notably fortified, and leaving
there a Garrison to defend it, the English Captain returned again with the
rest of his army to Bordeaux. In the mean while the French men to the number
of twelve thousand, besieged the same Castle again very streytly and put the
soldiers there in Garrison to great distress. But the English Captain at
Bordeaux having intelligence thereof, assembled some nine hundredth men, and in
an evening, when the French men were to supperward, brake suddenly out of a
wood and charged so resolutely upon them, that he put them to discomfiture,
and in the chase took diverse prisoners, their Captain for one, being sore
wounded, whom the people in those parts had in such estimation, as if he had
been a Prince.

As the English men lay in leaguer before a certain Castle, the soldiers put
their Captain in hold because he refused to yield it up to the enemy, and
would by no means grant his liberty, but upon consent to their request. In
the end he consented, and afterward coming to Toulouse, was there arrained of
treason, and hanged upon a gibbet for his labor. The town of Rioll was
likewise rendered into the Englishmens hands, but the Castle was still
maintained by the Captain. The Englishmen therefore drew a mine, and overthrew
a great part of it to the ground: then the captain considering his imminent
peril, abandoned the place and left the Castle to the English. They also
received Angolesme by composition, after a months respit which the townsemen
had requested upon hope to be relieved in the mean time by the French King.

It is formerly told you of Jacques de Arteuill how he was grown so great
among the Flemmings, that the Earl himself could have no safe recourse into
his own country. But at length he received the just reward of a seditious
rebel. He had given great hope to the King of England, that he would procure
the whole country of Flaunders by general consent to accept him for their
sovereign. And for accomplishment hereof the King of England with a well
furnished navy arrived in the haven of Flaunders. The matter was propounded to
the commons, and all for the most part seemed well affected to the King of
England. But the Gauntoys took this practice in marvelous ill part, and when
Jacques returned into the Citle, they entertained him nothing so kindly as they
were wont, but besetting the house where he was, brake open the doors upon
him, and slew him as he thought to have escaped at a posterne. Amongst other
Articles wherewith The death of Jacques de Arteuill.
they charged him, this also was a principal point, that he had privately
conveyed all the common treasure over to the King of England. The Earl of
Flaunders moreover had but one only son.

About the same time, William Earl of Henault sailing with great assistance
into Friseland (pretending himself to be rightful Lord of that country) was
himself there slain in battle with diverse of his nobility. After his death,
Margaret Princess of Henault and wife to Lewis of Bavier the Emperor, took
possession of this Earldom. The French King was very desirous to draw unto
his party one Sir John of Henault, a worthy Gentleman and a gallant soldier,
who had formerly done great service to the King of England. The matter was
attempted by diverse means, and when no other would take effect, this devise
was put in practice: to insinuate into his conceit, that the King of England
had a purpose to withdraw from him, his pensions and yearly entertainments.
He gave such credit to this report, that forthwith he wholly estranged himself
from the King of England, and yielded his service to the French King.

When the French King understood that the Englishmen wasted Aquitaine, and had
won many towns and fortresses there, he levied his forces, amounting to the
number of an hundredth thousand men. Over this army he appointed his Son John
Duke of Normandy to be Lieutenant General. To the French kings aid came Odet
Duke of Burgundy, with his Son Phillip Earl of Artoys and Boloine, both of
them excellently well accomplished for the war. They recovered the town of
Angolesme, and laid siege to the castle of Aguillion, gotten before by the
Englishmen upon composition, then which there was not a stronger nor better
fortified in those quarters. The winning thereof was by sundry means
attempted. But it is Valiant resistance made by the English in the Castle of
Aguillion.
incredible to believe, with what courage and resolution the Englishmen that
lay there in Garrison defended themselves. The French King being advertised
thereof, and demanded what his pleasure was to be done in the matter, returned
answer to his Son that he should continue his siege till necessity of
hunger constrained them to yield.

The King of England understanding in what distress his men were, raised in
continently a power of fourteen thousand soldiers. He was accompained amongst
other with his Son Edward Prince of Wales, and a certain French Gentleman
called Godfrey of Harecourt, who being expulsed his country by the French King,
fled to the King of England for safeguard of himself, and revenge of his
injuries: for the French King had seized upon all his possessions. This
Godfrey was the cause that the King of England directed his course into
Normandy, being otherwise purposed to sail into Aquitaine. He divided his
Army into three parts, whereof two raunged along the sea coast, wasting the
fields, sacking diverse towns, and leading away their prisoners, least
afterward they might gather to a head and work them some displeasure. The
third wherein was the King himself, marched through the maine land, making
havoc of all things, and every night they met all together again at the
kings camp.

The French King in the mean time caused such an army to be raised, as a more
puissant had not been seen in France of many years. Letters were also
addressed to the King of Bohemia for aid, who at that time highly favored the
French King. The Englishmen took a very rich town in Normandy called Saint
Lupes, and afterward hastened to the siege of another much richer called Cae^,
borrowing that name of the river running by it. The townsmen were purposed to
have given battle to the Englishmen in the field: but being people
unexperienced in arms, at the first fight of the enemy, they fled back again
into the town. The French captains had betaken themselves to their
fortresses, but beholding the huge slaughter made in the City (for the
Englishmen had taken it) they Caen in Normandy wo^ne by the English.
yielded. Amongst other prisoners the Constable was one, whom with the rest
which were taken in his company, the King of England afterward bought of him
that took them for twenty thousand crowns. The Englishmen marching still
forward, passed over the river Seane toward Roane, and their light horsemen
scoured the country even unto the Suburbs of Paris: where encountering the
townsmen of Amience well appointed, posting toward Paris upon commandment
from the King, because of long time before they had been charged with no
service for the wars, they let fiercely upon them, and bereft them of their
carriage.

The French King in the mean while (notwithstanding the Parisians earnest suit
to the contrary) departed from Paris to Saint Dennis, whither as then the rest
of the Peers were assembled. From thence pursuing his enemy with a certain
vehement and wonderful desire to fight, he removed to Amience. The King of
England assayed to pass his army over the river Some, but there was neither
foord known, nor bridge possible to be taken, they were all so surely guarded
by the French men. At length after proclamation of enlargement and reward to
any French prisoner that should perform it, a certain young man taken by
chance, discovered a forde. The French men suspecting they would pass over at
the same place, opposed themselves strongly against them, and entertained them
in the river with a sharp skirmish. Nevertheless the Englishmen waded through
and put them to flight. By this time The battle of Blanchetaque.
the French King was come to Abbevile, and the King of England waited for him
in the plain fields, to give him battle.

When the time of battle approached, the King of England made his prayers to
God to send him an happy victory, and divided his wholly Army into three parts.
In the vauntgarde was his Son, in the reregard himself. The The memorable
battle and victory of King Edward at Cressy.
fight was furious on both sides, but at length the Englishmen obtained the
victory, which may seem a wonder considering the huge multitude of their
enemies. In this battle the King of England (who awaiting opportunity, had not
yet put himself in preasse) being advertised that his Son fighting valiantly
in the forefront, was wellnighe oppressed by the enemy, he made answer to the
messengers in this sort: Demand no help of me this day so long as my Son
lives: For I will that he now show some proof of his valor, and that the
honor of the victory be wholly his and theirs that are appointed to attend him.
In this battle was slain Henry of Lutzenburge Father to Charles King of
Bohemia, who although he were blind, would needs adventure against the enemy
notwithstanding. Toward night the French King accompanied with very few,
withdrewe himself out of the field. The King of England caused the dead bodies
of the French men to be numbered, and there were found slain, eleven Princes,
fourscore Barons, twelve hundredth Knights, and about thirty thousand others.
By commandment from the King, all the noble men were buried in the villages
near adjoining, and three days truce was granted to give burial to their
dead.

After the King of England had obtained this notable victory, he took his way
directly toward Calice, and environning Calice besieged.
the town with a strong siege, there planted himself, in purpose not to
depart before he had constrained them to yield for famine. Mean while the
French King sent word to his Son the Duke of Normandy, lying still at the
siege of Aguillion, that he should give over his enterprise, and convey his
forces again into France, to withstand the English men who subdued all things
before them as they passed. Before this advertisement came to the Army, there
was another battle fought between the French and the English: wherein was
present Phillip son to the Duke of Burgundy, who falling with his horse soon
after departed this life. During the siege of Aguillion (whereof an English
Baron was captain) the Earl of Derbie whom the King of England had before
sent into Aquitaine, remaining at Bordeaux. As Soon as he understood that the
siege was raised and the Duke of Normandy departed, he assembled to the number
of six thousand men, and raunging through a great part of the country
thereabouts, at length took Poitiers by assault, and then returning again to
Bordeaux, dismissed his soldiers, leaving no Garrison in Poitiers, because the
town was utterly raced.

Whilste the King of England was busied about the siege of Calice, David King
of Scotts (partly of his own motion, partly by procurement of the French
King) persuading himself that all the soldiers of England or at leastwise the
greater part were gone a warfare with their King, assembled his forces to the
number of forty thousand or there about, and invaded England. The Queen of
England in the mean time behaved her self with great courage and discretion,
consulting with the Lords and Prelates of her Real me, about the direction of
her affairs. So an army was levied upon the sudden, and the enemy fiercely
encountered certain Archbishops and Bishops of England being present in the
conflict: whose power notwithstanding it were sarre inferior in number to the
Scotts, yet they obtained the victory. In this battle the Scottish King
himself with many others, were taken prisoners. David King of Scotts taken
prisoner.
The number of them that were slain, amounted to fifteen thousand, the rest
saved themselves by flight. After the accomplishment of this honorable
victory, the Queen of England crossed the seas and went to visit the King
her husband.

In the battle before mentioned, amongst others was also The battle of Cressy.
slain the Earl of Flaunders, who by reason of the rebelliu of Jacques de
Artevill, was compelled to put himself into the French Kings protection. He
left a Son named Lewis at that time about fifteen years of age. Now the
King of England was in great expectation, that through the politic
assistance* of Jacques de Artevill, he should have brought the Flemminges to
receive him for their sovereign, and that his Son the Prince of Wales with
their general acceptance, should have obtained the Lordship of all Flaunders.
But the author of so wicked a devise was slain as is already declared: for the
Flemmings would not disinherit the Son of their Lord, though they loved not his
Father. The King of England therefore began to treat of a marriage between
the young Earl, who was then remaining in the French Court (for he fled
thither with his Father at such time as the state grew troublesome in
Flaunders) and a daughter of his named Isabell. Against this match the Duke of
Braband opposed himself, for he also had a daughter at the same time whom he
desired to match with the young Earl. Means were found by the Flemminges to
convey the Earl from the French King, and he returned into Flaunders in hope
to recover his Fathers possession. The King of England in the mean while was
nothing slack in soliciting his suit with the Lords of Flaunders. By them the
matter was moved and the match proffered to young Lewis. But he utterly refused
it, protesting that he would never marry the daughter of him that had slain
his Father. When the counselors of Flaunders saw him so resolute in this
opinion and that he would give them none other answer, they committed him to
safe custody, and would grant no enlargement, but upon condition that he
should be ruled by the advice of his elders. So at length he was persuaded, and
the King of England with the Earls wife that should be, the Lords of
Flaunders, and himself, met together at a day appointed. There the matter
was debated, the Earl consented, was forthwith contracted, and after returned
into Flaunders, where he was nothing so straightly looked unto as he had been.
A little before the nuptials should be solemnized, he took occasion
accompanied with a small train, to ride a hawking, where pretending great
earnestness in following a Faulcon, which he had let fly at the heron, by
little and little he outstripped the rest of his company, till at last he lost
sight of them all, and so escaped again to the French King.

Whilste the King of England besieged Calice, the truce which we told you was
concluded by certain Cardinals between Charles of Bloys and the Countess of
Mountfort expired, by occasion where of the wars were renewed again afresh.
The King of England sent a competent crew of horsemen out of the army which
besieged Calice, to succor the Lady Mountfort. Certain Englishmen were
straightly environed by Charles of Bloys in a town and castle which they had
taken immediately before: But certain other Englishmen sent suddenly from the
Countess in the dawning of the day, brake unlooked for into the camp of the
French men (who by reason of a little good fortune in a certain skirmish the
day before, looked negligently to their watch) and putting a great part of them
to the sword, Charles of Bloys taken prisoner.
took also the Lord Charles of Bloys himself prisoner.

In the mean time the King of England prested the town of Calice with great
vehemence, and the French King intending to raise his siege, levied a mighty
army. Whereof the King of England having advertisement, so fortified all
places, by which the French men might have any access as well by the sea coast
as the maine land, that they could not possibly make any approach to disturb
him. The French King seeing all entrance already foreclosed, required the King
of England to give him battle. But the King of England considering how he had
spent welnigh a whole year in the siege of this City, and withal consumed a
great treasure about it, thought it good policy to hold his advantage. The same
time also two Cardinals sent from Pope Clement to endeavor an accord between
the Princes, had three days communication with the Lords that were appointed
Commissioners from both parties, but could effect nothing of their purpose.
Whereupon the French King presently after dissolved all his great army. The
Call sians seeing themselves deprived both of present aid and future
expectation, began to parley of giving up the town. But the King of England
would accept no other condition but one, which was to put themselves, life, and
goods absolutely into his power, and to remain wholly at his disposition. His
counsel earnestly dissuading him from this obstinate resolution, as a thing
tending to very ill example, at length the matter was brought to this issue:
that six of the principal citizens, bareheaded and barefooted, with halters
about their necks, and the keys of the town in their hands, should present
themselves before him to be disposed of at his pleasure. The report of those
tidings, suddenly moved great mourning and lamentation in the city. In which
sorrowful confusion, when one not of the meaner rank had protested openly
that he would not shun death in the behalf of his country, now almost pined
with hunger, his example soon after drew five more to the like affection.

These men being publicly brought forth in such manner as he appointed who had
now jurisdiction over their lives, and by his commandment adjudged to dye:
when all the Noble men had made intercession in vain, the Calice yielded to
King Edward.
Queen at length after many reasons alleged for her purpose, with much
entreatie obtained their pardon. Then were some sent to take possession of the
town, and by authority from the King all the old Inhabitants were removed, and
the City new peopled with English. After this, by means of a certain
Cardinal, a truce was taken for two years.

The King of England entrusted the government of Calice to a certain Italian.
Not long after, a French Lord that lay in Garrison at Saint Omers, knowing the
nature of the Italians to be above all other people covetous of gold,
practiced privately with this fellow, to sell him the Castle for twenty
thousand Crowns. The King of England, I know not by what means, having
intelligence hereof, dissembled his knowledge, and sending for the Italian,
examined him of the matter. Who seeing no other remedy confessed the truth, and
besought him of pardon. The King granted, and at his departure gave him in
charge to proceed with his project. A day before this practice should be put
in execution, the King himself strongly guarded, as covertly as might be
entered into Calice. The french man who had paid his money down, and knew
nothing that the plot was discovered, sent his men of arms before to take the
Castle. As Soon as they came in, not suspecting any such matter, they were
presently attached and made prisoners to the English. Then in the dawning of
the day the King of England issuing out of the City, charged suddenly upon
the rest of the French men which houered thereabout to see the success of
their enterprise, and put them to flight, taking many prisoners, and amongst
others the same person that was the first contriuer of this treason.

About this time King Phillip of Valois married another wife, the daughter of
Phillip King of Navarre: and almost at the same instant John his eldest Son
took to wife I^aue Duchess of Boloine, late wife to the Duke of Burgundies
Son, the same that at the siege of Aguillion ended his life, in the year of
our Lord 1346. 1346. Phillip of Valoys dies, and John his Son succeeds.


After the decease of King Phillip, John his Son succeeded in his stead, who
not long after his coronation arrained the Constable (then newly delivered out
of prison in England) of treason, and caused him to be beheaded at Paris.

John the son of Phillip de Valoys.
SHortly after the coronation of King John, Pope Clement departed out of this
life at Avinon. He appointed for his successor in the papacy, the Cardinal of
Ostia a French man borne, called before his election Stephen Albert, but
afterward named Innocent the sixth. By occasion of certain disgraceful
speeches mutually enterchanged, a mortal quarrel was grown betwixt the King
of Bohemia and the Duke of Lancaster, which they were at point to decide by
single combat: but the French King interposing himself, by his mediation the
matter was compounded. After the Constable as we told you, was by the kings
commandment put to death, Charles of Spain, upon whom the King had bestowed
the seigniory of Angolesme, and who had also espoused the daughter of Charles
of Bloys, being advanced to that office, was by Charles king of Navarre slain
suddenly in his bed. With this fact, as ye may well judge, the French kings
mind was not a little troubled, nevertheless upon certain conditions he was
pacified. To this Charles thus murdered succeeded Jacques of Burbon. And the
truce taken between the French king and the English to endure till April, was
prolonged to Midsommer. For the ambassadors of both kings meeting at Avinion
before the Pope, when they could not agree upon articles of peace, added so
much more time to the continuance of the truce.

The Prince of Wales brought an army into Aquitaine, and the King his Father
intending to prosecute his wars in France, came to Calice. There the French
King by an herald proffered the single combat, but the King of England refused
it. The French King sending out his writtes, summoned to Paris all his
nobility, with the heads of the church and the burgesses of his towns,
declaring unto them how greatly it imported him to provide for the wars. So
by act of Parliament a general subsidy was granted, from payment whereof
there was no man could be exempted.

The King of Navarre, John Earl of Harecourt, and diverse others, being
surprised by the French kings unsuspected approach, as they sat at dinner in
the Castle of Roan, were suddenly apprehended and committed to safe custody.
The King of Navarre was sent prisoner to Paris. The Earl of Harecourt had
uttered I wot not what reproachful words against the King, in presence of
diverse noble men, stoutly maintaining that the subsidy lately exacted, ought
not to be paid, and withal exhorting the residue to stand stiffly in denial
thereof. Hence grew the ground of his indictment, and hence proceeded the cause
of his punishment. For herevppon the King commanded him to be beheaded, and
his body afterward to be hanged upon a gibbet.

The King of Englands Son who came lately (as we Edward the black Prince.
told you) into Aquitaine, setting forth from Bordeaux, wasted all the country
thereabout, namely Poytiers, Turon, and Berrie; where fournishing himself with
what was needful for his own use, the rest he utterly spoiled and destroyed,
burning up their corn, and shedding out their wines to the intent that
afterward it might not be converted to the benefit of his enemy. The French
King in the mean while having a great power assembled at Charires, departed
from thence, with all possible have, and a right enemie-like affection
following after the English Prince. When he came near unto Poytiers, news was
brought him that the English army lay encamped not far off. Immediately
herevppon calling his counsel, he gave direction for the setting of his men in
order, disposing his whole army into three battalions. In the first he placed
^he Duke of Orleans, in the second Charles his eldest Son, and himself led the
reregard. The number of his enemies was very small. As Soon as he understood by
his scowts in what sort they were embattelled, and how they had planted
themselves in a place both by nature and their own industry strongly
fortified, he gave commandment that all his people should fight on foot,
three hundredth or somewhat more only excepted, who with their horses were
appointed to break the array of the english archers. He was accompanied in the
field with his four (...) realm, with great impunitie of vice, as generally
happens during their Kings captivity.
in such cases, where scarce any are thought to remain which by authority
might repres^e mischief and punish offenders. Thieves and robbers banding
themselves together, filled the country with repine and murder, forestalling
the highwaies, and spoiling the passengers. Besides this, the S^ates could not
well agree among themselves, for the nobility began to distaste the authority
of the ^ix and thirty which were appointed to have chief rule in the common
wealth. But most horrible of all other, was that ^umultuous insurrection of the
peasants which assembled in Champaine and the places thereabout, whose company
by little and little aug^enting through the daily concourse of such rascalles
as resorted to them from all quarters, at length increased so far, that their
number amounted to an hundredth thousand. Their purpose was to have destroyed
all the nobility and gentry of France. And with this intent entering violently
into the noble men and gentlemen's houses, they ri^led them, bound the Masters
to the posts, and ^auished their wives and daughters before their faces,
murdered cruelly all the whole houshoulde, and lastly consumed the houses with
fire. And now their barbarous outrage preuayling so ^arre, that the women of
greatest calling were compelled to forsake their dwellings and hide themselves
in secret places, unless they would abandon their bodies to the beastly lust
of most filthy varlets, an army at length was raised, and at the town of
Meaulx they were fought withal, and every one slain or drowned in the river
Marne.

Charles the kings son, perceiving there was a secret conspiracy between
the King of Navarre and the Provost of Paris, departed out of the town, and
assembled his forces. It seemed as if the matter would have grown to a
troublesome issue, for he besieged the city, but by the mediation of
certain Bishops, the Princes were reconciled. The Prouoste nevertheless
intending to set all in an vproare, had plotted one night to dispatch all those
of the contrary faction. And the matter was brought to such forwa^dnesse, that
he had already agreed with ce^taine (^ho for the same purpose awayted their
prey without the gates) that at a time appointed in the night they should enter
into the city. But the treason being discovered, he himself was
apprehended in the night season with ^he keys of the town in his hand, and so
slain with so^e others that were partakers of his practice. This Prouo^^e
(during the troublesome state of those times,) was the first that enclosed
Paris with walls and ditches, and planted gates at the entrances into the
city.

The King of Navarre being certified of this man's death, whom he dearly
esteemed in regard of the manifold benefits he had received at his hands, and
partly moved with displeasure of the matter, but ^ore nearly touched, for that
himself was commonly noted to be chief author of that practice, as well of
his o^ne accord, as by instigation of his brother Philip, (who had formerly
vexed Normandy with wars, and desired nothing more then to ^orke mischief to
the realm of France) ^orthwith denounced war, and hotly pursued it, making
many excursions toward Seane and Marne, and ^inning also diverse towns and
fortresses about Amien^e and Arras. The Provost had furnished him with great
sommes of money, and therefore he might maintain men of war at his pleasure:
besides, many favored his pretense and furthered his proceedings. Hereby it
cam^ to pass that oftentimes he took many towns and castles ^ith little or
no difficulty: insomuch that certain of the principal to^nesmen of Amie^ce
at an hour agreed upon in the night, set open the gates of the town for his
soldiers to enter, where then nothing else remained to win but the castle.
But by good fortune certain french horsemen falling upon them, dissappoynted
their purpose, putting the aduenture^s to flight, and the tra^tors to execution.

Together with these evils (as is wont to happen) ensued a wonderful dearth
and scarcity of all things, in such forte as the poorer people had much ado
to sustain their lives: and this plague continued four years. For, so long
as the insatiable soldiers devoured all men's goods, of what estate or degree
soever without controlment, so long the husbandman might not apply his labor
in safety, not the merchant exercise his traffic without extreme hazard
both of life and goods: what other effect could ensue thereof, but a general
and common mischief, and such a one as should concern every particular
person?

Certain of the king of Navarres people being upon a A strange shift in
extremity.
time surprised by their enemies at some disadvantage, when they saw that of
necessity they must put their fortunes in trial, though far ouermatched in
number, yet seeing no other remedy, they betook themselves to a little hill,
and putting off all their spurs, pitched them in the ground before the^ with
the rowells upward to hinder the aproach of their enemies. But the evening came
on so fast, that it stayed the frenchmen from the'ncounter. In the night time
with great silence they conveyed themselves into the next village, and there
making fires as if they had purposed to tarry all night, they secretly
departed contrary to the frenchmens expectation, who pursued in vain, but
could not overtake them. Amongst other places the Navarrois held Melune upon
Seane. To the besieging of this town, the Duke of Normandy sent four thousand
horsemen. But by mediation of the Cardinals which we spoke of before, a peace
was concluded between them. But Phillip the King of Navarres brother would
never give his consent to any conditions of peace whatsoever, vpbraiding his
brother that he was deluded with witchcraftes and enchauntments: and therefore
he retired himself to certain holds upon the Sea coast which were in the
kings of Englands subjection.

By that time the peace was confirmed between the Navarrois and the Frenchmen,
the three years truce (obtained by the Cardinals after the taking of King
John) between France and England, expired. Therefore all such as had served
under the King of Navarre, repaired to the English Captains for entertainment,
and so one mischief drew on many more successively ensuing each other.
Notwithstanding for that time, the Englishmen were but ill entreated by the
French, though not without great damage to the poor wretches that inhabited
in the vpland country, or in towns but weakly fortified. For the Englishmen
accompanied with foreign soldiers, made spoil of them at their pleasure.

When the time of truce (as we said before) was worn out, the king of England
and his eldest Son with the Private conference about a peace.
French King and the Duke of Burbon, conferred privately together at London
concerning a peace, the articles whereof they sent over to the Duke of
Normandy, and he propounded them to the three estates of the kingdom. But when
the matter came to be debated in counsel, these conditions were utterly
disliked, and answer was given to the Ambassadors, that they would rather
choose to endure yet greater miseries, then condescend to such articles. This
answer was taken in very ill part, as well by the captive King of France, as
by the King of England: who immediately thereupon caused such an army to be
levied, as never any man saw pass out of England before. He took landing at
Calice, accompanied with his four sons. But before his departure out of
England, he made open declaration of his intent before the whole army: in
effect, that he had undertaken this expedition in hope and full purpose to
enforce the French men to receive such conditions as should be both for the
honor of his person, the commodity of his people, and the dignity of his
crown: And that he was resolved never to give over, nor return again, till
such time as he had accomplished his affairs in such sort as he desired.
Wherefore if any man disliked his pretense, he should have free liberty to
depart, or tarry. But there was none amongst them all which did not willingly
embrace these conditions.

From Calice the King of England marched to Rhemes, 1359.
which city when he found for the bigness thereof to be strongly fortifyed,
he forbear to assault it, because he would not rashly hazard the loss of any of
his men whom he reserved for greater services. From thence after two months
siege or somewhat more, he took his way into Burgundy. The Duke sent
messengers to him, requesting that It should seem to be but twenty thousand.
his soldiers might not be suffered to spoil his country, The King of England
being a very courteous Prince was easily entreated; but upon condition that
the Duke of Burgundy should pay him an hundredth thousand crowns. In the mean
time France was miserably wasted, partly by the King of England himself,
partly by the rest of his army left in Picardy, and not a little by the King of
Navarre, who yet again moved arms against the Duke of Normandy.

A certain friar of the order of Saint Frauncis, prophesied at Avinion that
both the Clergy should suffer much Johannes Ro^hetaillada.
for their pride, covetousness and ambition, and that the kingdom of France
should be extremely afflicted by the invasions of strangers, in so much that no
part of it should be free from that misery. The Pope because he foretold
matters that displeased him, cast this friar in prison.

The King of England sent word to the Duke of Normandy, that he would give him
battle: but the Duke having no disposition to put himself to the courtesy of
Fortune, stayed still at Paris. And because he well perceived, that the state
could not long continue at this pass without the utter subversion and
overthrow of the kingdom: by advise of his nobility and counsel, he sent
ambassadors to the king of England to entreat of peace. The matter was
diversely attempted, but it seemed almost an impossibility to accord their
difference. For the King of England still absolutely maintained, that the
crown of France was his rightful inheritance.

Whilst things were thus in consultation, there suddenly rose a marvelous
tempest about Chartres, the violence King Edward inclines to peace. 1360.
whereof was such, that it overthrew both men and horses. The king was so moved
with the consideration hereof, that he made a vow he would incline his mind
unto peace, and so at Calice the matter was concluded. The conditions were
these: that the king of England, his heirs, and successors after him, should
hold and enjoy the Countyes, Cities, Castles, holds, Lordships, Isles, rents
and revenues of all Aquitaine; also the City, Castle, county and whole
seigniorie of Poytiers: the City and castle of Rochell, and Limoges with all
the country about it. To these were added, Angolesme, as well the town as the
castle, with all the territory thereto belonging: Also Calice, and many other
places besides, whereof as the number is great, so the rehersall would be
tedious. Item, that the king of France should renounce his title to all these,
and release all fealty and right, which he, his heirs or successors might by
any means claim therein, and that the king of England should hold them all
frankly and freely without acknowledgment of any homage or superiority to the
king of France or his successors in that behalf. Item, that the king of
England should again, for himself, his heirs and successors, disclaim all
title, right and interest, which either he or his posterity might pretend to
the crown of France. Item, that he should resign all the portion which he
challenged in the Dukedomes of Normandy, Aniow and Turon: also all his right to
Britain. These and many other articles, described more at large in my author,
both the Kings and their sons were solemnly sworn to observe. And for
further assurance, the French King gave in hostage, the Peace concluded, and
King John set at liberty.
Dukes of Orleance, Aniow, Berry and Burbon, besides some twelve Earls and
Barons, and diverse personages of good account sent particularly from all the
chief Cities of France. These being all conveyed to London, the French king
was set at liberty and returned again to Paris, to the great reioycement of
his subjects. 1360.


Immediately upon his return, he directed forth letters to all his officers,
Lievetenants, and Captains, to avoid out of all such Towns, Castles and
holds, as he had departed withal to the King of England. But it is wonderful
to report, with what unwillingness they all for the most part obayed this
commandment: for it seemed a very strange and difficult matter for them to
undergo the yoke and subjection of the English. But the French King being a
just and virtuous Prince, would for no respect infringe his oath, or swerve
from his covenants. Therefore he gave command that all things should be
performed according to the express tenor of the agreement. In like manner the
King of England sent commissioners to surrender again certain Castles and
holds taken in the wars into the French kings possession. When the towns
and fortresses were in this sort delivered, the soldiers which had now
accustomed themselves so long time together to live upon spoil and pillage,
considering that in regard of the wicked acts they had formerly committed, it
would be little for their profit, and less for their safety to return home
again, determined from thenceforth to seek their fortunes. And thereupon
assembling themselves together, they ranged through Champaine and the places
adjoining, wasting and destroying all things before them, and as it commonly
falls out, their number daily increased. The French king being informed of
their mischievous proceedings, sent Jacques of Burbon against them with an
army. He found them encamped upon a very high hill, the situation whereof was
such that it was impossible to take any perfect view of their forces: and being
indeed some sixteen thousand, they appeared to his scouts not above 5000. When
it came to the encounter, it was fiercely fought on both sides, but fortune
inclined to the worser party. Many gallant gentlemen perished in this conflict:
the Duke of Burbon himself with Peter his eldest Son were very sore wounded,
and being conveyed to Lions, died within three days after. When these
villains had obtained this victory, they took their way directly toward
Avinion; at whose approach the Pope and his college of Cardinals were not a
little affrighted, for such was both their courage and their cruelty, that no
man durst oppose himself against them. Nevertheless the Pope and his
Cardinals being thus driven to their shifts, and having no other means to
repress this mutinous multitude, to whom no mischief came amiss, commanded
a croysie to be preached against them, with a grant of clear remission of all
their sins which took it upon them. Many assembled, but when there was no
mention of pay, they shrunk away every one. The very same time the Marquis of
Mountferrat made war upon the Duke of Millaine. The Pope therefore practiced
with him to lead away this rebellious rebel into Lumbardie. And even so it
fell out, for when the Pope and Cardinals had paid them threescore thousand
crowns, and that the Marquis also had promised them entertainment besides,
they followed him and did him good service in his wars.

The french King passed through the Dukedom of Burgundy 1362.
(which was then lately fallen to him by the death of the younger Duke) toward
Avmion to visit the Pope, who in short space after deceassed. And when they
could not determine upon a new election (by reason of the inordinate strife
which was chiefelie between two contending for the papacy) at length a
certain abbot of Saint Victors in Marseilles, a learned and godly man, was
chosen, and from thenceforth called Pope Vrbane.

The King of Ciprus the same time arrived at Avinion, 1362.
and made earnest intercession to the Pope and the french King, for the
undertaking of an expedition against the Saracens and other enemies of the
christian faith. The Pope promised his furtherance, and in a public assembly
propounded the matter. Whereupon the french King with a great part of his
nobility, took upon them the sign of the cross. Afterward the King of Ciprus
traveled into Bohemia to the Emperor, and from thence through Germante,
Brabant, and Flaunders, he came into England, making the like petition to King
Edward, but he honorably excused himself. Out of England he returned unto
Amience where the french King then soiourned: and after that he repaired into
Gascoine to the Prince of Wales, who about the same time had a Son borne named
Edward.

The noble men that were left in hostage for the french King, began to grow
discontented for the long restraint of their liberty, and king Edward being of
a gentle and courteous disposition, had given them leave to go over to Calice,
as well to recreate and refresh their minds, as also that from thence (being
so near France) they might the more commodiously dispose of their affairs in
their own country. They sent oftentimes to the King and the Duke of Normandy
his Son. But the King was so busied about the preparation of his voyage
against the Sa^acens and withal so troubled by the King of Navarre, who still
continued in arms against him, that he could not convenientlie intend to
dispatch them. By means whereof, it came to pass that the Duke of Aniow the
kings Son, leaving the rest of his fellow pledges, returned again into
France.

The french King had a mervailous desire to see the King of England again,
because he had so honorably entreated him whilste he was his prisoner. He was
counseled to the contrary, notwithstanding he still persisted in his purpose,
and so much the rather for that he would excuse his Son for departing without
license. So he went and was entertained very royally. But not long after he
fell sick and died The death of King John.
at London. His body was conveyed over into France and buried in the town of
Saint Dennise, the King of Ciprus being present at his funeralles.

The King of Navarre thinking that occasion was now fitly offered him to make
war, collected forces from all parts where he could raise them: and in
Normandy a battle was fought with great fierceness and little advantage on
both sides.

After the death of king John, his son Charles who was before styled Duke of
Normandy, succeeded in the inheritance of the kingdom, and was the same year
crowned at Reames, together with his wife the daughter of Peter Duke of Burbon.
At his coronation were present, the King of Ciprus, Wenslaus King of Bohemia,
and the Dukes of Lutzemburge and Brabant. When the solemnities were finished
and the new King returned to Paris, he proclaimed his younger brother Phillip,
(who had been prisoner with his father in England) Duke of Burgundy, the same
being formerly promised him by King John before his last going over into
England.

Charles the fifth.
AS yet France was not thoroughly purged from the remnant of those rauinous
cutthroates before mentioned: and in Normandy and the places thereabout, many
taking part with the Navarrois, much afflicted the country. The ringleader of
these wars was Lewis of Navarre. King Charles appointed his brother Phillip
(lately created Duke of Burgundy) to go against them, by whom all for the most
part was again recovered. About the same time the Earl of Mountpeliarde,
aided by certain Germans his friends, entered into Burgundy not far from
Besanson. Incontinently the Duke repaired thither with his army, but his
enemies were retired before his coming.

Amongst the Articles of peace between the kings of England and France,
(whereof we have given you a brief abstract before,) the matters of Britain
were excepted, and the kings had both promised to employ their mutual
endeauours that the controversy might be indifferently decyded. But the matter
was very slightly handled, and it happened that King John dyed as is already
declared. By means whereof the wars brake forth afresh, and the french King
sent a thousand horse to the aid of Charles of Bloys, who upon the delivery
of his Sons in hostage, was now released out of prison. On the other side, John
Earl of Mountfort obtained succor partly from others, but principally from
the Englishmen, who at that time held the possession of Aquitaine. When their
armies were both come into the field and ready to join battle, a cerraine
nobleman of Britain (for whom it was not lawful to bear arms because he
was a prisoner) undertook to be a mediator betwixt them, exhorting and humbly
entreating them that they would accord friendly amongst themselves, and not
suffer the matter to come to trial of the sword. It was possible he might have
prevailed, but that certain gentlemen secretly persuaded the Earl of
Mountfort their general, that he should not by any means come to composition
with his enemy. For these men having already consumed the greatest part of
their means, now set up their rest, either to recover themselves again by the
wars, or to lose what remained in the adventure of their fortunes. Thus battle
was given, with much bloodshed on both sides, but the Englishmens valor put
their enemies to flight. Charles himself was slain in the field, which many
thought to be a matter plotted of purpose, because Charles of Bloys slain in
battle.
there was no other means to bring those wars to conclusion. The Earl of
Mountfort beholding his body deprived of life, could not refrain from tears
notwithstanding he was his enemy.

When Mountfort had thus chased his enemies and gotten the victory, in short
space after he recovered many towns of Britain. The French King being
advertised of the state of these affairs, sent his brother the Duke of Aniow,
as well to comfort the late wife (now widdowe) of Charles, which remained
exceeding sorrowful and pensive, as also to animate and encourage their minds
which in her behalf still maintained their garrisons. But a great part of
Britain being by this time brought under the subjection of Mountfort, the
French King upon further deliberation with his counsel, sent ambassadors to
him to treat of agreement. Mountfort referred his cause to the King of
England, who not disliking the matter, he accepted the conditions proffered:
which in substance were these. That Mountfort should hold all the Dukedom of
Britain during his life, and if it fortuned him to dye without issue, then the
inheritance should again return to the Sons of Charles, which as we told
you were the^ kept hostages in England. Item, that he should assure unto the
widow of Charles, some Earldom in those parts, whose yearly revenue should
amount to twenty thousand frankes. Item, that at a time prescribed (being
summoned by the french King) he should present himself in person before him, to
be by him invested in his Dukedom, and to perform all ceremonies usually
incident to that solemnity. And finally of his own voluntary motion he
promised to employ his endeavor for the ranso^ming of his kinsmen that
remained pledges in England.

About this time Lewis of Navarre went into Italy to be affianced to the Queen
of Naples daughter. The French King lent him threescore thousand frankes for
the furniture of his journey, receiving certain Castles of his in pawn for
the repayment of his money. When he had almost brought his matters to effect at
Naples, shortly after he ended his life.

After the wars of Britain and Navarre were finished, every place still
swarmed with such cutthrote soldiers as were accustomed to live upon pillage,
and these mightily plagued the country. The French King well considered that
they must be either wholly subverted, or by some other means removed out of
the Realm. Therefore, the King of Hungary having wars at that time with the
Turk, he would gladly have conveyed them over to him as he requested: but the
old soldiers to whom that country was not unknown, dissuaded their fellows
from undertaking that voyage. Then another devise was contrived, and Pope
Vrbane lying at Avinion, furthered the french King in his purpose. For he also
out of his good affection to France would willingly have had that mischievous
multitude dispatched out of the kingdom. There ragyned at that time in Castile
a King called Don Pietro, a wicked person and a notable tyrant. For he not
only put to death diverse good and virtuous persons, but murdered many also
with his own hands, and amongst others his own wife, descended of the
honorable house of Burbon. He cast the governors of the church in prison, and
seized all their goods into his own possession. It was reported by his own
familiar friends, that he had conspired with the King of Granado the general
enemy of christendom. His father was King Alphonso, who falling in affection
The occasion of Prince Edwards expeditio^ into Spain.
with another woman besides his wife, had by her three sons, the eldest
whereof named Henry was a man both of valiant courage and virtuous
disposition. This tyrant in regard of the manifold crimes whereof he was often
accused before the Pope, had already provoked all men's hatred against him. Pope
Vrbane therefore upon good consideration, sent for this bastard Henry, and
Peter King of Arragon, (who was at continual enmity with the tyrant, as one
that had bereft him of diverse Lordships) to come before him at Avinion. There
Henry the bastard was made legittimate, and denounced King of Castile, the
tyrant being first excommunicate, after desposed. The King of Arragon promised
free passage through his country, and provision of victualles, to such armies
as should be conducted into Castile against the tyrant: intending also by the
help of those forces to recover his own losses. To this expedition resorted
many honorable personages: and by this means those soldiers that had so long
annoyed the realm of France, were conveyed into Castile. The tyrant having
intelligence of the army that was coming against him, betook himself to
flight, with his wife, his two daughters, and one noble man only. For he was
so Don Pietro the tyrant expulsed, and Henry the bastard made King of Castile.
hated of the commons, that not one of them would take arms in his defense: so
he was forsaken and left destitute of all men. And Henry the bastard arriving
in Castile with great joy and general applause of the people, took upon him
the administration of the kingdom. After his coronation, when he had received
the oath of allegiance from the most part of the Nobility, and Cities of the
realm, the noble men by whose aid he had obtained the crown, took their
leaves and departed: for now all seemed to be accomplished. But he had not yet
discharged those french make-shiftes, because he purposed to make war against
the King of Granado.

The tyrant remaining in these perplexities, by the advice of that one noble
man which attended him, addressed letters to the Prince of Wales, full of
lamentable complaints concerning his misfortunes, beseeching him to commiserate
his estate and to releleeue him with succor. Shortly after, he himself not
daring to trust his own subjects, repaired to Bayon. The Princes counsel were
of opinion that he ought not to be succored in regard of his abominable
wickedness and ungodly disposition, nor that any dangerous enterprise should
be undertaken for his sake. Contrarily the Prince judged it an unworthy thing
that a bastard Son should usurp the inheritance of the crown, which was a
very ill president and extended to the prejudice of other kings and princes.
Therefore when the tyrant came he received him courteously into the town of
Bordeaux, and promised him his assistance. Nevertheless he sent in^ England to
the King his Father, declaring to him the wh^ circumstance of the matter, and
requiring his cou^ and direction concerning his proceedings. The King of
England in regard th^^ of long time before, there had been a league between
(...) Spaniard and him, encouraged his Son (in the answ^ of his letters) to
go forward with his purpose for the (...) him to his ^ing do (...) And so the
journey was (...) upon between the. But one thing was (...) in the wa^ Their
^assage lay through the King oSpan^ varres country, who had lately contracted
amity with Henry the new King of Spain. Howbeit matters were so handled,
that a meeting was had at Bayon, and upon certain conditions the King of
Navarre was ^o well satisfied, that he promised all curtesy, friendship, and
peace. King Henry being advertised of these proceedings, sent to the King of
France forayd.

The Prince practiced with the Captains of those soldiers which before had
been so troublesome to France and now took pay of the Spaniard, that they
should forsake King Henry's service, and follow him. There was about twelve
thousand of them: and as they were marching toward Gas^oine, in the kingdom
of Arragon they endured great distress, the ways and passages being on all
sides soreclosed and fortified. Nevertheles they made way through all
inconveniences, and holding on their journey till they came almost at Tholous,
they were received into Mount Albane, a town pertaining to the territory of
Guyen. The french men understanding thereof, besette the ways round about
that they might not issue forth into Tholous, or the places adjoining. In
conclusion, it came to hand-strokes: and the French men fought valiantly,
insomuch that they chased their enemies even unto the town: but by reason of
the fresh supplies coming continually to their rescue, in the end the French
men were overthrown, and the greater part of them either slain or taken
prisoners. In which number was the Earl of Provence, who came at that time to
aid the men of Tholons: and besides him, diverse others of great account The
Earl of Provence taken prisoner.
both of Provence and France. Having thus cleared their passage by the sword,
they proceeded to the end of their journey.

The prince of Wales because he was loath to burden the people of Aquitaine with
exactions for the maintenance of his soldiers, borrowed no small some of money
of his father, and besides that converted all his plate both gold and silver
into coin.

Many prisoners (as the custom is) were discharged upon their word; so was
the Earl of Provence. But Pope Vrbane for hatred he bare to those mutinous
soldiers, took upon him to acquit the Earl of Provence and others that were
set at liberty after the same manner, from their ransoms: so that they paid not
one farthing, but had a clear dispensation from him of all bonds and
obligations whatsoever.

Whilst the Prince was making preparation for the The king of Maiorica craveth
aid of Prince Edward, and obtayneth promise of the same.
wars, there arived at Bordeaux the King of Maiorica, who made grievous
complaint of the King of Arragon, which had slain his father in prison at
Barcelone, and withheld all his possessions from him by force: toward the
revenge of which injuries and the recovery of his inheritance he humbly
implored the Princes aid. He had to wife the Queen of Naples. The Prince upon
hearing of his complaint, promised that so soon as he had finished this
enterprise for Spain, he would undertake his affairs, and so bring to pass
that either upon reasonable conditions, or by force of arms, he should be
restored to his kingdom.

Before the Prince set out from Bordeaux he had a son borne, to whom the
banished King of Maiorica was godfather. The birth of King Richard 2.
He was named Richard, and afterward came to be king of England, Edward the
Princes elder son being dead before his father.

In the beginning of February the Prince departed from Bordeaux, and within a
little while after, an uncertain rumor Prince Edward sets forward on his
journey into Spain.
was bruted abroad concerning the King of Navarre, as if he had entered into a
new league with King Henry of Castile, and that thereupon the Ptince and his
Army should be denied passage through his country. Hereupon letters were
addressed to the King of Navarre, who advisedly alleging the reasons that
moved him, withal declared his good affection to the Prince and the banished
Tyrant. The Prince marched with his army in three battles, one following
another, the vauntgard was conducted by the Duke of Lancaster sent lately from
the King of England to assist him, the King of Maiorica had the leading of the
rereward, and he himself accompanied with the tyrant marched in the maine
battle. As they passed through Navarre, the King himself for their better
direction became their guide, and bare them company through a great part of his
country. At Pampelone also (which is the chief city of Navarre,) he
entertained the Prince with a banquet. Many feared that the armies should have
been stayed as soon as they came within his kingdom, but contrary to their
opinion, the King still persevered in peace and friendship.

King Henry having advertisement of the army coming against him out of
Aquitaine, levied forces in Spain to the number of threscore thousand fighting
men. For he was exceedingly beloved, and every man was willing to undergo any
danger for his sake. The^ he sent an herault with letters to the Prince,
desiring to know what the reason was that he undertook these wars against
him, seeing that for his part he had never offered him any manner of offense or
injury. The Prince upon deliberation with his council detained the messenger,
and marching still forwards, arrived at a town called Victoria, nere unto
which, both himself and his adversary encamped with their armies. The king of
Spain had three thousand soldiers sent to his aid out of France.

The Englishmen had planted themselves upon a hill. Counsel was given to the
Spaniard that if he purposed to win the victory without slaughter and
bloodshed, he should need to take no other course, but only to shut up the
ways that no provision of victual might be conveyed to his enemy. For the
Englishmen were enclosed as in a straight, and with small labor all passage
might easily have been intercepted. But the King of Spain desirous to fight,
in regard of the greatness of his forces which were now grown to above an
hundred thousand (for their number daily increased) chose rather to abide the
trial of battle.

When the Prince had rested some few days in that place, because of the
barrennes thereof he dislodged from thence, and encamped in another ground more
commodious. And being not far distant from his enemy, he sent back the
messenger, whom he had now detayned almost three weeks, with letters to the
King of Spain, containing briefly this answer: that, for respects of great
importance he was come to succor the banished King, that he would willingly
compound the difference between them, but upon no other terms then that King
Henry should renounce the title and resign the government of that kingdom,
whereto he could pretend no lawful interest: and if this were refused, that he
should find him prepared as well the one way, as the other.

We showed you before in what manner the Englishmen ordered their battles. The
spaniards in like sort divided their whole power into three parts. The first
was led by a certain French Captain of great esteem, and in it were about
four thousand men. The second was commanded by the two brothers of King Henry,
and it contained some five and twenty thousand, horse and foot. The third by
King Henry himself, and his battle far exceeded both the other in number, as
having in it seven thousand horse, and threscore thousand footmen, whereof a
great part were armed with crossebowes. The field was pitched between Navarre
and the town of Navarette. Seldom or never has any battle been fought with
greater fury and violence. The spaniards used slings, whose force was such that
therewith they pierced the helmets of their enemies, surely a cruel kind of
fight. On the other side the Englishmen being most expert arches, over whelmed
them with the multitude of their shot. One of king Henry's brothers (which as
we told you had the leading of the vauntgard) as soon as he saw the Princes
colors advance toward him, departed out of the battle, and never struck
stroke against the enemy. His example much discouraged a great many of the
rest. But King Henry himself wheresoever he saw his men fainte or go by the
worse, preassed in thither, calling earnestly upon them, exhorting and
encouraging them, and often putting them in remembrance both of his honor and
their duty: in so much that thrice in that one day did his vehement
acclamations add new life to his soldiers courage, and thrice restrained them
from flying, when they were even betaking themselves to flight. Neither did the
common soldiers only, exercise their weapons that day, but the Princes
themselves also, laying hand to their swords, made honorable proof of their
particular valor. The deposed Tyrant sought by all means he could to have
encountered King Henry. The fight continued for a time very vehement and cruel,
the soldiers on either part well expressing the hostility of their affection
by the violence of their actions: but at length the Spaniards unable to
withstand the united forces of the Englishmen and Gascones, gave themselves to
flight, neither could king Henry by his authority or persuasion Prince Edwards
victory against Henry king of Castile
cause them to turn head against their enemies. So that perceiving himself to
be more and more abandoned of his people, he was constrained to fly also: for
he made no question at all that he should be put to death if he had been taken
prisoner in the battle. The Englishmen pursued the chase and meruaillous
destruction was made partly of those that were slain partly of those
that-perished in a certain notable river thereby, whereinto they chose rather
to cast themselves hedlong, then to come alive into the hands of their enemies.
When the chase was ended, a general view was taken of the dead bodies, and
there were found slain, little less then six hundredth horsemen, and almost
seven thousand footmen, not accounting them that were killed at the bridge or
drowned in the River. After this battle the Princes came together to Burgis (a
town of Spain) and thither resorted all the Nobility of the country, from
Toledo, from Lisbone, from Gallicta, from Sivill, and from diverse other places
of Castile, to swear Don Pietro restored.
fealty to Don Pietro, again restored: for well they saw, it was not possible
to resist such power as he had now about him.

These things dispatched, Prince Edward dealt with the Tyrant to provide money
for the payment of his soldiers, by whose help he had recovered his kingdom:
whereupon Don Pietro took his journey into Sivill, there to levy money for that
purpose, pretending to return within few weeks after, and to give
satisfaction to all men. For at such time as he was driven out of Castle, and
came first to Bordeaux to implore the Princes aid, as we have formerly
declared, he made faithful promise, that as soon as he should be restored to
his kingdom, he would give liberal contentment to all that served in his
quarrel: and to the same effect became bound to the Prince, that so the Prince
might be his surety to the Captains and gentlemen that were ready to
undertake the enterprise in The ingratitude of the Tyrant.
his behalf. At his departing toward Sivill, he made certain appointment
with the Prince, and gave him his faith to return very shortly again, and to
bring money with him for the discharge of his soldiers. When the prince upon
expectation of his return, had tarried certain months beyond the time
prefixed, he sent messengers to inquire the cause of his delay. The tyrant
excused himself, how he had sent certain of his servants with the money, and
that they were intercepted in the way by thieves. Wherefore he requested him to
return into his own country, and leave some officers of his in Castile, to
whom he would make satisfaction to the uttermost. This answer greatly
displeased the Prince, but no other at that time could be obtained.

King Henry escaping out of the battle, fled to Valentia a city of Arragon,
and there acquainted the king with his calamity. From thence he went to
Mountpelier to the Duke of Aniow, a mortal enemy of the English. After that,
he took his journey to Avinion to Pope Vrbane (who was then prepayring to
depart from thence to Rome) and to him likewise recounted his miseries and
misfortunes. At last being privately aided, by the Duke of Aniow, he assembled
certain forces, and invaded Prince Edwards dominions. The Princess somewhat
amazed with the suddenness thereof, sent to the French King to repress her
enemy. But the French King winked at the matter. Herevppon Prince Edward
having advertisement how the world went, was constrained to return into his
own country before the King of Castile had paid him his money. As he came
through Arragon he met with some impediments, and his passage was stopped.
Nevertheless at a day of meeting the matter was taken up friendly between
them.

Prince Edward after his return into his own dominion, because he had
consumed a great mass of money about this expedition into Spain, summoned all
the nobility of Aquitaine with the burgesses of the cities, to a parliament:
and there made public request for the grant of a general subsidy to belevyed
through all his dominion, and that only for five years, in consideration as
well of the great debt wherewith he had charged himself, and had not yet
discharged his soldiers, as also for that he had spent, and in a manner
clearly exhausted all his own treasure about this voyage. All the cities for
the most part gave their consents; but many of the greatest Lords opposed
themselves against the Princes purpose. Affirming that so long as they were
subject to the King of France, they were never burdened with any such
exactions, and rather then they would now undergo them, they would endure the
uttermost whatsoever. When the Prince would relent no part of his rigor, the
Lords which had thus gainsa^d him, took their The Lords of Gascoigne rebel
against Prince Edward.
way directly to Paris to the French King, where in assembly of the council,
they declared their grief, making sore complaint of the Prince, and withal
beseeching the French King to receive them into his protection.

The French King made answer that he would deal by the advice of his
counsel, and according to the articles of peace concluded between his father
and the King of England. Mean while the Lords of Gascoine remained at Paris.
The subsidy was such, that every household should pay yearly one francke:
which had amounted to the some of twelve hundredth thousand Frankes by the year.

King Henry having advertisement of the rebellion of the Gascones, and holding
it good policy to make use of another man's trouble, resolved not to let slip
so fair an opportunity. Therefore by the King of Arragons assistance, he
raised an army of ten thousandmen, and which way soever he directed his forces,
he recovered towns and castles again to his subjection. Don Pietro remaining
the same time at Sivill, as soon as he heard news of these proceedings, sent
presently to the King of Portingall and the King of Granado for succor. He
obtained his request, and had gathered together in all, forty thousand men,
amongst whom there were many Saracens.

King Henry seeing it stood him in hand to proceed rather by discretion and
policy, then by plain force, (for the Tyrant far exceeded him in number of
soldiers,) following the advice of a certain Captain of his, even in the
mornings first approach, contrary to expectation, suddenly invaded his
enemies, and fought prosperously: in such sort, that the Tyrant was constrained
to fly for tefuge into a castle thereby, whereof as soon as King Henry had
intelligence, he brought all his Army thither, and bent his forces against it.
The tyrant perceiving his imminent peril, issued secretly out of the castle,
accompanied with some sewe in the dead time of the night, hoping so to have
escaped by flight. But it was his fortune to fall into the hands of the
captain of the Scowtwatch, by whom he was apprehended and brought forth with
before King Henry, who at his first entrance began presently to inveigh against
him with most bitter terms, and the tyrant for his part also returned words of
like reproach, calling him son of a strumpet. To be short, King Henry
overthrowing The death of Don Pietro, and recovery of the kingdom by Hen ry
the Bastard.
him to the ground and getting upon him, stabbed him to the heart with his
dagger, and in short space after his death, with small trouble recovered again
the possession of the whole kingdom. The King of Portingall went about to have
revenged the death of his kinsman Don Pietro by battle, but he was pacified.

During the time that the Lords of Gascoine soiourned at Paris, the French King
had a son borne, which afterward carried the name of his father. In the mean
while the Lords of Gascoine made often supplication to the French King, that he
would undertake the defense of their cause against Prince Edward: which thing
if he refused to do, extreme necessity would compel them to seek some under
whose protection they might quietly enjoy their possessions; by means whereof
it might come to pass in time, that the Kings of France should forgo all
their right and interest in the whole province of Aquitaine. The french King
considering the great importance and danger of the war, took long respite
to deliberate upon the matter. Most of his counsel persuaded him to war,
affirming with great vehemence that the articles of peace were infringed by the
King of England. At length it seemed good to summon the Prince to appear in
person at the parliament of Paris, and certain were appointed to carry the
summons accordingly. Prince Edward when he heard this message, after some
pause, made answer to this effect, that sithence the French King had so
commanded him he would surely come to Paris, but it should be with his helmet
on his head, and threescore thousand soldiers in his company. The messengers
departed out of Bordeaux, and being apprehended in their way homeward, wereby
the Princes commandment cast in prison.

Here by the way, it shall not be amiss to make some remembrance of the
hostages left in England. The Duke of Aniow (as is declared already) had
conveyed himself away before the death of King John. The Duke of Berry through
the King of Englands courtesy, had entreated a years respite to solace
himself in France. And upon like favor diverse others were licenced to
depart for a season. Some one or two only by the payment of their ransomes
purchaced their liberty. Those that the King had thus dismissed, after the wars
began again, returned no more.

The french King proclaimed open war against the The peace broken, and wars
again renewed between England and Franc
King of England, and committed the charge thereof unto two of his brethren,
who mustered soldiers from all parts, so that the number of them amounted to
an hundred thousand men. The French men made often incursions upon the
country of Poytiers and other of the Princes dominions. And the Princes
soldiers likewise invaded the Lordships of those who had given the first
occasion of these wars, and made complaint of him to the French King.

The french King published his cause and the necessity of this war in diverse
places by cunning persons, with so well seeming circumstances, as no man could
otherwise judge, but that his proceedinges were grounded upon most just and
reasonable occasions. The same did the King of England also, verily to this
intent, that by declaring the causes of the war they might have the people
more at commandment to pay their subsidies, and to bear the burden of their
exactions.

Lewis Earl of Flaunders had no issue but one daughter: The King of England
sought by all means to have obtained her in marriage for his youngest Son,
and the matter was labored for the space of three whole years together. In
the Earl himself was no want of good affection: but Pope Vrbane in regard
they were of his kindred, would in no wise give his consent to the marriage. The
Earl therefore perceiving this match might not go forward, began to make means
by his friends to Phillip Duke of Burgundy the French kings brother, that the
marriage might be made between him and his daughter. This treaty took
effect, and so it came to pass that Burgoigne and Flaunders were united
together.

The King of England considering how by means of this marriage the Duke of
Burgundy should become heir to the Earl of Flaunders, practiced with the King
of Navarre who bare a secret grudge to the French King for certain
Lordshippes, that he should denounce open wars against him.

The French king had provided a great power of shipping, intending to send his
brother the Duke of Burgundy with an army of choice soldiers to make wars in
England. The King of England having intelligence thereof, made preparation
according, and determined to receive them with some entertainment in their
passage. Moreover he sent his Son the Duke of Lancaster with certain forces
to Calice; which when the French King understood, by the advice of his counsel
he altered his purpose, judging it the better course to encounter with his
enemy, when he had already passed the Seas of his own accord. Herevppon the
Duke of Burgundy was set forth well appointed, who at such time as he lay
encamped near his enemy, notwithstanding he were of much greater puissance,
yet would he not adventure to give him battle, unless he had express
direction for the same from the king his brother.

My author reports that a certain English captain, a man of approoved
valor and discretion and withal very fortunate in his affairs, having one
day observed a fair opportunity, would have attempted some exploit upon the
enemy: and to the intent the better to effect his purpose, had requested an
English Earl to guard him with certain horsemen for the performance of his
enterprise. Which when the Earl had condiscended unto, some followers of his
gave him counsel to the contrary, persuading him that if the adventure prooved
succesfull, the reputation thereof would redownd to another, and therefore that
it were better for him to undertake some service by himself, the honor where
of might be entirely his own. By this means the Captain being disappointed,
was feign to leave his desired enterprise unperformed. Thus we see, envy and
ambition, has some predominance in all places, and oftentimes it falls out,
that through private ^mulation, whilste one will adventure nothing in another
behalf, many notable occasions are neglected, which perhaps the enemy
afterward converteth to his own advantage.

When the French and English armies had thus a while conf^onted one another,
the Duke of Burgundy by the kings command brake up his camp, and licensed all
his soldiers to depart. The Duke of Lancaster returned to Calice, and when he
had there rested some few days to refresh himself, reassembling his forces,
he took his way into France, where having burnt up certain towns, because
the winter approached, he dissolved his army and returned into England.

These long-lasting wars greatly grieved many noble men of France, insomuch
that diverse of them conveyed away their goods and housholdstuffe, remooved
the^selus into other places where they might with more safety expect the
comfort of a calmer season, wisely mistrusting least in sitting still, o^
taking part either with the french King or the English, they might have tarried
to their cost howsoever. For so stood the ca^e with many of them who had
possessions in both Princes dominions, that they could neither adhere to the
one nor forsake the other, without prejudice to their own estate, and apparent
loss of whatsoever they held within either of their jurisdictions. On the
other side many Lords of Gascoine revolted from Prince Edward and joined with
the french.

King Edward as he was a man of singular wisdom and stayed disposition,
foreseeing that this defection of the nobility from his Son would tend to
much mischief, addressed letters into Gascoine to this effect. How he
understood that they all for the most part were discontented with the subsidy
which his Son had lately imposed upon them: his mind was therefore to apply
a remedy to this inconvenience, and wholly to take away all occasions which
might any way move dissen^ion or controversy. To which purpose and intent he
had given commandment to his Son that he should surcease from all such
exaction of money, and that all those which found themselves o^er-charged or
burdened, either by him or any of his officers, should have satisfaction
allowed them according to the damage they had sustained. And further he
pardoned all such as had revolted to the French King, upon condition that
within one month after they should return again into Gascoigne: requesting
this only at their hands, that they would not stir sedition, but calling to
mind their promised faith and allegiance, rest contented to conform
themselves to the present state of government. In so doing they should find him
ready to make particular recompense to as many as could justly complain of
oppression. And for conclusion that this was the intention and desire both of
himself and all his counselors.

These letters were published in diverse places of Gascoine, but they wrought
small effect, for many were seen daily to forsake the Prince, and to resort to
the French King notwithstanding: whereby it appeared plainly, that no virtue
has more force to hold the hearts of men in obedience, then affability. For
Prince Edward though otherwise a worthy gentleman, being puffed up as men
commonly are, with the prosperous atchieving of great enterprises, began to
carry himself roughly and austerely toward the noble men that were his
subjects: whereby it came to pass that they could not love him. But the french
King for King Charles commended for his courtesy.
that besides his excellent wisdom, he was also gentle and courteous, easily
insinuated himself into the favor and affection of all men. By means whereof
he greatly enriched the Realm of France, and worthily deserved to be
registered in the number of the most prudent Princes.

The french King by the advice of his brethren, the Dukes of Aniow, Berry, and
Burgoyne, with other of his nobility, sent a puissant army into Gascoine. The
Duke of Aniow marching with his forces from Toulouse, easily recovered either
by force or by composition, whatsoever towns or holds were pertaining to the
English in those quarters. The Duke of Berrie invaded the territory of Lymoges.
Certain Lords of Gascoine joined themselves with the Duke of Aniow, they were
the same that by their complaints and accusations had formerly incited the
french King to undertake this war. The Duke of Berry was associated with the
dukes of Burbon and Alaunson and diverse others: which way soever they took,
they found easy passage.

About this time the french King fell to agreement with the King of Navarre.
For it stood him upon to make him his friend, least perhaps he should have
given access to the English forces through a part of Normandy which he held,
and by the seacoast, into the rest of that country pertaining to the crown of
France. The agreement was upon this point, that the King of Navarre as soon
as he returned into his own kingdom, should make his defiance to the King of
England. There came also a power out of Spain to the aid of the French King,
upon the bounty and good affection of King Henry. In the mean time the Prince
of Wales not unmindful of his friends A truce taken with Scotland ^or 9. years.
and adherents, raised men of war on all sides; and the King his father that
he might with more ease sustain the brunt of these wars, took a truce with
the Scottish King for nine years, in such sort as it should be lawful for the
Scots to serve for entertainment on either party at their pleasure. He sent
also another army to wast the country of Picardy: the charge whereof he
committed to one Sir Robert Knolles, a man marvailously affected to the english
nation, though himself were a stranger and a briton borne. The number of his
forces came to some ten thousand men. With this power departing from Calice and
marching through Artois, when he came before Arras, he forbear to assault it,
but by setting fire to the subvrbes, tempted the townsmen to make some sallie
out of their gates, whereto notwithstanding he could not provoke them. So he
proceeded forward destroying all with fire and sword as he passed.

The Duke of Aniow after he had recovered diverse places from the English, in
regard he thought sufficient, was performed for the present, imparting his
purpose to the rest of his associates* dissolved his army and distributed his
men into garrisons. The Duke of Berry after long siege, received the City of
Lymoges by composition. Whereat Lymoges recouerd by the French.
the Prince of Wales conceived so great offense and indignation, that raising a
power immediately, he begirt the town with a new siege, vowing never to depart
before he reduced it again into his subjection. And when he understood by such
as had taken exact view of the situation and strength thereof, that it was too
hard a matter for him to take it by assault, he caused a mine to be drawn and
conveyed under the earth even close to the gates of the City: which being set
on fire, the violence thereof overthrew a great piece of the wall, and opened a
large breach for his soldiers to enter. But who is able to report the
miserable and unmerciful slaughter which then ensued? Not so much as women and
young Children which cast themselves prostrate at the feet of the English,
lamentably imploring the saftie of their lives, could obtained any favor, but
were all put to the sword: so implacable was the Princes wrath, so relentlesse
his displeasure. And after all Conquered again and utterly raced by the
English.
this terrible massacre of people, the spoil and sack of the Citizens goods,
with the committing of all beastly and inhumane outrage, according to the lust
and fury of the soldier, the town it self by Prince Edwards command being
set on fire, was utterly raced and laid level with the ground. The Duke of
Berry when he wanne this City had dismissed his army as his brother had done
before him: by means whereof it came to pass, that his soldiers being
dispersed and few perhaps remaining there in garrison, the townsmen were left
destitute of relief.

The army of Sir Robert Knolles which had pierced through France into the
country of Aniow, was at length slain by the Constable, and Sir Robert
himself escaping by flight returned into Britain. About this time dyed Pope
Vrbane, who but lately before was retuned to Avinion. In his place was set up
Gregory the xi. through the earnest suit and great travel of the french King,
who foresawe that this bishop would be a great strength to his procedings.

Prince Edward by the advice of his physicians left Gascoine, and returned into
his own country. For at such time as he warred in Spain, in the behalf of
Don Pietro the banished tyrant of Castile, he caught a greevous and welneere
incurable disease, which was now so far grown and increased upon him, that
he was not able to sit upon horseback, but was feign to be carried from place
to place in a litter: whereupon his physicians gave him counsel to go into
England, because they were of opinion he might better be recovered, in regard
the temperature of the climate Prince Edward returns into England.
(being his native soil) was more agreeable to the constitution of his body.
At his departure out of Aquitaine, he appointed his brother the Duke of
Lancaster, (who during the whole continuance of the wars had been partaker
of his fortunes) to be his vicegerent into those quarters: beseeching the noble
men of Gascoine which were assembled at Bordeaux that they would be content to
accept of his government.

We have formerly made mention of the King of Maiorica, who in hope to be
revenged of the disgrace and injury done unto him, had for a time depended
upon the faithful promise of Prince Edward to aid him against his enemy the
King of Arragon, then confederate with the Spaniard. But King Henry of Spain
when after the Princes depature he had almost recovered all that belonged to
his dominion, found this King of Maiorica in a certain town of Spain, left
there by the english for recovery of his health: and because he had taken part
with his enemis, apprehended him and detained him in prison for the space of
certain years after. At length by the help of his friends and upon the
payment of an hundredth thousand pistolets, he procured his liberty, and levying
great forces against the king of Arragon, the matter had surely come to a
bloody conclusion, had he not again fallen suddenly into a violent sickness,
which in short space ended his life. By this means therefore the occasion
being taken away, the wars ceased.

Don Pietro the tyrant of Spain, whose history we have discoursed already,
left behind him two daughters, Constance and Isabell, whom certain noble men
of Spain immediately upon their fathers death conveyed by sea into The Duke of
Lancaster marries Constance one of the daughters of Don Pietro.
Aquitaine. The Duke of Lancaster by advise and persuasion of his friends,
espoused Constance the elder of these sissters: whereunto he was the rather
moved, as well in commiseration of the young Ladies misery, as in hope
hereafter to obtain the possession of their inheritance. The King of Spain
having intelligence hereof, and fearing likewise that the King of Englands fifth
son would marry the Edmond of Langly.
other daughter, addressed his ambassadors to the French King, with whom he
joined in most steadfast league of friendship: the French King for his part
promising him assured aid against any enemy whatsoever, and moreover that he
would never enter into other conditions of peace with the King of England, but
such as should be both to the honor and profit of the King of Spain.

The Duke of Lancaster shortly after his marriage assembled The Duke of
Lancaster returns into England.
the Lords of the country together, and declaring to them his occasions and
purpose of departure, appointed such officers as should govern in his absence,
and departed with his wife into England.

King Edward upon advisement with his counsel, determined to send his son
the Duke of Lancaster with an army into Picardy, which wasting and destroying
that country, should from thence proceed forward into France. Moreover he
sent the Earl of Pembroke with another army into Aquitaine, to make war
likewise in those parts, that so the French men might not fail to have their
hands full on all sides. But the French King having knowledge hereof, by means
of certain English men that resorted unto him, forefortifyed with garrisons
all places of Picardy, and further understanding by relation of those
fugitives, that the English fleet should arrive in Gascoigne, he gave secret
intelligence thereof to the King of Spain his new co^federate. The Spanyard
performed the part of a friend, and sent 40 great Ships with thirteen others
of less receyt, well appointed to meet with the English men in their passage.
Not far from Rochell the Spanish fleet encountered the English with great
violence, and the fight 1372.
continued almost a whole day without intermission. During which space the
Rochellers stood like idle spectators beholding the conflict, and being
requested by their governors to help the English in their necessity,
alleged frivolous matters for excuse and refused: For howsoever they,
dissembled outwardly to the world, yet in their hearts they vttterly abhorred
the Englishmens government. The next day they renewed their fight afresh, and
it was maintained with as great resolution as ever was any. Notwithstanding, in
the end the Spaniards obtained victory, by reason that both in number of men
and shipping, and in the greatness of their vessels also they much
overmatched the English. Many were slain, and many taken prisoners, amongst
whom was the Earl of Pembroke himself, The English men overcome at Sea, and
the Earl of Pembroke taken prisoner.
and most part of the captains in his fleet. The ship likewise which carried
a great quantity of treasure for the maintayning of three thousand soldiers,
was swallowed up in the sea. After this battle was ended, came a sufficient
power out of Gascoigne to Rochell, but it was too late when the matter had
fallen out so vnprosperously before.

Thus it came to pass, that by little and little the King of England lost all
his whole seigniory of Gascoigne, the people partly rebelling, and partly
yielding themselves willingly to his enemy.

Whilst these things passed, there repaired to the French Kings court one Ivan,
the son of a certain British Lord, making grevous complaint of great injury
done unto Ivan the son of Ammon Prince of Wales.
him by the King of England, both in causing his father Ammon Prince of Wales
to be wrongfully put to death, and afterward in conferring the principality of
the whole country to his own son Edward. Upon relation of his grevance, the
French King furnished him with a fleet of ships and some four thousand men to
serve him, by whose help this Ivan, entering into a certain yland belonging
The I Will of Garnes^y.
to the English, and coming to encounter with his enemies, overthrew them in
the field and put them to flight. After which exploit he was recalled by the
French King and sent into Spain, there to make provision of more Ships, that
he might lay siege to the town of Rochell.

This good success of the French kings affairs both by the Spaniards and by
Ivan, gave him occasion to think that the rest of the English provinces, would
easily be brought to revolte; especially if the English men should receive but
another overthrowe, or at leastwise be put to any extraordinary trouble or
molestation. Hereupon he sent the constable, with a great power of the chiefest
peers of his kingdom, to renew the wars again in his enemies countries.
As Soon as they came into the territory of Poytiers, all the towns and castles
thereabout rendered themselves into their subjection. The townsmen of Poytiers
being at variance among themselves, addressed letters to the constable,
signifying their good affection toward him, and early in the next morning
according to promise, Poytiers yields to the French.
set open their gates to receive him into the city. This example of the
Poitevins diverse other towns took as a president for themselves to imitate.

In the mean while, this Ivans whom we spoke of before, accompanied with the
Spanish Admiral came with a well furnished navy out of Spain and arrived at
Rochell: which town notwithstanding sustained no damage at their hands,
because the townsmen hated the English, and desired by all means to be again
under the French Kings government. They had long since freed themselves from
their forced subjection, but that the English garrison which kept the castle,
held them always in such awe as they durst never venture to put their purpose
in execution. At length contriving a stratageme politic enough for the time;
under pretense of taking a general muster as well of the townsmen, as of the
garrison, they allured the captain (who was a man of no great forecaste) with
all his company out of the hold. Which done, forthwith a great number of the
townsmen, breaking out from an ambush, gave assault to the forte and suddenly
surprised it, those few which made resistance being easily repressed. The
noble men of France were at the same time assembled at Poytiers, and having
intelligence hereof, were desirous to be received by the Rochellers into their
town. Whereunto they condiscended, but upon certain conditions which were
these. 1. That it should be lawful for the men of Rochell utterly to race
their Castle, out of which they had often received so great displeasure, and to
lay it level with the Rochell yields to the French.
ground: 2, That the French men should solemnly promise neverto erecte any
castle there again: 3, And that Rochell from thenceforth should perpetually
remain a member of the crown of France, and never be alyenated to any other
Lord, by any possible means that might be devised according as times and
states should happen to alter afterward. When the King (who was made acquainted
with these proceedings by the Lords) had confirmed and ratifyed these
covenants, Rochell became subject again to the French: and the revolting of
this town, gave occasion to many other of their neighbors to do the like.

The French kings captains holding it discretion to follow their fortune, used
such industry, that in short space they recovered all the territory of Poytow
and the country adjoining, not without some help and furtherance from the
Britons, who were exceedingly inclined to the French King, though their Lord
wholly favored the King of England, as by whose means he had obtained his
Dukedom. It happened not long after that the Englishmen immediately upon
their coming into Britain, burnt up seven great ships of the King of
Spaines as they lay there in harbor. Herevppon suspicion arose, that this
matter was done by the Duke of Britains consent and direction, whereof the
French king being advertised by certain Lords of Britain, sent the Constable
to make wars upon the Duke and to conquer his country, as one who had
forseited his estate by entering into a league with the English men against him,
of whom he had received the investiture of his Dukedom, and to whom as the
custom is he had sworn homage and fealty. The Duke The Duke of Britain
flies into England.
of Britain in this extremity, distrusting his own subjects fled into
England. And the Constable by the help of the Britons themselves brought much
of the country in subjection.

David King of Scotland deceassed without issue, and 1373.
by right of succession, the crown descended to Robert.

It is said before, that King Edward after his son the Duke of Lancaster was
come with his wife into England, had determined to send him over again to make
wars The Duke of Lancaster arriueth at Calice
in Picardy. But the matter was delayed. For this year was the first time of
his arrival at Calice accompanied with the Duke of Britain, and thirteen
thousand soldiers. They raunged through a great part of Picardy, putting all to
fire and sword, but they abstayned from besieging of towns for the French king
had long before sufficiently strengthened them with garrisons. And as they
marched forward making havocke of all things, the French army still followed
without intermission: notwithstanding they never came to join battle, but by
intercession of the Popes legates, a truce was taken, and a time appointed for
another meeting at Bruges in Flaunders there to treat of waightyer matters.

Before this truce was proclaimed, the Duke of Britain by the Englishmens aid,
had recovered diverse places, and was like to have gotten more, had not the
news of this truce been a stay to his proceedings. Therefore discharging his
army and leaving good garrisons in the places recovered, he returned into
England. About the calends of 1376.
November the ambassadors of both Kings repaired to Bruges, that there by
mediation of the Popes Legates, they might treat of a marriage between
Richard son to the Prince of Wales, and Marie the French Kings daughter. The
matter was diversely debated, but could not be brought to any perfect
conclusion. Pope Gregory taking offense thereat, departed from Avinion and
went to Rome.

About this time Prince Edward the King of Englands eldest son, a most worthy
and valiant gentleman, ended The death of Prince Edward.
his life at London. After whose death king Edward assembling the rest of his
sons and the nobility of his realm, declared publikelie unto them, his
purpose that Richard the son of his son deceassed, should succeed in the
inheritance of the kingdom. And because he had long since imparted as much both
to the noble men and the residue of his sons, before he made his last voyage
into France, it was no hard matter to persuade them all to approve his
determination, and to confirm the same by oath. Within a while after the King
himself also departed King Edward the thirds death and commendation.
this life, not without great sorrow of as many as knew him: for he was a
Prince so renowned, that even the French King himself, when he heard of his
death, gave this report, that he thought him worthy to be numbered amongst the
wisest of princes. After his deceasse, succeeded Richard his grand son,
according to his own appointment King Richard 2. 1377.
in his life time, and was crowned king of England the eleventh year of his
age, Anno Dom. 1377. The Duke of Lancaster was chosen protector, and took
upon him the government of the realm during the kings minority, who in the
mean while was trained up under the instruction of a certain noble man
appointed to that charge by general election.

It is declared before how the French King the better to maintain his wars
against England, had made a league with the King of Navarre, but it fell out
afterward that two gentlemen of the house of Navarre, attending upon the king
of Navarres sons in the French court, were had The French King poisoned.
in suspicion of giving poison to the King. Which fact when they had publicly
confessed before the people, they were put to execution for the same.
Immediately hereupon the French King sent an army into the sea coast of
Normandy belonging to the King of Navarre, under the conduct of the Constable,
who easily subdued all that part 1378.
of the country. Besides this, the King of Spain the French kings new
confederate, made war also upon the King of Navarre: who being driven to
this distress, required aid of Richard King of England, of whom he
accordingly obtained it.

The Duke of Britain remaining still in England, made importunate suite to the
young King from time to time for aid, but the king gave always a dea^e ^are to
his request. For the Duke of Lancaster aspiring to get that seigniory to
himself, assembled a power, and sailed over into Britain, where he laid siege
to certain places, but the French 1379.
army whereof the Constable was general, compelled him to depart.

The second Book.
IN the former book is declared how the French men recovered a great part of
Aquitaine from the English. There were many still notwithstanding in those
places, which stood stoutly for the King of England. The Duke of Aniow
therefore coming thither with an army subdued in a mannner all that ever
remained. The Gascoignes had lately before sent into England for succor: but
by reason there was trouble and insuirection budding up within the realm,
their sending was to none effect. For the Duke of Lancaster who had all the
authority in his hands, was much hated by the commons, which afterward was the
occasion of much mischief in England. Thus when no forces came from thence to
their rescue, the Gascones destitute of all succor, were constrained to yield
themselves to the enemy.

The French King being a wise and politic prince, held correspondence with
all men which might stand him instead, or from whom he expected any commodity
or furtherance: considering therefore with himself how the king of England was
yet under age, and that trouble and part-taking were growing within the realm,
he solicited Robert King of Scotland, and put him often in remembrance by his
letters, to make war upon the Englishmen now while so great opportunity was
offered, that being thereby busyed at home, they might not have so good leisure
to pass over into France. The scottish King moved with these instigations,
and partly of himself desirous to revenge old injuries, especially whilste the
King of England was yet in his nouage, upon consultation of the matter, sent
commandment for the assembling of his people to meet him at a certain time
ready furnished and appointed for the wars, upon the borders of England and
Scotland. When they were come together, a certain Scottish Lord desirous to
show some proffe of his vasor and bold courage, associating himself with some
few others, in the night season whilste the watch were all sleeping or
negligent, without any great difficulty surprised the castle of Barwicke. When
the governor of the town understood The Castle of Barwicke surprised by the
Scottish.
it, he gatherd together a company of the townsemen and early in the morning
as soon as any daylight appeared, first brake down the bridge (which was the
only passage to issue out,) and then environed the castle round about with a
siege, so straightly that it was impossible for his enemy to make any evasion.
The people of the country being also certified by him how the matter stood,
brought in ten thousand men to his aid. At the tidings whereof, the Scottish
men raised their camp to come and rescue their besieged companions. But they
were so terrified with the greatness of the English army, that they would not
adventure the courtesy of fortune. So in conclusion, assault was given, the
castle recovered, and all that were in it were Again recocouered by the
English.
put to the sword, save only the captain himself, upon whose authority
this enterprise was undertaken. After the Castle was thus gotten again, it
seemed good to the Englishmen to pursue their eniemies in their retreyte, which
they likewise did, though it fell out to their own deadly disadvantage, fortune
favoring the Scottish.

Pope Gregory in time past had made a solemn vow, that if ever he attained to
the Papacy, he would never keep his residence any other where then are Rome.
This was very offensive to some of the Cardinals which bare scarce good
affection to the Romans: and it was nothing pleasing to the french King, who
was desirous to have had the Pope his nearer neighbor. Therefore he sent his
brother the Duke of Aniow to Avinion to persuade with him, but he was not able
to divert him from his purpose. So he went to Rome, the place he desired, and
within a while after there ended his life. When the Cardinals as the custom is
were assembled together for the election of another, the people of Rome began
to make great tumult in the court, threatening violent effects of their
displeasure, if they made choice of any other to be Pope, then such a one Great
tumult about the election of a Pope.
as was both by birth and ancestors a Roman: And therewithal rushing in
amongst the Cardinals, and with their fury interrupting their business, it
came to pass by means of this disturbance, that one was chosen for Pope which
was 100 years old. This man the Romans hoysed up upon a white Mule, and with
great solemnity led him about the City. But the crooked old man weary with
this troublesome kind of courtesy, and tired with this tumbling up and down,
within three days afeer gave up the ghost. Whereupon ensued another
hurliburly, the Romans therein with arrogant threats showing themselves more
outrageous then before. At length a Roman borne was elected and called
afterward by the name of Vrbane the sixth.

About the same time dyed the Queen of Navarre the french kings sister, and by
her decease a certain seigniory in Normandy fell to Charles and Peter the King
of Nauarres sons, which were brought up in the french Court. Many counseled
the french King to seize into his hands all the King of Navarres possessions in
Normandy, and to hold the same till his sons were come of age. The King of
Navarre mistrusting as much, requested to have his Sons sent home, pretending
that he was purposed to bestow the elder of the^ in marriage with the King of
Spaines daughter. Answer was returned by the french King, that his sons
could not be in a better or more honorable place then in his Court. For he
would bring them up in all respects, as was fitting for the Sons of a King,
and such as were alyed in blood to himself. This answer was taken in
displeasure by the King of Navarre, who therevppon fortified those places of
Normondy against the force of the french men. Many important occasions moved
the french King to conceive offense against the King of Navarre, but especially
that matter of poisoning, which we told you before was confessed. Wherefore
sending an army against him, he subdued Mountpelier, and the country about it,
which at that time were under the King of Nauarres subjection.

The King of Navarre being thus molested both upon the frontiers of his own
kingdom, and in Normandy, (for the French King had sent an army thither also)
made request to the King of England by ambassadors, that he might be received
into his friendship. The King of England sent him answer, how he thought it
expedient, that if he would deal seriously and effectually in matters of such
importance, he should come into England himself. This motion was well accepted
by the King of Navarre, and accordingly he repaired into England: where
recounting his misfortunes, after the matter had been debated in counsel, he
was received into league and amity with the King of England, upon these or the
like conditions. 1. That from thenceforth ever after he should take part with
the English: 2. That he should never make peace with the french King or the
King of Spain upon any terms whatsoever, without consent of the King of
England and King Richard enters into league with the King of Navarre.
his counsel: 3. That he should fortify the Castle of Chirburg in Normandy,
and maintain a garrison in it for three years space to the use of the King of
England: 4. That, if it should happen the Englishmen to recover any towns in
these quarters from the french, then the King of England to have the profits of
the same, the propriety of the places remaining to the King of Navarre. And
this especially was most acceptable to the English, because from thence they
might always have access into France at their pleasure. It was further
agreed, that the King of England should immediately send four thousand horsemen
into Navarre to be employed against the Spaniard, and that it should not be
lawful for them to depart out of the King of Navarres service, till such time
as the wars were finished. This to be done, not at the King of Englands
charged, but his own.

The french King being advertised by some of the King of Navarres own
household, that he was purposed to go into England, persuaded the king of
Spain to make invasion upon his country in the mean while. The commander of
that army which the french King had sent into Normandy was a great soldier,
and one well experienced in martial affairs, called the Lord Cowcy. This man
whilste the King of Navarre was absent negotiating his affairs in England,
recovered many towns and fortresses thereabout, and with so much more facility
because he carried in his company Charles the King of Nauarres eldest son; in
whose behalf when many heard those wars were undertaken, they stood not
much upon resistance* Only the Castle of Chirburg remained still to be
brought in subjection.

Henry King of Castile besieging Bayon (a town of the English dominion) with
a great army, had surely enforced them to yield had not the plague consumed his
soldiers. Neuerthelosse he brought not forth his forces in vain, for he
subdued many other towns thereabouts: and besides a great part of his army was
conveyed to the siege of Pampelone the chief City of Navarre.

I told you before of one Ivan a welsh man, who after the death of his father
Prince of Wales, had from thenceforth of a child been brought up under
Phillip, John, and Charles, Kings of France. This Ivan being grown to man's
estate, and desirous of reuengment, omitted no occasion whereby he might work
displeasure to the English: and in all military employments so demeaned
himself, that the french King held him in great reputation. As he lay at the
siege of a certain Castle in the country of Burdeloys, and had brought the
besieged to that point that famine must of necessity have enforced them to
yield, a certain welchman under pretense of bringing private intelligence of
his countrymens good affection, insinuated himself into his acquaintance, and
in conclusion waiting opportunity one day when he had no other company about
him, cruelly murdered Ivan of Wales trecherously muthered by one James Laube
a welsh man, as he lay at the siege of a certain castle called Moctaine.
him unawares as he sat idely gazing upon the Castle and combing his head. The
rest of the Captains though they were much troubled with this sha^efull
murder of so gallant a soldier, yet continued their siege very straightly
notwithstanding. But upon the approach of a great number of Englishmen coming
by sea, both the french men, and Britons (which joined to their aid) were
constrained to break up their camp and leave their enterprise unperformed. By
this occasion the Englishmen recovered much in the territory of Burdeauz.

Amongst other places, the English had besieged a town in Britain called
Saint Maloes, at that time in possession Saint Maloes besieged.
of the french men. Many assaults were given and those very violent, but the
french King then abiding at Roan, sent an army, whose coming somewhat abated
the fury of the assaylants, and gave a stop to their proceedings. Nevertheless
they went forward with their enterprise and attempted to compass it by
undermining. Which when the townes-men perceived, taking the advantage of
opportunity, one night very secretly they issued out of the town, and whilst
their enemies kept negligent watch, brake up the mines in such sort, that those
which labored in the works underneath, were overwhelmed with the earth which
they tumbled upon them. The English thus prevented, and disappointed of their
purpose, thought it best for their behoof to return into their couuntrey. Two
of the King of Englands uncles were chief co^manders in this service.

John the King of Spaines Son (termed the infant of Spain) and the Constable
of Spain together besieged Pampelone. The King of Navarre emboldened with the
assistance of the English, valiantly defended himself and was purposed to have
given battle in the field: but King Henry upon some occasions recalled his
son, and so the army was dispersed. The Englishmen and Nauarroys together
pursued the Spaniards in their departure, and burned and sacked certain towns
and villages upon the frontiers. Wherewith the King of Spain was so
vehemently moved, that he raised an army of some forty thousand, in purpose to
have besieged Tudell, the place where the King of Navarre wintered. But by
mediation of good men, a means was found to make peace between them. Which
was, that Charles the King of Nauarres son should take to wife the King of
Spaines daughter, and the King of Spaines Son should likewise marry the King
of Nauarres daughter. This Charles (as we told you) had been detained certain
years by the french King: but at such time as this treaty of marriage took
effect, upon the king of Spaines request, he was honorably sent home to her
father. Immediately upon the conclusion of these matters, the King of Spain
deceassed, and John his son with the Henry the bastard King of Castile
deceaseth and John his Son succeeds.
general consent and approbation of the state, was received in his steed. The
Duke of Lancaster and his brother (who had married the daughters of Pietro the
tyrant slain by King Henry) took it in high displeasure that the matter was
knit up in this sort; not a little enuing the new kings coronation. The King of
Portingall also was very much offended at the succession of King John, as shall
be declared more at large hereafter.

The French king being a notable politic Prince, and of great experience in
matters of state, to the intent he might more commodiously maintain his wars
against Edmond of Langly.
the English, sent an ambassador into Scotland to retain the Scottish King in
amity and friendship. This man arriving by the way at Sluice in Flaunders from
whence he purposed to have proceeded on his iouruey, was by the magistrate of
the town brought before the Earl then remaining at Bruges: where by occasion
of some indiscreet speeches, he was reproved and sharply checked with terms
of reproach, both by the Earl of Flaunders himself, and by the Duke of
Britain; inueying earnestly against such kind of persons, as the chief
causers of all dissension and unquietness. There were others also which put him
in fear that if he committed himself to sea, it was likely that the
Englishmen lying in weight for such oportunities, would intercept him in his
passage. Here upon altering his purposes he returned into France without
dispatch of his commission: and upon the report he made of these matters, the
french King wrote very sharp letters to the Earl of Flaunders, exhorting and
aduising him as he tendered his own welfare, that he should not foster his
enemy the Duke of Britain. When the Earl had imparted these letters to his
counsel, there were none but persuaded him, that a banished Prince forced in
such sort to fly his country, was by all means to be relieved: many of them
boasting, that if it should come to the push to have wars for the matter,
Flaunders was able to withstand the uttermost that France could do.
Nevertheless the duke of Britain shortly after of his own accord departed into
England, and the minds and affections of his people began to incline more
favorably toward him then in former times they had done.

It is declared before, how the Cardinals after the death of Pope Gregory, to
pacify the tumult of the Romans, had through fear and compulsion chosen
Vrbane the sixth. Now because this Vrbane by reason of his pride and insolency
was misliked of all men, the Cardinals by general consent proceeded to a new
election, and chose Robert bishop of Cambrey, called afterward by the name of
Clement. There remained at that time in the territory of the Romans one Robert
Budaeus, a m^n honorably descended He is called Siluester Budaeus. Fross.
Chro. Li^. 2.
in the country of Britain and a stout warrior, having two thousand of his
country men under his command. Him did Pope Clement solicit for the
maintenance of his quarrel, who nothing misliking the motion, was secretly
conveyed with his men into the Castle from thence, to work disturbance to the
Romans. On the other side the Romans oftentimes sent the Germane and Italian
soldiers whom they had waged in their defense, against these Britons: and
they handled the matter in such sort, that their enemies wearied with their
often and continual assaults, were at length constrained to yield up the
Castle upon no other conditions, but only the saving of their lives. Robert
their captain who was not present at the doing hereof, but lay encamped
without the City, when he heard these tidings, waighted opportunity till such
time as he understood by his espialles, that the Romans should assemble
together in the Castle to consult of their affairs: then taking his way
through secret passages, and under the euenings covert entering closely into the
City even at the fittest time that could be wished for his purpose, he
assailed the Romans as they came out of the counsel house, unarmed and
suspecting no such matter: of whom he made a terrible slaughter, and killed
many of the principal men and chief Citizens amongst them. After the
accomplishment of which misch^efe, he returned again to his camp at leisure.

When the French King understood that a new Pope was created, he called a
convocation of certain estates and chiefly of divines, demanding their
opinion whether of the two Popes ought in this diversity to be acknowledged.
Their censures for the most part as happens in such cases, were variable and
different. The Lords of the spiritualty with the Kings brothers, and many of
the divines, were of opinion that Cleoment ought to be received. This
determination pleased the King well, and was immediately proclaimed through the
whole kingdom, that a certainty might generally be known for his subjects to
trust unto. Of the same judgment were the King of Spain, the Earl of Savoy,
the Duke of Millaine, and the Queen of Naples. Charles of Boheme the Emperor
dissembled his mind, notwithstanding the greater part of the Empire took
part with Pope Vrbane. The Scottish King also inclined to Clement. Lewis Earl
of Flaunders affirmed boldly, that open injury was offered to Vrbane: the
Henaulters stood newter, adhering neither to* the one, nor the other. Pope
Clement the better to confirm his cause, directed the Cardinal of Poytiers
into France and the countries adjoining, to publish in all places where he
came, how Vrbane had been by force and violence utterly against the wills of
the Cardinals, intruded into the papacy. It was an easy matter to persuade
the French men, who had already given sentence on his side. The Earls of
Henault and Barband, omitted not to give him all honorable and courteous
entertainment, but for aught else, there was nothing to be obtained at their
hands. The Earl of Flaunders had sent him word long before, that he had no
desire to talk with him, for he accounted Vrbane as chief shepherd of the
Lords flock, and intended never to forsake him. Moreover Pope Clement sent to
Avinion to have his Court prepared and furnished with all things necessary
against his coming.

About this time the Queen of Naples resorted to the The Queen of Naples
comes to the Pope.
Pope to treat with him of very important affairs: and thus stood the case.
Lewis of Sicill Duke of Apulia and Calabria, lying upon his death bed, caused
this his daughter to come before him and addressed his speech to her in this
manner. Thou art now (my dear daughter) to enter upon the inheritance of a
most flourishing estate, and I doubt not but many princes will be forward to
desire thee in marriage, in respect of this thy goodly and glorious heritage.
Therefore if thou will follow thy fathers counsel, match thy self to a Prince
that is rich and powerful whose puissance may be able to defend both thee and
thy possessions. And if it happen that thou haste no issue, then make
conueyance of all thy patrimony according to the direction of the Pope then
being. This my father Robert enjoined me at his death, and this (to discharge
my self of that duty) I likewise give in charge to thee again. When the
father had discoursed much more to this effect, the daughter devoutly promised
in the presence of many, that she would not fail in her duty for the
performance of his command. After her fathers deceasse, she was married to
Andrew the brother of Lewis the King of Hungary: but of this marriage proceeded
no issue, be reason that her husband dyed very young. Afterward she matched her
self to Charles prince of Tarent, and by him had only one daughter. Against
this Charles, the King of Hungary moved wars, and subdewed from him the
countries of Apulia and Calabria, Charles himself being likewise taken
prisoner in battle and carried away into Hungary where he ended his life.
After him she married to the King of Maiorica, and sent Ambassadors into
France to Lewis of Navarre (of whom we have formerly made mention) for the
concluding of a match between him and her daughter. Who taking his journey for
the same intent, deceassed by the way before he could attain the
accomplishment of his purpose. The King of Maiorica in hope to recover his
fathers inheritance, prepared to make sharp wars upon the King of Arragon, by
whom it was withheld from him. His wife desirous to retain him still at
home, dissuaded him all she could from his intended enterprise, alleging how
he already enjoyed a kingdom large and flourishing sufficient of it self to
maintain plenty even with superfluity: but she could not prevail. Therefore
giving place to his resolution, at his departure she earnestly exhorted him,
that he should open all his estate to Charles King of France who was a wise
and prudent prince, and declaring to him his injuries received, dispose all his
proceedings according to his direction. But the King of Maiorica expecting I
know not what greater helps otherwhere, required aid of Prince Edward the
king of Englands son, who indeed faithfully promised him what he was able to
perform. Now during his absence, upon these occasions his wife sent a
messenger to the French King, requesting him that out of his royal courtesy he
would be a means to procure her a match for her daughter, such a one as both
for the nobility of his birth and the worthiness of his person, were fitting
for her estate: to the intent that so ample and rich possessions might not at
any time fall into the hands of strangers. The french king moved with her
reasonable petition, sent a kinsman of of his, unto whom she willingly
espoused her daughter. The King of Maiorica as is showed before, ended his life
in the pursuit of his enterprise: After his death the Queen married again the
fourth time. Whereat the King of Hungaries nephew named Charles, conceiving
great offense, made wars upon the new king, and besieging him in a certain
castle upon the sea coast, at the winning thereof (which was by composition) he
took both him and her prisoners, and with them also her daughter and her
husband, which unfortunate pair it fortuned soon after to exchange this life
for a better. The king and his wife were both released, upon condition that
they should surrender Apulia and Calabria. Which when Charles had once gotten
into his possession, thenceforth establishing his estate, and augmenting his
puissance by joining in league with the princes round about him, he gaped also
for the kingdoms of Naples, Sicill, and Province. The Queen therefore
fearing, and in a manner foreseeing that as soon as she were dead, Charles
would with all his forces invade those dominions, repaired to the Pope
discoursing to him the whole state of her affairs, and withal beseeching him
that he would receive her into his protection. Hereupon by a frank and free
grant, she conveyed Naples, Sicill, Calabria, Apulia and Province, absolutely
to the Pope, to bestow The Queen of Naples co^ueyeth her inheritance to the
Pope.
them all upon whomsoever he pleased hereafter. The Pope accepted this
donatio^ of hers very thankfully, and caused instruments of the same made in
form of law, to be publicly recorded. Not long after, the Pope at his
coming to Auinion bestowed all those seignioryes upon the Duke of Aniow which
came thither from Tholous to visit him: and this grant was confirmed to him
and to his heirs for ever.

The men of Bruges endeavored with great labor and cost to draw the river
Lisa from Gaunt to their town; and The occasion of the Flemish wars.
for effecting thereof, kept well nere five hundredth men at work. The
Gauntoyes being certifyed of their proceedings, began to make some stir and
to show themselves discontent with the matter. There was at that time in Gaunt
a marvelous factious fellow and very popular, called John Lion, one that
applied his whole study and industry to incense John Lion a seditious fellow
in Gaunt, brings up the faction of the white cappes.
the people against their Prince. His counsel being demanded by the commons
in this matter; with a set speech and composed countenance, he made answer to
this effect. That in truth this attempt of the men of Bruges was not to be
tolerated, but withal, that an ancient custom of the city (very laudable
though at that time grown out of use) was necessary to be renewed, namely, that
all such as were desirous of the ancient liberty, should we are white cappes.
For (said he) the Gauntoyes have had many and those very notable priueledges
above others, which by little and little were now worn out of date and utterly
extinguished, to the great wrong and prejudice of the citizens: and if they
would be so contented still, it would come to pass in the end, that even those
that remained should be taken from them. That the city of Gaunt had in times
past so flourished that men of great account held themselves well appayd, and
thought no small honor if either by desert, reward, or favor they might
obtain to be made free denizens of the city: but now the world was so
changed, that no man (no not for benefit and commodity proffered him) would
much desire to be admitted into their society. With these and such like
speeches he exceedingly stirred up their minds, and easily drew the worser
sort of people to follow him. Every man betook him to his white cap: and one
day amongst the rest assembling themselves together, they took arms and went
forth to destroy the laborers of Bruges. But they having incling thereof, left
their work unfinished, and provided for their safety by flight. Another matter
which greatly exaggerated their displeasure, was this. The Gauntoys would have
had a townesman of theirs set at liberty whom the Earl had caused to be
apprehended: exclayming that thereby their privileges were violated. And
therefore when they had sent their messenger to the Sheriff, and could not
obtain his deliverance, they made means to the Earl to get him released. The
Earl promised he would willingly afforde them that pleasure, adding further
that he would do nothing whereby their liberties might any way be infringed,
and moreover that he would give commandment to the men of Bruges wholly to
surceasse from their attempted enterprise, and to fill up all those ditches
which they had dug and cut out already. Desiring only in the mean time
that they would leave of that fashion of wearing white cappes, as a thing that
ministered perpetual matter of faction and sedition. When this answer was
brought to the Gauntoyes, it greatly alienated their affections from the Earl,
especially being so exasperated and provoked against him by Lion the author of
this insurrection: who persuaded them confidently that if this custom might be
abollished, it were the next way to reduce them again into their old
subjection and servitude. Now although the Earl of Flaunders entreated his
people fair to lay aside their cappes, yet nevertheless he sent some two
hundred men to have entered unlooked for into the city, who surprising Lion and
certain others, should have conveyed them from the people, and committed them
to prison. But this matter could not be so covertly handled, but Lion gat
knowledge thereof, and had leisure both to call the people together and to
exhort them with vehement persuasions, that if ever they would fight for the
maintenance of their liberty, they should now presently make proof of their
valor. Hereupon having some four hundred of his faction about him, he
proceeded to the market place: where encountering the governor of the town, he
snatched the Earls ensign out of his hands, and tearing it in peaces, trod it
under his feet, killing the governor himself from whom he took it. What
should I tell you, how mightily the Earls patience was moved with this
villainy? The citizens and twownedwellers which were of honester minds and
better discretion, foreseing that all things tended to a sorrowful issue,
consulted amongst themselves, and sent certain of their principal men to make
suit to the Earl for pardon of their offense. The Earl at the first received
them somewhat roughly, but afterward least by severity out of season the
mischief might have grown greater, he was content to remit the rigor of his
displeasure. Whilst those men traveled about the common benefit, Lion who
sought nothing but trouble and disturbance, to the intent he might know the
certain number of his followers, mustred them without the town, and found
them to be almost ten thousand. Then speaking to them in open audience many and
diverse things concerning the maintenance of their liberty, he gave them
counsel to pull down a certain castle (which the Earl had lately builded)
because from thence the city might be much annoyed: and it was no hard matter
to persuade his seditious multitude. So they easily wan it having no garrison
to defend it, and when they had rifled, it they set it on fire: Lion in the
mean time making show as if he had been sorry for the fact, pretending that
it happened by mischaunce, whereas in truth it was committed of mere malice
and set purpose. These tidings so troubled the Earl, that he would not endure
to hear the messengers of the people speak craving pardon for this offense, as
they had done for the other, but there threatened them to punishment as the fact
deserved. For he had bestowed a great some of money about the building of this
castle, besides the reproachfulnes of the action, wherewith his noble spirit
was much more provoked then by any other occcasion. The Earl made grievous
co^playnt amongst a great company of noblemen and knights assembled at Lisle in
Flaunders, of the intolerable pride of his rebellious subjects, and of the
unworthy iniu^ies they had offered him; wherewith he so moved their affections,
that they all with one consent promised him their vttermostayd and furtherance,
and to be ready prepared for any service wherein he would employ them. Hereupon
soldiers were forthwith placed in garrisons and wars begone; the very
original whereof, is the same which we have already discoursed.

When the Earls mind was thus incensed against the Flemmings, Lion having
thereby gotten greater opportunity, after he had in open assembly slanderously
inveyed against the cruelty and obstinate wilfulness of the adverse party, and
under that pretext persuaded the people that it was very necessary to procure
their neighbors to join with them in league and confederacy, he again
mustered his soldiers by the poule, and found them to be nerehand twelve
thousand. Amongst others which followed his faction, were the men of a certain
town called Damme: in which town shortly after Lion dyed very suddenly, not
without suspicion of poisoning. The men of Ipre were The death of Lon.
likewise of his confederacy, into which town the rebels entering by
permission of the commons, slew certain gentlemen that lay therein garrison.
After Lion was dead, the Gantoyes created them new captains, and being
assisted by the men of Bruges and many other towns which took their part,
their number increasing to an infinite multitude, they besieged (a long while
to little purpose) The Earl of Flaunders besieged by his subjects.
the Castle of Teremund, wherein the Earl of Flaunders at that time remained.
Wherefore raising their siege and joining those forces to the rest of their
army, they proceeded forward to the town of Arde, which they streytly
beleagered, and the townsmen as stoutly defended. Notwithstanding, when no way
could be devised to bring victual to the besieged, the Earl foreseing that
the necessity thereof in conclusion would force them to yield, wished secretly
that some conditions of peace might be procured between them. Hereunto also
his mother the Lady of Artoyes was meruailously inclined: who but lately before
addressing most friendly letters to the Duke of Burgundy (which had married the
Earl of Flanders daughter) earnestly besought him that he would employ his
diligent endeavor to bring this matter of agreement to effect. For the
accomplishment whereof a treaty being had at Tournay, after fifteen days
spent in debating of diverse matters (the Gauntoyes in that while showing
themselves very arrogant and lusty) at length it was concluded to this purpose.
That the Gantoyes should break up their siege before Ard, and within one year
next ensuing reedify the castle which they had lately raced: and that the Earl
laying aside all memory of former displeasures, should come and make his
residence at Gaunt. The Duke of Britain because he was loath by his long
soiourning with the Earl of Flaunders, to procure him the French Kings
displeasure, departed from thence (as I told you before) into England. During
his continuance there, he received very comfortable The Duke of Britain
returns into his country.
letters from almost all the states of his country, soliciting his return
home again: whereupon by the King of Englands advise he returned, but not
without English aid for his better assurance and safety.

When the Earl of Flaunders according to his former agreement, was come to
Gaunt, he made an eloquent oration before all the people, wherein he at large
declared his good affection, (by the way lightly glauncing at their
ingratitude) and withal (doing the office of a gracious Prince) exhorted them,
from thencefoorth to maintain peace and tranquillity in the common wealth. For
his part, protesting that he would so order all his affairs, as no occasion of
trouble should any way be derived from his proceedings. Only this he requested
with great earnestnes at their hands, that they would forbear that fashion of
wearing white cappes, and cause the custom thereof to be discontinued. To all
the rest of his speech they gave quiet attention, but as soon as he talked of
laying aside their cappes, ye might have seen the colors and countenances of
most of them changed. The Earl (as it is likely) perceiving their minds, and
considering with himself that the seeds of discord were generally dispersed
amongst them, dismissed his audience and departed out of Gaunt. This was a
pleasant spectacle to the seditious, but the honestly affected were greatly
grieved that this private grudge and inward debate should thus be more and more
augmented.

After the Earl of Flaunders had forsaken the town of Gaunt, a certain
gentleman moved with desire of revenge for the death of the governor his
kinseman lately murdered by the rebels, made defiance to the Gauntoys, and
by occasion set upon certain merchants as they were sailing up the river of
Skeld with corn for provision of the town. He took the^ and cut off their
hands and put out their eyes: which fact of his was generally interpreted by
townsmen as done by the Earls direction. The seditious sort, as if hereby a
gap had been opened to do what mischief they listed, assembled to the number
of five thousand men, and suddenly surprised Arde, (which at that time was
unfurnished for defense, expecting no danger in regard the peace was so lately
concluded) and when they had taken it, beat down certain gates and towers, and
that part of the wall which looked toward Gaunt. Then the Earl being as it
were overcome, and vanquished with their intolerable outrage, after he had by
his messengers directed into the City, laid open in plain terms before the
people, both their wicked proceedings, and his patient forbearance, proclaimed
open wars and utter enmity against them.

In the mean season those citizens which were desirous of peace, persuaded and
prevailed with the rest, that to mittigate the Earls displeasure, they should
make restitution of the town they had taken, and banish certain of the chief
authors of the enterprise. This thing gave the Earl some satisfaction. And for
example sake, he put to death certain commoners of the town of Ipre, which
had been chief moouers of the late insurrection. Upon the report whereof, the
rebels and ring^eaders of mischief at Gaunt, began to mistrust that all would
be amiss on their sides also. Wherefore following the counsel of one of their
own stamp (who was of opinion that liberty could not be procured, but by
subversion of the nobility and gentlemen's estates) they overthrew and beat
down all the Castles and gentlemen's houses they could come to, and rifling
their goods, divided the spoil amongst them. The gentlemen moved with this
violent injury, and increased in number by the loss of their substance, upon
complaint to the Earl, obtained his license and with such power as they
procured, made cruel wars upon the Gauntoys. Who fearing least the Earl
should procure aid out of France, they sent messengers before hand to the
French King, beseeching him that he would not take arms against their common
wealth; affirming that they contended with their Lord and endured the
discommodities of war, not upon any wilful obstinacy, but in desire to
maintain their liberty. The french King being already scarce well pleased with
the Earl of Flaunders for harboring the Duke of Britain, both condiscended
to their requests, and gave them encouragement. Pope Clement also, whom the
Earl had refused to acknowledge, was nothing forgetful thereof, but kept it
in mind against occasion should serve, to work him as great a displeasure.

When the Duke of Britain (as we have told you) being King Richard aydeth the
Duke of Britain.
called home by his subjects letters, was returned into his country, the King
of England according to promise sent a number of soldiers to his succor: but
by violence of tempest they were driven back into England. The duke in the
mean while not knowing hereof, and wondering at the occasion of their delay,
solicited the King again for aid. Herevppon the King sent on of his uncles,
(the youngest son of King Edward) and with him six thousand men. After Thomas
of VVoodstocke the Earl of Buckingham.
he had passed through a good part of France, when he approached nere his enemy
the Duke of Burgundy, the French Kings brother; the Duke was desirous to have
given him battle; but the French King for weighty considerations commanded the
contrary, presupposing it would come to pass that they might be disseuered of
themselves. And as he was endued with a kind of fortunate discretion for the
managing of his affairs, he practiced by his letters as secretly as might be
with the men of Nants, (a rich and populous City in those quaters) putting
them in remembrance of their duty, and earnestly desiring them that they would
not take part with his enemies against him. They in regard of their affection
to France, promised assurance of their good will and faithful endeavor,
thereby discharging the kings mind of al doubts, and that they might better
make resistance against their enemies, they requested him to send a convenient
number of soldiers to remain with them in garrison. The Englishmen after a
combersome iourny and many difficulties, at length arrived in Britain. My
author reports that the Engligmen were wont to observe this custom: that
when they went forth to warfare into any foreign country, they were solemnly
sworn to their King, first to conceal and in any wise to keep secret all
counsels and purposes concerning the service undertaken: and then that they
should conclude no absolute peace with the enemy, but with the consent and
approbation of their King and his nobility.

As the Englishmen (according to my former speech) were marching through the
midst of France toward Britain, King Charles the wisest and most prudent
Prince of his times, fell gre^uously sick. It is declared before how certain
of the King of Nauarres friends had given him poison. The op^ of which poison
was so violent, that both his hair an^ nails fell off, and his body became so
withered, that scarce the image of a man remained. Nevertheless the Emperor
sent him a certain German physician, who abated the force thereof in such
sort, both nails and hair and health also by little and little returned. But
his body could never be so clearly purged, King Charles the 5. dies of
poysontaken long before.
but some part of the venom remained, which being drawn into his arm,
distilled out at an issue made for the purpose. And the physician told him at
his departure, that whenever that issue dried up, he should not live long
after. Therefore despairing of health, and feeling his own weakness, he sent for
his brethren the dukes of Burgundy and Berry, with the Duke of Burbon, to whom
he spoke in this manner: (as for the Duke of Aniow because he seemed so His
speech at his death.
gripple and covetous, he desired not his presence.) I feel undoubtedly my
dear brothers, that I cannot long continue amongst you. Therefore I commend
Charles my son to your tuition, beseeching you that you will be always
assistant to him with your wisdom and counsel, as it becomes uncles to
assist their nephew which must undergo the weight of so great a burden, and
that in so tender years as he can no ways be able to help himself. As Soon
as I am dead, let it be your care to see him crowned: for in you I repose all
my trust and confidence. Ye see he is but a very child, and therefore shall
stand in need of good bringing up and wholesome instruction. So let him be
taught, and trained up in all points pertaining to the office of a king, as it
may appear to the world that you have performed your duties. And for a wife
when time shall serve and years be fitting, let me entreat you to make his
choice, for birth and estate such a one, as by her match the realm may rather
be honored, then impaired. I have had much conference with a certain
Astronomer of great learning and judgment; who told me, that in the time of
his youth he should be put to much trouble and disquietnes, and should escape
many casualties of fortune. Surely I have often and very much considered with
my self, by what occasions such things should come to pass. For at this
present through the divine favor, ye have a state reasonable quiet and settled.
Of Flaunders I know not what to think: the Duke of Britain is subtle, a
friend to the English, an enemy to us: therefore it is behoouefull that ye
retain the chief Cities of Britain in love and amity, for by this means
shall the Dukes counselles be frustrate. Surely the Britons deserve to be
commended, and are worthy to be well esteemed: for they have always done me
faithful service, both in defending my kingdom, and pursuing my enemies. Send
into Germany, to provide a wife for my son in those quarters, that by such
means the bond of league and frendshippe betwixt us may be more strongly
combined. Ye have heard how the King of England takes the same course, and
seeks a wife from thence, that he may strengthen and establish his affairs by
such alliance. This realm of ours (as we see) is much disquiered, and
suffers many displeasures by the English: I beseech you endeavor to take away
all such occasions of war and enmity. For howsoever I may seem to have
nourished wars, yet in my heart I have utterly abhorred them, and the thought
thereof at this present moves no small remorce in my conscience. These and many
other things were spoken by him to the like effect. The Duke of Aniow was
absent as I told you a little before, notwithstanding by messengers that went
and came, he easily understood how all things passed: and upon advertisement
from some of his friends remaining at the Court, he came to Paris the same day
that the King ended his life. As 1380.
soon as he heard certainly that the King was dead, incontinently he seized
upon all the kings apparel and iewelles and whatsoever else was there of worth
or value. For at the same time he had determined upon a journey into Naples,
toward the furniture whereof he had need of many such necessaries, especially
being so augmented in honor as he was lately before by the gift of Pope
Clement.

Now although it were appointed by the kings will who should have the
administration of his goods, yet nevertheless the duke of Aniow took it upon
him, and his brothers did not greatly gainsay him, peradventure inrespect he
was their elder. Afterward it was decreed by the Peers of the Realm, that so
soon as the coronation of their new King were finished, the government of the
state should be committed to his uncles, to remain in their hands till the
king 1380.
came to one and twenty years of age. To the coronation of this King were
called Albert Duke of Bavaria, the The coronation of Charles the fixed.
Earl of Savoy, and the dukes of Gelders and Iuliers: there were also present
Wenceslaus Duke of Braband, with the duke of Loraine, the Earl of March, and
others. The Earl of Flaunders excused himself. The young King was then twelve
years old, he had one brother, and one sister, both, by father and Mother;
their names were Lewis, and Katherine. After these solemnities ended, great
consultacion was had about matters concerning the honor and fafety of the
kingdom. At length it was concluded, that the duke of Berry should govern all
that province which is commonly called Languedoc, the duke of Burgoine should
rule Picardy and Normandy, and the duke of Aniow remaining about the kings
person, should have the chief government of the whole kingdom.

King Charles was a Prince so wise and prudent, that sitting The commendation
of King Charles the 5.
in his gown at Paris in ease and quietness, he recovered many things by
counsel and policy, which his predecessors fighting themselves in the field
with all the forces they could make, had lost before in battle, to their
enemies. And amongst other vexations which happened to King Edward at his last
voyage that he intended into Britain for the rescue of his men besieged, when
he was forced back by the extremity of weather: this one thing troubled him
above the rest, that he must make war with such an enemy as never bare
arms, nor came into the field: whervppon it is reported he should say, that he
never dealt with any enemy which used so little armor and put him to so much
trouble. For indeed King Charles after he came to the crown, never put on
armor himself, but mannaging all his affairs by wisdom and policy,
committed the execution thereof to his brothers.

Charles the sixth.
IT is showed before how the youngest son of King Edward passed with his
forces through France into Britain to aid the Duke: who albeit he were
recalled by his subjects (as I told you) yet the King of France wrought so
much by his policy that he found small faithfulness, and but cold affection in
many of them, especially in the people of Nants and some others. When the duke
Thomas Earl of Buckingham.
discoursed of his unfortunate adventures, and the subtilty of his enemies
proceedings, the King of Englands son always comforted him and promised
assurance of friendship and succor. So they agreed between themselves to
besiege the town of Nants with both their forces united together, and the
Englishmen went about it without Nants besieged.
further delay. The Duke of Britain in the mean time solicited his people to
furnish him with succors for the proceeding in his enterprise. But they made
him answer, that they would in no wise waste their own country for the
Englishmens pleasures, and that they would never take arms in his quarrel so
long as the Englishmen lingered in Britain. This was the very occasion and
impediment which made him break promise with the English. And the King of
Englands son meruailing what the matter meant, began to be somewhat offended,
especially because there came no news at all from the duke (the messengers
which carried letters between them being indeed cut off by the way.) At length
after long and daily expectation when he had spent two months in the siege,
finding that all he could do of himself was but labor lost, unless more
forces came from his confederate, leaving his enterprise unperformed, he
himself took his journey to the duke, intending to know directly what was his
purpose and resolution. The Duke aduis^dly purged himself, imputing the blame
to his people, by whose treachery being deceived, he was not able to perform
his promise. Nevertheless, to render his friend some satisfaction, he gave him
leave to winter with his army at Vannes.

During the time that Nants was besieged, certain noble men of Britain of
more eminent respect and authority then the rest, had some communication with
their Prince in these words, or the like. Sir, you sufficiently declare and
manifestly show, that you are wholly addicted to the English nation. But what
fruit or commodity, what honor or advancement, do you expect from their
friendship? what motives induce you to observe them with such affection? For
when you have brought the^ into Britain, they shall bereave you of your goods,
and dispossess you of your inheritance descended from your ancestors, and
this they will do if ever they obtain the upper hand of the French men. Let
the King of Nauarres example move you: who in regard of the singular good
opinion he had conceived of their faithfulness, committed into their hands the
town and castle of Chirburg: whereinto being once admitted, they would never
out of it but held it for ever after as their own. By like occasion, if
through your sufferance and favor they be once received into our cities here,
never persuade your self that they will at any time forgo them: for they may
always have aid out, of their own country at pleasure, whereby their courage
shall be refreshed, and their forces renewed. We need not seek far for a
president: see you not how they detain Breast, a town entirely of your own
seigniory and jurisdiction? But when will they find time to restore it again?
assure your self for certainty they intend nothing less. Let this therefore
be your warning, and hold your self well appayd that you are beloved of your
people, who are resolutely of this mind and purpose, never to forsake the
French king to pleasure the English, will you for your wives sake, because you
have married an English woman, take a course to overthrow your self and your
estate? will you therefore adventure the loss of so goodly and large an
heritage, for the keeping whereof you have sustained so many perils and so
great dangers? will you be at the charge to maintain soldiers perpetually?
what are you able to perform of your self, when your subjects shall forsake
you, yea and take arms and fight against you also? But omitting all these
reasons and considerations: the French King is now dead which was so vehemently
incensed against you, and in his place his son succeeded, who is yet very
young and of no evil disposition, we will apply our endeauours to reconcile
you unto him, that friendship and amity may be established between yo^. So
shall it come to pass, that both you shall enjoy your own without trouble or
disturbance, and these Englishmen finding their expectations and purpose
prevented, shall get them home into their country.

The Duke although he were much moved with this kind of discourse, yet
dissembled the matter for fear of giving offense to the English. And the noble
men which had given him this counsel, thinking it was no time to use longer
delay, posted secretly to the French King lying then at Paris, where declaring
what had passed, they treated for peace. The English general not knowing what
was in hand, purposed against the next spring to have had new supplies out of
England, and to have made sharper wars in France then before. The French men
themselves mistrusted as much: foreseeing that at one time or other some great
mischief would befall them from the English. The Britons which negotiated with
the King for agreement, perceiving that such a matter was feared in France
(like discrect commissioners who observe all things diligently in such
occasions, and apply the same to their own advantage) in their treaty of
peace, did meruailously exaggerate that point, and with great policy, insomuch
that by mentioning such matters and casting doubts thereupon, they had the
French King far easier to be dealt with in all their affairs. The Duke of
Aniow (as I told you) was chief in authority: who for that he was purposed
shortly after to take his journey into Calabria and the other provinces which
he had obtained in gift from the Pope, intended nothing less then that France
should be troubled with any new wars, by occasion whereof he might lose the
opportunity of performing what he had before determined. Therefore accepting
the counsel of the Briton commissioners, so much rather for the doubts of
future war which they had suggested into his opinion, he willingly
condiscended to the motion of agreement. So it was concluded, to this effect:
that the Duke of Britain being received into The Duke of Britain reconciled
to the French king, forsakes the English.
the French kings favor, should do homage to him for his Dukedom, with
performance of all rights belonging to such ceremonies. And further, to the
intent that the English general (who upon the Dukes request had traveled such
an infinite compass of ground to come to his aid) might in some sort be
honorably satisfied, it was permitted to the Duke to furnish him with ships
and all other things necessary for the conueying of him and his people again
into his country. The English general seeing himself thus deluded, and
deceived, would admit no excuses, but full of indignation, hoysed sails to the
wind and made homeward into England.

About this time the Earl of Flaunders was exceedingly incensed against the
Gauntoyes for their intolerable proud and arrogant demeanor. It happened the
same time very fortunately for him, that variance rose amongst the men of
Bruges, between the Aldermen and the Commons: insomuch that the magistrate
wrote letters to the Earl, instantly desiring his presence. Whereupon he came,
and having put to death some five hundredth one and other, he received the town
into his protection, with certain other of their neighbors which were desirous
of the like favor. Being therefore emboldened by the accession of these
forces, he determined to chastise the men of Ipre, who had slain certain
gentlemen of his household, and received the Gauntoyes into their town. At
their request, the Gauntoyes their confederates sent three thousand men to aid
them. The Earls army with the help of the men of Bruges amounted well nere to
the number of twenty thousand. The Gantoyes therefore augmented their power
likewise by leuying nine thousand more: and so proceeding some miles on their
way, they sent word to their fellows, that they should also bring forth their
men into the field, that so with united forces they might jointly assail their
enemy. There came forth some eight thousand, who when they had marched a while
in order of battle, arriving at a three-way leete, and consulting among
themselves which way was to be taken, at length they followed the same which
was forelayd before by any ambush of the Earls soldiers: whereinto being once
fallen, before they could clear themselves from the danger, and come to join
with their confederates, they lost three thousand of their men, the rest hardly
escaping by flight. The party which gave them counsel to enter that passage,
being accused of treason for his labor, was by the people in their fury and
uproar admitting no excuse, miserably slain and torn in pieces one limme from
another, every man snatching some part to wreake his particular malice. The
unhappy wretch (doubtless) had this punishment undeserved: for had he
committed such a villainy, surely he would never have trusted himself in their
hands afterward.

After this good success, the Earl forthwith addressed himself to the siege
of Ipre, now whilst they were all in this fear and perplexity. But the men of
Ipre terrifyed with the late accident, submitted themselves to his mercy. Being
received into the town, he put to death some 700 commoners, and sent three
hundredth or thereabouts of the wealthyer sort, prisoners to Bruges. Many other
towns following the example of Ipre, yielded themselves likewise to his
obedience. The Gauntoyes therefore which now in a manner alone stood out
against him, were besieged, but it could not be done so streytly, but that
victual and provision might freely be conveyed into the town at one gate or
another. For the place is naturally very strong, both in regard of the ground
whereupon it is situate, and the commodity of two rivers called Skeld and Lise
running by it: therefore he had need of a very populous army that should
enuiron it on all sides. The townsmen mustered themselves by poule, and there
were found of such as for their years were able to bear arms, to the number
of four score thousand. They so little esteemed the siege that even then
whilst their enemies lay before the city, they went forth and sacked certain
towns of Flaunders. Amongst others the men of Bruxelles favored them
exceedingly: and the Liegeois also would surely have sent them succor, but
that the great distance between them was a hinderance to their purpose. The
Earl perceiving he did but lose time and labor in besieging Gaunt, for that
the winter also approached, brake up his siege and dispersed his army. In the
beginning of the next spring he 1381.
leuyed some twenty thousand men and besieged Gawre. The captain that lay
there in garrison desired help of the Gauntoyes, and they presently sent a
band of six thousand: who falling by chance upon some six hundredth soldiers
of Arde, which upon commandment were marching in great haste toward the
Earl, oppressed them with their multitude, and slew them every one. Besides
this, one Peter Peter de Boys.
de Bois a valiant fellow, receiving other six thousand men of the Gauntoyes,
had couenanted with him that went before to the relief of Gawre, that he
should not fight with the Earl, but jointly together with both their forces.
But the other notwithstanding, hearing that his enemy approached ready to give
battle, was so enflamed with desire of honor, that without further expecting
the company of his assistant, though his own power were far too weak for such
an encounter, yet he put his men in order against the enemy. The Earl divided
his battle into five squadrons, in every of which were four thousand
soldiers, and giving charge upon his enemies, albeit they valiantly defended
themselves, yet by reason of their small number, unable to sustain so great
violence, he soon overthrew them and put them to flight. His horsemen pursued
the chase with great cruelty: and when they had withdrawn themselves for refuge
into a certain monastery thereby, the Earl because none of the whole rout
should escape, caused fire to be set on all the housing about it. There were
two Captains over these forces, whereof the one fighting valiantly at the gate
of the place was there slain, the other which had gotten himself up into a
tower, was compelled at length by violence of the flame which had now caught
hold of every thing about him, to leap down headlong amongst the thickest of
his enemies, where being received upon their pikes and swords points, he was
hoysed up again into the fire and so ended his life. All the rest perished
miserably in the fire, three hundredth only excepted which took their flight
directly homeward toward Gaunt, and so escaped. This Peter de Boys whom we
spoke of, being not far of, saw in what distress his fellows remained, and
beheld the sad spectacle of their destruction, but by reason of a river and
certain marshes between, he was not able to come time enough to their
rescue. For which cause as soon as he came home with his company to Gaunt, he
had like to have been slain by the common people. But he alleged such
reasonable excuse, that he gave them contentment, and withal persuaded them,
that in regard they had lost two expert men of war in this defeat, they
should authorize some one other by whose industry they thought the affairs of
the common wealth might be better directed: for so it was needful having to
deal with such a cruel enemy.

The Earl dismissing a good part of his army, sent the rest into garrisons,
but especially to the defense of Arde. In the mean time about twelve hundred
of the faction of the white cappes, having advertisement what time certain
gentlemen would raunge abroad out of Arde to fetch in some booty, brake out of
an ambush upon them as they returned with their prey, and put most of them to
the sword. But they escaped not scot^ree with this trick: for themselves being
circumuented with like policy, by the companions of those that were slain few
or none of them returned to boast of their enterprise.

The wealthyer and honester sort of citizens in Gaunt did greatly lament
(though secretly to themselves) that the state of their common weal was thus
crazed and shaken, their Captains and men of war being from time to time
killed up, and themselves also by little and little consumed by the Earl of
Flaunders. For such rascall^es and base varlets as in time of peace were of no
reputation, but rather esteemed as beggars, by reason of their number and
power, were now in chief authority and ruled all things in the city at
their pleasure. And because in these troublesome affairs they might both do
and command what they listed, they were well pleased with this bloody
spectacle of daily tumult and insurrection. Moreover Peter de Boys the very
wellspring of mischief, considering with himself that howsoever matters
should fall out, and though the Earl were reconciled to the Ganntoys, yet he
should hardly escape without peril of his life, began to look about for a
fellow whom he might comme^d to the people for their purpose, such a one
indeed as could stir sedition cunningly, and would persist in the
maintenance thereof to the uttermost. At last he bethought himself of Philip
de Arteuill, the son of Jacques often Phillip of Arteuill.
heretofore mentioned; who albeit in regard of his disposition and sufficiency,
he were a fellow fit for such employment, yet because his father was slain (in
such sort as we have formerly declared) by the Gauntoyes, he always kept
himself within the compass of a private life. In every place as on passed
through the city, a man might have heard the peoples words wishing again
either for Jacques whom they had already killed, or some other such like whom
they might follow as their captain and governor. Boys making use hereof to his
advantage, brake the matter to some of his own faction, but not before such
time as he had conferred with Philip, whom by declaring these circumstances,
proposing great rewards, and se^ting before his eyes what honor he might
obtain by this means in such a city as Gaunt, he easily allured to his
purpose. The next day he began to commend Phillip to the people, taking
occasion at his father Jacques, how there was never any who with greater
fidelity had governed the state of Flaunders then he: whereof the old men of the
country, to whom the truth thereof was known, could sufficiently bear
witness how he had always most earnestly defended the honor and profit of
the country, which could not possibly have escaped extreme misery long ago,
had it not been preserved by the wisdom of that one man alone, wherefore for
his part he thought his countrymen should not do amiss to choose an impe of
the same stock (being no worse then it was) to place in the common wealth for
the maintenance of public welfare. Through these persuasions the people made
choice of Phillip to be their Captain.

It is declared before how John the son of Henry king of Cast^e, was by
general consent of the state admitted to the succession of the crown. This
much displeased Ferdinando King of Portugal, who held it a great indignity
that the son of a bastard should be exalted to the government of so great a
dominion, and the lawful Kings daughters be disinherited the while: of whom
as we have said before, the Duke of Lancaster had married one, and his brother
the other. Moved therefore with the unworthiness Edmond of Langly.
of the matter, and also because he was alyed in blood to the Ladies, he
proclaimed wars against the King of Spain, desiring aid of the King of
England, who sent his uncle the Earl of Cambridge with an army, having also in
his company Isabell his wife and John his son. The Duke of Lancaster was sent
into Scotland to treat with the Scottish King for the renewing of peace, or at
least wise to take a truce for a season. During his absence, there sprung up a
most perilous insurrection, the occasion whereof in effect was this. The
country people in those places (as in diverse others) hold their livings of the
Nobility and Gentlemen, in such sort as they are bound both to till their
lands, to fell their corn, to gather it together, bestow it in their barnes,
thresh it, dress it, and whatsoever else belongs unto it: they are also bound
to cut their wood and carry it home to their Landlords houses. Now the same
time there was a certain mass priest called Sir John Wallis, who had preached
in his sermons to the people, that equality ought to be observed in all
things, that one man was no better then another, the gentleman then the churl,
the rich then the poor, the learned then the ignorant: but all men were
derived from the self same parents, even Adam and Eve, and that our first
forefathers lived all after one sort, without any ine quality of state, or
difference of persons. Herewithall he persuaded them to assemble in great
number, and make suite to the King for redress, who because he was young,
might perhaps be brought to harken to their requests, or if he would not, then
to set themselves at liberty by the sword. This priest being apprenhended and
committed to prison for these matters, was by the Archbishop of Canterbury let
loose, upon what conscience I know not, but sutelie it proved to his own
sorrow and confusion. For after he was once abroad, he proceeded with his
enterprise more boldly then before. The poorer sort of the Londoners for envy
they bare to the rich (as it is commonly seen) commended this course of the
rebels, and by letters soll icited them to come to London, promising to give
them entrance into the City. Herevppon gathering their company together both
out of all the country adio^ing, and from some places further of, well near to
the number of threescore thousand, they came to Canterbury a town of their
own faction, and there spoiled the shrine of Saint Thomas. Next dare marching
forwards, they beat down to the ground all houses in their way which belonged
not to some of their conspiracy, and which way soever they went they compelled
all husbandmen to be pertakers of their proceedings. At Rochester they took a
certain knight by force, and Sir John Newton captain of the Castle of
Rochester. At Blackheath.
made him to become their leader: and for assurance that he should not deceive
them, made him deliver his children into their hands for pledges. When they
came within a little of London, they sent him to the King with this message,
that they were minded to have some speech with him concerning weighty
affairs, and therefore that he should come forth and talk with them. The King
upon deliberation, made answer that he would perform their request. So the
next day accompanied with certain lords he entered his barge, and rowing near
the place where they were descended to the shore in great number expecting his
coming, he demanded of them what they would with him? They required that he
would come out of his barge to parlie, and then their demands should be
declared unto him. But the King distrusting their multitude, without any
further communication returned back again. Then being more vehemently moved,
they hastened to London, making spoil of some lawyers and gentlemen's houses in
their way. And when they approached the City, finding the gates shut against
them, they threatened to set fire on the suburbs, with the cruellest effects of
their fury besides, and that if they entered by force, it should be to the
utter destruction of all that were in it. The Citizens herewith dismayed,
especially considering that a great number within inclined to sedition and
tumult, gave them entrance. They were no sooner come in but presently they
raunged through all the tauernes and tippling houses and fell to drinking and
making good cheer, no man presuming so much as once to say them nay of any
thing. The Captains in the mean while with some twenty thousand, VVat Tiler.
Jack Straw and John Ball. The Sauoy.
marching through the midst of the City, set fire on the duke of Lancasters
house, and some others which they burned to the ground. They put all strangers
to the sword and rifled the houses of the Exchangers. In the evening they
assembled themselves altogether again in a company before the tower (where the
King then remained, and with At Saint Katherines.
him a great number of the chief of the city) openly protesting that they
would never from thence till such time as they had obtained their purpose. The
King and some others thought it best to have set upon them in the night season
as they lay negligently dispersed and unarmed, overwhelmed with sleep and
drunke^nes, and so to have defeated them. Others to whom this attempt seemed
dangerous and of great uncertainty in the event, judged it better that means
were made to pacify them with some gentle and plausible oration. And this
counsel took effect. The day following the King sent them word, that as many
as would speak with him should repair to a certain place where he would Mile
end.
meet them, and give satisfaction to their demands. Many came, and many
tarried still in the city, especially the chief captains of the sedition: who
as soon as the King was gone forth, followed with some four hundredth of VVat
Tiler, Jack Straw, and John Ball.
their companions brake into the tower, and there surprising the Archbishop of
Canterbury Lord Chancellor of England, they cut of his head, and served diverse
others also Simon Sudbury.
of great account in the same sort, whose heads they prict upon polles, and set
them up upon the bridge, and other places of greatest view and most resort in
the city. When the King came to communication with the rebels, he demanded
gently of them, what they required? Marry (quoth they) that thou set us and our
Children and our posterity that shall come after us at liberty for ever, and
being so enlarged, maintain and preserve us from all manner of bondage and
servitude, either in show, or substance. The King promised to fulfill their
requests, and therevppon signed and delivered unto them certain writings and
charters for the same, wherewith a great part of them were reasonably well
satisfied, and began to be much more tractable. But the principal heads of
rebellion which, as I told you, abode still behind, being villains of most
wicked disposition, whose only desire was to make a prey of rich men's goods,
had drawn together in the mean time some twenty thousand with part of the
comminalty intending to have fallen to rifling presently. But the King coming
unawares (though not out of season) upon them, as he returned from parley with
the rebels at the place appointed without the city, espying such a multitude
together, paused a while to understand the matter. Immediately one of those
varlets It was in Smith sield. VVat Tiler.
stepping forth, began to talk to him in a very rude and contemptuous fashion,
having formerly given in charge to his companions, that at a certain sign or
watchworde which he would give them, they should rush violently forth and kill
all that were abount the King, whom only he would have spared in regard of his
age. As he continued in his arrogant speeches and behavior to the King, the
Mayor of the City disdaining thereat, thrust him through with his sword. Then
might ye have seen the enraged William VValworth.
multitude in a blind fury even ready to have destroyed them all: but the King
pacified them pressing himself alone into the thickest of them, which
otherwise perhaps might have seemed a poin^ of indiscretion; but the success
warranted the action. Many counseled the King to have pursued them in their
departure, and to have set upon them as they were separated and dispersed. But
the king would not allow of that course, nor suffer any violence as then to be
used toward them: thinking that with more ease and better leisure he might
take punishment of them at his pleasure hereafter. Neither were all offenders
alike: for, as in such commotions it happens, a great sort were taken up by
the way perforce, and compelled to go along with the rest for company. And he
used this gentleness the rather because the chief captains and ringleaders
of this mischief, being detected by the people, they only might be put to
death, and the residue be pardoned.

The Earl of Flaunders once again besieged Gaunt, assembling men of war out
of Henault and Artoys, the Lordship Gaunt besieged by the Earl of Flaunders.
whereof was lately befalne him by the death of his mother. In the mean time a
certain Captain of his, winning a little village belonging to the Gauntoys
called Grantmont, slew all that were in it, every one both old men, women, and
Children, not sparing so much as women with child, and those that lay sick in
their beds. The churches were destroyed with fire, and the town laid level
with the ground. It happened the author of this so miserable and unmerciful
spectacle, in a certain skirmish (such as there were many) falling into an
ambush of the Gauntoys, to be slain. The Earl taking his death very
grievously (for he had not any man about him whom he more dearly esteemed)
brake up his siege, conceiving greater displeasure against the Gauntoys then
before. Nevertheless by mediation of the Lords of Henault and Braband, and
upon the earnest suit of the people, peace was again concluded. Amongst other
articles this was one, that within fifteen days after, the Gauntoys should
deliver two hundredth persons such as the Earl should nominate, to be disposed
of at his pleasure. Peter de Bloys and Phillip of Arteuill having secret
intelligence hereof, and suspecting themselves might be some of the number,
provided a competent crew of their faction to be in a readiness at all
assayes, and the next morning when the articles of peace were read publicly in
the Towne-house, they entered in strongly accompanied, and slew two Aldermen of
great account: the same which were chief agents for the town in this treaty
of agreement. With this fact the Earl was so exceedingly provoked that it
seemd from thence forth he would never have come to any composition with the
Gauntoyes before he had utterly rooted out the whole rabble of that seditious
generation.

About this time happened an insurrection in Paris: the Commotion in Paris.
citizens requiring that the late subsidy and new exactions imposed upon them,
might be taken away, from payment whereof they pleaded immunity by a grant they
had obtained from King Charles the fifth, which they said the new King at his
coronation had likewise confirmed. The King to whom it was unpleasing and
tedious to live amongst contentious persons, departed out of Paris to Meaulx.
The people in the mean while rising in an uproar, brake up the prisons, let
out the prisoners, and killed certain of the kings officers. At length a
certain noble man of the The Lord Coucy.
court who was very well beloved of the people, being sent to appease the
tumult, dealt with the citizens in such sort, that they were content in regard
of the necessity of the time, to disburse weekly ten thousand sranks toward
the maintenance of the king wars and payment of his soldiers. Another uproar
happened also at Roan not unlike to this at Paris, but it was suppressed by the
King himself. Many Cities and common wealths following the footsteps of the
Gauntoys (whom they extolled with high commendation as most stout defenders of
their liberty) rebelled against their magistrates. Behold to what ruin all
things tended, if by the industry of valiant Princes, these evils had not been
restrained.

The Earl of Cambridge of whom we spoke before, making a long passage for
want of good weather, after he had been much tossed upon the seas with the
contrary winds, at last arrived with all his soldiers at Lisbone in Portugal:
When he had tarried there certain months, the King of Portingale bestowed all
his men in garrisons, giving commandment that they should not attempt any
thing against the enemy without his knowledge and direction. The englishmen and
Gascoines unacquainted with idleness, and desirous to be employed in some
exercise of arms, upon a time when they could not obtain license of the
King, went forth of their own heads, and winning certain holds of the
Spaniards, placed garrisons in them and returned. No other memorable service
was performed of many months after, by means whereof the King of Spain had
time and leisure more then enough, to make sufficient preparation for his
defense. He had aid also sent him out of France, which was allowed free
passage through Arragon by reason of the league that was confirmed between both
kings upon conclusion of the marriage, as we have discoursed already.

The King of England sending ambassadors into Germamany, to Charles King of
Bohemia, requested to have his King Richard marries Anne sister to Charles
King of Bohemia.
sister to wife. The matter was debated a tweluemoneth and more, and at last
took effect. The french King to the intent to hinder this marriage, gave
commandment to the Normans to enter the seas with a puissant fleet, and to
intercept the new Bride with all her train in their passage. But the Duke of
Braband, putting him in mind how unfitting it were for his honor to attempt
such an enterprise against a company of silly women unable to make resistance:
partly by the justness of his request, and partly by entreaty and persuasion,
diuerted the king from his purpose.

It was covenanted between the King and the Parisians, that the money which they
were to pay weekly should be kept by the treasurer of the City, and no part of
it to be expe^ded about any other occasion but only in time of necessity for
the maintenance of men of war. Now the french King when he should send his
succors unto Spain, required the treasurer to disburse an hundredth thousand
franks for the use of that service. The treasurer neither refusing, nor
performing, delayed the matter with frivolous excuses. The duke of Aniow at
that time standing in great favor with the people, to the intent the more
commodiously to furnish himself for his journey into Naples, wrought secretly
in such sort, that no part of this money was sent to the King: but having all
the authority in his own hands, found means to bring the matter so about,
that the whole sum which the King demanded, was without any grudging
delivered to himself. Being therefore plentifully furnished with all The Duke
of Aniow takes his iourny into Italy.
things needful, and having gathered together about thirty thousand men, he
proceeded on his voyage. When he arrived at Auinion where Pope Clement then
remained, he found the hearts of the noblity meruailously inclined toward him.
Afterward leaving Prouence, he passed through Italy into Apulia and Calabria:
of which countries when with most earnest affection of the people he had taken
possession, he took his way toward Naples. But the Neapolitanes were
altogether addicted to his adversary, Charles the King of Hungaries nephewe
heretofore mentioned. This Charles after the death of the Queen of Naples, who
left no issue of her own to enjoy her inheritance, usurped the title and
dominion of all these seigniories: affirming that the Popes gift to the Duke
of Aniow was for two especial causes of no force nor value. First, because it
was not in the deceased Queens power to alienate those things that were not
her own: which opinion of his the Neapolitanes and Sicilians stoutly
mayntained. And again, though it had been most free for her to dispose of
them all at her pleasure, yet because in those countries they acknowledged
Vrbane for chief bishop, and not Clement to whom and from whom that
conveyance was made, the gift must necessarily be void and frustrate. Charles
had long before furnished Zeuf an enchaunted castle: see Fros: Chro: Lib: 2.
Cap: 391.
with all manner of provision a certain castle called Leuf, planted (as the
people say) by art Magic, encompast on every side with the sea and so
impregnably fortified, that by any other means then by such like skill, it was
impossible to be conquered. Into this castle abundantly stored with all
necessaries for certain years, he withdrew himself and his retinue: taking no
great thought for the rest, in regard he was well assured that the Neapolitanes
would never forsake him, and as for Calabria though he lost it for the present,
yet after a year or two he made no question to recover it. For he knew the
Duke must always maintain a great army in pay for fear of rebellion, which
he could not long continue, but either want of money or victual would force
him to great inconvenience. So that his power being weakened and his numbers
dispersed, he might easily be overthrown and driven out of the country. But
there was a certain coniurer which promised the Duke of Aniow to blind the
eyes of them in the Castle, in such sort as they This enchaunter by such like
illusions had before caused the Queen of Naples and her husband to yield up
the same castle into the hands of Charles. Fross. Chro. lib. 2. cap 346. and
392.
should believe there was a bridge made over from the main land, by means
whereof they should be compelled to yield for fear. But by procurement of the
Earl of Sauoy (who accompanied the Duke in that expedition) he was put to
death for a like piece of service which he had done long before.

The Englishmen and Gascones having tarried almost nine months in Portingale
without performing any notable exployt, like men that hated such slolthfulnes,
determined once again to adventure sorth against the Spaniards. Their Captain
the Earl of Cambridge, when they acquainted him with the matter was against
it, but they nevertheless went forward with their purpose, and having good
success brought certain towns in subjection. After their return, they
complained that their entertaynment was not paid them. The king of Portingale
half angry because they adventured without his commission, made show as if he
would not have contented them. Whereupon some counseled to forrey the country
and take out their wages in pillage; but others of more stayed judgment and
sounder discretion persuaded the contrary, and so at length by entreaty they
obtained that which they were purposed to have gotten by violence. After this
the King of Portingale leuyed an army of fifteen thousand besides the English:
and the King of Spain having a power of thirty thousand, bad him battle. Both
their forces came into the field, and many days together light skirmishes
passed between them. But the king of Portingale because his enemies forces
were more in number then his, would in no wise join with him in a set
battle. The Duke of Lancaster (whom this matter chiefly concerned, in regard
he married the eldest daughter of Don Pietro) had promised his brother at his
setting forth toward Spain, that as soon as he had dispatched his affairs in
Scotland, he would come thither also himself, and bring an other army. His
coming the king of Portingale expected. But by reason of the late
insurrection, the state being somewhat troublesome in England, the King thought
it not convenient to send his men of war out of the Country. The King of
Portingale therefore seeing no more succors come, began to treat with the
Spaniard of peace, though altogether against the minds of the English: whose
General highly offended with the matter, returned thereupon into England, and
took with him his son also, to whom the king of Portingales daughter named
Beatrice a Lady of 10 years old had been lately betrothed. The nextyeere
following, the King of Spaines wife (which was the King of Arragons daughter)
deceassed, and the King of Spain married this Beatrice, whom the Earl of
Cambridge had in a manner cast off and forsaken. This marriage was ratifyed by
the Pope. Not long after, also dyed Ferdinando King of Portingale, in whose
place, not the King of Spain The death of Ferdinando king of Portingale.
which had married his daughter, but a bastard brother of his succeeded, being
admitted to the crown rather by favor of the clergy and authority of the
cities, then by election or approbation of the nobility. Upon this occasion
much trouble and great wars ensued afterward.

When the Gauntoys through the Earl of Flaunders procurement The Gauntoyes
kept from victual, and brought to great extremity by the Earl of Flaunders.
were kept streitly from victual out of all places adjoining, certain of
their town to the number of twelve thousand, passing through Barband came to
Liege and were there relieved with corn and other necessaries. In their
return homeward, they earnestly besought the Duchess of Braband (for the Duke
was then at Lutzemburgh) to be a means to the Earl of Flaunders, that at
leastwise he would be fo far pleased as to suffer the matters between them,
to be debated by indifferent persons at some time and place appointed. The
Earl condiscended, and a meeting was had at Tornay. Thither resorted the
commissioners of diverse neighbor states, to compound the strife if it might
be possible. For the Gauntoys came Philip^ of Arteuile. But after much
expectation, when it seemed the Earl would neither come himself, nor send any
other to treat in his behalf, the parties assembled wrote letters,
admonishing and earnestly entreating him, that he would not neglect this good
opportunity, now whilst his adversaries were so tractable to deal with, and so
desirous of agreement. Whereunto the Earl made answer, that he had not
leisure to be present there himself, but to gratify those honorable persons
that had traveled so far in the matter, he would send some in few days
after, which should fully acquaint them with his resolution: the effect
whereof, upon relation of his messengers, was much to this purpose. That he
would not come to composition with the Gauntoys upon any other terms, then
that all of them generally between fifteen and threescore years of age,
presenting themselves without the city upon the open plain, without any
manner of weapon, bare headed and bare footed, with halters about their necks,
should first crave pardon of him for their offenses, and afterward submit
themselves to his mercy, to determine of them and their lives at his pleasure.
Other answer then this (notwithstanding all the intercession of his friends)
none could be obtained, and so the assembly brake up. Phillip returning to
Gaunt, the next day discoursed the success of his treaty to the people. Then
might ye have seen the lamentable state of a city reduced to extreme misery
and desperation. In which general calamity Philip put them in choice of three
courses to be taken, either to accept the conditions proffered, or A hard choice
to shut themselves up in their churches, and there praying to God for pardon
of their sins, abide patiently the end of their lives: or else some five
thousand of them to issue out of the town and fight with their enemy. After
deliberation, this last took place: for indeed there was no other remedy, but
either to try their fortunes forthwith by the sword, or else to perish
miserably for hunger. The Earl had his men of war about him the same time at
Bruges to the number of forty thousand. For knowing that his enemies were now
brought to such distress, he was resolved by all means to make an honorable
conclusion of this war: and therefore when he heard tidings of the Gauntoys
approach, ^e disposed his forces to receive them. The Gauntoyes though they
were few in number, yet being hartened by persuasions, and chiefly for that
they left a poor, forlorn, afflicted, and most miserable city behind them,
wherein their wives, their children, and whatsoever See the effects of
desperate resolution.
else was dear to them remained, the safety or destruction of all which
depended wholly upon the success of that one days service, came to the field
with a bold courage and desperate resolution. The men of Bruges who before were
exceedingly forward and desirous to fight (in so much that the Earl was in a
manner constrained by their importunity to give battle that day against his
own mind and purpose) as soon as the armies joined, being strooken with a
sudden fear, upon what occasion I know not, except because the sun was
in their faces, brake their array and ran headlong out of the battle. The
Earl himself also when he could by no means restrain them, was forced to
fly and his battle of horsemen with him. The Earl outryding the rest of his
company, recovered the town of 1382.
Bruges, and would have closed the gates against the entrance of his enemies:
but it was in vain, for they pursued so fast after him as he fled, that they
entered the city a little before night. And even then the Earl not altogether
The Earl overthrown, and Bruges taken by the Gauntoys.
past hope, gathered the town^ ^^^en together, and made head against the
enemy: But he was brought to such extremity, that somewhat before midnight the
Gauntoyes having ouerrunne all the City, and he being utterly destirute and
forsaken of his people, was feign to convey himself by stealth sometime into
one lane and sometime into another, and at length entering into the cottage of a
poor woman, who had scarce so much in all her house as to hide him, with much
ado saved his life. Behold here the misery and strange mutability of man's
estate.

After this victory, the men of Bruges were cruelly entreated by the enemy, and
amongst other things that pleased the conqueror, some five hundredth of the
wealthyest of their city were carried prisoners to Gaunt. The Earl still
doubtful of his life, after he had lurked there a while in great secrecy, fled
to Lisle one while on foot, and other whiles on a mares back without any
saddle, in most wearysome way and most tedious weather. This success of
Strange alteration in the Earls fortune.
the Gauntoys greatly rejoiced the people of Paris, of Roan, of Liege, of
Braband and all the cities thereabout; not only in regard of the example, but
because they also wished ill to the earl of Flaunders, whom they generally
noted of pride: Phillip was highly honored in all places where he became, and
in all things used such excess as ever in a Prince might have been counted
superfluity. All the towns generally submitted themselves to the victorious
people of Gaunt. Only the men of Arde being summoned to yield, when they had
valiantly refused even in despite of their enemies, were besieged by Phillip
with a strong power leuyed from all parts of Flannders. The Gauntoyes in the
mean time made many rodes into the country, rissing and destroying diverse
gentle men's houses. And amongst the rest, a certain castle of the Earls where
they found the holy Funt wherein the Earl was christened, with his cradle and
such other things, which were all made a prey to the barbarous fury and outrage
of the soldier. The Earl being thus utterly overthrown and brought under
foot, considered how there was no other hope of recovery now remaining but
one, which was to move the French king to commiseration of his estate. To this
therefore he addressed himself: and for better obtaynment of his purpose,
employed the friendly endeavor of The Duke of Burgundy.
his son in law, the uncle of him at whose hands he required succor. The
young king easily induced by his persuasions, undertook this war with great
alacrity. When Phillip of Arteuill understood that by the Duke of Burgoines The
French King takes upon him the Earls quarrel against the Gauntoys.
intercession, the Earls suite was preferred in France, he addressed letters
forthwith in the name of the people to the French king, beseeching him that he
would be a means to make reconciliation between the Earl and his country. He
wrote not this so much for any good faith which he intended, as to learn
hereby what opinion was holden of him in France. But as soon as he saw
himself disappointed there (for the King had disdain at his letters) he
turned to the King of England, of whom he not only requested aid for the
Gauntoyes, but also (altogether out of season) demanded the two hundredth
thousand crowns that his father Jacques had lent King Edward at the siege of
Tourney: by means whereof it came to pass that he obtained neither the one
nor the other. For had he made no mention at all of the money, but only
entreated of the league, it is like enough he might have obtained his desire.

The Earl of Flaunders having access now opened unto him by reason the kings
mind was so addicted to this war, took his journey into France. And after he
had received his inauguration at the kings hands, for the county of Artoys
(which was lately befalne him) he began to conceive better hope of his
affairs: especially when he saw so puissant a Prince, with such forwardnes of
affection, bring a mighty army of no less then threescore thousand men, to
wage batell against his enemy in the maintenance of his quarrel. Whereof so
soon as Phillip had received advertisement, he omitted no part of what
pertained to his charge, but commanded presently that all the bridges upon the
river Lise which were nere hand, should be broken down. Moreover he caused two
passages upon the river to be strongly fortifyed and defended with good
garrisons: the one of them (at Comius) being kept by Peter de Boys with nine
thousand men. Whereof the French men being not ignorant, sundry opinions rose
amongst the^ as they consulted of their affairs: some thinking it were best to
go about by Saint Omers where the river is shallowest; others giving counsel
to make a bridge over Skeld not far from Tourney, to the intent the army
might pass easily from thence into Arde. At length it likte them best to
venture upon the enemy before mentioned which lay at Comius. When they came
thither, they found the bridge broken down and no passage to get over,
whereupon they fell again to consultation. In the mean while certain
aduenturous gallants which were desirous to make some proof of their valor
(having formerly agreed amongst themselves, that if no passage could be found,
they would secretly use some means by their own industry without knowledge of
their commanders, to convey themselves over) with the help of three or four
small botes slyding along by a cord fastened to both sides of the river, passed
over in that sort by a few at once, till they had gotten all their company to
the further side in safety: and this they did with so little trouble or
danger, that the enemy who lay encamped not far of, never perceived it
before such time as he saw them marching toward him with Ensigns displayed.
Peter de Boyis immagining that so small a number durst never venture upon him,
because the cuening approached, would not fight with them as then, but rather
thought to set upon them in the night when the weariness of their travel had
overtaken them with They were in all not above sour or five hundredth. Fros.
Chro. lib. 2. Cap. 414.
sleep. But the French men whom the boldness of their attempt had made
circumspect in their proceedings, considering how great and dangerous an
enterprise they had undertaken without license either of King or Captain, were
exceedingly watchful, and stood always upon their guard for fear of
disadvantage. About the break of day their enemies came forth to assail them,
whom they encountered with such resolution (albeit their number were but a
handful in comparison) that they slew well ^ere six thousand, and chased the
rest into a town thereby which they took for refuge. After this battle the
French king presently building up a bridge, brought over the rest of his
forces, and marched directly toward Ipre. The townesme^ following the fortune
of the conquerours army, slew their governor because he refused to yield, and
committed Ipre receives the French king.
themselves to the French King. All their neighbors immitating their example,
did both pay great sums of money, and also brought their captains prisoners
which persuaded them to stand out in rebellion. But the Earl of Flaunders was
called to council in none of these proceedings. The men of Bruges could have
been contented to yield as well as the rest, but their Captains so encouraged
them with hope of aid out of England, that they held it out notwithstanding.

When Phillip of Arteuill understood that the power of the most puissant King
was encamped not far from him, he also brought forth his army into the field,
which consisted of some fifty thousand men. There he exhorted them in a pithy
oration, that now going to battle they set before their ^ies that memorable
overthrow which with so small a company they had given to the Earl of
Flaunders; and withal to consider how after this battle, if they obtained
victory, they should thenceforth become Lords of all, and be able to make
opposition against them. Which thing in their behalf all good and well
governed common wealths desired, to whom no tidings could be more acceptable,
then to hear that the Gauntoys fighting valiantly and constantly in defense of
their liberty, had reaped the honorable reward of their virtue and courage, by
destroying such persons as through ambition and covetousness could not suffer
any common wealth to remain in quiet. When he had spoken much more to this
effect, he commanded that in the conflict they should put all to the sword, and
spare no man, the King only excepted. The Flemings not forgetting what Phillip
had told them, fought very manfully: and this also not a little sharpened their
courage, that they had stirred up such a puissant enemy against them, whom if
they might overcome, it would redound to their perpetual fame amongst all
posterity. Notwithstanding at length being enclosed between two wings of their
enemies The French kings victory against the Gauntoyes.
and forced into a straight, they were overthrown. The battle lasted not much
above an hour, and yet in that little space xxv. Thousand of their number were
wanting. Philip fighting valiantly amongst the thickest of his enemies Phillip
de Arteuill slain.
was slain in the field, and his body being sought for and found amongst the
dead, was by the Kings commandment hanged upon a tree. Undoubtedly, that
days battle was fought in a fortunate hour for all noblemen and gentlemen.
For had it fallen out otherwise then it did, surely (as the world then went) it
would have given a great blow to their anthority, and have shaken even the
seats of Kings and Princes. The Parisians, who lately before had begun a
co^motion, longed exceedingly to hear some good news of the success of this
battle. In Champaigne and a great part of France besides, all the wealthiest
cities, and the peasants of the country began to make insurrection. Therefore
upon the success of this action, depended the safety or ruin of many Princes
estates. The King was then between thirteen and fourteen years of age. The
men of Bruges perceiving that by this overthrow of the Bruges yields to the
french King.
Gauntoyes, all hope of succor was bereft them, and all means of recovery
taken away, submitted themselves to the kings mercy. And the Earl of Flaunders
because he bare no displeasure to this town, became intercessour for them to
the King, that they might be received into favor paying six score thousand
franks. Those that be sieged Arde, as soon as they heard tidings how their
fellows were discomfited, brake up their camp and returned to Gaunt. The
Gauntoyes altogether broken and discouraged with this so great misfortune,
began to consider with themselves how they might best move the Kings mind to
mercy and compassion. But Peter de Boys being brought thither in a horselitter
(for he was yet weak of his wounds) with his great words and glorious vaunts,
quite put that immagination out of their heads. After the french King upon
deliberation with his counsel, thought it not convenient as then to besiege
Gaunt, he distributed his men into diverse garrisons, and returned to Tourney.

The Gauntoys as is showed before, had sent to the King of England about the
obtaynment of a league; the articles whereof (devised by his counsel) the King
sent to them in writing by a gentleman of his household, that if the Flemings
allowed them, they should confirm them with their seals. But the ambassador
arriving at Calice, when he heard how the Gauntoys were overthrown, and that
the french men had subdued most part of the country, without performance of his
commission he returned into England. Neither were the English nobility greatly
sorry that the Gauntoys went by the worse: whom if it had fortuned to go away
with victory, the commons generally in all countyres adjoining, would from
thence have derived a pattern of pride and rebellion, and considering how but
lately before there had been most perilous tumults in England, every small
matter might have ministered new occasion of insurrection. Thus they thought,
and this was their opinion. Whilst the french king lay at Tourney, diverse well
disposed persons labored very earnestly to make a reconciliation between the
Earl and his rebellious subjects. The Gauntoys refused not to be at the french
Kings disposition, but rather then receive the Earl Lewis again, it seemed
they would endure all extremityes whatsoever. When nothing could be brought to
effect, the french King returned homeward: and as he approached near Paris,
there came forth to meet him some 20000 of the townesemen, all armed and well
appointed. This seemed very strange both to the King and all that were about
him: and because in those days it was no trusting to such a multitude in
arms, there were some sent to inquire their meaning. Their answer was thus:
that they came forth in such sort provided, to the intent the King might see
with what power the Parisians could furnish him upon short warning whenever
he had need of their service. This they framed for, an excuse at the present
time, but doubtless their intention was far otherwise before, and had not
the King come home with victory, surely strange things had happened. Being
commanded to return into the town and put off their armor, they obeyed. The
King brought with him a great army of Britons and Burgonions, the countenance
whereof kept the Parisians in fear. Then by advise of his uncles he began
leysurely to deal with them according to their deserts. He caused all their
cors^ets to be brought together upon a heap, and took them from them: put to
death many principal men of your City, imposed diverse taxes and tributes upon
them, and in conclusion wip^e them off some four hundredth thousand franks for
fines and ransomes.

There was mortal contention the same time between Schism in the Church.
the two Popes Clement, and Vrbane. Clement then remained at Avinion, and
Vrbane, partly for other causes, but principally the more commodiously to annoy
his adversary the French King, repaired to Genoa. He came not out of Italy
unfurnished of means wherewith to strengthen his supremacy. And these were his
practices. He determined The practices of Pope Vrbane against Clement his
adversary.
to send his bulls into England, directed to the Archbishops and Bishops of
the Realm, wherein he granted free remission of all sins to such as
impugned the Clementines: for so did Pope Clement with him in France. And
being well assured that he could no way work the Frenchmen greater displeasure
then by this means to set the Englishmen against them, he practiced another
devise for the getting of money, without which, he knew the English nobility
would be nothing forward to take arms for all his absolutions. Therefore he
thought it best besides for his former pardons, to grant the King license to
levy a tenth upon all churchmens goods, the principal prelates excepted, out
of which collection the soldiers employed in that service, should be allowed
their entertainment. And to compass this matter the better, he suborned the
chief of the Clergy (whom he had exempted from this payment) to urge forward
the inferior sort to make contribution. By this means, neither the kings
treasure is exhausted, nor the common people burdened more the^ they gave of
their own voluntary affection: which surely every man did for his part most
liberally, as the world went in those days: especially in consideration of the
reward proposed (which was not mean nor ordinary) the opportunity of obtaining
whereof, no man thought was in any wise to be neglected. Thus partly by the
great number of bulls which Pope Vrbane sent into England, and partly by He
sent no less then 30. as appears: Fross. Chro: lib. 2. cap. 428.
sermons preached in every place to that purpose, men's minds were so ravished,
that they thought themselves already in paradise, which had the fortune to dye
in such a blessed season: so that in short space there was gathered together,
of the tenths of the Clergy and benevolence of the people, ahout the sum of
five and twenty hundred thousand franks. And that the matter might import more
credit, it was the Popes pleasure some churchmen which had experience in such
affairs, associated with some other skillful captain, should have chief
command over the army thus assembled. In like manner he sent his bulls into
Portingale, and used the like practice there to trouble the King of Spain
which took part against him. So the Duke of Lancaster was appointed to invade
Spain, and a Bishop of the family of the Spencers was sent to make wars Henry
Spencer Bishop of Norwich.
in France. But in regard the Duke was nothing favored by the commons, and
suspected to have taken upon him this voyage, rather for covetousness then
any conscience, most patt of the people desired to serve under the Bishop. To
whom the King at his setting forth, gave commandment that he should tarry
for his other associate and fellow Captain of the war, at Calice. But the
Bishop being one that could away with no lingering, and supposing there was no
delay to be used in the matter, led forth his army presently into Flaunders.
The Earl lying then at Lile, sent to him to know the cause of his sudden
invasion without defiance. Whereto he answered, that he persecuted all the
Clementines in the behalf of Pope Vrbane. The messengers replied, that
Flaunders held altogether of Vrbanes side; and it there were none other
occasion but that, he had unjustly undertaken this war against those that had
no way deserved it. Wherefore they desired him to grant them safe conduct,
that they might pass over into England to speak with the King. Then the
Bishop in a froward fashion told them, that for his part he would make them no
safe conduct neither to go nor tarry; if they would needs pass, they might do
it at their own peril. When no other answer then this could be obtained
from a person so arrogant and uncivil, the Flemings to the number of Nine
thousand flemings slain by the English in a battle not far from Duakirk.
twelve thousand made opposition against the English, not far from the town
of Dunkirke; where encountering them in battle, (after they had slain a
Herald sent with a message from the Englishmen) they were overthrown and put
to flight with the loss of some nine thousand of their people. Then the
Englishmen having taken certain little towns thereabout, marched forward to
besiege Ipre. And to the intent to make their power the stronger, they sent
word to the Gauntoys that they also should draw out their forces into the
field. For there was no league established between them, and it grieved the
English not a little that the french men won the victory in the former
battle, so envious were they of the french men's honor or good fortune. The
Gauntoys therefore sent them 20000. men to the siege of Ipre. Whilst Ipre was
thus straightly environed, the Earl of Flaunders by mediation of the Bishop of
Liege, determined to fall to some friendly agreement with the English, whom
(as in reason it might be supposed) he should find tractable in that behalf,
considering how the war was raised only against the Clementines, and
himself with all his people were Vrbanists But the Gauntoys who were partakers
of the English men's counsels, for hatred they bare to their Lord, interrupted
this treaty. Then had the Earl no other hope but the help of the french King,
who being again solicited by the Duke of Burgome, his uncle, and the Earl of
Flaunders son in law, undertook the matter, and raised an army of above
1383. The French King again undertakes the Earl of Flaunders cause.
an hundred thousand men. The Bishop as unskillful in matters of war so
wonderously proud, when he heard that the kings power was coming against him,
streytway dislodged his camp, and breaking up his siege withdrew himself
toward the sea coast, with part of his army (the rest being dispersed in
garrisons) to the intent that when his enemy approached, he might the better
provide for his safety by an easy retreyte to Calice. In the Kings army was the
Duke of Britain, which seemed a strange sight to the Englishmen, through
whose friendship and assistance he had often been succored and restored to his
Duke dome. But he might lawfully do it at that time without empeachment of his
honor. First, because he was lately before reconciled to the french King: and
again in regard he ought this reciprocal duty to the Earl of Flaunders,
whose bounty and good affection he had abundantly tasted in the time of his
necessity, when he lived as an exile, expnlsed out of his own country. Such is
the instability of man's estate, that the affliction which oppresses one to
day, seizes upon another to morrow. And yet the Duke showed himself no whit
unmindful of the benefits he had received from the English, who upon the
approach of the french army, had retired themselves into a certain town
called Borborough, and were besieged in the same. For considering the imminent
peril that hung over their heads, which they could no way avoid but by
yielding (the success whereof was likewise uncertain) he ceased not to exhort
them (as they parlyed with him from the walls) to provide in time for their
own safeguard by offering some reasonable composition. The Englishmen not only
unthankfully accepted his motion, but further entreated him to be a means to
the King for the effecting of their purpose, which he also undertook and
performed. So the King upon some deliberation, receiving the town into his
hands, suffered all the Englishmen to depart without harm or violence. When
the expedition was ended, and the army brake up, the King gave honorable
thanks to such foreign Captains as had served him in this journey, especially
to Duke Frederick of Bauier, who had put himself forth into this action, only
upon desire to see the countries and to observe the order and discipline of the
french wars.

The Duke of Britain desirous in regard of his good affection, as well to the
french King as the English, to bring them to agreement, procured so much by his
great travel and diligence, that an appointment was made for the meeting of
certain ambassadors from France, England, and Spain. For the french King
would not deal with the English, but so as the Spaniard might be included in
the treaty. And because in so doubtful a case, neither the french men would
come to Calice, nor the Englishmen to Boloine, a place indifferent between
both was assigned for their meeting. There the french kings uncles demanded
again all Aquitaine, together with Calice, and all the fortresses which the
Englishmen then held on that side the sea, as far as the river of Gerond,
as well in Normandy, as in the countries of Britain, Poytow, and Rochell.
Contrariwise the Englishmen would part from none of all those things, and
besides, the principal points which they had in co^^ission to treat of, they
would also that the Gauntoys should be received into this society: For so it
was formerly agreed between the Gauntoys and them at Calice. But against this
demand the Earl of Flaunders opposed himself with great vehemence, affirming
that they were in no wise to be admitted into league with so great Princes. In
conclusion, when nothing else could be agreed upon, a truce was taken for
ten months both by s^a and land, between the French, English, Spanish,
Scottish, and Gauntoys, notwithstanding all that the Earl of Flaunders could
allege or persuade to the contrary. This also was added, that somewhat before
the truce expired, the ambassadors should meet again at a place appointed to
confer of these affairs more at large.

Within a while after deceased the Earl of Flaunders, 1383. The death of Lewis
Earl of Flaunders.
whom fortune for a time had wonderfully entangled with wars amongst his
own subjects; so that in his example alone we may behold, how great a
happiness it is for a Prince so to govern his people as he may be both
beloved and feared: and contrarily, how dangerous it is to happen upon a
puissant common wealth which under pretense of maintayning their liberty,
confounds all things together, to the intent to shift their necks wholly out
of the yoke of obedience.

When the ambassadors departed from the treaty above mentioned, it was agreed
amongst other matters, that the French men should give notice of the truce to
the King of Scotland. But this was left unperformed, by what error or
negligence I know not. It should seem after the Earl of Flaunders death, the
duke of Burgoynes brai^e was so busied that he quite forgot it: for all that
inheritance was descended to him. Certain English gentlemen taking advantage
of this occasion made a rode into Scotland, wasting the country as they went
with fire and sword. The Scotts who knew nothing what had passed, meruailled
much at the matter, seeing no war was proclaimed, and so much the more
because they had heard a certain dark rumor of a truce. But howsoever the
case stood, they prepared to defend themselves. When report hereof was brought
to the french King, the Peers began to accuse one another of negligence in
forgetting a matter of so great moment. And because there was now no other
remedy, they sent certain into Scotland, which by declaring the true
circumstances of the matter should give them satisfaction. The king himself
was well inclined to peace, but the Lords of his country made much ado and
were very hot upon revenge, and in like manner rode forth into the borders of
England to show that they neither wanted courage nor ability to defend
themselves and their goods from their enemies. At length being pacifyed and the
King persuaded, the French ambassadors sent an herald into England, and so
quieted the strife. And when the truce was received and ratifyed on both parts,
it was proclaimed by sound of trumpet, that no man should presume to
transgress the articles therein contained. But to persuade the king of England
to this peace (for he was highly offended at the late invasion of the Scottish)
great means were made by the Duke of Lancaster, who had formerly determined to
make his voyage this year into Spain, with the assistance of the King of
Portingale: which war he was the more desirous to accomplish, in regard he
had issue by his wife, to whom he affirmed the kingdom of Spain was both by
the law of nations and nature it self, of right apper^ayning.

It is showed before with how great preparation and puissance the Duke of Aniow
passed into Italy. When he came thither he found no opposition, but only in
the Neapolitanes, who would in no wise be turned from his adversary: but
Prouence, Calabria, and Apulia received him. The Earl of Sauoy (as I told you)
accompanied him in his journey, and about this time ended his life. Now when he
had retained his soldiers for the space of three years together, being almost
drayned dry with so great and continual charges, he requested his brothers
that they would not fail him in these his affairs of so great honor and
importance. They out of their love and honorable affection, holding it not fit
to abandon him in so ^ust a quarrel, The Duke of Aniow dies in Italy.
sent an army to aid him: which when it came to Auinion, received certain
tidings that he was lately dead at a Castle not far from Naples, and so
returned home again.

After the death of the Earl of Flaunders, the inheritance of that country
descended to Phillip Duke of Burgundy which had married his daughter. Now the
Duchess of Braband (whose husband Wenceslaus of Bohemia dyed lately before at
Lutzemburge) desired earnestly, that Burgundy, Henault and Flaunders, might be
united in perpetual league and amity. The Duke of Burgoigne had a son named
John. This John married Margaret the daughter of Albert Duke of Bauier and
Henault at Cambray. And William the son of Albert took to wife Margaret
daughter to the Duke of Burgoigne. The french king was present at these
nuptialles. And the Duke of Burgoigne gave in dowry with his daughter an
hundred thousand franks. These allyances troubled the Duke of Lancaster, who
had a purpose to have matched a daughter of his to the son Her name was
Phillip whom he had by Blaunch his first wife.
of Duke Albert. And therefore at such time as these matters were in treaty, he
endeavored by his letters to Albert, to have hindered their proceedings, but it
prevailed not.

Concerning the Earls of Henault, ye must conceive that William the Lord of
this seigniory had four daughters, Margaret, Phillip, Ione, and Isabell, and
one son named William. Margaret was married to Lewis of Bauier the Emperor:
Edward king of England, married Phillip: William was slain in battle against
the Phrisoners and left no issue. Therefore by his death the right of
succession deuolued to Margaret the eldest sister: and she enjoyed the heritage
till such time as Albert her son whom she had by Lewis the Emperor, being
grown to man's estate, entered upon the inheritance of his ancestors. And
afterward William the son of Albert married the Duke of Burgoignes daughter,
as is a little before declared.

The Duke of Aniow left behind him two sons, Lewis, and Charles: in whose
right their mother (by the counsel of Pope Clement and the French king) made
war upon the people of Prouence, not without the French Kings assistance,
who supplied her wants both with men and money. The men of Manceilles were well
affected toward her, but all the rest opposed themselves against her, and as
it seemed, would not accept her for their sovereign, before Calabria, Naples
and Apulia had done the same: of which countries when she could show her self
to have quiet possession, they also offered to put themsel es under her
obedience.

The truce by this time being expired, the French King had a mervailous desire
to be doing with the King of England. Hereupon leuying an army, he sent the
Duke of Burbon into Aquitaine, that if it were possible he might expel the
English men wholly out of France. He sent another The Admiral of France sent
with a power into Scotland.
army also into Scotland under the conduct of his Admiral, to the intent the
Scottish power and his being joined together, might put the king of England to
the greater vexation. But when the Admiral arrived in Scotland, he found not
such friendly entertaynement as he looked for.

Charles the fifth, upon his deathbed had requested his brothers to choose a
wife for his son of some noble family, and especially out of Germany, that the
alliance might be the stronger. They did according to his desire. For he
married Isabell the daughter o^ Stephen Duke of Bauier, a Lady Charles the
French king, marryeth Isabell daughter of Stephen Duke of Bauier.
of most excellent beauty. But the first means of this match was derived from
this occasion, that Frederick of Bauier her uncle had followed the French
king in his late wars against the English, as has been already declared.

Shortly after the death of the Duke of Aniow, who had attempted great matters
in Italy, dyed also his adversary Charles, sur^amed the Peaceable. It was
supposed, that he was made away by the Queen of Hungary, who having two
daughters by her husband Lewis deceassed, feared lest this Charles which was
his brothers son, should dispossess them of their inheritance, specially for
that he openly termed himself King of Hungary: and therefore wrought means
to dispatch him out of the world: but whether this be a true report or a
conjecture, I cannot affirm. Then sent she ambassadors to the French King,
requiring that her daughter might be matchd to his brother Lewis of Valoys.
This being not mislikte in France, commissioners were sent into Hungary to go
through with the matter in the behalf of Duke Lewis, and others afterward sent
from thence into France to fetch the bridegroom. In the mean while Henry of
Bohemia, called the Marquis of Blankford, the natural brother of Charles King
of Bohemia, disdayning that a king should be sought so far off, by the
procurement of certain Lords of Hungary, and not without consent of his
brother, besieged the Queen and her daughter, as they soiourned for their
recreation in a certain castle seated in a solitary place far from resort of
people. By means whereof she was at length constrained to give him her
daughter to wife. The French kings brother who was proceeded on his journey, as
sarre as Champaigne with all his household and retinue, when he heard news of
this alteration in Hungary, was not a little discontented with the matter and
returned again to his brother: who seemed not greatly sorry, for as much as
Hungary by reason of the far distance of the country from France could
hardly afforde him any help at need.

The Scottish king understanding the Admiralles desire to be employed, leuyed
an army of thirty thousand men. The French and Scottish men together invade the
borders of England.
He himself would not be present in the journey, but he sent his nine sons:
who together with the French men set forth toward their enemies country, and
wasted the borders far and near. But as soon as they understood that the
King of England approached with an army of seauenty thousand men, they made no
longer abode, but retired and the English pursued after. The Admiral persuaded
to give battle, but the Scottish men in regard their enemies were more in
number then they, and because they knew likewise that the English were men of
great practice and experience in arms, by all means refused the encounter.
And it appeared, the English were never almost more vehemently bent to do the
Scottish a displeasure, then at that time, because they had then waged foreign
soldiers against them, and that out of France: wherewith the English men were
exceedingly provoked. The Scottish men the better to satisfy the Admiral (who
still urged them to give battle) brought him to a hill there by of exceeding
great height, from whence he might perfectly take a view of all his enemies
forces. Which as soon as he had seen, he was content to follow their counsel
that were of a contrary opinion to his own. Notwithstanding least they should
seem to have performed nothing, with both their powers joined together, they
invaded the marches of Wales, where they did somewhat more harm then they
could in England. The Duke of Lancaster and many others gave counsel to
follow after them, but a certain person of great credyt and authority, quite
diuerted the kings mind from that purpose, suggesting The Earl of Oxenford.
into his conceit, how the Duke sought to thrust him forth into this dangerous
action, to the intent he might perish in battle, and so himself get
possession of the crown. How much mischief this bringing the King in
suspicion of his uncles bred afterward in England, shall be declared in place
convenient.

The Gauntoys tired with seven years wars, were desirous of peace, but it
was privately amongst themselves. For Peter de Boys who knew it was most for
his profit and reputation, to have the people always in trouble and
contention, held them under in such sort, that scarce any man durst openly make
mention of peace. Nevertheless, through the diligent endeavor of two well
disposed citizens (men studious of the public welfare) and a certain
gentleman of virtuous quality, who was well beloved 1358.
and befriended in France, their matter was brought to a peaceable conclusion:
and the Duke of Burgoigne who The Gauntoies received to savor, and their peace
made with their Lord the Duke of Burgoigne.
was lately become Lord of the country, showed himself very gentle and
tractable, which he did so much the rather, because in the beginning of the
next spring he was purposed to make wars in England. My author makes a large
rehersall of the Articles of this peace, which here it shall not be needful to
insert. When Peter de Boys understood these proceedings, he likte them so well,
that he left the City, and went over into England with an English gentleman
Sir John Bourchier.
whom the Gauntoys long before had procured upon ernest entreaty to be
governor of their town. For howsoever after the peace was confirmed, it seemd
he might have stayed there in safety, yet not daring to trust the multitude,
he thought it his best course to convey himself out of their danger. The
author of this work after rehearsal of these matters, discourses how
himself for his better knowledge and instruction of such occurrenty as
happened in Spain, Portingale, Gascoigne, and the countries thereabout (when
he was of those years that he was able to endure the travel of the journey,
and of that capacity and understanding that he could describe and register in
writing such things as he learned by his own or others observation) came at
length to the house of a Gascone Lord called the Earl of Foys, a man of much
honor and The Earl of Foys.
respect in those times: by whom being familiarly entertained for certain
months together, he received diverse informations both from the Earl
himself, and from other persons of great credyt and account which had been
present themselves at the doing of those things whereof they made relation.
Amongst the rest he recounteth a certain sorrowful adventure, and such a one
as would make even nature it self astonished; the discourse is this.

The Earl of Foys an honorable and valiant gentleman, held in custody a
certain noble man whom he had The strange story of Gascone Earl of Foys, and
his son.
taken prisoner, by the law of arms, who for his ransom couenanted to pay
fifty thousand franks, for which sum the king of Navarre (whose sister the
Earl had married) proffered to become surety. But the Earl suspecting the
Kings credit (wherewith perhaps he had been too well acquainted) would not
but upon better assurance, deliver his prisoner. His wife displeased to see her
brother no better respected, was very importunate with her husband, and would
not be in quiet till she had persuaded him: oftentimes making mention how there
was a matter of as great value as that, to be assigned to her brother in
consideration of her dowry, and therefore that he need not fear to be
deceived. The prisoner by this means being set at liberty, as soon as he came
home into his country, to the intent to discharge his credit, provided the
sum of money and sent it at his day accordingly, not to the Earl himself,
but to the King of Navarre his surety: which when the Earl understood, he
marvelled much the money was not brought him, and by his wife (who willingly
undertook the journey) signified his mind to the King of Navarre, desiring
him to remember his promise, who upon receipt of the message answered his sister
in this sort: Sister, this money belongs all to you as your husbands debt in
lieu of your dowry, and since it is now come to my hands, I will in no wise
suffer it to pass from me again. Then began she to entreat and earnestly
to beseech him that he would alter his purpose in that behalf, showing how
great occasion it would minister of perpetual hatred and contention between
them, and how she durst never return home to her husband, unless she brought
the money with her: for he was by nature wrathful, and would never be pleased
with her again, if he saw himself deceitfully dealt with, considering how
she was the only means which moved him to accept that assurance, and to
deliver his prisoner, neither of which he would have done but upon her
entreaty, and therefore the whole blame would be imputed to her by her
husband. When she had oftentimes thus expostulated in vain, and saw his
obstinate mind would be nothing changed, not daring to go back into her own
country, she abode still in Navarre with her brother. During the time she
soiorned there, her son which bare his fathers name, a youth of some fifteen
years of age, came thither to visit her: and after certain months tar^iance
Gascone.
when he prepared to depart, he would feign have persuaded her to return with
him to his father, but she would by no means be entreated. So he took his
leave, and went from thence to Pampelone to do the like to his uncle: who not
only used him with all honorable and kind respect, but also at his departure
gave him many rich gifts, and amongst the rest, a purse with a little box in
it full of a certain confection in fine powlder, the force whereof was such,
that whosoever had tasted of it in never so small quantity, should incontinently
have died. In presenting this amiable gift to his young kinseman, he vtterd
these speeches. You see (sweet nephew) how great displeasure your father has
conceived against your mother, yet not so great but that there is possibility
they may be again reconciled. No man will imagine how much I am grieved for
the coffeehouse between them, and no less in duty ought you to be also.
But for remedy of this inconvenience, when you are returned to your father, you
shall find the means to cast alittle of this powlder upon the meat which shall
be set before him, but you must do it very closely: for it will come to pass,
that whereas now he utterly abhors her, as soon as he has eaten of that
meat, he shall desire her above all things; insomuch as he shall scarcely at
any time endure her out of his company, so great shall be his love, so ardent
his affection. Undoubtedly you have much reason to wish it were so; but in any
wise beware you make no man of your counsel, for then you loose your labor.
The young gentleman as yet unacquainted with the world, thinking his uncle (of
whom he would never have suspected ill) had intended good faith and spoken as
he thought, received the gift tha^kfully, and promised to do according to his
direction. When he came home, his father gently welco^med him, inquiring of
diverse circumstances concerning his journey, and other novelties, and amongst
the rest, whether his uncle had given him any at his parting, or no. He
answered yes, and showed him all his gifts, the box only excepted. But it so
fell out, that a bastard son of the Earls, who kept familiar company with his
brother, I know not by what occasion, lighted upon his garment and found the
purse hanging at it, wherein he perceived some special thing whatsoever it
were, was contained. Whereupon questioning with his brother what it should be
that he carried so continually about him in his bosom, he would give him no
answer, but changed color and seemed angry that he had been so inquisitiue.
Within few days after they fell at variance playing at tennice, and the young
Lord buffetted his bastard brother with his fists: who having no other means
to make his party good, ran straight to the Earl with a lamentable
complaint, showing what injury was done to him by his brother, who indeed
deserved to be beaten himself, and well chastized with a whip. And for what
cause (quoth the Earl) do thou think him worthy to be whipped? because
(quoth the bastard) ever since he ruturned from his mother, he has carried
about him at his breast a thing with a rank savor, to what purpose I know
not, but that he told me it would not be long before his mother and you were
reconciled. With that the Earl began to have some suspicion, and commanded
the boy to keep all secret. Next meal as he sat at dinner, and his son
(after his ordinary custom) serving him with assay, he espied the purstrings
hanging at his bosom: whereupon he harkened him to him as if he wou^ld have
whispe^ed in his ear, and when he came nigh, took hold of his dublet and
vnbuttoned it, and cutting of the purse, made a proose of the confection upon
a dog, who as soon as he had reciued it, fell down dead immediately. Then the
Earl enraged with anger, and trembling all over his body, rose up against his
son intending doubtless to have slain him, but that the Gentlemen which
were about him, abhorring the cruelty of such a fact, and amazed at the
strangenes of the accident, withheld him. When he saw he could be suffered to
use no other violence, with bitter execrations he cursed his son, that had
gone about so unnaturally, and with so horrible kind of death to have murdered
his own father, who had oftentimes sustained great wars against mighty and
puissant Princes, only to enlarge his seigniorie and to leave him the richer
inheritance. All that were present did what they could to appease his wrath:
but he commanded his son forth with to prison, and to be sure he should not
escape, gave in charge that he should be streyghtly watched, threatening this
keeper with extreme punishment if he showed him any favor. Moreover he put to
death with most cruel torments about fifteen persons all gentlemen of good
worth because that being conversant and familiar with his son, they had not
discovered this damnable practice. Afterward in an assembly of all the states
of his country, whom he had summoned to be present at a day appointed, when he
had declared at large the most wicked and unnatural treason which his son
had practiced against him, amplifying the matter with diverse circumstances to
make it appear more heinous, he gave sentence upon him that he should be put
to death. Intercession was made of all hands humbly entreating him that he
would not show so cruel an example: neither would they depart from thence
before he had faithfully assured them, that his sons life should be saved.
He performed his promise, but detayned him still in prison. When report of this
matter came to Pope Gregory the xi. he sent certain Cardinals from Avinion,
whom he had given in charge to make a perfect atonement between the father
and the son. But (God knows) they came to late. For the young Earl during
the space of ten days that he was kept in prison, had taken little or no
sustenance, (though meat were set before him) so as it should seem, through
continual musing upon the strangenes of his misfortune, he had conceived so
great g^eese, as he desired nothing but death. Whereof his father being
informed by the keeper, he entered in unto him with a troubled mind, The Earl
of Foys kills his own son unwittingly.
holding a penknife in his hand wherewith he was paring his nails, and by what
fatal adventure I know not, cut a vain of his sons throat, chiding him
bitterly in the mean time for refusing his meat, and so departed out of the
room. Immediately after, the keeper coming in, found him dead upon the
floor. Which news being brought to the Earl, did maruailously afflict him
though he were much disquieted before. For this accident happened altogether
beyond his intent and expectation.

Ye have heard before of the death of Ferdinando King Page 110.
of Portingale, in whose place was chosen not John King of Castile the deceased
kings son in law, but another of the clergy, Ferdinandoes base brother, and
that rather by favor of the cities, the^ of the nobility. Whereupon the King of
Spain sent ambassadors forthwith to the state of Lisbone (the principal and
most flourishing of all that country) sharply accusing and reproving them for
so unjustly taking the inheritance of the crown from him, who had married the
only daughter of their King Ferdinando, and conferring the same upon one which
in right had no title at all to that dignity.

When this would not prevail, and that they showed themselves themselves
resolute to abide by their election, he raised an John King of Spain lays
claim to the crowen of Portingale, and besieged Lisbone.
army of thirty thousand men, and besiegd their City. But after a years
continuance and more, having performed no notable service, he was constrained
to return into Spain by reason of a pestilence which consumed wel-nee^ 20000.
of his men: and not long after there came succors to him to out of France,
wherewith both his power and his courage were anew reenforced. Nevertheless
when it came to consultatio^, the Spaniards thought best to discharge the army,
but the French men being demanded their opinion, gave counsel to fight with
the enemy, alleging probable reasons for the same. At such time as the King
of Spain retired with his army from Lisbone, certain ships of the
Englishmen arrived in the haven. They were not sent thither by the King of
England, but of their own heads, after they had roued about from place to place
in Gascoigne and Guyen, they assembled at Bordeaux, and there taking shipping
would needs go serve the king of Portingale. The king was very glad of their
service, and thereupon levied his forces again in purpose to give his enemy
battle in the field. But diverse of the nobility such as had not given their
consents to his election, being offended with the Citizens of Lisbone, whose
authority in that behalf prevailed, refused to take arms at his
commandment. The King hereuppon aduising with his counsel, they persuaded
him to make no longer delay in the matter, but to go forth against his enemy
with such power as he had already: how there was no other means to set the
Kingdom in quiet: that it behooued him to make way for his fortunes by the
sword, and not be discouraged though his enemy were of greater puissance than
he, for oftentimes it fell out, and examples were plentiful, that great
numbers were overthrown by small handfulles: lastly, that he should propose to
himself the example of Henry, the father of the king of Castile then
reigning, who by the sword had conquered that Kingdom, and by the sword
maintained his conquest. Encouraged with these and such like speeches, he
brought his army into the field, consisting of ten thousand men. The Englishmen
seeing themselves ouermatched in number, gave the King counsel, that he should
not abide in the plains, but seek some place of strong situation to encampe
in, where the enemy might make no approach but to his disadvantage. Such a
place was found, which they likewise so fortifyed by their industry, and
compast on every side with sundry impediments, that but by one only entrance,
and that not very large, there was no possible means to come at them. In the
Spanish army, the French men carried greatest sway by reason of the kings
favor, who ordered all his affairs by their counsel and direction: which
things stirred up envy in the Spaniards hearts, as those that could by no
means endure, so great hope should be reposed in the aid of strangers. This
also much increased their grudge, that when the King had brought his army to
the place of battle, the French men sued importunatly to have the leading of
the vauntguard. When they approached near their enemies, the French men
persuaded to give battle presently, but the Spaniards counseled ^o defer it
till the next morning, because night was then at hand. But the Frenchmens
persuasion took place: who as soon as the sign of battle was given, ran
furiously upon their enemies, and assailed them with great violence. The fight
was maintained with great force and courage on both sides: but the valor and
skill of the English archers here approved it The King of Portugale through
the English men's aid obtains a notable victory.
self, as it had oftentimes done in other places. For the showers of arrows
which they sent amongst the Frenchmen, so galled their horses, and distressed
their men, that the greatest part of them being slain the residue were all
taken prisoners. The King of Spain with the rest of his forces to the number
of twenty thousand, was two miles behind when the French men gave this
ouer-hasty onset: and when word was brought him, that they were dangerously
engaged, and in peril to be all slain, he was very desirous to have come to
their rescue, but he could not bring his soldiers forward. For it was
determined amongst them, that seeing the french men would needs seem valiant
above the rest, and had vaunted themselves with so great bravery, they would
give them leave to go through with their enterprise alone, and disclaim all
interest in the success of their proceedings. A little before night the King
of Spain drew near to his enemy, who upon advertisement thereof, first
placed his men again in order of battle, and then gave commandment on pain
of death, that all such as had any prisoners should presently kill the^, least
in the ensuing conflict, they might happen to recover arms and join with the
enemy. Surely it was a cruel sight, and such a one as moved even the
conquerours themselves to pity and tears: but there was no remedy, they must
do as they were commanded. There was about a thousand of these prisoners, all
which were consumed by a cowardly kind of death; so as it appeared, their
fellows which dyed valiantly before in fight were much more happy then they,
who being both by fortune and their own virtue preserved, after assurance
given by the enemy, and received by them according to the law of atmes, fell
into extreme calamity at such time as they thought themselves most secure of
life and safety, and were slain by the conqueror, not enraged and angry as in
the fury of battle, but being now at peace with them and even himself
abhorring such an unnatural slaughter. The Portingales through the great
advantage of their ground, overthrew their enemies again; and in this second
battle was mercy showed to no man. They that could, saved themselves by
flight, the rest were all slain. The Spaniards mist of their number about
seven thousand. Afterward (as the custom of Princes is when they have
performed many notable mischiefs) a truce was agreed upon. So the King of
Spain dismissed his soldiers, and the King of Portugale was received with
great triumph into Lisbone.

About the same time the French men recovered all that was holden by certain
Brigants in the country of Tholous and the places there adioining. The Gascones
for that the wars they made in France was greatly to their enriching, did
willingly serve under the King of England: and if they had been gently and
respectively used they would never have changed their Lord. But the King of
Englands Son by his strange behavior alienated the greatest part of the
nobility from him, in such sort that they forsook him, and put themselves
under protection of the French King. Besides this, his officers used the
Gascones disdainfully as unworthy to whom any charge in the common wealth
should be committed. Hereupon grew hatred between them, and by this occasion
Charles the fifth recovered all again, as has been already declared.

Whilst the wars were yet hotly pursued between the two Popes, the soldiers
of Clement had besieged Vrbane in Pope Vrbane besieged.
a certain castle of Italy, and if money had come to content them he had
surely been taken. But the Bishops treasure at Avinion was already so wasted,
that the su^me of twenty thousand frankes which should be distributed amongst
the soldiers, could not possibly be raised. This dissension between the two
Popes, drew almost all the Princes of Christendom into sundry factions, as has
been showed before. These miseries and many other wherewith the Clergy should
sometimes be afflicted, a certain Franciscane Friar had long since foretold
in the time of Pope Innocent: and being for the same cast in prison at Auinion,
had lost his head for his labor, but that he confirmed his sayings by
authority of scripture.

We have spoken of Ferdinando king of Portingall, which left behind him one
only daughter named Beatrice, married to the King of Spain. Now my author
declares how he understood afterward, that she was begotten by the king of
Portugal upon a certain Lady whom he had ravished, and whose husband he
had chased out of the kingdom: and that his daughter so borne was afterward
by Pope Vrbane made legitimate. And moreover, at such time as the marriage was
in treaty between this Lady and the King of Spain, this matter was also
brought in controversy. But the King of Portugal to remove all doubts, dealt
in such sort with his nobility and chiefest of the cities, that they all
solemnly promised him, not to acknowledge any other sovereign after his death,
then this his only daughter, neither to admit any man else to the succession
of the crown, but him that should have her in marriage. As Soon as he was
departed out of this life, the noble men were desirous the inheritance should
pass to the King of Spain: but the cities for hatred they bare to the
Spaniards, advanced him to the crown, of whom we have oftentimes spoken
before, namely the base brother of the King deceassed. And because at such time
as the king of Portugal dyed, the Ladies husband remained still alive, most
men thought that the child begotten between them, was borne in adultery.
Moreover that couple had lived five years together as man and wife, when the
king doting in his wicked and frantic affection, attempted this dishonorable
practice, not only for a Prince, but for any other person, most unworthy and
shameful. The wretched husband being robbed of his wife, gat him to the King
of Spain: and after the King of Portingales decease returned again to
Lishone, but received his wife no more, following therein the ^ounsell of his
friends, who alleged great reasons to the contrary. Afterward he was slain in
a certain skirmish: and it is likely he had small joy of his life, considering
the extreme injury and disgrace received from such a one, of whom he had no
hope to be revenged.

At such time as Lisbone was besieged by the Spaniards, the king of Portingale
sent Ambassadors into England, exhorting and requesting the Duke of Lancaster
to succor him in this great necessity, against such an enemy as both
possessed a kingdom which was none of his own, and sought also by force to
seize upon the crown of Portingale, whereto he had no more right then to the
other. Upon hearing of their embassage, it was concluded that the Duke of
Lancaster should be sent into Portingale, and all things were prepared and made
ready for his voyage, when suddenly the Admiral of France landing with an
army in Scotland, from thence made war upon the Page. 127.
English, as has been before declared. Hereuppon the Dukes journey was stayed.
Nevertheless the King of Portingale fought prosperously, and vanquished his
enemy in two battles as is showed already. And after this victory returning
to Lisbone, by advise of his counsel, he sent Ambassadors again to the king
of England, and the Duke of Lancaster, desiring him if ever he meant to attempt
any thing against his adversary the king of Spain, that he would not neglect
the present opportunity. For twice he himself had already defeated him in
battle, and driven him from the field: now did he quake and tremble for
distrust of his estate, and it were an easy matter to overthrow him wholly,
specially if they should assail him with both their forces united together.
Scarce could he know on which side to turn him, his affairs and his counsels
would be all so confounded: and that his state might be more violently shaken,
it seemed best in his opinion to make present invasion upon him befote he
should recover his strength or bethink him of the danger. When these and many
other like matters had been delivered by the Ambassadors, it pleased the King
that the Duke of Lancaster should now at length proceed with his voyage before
undertaken. So with a certain number of horsemen, The Duke of Lancaster
sayleth into Portugal. Bristowe.
and more then two thousand archers, accompanied with his wife and children, he
took shipping at a certain haven in Wales, whither the Portingales upon
advertisement from their ambassadors, had before sent five and twenty ships
and Galleys to attend him. And because he saw great likelihood of troubles to
arise in England, and that he was enuyed by many which were in authority about
the King his nephew, he was very glad and desirous to go this journey. His
first landing was in the haven of Breast, which town because the Englishmen
refused to restore to the Duke of Britain, was at that time by the Britons and
Frenchmen together beseiged. But the Duke of Lancasters puissance enforced the
Britons to raise their seige. Then directed he his course toward Cologne a
town in Spain. For after much deliberation it was generally thought more
honor to land first in their enemies country, then to go straight to their
friends. But the town was so strongly fortifyed as their atttempt and
endeavor was vain. Therefore loosing from thence they The Duke of Lancaster
arri-Seth in pain.
sailed to Compostella, into which town after some parley they were honorably
received.

As Soon as the King of Spain heard tidings of the Englishmens arrival, he
took counsel with certain French Lords whom he chiefly favored, concerning
his affairs, and what they thought of the Englishmens proceedings. They were
absolutely of opinion, that the king of Portugale should marry the Duke of
Lancasters daughter, and therefore that it behou'd him to require aid of the
French king: who both in respect of his own good disposition, and the most
strict and ancient alliance between Spain and France, would not fail of
his friendly duty in that behalf. Moreover assuring him that there were a
great number in France so ill affected to idleness that nothing could happen
more according to their desires, then to meet with any occasion of millitary
employment. When they had given him this counsel, they further advised him to
take order, that all weak holds, churches, and such like, whereinto the
country people had conveyed their goods for fear of the forraging soldiers
should be beaten down. For those places were such as could not be defended,
and if they were taken, the prey and pillage therein would afforde great
profit and advantage to the enemy. The King to who^ this counsel seemed not
amiss, authorized the French men to cast down what they thought good at their
discretion, and withal to seize whatsoever they found in them (after a day
prefixed) to their own commodity. The French king being solicited by the king
of Spain for aid, required him to be of good courage, for within short space
he would bend all the forces he was able to make against the English nation:
who being once subdued, he would send store of soldiers into Spain, by whose
help he should be enabled, not only to bridle and restrain, but to break
and confound the puissance of both his adversaries. Whilst the Englishmen
wintred at Compostella, they made often rodes into the country, and brought
certain towns under their subjection. In the mean time the king of
Pontingale wrote diverse Letters to the Duke of Lancaster full of great
kindness and affection. But counsel was given the Duke, that he should delay
the matter no longer, nor negociate with the King any further by letters: that
it was very behooueful for him, now he had proceeded thus far, to go through
with his affairs as speedily as might be: the French men were subtle fellows,
the Spaniards had small faithfulness: and it might so fall out that the French
men, by whom the King of Spain was wholly carried, would persuade him to
agreement with the King of Portingale upon some indifferent conditions. These
reasons were approved, and therevppon the Duke sent word to the King of
Portingale that he was desirous to speak with him, whereto he condiscended and
so they met at a place appointed. After much communication, it was concluded
that the Duke of Lancaster should stay all the winter at Compostella, sending
abroad his soldiers to forrey the country in the mean while, and as soon as
the spring time approached, to advance their Standards both together against the
enemy, in what part of the Kingdom soever he remained. Also that the King of
Portugale should take his choice which of the Dukes daughters he would have in
marriage. He chose Phillip the Dukes daughter by his first wife. The matters
thus accomplished, the duke returned to Compostella. The King of Spain being
disquicted by the English soldiers, which wasted his country and forced his
towns to yield, meruailed much that there came no aid all this while out of
France: but the French Lords always encouraged him, putting him in comfort,
that as soon as the wars in England were dispatched, he should not fail of
sufficient succors.

The French King, upon a marvelous desire to invade The French King makes
great preparation to invade England.
England, assembled the greatest puissance he could possibly make. There were
numbered of noblemen and gentlemen above twenty thousand, and more then fifteen
hundred ships, abundantly furnished with all necessaries, even to smallest
trifles. And although this preparation was such, as a greater or more sumptuous
had not been seen in man's remembrance, yet (as it often happens in such
occasions) the report thereof in England far exceeded the truth, and was
extended above measure. In so much that public prayers and supplications were
daily offered to God, that he would auert and turn from them this imminent
mischeife. All the havens and port towns where they suspected the French men
might land, were strongly fortified and planted with Garrisons: and an
unmeasurable mass of money was levied, amounting to the ^umme of twenty hundred
thousand flore^s, so as there was no man in the whole kingdom which felt not
the weight of this heavy burden. All good and well disposed persons bewailed
the present state of their country; but idle vnthrif^s, malcontents, and such
as had nothing to take to, were of nothing more desirous. The French army was
now fully furnished and all things put in a readiness in the haven of Sluse in
Flaunders, nothing was wanting, but only the Duke of Berryes presence. He
never allowed this enterprise, and at his coming thither, when consultation
was had about setting forward on their journey, he persuaded the contrary with
diverse reasons, as the roughnes of the winter weather (for it was then about
Christmas) and the tender age of the King whom he thought in no wise was to be
committed to the uncertainty of winds and seas at that unseasonable time of the
year. His counsel prevailed, and therevppon the voyage was put of till the
next spring; the preparation whereof stood France in little less then thirty
hundred thousand Frankes. It was oftentimes reported for certainty to the King
of Portugale, that the French Kings army was already entered into England.
Whereupon some gave him counsel, that he should not be to forward in marrying
his wife which he had lately affianced, but rather to exspect what issue the
wars would come to: for if it should happen the King of England to go by the
worse (as it was likely enough at that time) the Duke of Lancasters friendship
would then do him small pleasure. The King following their advise, dissembled
his marriage, and for a while made nomotion at all thereof, but with kind
letters and costly presents still continued the Dukes favor for his advantage.

Leo King of Armenia who had been driven out of his country by the Tartars, and
came lately before into France, being not a little sorry that so great
dissension should grow between two such puissant Princes as the French King and
the English, of a certain godly zeal and good disposition sailed over into
England, to make a trial if he could do ought in establishing a peace between
them. The King of England gave him patient ear in discoursing his miseries and
banishment, and how the power of the Turks and Barbarians daily increased
through the mutual wars and dissension of the Christian Princes. And when by
occasion hereof he descended to the point, to exhort to love and concord, the
King answered, that he should first deal with his adversary to discharge his
great army; and that done, for his part he was not so perverse, but he would
willingly embrace whatsoever was agreeable to equity and reason. Hereupon he
returned to the French King, who seemed nothing affected, nor inclinable to
peace.

The third Book.
IT fortuned in France, that a certain Jaquesle Gris sir John de Carogne.
gentleman of the Earl of Alaunsons house, ravished another man's wife whilste
her husband was absent in a foreign country. As Soon as he returned, the
sorrowful Lady with tears in her eyes and shame in her countenance, declared
unto him the violence she had suffered. Her husband complained to the Earl of
Alaunson, and the party accused denied the deed. Now the Earl showing himself
more favorable to the offender, then to him that had the injury, the
plaintiff appealed to the Parliament of Paris. A whole year and more the
matter was there ca^uassed; and in conclusion, when the one still avouched the
fact, and the other stood stoutly in denial, it was decreed, that the
controversy should be decided by combat. So at a certain day which either
themselves had chosen, or the judges appointed, they encountered one another
firston on horseback, after on foot. Not blind fortune, which otherwise is
wont to bear sway in such cases, but justice and true valor showed their
force in this conflict. For he that held his wives chasti^y deerer then his
own life, and was not afraid to venture his head in defense of the same, by
his adversaries A notable example of
destruction, made it manifest to the world, that there is a God of vengeance,
which will not suffer secret divine justice.
wickedness to escape unpunished. After he was slain, the hangman drew his
body to the gallows and hung it up: whereas if he had fortuned to g^t the
victory, the woman for falsely accusing him, should by decree of the Parliament
have been burned, and her husband after his death, put to the same reproach
which now was used to his adversary. The whole company of honorable
spectators The French king was present with most of his nobility.
highly exstolled the conqueror, and applauded his victory with deserved
commendation. Moreover the French king out of a certain princely respect and
inclination, not suffering so worthy an act to pass unrewarded, gave him
presently a thousand franks, and from thenceforth a pension of two hundredth
pounds by the year, during his life.

About this time deceassed the King of Arragon: who The death of Peter King of
Arragon.
a little before his death calling his sons unto him, exhorted them to
mutual love and concord: and for as much as in so great partaking of Princes,
he only had stood indifferent between the two Popes, he desired his sons
that they would do the like, and not apply themselves to any faction till the
truth were more manifestly discussed. Nevertheless when he was dead, Pope
Clement and the French king, drew John his eldest son to their party. But
when he came to be crowned, the cities would not consent, unless he were
first solemnly sworn not to leuy any tributes or exactions of money, other
then such as had been formerly accustomed.

Edward Prince of Wales as long as he lived, was for his noble chiualry and
glorious fortune held in great admiration, and many sought his friendship and
alliance. Amongst others there was also a league between him and the King of
Arragon, under these conditions. That the Englishmen should at no time make
wars upon the realm of Arragon: and in consideration hereof, that the King
of Arragon should yearly send five hundredth horse to serve the Duke of
Aquitaine against any enemy whatsoever, or if he could not conuen^ently find
so many horsemen, he should pay him a certain sum of money. Now for the space
of ten years he had neither done the king of England any service, nor paid him
any money. The Duke of Lancaster therefore (to whom at his setting forth
toward Portugal, the king his nephew had given authority to demand all
rights and services belonging to the Dukedom of Aquitaine, either from the king
of Arragon, or any other) thinking that so great a mass of money would much
pleasure him in his present affairs, wrote letters requiring those arrerages,
and sent them to the King of Arragon by the Archbishop of Bordeaux. Who at his
coming found the King very sick, so as he dyed within few days after. The
Archbishop nevertheless still prosecuted The Duke of Lancasters ambassador
imprisoned by the King of Arragon.
his suite, and the new king offended with his importunity cast him in prison
at Barcelone. Whereof when the Duke of Lancaster was informed, he gave
commandment to the English garrison at Lourde (which is the only strong and
impregnable castle in those quarters) that they should infest the Arragonians
with war, and do them as much displeasure as they could. They were nothing
slack in performing his command, and wrought great annoyance to the country,
especially to the merchants, whom they intercepted at every passage and spoiled
of their commodities. The people of Barcelone being vexed with their daily
excursions, and caught up as a prey by the ravenous soldiers, made such means
to their king by intercession of the nobility, that he was content to release
his prisoner.

After that by persuasion of the Duke of Ber^y, the voyage into England was
deferred, as we have showed a little before: as soon as the spring came on, it
was appointed that the Constable of France with twelve thousand men should be
sent to invade England, and besides that certain forces should be likewise
conueid into Spain to the relief of King John against the Englishmen and
Portingales. Upon this occasion a new subsidy being sessed again through all
France, ye might have seen many country people and towne-dwellers, which not
knowing how otherwise to help themselves, abandoned their lands and tenements,
and departed either into Henault, or into the Bishopric of Liege, because
those places at that time were free from the burden of such intolerable
exactions. The succors sent into Spain were six thousand horsemen, under
conduct of the Duke of Burbon.

We have told you before how the king of Portugal expecting the success of
the English war, dissembled politickly with the Duke of Lancaster in the
mean while. Now when he saw that England was discharged of the danger, and
that the French kings army was dissolved, he sent some forthwith to affiance
the Duke of Lancasters Phillip the Duke of Lancasters daughter married to the
King of Portugal.
daughter in his name, whom within few days after being honorably conducted
unto him, he espoused. After the marriage he sent word to his father in law,
that he should draw out his forces as soon as he pleased, and he would do the
like, that so they might jointly together proceed against their enemy. In the
mean while the French men well appointed and gallantly furnished, arrived in
Spain. After whose coming, consultation being had whether it were best to
bring their forces in to the field, or to place their men in ga^rrisons, when
sundry opinions rose amongst them, the Spaniards persuading battle, the French
men the contrary, it was referred by the King to one of the French Captains of
most experience, to determine the matter at his discretion. And he in regard
the Duke of Burbon their General was not yet come, thought it altogether
unfitting to fight with the enemy, but rather to bestow their soldiers in
places convenient till need should require: for by this means it would come
to pass, that the Englishmen ranging over all the country, through the
intemperate heat of the climate, should fall into many dangerous diseases: and
although for the present they became Lords of diverse places, yet should they
not be able to maintain them long: and when their strength began once to
decrease, it would be an easy matter to recover all again, especially after
the Duke of Burbons coming, with the rest of their forces. This determination
took place, and so immediately the men of war were conveyed into those parts
of Spain which border upon Portugal, to defend the frontiers of the kingdom.

The Constable who was appointed to make invasion upon England, had his army
prepared, and his ships ready rigged in a certain haven of Britain. Diverse
other Lords of France were likewise ready to be embarked at Harflew in
Normandy, whose direction was to have landed their forces together with his,
upon the coast of England. But there happened a sudden adventure in the mean
time, whereby their whole enterprise was overthrown, and that ye may the
better conceive the discourse, we will rehearse the matter from his first
original. It is declared before, how Charles of Bloys being taken prisoner by
the Englishmen that aided the Countess of Mountfort, was set at liberty upon
condition he should pay two hundredth thousand crowns to the King of England
for his ransom, and for assurance of the same, left his two sons John and Guy
in hostage. It fortuned afterward that he was slain in battle against the
Duke of Britain. After which time the Englishmen at the Duke of Britains
request, came thorough the midst of France with a great power to aid him.
Whereupon the French king fearing least the Duke by this occasion should yield
himself subject to the King of England, made composition with him as has
been before declared. Whereat the Englishmen (who had traveled a long journey
through many perils and great difficulties, to come into Britain) were
exceedingly offended, and as soon as they came home, made complaint to their
king of the Dukes discurtesie and ingratitude. And to the intent to work him
as great displeasure, they made this offer to John the son of Charles of
Bloys, (whom they held still as pledge for his fathers ransom, his brother
being deceassed there already) that if he would receive and hold the Duchy of
Britain of the King of England, and do homage and fealty to him for the
same, he should be delivered out of prison, and set in possession of his
Dukedom, and besides, have in marriage Phillip the Duke of Lancasters
daughter; the same which was afterward Queen of Portugal. The offer of
marriage he was well contented to accept, but to seem disloyal to the French
king, or be an enemy to the crown of France, that he would never consent to.
Whereupon remaining steadfast in his resolution, he was again committed to
prison. Now the Constable of France Sir Oliver Clisson, (who although his
inheritance lay in Britain, yet loved not the Duke, and the Duke on the other
side hated him more then any man else, because upon the Kings command; he had
troubled his country with war) had a daughter whom he much desired to marry
with this John that was prisoner in England, thinking it would be a great
advancement to his house if he might bring it to pas^e. Therefore when he had
cast in his mind by what means he might best purchase his liberty, he began
secretly to practice with the Duke of Ireland (a man whom the king highly
favored and much delighted in his company) promising to give him six score
thousand frankes if he would undertake to procure his enlargement. The Duke
accepted his offer: not withstanding as long as the Duke of Lancaster remained
in the relame; in regard the matter had been motioned before for his daughter,
he could effect nothing of his purpose. But after he was gone* the Duke of
Ireland desirous of the gold, ontreated the King (with whom no man was more
familiar then himself) that in consideration of his services and pains taken
in the common wealth, he would bestow the prisoner upon him, for whose
ransom he might get a great mass of money. The king who was altogether
carried by this man, in such sort as he both neglected and hated his uncles
in respect of him, did willingly condescend to his request. As Soon as the
prisoner was delivered into his hands, he conueid him over to Boloine,
receiving there three score thousand frankes, the rest to be paid him at Paris:
where the Constable expecting the young man's arrival, when he came received
him with great honor, and married him forthwith to his daughter. How much this
matter troubled the Duke of John of Bloys marryeth the Constables daughter of
France.
Britain, he may well conjecture that remembers the discourse, and
considers the circumstances of such things as have been heretofore rehearsed
touching the wars in Britain. For he saw that by this marriage his whole
estate was called in question, and like to be much endaungered. Therefore he
prepared revenge, having the thought thereof more conversant in his mind, then
any other. And at such time as the Constable had his army about him in the
Dukes country, ready to have pass into England as we told ye before, the Duke
summoned all his nobility to be at Vannes by a certain day, for weighty
affairs that he had to consult of: desiring the Constable also by letters,
that he would honor the assembly with his presence. The Constable though he
were nothing ignorant of the mutual grudge between them, yet presuming upon
the greatness of his office, and the authority of his present emploiment
against the King enemies, came thither as he was requested. After some
consultation had about the matters they met for, the Duke as it were for
pleasure and recreation, invited certain of the chief Noble men, and amongst
them also the Constable, into a certain castle there by which he had lately
begun to build, The Castle of Ermine.
and now in a manner finished. When they came thither, the Duke stoutly
dissembling his purpose, and himself leading the Constable from place to
place, as it had been to do him the more honor, at last brought him to a
certain tower of far more sumptuous and costly building then the rest,
desiring him to view it well, and if he espied any fault, that he would
frankely tell him his opinion. The Constable entered in alone, and mounting up
the first story the doors were presently closed beneath, and certain armed men
rushing suddenly forth, laid hands upon him and bound him in fetters. The
hangman was likewise ready by the Dukes appointment to have taken away his
life. Nevertheless at the humble entreaty and tears of a certain noble man
that came in his company, the Duke The Lord de laval.
hardly relenting delayed his execution, commanding him to be kept streitly in
yrons. But within few hours after, anger boiling in his breast, and admitting
no other thought but revenge, his wrath not like others being any whit
assuaged, but rather more vehemently increased by respit and consideration, he
again commanded that his head should be stricken of. But what labor and care,
what peril and difficulty he again sustained, by whose means the Constable
had hitherto been saved; how many, how sorrowful, how effectual matters he
alleged, before he could move the Dukes most obdurate mind to any sense or
feeling of compassion: none can conceive but he which knows that the Duke
long since had resolved upon nothing more certainly then by one means or
other, to bring the Constable to destruction; none but he which knows that
the Duke for many years together had with incredible desire hunted for this
opportunity; none but he which considers that it was a most unnatural and
outrageous kind of anger, which upon time to muse and think of it, was not
quenched but enflamed, and could be satisfied with nothing, but the blood and
slaughter of a man which was brought in danger by deceit, and under the
pretense of friendship. Therefore that the Constable was saved from the Dukes
deadly intent, next to the providence of the everliving God, he was only to
thank this man for his deliverance; who immediately made intercession for him,
and never rested till by extreme importutunity he had extorted from the Duke,
the assurance of his friends life and safety. So at length the Duke was
contented to set the Constable at liberty, upon condition that he should pay
him an hundredth thousand crowns before he departed, and deliver three castles
into his hands, to remain to him and his heirs for ever. Whereof as soon as
the Duke had taken possession, he dismissed his prisoner, who within two days
after came to Paris and made grievous complaint to the King of the great injury
and violence he had suffered. The king gave him comfort and hope of redress,
but the Kings uncles upon relation of the circumstances, were so far from
pitying his mischaunce, that they rather seemed angry and offended, because
when he had all things in a readiness for his journey, he neglected his
affairs and the opportunity of the season, to follow matters of pleasure and
idle disporte, giving rash credyt to such a one, as both he himself hated, and
who he knew well enough, had long since sought advantage of his life. The
Admiral and the rest of the Lords which were ready to take shipping in
Normandy, upon understanding of these occurrents, dismissed their forces. So
it came to pass that this expedition against England, which by the general
consent and good liking of the whole kingdom had been most certainly resolved
and concluded upon, was by these occasions that ye have heard, utterly
overthrown and disappointed. At the same time also the young Duke of Gelders
proclaimed 1390.
wars against the French King, and sent him his defiance: for the king of
England, for so doing had given him a pension of four thousand frankes.

The chief motives that stirred the Duke of Britain to this fact before
mentioned, were first the mortal hatred he bare to the Constable: and
secondly, that he might thereby reconcile himself to the King of England,
whose displeasure he had mightily procured by entering in league with the French
King. Most part of the noblemen of France persuaded the King in the Constables
behalf, that he should not suffer such a deed to escape unpunished. Hereupon
messengers were sent to the Duke, to let him understand that both the King and
his uncles and the whole counsel of state were highly offended with him,
because through his violent apprehension and detayning of the Constable, he had
frustrated the kings purpose of inuading his enemies. Wherefore their will and
pleasure was, that he should make full restitution both of the money and castles
which he had wrongfully taken: and concerning his disappointment of the voyage,
that he should come in person to Paris, there to render an account of his
doings. The duke when he had received this message, after some deliberation of
the matter, made answer to this effect: that he not only nothing repented him
of what he had done to the Constable, but was also exceeding sorry that he did
no more, and that it grieved him at the heart as often as he remembered it, that
ever he suffered him to go away alive. As for the castles, seeing he had them
in his possession, he would by no means restore them again, nor never depart
with them unless the King put him out by force. The money was all bestowed
amongst those that helped him to defend his country against the Constable, the^
whom he had not a more mortal enemy in the world. For interrupring the
journey into England, he had never any such thought in his mind, it was a
private case between the Constable and him, and whatsoever was done, proceeded
of no other intent, but only desire of revenge.

Ye have heard, how at such time as invasion was feared in England, great
sums of money were levied for the maintenance of war, to defend the Realm.
Now, when the French men altering their purpose, returned without performance
of their enterprise, many gave out speeches that it was unjustly done of the
kings officers to keep still the money, the danger being avoided without any
charge or expenses. This muttering being stilled for a while, upon occasion of
a new subsidy demanded for payment of the soldiers wages which had been placed
in garrisons, was again renewed more boldly then before. The commons took the
matter very haynously, and framed grievous accusations against certain
persons, through whose dishonesty and unfaithfulness, they said the whole
treasure of the kingdom, and the goods of the subjects, were wastfully
consumed. The King was led altogether by a few of the meaner sort, men of base
quality and ignorant disposition. But especially, the Duke of Ireland had him
in a manner at command, and possessed him in such sort, as it seemed he had
enchaunted the young kings affections. For whatsoever he said was done, and
there was nothing so unjust or contrary to reason, which the King would not
credit upon his report. He brought the kings uncles in suspicion and hatred,
so as they had much ado to keep themselves out of danger. As for them, they
were nothing displeased with the peoples complaints: for by this occasion they
saw many alterations would happen. Therefore they inclined to the people,
allowing their pretense, and encouraging them to proceed as they had already
begun. In At Saint Georges feast at Windsor.
conclusion it came to this pass, that at a certain time when the King and
his nobility were assembled together, the Londoners made grievous complaint of
the new subsidies and exactions which from time to time were imposed upon them:
and which grieved them most of all, that they saw no good or necessary use
whereto all that money was converted. They thought the King was not made privy to
any thing, and therefore they required that a day might be assigned to the
kings collectors and receiuors to yield an account of their receipts and
payments, whereby it might appear, who had carried themselves uprightly in
their office, and who otherwise, that the one might be retained, and the other
discharged. The Duke of Gloucester one of the kings uncles, had given them
counsel and direction to frame their speech in this manner. But the King
as soon as he heard their suit, rejected it at the first, and would have put of
his answer till another time. But the people still urged their demand, and
pressed upon him with more earnestnes, because many of the noble men about him
did openly allow of their petition. So at length he was contented, that within
a few days after an account should be taken of all those officers, and that
his uncles and certain other whom the people required, should have the
examination of the matter. In many of the officers was found great fraud and
extortion, all which the law condemned to death. Immediately upon receipt of the
accounts, the King accompanied with his minion the Duke of Ireland, took his
journey into another part of the Realm. Where understanding that certain of
his household were put to execution at London, he was exceedingly moved to
displeasure both against the commons, and against his uncles. For the Duke of
Ireland had as it were imprinted this conceit in his mind, that they went about
to depose him from his crown, and therefore never ceased to incense and
provoke him (who of himself was too apprehensiue of such occasions) till he
had persuaded him to make war against them. So the Duke was made general, and
by the Kings appointment levied some fifteen thousand men. But before he would
march forward with his army, he sent a certain friend of his disguised in the
habit Sir Robert Tresilian.
of a merchant, to London, where the kings uncles were assembled, to discover
their counsels and manner of proceedings. But this gentleman (most contrary to
his expectation) I wot not by what misfortune, was discovered himself, and
when he had revealed to the Lords certain matters concerning the King, he was
put to death. This occasion as ye may well conjecture, did mightily aggrauate
the kings displeasure.

Now, when the Duke of Ireland saw the power of his adversaries approaching
against him, as fierce and slout as he seemed before, yet performed he nothing
worthy of a valiant or discreet commander. For he was absolutely persuaded out
of a selfe-guilty opinion of his own desert, that if it were his fortune to be
taken in battle, there would be no other way with him, but death. Therefore
as soon as he had placed his men in order, he began to provide for his own
security, retyring into the rereward, to the intent that as occasion should
serve, he might be the readyer to convey himself out of danger. The soldiers
hearing a sudden rumor that their General had forsaken them, abandoned
themselves presently to flight, without exchanging any stroke with their enemy.
Very few were slain, and Sir Robert Beachampe, sir John Salisbury, sir
Nicholas Brambre.
those only in chase, certain knights were taken and put to death at London.
The Duke of Ireland accompanied with one or two of his friends, fled over the
seas into Holland, whither he had long before caused all his treasure to be
conveyed. For albeit he had the King wholly on his side, yet he much mistrusted
and feared his uncles, of whom he had so well deserved, that nothing but utter
enmity was to be expected at their hands. These troubles being thus quieted,
and the noble men yet hearing no news of the King; it was thought convenient,
that the Archbishop of Canterbury should be addressed unto him in the name of
his uncles and the people, signifying how they were al very desirous of his
presence, and that if it pleased him to repair to London, he should be
honorably and lovingly received. For they sought nothing but the welfare and
tranquillity of the kingdom, which it was impossible for him to maintain
without the good wills of his subjects* That it was not without causes of
great importance, that some were openly punished, and others driven out of the
realm; for as much as through the authority and ill gonernment of those
persons, the honor of the kingdom was impaired. What the noblemen had done in
that behalf, was for the general good of the common wealth, and as the state
then stood that it was a matter of necessity, and therefore he had no just
cause of displeasure against them. Although the King were highly offended with
the occasions which had passed before: yet upon these and such other reasons as
the Archbishop used, he was persuaded to come to London. After he had remained
there a while, a Parliament was called at Westminster, where the Lords and
Prelates of the realm renewed their oath of allegiance to him, which they had
formerly sworn to his uncles in his behalf: for he was now attained to the
age of one and twenty years, the age accustomably prescribed for the
administration of public affairs.

In this mean while, the Duke of Lancaster subdued may towns in Spain, and
the King of Portugal was not idle but in an other part of the country, brought
much into his father in laws subjection. And when they had practiced this kind
of warre-fare for a time, at length they joined their forces together, to give
their enemies battle in the field. The King of Spain in the mean season
meruailed much at the Duke of Burbons long tariance and delay, whose only
coming he had waited for all this while with so great expectation. The French
men's advise being again demanded, they persisted resolute in their first
opinion, holding it altogether inexpedient to give the Englishmen battle,
though they had gotten many towns, for those might easily be recovered
hereafter: and it must needs come to pass, that the Englishmen being tired
with the continual travels of war, sometimes overcome with extremity of
heat, otherwhiles enfeebled through the subtlety of the piercing air entering
in at the open pores of their bodies, should fall into sundry diseases and
infirmities. And indeed so it happened. For by reason of the The Englishmens
miseries under the Duke of Lancaster in Spain.
vehement heat and sudden cold, which they were forced to abide in the day
time, through the Suns scorching violence and their own travel, in the night
by occasion of their watches, and open lodgings in the field, diverse pes^ilent
sicknesses were engendered amongst them. Besides this, most part of their horses
not finding wherewith to sustain them in the country, perished for hunger.
Herevppon rose many sorrowful complaints amongst the poor soldiers lamenting
their misfortune. The King of Portugales counsel being asked in this
necessity, he thought it best in regard of the intemperatenes of the season, to
withdraw into some of the towns which they had taken, and to discharge the
army. The Duke on the other side feared least when their soldiers were
dispersed, the Duke of Burbon whom he knew to be coming, should surprise them
unawares. Whereupon resolving as yet not to break up their camp, they
continued still in the field. But it was lamentable to behold the English, who
being altogether unaccustomed to the intolerable heat of that country, and the
drinking of those hot wines, were so afflicted with sickness, that the poor
wretches with great misery had much ado to sustain their lives. Then the
general of the horsemen, who could both hear and discern the state of the Sir
John Holland.
army more nearly, by reason of his daily intercourse in all affairs,
acquainted the Duke of Lancaster with the calamity of his people, and showed
him how the case was such as required both speedy help and present resolution.
Herevppon it was concluded to dismiss the army, at the tidings whereof, there
was great rejoicing through the whole ca^pe. Nevertheless they saw no means how
to return into their country. By sea they could not, they were to far within
land, and besides, most of them were so feeble and diseased, as they could not
possibly brook the violence of waves and tempests: by la^d there was no going,
for their passage must lie through Spain, Navarre and Arragon, king do^es
confederate against them: what should be done in this extremity? An herald was
sent to the enemy, to require a safe conduct for certain English gentlemen,
to come and parley with the King. The Spanyard musing what strange occasion
should move them, admitted their request: the effect whereof was this: That for
as much as their whole army was grievously visited with sickness, the King
calling to remembrance the miseries of mankind, which are incident to all,
would give leave to their sick persons to withdraw themselves into some of his
towns, and to abide there till their health might be recovered. And for the
rest which were desirous to return into their country, that he would grant
them license to pass quietly through his kingdom of Spain, and withal to be
a means to the kings of Arragon and Navarre, that they would likewise suffer
them to travel in safety through their dominions. The King of Spain after
deliberation, condiscended to their request upon condition, that as well those
which went now directly toward their Country, as the rest that stayed for
recovery of their health, should at their departure be solemnly sworn, neither
to return any more to the Duke of Lancaster, nor to come within the confines
of Spain upon any occasion of war, for the space of six years after. These
conditions though they seemed grievous unto them, yet so earnest was their
desire and affection homewards, as they would willingly have accepted them,
had they been much worse. The Duke of Lancaster who had compassed this matter
by collateral means in another man's name, least he should seem to have
craved ought at his enemies hands, after the dissoluing of his army, departed
again to Compostella, dispersing his sick people into the towns and villages
there adjoining. Of those that went for England, diverse Lords and Gentlemen,
beside great numbers of the common sort, being unable to sustain the violence
of their disease, and the travel of their journey, ended their lives in the
way. In the mean time the Duke of Burbon who had lingered a long while, and
fetched a great compass (for he had visited Pope Clement at Avinion) arrived
in Spain: and although he heard tidings of the dissoluing of the English army,
yet nevertheless in regard he had proceeded thus far, he would not now go out
of the country before he had seen the King. The Spaniard was affrayde least if
the French soldiers should make any long tariance, or at leastwise be
admitted, they would demand entertainment, which if he should deny them, they
would rob and spoil his country: therefore within few days after the Dukes
coming thither (whom otherwise he received with all honor and courtesy) he
declared unto him, how at that time the enemy being deprarted of his own
accord, he had no further employment for sorraine souldiets. The Duke was not
only nothing offended with this discharge, but very glad of the occasion to be
soon dispatched, for he found the country did not agree with his peoples
complexion. The Duke of Lancaster lay sick a while at Compostella, and upon
the recovery of his strength, hearing of the Duke of Burbons departure, he also
set his mind upon returning into his country: for he well perceived, that by
reason of these calamities and afflictions, he was utterly disabled from going
through with his enterprise. Therefore borrowing both men and shipping of the
King of Portugal, he set sails to the wind, and in four hours after arrived
at Bayon. Here may you see how strange and lamentable The Duke of Lancaster
returns out of Spain.
are the adue^tures and casualties of man's life, and how uncertain are the
events of all our actions, of all our cogitatio^s. For this Duke, who sometimes
through occasion of foreign wars, and otherwhiles by reason of civil
discord and rebellion, being restrained from his purpose, could not when he
would, accomplish this voyage, which for many years before he had so ardently
desired: now after such time as upon often inuitements and embassages from the
King of Portugal, he was come into the kingdom which pertayned to his wives
inheritance, was at length compelled without atchieuing any memorable matter,
and with the loss of his soldiers, under a colorable submission to his
enemy, to leave all his affairs and intents unperformed, and to return home
into his own country.

We have formerly made mention of the duke of Gelders which denounced wars
against the realm of France; and that was done in a very proud and
contemptuous fashion, contrary to the accustomed manner of defiance. Now for
the better understanding of all circumstances, observe this discourse. Reynold
Earl of Gelders through prod^gality and riot, had much impouerished his
estate; and when by reason of his wants, he could hardly maintain the
reputation of his calling, in this distress he repaired to his uncle the
Archbishop of Colen for counsel. The Bishop after so sharp reprehension, used
these, or the like speeches. Cosen, you see and perceive wel-enough that there
is not any Prince, nor noble man of so small account, which will bestow his
daughter with you in marriage, you have so spent and consumed your means, and
set your self so exceedingly in debt. But there is a rich merchant, Bertold of
Bertold of Machline.
Machline, which you know has but one only daughter, to whom in expectation
of her large dowry, many great Lords have been suitors. You cannot make a
better match for your self than to seize upon such a booty. You shall do well
therefore to make this offer to her father: that if he will undertake with his
money to redeem those towns and castles which you have pawned to your
creditors, and withal be contented to release such bonds of debt as he has of
yours already, in consideration hereof you will take his daughter to wife. This
counsel was well accepted of the Earl, and so he sent one to make the motion.
When Bertold had received the message, his answer was this: that he should
hold it a great honor both to himself and all his house, if his daughter
might seem worthy to be matched with such a husband: the respects which he
thought moved the Earl to desire it, were that he might be discharged from the
danger of his creditors, and possess his own without controlment. Therefore
he was well content to proceed with the marriage, and dislikte not of the
conditions proffered, so as these likewise for his part might be added: that if
it fortuned the Earl to dye first, leaving no issue, then all his possessions
to remain entirely to his wife during her life. And if it happened her to die
first, leaving issue by the Earl, that then her children should be admitted to
their fathers inheritance, and not be debarred of their fortune, though he
should afterward marry a woman of more honorable birth, and have issue by her
also. These conditions being accepted, Marie the daughter of Bertold was
married to the Earl of Gelders, and the fourth year after Reignold Earl of
Gelders, married Mary daughter to Bertold of Machline.
deceased, leaving issue by her husband one daughter named Isabell. After her
decease the Earl married again, Isabell sister to that most worthy and
prudent Prince, Edward King of England, by whom he had two sons, Reignold and
Edward, and one daughter called Ioane. It fortuned both the Reignolds, as well
the father as the son, deceased: Edward took to wife a daughter of Albert Duke
of Bauier, and afterward in a battle against Wenceslaus Duke of Braband, was
wounded to death, and departed without issue. Ioane therefore after the death
of her brothers, presumed the inheritance should be hers; but Isabell which was
descended of the first marriage, maintained the contrary, affirming that
herself only had rightful interest in the succession. This Isabell was joined
in marriage to John of Bloys, who had much alteration with his adversaries
about the inheritance, and great contention was like to have grown between
them, so far forth as the matter had surely come to trial of the sword, but
that by his wives departure in the mean season, the controversy was decided.
Then Ioane which was now the only and undoubted heir of her father, being
married to William Marquis of Iuliers, bare to him a son called after his
fathers name, William. This William made Duke of Gelders in the right of his
mother, took to wife the daughter of Albert Duke of Bauier, the same which had
been formerly espoused to Edward of Gelders his vnele, but by reason of her
tender years, remaining still a maiden widdowe. Reignold Earl of Gelders
which married the king of Englands sister, in regard of his great league and
alliance with King Edward, was highly favored by Lewis of Bauier then
Emperor, in so much that he advanced both him and the Marquess of Iuliers to
a higher degree of honor, and created them both Dukes. Now the occasion why
this William the young Duke of Gelders made defiance to the French King, was
both because he bare good affection to the king of Engand* to who^ he was alyed
be faith and homage, and also for that Wenceslaus Duke of Braband, whom he
exceedingly hated, was confederate with the French men. The cause of his hatred
against the Duke of Braband was this. Reignold which married first Mary of
Machline, and afterward king Edwards sister, being a man beyond all measure
prodigal, morgaged three Castles to the Earl of Morse, a rich Lord in
Germany, for a great sum of money. ^he Earl a long while after, seeing his
debtor unable to redeem his pledge, sold the castles to Wenceslaus Duke of
Braband. After the death of Reignold, Edward his son addressing letters to
Wenceslaus, requested to have the Castles again and he would repay him all the
money that he had disbursed. Which when Wenceslaus absolutely refused,
preparation was made for waries, which doubtless should have been the
conclusion, but that by entreaty of the Duke of Iuliers, and Albert of Bauier,
the matter for that time was compounded. The same year Charles the Emperor
appointed his brother Wenceslaus as publik protector Langue fride.
of the high ways, for the punishment of thieves and robbers, that people
might pass quietly from one place to another. Now it fortuned that certain
merchants of Flaunders and Braband, as they traveled about their affairs into
Germany were robbed of their money and spoiled of all their goods in the
country of Iuliers, through which they made their journey. It was reported,
that the offenders were received and fostered by the Duke of Iuliers, who (as
many more besides himself) was thought to repine at the giving of so great an
honor to Duke Wenceslaus. The poor merchants that sustained the loss, made
grievous complaint to him which had the charge of redressing such enormities:
who thereuppon directing friendly letters to the Duke of Iuliers, prevailed so
little, that he might plainly perceive, he rather desired war, then peace.
Wenceslaus therefore least the suffering of such disorders to escape
unpunished, should bring the authority of his office in contempt, leuyed an
army. The Duke of Iuliers did the like, and was aided by Edward Duke of
G^lders. The battle was fought in Iuliers with great VVenceslaus Duke of
Braband taken pri sooner. Edward Duke of Gelders slain in battle.
fierceness on both sides: but the Brabanders were disco^fited and put to
flight, and amongst others the Duke himself also taken prisoner. Edward Duke
of Gelders was likewise mortally wounded, and dyed of the same. When the
Duchess of Braband heard tidings of her husbands captivity, by advise of the
French King she resorted to the Emperor at Confluence: who upon her complaint
being moved with his brothers misfortune, prepared sharp wars against the
Duke of Iuliers, intending to have made a notable spoil and destruction of his
country, had he not been pacifyed by the Princes electors, who thought it would
be an ill president, that a fellow of the Empire should be so oppressed. The
Duke therefore being by their means brought before the Emperors presence, when
he had voluntarily discharged his prisoner, after sharp reprehension, he was
again reconciled and restored to the Emperors favor. Within few years
after, dyed Wenceslaus Duke of Braband, then William the Duke of Iuliers son,
holding the seigniory of Gelders in right of his mother, claymed again from
the duchess of Braband these Castles which his uncle Edward in his life time
had challenged before. The restitution whereof being 1383.
denied, ministered new occasion whereby the old grudge was again revived.
And because Braband at that time was in league with France, and the Duke of
Burgoine the French kings brother, was next heir to the widdowe; the Duke of
Gelders (who studied all the displeasure he could against the house of France)
to the intent to show his love toward the English nation, passed over the
seas, and contracted great alliance with King Richard, receiving from him a
pension of four thousand franks, as has been before declared, and afterward
at his return, defied the French king, and professed open enmity against the
Brabanders: in so much that the Duke of Burgoigne upon advertisement from the
widdowe, of his daily incursions, was constraimed to send thither certain
companies of horsemen, for defense of the frontyers.

Mention is made before of the Duke of Lancaster, who by reason of great plague
and mortality in his army, was forced to discharge his soldiers and return to
the king of Portingale. Now when the Spaniards and French men The Spaniards
recover again all that the Duke of Lancaster had gotten in Castile.
saw their enemies dispersed, they easily recovered all that was lost, the
Englishmen which remained in garrisons being either expelled by force, or
dismissed by composition. The king of Portugal persuaded his father in law to
send for a new supply out of England. But the Duke considering how it was far
of, and that the state of England was at that time greatly encombred, made
speedy provision for his departure, and sailed (as we have showed you) to
Bayon: from whence he wrote diverse letters both to the King, and to his
brothers for succor. But the Englishmens minds were so alienated from the wars
of Portingall, by reason of the great miseries they endured there, that scarce
any man could be found which would enter his name to go upon that voyage.
Besides this, the troubles, seditions, and executions which had been lately in
the realm before, remained still so fresh in every man's memory, as they had no
leisure to intend to foreign affairs. The French king understanding how the
world went in England, to the intent to make use of his adversaries ill
fortune, upon great hopes and large promises, allured the Duke of Ireland out
of the Neatherlands into France.

Charles king of Navarre about this time sessing his people at a subsidy of two
hundred thousand franks, assembled the burgesses of his towns at Pampelone the
chief City of his kingdom: and when he saw that they stuck upon the
matter, he shut them up in a certain court enclosed about with high walls,
threatening that if they concluded not the sooner, he would handle them
according to their deserts. But in the mean while happened a wonderful
accident. After he had left them in this angry mood, he gave himself to
sleep: and because he was aged, his servants were accustomed to burn a
perfume about him, to provoke him to sweat. Now it fortuned (by what negligence
or mischaunce at that time I know not) that some spark of fire caught hold of
the bed; which by little and little increasing and gathering strength, at
Charles King of Navarre, by a strange misfortune burned in his bed.
last brake forth in a burning siame about him: by means whereof the wretched
king being alone and not able by reason of his age to help himself, nor to
wind out of the linen which entangled him, was almost consumed in the flames
before any could come to his rescue.

Many Lords of France which were much displeased that the Duke of Gelders had
made defiance to their king in such proud terms, contrary to the custom of
other Princes, were of opinion, that if he should escape clearly away withal,
it might perhaps hereafter be imputed as a blame and reproach to them which were
now of the kings counsel. The king was forward enough to have taken a course
of revenge, but in regard the Duke of Britain attempted new troubles,
soliciting the English to be partakers of his proceedings, the enterprise
which both himself and many other desired, could not then be performed. The
Duke of Berry sent one privately in his own name, to deal with the Duke of
Britain in friendly manner, to draw him to some reasonable agreement: but it
was in vain, and that made the French men in greater fear and suspicion. For
they considered what peril it might be to the realm, if the King as he
desired him self, and was persuaded by others, should now address himself
into Germany, when the Duke of Britain showed so small affection to peace as
he seemd altogether desirous of war, attending but for opportunity to
discover his intention. When they had long varied in opinions, some thinking
such indignity was in no wise to be taken at so mean a Lords hands as the Duke
of Gelders, and that the King now in his youth was to be enured to arms;
others opposing against this counsel, the present state of the kingdom, the
charge of the wars, and the fierceness of the Germans: at length it was
agreed, to contemn the Duke of Gelders as a young man, whom rather heat of
youth, then any advised judgment had moved to that action: and if he proceeded
to make wars as he had threatened, that then it should be more honor for the
king to advance his forces against him. But by all means it was thought
necessary to fall to agreement with the Duke of Britain. For he (as we said
before) seemed openly to practice with the King of England, and already
certain English ships scowred the Seas between Normandy and Britain; which
notwithstanding they did no harm to France, yet because they still houe^ed
about that coast, the French men always mistrusted the worst. For these causes
many thought it the fittest course by war to chastize the Dukes presumption.
But the Kings Uncles and some others of sadder discretion, who always held the
success of war uncertain, were of a contrary opinion. For it was easy to
conjecture, that the wars with England would be renewed upon this occasion,
which was the only thing that the Duke of Britain desired. Commissioners were
therefore directed unto him to make a peaceable conclusion of the matter.
Whereof the Duke being informed, before their coming, consulted of his
affairs at large. His counsel with weighty reasons persuaded him, that he
should desist from his course, and restrayning his affections, submit
himself to the French King, whose puissance was such, as he had restored
great Lords, yea, and Princes, to their honor and estates, and had driven
others again to whom he bare displeasure, out of their seigniories and
dominions. Therefore their best advise was, that he should of his own accord,
restore again to the Constable the castles which he had lately taken from him.
For it would be more honorable for him to deliver them now willingly, then
hereafter by compulsion. The Duke following their counsel, The Duke of
Britain restores all that he had taken from the Constable.
made restitution of all, and besides, put every officer in his place again,
as he found them when he first seized the castles into his possession. The fame
hereof being presently spread into France, met the commissioners also upon the
confines of Britain. Who when they came before the Duke, because of his own
accord, he had already performed that which otherwise they should have
requested at his hands, they proceeded to the other part of their commission,
which was, to require him, that at a day prefixed he would repair to the town
of Bloys upon the river Loire, there to meet and confer with the Kings
uncles. The Duke condiscended, and being come thither accordingly, they
exhorted and entreated him, that for assurance and confirmation of peace, he
would speak with the King himself, and do homage unto him as all others had
done, he only excepted. The Duke as one that was not ignorant how great enemies
he had about the King, namely the Constable, and John his Son lately set free
out of England, discreetly and earnestly excused himself. Nevertheless after
the Kings uncles had made him faithful promise that he should both go and
return in safety, without any offense or interruption, he was contented at
length to bear them company to Paris.

When the Duke of Lancaster had sent many letters from Bayon into England for
succors, and could not prevail, seeing all men's affections generally
enstranged from the voyage of Spain, it was a mighty grief and corrosiue to
his heart, considering with himself how strong and well furnished an army he
had brought forth against his enemy, through the puissance whereof, he had
conquered no small number of towns and fortresses: and afterward how cruelly
fortune had dealt with him and his, overthrowing the whole course of his
proceedings in such sort, as he saw no possible means left, how ever to
obtain his inheritance of the kingdom of Castile. In musing upon this his
misfortune, he compared it to that calamity which the Duke of Aniow suffered in
Calabria, who being come into Italy upon large hopes and great expectation, not
only failed of the ends whereto he aspired, but spent his life also in the
pursuit of his enterprise. This only was a comfort to him in all his
discouragements, that he had a daughter by his wife Constance, whom he thought
some French Lord of high estate, either in respect of her birth or possibility,
would desire to have in marriage. Now the Duke of Berry was at the same time a
widdower, and his friends now and then discoursing with him about a wife,
amongst others mentioned also the Duke of Lancasters daughter. The Duke
presently began to conceive some good affection that way, and therevppon
advertised the Duke of Lancaster of his intent: whom when he had found nothing
strange in the matter, he sent Commisioners again to negotiate with him
further in that behalf. The Duke of Lancaster in the mean time, politickly
dispersed the fame hereof into all countries far and near, by sending to his
friends instructed for the purpose, both the copyes of his own and the Duke of
Berries letters: for he was well assured that these tidings would meruailously
trouble and disquiet the King of Spain. Who indeed as soon as he heard of the
matter, began to enter into a deep consideration with himself, how great
inconvenience might redound unto him by this marriage, namely, that peace being
established between England and France, both those nations uniting their
forces together, would make wars upon Spain, and so convey the possession
of the crown to the Duke of Lancasters wife. Wherefore, upon advise which his
counsel, it was thought good to make a secret motion, that the Duke of
Lancasters daughter might be given in marriage to Henry his son, whom he
had by the King of Arragons daughter. Hereupon a sew were sent, and those
slenderly accompanied, least the French men by whose friendship he possessed
his kingdom, should come to any knowledge of the business intended. The Duke
gave good ear to their message. And yet he put the French commissioners still
in great hope, ever making this exception, that he would go through with
nothing without the consent and approbation of the King of England his nephew,
to whom he had wholly referred the conclusion of these matters: and with this
answer he dismissed them. But he carried himself much more familiarly toward
the Spaniards, through his wives procurement, who saw by this means, that her
daughter without any empeachment or difficulty, should orderly succeed in the
inheritance of that flourishing kingdom, for the obtaining whereof so many
travailes and painful adventures had been sustained by her husband.

The hatred kindled every day more and more, between the Brabanders and
Gelders; and the Brabanders assembling about forty thousand men, besieged
Grave a town Grave besieged by the Brabanders.
near adjoining to the river Maze. The duke of Gelders lying the same time at
Nymmeghen, because he had great confidence both in the townsemen and the
Garrison left at Grave, did not greatly pass for that siege. Nevertheless he
required aid of the King of England, sor so it was conditioned between them
when he made his defiance to the French King. But the state of England was so
entangled with civil dissension, and troubled with expectation of wars out of
Scotland, that no aid could be obtained from thence. And the Brabanders seeing
they wasted their time in vain, sent some ten thousand of their men abroad
to harry their enemies country. The Duke of Gelders being certified thereof,
gathered together about three hundred horsemen, and contrary to the persuasions
of almost all his Counsel, with that small company marched toward his enemy
with great courage: esteeming it better to die fighting manfully in the field,
than to be shut up within the walls of a town, and besieged. Therefore when
he had put his men in array, he exhorted them to knightly prowess and
valiant demea^our, giving so great encouragement by example of his own
resolution, that setting sputres to their horses, they all in one troop ran
suriously The notable victory of the Duke of Gelders against the Brabanders.
1388.
upon their enemies, preventing their expectation with such a desperate charge
before they could settle themselves to any orderly resistance, that they easily
overcame them, and with small loss obtained an honorable victory. Many
perished, some slain in fight, others drowned in the river Maze: such as
escaped, fled with all the speed they could make, and carried tidings of their
overthrow to the camp before Grave. Whereupon so great terror rose presently
amongst them, that without further delay they abandoned the siege, and for
haste left all their provision and baggage behind them.

The French king being exceedingly desirous to take reuengement of the Duke of
Gelders for those arrogant and reproachful Letters he had sent him, raised a
mighty army. Many dissuaded him from this voyage, and among the rest, his
uncles; but because the duke of Britain was now fully concluded withal,
insomuch that he had repayd the money also that he had taken from the
Constable, the King would not by any means omit the present occasion of
accomplishing his purpose. And first he sent ambassadors to the emperor to
acquaint him with the causes of this war: for so it be hooued him, in regard
of certain covenants and articles made formerly betwixt the Emperor and him.
It was thought best to pass the army through Braband; and the Duchess her
self was well contented it should be so; but all the people besides, stood
stowtly against it, and were ready to defend their frontires from admitting
such a multitude, as being once received, would do no less harm and
annoyance to the country, than if their enemies should waste and spoil it.
Moreover, they threatened the Duchess, that if she gratified the Frenchmen in
this behalf, they would never take arms against the duke of Gelders. Then she
advise dly excused her self to the King, imputing the blame to her people, and
beseeching him not to take any offense at her denial. Therefore taking his
journey through Champaigne, he sent three thousand before to The French king
goes against the Duke of Gelders.
make way through the forest of Ardenne, which otherwise he could not have
passed. Moreover he sent unto the Emperor, a coppie of the Letter which the
duke of Gelders would have had carried into France when he made his defiance.
When the Emperor had seen that despightful and vnreuerent manner of writing,
he gave answer to the ambassadors in such sort as might well assure the^ he
would be no hindrance to the Frenchmens proceedings. Who hewing their passage
through the forest of Arden, entered into the territory of Lutzemburge; and
when they approached near the country of Liege, the Bishop (whose name was
Arnold, of the house of the Earls of Horn) moved by the Archbishop of Colen,
made intercession to the King for the duke of Iuliers, whose seigniory was like
to be the first that should have tasted the violence of that war. The King
was not much against his request, so the duke himself would come and show how
the matters which he alleged for his excuse, were just and reasonable. The
duke being brought to the Kings presence, protested that he neither counseled
his son to make that defiance, nor had any knowledge thereof before the
letters were sent. And for confirmation of his innocence in this case,
promised that he would persuade with his son, to make his purgation
advisedly before the King, and desire him of pardon: which thing if he could
not effect, he would set open all his towns to the King, that by means
thereof he might accomplish his wars with more advantage. This condition was
accepted, and the rather by the duke of Burgoigns persuasion. The duke of
Iuliers therefore accompanied with the Archbishop of Collen, resorted to his
son, and ye will not believe what travel and endeavor he used to alter his
obstinate mind. For all his discourse sauoured of nothing but mere
fierceness and contempt of the King, whose puissance he persuaded himself,
that he should be able to withstand through the help of the English. At length
after many rebukes and sharp threatenings, with mild speeches and gentle
entreaties now and then intermingled between, being forced as it were by
assault, he condiscended to his father. Then the duke drew him a form of
excuse The Duke of Gelders submits himself to the French king.
to this effect; that whatsoever he had done in this matter, was by counsel
and procurement of the King of England. When the French King had seen the duke
of Gelders, and heard what he had spoken for himself, his mindeseemed to
relent with a singular kind of affection: for he not only pardoned his
fault, but from thenceforth began to love him, and that much more earnestly,
than if he had never offended him.

When the Scottish men understood that discord was hatching in England, and by
continuance of time had gathered greater strength, being daily more and more
augmented, to the intent to revenge old injuries, without acquainting the King
with their purpose, they assembled to the number of forty thousand men. They
thought likewise The Scotts invade England.
to have concealed it from their enemies by a policy, but they were deceived.
For the English having intelligence thereof, made preparation to with stand
them. It came to a pitched field, and never was battle fought with greater
force between them. The Scottish army being divided in two parts, came not
with equal puissance to the encounter, because they were separated one far
from an other: nevertheless they went away with victory.

After the French men's departure, the Duke of Gelders being one that took no
pleasure in case and idleness, raised certain forces and took his journey
toward Prussia. It happened, that as he passed through Germany, he was taken
prisoner. But the Lords of Prussia rescued him again The Duke of Gelders
taken prisoner.
by force, and caused the party which had taken him, to fly for his own
safety, lest he should have fallen into the like mi^fortune himself. Now
although he were set free by the help of his friends, and as he lost his
liberty by the law of Arms, so he had recovered it by the same means
again: yet because he would keep faith with his enemy, he came at a certain
time to a place appointed, and compounded for his ransom.

The Duke of Lancaster (as we showed before) kept the duke of Berry still a
suter in great exspectation, and yet he was all the while more affected to the
Spaniard. Amongst other doubts which he cast, this was one: that if the Duke of
Berry should fortune to die, his daughter should then remain but a poor Lady
in respect of her other sisters, for the duke had children by his first wife,
which doubtless would go away with the greatest part of his estate. When the
French King understood how the King of Spain had put in a bar against the
duke of Berrios proceedings, he was wonderfully offended; so was the whole
Counsel of France, who knew well how highly Spain was bound to the Kings of
France for great benefits received many ages together. For by the aid of
Charles the sift, Henry the bastard being set in possession of the kingdom,
left the same after his decease, to his son John now reigning: yet not in
such sort that he was able to defend it against the English men and their
confederates the Portingales, if he had not been vpholden by the succor of
the French men.

This ingratitude therefore being generally taken in very ill part,
Ambassadors were addressed to the King of Spain with this message. That he
should take good aduisement and consider well with himself, what he did, and
with whom he contracted freindship: sieldome any marriages were made, but
there passed leagues and confederacies between the parties. There were yet
extant counterpanes of the alliance between Henry his father, and his
posterity on the one part, and the Kings of France on the other: Against the
covenants whereof it were not good to transgress: if he did, that he should
think no wrong done him by the French King in forsaking his freindship, which
notwithstanding was the thing that he studied by all possible means to
preserve and continue. The King of Spain answered, that indeed there had been
debating of certain matters in his name with the duke of Lancaster, but it
should be in no wise prejudicial to the state of France; and that he would
never attempt any action, whereby in the least degree he might seem to have
broken the bonds of freindship and alliance between them. As Soon as he had
dismissed the ambassadors with this answer, immediately Katherine the Duke of
Lancasters daughter, married to Henry Prince of Castile.
after he went through with the marriage, and therevppon the Lady Constance to
put the matter out of question, conveyed Katherine her daughter into Spain,
and there married her to Henry the young Prince of Castile. Which done, she
made diligent search for her fathers bones, and when the place of his burial at
length was discovered, she caused them to be taken up, and honorably entumbed
again at Civil.

Through the travel and industry of certain well disposed persons,
communication was had concerning a truce between the Kings of England and
France, with their Truce for three years between England, France, and their
confederates.
confederates, viz. Spain, Portugal, and Scotland. Now because the Scotts
lately before had some good success against the English, there was much ado
to draw them to any agreement: nevertheless their King being well inclined to
quietness, in the end they also changed their copy. So a truce was concluded
for three years, in such sort, that whosoever should by any means infringe
it, should be accounted, as a wicked and perjured person.

We have spoken before of the Duke of Ireland, who being driven out of England,
and lately through fair promises allured out of the low countries into
France, remained there a while, but could not purchase any settled aboade or
continual resting place. For the Lord Cow^y a man of great authority about the
French King, upon just and weighty occasions, hated him extremely. For the
Duke of Ireland having taken to wife this Lord Cow^yes daughter, fell
afterward in love with an other woman, and by dispensation from Pope Vrbane,
who was ready by all means to pleasure the King of England, divorced his wife
and married his paramour. The Lord Cowey therefore, father of the wronged Lady,
being deeply moved with such dishonorable injury, would never be in quiet,
till he had bayted out of France this man, whom the world charged with more
crimes, then that alone. See here the ^bbing and slowing of humain estates, the
affections of Princes, and the ends of wicked persons.

The French King was persuaded by some about him, to make a progress into the
furthest parts of his kingdom, as a thing so acceptable to the people, as
nothing could be more effectual to win their hearts. So he took his journey
through Campaigne, Burgoigne, and other provinces till he came to Avinion: and
when he had visited the Pope, went from thence to Mountpelyer. Which City
although by reason of trasicke and merchandise it be very wealthy, yet it had
been so oppressed with tributes and exactions, that as then it was much
impouerished. For as long as king Charles the fifth lived, the duke of Aniow had
the rule of all those countries, to the great enriching of his own cofers. And
at such time as in pursuit of greater fortunes, he undertook his voyage toward
Naples, by consent of the Peers the duke of Berry succeeded in his government.
But as soon as the king came to one and twenty years of age, he displaced his
uncles from their authority, and took the administration of their offices into
his own hands. Now when he came into Province and the places adjoining, many
grievous complaints were preferred against his uncle of Berry, who had beyond
measure polled the poor commons of their goods, and brought them in a manner
to extreme desperation. Ye might daily have seen great numbers of suitors
putting up petitions and supplications, complaining of deceyt, injury,
violence, rapes, extortions, and proscriptions. It greiued the King exceedingly
to see the The Duke of Berries treasurer burned.
miseries of his people, and therefore for an example to terrify others, he
caused the Duke of Berries treasurer, the chiefest man in those quarters, to be
burned^; for there came many accusations against him, of great wrong and
oppression which he had done in the country. The Duke of Berry by his letters
made earnest intercession to save his life, but he could not prevail. When the
King undertook this journey, he would in no wise be accompanied by his uncles,
wherewith they were greatly offended, but especially because they saw some
others of mean estate, to grow in great reputation about him.

About this time departed Pope Vrbane out of this life, The death of Pope
Vrbane.
whereof Clement being certified within ten days after, at Avinion, he
earnestly commended his cause to the French King, desiring him that now upon
this occasion he would use his credit with the Emperor, the King of Hungary,
and other Princes, to the intent that all discord being removed, peace and
quietness might at length be established in the church. He was in good hope
that now when his adversary was dead, the supremacy would entirely have fallen
to him. But he was far deceived; for the Cardinals created Boniface of
Naples.

The Moors and Barbarians made often excursions upon the Genowaies, and the
Cities and Islands under their subjection. Which thing they might more
commodiously do, because upon the confines, coming from Genoa toward their
country, they held a very strong and defensible town called Affricke. Out of
this town they issue forth against their enemies by sea with great ease and
advantage, and if need require, they have recourse again into the same, as a
most safe harbor and receptacle. The Genowayes therefore enforced through the
complaints and entreaty of their friends, began to consider how they might
work redress. And because they understood there was a truce lately concluded
between France, England, and the kingdoms conconfederate, they sent
ambassadors to the French King, requiring him of succor. The King was so
inclinable to this war, that he not only undertook it himself, but
solicited diverse of his neighbor Princes, to set their helping hands to
performance of the enterprise. Therefore assembling 1390. The French King
aydeth the Genowayes against the Moors and Barbarians.
no small power out of France, Britain, Artoys, Flaunders, and England, he
sent it into Lombardy, under the conduct of Lewis Duke of Burbon, with whom he
joined in commission the Lord Cowcy, a man of most knowledge and experience,
and in greatest judgment and direction in military affairs, that lived in
those times. These taking shipping together at Genoa, at length overcame the
contrary waves and tempests which encountered them at sea, and arrived safely in
their enemies country. Now as the Moors were consulting, because they saw that
the Genowayes upon this redoubling of their puissance, by the coming of the
french and other foreign nations to their aid, would besiege their City; a
certain grave old man amongst them, descended of a noble family, gave counsel
in this manner. That they should not give battle to their enemies, in regard
of their great number; but rather suffer them quietly to encampe and settle
themselves before the City; for it was strong enough to abide the violence of
their siege for a long season. Therefore let their enemies roast themselves
abroad in the heat of the scorching sun beams, whilst they being fenced
from the injury of the weather, with houses and shadowy places, rested at their
ease within the City. For it would come to pass, that when their provision by
little and little was consumed, themselves tormented with heat, and tired with
a thousand other discommodities, they would get home again without speeding of
their purpose. The old man's counsel was well liked, and the city being
besieged both by sea and land, many light skirmishes were daily interchanged.
The Barbarians sent an Ambassador desiring to know for what causes this war
was moved against them. The French men made answer, that the chief reason
was, because their forefathers had put the Savior of the world to a shameful
death, for that they excluded baptism, were blasphemers of God, and spoke
irreverently of the holy Virgin mother of Christ: these were the occasions why
they bent their forces against them, as the common enemies of christendom.
This answer seemed but a mockery to the Moors, so far were they from any
thought of misliking their religion. The Sicillians and other countries near
adjoining brought corn, wine and other provision abundantly into the camp of
the besiegers. But by reason of the hotenesse of those country wines, and the
extreme intemperatenesse of the air, it could not be otherwise but that very
many fell into most dangerous diseases. Amongst these inconveniences the duke
of Burbon now altogether out of season being haughty, proud and cruel, and
such a one as no man almost might presume into his presence, would remitte no
part of his severity: insomuch that through his default, showing himself
always rough and intractable, many notable exploits were omitted. After two
months siege, when they had bestowed all their labor in vain, virtaile
waxing scant, and scarcity being feared, because the winter approached and
their watching grew painful (for the Barbarians did continually molest them
in the night) the pestilence being also mistrusted to hang over their heads,
most were of opinion, that the best course was, to dissolve the army. This also
was another thing which they suspected, that the Genowayes perhaps might fall
to agreement with their enemies, and there was already such a rumor spread
through all the camp. Upon these considerations therefore the French men raising
their siege (which greatly displesed the Genowais) addressed themselves
homeward. Whereupon the Barbarians resuming greater courage, began to conceive
large hopes and to promise themselves the performance of great matters
hereafter. And that they might be able to repulse their enemies with greater
force another time, they joined in league with the Princes that bordered about
them.

John king of Spain, within two years after his son had The death of John
king of Castile.
married the duke of Lancasters daughter, departed this life, leaving the
succession of the Crown to Henry his son. Moreover at such time as the
marriage was concluded, this also was one covenant betwixt them: That the King
of Spain should yearly pay to the Duke of Lancaster and his wife, a hundred
thousand crowns, and for assurance thereof, should deliver as pledges, four of
the chief Earls of his kingdom.

Galeas duke of Millaine surprised his uncle Barnabas by treason, and put him
to death. The son of this Barnabas took to wife the Earl of Arminackes
sister. And Lewis duke of Orleance brother to King Charles the sixth, had married
Valentine the daughter of Galeas. Now the Earl of The Earl of Arminacke
passes into Italy against the Duke of Millaine.
Arminacke upon the incessant importunity of his sister, assembled an army of
the companions in France, and leading them into Italy, laid siege to
Alexandria, a town pertaining to the Duchy of Millaine. Galeas, who soiourned
the same time at Pauy, sent thither five hundred horsemen to lie there in
garrison: for his enemies were not then of so great number, that they could
enuiron the town round about. The Captain of those horsemen being a skillful
man of arms, after he had lain a while at Alexandria, issued forth one day
with 300. horse to draw his enemies to some disadvantage: for he knew well they
would proffer some skirmish to the townes-men. Therefore at his going out he
gave commandment, that in their fight they should retire from the enemy, and
suffer him to pursue them, till they had drawn him within compass of their
danger. He was nothing deceived in his opinion: for as they were skirmishing
after their ordinary manner, the townsmen gave back till they came to the
place where their fellows lay in ambush, who incontinently brake forth with
great violence. The French men thus unexpectedly engaged, behaved themselves
with great courage and valor: but being ouerwearied with travel, and faint
with heat of the Sun, they were unable to sustain the reviewed force and
fury of their enemies. The Earl himself having gotten out of the preasse to
take air, found a brook there by, whereof he drunk so abundantly, that he
was suddenly taken with such a sickness, as both presently bereft him of his
speech, and within few hours after, of his life. His soldiers by this means
discouraged, made as much haste as they could to get themselves out of Italy.
But many of them being intercepted and slain in their passage, the rest when
they came to the confines of France, were by the Kings commandment
prohibited to enter.

The Duke of Britain, who had larely been at Paris, and done his homage
according to the custom, being unable to change the disposition of his nature,
though he had bin oftentimes reconciled to the French King, yet in his heart he
could not choose but hate him, and love the King of England At such time as
this atonement was made at Paris, he promised from thencefoorth to become a
Clementine. But as soon as he was returned into his own country, he
performed nothing less. And when the Kings Officers were sent unto him, he
would not admit them to his presence: carrying himself altogether in such a
fashion, as it might plainly appear he sought new occasions of war and
contention. Many counseled the King to levy arms against him, to abate his
pride and arrogancy, which was in tolerable. But the Kings uncles, and
especially the Duke of Burgoigne (whose wife was the Duke of Britains
kinswoman) employed their travel to this effect, that a day certain might be
assigned for communication. So a meeting was had at Tours: and certain points
were there rehearsed, wherein the Duke might seem to have contemned the kings
authority. The Duke answered respectively to every of them, and sharply
enough, glauncing covertly sometimes at certain persons of base lineage in the
Court, upon whose counsel and opinions the King much depended. Such difference
and alteration was about the matter, that it seemed not likely to be otherwise
ended, than by the sword. Nevertheless, in conclusion a means was found to
make amity and peace between them. The French king gave his daughter in
marriage to the Duke of Britains son: and the son of John of Bloys (the
Constables son in law) married the Duke of Britains daughter. Verily, for the
most part, to such comicall conclusions, come the tragical contentions of
Princes.

Guy Earl of Bloys had rich and ample inheritance, both in France and other
countries. But after the death of Lewis Guy Earl of Bloys.
his son, who deceased very young, he had no one certain heir, but diverse
in diverse places, according as his lands lay separated one far from another.
Now the duke of Touraine the French kings brother, by the means of his wife
which was daughter to Gal^as Duke of Millaine, had a greatmasse of money lying
by him. And because he was desirous to bestow it to some benefit, he would
never rest till he had persuaded the Earl to sell him all the lands pertaining
to the Earldom of Bloys. It was a hard matter to compass, and good reason
why: but being overcome at last by the entreaty of his wife, the Duke of
Berryes daughter (whom the French king had suborned) when he saw no hope of
issue, he sold him the reuersion of his Earldom for two hundred thousand
franks.

Gascone Earl of Foys, whose singular wisdom and liberality my Author does
oftentimes commend, fell suddenly The sudden death of Gascone Earl of Foys.
down dead one day when he was come home from hunting, as he washed his hands
to go to dinner. By what mischaunce his only son perished, we have showed
before. Now of his base sons he loved one so well, that he was earnestly in
hand with the French King for his legittimation, that he might have made him
his heir: and if sudden death had not prevented him, perhaps he might have
brought the matter to pass as he desired. The next of his kinted to succeed
him was the vicount of Chastillon, but as long as he lived, he always hated
him, and to the intent to do him displeasure, besides his purpose and
endeavor to have conveyed the inheritance to his bastard son, he also
borrowed of the French King (when he had no need) five hundred thousand
frankes, because if ever he happened to become his heir, he would be sure to
charge him with a heavy burden. As Soon as the Earl was dead, there wanted
not some to persuade the King, that in regard he deceassed without issue, and
was indebted to him so great a sum of money, he should seize all the Earldome
into his own possession. After the matter had been diversely debated, at length
by inter cession of the Duke of Berry, the King was contented to depart with
the Earldome to the Vicount, upon these conditions: that he should pay unto him
threescore thousand frankes, and twenty thousand more to such as had traveled
and taken pains in his behalf for the obtainment of his suit; and finally,
that by the censure of indifferent persons, he should deal friendly and
honorably with the Earls two bastard Sons that remained.

After the French men were returned out of Barbary, upon relation which many
made of the occurrents they had seen, the King was enflamed with a marvelous
desire to go into those countries to conquer the Barbarians: and there were
diverse that provoked and put him forward to the action, as an enterprise
fitting a Prince of such puissance. But it was generally thought necessary,
that the church should first be settled in quiet, before this expedition were
undertaken. And that could not otherwise be brought to pass, then by
suppressing the new Pope lately chosen at Rome: This counsel was well
approved, and there upon proclamation made through all France, that the King
would address himself to the wars, at the beginning of the next spring. Now
when this voyage was thus fully resolved upon, ambassadors arrived out of
England, signifying how their King was very desirous of peace. This news
wonderfully rejoiced the French King, and therevppon a meeting was appointed at
Amience. The King of England sent thither two of his uncles the Dukes of
Lancaster, and York, but the Duke of Gloucester the great adversary of peace,
he kept still with himself at Dover. The french King was present in person at
this treaty. The Englishmen demanded again all Aquitaine, 1391. A treaty of
peace at Amience.
which King John had departed from by the law of arms: and besides, fourteen
hundred thousand frankes which remained yet unpaid for his ransom. The
French men offered them a part of Aquitaine, namely, that they had already in
possession, and nine Bishoprics. For the payment of their money they required
three years respit, and that Calice might be raced to the ground.

The conditions were rejected on both sides. For although the Englishmen
enclind wonderfully to peace, yet without their kings consent, they would not
conclude upon any thing, for that was beyond the limits of their commission. It
seemed the King of England did not greatly disallow the rest of the articles,
saving only the racing of Calice. But the Duke of Gloucester, the disturber of
peace, and enemy to all agreement, made vehement opposition; affirming that it
was impossible ever to draw the French men to any accord which might be for
the profit and honor of England.

And because in these affairs of so great consequence, the King alone had not
authority sufficient to confirm the articles of peace, though he likte them
never so well, without consent of the three estates of his kingdom assembled
in Parliament; it was agreed, that to the former, three years truce, another
tweluemonth should be added, that in the mean time convenient leisure might be
had, to consider and determine of the matter at large. Nevertheless at the
Duke of Lancasters departure, the French King discovering his mind, showed him
how earnestly he was desirous of peace, to the intent that by this means he
might bend all his forces against the Turks and Barbarians, who had lately
both driven the King of Armenia out of his country, and also entered with great
cruelty into the Kingdom of Hungary. The Duke well disposed of himself, and
moved with the Kings most courteous and honorable discourse, promised him his
faithful furtherance, and that he would never cease the employing of his best
endeauours, till he had brought the matter to such a conclusion, as by the King
especially, and by all well affected people was generally desired.

The french King made an exchange with his brother Lewis, for the Duke dome of
Toureine, in liev whereof he gave him the duke dome of Orleance which was much
greater; but with this condition, that all his heirs and successors should do
homage and fealty to the Kings of France for the same.

A certain gentleman of the Court called Peter of Craon, Sir Peter of Craon.
was highly in favor with the Duke of Orleance, who besides his wife, bare
secret affection to another Lady of excellent beauty; and this matter was not
unknown to that friend of his, whom he used so familiarly. It so fell out,
that the Duchess had intelligence of her husbands love, and therevppon,
sending for the Lady, rebukte and threatened her very sharply. The Lady all a
basht and sorrowful, excused her self as well as she could, and at her next
meeting with the Duke, told him all what had happened, and how the matter which
he desired to keep most secret, was discovered to his wife. The Duke
dissembling his knowledge, carried himself so kindly toward his wife, that in
the end he got notice from her, of the party which had betrayed him, namely,
Peter of Craon: who by this means being brought both into the Dukes, and the
Kings displeasure, was shortly after banished the Court. And therevppon finding
no quiet harbor in France, he resorted to the Duke of Britain; who burning
with irteconcileable hatred toward the Constable, handled the matter in such
sort, as Sir Peter of Craon was persuaded, that the Constable through secret
complaints and accusations against him, had been the procurer of his banishment.

Herevppon imagining with himself by what means he might be revenged of this
injury, he sent certain of his household servants at sundry times to Paris,
commanding them to enter the town disguised, and to keep themselves private
in a house of his: within a while he followed after himself. And one day when
he had learned certainly by his spies, what time the Constable would return
from Court, he set upon him coming homeward in the night Sir Oliver Clisson
treacherously assaulted, and almost slain by sir Peter of Craon.
with small attendants, and wounded him very grievously: in so much that having
overthrown him from his horse, he left him in the place for dead. News hereof
was presently brought to the King, who himself came forthwith to visit the
Constable, and gave commandment also to the Provost of the City, that he
should make diligent search with all possible speed to find out the offenders.
But it was to no purpose: For Saint Peter of Craon as soon as he had committed
the fact, fled immediately upon the spur toward Britain, through the gate of
S. Anthony, Ever since the Parisians met the King in arms at his return out of
which at that time stood open, and had done both night and day for many years
before. The King sent a messenger to the Duke of Britain, commanding him upon
his allegiance to apprehend Sir Peter of Craon and send him to Paris. The Duke
stiffly denied any such to be there. But the King Flaunders, when to curb their
boldness, he caused all their armor to be taken from them, the chains of the
streets to be carried away, and the four principal gates of the city from
thence forth to be left always open. The French King falls suddenly into a
frenzy.
held that excuse altogether insufficient: and therefore partly moved with
the heinousness of the offense, which in some sort he thought concerned his
own person, and likewise for that he saw the Duke to be a continual
disturber of the realm, he levied a great army and marched toward Britain.
The Kings uncles for hatred they bare to the Constable, persuaded him as much
as they could, to desist from his purpose. But when they could not prevail,
they themselves also accompanied him in his journey. At such time as they
approached the enemies frontiers, the king who had been troubled before with a
fever, and certain light fantasies in his brain, being now distempered with
overmuch heat of the weather, and disquieted with other matters, was
suddenly, as he rode upon the way, deprived of all power and use of
understanding. In such sort, that imagining he had been amongst his enemies,
he drew out his sword and ran desperately upon the Lords, and the rest of
the company which was about him, chasing his own brother and diverse others a
great way together, so as for their better safety, they were forced to alight
from their horses; and shift as well away as they could on foot. At length,
catching hold of him behind, and disarming him, they conveyed him to the next
town for a while, and afterward to a certain castle of France more nearer
to Paris. Which done, when consultation was had, to whom the government of the
commonwealth should be committed, whether to the Kings uncles, or to his
brother, it was thought fittest that his uncles should have the authority,
because the other was yet too young to take the administration upon him. Whilst
the king lay thus diseased, his uncles having gotten power and opportunity to
deal straightly with those that before had led the King as they listed, drove
the Constable out of France, and put diverse others in prison and bonds. The
Constable was not expulsed by force, but upon some sharp speeches given him by
the Duke of Burgoigne, departed of his own accord, holding it his safest
course, by a timely flight to prevent future inconveniences. It grieved his
enemies, that he had so escaped, and to the intent they might not seem to
proceed indirectly against him (for they knew the duke of Burbon and the Duke
of Orleance wished him well) they 1391.
cited him after he was gone, to the parliament of Paris. At the day prefixed
when he made no appearance, he was condemned both of felony and treason. For at
such time as he lay dangerously sick of his wounds, upon the making of his
will, his mooueable goods were found to be in value about seauenteene hundred
thousand frankes: which huge mass of money many were of opinion he had gotten
by very unlawful means. The rest that were holden in prison, being bereft
both of lands and goods, remained also in great danger of their lives. Of
this number, one or two, when they saw their innocence could not shield them
Sir John Mericer.
from extremity of peril, conceived so great sorrow with the consideration of
their present estate compared to the glory of their former fortunes, that with
weeping and lamenting they had almost made themselves blind.

The fourth Book.
AS well the French Kings uncles, as the English, labored very earnestly, that
at length a final peace might be concluded betwixt them. The matter was
negotiated by writing, to the intent every circumstance might be more
diligently examined and considered. It seemed to the Englishmen, and specially
to the Duke of Gloucester, that the French men used certain words of doubtful
signification, which afterward, as occasion should serve, they might interpret
in another sense for their own advantage. Therefore they were more circumspect
in discussing every particular, and wheresoever any uncertainty or doubtful
manner of speech occurred, they would be resolved in what construction it
should be taken before they passed any further. All such for the most part as
had wasted their substance, and impouerished their estates in time of peace,
were now desirous of war; but the two Kings were exceedingly inclined to
concord: and especially the French King, in regard of the occasions before
mentioned. The banished King of Armenia also, by discoursing with how
insatiable desire, and what mighty puissance the barbarous nations gap^d, not
only after the kingdom of Hungary; but in a manner for all Christendom, gave
great furtherance to the matter in handling. In conclusion, a truce was taken
for four years A truce for four years between England and France
both by sea and land, it being further agreed, that certain seigniories
should be restored on either party, as well to the English as the French, and
all the soldiers which lived by spoil and pillage, to be dismissed. The
French king who lately before, by the help of a certain skillful Physician,
had recovered both his understanding, and his speech, about this time relapsed
again into his former extreamitie.

Pope Clement (who had sustained the opposition of two The death of pope Clement
adversaries, first Vrbane, then Boniface newly erected) being dead at Avinion,
the Cardinals substituted Benedict in his place, conditionally, that if the
French King did not ratify his election, another should be chosen. Both the
Popes sent their Legates to the French King, and he gave them both friendly
audience, howbeit by the counsel of his divines, he inclind neither to the
one, nor the other, but rather sought means how to take a way all ground of
dissension, and to establish quietness in the Church. Therefore sending
Ambassadors to the Emperor, whose authority, care, and diligence ought to be
chief in that behalf, and likewise to the Kings of Bohemia, Hungary and
England, he besought them earnestly, that they would help to further the
public welfare and tranquillity of christendom.

The King of England at this time, by consent of the King Richard gives all
Aquitaine to the duke of ^ancaster.
whole state of his realm, gave all the Duchy of Aquitaine entirely and
freely to the Duke of Lancaster, and to his heirs for ever. The Duke therefore
disposing of his affairs in England, sailed over into Aquitaine, and at
Bordeaux showed the grant which King Richard had given him. The townsmen made
him answer, That of his presence and coming thither they were glad and
joyful: but to admit his government, and acknowledge him for their sovereign
Lord, that could they not yet resolve upon. Let him first deal and agree with
the rest of the Cities, whom it equally concerned, and if they would be
content to ratify the Kings grant, neither should their part of duty be
unperformed. The men of Bayon answered him after the same fashion. And when
he assayed the disposition of several persons, the noblemen and gentlemen
being assembled together, gave this determination: That in regard the
Aquitaines were so linked, and as it were engraffed together with the English,
that they might by no means be separated or conveyed over to any other Lord,
therefore they were of opinion, that this gift of the Kings must necessarily be
void and frustrate. At length it was thought good, that commissioners should
be sent to plead the matter before the King himself. Who when they came
thither, boldly maintained their right; affirming that their The Gascones
refuse to accept the duke of Lancaster for their sovereign.
seigniory ought not to be alienated from the Crown of England, neither by
gift, marriage, composition, nor any other means whatsoever. That the Kings of
England were accustomed at their coronation, to promise by solemn oath that it
should be so, and that the King there present had done the same: and there
withal they produced their charter. They alleged further, that it was most
necessary and behoouefull for the realm, that this custom authorized by the
wisdom of grave counselors, and established by continuance of long time,
should still be kept firm and inuiolate. For howsoever the Duke of Lancaster
at this present were a faithful and assured friend to the English men, yet
things could not always continue at one stay: and it might happen hereafter,
that he should conclude some league, or agree upon some marriage with the
Frenchmen, Britons, Burgonions, or others, according as time should serve, and
his own affairs require: whereby it might come to pass, that the Dukedom of
Aquitaine, which by a certain peculiar prerogative was now annexed to the
crown of England, should be transferred to a strange Lord, and from thenceforth
lost all their ancient aliance and society with the English nation. When they
had finished their speech to this purpose, many were moved by their reasons to
be of the same opinion. But the Duke of Gloucester with great vehemency of
spirit opposed himself against them, not so much for any affection to his
brother, as for that he wished him by this means to be removed further off
from the realm, to the intent himself might the more commodiously rule all
things as he listed. After much debating, the Gascones request prevailed; and
therevppon word was sent to the Duke of Lancaster, that he should surcease
from his enterprise, and insist upon his grant no further. Whilst the Duke was
absent in the parts of Aquitaine, King Richard raising an army of thirty
thousand K. Richards voyage into Ireland.
Archers, and four thousand horsemen, passed over into Ireland: for the
conquest whereof, in former times great wars had been made by his
ancestors. Nine months after his arrival, the country was yielded into his
subjection, and their four petty kings taken prisoners, in framing whose
fashions to ciuillity and good manners, no art nor diligence was omitted: but
hardly may a barbarous mind and savage nature be reduced to civil
conversation.

After the death of Queen Anne daughter to Charles the Emperor, the King of
England because he had no issue, resolved 1394.
upon a second marriage. But especially above all other nations, he desired to
link himself with France in a most steadfast bond of amity. Herevpo^ he began
to be a suter for Isabell the French kings daughter, which had lately before
been betrothed to the Duke of Britains Son, at Tours. This motion did
greatly displease the Duke of Gloucester, who desired nothing but wars. The
French men for the most part were of opinion, that nothing was to be determined
in this matter, before peace were thoroughly concluded and established.

Henry King of Hungary, brother to Charles the Emperor, Otherwise called
Lamorabaquy.
being threatened with wars from Basam a mighty and puissant Prince of the
Turks, required aid of the French king: who sent two thousand young Gentlemen
to his succor. John the son of Phillip Duke of Burgoigne a young John the
duke of Burgoignes son sent by the French king to aid the King of Hangary
against the Turks.
Lord of the age of two and twenty years, associated for his better direction,
with that worthy and valiant soldier the Lord Cowcy, was appointed general of
these forces. They passed out of France into Austria, and from thence to Buda
in Hurgary, where being arrived, although the enemy before had prefixed a day
of battle, yet heard they no news of his coming; therefore it was thought
best to pass the army over Danubius, and to assail him in his own country.
They were almost an hundred thousand strong, the greater part of them being
horsemen* Now when the^ were entered into the Turks dominion, after the taking
of some towns, they laid siege to the city of Nicopolis, the principal and
strongest in those quarters. The siege continuing somewhat long, and affoording
more vacant Nicopolis besieged.
time than was convenient for soldiers, the Lord Cowcy desirous to advance
his honor and the reputation of his name, accompanied with five hundred
lances, and as many archers, all on horseback, ranged abroad somewhat
farther into the country, to see if he could meet with any enemy upon whom
he might adventure his fortune. It happened according to his desire. For the
enemy understanding that there were forragers abroad, assembled to the number
of twenty thousand, and marched directly against them. When the French men had
intelligence thereof, they practiced a devise as the time then served not
unfitting for their purpose. Entering all into a wood, they sent about some
hundredth horsemen to entice the Turks out of their strength where they lay at
the defense of a certain passage, to come forth and skirmish with them. The
Turks supposing there had bin no more of their ennemies than they saw, issued
presently out against them: and the French men purposely retired until such
time as they had drawn them to the wood, within compass of their ambush,
which suddenly brake forth, and invaded them on all sides. By this means the
Turks being intercepted and Fifteen thousand Turks (...) slain by one
thousand christians under the conduct of the Lord Cow^y.
cut off, as well by those that freshly assailed them, as by the other which
before made countenance to fly, but now turned furiously upon them, were
slain to the number of fifteen thousand, and the rest hardly saved themselves
by flight. Basan the Turkish king, howsoever he seemed slack in his affairs,
yet had he perfect intelligence of all his enemies proceedings. For he was
continually certified thereof by Galeas Duke of Millaine, with whom he had
great intercourse of friendship. Therefore he assembled a huge army, the
Souldan of Babylon, the Medes, and the King of Persia, sending great forces to
aid him.

Concerning the Duke of Millaine, ye shall understand, A discourse ot the Duke
of Millaine.
that there were sometimes three brothers, Manfred, Galeas, and Barnabas. The
uncle of these was Archbishop of Millaine. Lewis of Bauier being elected
Emperor, when he could not obtain his confirmation from the Pope, went to
Rome, and there of his own authority creating another Pope, and certain
Cardinals, was by him invested in his imperial dignity: and afterward
permitted his soldiers to take the payment of their wages out of the spoil of
the City. Charles King of Bohemia, the Son of Henry of Lutzemburge, was
created Emperor against this Lewis. Which Charles coming newly into Italy
from Aquisgraue where he had received his co^secratio^ of the Pope, this
Archbishop of Millaine entertained him with great courtesy, and did him all the
honor he could, lending him money also at his departure, to the sum of an
hundred thousand crowns. The Emperor in consideration hereof, and to show his
grateful mind, created the Archbishop, Vicount of Millaine, and gave to him
and to his nephews after him, all that seigniory, to hold and enjoy the same,
till such time as the Emperor should redeem it again by repaiment of the
whole sum which he had borrowed. After the Archbishops death, Manfred his
eldest nephew by the Emperors consentand good liking, succeeded in the
seigniory of Millaine. But his brothers for envy dispatched him out of the way,
concluding with themselves to seize upon his estate, and afterward to confirm
their authority by alliance in marriage with other Princes. So when they had
^idde their elder brother of his life, they made equal partitio^ between them,
and rayned puissantly by force and policy. Galeas in regard he was the elder,
had ten towns, and Barnabas had nine. Millaine it self was indifferently
allotted to them both, the one to have it one year, and the other another, by
turns. They leuyed subsidies and taxes of their people from time to time, by
most unjust and violent means. Such fortresses as either of them held, they
furninished with Garrisons of foreign soldiers, of all nations but their own,
whom they principally distrusted. Through compulsion and rigor they kept the
people in great awe and subjection, exacting most cruel punishment upon such
as stirred never so little against them, to the intent to terrify others by
their example. They purchased the alliance of Princes with great sums of
money. Galeas paid to the Earl of Sauoy whose sister he married, an 100000
crowns. This Galeas had like wise a son of his own name that married the
daughter of John King of France, who in consideration hereof, departed with
six hundred thousand frankes toward the payment of his father in laws
ransom, to the King of England. Valentine the daughter of this younger Galeas,
was married to Lewis Duke of Orleans, brother to the French King Charles the
sixth: but her father first paid to him that should be his son in law, ten
hundred thousand franks, surely a wonderful sum of money: with part whereof
the Earldom of Bloys was purchased, as we have heretofore declared.

Between the two brothers there was no contention, as long as they lived
together. But the younger Galeas after his fathers deceasse, surprised his
uncle Barnabas by treason, and slew him.

One of this Barnabas daughters was married to Stephon Duke of Bauier, and
brought forth a daughter named Isabell, who afterward became the wife of
Charles King of France, as is mentioned in this history already. Galeas Page
127.
having thus trecherously slain his uncle, was not so contented, but
persecuted even his childrens children, and all their generation, seizing into
his hands all their goods and possessions. Also he burdened the people with
grievous and continual exactions.

Besides this, he held a wicked and vnreuerent opinion concerning the Godhead.
So he might enrich himself and advance his authority, he regarded not by what
means it were effected. Amongst other precepts of good doctrine wherewith he
was plentifully instructed, he was also misled in this opinion, and took it
as hereditary from his ancestors, utterly to despise the Popes authority, and
to rejoice exceedingly when any dissension happened in the church. Now the Duke
of Orleance wife being a very ambitious woman, was not a little feign and
desirous that her husband might attain to the Crown, by what means she did
not greatly regard. Herevppon many suspected that the kings mind had been all
this while enchaunted by her witchcraft. The ground of the suspicion grew
upon this occasion. She had a Son by her husband, a fair young child, much
about the age of the Dolphin. As these two children were sporting together in a
chamber, a poisoned appell was cast in amongst them, on that side where the
kings son was: but the child (which may seem a wonder) refused to meddle
withal. Then the other when no body perceived him, caught it up, and within a
little while after he had eaten of it, through the violent operation of the
poison, yielded up the ghost. The report hereof was presently carried to the
Court, and soon dispersed over all the country. This also was another thing
which increased the suspicion, that during all the time of the Kings sickness,
he would endure neither the Queen, nor any other woman to come about him, but
only this Duchess of Orleans. By these occasions, men's minds being
meruailously incensed, she was conveyed from the Court to a certain castle
not far from Paris, and there restrained of her liberty. Besides, her husband
conceived great displeasure against her about the death of his son. When
Galeas of Millaine understood how his daughter was entreated, he was highly
offended, and sent ambassadors forthwith into France, where they found
nothing so friendly entertainment as he expected. Therefore about such time as
the voyage was undertaken into Hungary, he proclaimed wars against the
French King: and the more to grieve his enemy, entered in league with Basan the
Turk, and made him acquainted both with his own affairs, and with the state
of France.

Albert Earl of Henault, whereas William his son was purposed to have gone
this expedition against the Turks, ceased not to exhort him that he should
rather make war upon the Phrisoners, which contrary to all right withdrew
themselves from his obedience. The young Earl obeying his fathers command,
assembled his men of war from all parts adjoining, and being likewise
assisted both with French and English succors, took shipping together and
sailed into Fris^land. Within few days after their arrival, endeavoring to
pass over the banks and ditches wherewith that country is strongly fenced, the
wild Fri^oners having intelligence of their enemies approach, made stout
opposition against them. But after long conflict, through the valor and
prowess of the horsemen and archers, who by a secret passage had conveyed
themselves nearer unto them, they were suddenly ouer-charged and many of them
slain. Little else was performed at that time, by reason the winter was so
near at hand. But about Friseland subdewed by the Earl of Henault.
two years after, the wars being renewed there again, those haughty and
proud stomachs of theirs, were forced to yield under his subjection, and to
acknowledge him for their Lord, whom always before they had contemned.

After the King of England had long solicited his marriage with the French
kings daughter, and that many ambassadors had passed between them, at length
it was concluded, that both the kings should meet in person at a certain town
which was the mid way between the French territory and Calice. This agreement
took effect. and the french King himself delivered his daughter by the hand to
the 1396. King Richard marries Isabel the french kings daughter.
King of England. But before the matter could be brought to this conclusion,
king Richard was feign to feed his uncle the Duke of Gloucester both with gifts
andlarge promises. For he hated peace extremely, and was of so perverse and
proud disposition, that the King stood in great fear least he should have
raised his commons against him, and therefore held it his best course ^o assure
himself of his friendship. After the consummation of these nuptialles the
French King was purposed to have made invasion upon the Dukedom of Millaine;
and the King of England had already promised to aid him with six thousand
archers. But there happened a matter in the mean time, which gave occasion of
new deliberation.

The Hungarians and French men together had strongly besieged Nicopolis, and
conceived good hope, that in short space they should become Lords of the City.
In the mean while Basam the Turkish King, assembled out of his own dominions
and the countries of Princes adjoining, about two hundred thousand men. He sent
almost eight thousand before, and divided the rest of his whole army into two
battelles. As Soon as our men were advertised of their coming, they presently
prepared to meet them. And because the scowtes which they had sent forth to
discover, reported that the enemies were but a small number, (for they had
seen no more then those eight thousand fore-riders) the French men in great
heat made have to the encounter. As they were thus in a readiness, the King
of Hungary sent them word, that they should not be too forward, for he
mistrusted the scowts had not taken a full view of their enemies forces: and
that he had sent out some others better acquainted with the coasts of the
country, who within few hours would assuredly return and bring more certain
intelligence. The Lord Cowcy and many others allowed this advise, and thought it
necessary by all means to be followed. But the Constable Phillip of Artoys,
because his opinion was not first demanded, prowdly and peruersly One man's
pride, causes many men's destruction.
misconstrued the kings profitable counsel, as if his intent had been to
bereave the French men of their opportunity, (being already raunged in
battle,) and to assume the honor of the victory to himself.

To this effect he uttered many idle words; nor for that he was so persuaded
himself, or could by any good reason dissallow of the King of Hungaries
counsel, but because he enuyed the Lord Cowcyes late honorable exployt, and
the reputation he had gained by defeating so great number of enemies with so
small forces. And he disdained not a little, that himself being both for
dignity and revenue one of the greatest subjects i^ France, any other should be
preferred before him: presuming that his opinion and authority in such cases
ought principally to take place, and to be respected above the rest. Therefore
rejecting the King of Hungaries advise which the residue approved, and
supposing there was no delay to be made in the matter, without expecting the
aid of his associates, he marched forward against the enemy. By occasion
whereof, the rest were likewise enforced to join their powers with his,
unless they would be accounted betrayers of their company.

See what mischief comes of pride and emulation. Now were their enemies upon
them, and the French men so besette on all sides with huge numbers which
encompast them about, that they saw no way to escape. And although they were
very few in comparison of their enemies, yet in this distress they showed
proofs of invincible courage: but they were so oppressed with multitude, that it
was impossible for them to avoid a lamentable destruction. The Lords for The
siege before Nicopolis raised, and all the Frenchmen slain or taken prisoners.
the most part were all taken prisoners, the beauty and richnes of their armor
discovering them to the Barbarous people, who saved their lives in hope to make
great commodity of their ransoms. After the victory, king Basam caused a view
of the dead bodies to be taken, and when he understood that there were many
more slain of his part, then of his enemies, being enraged with great fury, he
commanded 300. gentlemen of diverse nations that remained prisoners, should be
all cruelly slain, and cut in pieces. The King of Hungary when he saw how the
french men without further expectation, would rashly adventure against the
enemy, was exceedingly sorry: and when he beheld their miserable overthrow, by
persuasion of such as were about him, not seeing any other remedy, he himself
also fled and passed over Danubius. Undoubtedly the pride and envy of the
French men gave the enemy that days victory. Basam the Turkish King, after he
understood the estate of his prisoners, such I mean as were of greater birth
and calling then the rest, determined no violence against them, but sent a
messenger into France to give notice of their captivity and the overthrow of
the Christian army. Phillip Duke of Burgoigne who took his sons misfortune
very heavily, persuaded the French King, that he should send some rich presents
to the barbarous tyrant, whereby he might be moved to deal more favorably with
his prisoners.

Of all others the Lord Cowcyes noble spirit was most dejected with this
calamity: For entering into a deep consideration with himself how he had
always heretofore been very fortunate in warrelike affairs, and now having
received so great a charge from a mighty prince, could not hold his place and
execute his office for the envy of his adversary, but was brought in danger of
his life through another man's rashness in a barbarous country, with the loss
and slaughter of a great number of his friends, upon the conceit hereof, he
died for sorrow. To the like end also came the party, that by his folly and
indiscretion drew The Lord Cowcies death
so many thousand people, and so many honorable personages into destruction
and extreme misery.

The Duke of Burgoigne, to the intent to redeem his 1397.
son, and the rest of his fellow prisoners from captivity, dealt with the
Merchants of Venice (which travel into all parts of the world for commodities)
that joining with the other Ambassadors sent by the French King, they should
compound with the Turks for their ransom. The composition which they made,
was to this effect, that the Lords and Gentlemen that remained prisoners, to
the number of five and twenty, should pay for their ransom two hundred
thousand crowns: and for this sum the Merchants became sureties. From that
time forth Basam began to use the French men more courteously than he had
done: and at their departure, taking occasion to speak to the Duke of
Burgoignes son, I perceive (said he) that thou art descended of high and
noble parentage, and live in great expectation of honor: it can not be but a
great grief and oppression to thy mind, thus in the flower of thy youth, to
be subjected to this misfortune; for recovery of which disgrace, and to put
away the sad remembrance of this adventure, perhaps thou will one day come
in battle against me again. And although by the law of arms I have now
power to bind both thee and thy fellows from ever bearing arms against me
hereafter, yet will I not do it, but freely give leave both to thee and the
rest, that being returned into your countries, ye shall assemble your
uttermost forces, and make wars upon me again whenever ye are disposed.
For I am of that courage and puissaunce, and withal so confident in my
fortunes, as I dread not the power of any enemy whatsoever: And this that I
speak, thou may boldly make report to whom thou think good, in my
name. Soon after, the French men being discharged, sailed with the Venetians
to Rhodes, and departing from thence, after a long and trouble some passage, at
length arrived safely at Venice. During the time they soiourned there, the King
of Hungary sent a messenger to congratulate their deliverance, signifying how
much he rejoiced at their happy enlargement: withal, how he understood they
were to pay a great mass of money for their ransom: and he heartily wished
his estate were such, that he were able to supply their defect thereof in such
plentiful manner as he desired. But as now by reason of the late unfortunate
overthrow, he was much impouerished, and the yearly revenues of his Crown
not a little impaired. Nevertheless, for some testimony of his good affection,
whereas the State of Venice was to pay him yearly seven thousand crowns, he
had given commission to his messengers to sell that annuity, and the money
rising thereof to bestow upon them toward the furnishing of their wants and
maintenance of their necessary expenses. The French men thankefully accepted
this kindness, but the Venetians answered subtly and uncertainly to the
matter; and there were some that suspected it was handled in such sort, of set
purpose between them and the ambassadors of Hungary.

The Duke of Burgoigne obtaining a friendly benevolence of his people, not
without help of the French kings liberality, discharged his credit with the
Merchants. His son being returned into France, made a large relation to the
king of such things as he had observed through the whole course of his voyage:
in conclusion adding thus much, how it was not unknown to the Turks, that
through the civil dissension of the Popes, the general quiet, not only of the
Church, but also of all Christendom, was disturbed; and that it seemed a
wonder to them, how ever Kings and Princes could suffer such licentious
liberty and unbridled ambition of one or two persons to remain uncontrolled.
The kings mind was exceedingly moved with this discourse, so as from that time
forward he intended to the establishing of peace more earnestly than ever
before.

The Duke of Gloucester being altogether of a turbulent At the marriage of King
Richard to the French Kings daughter, a truce was agreed upon for thirty
years.
and feditious nature, was not alittle angry and discontented in his mind,
that so many years truce was taken between the two Kings, who were now so
linked and united together by marriage, as there was no other expectation, but
that a final peace should be concluded betwixt them. Hereupon he caused
seditious rumors to be spread abroad, and such as imported danger to the Kings
person, whom he had now purposed in his mind to put besides the government
of the kingdom. And knowing himself to be in great favor and authority with
the Londoners, he persuaded them that from thencefoorth they should refuse the
payment of the tax which was imposed upon all kinds of merchandise certain
years since, for maintenance of the wars, and defense of the Country,
seeing now all was quiet again; and a truce taken with the enemy: for such
kind of exactions he said were unjust, and contrary to reason. The people by
petition moved this matter to the King, who referred his answer till the
Parliament at Westminster, which being come, the Duke of Lancaster made public
declaration of the Kings mind, in such sort as they were all well pacified for
that time, and departed without further trouble. Not long after, the earl of
Saint Paul sent from the French king to visit the new The Earl of Saint Paul.
married Queen, arrived at the Court of England: who understanding of the Duke
of Gloucesters treacherous practices, exhorted the King to provide a timely
remedy for such inconveniences. After his departure, a general brute was
raised, that the king would restore Calice to the French men, and that he had
already concluded upon the matter with the earl, whom the French king had
sent Ambassador for the same purpose. There was not any thing whatsoever that
could more vehemently have in censed all England against the King, than this.
And the Duke of Gloucester taking occasion hereat, persuaded the people, that
they should expostulate the matter with the king, to know certainly his
intention. The king answered in such sort as any sound and indifferent
judgment might well have been satisfied, and easily have seen that this
rumor was merely contrived by envy and detraction. These false reports and
malicious suggestions greatly troubled the kings mind, and when he understood
that his uncle aspired to the Crown, and studied how to bring his purpose to
effect, not without bewayling the present state of his country, he asked
counsel of the Duke of Lancaster and some others, (whose dispositions he
mistrusted not) what course they would advise him to in this behalf. The Duke
and the rest as well as they could, endeavored to quiet his thoughts, and to
remove all fear and suspicion out of his mind, assuring him, that their love
and good affection should never fail to do him faithful service. But in the
end, the matter proceeded so far, that such as were most familiar with the
King, and nearest about him, being unable to brook the pride and ouerdaring
insolency of the Duke of Gloucester (for he hated all those whom the King
favored) protested plainly, that in regard of his seditious practices, they
could no longer continue their places without great danger of their lives, and
hazard of their estates. And therevppon diverse were seen, and those of the
chiefer sort, to abandon the Court, and retire themselves to their country
dwellings: for it was no hard matter to foresee to what issue all things
tended. To be short, the King moved with with these speeches concurring with so
manifest presumptions, after much deliberation, under a politic pretense of
great kindness, allured his uncle from his own house to ride abroad with him
a hunting. Who being by this means trained forth with a small company, was by
the Earl Marshall suddenly arrested in the Kings name, and conveyed in great
secrecy to the Castle of Calice. When he had remained there a while, much
mistrusting what should become of him, one day as he was entered into the great
chamber, and about to wash his hands before dinner, four lusty fellows,
appointed by the Kings commandment, cast a towell about his neck, and
winding it strongly a cross two at the one end, and two at the other,
overthrew him to the ground, and strangled him. Then stripping off his clothes,
and closing his eyes, they laid him The duke of Glow ester murdered in the
castle of Calice. 1397.
in his bed, and presently gave it forth in the Castle, how the Duke that
night died suddenly of an apoplexy. Within two days after, his death was
published: but there were few or none, either in France or England that
greatly bewailed him. For such was his desert, as he had long since purchased
every man's ill affection, by reason of his turbulent spirit, which was
altogether bent to move unquietness and contention. Nevertheless the
Londoners took his death in very ill part, and so did the kings other uncles,
especially the Duke of Lancaster, who could well have found in his heart to
revenge this cruel outrage committed upon his brother, but that he feared
the kings puissance, now greatly increased by reason of his marriage. After the
murder of the duke of Gloucester, certain others also were executed at London
as accessory to his treason and Richard earl of Arundell.
conspiracy. The Earl of Warwick a man much respected in the commonwealth,
should likewise have tasted of the same cup, but that by intercession of his
friends, the kings rigor was somewhat mitigated, and so he was banished into
the I Will of Wight. The duke of Gloucester left a son under age, and therefore
the king took all his lands into his own custody, and appointed his mother
to give attendance upon the Queen. It is the custom of England, that the
king has the wardship of all Noble men's heirs, and the use of their lands
till they come to one and twenty years of age. The king who knew well how
grievously he had offended his uncles by killing their brother, growing now
suspicious of all men, kept continually a Guarde of two thousand archers about
him for the defense of his person.

Henry Earl of Derby the Duke of Lancasters son, a man highly in favor of
the people, in private and familiar conference between him and the Earl
Marshall, cast forth certain speeches ouer-liberally against the king. The
Marshall, to win favor with the king, uttered all their communication Thomas
Mow bray Duke of Norffolke.
in an assembly of the Lords, appeaching him of treason, and proffering the
combat. The Earl on the contrary part, retorted the treason upon himself,
and accepted his challenge. The King in whose presence all this had passed, was
meruailously displeased, and leaving the company, with drew himself into his
chamber. Many thought the King much too blame, in that he suffered the matter
to proceed so far (for the Champions were at great charge to furnish
themselves against the day of combat) esteeming it his peculiar duty, to have
used his authority for r^straining of such quarrels as these, whereby
occasions of much trouble might ensue afterward. When the King understood that
such speeches were given forth, and withal, how it was generally ill taken in
the behalf of the Earl of Derby, to the intent to give satisfaction both to
the Lords and the Commons who loved not the Earl Marshall, he took the
matter into his own hands, and gave sentence, that the duke of Lancasters
son should be The Earl of Derby and the Earl Marshall banished.
banished for ten years, and the Earl Marshall for ever. At the Earl of
Derbies departure, the King of his own accord, released four years of his
banishment: and the Earl following his fathers counsel, repaired to the
french king, who gave him very courteous and honorable entertainment. Great
sorrow and coffeehouse was showed by the Londoners when he departed, and
from that time forward all things there tended to a bloody and sorrowful
conclusion.

After the Lords of France were raunsomed from the Turks and returned into
their country, the French King much moved with the Earl of Neuers discourse,
to the The Duke of Burgoignes son.
intent to establish concord in the Church, addressed Letters forthwith to the
Emperor, earnestly requesting his assistaunce in that behalf. By mutual
consent a day was appointed for their meeting at Rhemes. Other matters were
devised and given forth for the occasion of their coming thither, that the
true cause of that assembly, which they were desirous to conceal, might for a
time be kept secret. After a solemn enterview and great consultation, it was
agreed, that the Bishop of Cambray should be directed to Pope Boniface then
lying at Rome to exhort him, that for the general quiet and welfare of the
Church, he would be content to resign his office, not for ever, but only till
such time as by the determination of Princes and learned Divines, a resolution
of all controversies might be established. The Pope answered gently, that he
would take the advice of his Cardinals. But the people of Rome in the mean
while having learned the cause of the Ambassadors coming, and perceiving it
would turn greatly to their discommoditie, persuaded the Pope that he should
not for any respect of Kings or Princes whosoever, abase himself so much, but
rather stand in defense of his right to the uttermost. The Pope therefore
dissembling his purpose, at his next communication with the Ambassador, told
him, that for his part he would not refuse to accomplish the Emperors and the
Kings request, so as his adversary would be content to do the like. Being
dismissed with this answer, the Ambassador returned to the Emperor, whom he
found at Confluence, and when he had delivered his message, departed from
thence into France.

The Divines there were of opinion, that the like motion should be made to
Benedict, as had bin before to Boniface. And upon this determination the same
Bishop being sent by the King to Avinion, declared the minds and intentions
of the Princes to the Pope. Who answered plainly and peremptorily, that he
would condescend to no such matter. Notwithstanding when he had propounded it
to his Cardinals, they were of sundry opinions, according as they were moved
by their several dispositions and affections. And when no certaintic could be
concluded, by reason of the difference amongst them, their assembly brake up.
Then the Ambassador pressing into the Popes presence, required his resolution.
The Pope prowdly answered, how he was lawfully and orderly promoted to that
holy dignity, which he would in no wise forgo as long as he lived, neither
was any man living so dear unto him for whose pleasure he would depart from
his right, and much less did he fear any force or violence in that behalf.
The Ambassador seeing no other answer could be gotten, returned homewardes,
and by the way showed the success of his affairs to the Marshall of France,
whom the king had sent with an army to second his proceedings. The Marshall as
soon as he understood the Popes obstinate resolution, made haste to Avinion,
and forraged all the country about, dividing his forces into diverse companies,
to keep all conueiance of victual from the town. He him self encamped
before the City, threatening the inhabitants to destroy all their houses, and
their vineyardes which they had abroad in the country, unless they yielded.
The townsmen well considering there was little help in the Pope, and that the
King was of great puissaunce, took counsel with certain French Cardinals,
and by their advise set open their gates. The Pope suffered himself to Pope
Benedict besieged, and taken prisoner by the Frenchmen.
be besieged in his palace, hoping to have been rescued by his cousine the
King of Arragon: but the King of Arragon was too wise to incur the offense of
so mighty a Prince for the Popes pleasure, from whom he could expect small
succor again if occasion should serve hereafter. Many of his Cardinals
exhorted him to a milder kind of carriage, but the Pope full of pride and
arrogancy stood firm in his first resolution, seeming as it were secure of
his estate, and altogether careless what should become of him. He was
plentifully furnished of all necessaries, saving only fuel, the want
whereof, together with the incessant importunity of the Cardinals, compelled
him at length to yield up the place. The Marshall bound him by oath, that he
should not depart out of the City before such time as an union were
established in the Church, and to be sure he should not falsify his promise,
appointed a sufficient guarde to attend him, and caused the Cardinals and
rich Citizens of Avinion to become sureties for his foorth-comming. The French
King having written the whole discourse of these proceedings to the Emperor,
solicited the King of England, that following their example, he should likewise
take part with neither of the Popes, but stand indifferent for a time, till
some remedy might be provided. The King was very willing to have satisfied his
father in laws request. But when the matter was propounded in parliament, he
not only effected nothing of his desire, but more and more vehemently incensed
the people against him, whom it exceedingly offended, that he should be so
addicted to the French men, that to do them a pleasure, it seemed he would
have condiscended to any thing. And they told him, that howsoever they had
been otherwise well contented to set aside all partiality of affection,
either to the one party, or the other, yet in regard the French King so
earnestly desired it, they would not agree to his request, nor in any wise
allow that he should prescribe articles of religion in England.

About this time died the Duke of Lancaster, a virtuous The death of John of
Gau^t Duke of Lancaster. 1399.
and prudent prince; of whose death as a thing desired, the king of England
very joyfully sent news into France. As for his son, who soiourned the same
time in the French court, he was so far from recalling him again to receive
his fathers inheritance, that he also seized it into his own hands, as
appertaining to himself till the time of the earls banishment were expired.
And not content heerewith, he distributed many of the Duke of Lancasters goods
among such persons as no man loved, but himself. The Earl of Derby was highly
favored and respected by the French King, in regard of his noble carriage and
generous disposition. And because he was also a man of great possessions,
there was a match motioned between him and the Duke of Berries daughter which
was then a widow. Whereof as soon as the King of England had intelligence, he
sent an Ambassador forthwith to interrupt their proceedings; informing his
father in law and his uncles, that he with whom they intended to contract
affinity, was a wicked person and a traitor. The Earl from whom all this
was kept secret, to the intent to learn what the Ambassador had done (for he
mistrusted somewhat because he had not seen him all the time of his being
there) fell in communication again with the French King and his brothers,
concerning the marriage. And they not thinking good to hold him longer in
suspense, declared what report they had heard of him from the King of
England. How much the Earl was grieved and discontented heerewithall, any man
out of his own judgment may easily conjecture. All the nobility of England
for the most part, with the Londoners, were exceedingly displeased at this his
unworthy and injurious accusation, for they knew assuredly it proceeded of mere
malice and hatred. King Richard the same time made preparation for another
voyage into Ireland, assembling to the number of ten thousand archers, and
two thousand horsemen: and he banished twoonoble men of great account, Henry
P^rcie earl of Northumberland and his son
because they refused to accompany him in that journey. For those Lords having
spoken somewhat boldly of the King, when they understood by their friends
that he had knowledge thereof, they thought it better to disobey his command,
than, by coming when he sent for them, to put their lives and estates in
manifest peril: and therevppon sentence of banishment was pronounced against
them. To be short, many causes concurred together at one time to aggrauate the
peoples hatred against the King. By occasion whereof, certain ill disposed
persons taking advantage of the time, when they saw the king both busied in
war, and irrecouerably deprived of the love of his subjects, assembling
together in rowts and companies, made spoil of the husbandmen, robbed the
Merchants, and ranged over all the country, doing great violence and
mischief, insomuch that many to avoid the danger of their outrage, were
forced to convey themselves into London, and other places of security.

When the king had thus utterly lost the hearts of his people, Thomas Arundell.
the Archbishop of Canterbury, by general consent of the State, was addressed
to the Earl of Derby, to bring him again into England, upon most assured hope
and expectation of the Crown. The Bishop undertook and performed this charge
so secretly, that none knew of his going, save those that were interessed in
the action, and when he came into France, not any man there could conjecture
the true cause of his coming. The Earl of Derby politikely dissembling the
matter, requested leave of the French King to go into Britain to visit the
Duke, with whom he made no long tarriance, but took shipping, and within few
days after arrived in England. By reason of the Archbishops presence and
authority, he found no interruption in his passage, but traveled along
toward London. And when they approached near the city, they sent a messenger
before to give notice of their coming. At which tidings the Citizens
suddenly surprised with joy; came flocking out of the gates in great companies
to welcome the Earl; from thencefoorth couenaunting to receive him for King of
England. Soon after, a certain number well appointed were sent forth against
king Richard, to apprehend him and bring him to London. Many of the Kings
followers when they understood of the Londoners coming, soon changed their
service, and chose them new Masters. At first the King made some show of
resistance, but seeing his people forsake him, by counsel of his friends, he
retired into the castle of Flint. When the Earl drewnigh, accompanied with
some two hundredth men and the rest of his army following after, he approached
the Castle gate and sent word to the king how he required to speak with him,
whereupon himself only and twelve more were admitted entrance. As soon as
he saw the King, without yielding him any reverence; Sir (said he) you must
this He should have used the benefit of opportunity.
day prepare toward London, for so the people are fully purposed. What should
he do in this distress? Being destitute of succor and beholding his enemies
forces before his face, to escape the fury of the people, he yielded him self
to the Earls mercy. As they carried him toward London, he requested one
thing very earnestly, which was, that he might not be led through the City.
His request was granted, but the people much offended. As soon as he came
thither, he was conveyed to prison. New officers and servants were placed about
the Queen, and other Ladies and Gentlewomen appointed to attend her, all the
French being dismissed, and sent home into their country. The Earl having
brought his matters to this pass, the first thing he did, he recalled the
Earl of Warwick and certain others that were banished. And shortly after he
caused to be beheaded four of the chief that had bin about King Richard, by
whose counsel he confessed himself to have been principally ruled in those
matters which were objected against him. They were drawn to their execution
under the prospect of his window, of purpose that he might see them. The Lords
that accompanied him in prison bewailed their miserable estates, and the King
himself with the consideration of his heavy misfortune, burst forth into
abundance of tears, and with bitter sighs cursed the day and hour that
ever he was borne, to come to such an end as now entered into his cogitation.
He was persuaded by his partners in misery, that to appease his adversary, and
to purchase the assurance of his own safety, and such as were about him, he
should renounce his royal state and dignity. Hereupon he required to have
communication with the Earl, to whom when he had declared his mind, after
the acceptance of his offer, the Earl fell into a bitter reproof of his former
life, making a large repetition of his offenses, and besides, vpbrayded him
with bastardy: for many reported that he was begotten by a Priest. Within few
days after King Richard in open assembly 1399. King Richard deposed.
of the Lords at the Tower of London, with all ceremonies and solemnities
incident to such occasions, resigned the Crown and Scepter, with all his right
and interest in the kingdom, to Henry of Lancaster, reducing himself into a
private estate, without assurance of his life, after he had reigned two and
twenty years. This alteration of the State in England so troubled the French
King, that he fell again into his old disease. But the Counsel of France
sent certain Ambassadors to visit the Queen his daughter, and to understand
in what state she remained. The Duke of Burbon was likewise sent into the
country of Burdeloys: which seigniory, since King Richard (to whom the people
in those parts were wonderfully affected) was fallen into this calamity, the
French men went about to recover again to themselves. But when the chief of
the Cities had propounded the matter to the Commons, they could not prevail.
For the people feared much to be oppressed again with the often taxes and
^allages which they had endured of old t^me under the French men. Certain
great Lords of England had secretly conspired against Henry their new King, but
their practice being discovered, they were all put to death.

The French King raising a puissant army, determined to have invaded England.
But it happened about the same time that King Richard ended his life at London.
My Author reports that he could not learn certainly by what means he came
to his death: but that Henry the late crowned king was incessantly called upon
by the people to dispatch him out of the way, because otherwise the realm
should never want matter of trouble and dissension. Nevertheless he adds
further, that the King in regard he had given him a faithful promise of his
life, would not condescend to their requests. Now when the matters between
France and England seemed thus to tend toward a sorrow full issue, by
mediation of good men a truce was obtained and confirmed for six and twenty
years. The French men were the rather inclined to peace, by reason of their
Kings infirmity.

Mention has been made of the earl Marshall of England banished by king
Richard, upon occasion of his quarrel with the Earl of Derby. As soon as he
understood that Henry of Lancaster had obtained the Cr^wn^e, and that King
Richard was dead, he conceived so great grief and displeasure therevppon,
that incontinently he fell sick and died, at Venice. Moreover Pope Benedict,
because that after so many advertisements he would not incline to the will of
the Princes, was deprived of his honor and Pontifical dignity.


