A discourse of the Civil wars late troubles in France, drawn into English
by Geffray Fenton, and divided into three books, Whereof The first begins
from the breach of peace in March. 1568. and continues till the death of the
Prince of Conde.

The second, from his death till the battle at Mongontour, which was the first
of October. 1569.

The third, contains variety of matters chauncing in sundry places since
that time.

Seen and allowed.

MON HEVR VIENDRA.

Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Lucas Harrison and George Bishop.

To the right honorable my singular good Lord, Sir Henry Sidney, knight of the
order, the Q. Majesty's deputy governor in her realm of Ireland, and Lord
President of her highness Country and Marches of Wales in England.
Notwithstanding (right honorable) my present insufficiency to write things
worthy any general view, and much less to stand before your peculiar and
grave judgment, yet, in respect of your natural affability inclinable to
honest endeavors, I am bold (under this argument) to exhibit a simple effect
of my serviceable mind so long time vowed to you and yours, as partly
encouraged by the honorable regard of your virtuous Lady and wife to my first
dedication, and partly induced by your name of singular merit to all sorts,
but most of all by an ancient and settled desire leading me (as it were) in an
aspiring imaginacion, to bring forth somewhat worthy your honorable view and
protection: wherein having as yet nothing of mine own to present your honor
withal, it may like you (in the mean while) to receive this short report of
the third and late French troubles, the same as they were lately written by a
diligent eye witness, assisting all their actual procedings until January
last: so, not vnmeet^ to be revealed to our country, no less for the quality
or freshenesse of the matter, which is very grave in it self, than for the
truth and indifferency of the author, who certainly in either part, procedes
with great modesty, observing with all such singular integrity as both the good
sort may settle and confirm, and the rest suffice and satisfy without cause
of offense, unless temperance and truth be offenses to such whose tastes can
abide no better dispositions tha^ their own: And this as it is a most
commendable order in writing, so has it no small grace in an history, and as
carefully to be imitated of all sorts, as the contrary is contemnable in any:
besides, if there be any dignity (next after the sacred word of God) to wise
writings on earth, a true history may justly challenge a first place, being (in
deed) no small parcel of the same sacred word it self. If we also descend into
Philosophy, History is her chiefest part in what degree so ever wise men will
place her, which Plato forgets not to affirm in reckening such cities and
people very happy, whose princes and sovereign governors be Philosophers, as
though no part of Philosophy did more lively and generally instruct a virtuous
life, tha^ histories, who as with a certain harmony and sweetness to draw
men to good by ali^^ing examples of good me^, so, of the contrary expressing
terrible successes of the wicked with their tragical ends, do even hale us
from the cuill to the better: the same happening most when writers be upright
speakers of the truth, and sincere hable judges of the same, likewise moderate
praisers, but free reprehenders, without affectation according to the
indifferent deserts of the parties: which so much the more becomes the
histories of our time to be thus seasoned, when we our selves be professors of
that heavenly and divine Philosophye, which, in teaching us the chief and high
truth, wills us also to be less negligent of our own estimation, than (in
swaruing from that which is honest and true) either to bleamish the one or
slander the other in our christian piety, and that with such a notable blot
for ever, as living men, obiecting our faults, as witnesses either of malice
or falshode, may also commend them to a perpetual posterity. Such therefore
is the excellent Majesty of a true history, as nothing in humayne things is
to be preferred before it, and such the necessity of it both in private and
public, as well in all states and policies, as also conducible to Religion,
directing withal every degree in his duty and true use of the same. And
lastly, it is the lively Image of time and seasons, which under God, most
absolutely, does govern and: esolue our transitory endeavors and actions: A
most true looking glass for the sovereign to behold continually, and a sound
study for the subject to be had still in use. Wherein (right honorable) if I
have indutifully abused your wisdom and grave experience, and by to much speech
and circumstance slipped into Phormyos fault, when he red to Hannibal, de re
militari, It may like you to measure with my vehemency to the cause, my
respective desire to your honor, who albeit is not (I know) without your deep
sight and excellent judgment in the tunges, yet it may please you to suffer
this small treatise (by your mediation) to becommunicated to others, to a
publik benefit of many, and special deface of slaunderers, who in this
co^spiring time do labor to confound both divine and humayne things, leaving
nothing unstained which they may bring within the compass of their carping
natures.

And likewise for my part, albeit I am bold to use this brief discourse, to
solicit rather in my unfeigned faith and disposition to your honor, than in
any worthynesse in the travail, yet if your honor vouchsafe too receive me
and my meaning with that virtue which surely is peculiar in you: I shall not
only be encouraged too greater things hereafter, but also others of worthy
skill in deed, will labor to honor you for this example, wherein I most humbly
and faithfully commend unto you my heart and devotion, as also if I had any
other thing more dear or precious, I present it with an unfeigned will to be
commanded as it best pleases your honor, whom God long preserve to your
prince, country, and friends. At London the xxiiij. of May. 1570.

Your honors humbly to command Geffray Fenton.

THE TABLE.
A
AEsse upon Vienne, fol. 89 The Lord of Acier, fo. 13 deuideth his horsemen, fo.
14 the number of his army, fo. 19 the order of the same fol. 19 his sickness.
fol. 137 The Duke of Alba a Spanyard. Fol. 5 Ales at Seuennes fol. 15 The Lord
Admiral sick. fol. 137. he sends Monsieur de la Noue, and Monsieur de la
Love to Montgontour, fol. 153 Monsieur de Amazey slain and hewn in pieces.
fol. 6 The Lord de Andelot, fol. 11. his death. fol. 74 Angoulesme beseeged,
fol. 20 and taken, fol. 20. and sommoned. fol. 77 The Duke of Angiou the kings
brother, fol. 12. seek the rest in the name of Monsieur. The Army of the Duke
of Sweburg or Deux Ponts. fol. 87 Argence. fo 62 The Assembly of Catholics. fo
10 The Assembly of the Prince of Condey. fol. 10 Aubeterre a town. fo. 30
Aubeterre a castle taken fo. ^1 The Duke of Aumal writes to the duke of
Swebrug ^8 The duke of Aumal is in ^^ra^e. fol. 33 The Prince of Autaigne and
his son, fo. 87* the departure of the said Prince from Fay la Vineuse. fol
145 Auuergne and ^o^thonnois exempt from preaching. 5
B
BAis upon Pais. fol. 15 Baron of Adrets, fo 53 the furniture for his return.
fol 101 Bassac a village. fol 58 Battle of Mongontour. 154 The lord of
Baudine hurt. 28 Beauuoir upon Matta. 56 Bearne a country of the Q. of Navarre
taken, 127. won again. 127 Bertis a village in Perigueux. 31 Bergerac a town.
^1. taken. 50 la (...) a c^ptaine. 45. killed at ^^reb^au. 46 the ar^e of
Brissac slain. 73 the Lord of Bo^^uel taken. 227 the Lord of Bouccard. 31. his
death 75 la Boutonne a river in Santonge. 66 Bourbonnois and Auuergne without
preaching 5 Boursaut discomfited. 51 Branthomme a town taken. 96 Bricquemau the
vo^ger, chief captain of the fotemen. 87 B^il^a^ a Ga^con captain. 92 a
Bridge built again by the kings brother over Char 58 a B^udge of boats on
Char 63 B^^des of French men of the Princes, depart from Poitou and Tou^am and
withdrue the^ selves to la Charity. 26
C
CAluerat a captain slain. 125 Carriage of Guise and Brissac taken. 36 the
Camp of those of the religion called the camp of the Princes. 27 Captains
being within Poytiers. 117 many Captains slain within Poitiers 134 Cardinal
of Lorraine and his a herents. 105 Catholics licenced to wear armor. 4
Cha^pigny besiegd and taken. 43 Chabanay a castle taken. 96 Chastele^ault a
town. 32 Chastelerault taken. 98. after besieged. 140 Chastelier Porta^t
slain. 62 Castles taken nigh to Poit. 118 la Charity besieged and taken. 84 la
Charity besieged by the lord of Sansac. 99 Chauuigny upon Vienne. 33. the
taking thereof. 34 Chasteau Leuesque in Perigueux. 96 La Chapelle a castle
taken. 96 the no^bring of Catholics. 7 Charge or onset on the Earl of Brissacs
footmen. 40 onset of the Admiral at larnac. 62 of the Prince of Condey. 62. on
the captain Chaumont and other. 70. on the lord of Mowy, nigh to Mongont. 154
Chasteau-neuf on Charante taken. 57 the Lord Changy slain. 134 Saint Chastie
in Perigueux 28 Challus a town of Limosin. 86 Chinon a town in Tourain. 47 S.
Christopher a steple taken. 19 Capieres hewne in pecces. 5 La Coche a captain.
16. is disco^fited. 33. hewn in pieces. 49 Coignae in Santonge, 57 Colombine a
captain. 75 Council of the duke de Alba 5 Courses unto the gates of Poitiers.
119 the third Civil war. 2
D
the Dauphinois are valiant men. 36 Daunoux came to rescue Poitiers. 122 the
Lord Desternay. 88 the Devise of the cornet of the Lord of Acier. 14 Dominico
Dalbe and his judgment. 145. put to death. 152 Dordonne a river. 19 Duke of
Swebrug or Deux ponts. 78 assembleth warriors. 79. writes to the king. 79
makes his protestatio^s and offers. 83. enters into France and takes la
Charity. 84. Passes the River of Vienne. 86. dies. 86. the description of his
army. 7
E
EDicte of the king. 17. touching offices. 18 Eis^elles a castle taken. 75
Enterprise on the castle of Lusignan 53. on S. John's d'Angely. 67. on
Angoulesm. 69 Entrich^t a captain killed. 155 Espondillan captain. 14 Encontre
before Lodun. 4^. at ^arnac. 61 an Enterprise on Bourges in Berry.
F
FAy la Vineuse a town* 144 the earl of S. Fiour. 88 S. Flowrant an Abbey. 50
Fort of Mouuans. 15 S. Poy taken. 46
G
Garniso^ in the towns yielded. 2 Gascour a captain slain. 136 Gran Villars
chief captain of the footmen. 87 Guerin Gansgorffe chief captain of the
footmen. 87 the Duke of Guise arriueth at Port. 117. the^ departs. 103 the
Lord of Guron. 100
H
HAns of There Is. 87 Hans Boucke. 87 Henry de Estaine. 87 Hercules the Princes
servant hewne in pieces. 6 Hewing to pieces of the Lord of Cipieres and his
train. 5 of the Lord of Amanzey. 6 of the Lord of Rapin, and others. 6
I
IAnlis death. 49 Iarnac besieged. 56. taken 56 at Iazena^l an encounter 35.
the number of the dead. 36 the Earl of Ioyeuse. 44 Judgments executed against
those of the religion. 210
K
The King comes to Amboise 125 gathers force. 126 The King, Queen mother,
and Cardinal come to Nyort. 168 The Kings coming to Angiers. 188
L
LAnceknights discomfited at Montgontour. 160 Lendurean a captain reuolteth.
68 Letters of the king repugnat to the Edict of peace. 4 Letters of the
Marshall of Mommorency. 116 Letters of the Queen of Navarre to the king. 20 to
the Queen mother. 24. to my Lord the kings brother. 26. to the cardinal of
Bourbon. 26 to the Queen of England. 38 Letters of the Admiral. 116 Leylle a
river. 28 Lille Bouchard upon Vienne. 44 Lodowicke and Henry earls of Nassaw,
brethren. 87 Lodune a town. 45. somned to yield 45. an encounter before the
same. 46. la Love marshall of the camp. 89 The Earl of Lude besieged in the
castle of Mirebeau. 45. then takes it. 46. besieged at Nyort. 46 Lusignan. 53.
taken. 99. yielded up again. 168
M
Mansfield earl an Alman. 87 Marshall of Montmorencye writes to the admiral,
116 Marquis of Mezieres. 20 The Lady Marquess of Rottelin. 77 a Messenger sent
to the prince of Condey for peace. 41 the Lord of Martigues. 12 Mazillac a
town taken. 18 Medoc an Isle taken. 76 Melle a town in Poitou taken 57
Mellusigne. 100 Menigours a village. 35 la Merry a captain slain. 93 Mestrall
a captain. 101 Millan in Roargues. 16 Mirebeau in Poictiers yielded 37. then
besieged and taken. 45 Mongontoue in Poitou. 153. a battle before the town.
157 Monsieur the Kings brother chief of the Catholics. 27 gathers power at
Orleans and Toures. 28. departs from Poitiers. 28 comes to Chastelleraut.
32. draws toward Chynon. 47. receives Rutters for his aid. 54. presents
himself in battle before Coignae. 58. passes over the River Charante. 59.
discharges part of his army. 98. besieges Chasteleraut. 140. tha^ raises
his siege. 142. gathers new power at Chynon. 152. the^ departs. 152
determines to give assault to Montgontour. 157. he encourages his men. 158
general Muster of the Catholics. 8 Monluc a knight enters into Perigueux. 86.
will succor Poitiers. 125 Montauban. 2 Montesquieu a Gascon. 62 Montgomery an
Earl. 12. set upon atla Motte. 52. sent into Angoulesme 69. sets the said
town in order. 70. is sent into Gascony. 85 gathers together the forces of
the Vicounts. 127. discor fiteth the lord of Tarides. 128 The Lord of
Moruilliers death. 94 La Motte captain, a Gascon. The lord of Mouuans. 14. his
fort. 15. he passes the Rhos ne. 16 his discomfiture. 29 the lord of Mouy. 88.
hurt at the coming forth of Nyort. 167 his death 167 Mucidan taken. 72
Mustring of the Princes horsemen 67. of the fotemen. 74 Montbrun and Mirabel
lords, depart from their ca^p with the discourse of their viage. 170 Martigues
death. 211
N
the siege raised from Nauerreis. 127 Earls of Naslau* Lodouic, and Henry
brethren. 87 the Nobility of Daulphinois. 7. excuse them selves of taking
oath. 7 Noutron a town taken. 85 the Lord de la Noue 60 Noyers in Burgondy. 9.
the same taken. 185 Nyort besieged. 94. given over Nimes the town and castle
taken. 201
O
Oisans a borough. 16 Ordering of the princes army. 32 Ordering of the army at
La Roche. 90 Orlea^s asse^bly of catholics. 28 Overthrow of the Lord of
Mouuaus. 29 Oath to the king. 6 Oath of the prince of Nauar. 68
P
Peace made. 1 Peace more hurtful tha^ war. 8 Pa^prow a vilage in Poitou. 34
the Lord of Pardillan. 59 Pope sends succor. 88 Parley of Angoulesme. 70
Pasquier a captain. 14 Paslage over Lot. 18 the Lord of Pierre Gourd. 15. his
discomfiture. 29 Peter Viret prisoner. 97 Perrol a captain slainae. 93 the
Lord of Pills takes the i will of Medoc. 76 the Lord of Pluueau. 59 Pluueas
regiment of foteme^. 62 the earl of Pampadon slain. 73 Pons in Santonge
besieged. 3^ taken. 34 Poitiers besieged. 120. all the discourse til the
raising of the siege. 142 Prince of Co^de disarmeth him self. 1. watched by
spies. 8. departs from Noyers. 9. with draws himself to Rochell. 10.
answers a messenger sent unto him for peace. 41. his death before Iarnac. 62.
his horslemen flee. 63. a notable deu^^e in his ensign. 65 Prince of Nauar
swears. 68 Princes depart from Nyort. 55 Princes constrained to take arms.
82 Princes march to join with the Almans. 84 Princes army described. 88
Partenay in Poitou lost. 166
Q
the Queen mother at Limoges. 88. encourages the soldiors. 89 the Queen of
Navarre and her children arrive at the ca^p. 20 her coming to Thony Charante
65 her departure from thence. 66
R
RAncon an Italian Marquis taken. Rapin hewn in pieces. 6 Regiments of
Dolphine, with the names of their chief captains. 13 Rutters come to aid the
kings brother. 54 Remedy to conserve the kingdom 103 Reynold Cracco. 87 Renell
a Marquis, 88 Request of those of the religion to the king. 101 Roannois a Duke
taken. 13. after set at liberty. 71 la Roche f^ucaut. 9 ^a Roche a village in
Limosin. 90 Rochelle. 1 the Lord of Rouray. 77 Ruffe^ a castle taken. 57
Request made to the Princes by those of Daulphine, and their answer. 170
S
Saints in Saintonge. 37 Saint Genais a town in Poitou taken. 97 Saint Titier
la Perch a town in Limosin. 99 Sanserre a town. 1 Sauigny a castle taken. 44
Saulmur a town. 11 Sanzay enters into Poitiers with bands of men. 145 Succor
from the duke of Aumale to late. 84 the Lord of Sessac taken 52 Siege of
Angoule^me 20. of Ponts. 30. of Mirebeau. 45. of Sanzarre 53 of Mucidan. 72 of
Bourge in Bourdel^^s. 76. of la Charity. 83. of Nyort. 94. of la Charity by
Sansac. 99. of Lusignan, 99 of Poitiers. 120. of Nauerre^^. 227. of
Chastelleraut. 140 Siege raised from Poitiers. 142. from Chastelleraut. 140 the
Lord of Soubize. 59 the Lord Strossy taken. 92 the lord steward S^^^ slain. 62
Skirmishes at Iazenail. 25. at Beaudo(...) on Marca. 56. at Bassac. 60. at
Coignac. 64. at Aesle in Lymosia, 89. at Port de Pille. 143. at Montgontour.
154 S. John d'Angely somoned to yield, with all the discourse of the siege. 176
the Lord of S. Heran hurt. 193
T
TAllard in Daulphine taken unawares. 11 the Parle of Tandes. 53 Tanlay in
Burgonie. 9 the Lord of Tarrides. 127. his overthrow. 128 the Lord of Tauanies.
154 the Lord of Teligny sent to Nyort. 65. leads men to succor
Chastellerault. 142 the Temporal goods of the church men sold. 51 the
Territories of the Queen mother exempt from preaching and the territories of
the kings brother. 5 at Tours the kings brothers assembly. 28 the Third civil
wars. 2 Towns taken by the prince. 10
V
VAcherie a captain slain 122 the Lord of Vallauoire. 14 Valfreniere a
captain slain. 76 Villages burnt in Perigueux. 32 the Lord of Villiers. 98 Vill
et lord of s. Mary slain 71 Viret a minister enprisond. 97 the Vicountes. 85
Visere a river. 28 La Viue a river of Montgontour. 156 Wolfgange duke of
Swebrug 78. the duke of Aumal writes to him. 9 Wolrard of Mansfield. 87 the
third civil War. 2 Warle in Bearne. 127
Y
The Lord of Iuoye. 49
FINIS.
A short Discourse of the Civil wars and last troubles in France, under
Charles the ninth.
The first Book.
Immediately upon the peace in March. 1568. and the same published in the
Princes army, before Chartres, the said Prince, the better to aduouch his ready
obedience The prince of Conde disarmeth him self.
to the King, did not only disarme himself and people, with present dismiss of
such strangers as were come to his succors, but also disgarrysoned with a
ready and dutyfull speed, every town and village, which he either held or
governed, wherein he was reverently obeyed upon the very first motion: only the
town of Rochell was exempted, as in respect of their ancient privilege,
pretending free dispense that way: The towns also of Montauban and Sanserre
delayed their consentes, as seeing matters not so surely quieted as the case
required. This peace gave great hope of perpetual benefit to such as seek
and embrace the quiet of France, albeeit, it brought forth a contrary
issue, for as it was, in some singular part, a confirmation of a former peace
in the year The third cyuill war.
1562. So is it also the beginning and original cause of a third civil war
incensed in this realm, whereof we mean to give present report.

Immediately that the said towns were surrendered, and the Prince absolutely
disarmed, ye gouerners of the provinces (which be all of the Romish religion)
seized upon all the towns, ports, passages and for tresses in France, bestowing
therein huge and mighty garrisons at their pleasure, and such as resembled
themselves in condition touching Garrisons put in the towns surrendered.
the general cause and quarrel, by which mean many of the reformed religion,
abiding still within those towns, happened into sundry heavy disquiets and
troubles both in their goods and provisions for releef, descending to their
enemies as pray and spoils, and also in their persons violentely enduring the
inciuil disposition of murdrous soldiers, inclined altogether to blood: wherein
notwithstanding his majesty dispatched ordinary commandments by letters
patents, and other expeditions to the gouerners and people directers of his
justice, as well to suffer them of the Religion to remayn within the towns of
their natural dwelling, as also to communicate in a general use and exercise
of their religion, goods honors charges and estates, according to the edict of
peace, yet there was either nothing don at all, or else to small purpose of
redress: for if they suffered any to reenter the said Those of the religion
shut out of towns
towns, they were such as they esteemed of least affection to the said
religion, and they both constrained in the very entry into the towns to
yield up such arms and weapons as they then had, and also such as neither
had, nor never proved the use of any, were enforced to bye and deliver them to
the officers, otherwise they should not have been received, the same being an
Means to disarme the^ of the religion.
express and manifest way to disarme them, and being once naked, the easier to
run upon and devour them, as it was truly supposed: themselves in this mean
while and their faction bare weapons, and raised greater guard than in the time
of war.

This syngular license or liberty to bear arms amongst themselves (without
that the Protestants durst either wear any or argue with them) did so whet
their sharp and eyger dispositions, that they attempted upon the naked
Protestants many actual and violent wrongs, the same thundering indifferently
as well upon the troops retired within the towns, as such as were denied to
enter, whose state was so much the more miserable, as either they wandered in
present peril, or were incerteyne of any assured place or safe stay of
aboade. The matter thus diuoluing from evil to worsse, the enemies of the
religion seeing themselves come almost to the last and extreme limit and end of
their intent, began to raise and do many disorders altogyther contrary to the
Edict of peace, yea and albeit the king did expressly auouche his unfeigned will
and pleasure to the execution of the said Edict simply and purely without any
modification or restraynte, yet his majesty afterward, gave out a contrary
declaration, enclosed Letters of the king contrary to the Edicte of peace.
in certain letters, sent to the lords of Montare and Saint Heram, to whom he
signified, y^ it was never his meaning that the Edict should take place, or
tolerate prechings in the countries of Auuergne, and Bourhonois, nor in any
lands belonging to the Queen his mother, the lords of Aniou and Allen^on, his
brothers, the L. Cardinal of Bourbon and Duke of Montpensier, the same
impugning manyfestly the said Edict, which did only reserve and exempt the
Prouostie and Vicontie of Paris.

There rested now no more to the enemies of the Religion, but proceed to the
execution of their enterprise in devouring the contrary part, albeit following
the counsel Counsel of the duke of Alba.
of the duke of Alba sent to the King, to sease first on the chief and
principal professers of the Religion, to the end to subdue with more ease the
meaner sort, using this phrase, (that the head of one Salmon was of greater
value than five hundredth Creuises) they resolved to entrap in every Province
the highest proppes and pillars of the said Religion, executing their first
effect on the Lord de Cipieres, son to the Count of Tande in Prouence, who
returning from Piedmount, where he had visited with reverence the Duke of
Sauoy, and lodging in Ferieux, a town in Prouence, was there murdered with.xxx.
ge^tlemen Amanzay.
of his train. The Lord d' Amanzey lieutenant to the lord d'Andelot of his
co^panyes of ^^e^ at arms, standing at ye gate of his house with one of his
little children in his hand, was also murdered: many other murders and bloody
slaughters were horribly thundered upon the side of the religion during this
time, as the bouchery done at Blandy upon Hercules, household servant Hercules
household servant to the prince.
to the prince of Conde, and the Lord de Rapyn, who being dispatched into
Langue dock for the service, and under safe conduct of the king, by the court
of of parlyament of ^houlous^ was sent headless out of this world: ye murders
also done at Roan, Amyens, ^ssoudun, Bourges, we infinite other places, wherein
diverse sorts and numbers of the said religion have bin unnaturally cut in
pieces, and yet neither justice done, nor remedy applied how soever they have
bin solicited by vehement suit.

In this mean while in the month of July, the gouerners of the provinces were
Request to offer an oath to the King.
earnest suitors to the Nobility professors of the religion, to offer an oath
of fidelity, according to a form sent by them, which they said his majesty
had already received, whereof the said states of Nobility, and specially they
of Dauphyne excused the^ selves, because (said they) if we only should do it,
and not they of the Romish opinion, they might charge us secretly with the
crime of Infidelity, as having assisted the part of the Prince of Conde, and
that for that cause such oath should be required of them and not of others,
the contrary whereof was fully verified by the Edict of peace, the king
declaring yt whatsoever was don in the said war by the prince, was done for
his service. By this mean and cause they excused to tender any such oath,
offering notwithstanding to do it, if they of the Romish side would toyne with
them, and so to be suitors to his majesty that it might be so.

Now notwithstanding ye edict, and in place to enterteine and observe the
purpose and meaning of it, ye gouerners of ye provinces sent commandment to
all yt were castle kepers within their charge, to survey and make numbers of
all such of the Romish religion only as were apt and able to bear arms,
wherein they were redily obeyed: with this further and express charge, that
such as had no armoure should forthwith provide them, remaining all in a
perfect readiness upon their first sommons or warning.

In ye next August after this view, grew General musters.
general musters without enhabling or allowing any of the reformed Religion,
which made the^ suspect the sequel, with fear that all was raised for their
ruin, and to restore and incense an other Civil war, seeing withal, that
they were handled worse and worse, as charged with such intolerable exactions,
that in common likelihode and truth, such time of peace was more perilous,
heavy and hurtful to them, than the fury of an open war, whose violence
they might by means either avoid or qualefie.

The Prince him self (being thus disarmed) The Prince and the Admiral watched.
was not without his high peril, for that neither he nor the Lord Admiral
could have such surety in any of their own houses, as either their doings or
lives were without danger, so that being watched and warded in and about their
Castles and capital places, were driven to go from house to house with their
wives and children in their arms, and finally the said Prince was constrained
to retire to Noyers in Burgongne, and the Lord Noyers. Tanley.
Admiral to Tanley, a house of the Lord d'Andelot his brother.

There were sent also sundry espialles to measure and judge the heighte of the
walls of Noyers* and conspire means to take the Prince, wherein, least they
should fail in the effect of their enterprise, there marched thither also
diverse troops of me^ of war. The same, albeit not so covertly done, but
came to the knowledge of the Prince, who (after he had given the King knowledge
of it) departed from Noyers the.xxiij. day of Auguste with the Princess his
wife great with child, the young Princes his children, the Lord Admiral,
Madame d'Andelot, with their several trains, taking their way into
Angoulmois toward the house of the Lord De la Rochefoucaut. And albeit all
the Ports, County Rochefoucaut.
Bridges, and Towns upon ^oere were either absolutely seized, or so directed
as they became impedimentes to their passage, yet such was their necessity and
peril, as they adventured to pass the said River by unknown foordes coming
at last not without extreme hazard, to the place of Rochefoucaut, from
whence, in respect of the doubtful security of that place, they retired to
Rochel. Immediately Rochell.
upon the brute of their retire to Rochel, was general amasse and leuies of
men ^ssemblie ^f the Ca^^olikes.
of war on al sides, reasse^bling also the camp, not altogether dismissed,
albeit dispersed since the former war: the same threatening no less malice
and peril to the Prince, than precise warning to enter into guard to resist
their imminent violence, whereupon he caused to come to him the Lord d'Andelot
which was then in Bryt^ayn^ ^ssemblie ^^ the ^rince.
with such force as he could any way levy, dispatching the like sommons to all
the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Captains of the reformed Religion.

The Nobility of the countries of Poitou, Sa(...)ge, Perigueu^, Angoulmois,
with other their fro^tier neighbors, were forthwith with ye said Prince with
certain companies of footme^ of the said countries, with whom he put himself to
the field, and took the towns of Saints. Coigna^, and S. Iean d'Angely in
Sainctonge, Niort, Partenay, Fo^tenay le Conte, Saint-mesent, Montagu, and
Melle in Poytou* and by mean of certain intelligence seized upon Blaye, and
therein was planted in garrison the regiment of footmen of the Lord de Pluueau.

It happened not many days before that Tallard taken.
those of y^ religion were not only chased out of ye town of T^llard in
Dauphine, but also oppressed with many private wrongs by ye contrary side, who
made stronger watch and ward within ye town, tha^ during y^ war: the same
kindling such indifferent fear and stomach in ye oppressed protestants, as
they drew into assembly with certain of Prouence, and retired to Gapensoys
(as having no aboade of furetie in their own Country) with who^ upon ye end of
this August they presented themselves in battaill before Tallard in ye very
dauning of the day, and entering forthwith the town by force and mean of the
Captain of the Castle, they killed about.lx. men which they found in arms.

In this mean while the Lord d'Andelot marching toward the Prince, directed
his way to Saulmur, as of purpose to pass there the River of ^^ere, enforcing
(as it were) so hard a passage, the rather to join with the Prince: There
were with him at that time the Count Mongomery, with many other great Lords,
with diverse numbers of horsemen and certain enseignes of footmen.

The Duke of Anjou brother to the (...)uke of (...)njou, bro(...)er to the
(...)ing.
King, being unfeignedly informed of the place where the Dandelot meant to pass,
dispatched the Lord Martignes to prevent him, who putting himself within
Saulmur thought so to withstand his passage over the River. Before d'Andelot was
within iij. leages of Saulmur, and at his bayt, the said Martignes departed
from Ang^ers, with.ij. hundredth horsemen, and.iiij. hundred harquebusears on
foot, whom he made to march along the caussey in this order: two hundredth
shot before, and the rest behind. And albeit ye d'Andelot had warning of his
coming, yet, he forced his own passage as it were in despite of his
suffraunce, and so with the discomfite of certain footmen, he entered Saulmur,
wherein there was no garrison before: By this means ye d'Andelot was defeated in
purpose, and his passage also so intercepted as he was driven to wade the
river, and with great peril aduenter his people through ye fourdes three
leagues beneath Saulmur: a thing which erst was never sought nor attempted of
any. He directed the^ his way by Poytou, and in passing by Loudun he took
prisoner the Duke of Roauuoys Duke de Roauuo^^ prisoner.
great Esquter of France, being in his house at Oyron, whom he sent after to
Rochel, and so joined his force with the Princes army in the country of
Poytou, about the beginning of October. 1568.

The Lord d'Acyer by warrant from ye The Lord d'Acier.
Prince, raised in Dauphyne. vij. regime^ts of footmen, and al of the
protestants of tho said Country, dividing them into these many numbers and
governors: The Lord de Montbrun had ten enseignes and one Cornette of
horssemen. The charge of the Lord d'Aucoune was eight enseignes and one Cornet
of Horssemen. The Lord de Saint Romain, being joined with the L. of Virieu
his uncle had.xvij. enseignes and one Cornet of horsemen. The company of the
Lord of Blacous was only xiiij. enseignes of footmen: the Lord de Mirabell
ten enseignes, the L. du Chelard. xij. enseignes, and the L. d'Orose only iiij.
enseignes. Besides, the said L. d'Acyer made levy in Prouence of one regimen
of footmen containing x. enseignes, under charge of y^ L. Paul de Mou^ans,
together with* ij companies ^he Lord ^e Mou^ans.
of horsemen, the one led by the L. Vallauoire, Captain of a hundred light
horsemen, and the other harquebusiers on horseback, under Capteyne Pasquier.

He raised also in ye country of ^aguedoc ^euies of ^en in La^^uedoc.
iiij. regiments of footme^, co^teyning.xxxv. enseignes, and bequeathed the^ to
ye conduct of ye Lords de Baudine his brother, ye Knight d'Ambres, la Mousson,
and Bouillargues, together with.ij. companies of light horsemen: the one of the
L. d'Acier himself, and the other of the L. d'Espondillan. There were also in
the company of the L. d'Acier about ij. hundredth Gentlemen well appointed: his
Cornet was green, drawn in form of a Hidra, with many heads of Cardinals and
diverse sorts of Monks, bearing the figure of a Hercules fighting with the^,
with ^eui^e of ^e ^d'A(...)r in his Corner.
this inscription above, Qui casso crudeles: containing the number and self
letters of his name intricately reuersed: laques du Crussol.

In the countries of Viuarez and Roargues, the said L. d*Acier dressed also.ij.
regime^ts of footmen, the one of the Lord Pierregourde, containing.xiij.
enseignes, and the other of the vicont de Pannat bearing.v. enseignes, besides
the company of the L. de Thoras Capteyn of.C. light horsemen: the general
assembly and meeting of the army was at Alles, a town in anguedoc.

It was hard to them of Dauphine to pass the Rosne and so join with the rest
of ye army, because their enemies had seized all the bridges upon the said
river: albeit ye L. de Mouuans (who was foremost in these companies) came to the
shore of Rosne on the side of Bais-sur-Bais, and there with a wonderful
diligence and speed within less than.xxiiij. hours, he raised a defensible
fort, the better to repulse ye enemy ye else would trouble his passage: by ye
aid of this fort his company gained ye other side of the river, and so
consequently all the rest one after an other, except the Lord de Saint
Romain, who passed over at P^irau^. This passage was made about the.x. and xj.
of September. 1568. and the said Fort called Le fort de Mouuans.

The L. de la Coche, a ge^tlema^ of Dauphine had like charge to erect a regime^
of footmen, albeit being discovered by the garrison of Grenoble, by whom he
endured certain waspish skirmishes, and after enforced to retire above an
ordinary speed to the territories of the duke of Sauoy, leaving his
lieutenant De saint Marie in the borow D'oysons, the same being won by him
not many days before, and now enforced to leave it and accompany the said Lord
de la Cloche into Sauoye, And seeing besides the difficulty to join with the
L. D'acyer, he wandered with his companies, and and dividing them into.viij.
enseignes of footmen and certain horsemen, marched toward Almayney, the same
Regiment being for the most part al of Lyonnoys and Dauphynoys, and thither
retired to eschew the persecutions of their own countries.

The Regime^ts of Dauphyne being passed the river of Rosne (as is said) the
Lord D'acyer began then to march with such speed and happy travel, that
about the xxiij. of September the army arrived at the said All'es, and from
thence drew a direct way to Myllan in Roargnes, dividing notwithstanding his
companies into seueralties in respect of the sterilitie of the country of
victuals and other necessities for war, and so came to the said Myllaw the
last of the said September.

The* xxviij. of the same month was Kings edict.
published at Paris an edict, wherein ye king draws out at length al chances
happened and passed within his realm for the matter of Religion, preferring
amongst the rest, that the Edict of Januarie gyuing the first sufferaunce or
leave to the Protestants to use an exercise of their religion, was but
prouisionall until his full age, and that his majesty had no meaning to force
observation of any Edicte made touching the said Religion, and therefore being
now at the age of maioritie, he pronounced general defense against all use and
exercise of the same religion thorough all his realm and contreys of his
obedience, charging by an arest irreuocable, and that upon pain of
confiscation of body and gods, not to have any other practice of Religion
within any of his said countries and lands than according to the catholic
church of Rome, which both he and his pred^ essours, have so long time held
and maynteined, enioyning precisely upon like p^in al ministers of the said
reformed re ligion to avoid his said realm within.xv. days with this
provision at last, that they of the said religon should not be in any sort
cyfted or searched in their consciences, albeit both after and notwithstanding
the said Edict, they have been oppressed more than before, and that with such
violence as diverse have revolted.

The same day also was published another Another edict of the King.
edict in the said parlyament at Paris wherein the king gave absolute order
that not only from thensforth he would not be served with any officers
professing that religion, but also they should be immediately suspended of
their estates and charges, with commandment to resign them into his hands
within.xv. days, otherways he would provide supplies of the Romish sort: it is
long since these edicts were upon the press, albeit they were not proclaimed
before now.

Now the Lord d'Acyer parting from Myllaw the v. of October took his way too
Cadenat, as of purpose to pass there the river of Lot, and in his way caused
to sommon the town of Marzillac the which without great denial, and under
certain conditions set open her gates, and the morrow after he took the tower
called Saint Christophle, with a pretty garrison of priests Marz taken and the
tower Saint Christophle.
in it. And so marching further he arrived at the said Cadenat the.x. of
October, with intent to pass the river of Dordone at Solliac, where in respect
the Lord de Mont-lu^ coasted him to withstand his passage, he assembled all his
army in a place called ^erac in Quercy, finding upon that view* xvij. thousand
harquebusiers, and vij. thousand Number of of the L. Daeiers army.
Pykes, and nine hundred horsemen in good point, and well disposed to fight.

In the same place he divided his army into two parts, the auantgard and
battaile^ in the vantgarde he set.vj. regimens of the Dauphynoys, with the
horsemen of the same country, and in the main battle he bestowed the
regimens of Languedoc, Prouence, Viu^rez, and Roargues, with the regimen of the
Lord d'Orose Dauphynois, al which companies passed by force over ye said river
of Dordone on the side of Solliac, from whence the said Lord of Mont-luc was
departed the day before, as having sounded the said river, and found it
passable almost in every place, and he not strong enough to hinder the passage
of such an army: his was the xiiij. day of the said October in the year
abouesayd.

Now that the Prince of Conde had received Angoulesme besieged.
the force and troops which the Lord Dandelot brought to him, he came to
besiege the town of Angoulesme, causing to be drawn thither from Rochel.
iiij. canons and. i^. Culuerins, with the which he made a breach on that side
toward Perigueux, the same albeit not sufficient, and therefore removed his
battery on that side which they call the Park: and because they that were within
used great diligence to fill up the breach, he made to be mounted upon the
vault of the temple of S. Claire, two culuerins to beat within the breach, the
same distressing so straytly them within, that in the end having mainteyned the
Angoulesme taken.
siege about. vii^. days, the Marquise of M^zieres their gouerner, yeldes the
town by composition to the Prince.

During this siege arrived the Queen The Queen of Navarre and his son
and young prince of Navarre her son, with madame Catherine her daughter,
accompanied with.iij. regiments of Gascoyn footmen, the one under charge of the
Lord De Pills, containing* xxiij. enseigns, an other governed by the Vicount
de Montamma, of.x. enseignes, and the third of.ix. enseignes, led by the
Vicount de Saint Magrin, with. vii^ cornets of light horsemen of the the same
country.

The said Queen being at Bergerac upon Regiment of ^a^^^yn.
her way dispatched to the Majesty's of the king and Queen, the kings brother
and Cardinal of Burbon, several letters upon the occasions y^ moved her to
come to the Camp with her son and daughter, and join them selves to the
general cause Letters of the Q of Navarre.
with the Prince of Conde her brother, the expedition was by the Lord De la
Motte, who before was sent to her by their Majesty's: In her Letters to the
King she complained chiefly of the rage and passion of the enemy, stretched
already so far that in effect it had confounded the hope of quiet promised in
the edict of pacification, not only evil observed, but altogether reuersed,
contrary to the royal promyses of his majesty to all his poor subjects of
the reformed side, the same mouyng by the synister inuentio^s of the Cardinal
of Lorain, as having, by general letters to the parlyaments, and others written
in particular, (whereof her self was witness in Guyenne) brought the effects of
the said edicts both vain and without execution: besides whilst he kept
matters in suspense, he had procured such horrible and infinite murders and
abused so long the mild patience of the protestants, as thinking upon no
bridle to govern his fury, he would not stick to lay hands of the princes of
the blood, whereof she commended a present and lamentable experience in his
conspiracy against the Prince her brother, whom his cruelty has enforced to
seek succors amongst his parents and allies: so that for her part, she and
her son resembling the Prince so near and dearly in proximitie of blood,
could do no less than offer him that which the direct law of friendship and
co^sanguinitie did demand, and therefore as she did assuredly stay and
repose her self upon the goodness and natural affection of his majesty
inclined rather to norish and preserve than tear and rent them up by the
roots: so she besought him with all humility to tolerate in the best part
their depar ture from their houses of intent to serve God, the king, and their
adherents in blood, and to impugn to the uttermost of their lives and power,
the violente malice of such as publicly have entered into conspiracy against
them: and lastely to believe that for these three causes only, they had put
their weapons between their hands, least they should be utterly extermined
from the view and face of the earth, according to their sinister resolutio^s,
like as also y^ said Cardinal devised to rauysh her son from between her
arms, perverting the power and authority of his majesty into unnatural
violence, as though the simple commandment of his majesty could not
sufficiently govern her and her son his majesty's most humble and obedient
servants, and so finally if his majesty would weigh in indifferent balance y^
faith of them, and infidelity of the said Cardinal (measuring y^ one and other
by a direct and straight line) his majesty should find more truth in their
effects, than in the words of the other.

In her letters to the Queen she stood upon three points that moved her to
leave her houses, and offer her life, goods and all her possible means to
advance the cause of Religion: The first was in respect of the service of
GOD, seeing the Cardinal and his confederates studied to root up from the
earth such as made profession of the true Religion: secondly to do service to
the souerayntie of the King, and with main life and goods to help that the
Edicte of pacification may be observed, and that France, the mother country
and nursse of so many sorts of people become not barreyn, and so suffer her
children to die: Thirdly that blood and co^sanguinitie did call her to offer
succoure and aid to her brother, harryed and pursued (against the Kings will)
by the malice of such as possess about his person such place, as no way is
due to them: neither can she better paynte out the Cardinal than by his own
colors, that is to say, as well by a number of tragical and lamentable
murders, whose complaint do sorowfully sound in every religious ear, as also
to see so many desolate souls hoping by the edict of pacification to enjoy a
plausible quiet and rest in their houses, miserably dispersed to their
adventure, and cruelly excluded from their soil of natural and ancient
aboade: The same Cardinal also and his wicked adherentes puffed up with a
general patience, that every one has used to their barbarous tirannie,
attempted against the Princes of the blood, with intent (in common likelihod)
to root up the main grafte and stock after they had wickedly defaced and
spoiled y^ tender branches. And because the zeal of their Religion did in no
sort induce them (as they have affirmed) she solicited the Queen to a
remembrance of the conspiracy done the last time she was sick, from the
which the Cardinal of Bourbon her brother was not exempted, albeit he was a
Catholic. So that it is only the blood of France which gripes them so at
heart, whereof what better experience and example can be aduouched, tha^ their
ungodly pursuit against ye Prince of Conde and his little children, to whose
succors (according to the dutiful office of blood and kynred) she would
never fail, desiring notwithstanding above all things, a good peace and so
well assured, as the Cardinal of Lorayne nor his adherents could either
dissolve or corrupt it.

She declared in her letters to the kings brother, how justly she was enticed
to her journey to Bergerac, with hope to pursue the full voyage for the service
of their Majesty's, with request that it would please him in good earnest, to
put his hand to the work, and help to defend the poor country of France
against the policies of such as seek to aspire to confound it, with a
thirste and desire (as it semes) to build their greatness and authority
upon the decayed and ruinouse stones of such, as (like firm pillars) do, and
have sustained it.

By her letters to y^ Cardinal of Bourbon her brother, that it was now more
than time, (if there were any at all) to gather stomach to him, and lay before
their Majesty's the lamentable state and desolation of France, whereunto he
was bound above the rest, in respect of the honor he bare to be a Prince of
the blood: She sommoned him also to remember the shame and outrage thundered
upon the person of his proper Brother, Systers, and Nephews, and all by a
Cardinal of Lorraine, who also abused him, as one of his suffragans. If all
these could not move him topitifull consideration of their case, at least, let
him remember Vespra Siciliana, pretended by his coadherentes the last time the
Queen was sick: And lastly, notwithstanding the separation of Religion, she
coniured him by the proper office of friendship and duty of nature and blood
concurring together, to consider their present pursuit against the Prince his
brother. All these letters were written and dated at Bergerac, the.xv^. of
September. 1568.

After the siege of Angoulesme, the said The Princes Camp.
Queen with the young Lady her daughter retired to Rochel, leaving the Prince
her son in the Camp, which afterward was called The Camp of the Princes,
because the said Princes of Navarre and Conde commanded together in the Army.

Whiles these things were thus ordered, the Duke of Aniou, brother to the King
and Chief over the Catholykes, forbear neither diligence nor means to advance
his force and erect his Camp at O(...). and other places there about, wherewith
he diffended toward Poyti^^ where understanding of the coming of the Lord
(...)er ^a^ching with the succoures he brought determined to fight with ^^^,
and ^o ^^^der him to join with the Prince of Conde, and for that purpose
departed from Poytiers with.iiij. thousand horsemen and.iiij. enseignes of
footmen, and entered with great iourneys the town of Perigueux: in like sort
the Lord d'Acier marched every day passing the ryuers of Leyll^ and V^ser^ in
the said country, and so the xxv. of October being near the town of Perigueux
and lodged in a village called S. Chastie, with the regiments of ^anguedock: as
he departed in the morning, the Lords of Montpensier, Guyse, and Bri^sac set
upon him both behind and before, albeit they were repulsed and so retired, the
Lord of Baudine being hurt in Baudine hurt.
that skirmishe with a harquebushot in the arm.

Being thus repulsed they went to the village not far from Chastie where were
lodged the Lords of Mouuens and Pierregourde with their companies, from whence
they were also repulsed because they were somewhat entrenched, and so retired
attending their foolemen which were not yet come. The L. d Acier dispatched
present word to y^ Lord of Mouuans and Pierregourde by the Lords d Orose to
fortify themselves within the village, promising them succors all the day of
his strength: All the Captains were of opinion to entrenche themselves within
the village, saving the Lord of Mouuans, who spread him self forth with upon
the fields, and then made march forth his carriage, and immediately after
the.ij. regimentes, albeit not far from the village he found those that had
affailed him in the morning attending his coming ready ringed and set in
batta^le: The said Lord of Mouuans saing these troops, and gathering by their
view and set order, their resolute mynds, choosed five hundredth harquebushers
as forlorn hope, whom he took upon him to lead against the Catholykes
(leaving the Lord Pierregourd with their battle.) These, after certain great
and sharp volues of shot were broken in a ^aye and put to flighte by the
horssemen of the enemy.

Immediately upon the disaray of these Overthrew of the L. of Mouuans and P.
Gourde.
forlorn hopes, the battaill began both to fear and doubt: and being hoatly
charged with the horsemen and Lances, pearcing amongst the enseignes, al was
disordered and put to flight, leaving the said Lords of Mouuans and Gourde
with.v. or vj. hundred soldiers dead on the place: on the Kings side dyed
certain, but none of mark, nor in great number: the peasants did both foil
and kill more protestants, than the soldiers. The Regimentes of Longuedo^
pursued still their way to ioyn with the vantgarde, and so to return together
to the succors of the Lord of Mouuans and Pierregourde, who^ they thought to
be entrenched within the said Village, albeit encountering contrary news of the
overthrow, they took way to Aubeterre, where they arrived the morrow after
together with those that remained of the said conflict.

After the taking of Angoulesme, the Pons besieged,
said Princes drue toward Saintonge, to besiege the Town and Castle of Pons,
within which the Lord of the place had garrisons of footmen, which greatly
oppressed those of the Religion. They began forth with to batter the Town,
and so by a breach, the Town was taken without much resistaunce, albeit those
of the Castle maynteined the matter, whervppon the Protestants were enforced
to a new battery. Now, the Prince hearing of the Lord d Aciers coming to
Aubeterre, and of his overthrow, left all their footmen with certain
Cornettes of horsemen to continue the siege, under the charge of the Lord de
Boccard, great master of their artillery, and with the rest of their
horssemen they came to Aubeterre.

The first of November the L. Admiral with the horsemen of the vauntgard, went
from Aubeterre to go to Berry, whether the Kings brother was come, and to this
end all the harquebushears brought by ye Lord d Acier, were commanded to
attend the enterprise of the Admiral, who hearing news of ye departure of ye
enemy from yt place, retired himself to Aubeterre, to deliberate with the
princes, and every of his company into his quarters, without any thing doing.
Their general and resolute advise was to pursue the Kings brother wheresoever
he went, and that as near as might be, the rather to entice him to battle,
upon which devise and to which effect the arm set forward in orderly march
the next morning: the regiments of Languedoc, Roargues with them of the Lord
d'Orose, and the rest of the prouincials were made the vauntgarde, and the
remeynder of the Dauphinoys in the main battle.

The Kings brother in this mean while hasted to Chastelleraut where the rest
of his Army was assembled, pursued continually in the tail by the Princes
power till they got a Village called Angiers, two leagues from Chastelleraut,
where were lodged part of their footmen of the vauntgarde.

The Kings brother finding great companies of footmen and horssemen assembled
at Chastelleraut, together with the Suyzers who brought sixteen Canone and
certain Coluerines with field pieces, determined to entrenche himself
strongly before y^ town (as in deed he did) and tarry there the coming of the
Princes. Whereof the lord Admiral the x. of November even from the point of
the day, renged his men of arms in battle and squadrons hoping to fight,
whereof he dispatched spedie advertisement to the other Princes then at
Chauuignie upon Vien, who likewise sent toward him forthwith the harquebusers
of the battle, and themselves leading the horsemen of the same battle, found
when they were near the place, the Admiral retiring, and could not that day
give battle, whether it were by reason of the trenches wherewith the
Catholics camp was strongly environed, or by reason of the thick mistes and
clouds which so darkened the morning, that hardly one could discern an other.

The Princes being thus come before Chauuignie, they sommoned the guard and
garrison of the Castle which were footeme^, to yield themselves and charge,
whereunto they condiscended without difficulty upon composition to depart the
castle, their lives saved, which was truly performed, every one bearyng in
his hand a white rod, and in that order went to Poytiers. And so as soon as
it was purged of the Papists, it was burned, to the end they should not thither
return, and be impediments to the passage over Vienne.

All this while the Duke d'Aumalle was upon the coast and country of Lorraine
with certain force by him assembled of purpose to hinder the entrye of
strangers into the realm for the aid of the princes. He understood that the
Lord de la Cloche was passing by that Country, to go into Almanie, and was
already upon the lands of the Bishop of Strasbourge Whereupon his footmen
began to charge him the.xij. of Nouembre in the morning: the Lord de la Cloche
made valyant resistance, and repulsed diverse times the said charge, greeuing
great numbers of them. Albeit being ouerlayde with fresh supply of companies,
after he had long endured the encounter, was in the end put to chase, and taken
with diverse of his troop, and so led to Metz in Lorraine: this skirmish
denoured of his people about a hundred or six score, not without great loss
of bot Souldioures and Captains of the say d'Aumalle.

The Princes now not able to have battle with the kings brother by the reasons
aforesaid, reuersed their way and went from thence to Vienne, of purpose only
to provoke him into the sield, and so give him battle.

The Lord of Boccard, whom (as you The castle of Pons taken.
hard) the Princes left at the siege of Pons having taken the Castle by
composition, and sent the Lord and Lady of the place prisonners to Rochel,
marched with his Artillery to join with the Princes camp, which the kings
brother thought to intercept, and for that cause passed Vienne by a Bridge of
boats which he caused to be made at Chastellerant, drawing directly to
Pamprou, near unto which his vauntgarde governed by the Lord Montpensier,
came the.xvij. of Nouembre. The Princes camp likewise marched to join with
the Lord de Boccard, arriving the same day somewhat late at Pamprou, near the
Lord de Montpensier, the same evening there were offered and received certain
short skirmishes, by reason the night gave let to their longer fight: the army
of the Princes camped nere the very houses of Pamprou, half a league from the
lord Mountpensier, who caused to kindle great fires as though he would encampe
there, stealing away albeit about midnight, and went to Jazenail to join with
ye kings brother that was there with the battle.

The morrow after being the xviij. of the same month, the Princes army was
ready ringed in battle at the first appearing of the day, who hoping to find
eftsoon the lord Mountpensier, where they left him the day before, determined
to bid him battle, but seeing he was so gone, as neither form nor figure
remained of his being there, the Prince spedde him so swiftly in the pursuit,
that he arrived at Jazenail almost as soon as he, and there began a warm
skirmishe from noone till night: the Admiral was not there at the beginning,
as following the chase of certain troops drawing toward Menigours, where he
took about lx. chariotes charged with baggage of the kings brothers camp, and
amongst others, the baggage of the duke of Guyse, and the County Bryssack,
with the most part of their silver vessel, all being a pray to the
souldioures. In the evening the Admiral arrived with the troops which he led.
Immediately after whose coming, the skirmishe qualified, the Princes army
retiring into a wood nere to that place toward Menigours. This was the first
proof and experience of the Dauphynoys which were in the Princes camp, who
not withstanding did so well as they deserved and had high commendacion: they
drive the Catholics from three or four of their trenches, and enforced them
to leave the next town to their camp, albeit they had sundry aduauntages of
the Princes footmen, as well by the multitude and numbers of shot which
thundered violently to defend their trenches, as also that their horsemen were
always a ready and singular succor to their footeme^, which the princes
horsemen could not do by reason of hedges and maine ditches, besides the
natural and troublesome situation of the place.

In this skirmish were brought to the earth on both sides about three hundredth
bodies, and almost all footmen, the number notwythstanding of the dead being
far greater of the Papists than Protestants, whose army being now in great
need to be refreshed, as having had neither rest nor releese for two days for
horse nor man, caused their footmen to march the morning after to Menigours,
to recreate themselves, and join with the Lord de Boccard, and all the
horsemen after they had presented themselves in order of battle at the place
where they were the day before, retired also thither without any thing doing.

The Kings brother after this skirmishe, took his way to Poytiers, and the
Princes drew toward Mirebeau a Town in Poictou, four leagues from
Poytiers, which was rendered without resistance (...)ebeau (...)endred.
to the Princes, who with their army soiourned there about eyghte days.

The Queen of Navarre being now at Rochel, wrote to the Queens Majesty of
England, the reasons of her departure from her own and soueraign countries: in
the first she preferred the cause of Religion, so oppressed with the inueterate
and barbarous tyranny of the Cardinal of Loraine. assisted by people of his
own humor, that she accounted in shame to be numbered amongst the faithful,
if she did not oppugn that horrible error with all such helps as God would
stir up, confederating her self and son with so holy and honorable
societies of Princes, resolved (under the favor of the great God of Arms) to
spare neither blood, life nor goods, to effect so blessed a purpose. Her
second reason (resemblyng also the first) was in respect of her Service to the
king, making the ruin of the church the confusion of him and his kingdom,
with whom because she and her son had the nearest affinity, they thought
it also their first and propre office of duty to intercept such, as
usurping upon the natural goodness and enclynation of their King, would
make himself the Author of his own destruction, with suborned imposition
(albeit he is one of the most true princes of the world) to be a falser of his
promise, and that by inventions of their own contriuing, to infringe the edict
of pacification, which so long as it was preserved, enterteined a joyful peace
between the king and his faithful subjects, and now being broken, does convert
the said fidelity of his people to a lamentable war, and so enforced as
there is not any one of them which has not been drawn into arms by violence.
The third cause, peculiar to her self and son, was, in that she saw the
ancient enemies of God and her house, with a shameless and perilous malice,
bent utterly to exterminate their race: Besides, as she beheld on the one side
with pitiful eyes the Prince her brother, who to esc^ue the mortal peril
pretended against him, was constrained (before he entered into arms) with his
biggebellied wife and little children, to search places of security and that
in such desolation, as the very remembrance is able to kindle remorse in any
christian heart: so on the other side, being credibly informed of diverse
expeditions and trains to ravish from between her hands her dear and only
son, she could do no less tha^ to imparte her self and son, with the said
consociacio^, and to share with them in their general fortunes, according to
the due office and bond of blood: and yet not to undertake arms to contend
against heaven (as the good catholics do suggest) and much less to war upon
the sovereign majesty of the king, but rather to confront those who with
their ancient spite to the general cause, do conioyne that whereof they have
given so many particular and public effects.

About the end of November the Admiral departed from Mirebeau in the night,
with all the horsemen and shot of the vauntgarde, drawing toward
Pontd'Auzance, as having aduertiseme^t that there were at that place certain
troops of the sovereign lieuetenaunts camp. And being there, he found in
deed the Regiment of footmen of the Count Brissack, whom he charged and put
them in part to flight, killing two or three hundred of them: he was in mind to
charge their horsemen which were also there, saving for the vehement rain
which enforced them to retire to Mirebeau, besides he had no certainty whether
the Prince of Conde were near enough to succoure him or not: the said Prince
was withdrawn the same evening with the horsemen and shot of the battle on
that side of the three s^^ples, thinking there to find certain other trowpes,
where of he had had advertisement, notwithstanding, finding the place
abandoned, he bended toward Auzance, and met in the way the vauntgarde
returnyng, which he did also.

As the Prince was in a castle of the Bishops of Poictiers, skarce a league
from Mirebeau, there came to him a Currier or Messenger from the Queen mother,
with charge chieflye to induce him to demand peace as a matter wherein it
belonged to him of duty to prevent his majesty, to whom he answered that he
was forced to enter into arms as his surest warraunte against the oppression
of his enemies, and not to attempt any matter prejudicial to the Majesty
royal, or his sovereign estate, whom he reverently held for his king
ordained of God, besides, the attempt of him and his, intended no further than
to entertain a charitable quiet in their conscience, a safe exercise of their
religion, and lastly, a tolerable defense of their lives, honors, and
possessions against the tyranny of an ungodly Cardinal of Lorayne and other
the enemies and common troublers of the public state of this Realm, and
precisely of the poor professors of the Gospel, contrary to the will and
meaning of his Majesty avouched by so many general edictes and other
particular expedicions discending from himself: for which causes they rested
upon resolucion to maintain perticularly against the said Cardinal and his
adherents, as the spring, root, and original of the ruin and thretning
subversion of the croune, and them to pursue as perjured and infringers of the
common faith, co^iured enemies to this estate and unity of the realm: lastly
touching himself, he has given sufficient proof and experience to the whole
world of his humble desire and inclination to peace, wherein his facility and
ready consent to y^ last peace do both best approve him, and also argue to the
world the strange perils offering to whelme him and the faction of his
religion. And therefore because his majesty is presently enuironned with his
enemies, whose principal condition is to close his ears against the
lamentable complaints of his oppressed people, he determined to be the
reporter of their doings in his own person.

This was the answer which the Prince gave the messenger in the Hall of the
castle, and that in the presence of a great number of Lords, knights,
gentlemen, and captains of his army: it was supposed in the camp that he came
to other end, as to espy the force of the Princes.

In the beginning of December, the Princes departed from Myrebeau, and drew to
wards Champigni, a Castle belonging to the Lord de Mountpensier, guarded with
vij. or viij. skore soldiers: they battred the castle on that side toward
the church, making a breach in the wall before the Hale of the said place:
they that were within rendered by composition, and in their place entered the
Captain Spondillan with certain numbers of shot, who immediately for sooke it
by commandment of the Princes, and left it at liberty: The morrow after the
artillery marched before the castle of the Lord de Sauigny, which without
great resistaunce saving certain volies or shot of the canon, was taken, they
within put to the edge of the sword, and the castle burned. During the siege
of these two castles, the regiments of footmen of the Lords of Mountbrun and
Myrebean, were at Lyllebouchard upon Vien, striving to win the passage,
wherein as they profited little, so they spedely retired. The kings brother
being gone from Poictiers, and having the succoures brought him by the count
de Loyeuse governor of the country of Languidock, in the absence of the lord
d'Anuille marshall of France (which were hesides the Regimen of the Lord of
Serlebourg, certain companies as well on foot as horsbacke) besieged the town
of Mirebeau not long since rendered to the Princes: This town was defended by
three companies of footmen, whereof two were governed by the captain la Board,
and the other by the Captain of the castle. At the beginning they battered
the town which was abandoned for want of sufficient supplies to furnish the
walls, all retiring within the said castle.

The town being taken, about the xij. of December, the kings brother left the
Count du Lude, governor of Poyctou, to continue the stege of the castle, with
two canons, two culuerines, and one regiment of footmen: he taking his way to
Lodun a town in Poyctou, the which not many days before was rendered to the
obedience of the Princes, sommoned it forthwith by a trumpet, to whom the lord
d'Acyer governor there, answered, that as he was set in charge of y^ town by
the Prince of Navarre. lieutenant general for y^ king in Guyen, so he would not
only kepeit to his use without further render or restitucio^, but also (to his
best) repulse what violence or force so ever were offered. This answer reported
to the kings deputy, he made his army march near the said town to a place
called the Roches.

The siege continuing still before the castle The castle of Mirebeau taken.
of Mirebeau by the said Count of Lude, in the end procuring a parley, he
entered subtillie about the xvj. of December 1568. The Captain la Board with
certain soldiers were there killed, the rest were saved.

As soon as the kings Lieuetenant had given sommons to render Lodun, the lord
d'Acyer advertised the Princes of his state, who departed forthwith from Towars
with the battle, and the Lord Admiral from Monstrueil-belay, with the
vantgarde to give succors to the said Lord d'Acyer. The xvj. of December they
presented their whole ca^pe in battle before Lodun, about half a quarter of a
league from y^ kings camp, who likewise was in battle in the said place of
Roches, where The meeting of the two armies
were great numbers of artillery discharged as well of the one as other side,
neither was there any other thing all the day, except some little and light
skirmish which devoured no man: in the evening every one retired into his
quarter until the morrow that the two camps did eftesoones discover in order
of battle at the same place, fulfilling also the like the.iij. day without
other thing doing than certain unhurtful skirmishes.

The.xix. of December the Kings brother disca^ped, who albeit drue toward
Chynon, yet such was the slownesse of his march that day, as the next
morning the two armies were all day in battaill order on that side toward
Chynon, sending only certain shot of artillery one against an other without
hurt of either side: the same (as it may be presumed) moving by a vehement and
slipperie cold, that the horsemen could not advance: it was a wonder to see
two armies in camp in such a hard and diverse season, the winter being so
extreme as has not bin seen in many years before, whick kindled sundry
sorts of diseases in diverse soldiers on both sides, and after dyed in
lamentable numbers: toward the evening the Kings Lieuetenaunt retired to
Chynon, albeit certain Captains of the Princes army charging upon their
tail, discomfited about vij. or.viij. score Suyzers, and three enseignes of
footmen suddenly set upon as they were refreshing them selves in the village.

The Princes returned to Touars, and the Admiral to Monstrueit-beley, to
winter there, leauyng the Lord d'Yuoy brother to the Lord de Ianlis, as
gouerner within the town of Loudun, and for the guard of the same, the
regimens of the L. of Mont-brun and Mirabel, with.ij. cornets of horsemen: the
Lord Ianlis not long after dyed of a disease in Almayne.

The Lord de la Coche who (as is said) was led prisoner to Metz, was this.v. of
January. 1569. murdered by certain garrison soldiers of the town, who taking
him out of prison and bynding him with Mychallon his ensign bearer, told him
they were commanded from the King to lead them to the Court, and so exchange
them for other prisoners within the princes Camp: albeit they were no sooner
cut of the town than they were stabbed with daggers, and so murdered

Near unto Saulmur is an abbey called Saint Florent, wherein were two hundred
Abbay S. florent taken.
footmen, as a garrison to the Catholics, who with their abbay were besieged in
this month of January by the vauntgarde of the Princes, and they after they
had beaten a breach entered by force-putting all that were beseeged to the mercy
of the sword: immediately after the garrison of Saulmur The Abbay recovered.
recovering the said Abbay, used the like execution of all that they found.

Whiles the princes soiorned at Towars, they dispatched into Gascoyne the Lord
de Pills, as well to levy new force, as other matters of special charge: At
his first arrival he took Bergerac and Saintfoy, and having speedily erected
certain forces of horsemen and footmen, he bestowed his footmen, and drew
toward Perigueux with his horsemen, and passing along the place where the
Lords of Mouuans and Pierregourde were discomfited, he fyred many villages,
and killed as many peisauntes as he met, as a revenge of the blood of so
many Souldioures which they had overcome and slain in the same overthrow.

The Kings army wintred at Chynon, Saulmur, Poyctiers and other places
thereabout: the princes army in the beginning of February departed from Towars
and Monstrueu-beley, discending lower intoo the country to find vittells: the
vauntgarde drew to Partenay and the battle to Niort, harboring in the places
thereabout.

The third day of this month, the Lord de Boursaut captain of a hundred
lyghts horsemen and his company, were sodeinly set upon within a village near
to Towars, by the Count Brissac, accompanied with vij. or.viij. hundred
horsemen presently issued out of Saulmur. There were many of them taken, and
many killed and the rest, as the Lord de Boursaut and others, saved themselves
by help of the dark night.

In the beginning of February y queen of Navarre came to ^^or^, where she
found the Princes, with diverse other great Lords, with whom she entered A
sale of the principal goods of the Church.
into Counsel for the affairs and disposition of the war: There was agreed
a sale of temporal goods of the Churchmen, toward the mayntenaunce of the
general cause, and for y^ purpose were drspatched present letters under the
names and authority of the said Queen, Princes of Navarre and Gonde, the
Lord Admiral, Dandelot, and Rochefoucaut, with words of ample power given to
their procurors and commissaries to promise and bind them for warrant
requisite in such case: These comissions were published in towns holden under
their obedience, with present sale and alyenation made accordingly, the same
raising great sums of money.

Whilst the said Queen, Princes and other stats remained in consultation with
in Nyort, certain horsemen of the Lord of Verac, (captain of a hundredth light
horsemen) making often incursion upon the next enemies, took the Lord of
Cassac lieutenant of the men at arms to the Duke of Guyse, as he was bayting
in an Inn, whom they led to Niort, and so to Rochell.

The Count Mountgomerey lodgyng in a village called la Motte, was charged upon
ye sodeyn by the Count Brissac, and enforced to retire within the Castle of
the same place, seruyng somewhat to his defense: so that he received no other
loss than his younger brother, which was led to the Castle of Luzignan: this
was the xij. of February.

The Princes now determined to perform their enterprise upon the castle of
Luzignan, and to take it, the same mouyng (as it seemed) either by a practyse
of Montgomories brother, or else by some secret intelligence they had with
the Governors Lieutenaunte of the same place, where they were in good order,
and upon the sudden the.xx. of February very early in the morning, diverse of
their Captains and soldiers entering within, albeit, being discovered their
further attempt was intercepted, and they returned without any thing doing.

The Count of Tande governor for the King in Prouence, in the beginning of
November the year before, put himself upon his way with three thousand
footmen and certain horsemen of that country marching intoo France as he
was commanded, and passing by Dauphine, the baron of Adretz, who also had
leuyed a Regyment of footmen containing.xvij. enseignes, joined with him, too
pass also in company into France: In their way they came by the siege of
Sanserre, which the Count Mertiuengo an Italyan and gouernoure of Gyran had
long continued, where as they spente long time without aduauncyng the end and
purpose of the siege, so procuryng the siege to be raised: the Count ^ande
drew to Poyctou to the Kings Camp, where he arrived about the end of
Februarye, and the baron of Adretz marched into ^orayn to the Duke d'Aumale,
sent thither (as you have heard) to withstand the entry of strangers into
France.

The Kings brother having received these new succors, and made show to his
men of arms of two hundred thousand frankes which the house of Paris had lent
the King upon the temporal goods of the Church men, he gathered ageyn his
Camp, and drew toward Angoulmoys.

Immediately after in the same month, arrived two thousand and five hundred
Reistres, under the conduct of the Counties Reyngraffe and Bassompier, who
being much harried in their long and paynful journey to come into France,
refreshed themselves certain time about Poyctiers before they joined with the
Kings Camp, who approached still to Angoulesme, and tarried them. And because
he would have the liberty of the River of Charente, to pass and repasse at
his pleasure, he dispatched the Lord de la Riuiere a Gentleman of Poyctou, for
to sease upon the Town and also the Castle of larnacke.

The Princes now being truly enfourmed what way the Kings Camp took,
departed from Nyort, and upon the beginning of March aryued at Saint lean
d'Angely, marchyng from thence with their battle to Saints. The Admiral
with the vauntegarde lodged at Coygnac and the d Andelot with the horsmenne and
shot of the said vauntgard, drawing with them two Coluerines and two field
pieces to besiege the Town of Iarnacke: The Captain la Riuiere the same day
was on horssebacke with his troop of horssemen to beat and skowre the strayte
that lay toward Coygnac^ albeeit discoueryng a far off the Lord Admiral,
he returned in great dyligence, and without staying in the town of larnack,
he enclosed him self speedyly within the Castle, which foorthwyth was
enuyronned and besieged on all sides by the Admyrall, who as soon as his
artillerye was planted, began to batter toward the gate of the Castle, the
same continuing all the day, and at night the Captain demanded parley, which
the next morning was granted together with a composition by the Lord de
Bricquemau, (left there to direct the siege by the Lord Admiral) the Castle
thus taken, the Vicont Montamma entered with his Regiment to defend the said
passage.

The.vj. of this month the Prince of Conde with the Admiral and d'Andelot,
and the horsemen as well of the vauntgard as main battle, except the Lord of
Bricquemaus regimen which was at Iarnack went to Beauuoir upon Matta, where was
the Kings brother with his army: There the Prince of Conde ringed in battle his
horsemen, leaving in covert behynd a hill certain dru^mes, sounding as though
his footmen had bin there, notwithstanding there was nothing done that day
other than certain skirmishes against the d'Andelot: The Reistres of the
catholics were not as yet joined to the Catholics Camp, albeit they arrived
very shortly after.

The Kings brother being defeated of his purpose and mean to pass the River
of Charente at Iarnac, marched up higher, and a little beneath Angoulesme, he
passed the River. In his way he took the castle of Ruffel, wherein were four
score Souldioures, whom he put to the sword: He took also the Town and
garrison of Melle, in the country of Poytou, who also tasted lamentably of the
like compassion. And being thus over Charente, he came to Chasteau-neuf,
standing upon the shore of the River, wherein was a garrison of fifty
Soldiers, who without resistance rendered the Castle.

The Princes understanding that the Catholics had wo^ne the passage, departed
from Saints, and came to lodge at Coygnac, and the Admiral with the
vau^tgarde at Iarnac, and thereabout.

The Friday the.xj. of this month, the Kings brother with all his horsemen and
certain numbers of shot, presented himself in order of battle before Coygnac,
causing in the mean while to be built up ageine the wooden bridge of
Chasteau-neuf, battered and beaten down by the said garrison. The Princes were
then within Coygnac accompanied only with their traynes and certain Gentlemen
of their retinue: (their men of arms being lodged in the Villages thereabout)
and therefore sent immediately to the Admiral for certain companies to march
toward them: the d'Andelot going thither, heard news in the way, that the
kings brother had drawn his men of arms before Coignac: The d'Andelot after he
had talked with y^ Princes returned to Iarnac.

The morrow the.xii. of March, y^ Princes army marched toward Chasteauneuf,
the Prince of Co^de with y^ maine battaill lodging at Iarnac. and the Admiral
with the vauntgard went before Chasteau-neuf to hinder the building of ye
bridge, and withstand the passage over the river: albeit as he was come near
the place, he understood that the Catholykes had set up the bridge, and passed
over with part of their army, entrenching them selves on the other side the
Bridge, to resist all impedimentes to their full passage, where upon the
Admiral returned to lodge at Bassac, leaving to Govern the retraite of his
companies, the light horssemen of Soubise and Pluueau, who remained behind,
ringed in battle in a plain near the said Chasteau-neuf until night. The
army of the Princes was greatly dispersed in diverse Towns and Villages,
being far distaunt one from an other.

In ye mean while the catholics camp passed over Charente all the night, with
as great speed as might be. And because the prince of Conde had no intent to
fight the next morning, as not having his forces nere him, he dispatched the
lord Perdillan to the Admiral, to advance the companies of the vauntgarde in
such diligence as to be ^ith him at Iarnac upon the dauning of the day, which
y^ Admiral performed according to the speed and necessity of the message,
albeit not all in such exact readiness as the case required, as lacking the
Lord Pluueaus horsemen and his regimen of footmen, left (as you have heard) to
govern and guard the retraite of the vauntgarde.

The morrow after being the.xiij. of March, the Prince with his horssemen
that were already arrived, presented himself in the morning in order of battle
before the enemy above the village of Bassac. When all was arrived, the said
Prince returned with the battle, and drue to Matta near S. Iean d'Angeli,
which the Admiral did also, leaving behind to direct the retraicte, the Lord
de la Noue, who retiring a reasonable pass, and not yet far off, was charged
with a great oste of horsiemen which forced him to take the charge and chased
him to Bassac, where the Admiral was ready to resist, and repulsed the
Catholykes until the other side of the village.

In the mean while certain troops of shot of the Catholics entered the said
village, and buckled to skirmishe with the Admiral, who likewise drove them
out of the village, notwithstanding they were relieved by the rest of the Camp
that followed at hand and returned to the Uillage.

The Lord Admiral seeing the Catholykes army so near, dispatched a
Genttleman of speed to the Prince, to advertise him that the whole Camp of
the contrary side was there and almost upon his back, so that seeing no mean
to retire without fighting, desired him to advance such powers as he had of
the battaill. Immediately the Prince reculed till he was very near the
Admiral, rynging himself in battaill at the foot of a hill on the left hand.

The Admiral was in order of battaill on the right hand along a little
Coppies, looking toward Bassac. He had about him the Lord Pluueaus regimen
of five enseignes of footmen, who made a long skirmishe: and seeing in the
mean while that the Catholics were ready to charge him, coming between the
Prince and him, turned his face right upon them, and with certain Cornettes
which were with him, pressed upon them so hoatly, that he brought to the
ground a great number, and so passed further. At the same instant the Prince,
after he had preferred his prayers to God, went to the charge, and with great
courage entered the battaille: upon who^ rushed a great squadron of Reistres,
and set upon him on the flanck or side: at which charge his horse was killed
and fell upon him, and his horsemen put to the chase, whom the catholics
pursued: albeit as they passed further, a french ^entlema^ named the L. of S.
Iean knew the Prince of Conde, and also the L. d'Argence, both which promised
him to save his life, or to leave theirs in the adventure: whereupon as an
Archer being descended on foot to help to shifte the Prince from under his
horse, and had set him upon his feet, one named Montesquion (thought to be
the Capteyne of the guard to the Kings brother) knowing the Prince, shot him
thorough the head with a Pistolet: the blow entering behynd and came forth
under his eye. The Lord Steward a Scot, and Chastelier Poitant, after they were
taken, were also stabbed with daggers and murdered: the said Chastellier by
one named Cosse^us, besides whom were slain in this encounter about.ij.
hundredth men, and xi prisoners: amongst others, the bastard of Navarre, the
Lord de la Noue, whose horse was killed at the first charge, the L. of
Teligni, de la Balbe, de Soubize, and de la Love. On y^ catholics side were
slain ye Count de la Mirande, the L. de Monsalletz, the Barons of Ingrande
and Prunay, with many other.

After this charge, one part of ye horsemen drew to S. Iea^ d'Angely together with
the Admiral, d'Andelot, ye Count de la Rochefoucaut and d Acier, with great
numbers of horsemen: the rest took the way to Coygnac.

In this encounter the Prince had no other footme^ than the L. Pluueaux
regiment heretofore mentioned, all the rest of his footmen was retired by his
commandment to Iarnac, as being not of mind to fight y^ day: there was made
at Iarnac a Bridge of boats to pass the River Charente in times of need, over
which ye footmen seeing the overthrow passed to the other side the river, and
then brake it in pieces for fear of pursutes, and so retired to Coygnac. where
were the Princes of Navarre and Anguyen. The Artillery led from Coygnac, was
brought thither again, having made no great way.

The said Princes of Navarre and Anguyen (now Prince of Conde) departed from
Cognac the next morning with such horsemen as were retired to them: they
arrived the same day at Saints in Sainctonge, leaving their footmen at
Cognac, to maynteyne head against the Catholics, who the morrow after being
the.xv. of March, presented themselves in battaill before Cognac with
horssemen and footmen, making countenance to besiege it. There was a great
skirmishe on the side of the park by mean of a sallie made upon them by the
L. de Baudine, in which encounter were left dead in the place about two
hundredth bodies, and great numbers hurt, which made the Catholykes retire the
same day returning to Jarnac.

In the mean while, the Admiral understanding the Princes were retired to
Saints, went thither to them, and with the horsemen of their train, he
brought them to S. Iean d'Angely, and from thence to Thome-Charante, whether
the Queen of Navarre came to communicate with them of their general affairs.
And now, albeit the vnwoorthynes^e of the Princes death, did so amaze the
Gentlemen and Soldiers of the army, as they seemed to waver in variety of
doubts, yet the Admiral (no less wise than well advised) knit them again
with new persuasions of courage by all his possible means. And sure this
death was sufficient enough to cool and qualify such as had no other regard
than to the loss of such a Governor of war, but considering more near the
actions of this Prince, and of how long time he had bin given to the sincere
service of his God, King, and Country: they assured them selves more than
before. They are persuaded, that there nothing happened to him, which he did
not either foresee or foretell according to the poesy written in the enseigne
of the company of his me^ of arms in these words: PRO CHRISTO ET PATRIA,
DVLCE PERICVLVM. And besides, ye said Prince was wont before his death to say in
his familiar talk, y^ he attended his sepulcher in the fields, in a day of
battaill.

The end of the first Book.
The second Book, of the last troubles and civil wars of France.
THE Prince of Conde thus taken away, and his death no small loss to them of
the Religion, the Kings Brother, knowing the Princes of Navarre and d'Anguyen
were passed the river of Botoune, determined to follow them, and in that
purpose departed from Janac and came to Dampierre where he passed the River: he
lodged his army within half a leage of S. Iean d'Angeli, of purpose to execute
a certain enterprise within the said town, by mean of the Capteyn of the
Castle. In the mean while the Princes army passed Charante as well at Thonye
Charante, as at Tallibourgh, keeping the boats always on their side.

The Queen of Navarre having imparted The Queen of Navarre returns to Rochel.
certain special admonitions, as well to the Prince her son, as other great
lords and personages of estate returned to Rochel.

The Kings brother understanding the said army was passed over Charante, and
also that his enterprise upon the town of S. Iean d'Angeli, was so discovered,
as he could not commit it to safe execution, returned from whence he came,
that is, to larnac, Chasteau-neuf and places about Angoulesme, attending his
opportunity to effect an attempt which he had conspired upon that town, and
that by mean of the Capteyne of the Park, which was also discovered, as
hereafter shall follow.

The Princes being now on the other side the river Charente, began to surueye
their forces, viewing first their horsemen, and then their footmen in order as
hereafter shall be showed. All the horsemen were sent for in one day into two
places: The Prince of Navarre and the L. Admiral mustred the battle, and the
d Andelot with the Count Rochefoucaut, the vantgarde. There were viewed and
enhabled about.iiij. thousand horsemen, well mounted and armed, with valiant
disposition to follow the cause to a good end. It was openly red there to al y^
horsemen, y^ the prince of Nauar declared himself chief of the army, with
promise not to leave the Camp till a The oath of the Prince of Navarre.
good and happy peace, and much less to spare his life and goods in that
behalf. This being published, the horsemen likewise protested by oath not to
depart the army without his leave, nor forbear life or living in the
assistance of the quarrel.

PEndureau Capteyn of a hundred light l'Endureau reuoltes.
horsemen, after the last conflict, revolted, and took part with the Count du
Lude, Governor of Poytou He was grievous, (after his reuolte) to the
protestants in a number of heavy evils, as in pilling and robbing them
without respect, and also under shadow of his white Cassakyns, wherewith he
yet disguised his people: He took the Castle of Mont-agu in base Poytou,
yielding to the garrison no other mercy than by the edge of the sword. He
made many incursions into Poytou, and anoyed the^ with such general peril,
that ye Princes (to overcome him and his troops) dispatched thither the Lord
de la Rocheenard, with xii. Cornettes of horsemen, and the regiments of footmen
of ye L. la Mousson, Saint Magrin, and Montamma, whose strength and travel was
to small purpose, because y^ enemy had a special safety in his singular
swiftness, as knowing well the straites and compass of that Country.

The Princes being at Saints, got intelligence of the enterprise which ye
Kings brother meant to execute within Angoulesme, and therevppon (knowing also
that he was upon his way thither, dispatched to intercept that purpose) ye
Count Mo^tgomery with ten Cornettes of horsemen, over and besides the regimen
of footmen of the Lord Montbrun and Mirabel sent thither already. The
Montgomery, the better to execute his charge, in the beginning of April,
sommoned the said ten Cornets of horsemen to be before him at Pons, the monday
being the.iiii. of April in the evening. At his coming, he found only.vj.
Cornets with who^ he departed after some expectation for the other which were
not yet come: he travailed all y^ night, and the next morning was received
within the Town of Angoulesme without any let or impediment by ye way: ye
other.iiii. cornets coming somewhat late to Pons, hasted on ye way after their
company, albeit as they were near Chasteau-neuf neither fearing nor forseeing
any peril, they were charged by a great troop of horsemen laid of purpose in
ambush to intercept them, and so pursued as the chase came to ^oygnac, from
whence they returned and found safety in the swiftness of their horses. At
this encounter the L. de Chaumont, Capteyn of one of the said Cornets, with
certain other common soldiers were taken prisoners, and about.xxx. or xl.
slain.

The Count Montgomery was no sooner within Angoulesme, than he began to devise
and provide for the safety of y^ town: wherein for his first policy, he
surueyed ye wards and warders of the town: And because that those which
before made the view and search of the town, passed not by the Park (which
is a new building joined to the town) which cut of all advertisement of any
thing done there: the place it self also not unapt to receive companies,
foysted in by night without knowledge to them of the Town: The said
Montgomery made pierce the walls, and open the gates of that side toward the
park, so that always after the searchers of the Town passed and visyted the
gardes of the same. He removed also the Capteyne of the said Park to avoid
treason, with order that every night the warders of that place should be
changed.

The Duke de Roauuois being led prisoner (as you have heard) to Rochel, and
there continuyng till the month of Januarie, was delivered upon his promise
to pay within three months after twenty thousand Frankes to raunsom, or,
in defaulte of either the time or sum, to return prisoner to Rochell. He
failed and therefore was sommoned to make good his word, which he refused,
clearing himself by the death of the prince of Conde, to whom, as he had given
his faith, so his death acquitted his promise. The Kings brother kept still
about Angoulesme, albeit understanding of the precise direction of the
Montgomery, gave over his further attempt, and departed fro^thence the.xij. of
April, taking his way to Perigueux, and passing by Aubeterre, he took ye
castle by composition, for whose guard the L. of the place did enterteyne about
a hundred me^, who enduring only certain shot of the ca^non, yielded themselves
(their lives saved:) wherein notwithstanding they were abused, for that diverse
were killed, and the L of the place arested as prisoner: from Aubeterre he drue
to Macedan a town of Perigueux, before the which, as the Lord de Montluc attend
him with his forces: so ye army being arrived, they began to batter with such
fury, as a breach was speedily enforced. There were within the town vij.
or.viij. score populair soul diours, who dispayring either to fill up the
breach, or to keep it longer, in respect chiefly of their small numbers,
abandoned the town and closed themselves within ye Castle being sufficiently
strong: The catholics being within the Town, bent their battery against the
Castle, where they had no sooner battered a breach, than they cried to the
assault. They within sustained y^ first assault, and like wise.ij. others in
ye neck of it, repulsing at last ye catholics, whereof a great number left
their dead bodies in pawn: the^ ye Kings brother (under their word of
assurance) came to parle with the^, wherein he so prevailed, as they yielded,
reserving only their lives, which notwtstanding were violently taken from the^
al without exception, contrary to his faith and word of honor: he lost at
these assaults a great company of soldiers with sundry lords and captains
of choice: amongst Brissac slain
which was the Conte Brissac stricken with a harque bush shot in the left
cheek: he was a galland gentleman and of great hope amongst the people,
of.xxv. years of age when he dyed, and of great calling and function in
France. For first he was knight of the order, capteyne of fifty men at arms
of the kings allowance, Colonel general over the French footmen in the Kings
Camp, and governed also in this journey a Regimen of.xl. enseignes of
footmen: his brother succeeded him in most of his charges, saving the estate
of Colonel general which was given to the Lord of Strossi: there dyed at that
siege the Conte Pompadon, with many other Conte Pompadon slain.
to the number of.v. or.vi. hundred.

Mucedan being taken in this month of April, the kings brother took way
again to Angoulmois, and the Lord of Montluc returned to his government, and
charge.

The princes horsemen being thus viewed and mustered, they would also survey
their footmen, in which business the d Andelot was chiefly used, and therefore
immediately dispatched, to the end he might peruse the garrisons in every town
of their obedience: he began his first travel in this charge upon the end of
April, following the garrisons and mustring them in his own presence. In the
beginning of May, be returned to Saints, feling himself somewhat sick, the same
growing so upon him as he dyed the saturday the.vii. of the same 1569. to the
lamentable greef and displesure of the whole army, as being noted a most wise
and valiant gentleman called commonly the knight without fear: his office of
general Colonel of the French footmen was given to the Lord d'Acyer: his
company of men of arms since his death has be^ governed by the lord of
Beauuais his lieutenant. It was thought he was poisoned, and the Physicians
that viewed his body were of the same opinion.

Immediately after, in the same month and at the same place dyed the Lord of
Boccarde having line long sick, he was of The Lord Boccard dead.
no less counsel in matters of consultation, than of courage in the
execution, his estate of the great. Master of the artillery was given to the
Lord Ianlis his son in law, with his cornet of horsemen.

And now, to ouerslip nothing that was executed in this last Apryll, there is
in the mountains of Daup(...) a Castle nere to B^yanson, wherein the King
keeps an ordinary dead pay of certain numbres of soldiers: A capteyn called
Colombyn borne in Grenoble, understanding by certain of the borough of Oysans
that most part of the said dead pay men were issued out of their charge, took
the said Castle, and finding no resistance other than the very capteyne of the
place, who yielded being hurt with a shot, he made him self lord of it, where
neglecting one first and most necessary policy in a victor, he rather
labored to deface the images, than to furnishe the place with convenient
provision, which being not unmarked of certain evil neigh bors, purlewing upon
ye castle, they forthwt environed him with a siege, and so cut off his vittell,
whereof they knew ye castle had but slender store: Their siege continuyng about
xv. days, enforced him at last to render the place upon composition and only
reservation of life, which notwithstanding was not kept, for that all his
soldiers were cut in pieces, and he only led on live to Grenoble.

After the general view and muster of the princes footmen, the Lord de
Pills, (returned now from G^scoyg^e) was sent to sease upon the isle of Medoc,
a rich isle lying between Rochell and Bordeaux, containing in length
about.xvj. or.xvij. leagues, and.iiij. or.v. leagues in breadth: he provided
necessary boats to pass the river of Gironde, and embarkyng him self
with.ij. thousand footmen, descended into the said yl^, and took haven
without any let: he made himself master of the isle upon the sudden and
unlooked for, fynding great foyson of riches, where with he and his soldiers
loaded themselves plentifully.

By mean of this I Will, he besieged Bourg a town in Bordelois, but being
speedily called back by the Princes, he raised his siege and came again to the
Camp: At this siege died of a shot in his shoulder the Lord Valpheuiere
lieutenant to the late Lord d'Andelot of his Regiment of footmen, whose
regimen was translated to the Lord of Rouray gentleman of France. This was
upon the end of May.

The kings brother, being now returned into the country of Angoulmois and after
he had somewhat releued his army on that side to Villebois, sent to sommon the
town of Angoulesme by a trompet, wherein hae was refused, and so took way
toward Berry to join his force with the Duke d'Aumall being in the said
country: the Conte Mont-gomerey charged upon the tail of his camp, and
discomfited certain of them.

The Lady Marquise of Rottelyn, understanding of the death of the prince of
Conde her son in law, put her upon the way to come to Rochell, where was the
widowprincesse her daughter: she passed to Saint Iean d'Angely, and so to
Thony upon Boutonne where the said Princess met her, and so returned into
France without her daughter, whom she purposed to have with her. But the
Princess excused her upon her children, which were then at Rochell whether
she also returned it was thought the Lady Marquise came to entreat a peace,
which was not so, because her occasion was only as is asoresayd: this was in
the end of May. 1569.

In the first kindlyng of these wars, the Princes having true intelligence of
diverse numbres of strangers entered the Realm for the strength of the
Catholics, determined also to fortify their army by the like mean: And
therefore knowing that the Prince Wolfgange Duke de deux Pons had erected great
numbres of men of arms, as well on foot as on horseback, the better to
defend his own countries, sent to him with request to yield them succoures
in their so urgent and extreme necessity, both with his army presently in
point, and also such other powers as he might possibly leute, whereunto the
said duke condescended with promise to relieve them with all his forces, which
albeit at that time were not fully assembled, yet he forgot not within short
time after to put an army in readiness to come into France, whereof the duke
d'Aumale (lying in Lorayne) being informed by special Intelligicers,
dispatched forthwith a Gentleman of his, by whom he advertised the Duke of
the common brute that passed of the diligence he used in the leuyes of men of
war in Almayne and al to assist the conspiracies of such as arm themselves
against the crown of France, with displayed war against the King, which for
his part as he neither had nor would believe, so lookyng nearer into his
magnificence and parts of a Prince, he judged him of no inclination to
favor rebels against their sovereign majesty, considering withal, the
ancient respect of amitte so long continued between the house of the electors
of the county Palatines of Rhine, and the scepter of France: Albeit, his
majesty desiring to understand an absolute truth, gave him special charge to
dispatche this special Messanger, he also having authority of his Majesty
to withstand the entry of any stranger, ^o releue the enterprise of the said
rebell^s, which he hoped to accomplish, or else to leave his life in the
charge.

The Duke forbear to answer speedily, until his army were fully in point,
albeeit after that he had received his Reistres, he began to march
toward the Conte of Burgogne, and as he lay upon the frontiers of France,
tarying for his Launceknyghtes, he answered the d'Aumales letter, which he
sent forthwith to the King: In the beginning he laid before him how in the
years before, many Reistermaisters passing through his Duchy without leave,
grieved so his country that the continual complaints of his people forced him
to draw into companyes of armed men, as well on horsbacke as on foot, to
withstand further offense to his people: And that now in respect his cousyns
and dearly beloved Princes of Navarre and Conde, have lamentably imparsed with
him the unjust quarrel, urged upon them, as well to enforce their lives and
goods, as to deprive the exercise of their Religion contrary to the kings faith
and plain protestation of his Edicts: and that not only they, but all the
Nobility and others, professing the same Religion, have and do endure
miserable oppressions, as estraunged from their own houses, thruste out of
their charges and offices, their possessions and welthes, consisked into the
Kings hands: lastly, that there be raised huge companies of men of war aided
with sundry sorts of strangers to cut them in pieces, as in other times of
open hostility: in these respects together with their earnest motion and
request for succors, and lastly upon an upright view and consideration of
their present calamity, he could, nor ought do no less than aid them: And
for their parts, the better to auouche their integrities in refusing all
attempts, aspiring preiudicially to ye crown of France, (as the d'Aumalles
letters did sinisterly suggest) the said Princes have protested by letters,
which he keeps sealed with their own hands, that if (at his being in
France) he see or know any inclination in them to conspire in any sort
against the crown, that he would not only draw away his succors, but convert
the^ to the enemy and contrary side, the rather to revenge their disloyalty:
which makes him judge of the Princes side, and believe y^ they are not only far
from the slaundrous impositions of their enemies, but also of unfeigned desire,
rather to rest quietly in their houses, than follow so hard and doubtful a
war, whereunto they have been drawn of force as to defend the violent
oppression of their malicious enemies: he alleged besides, that when his
Cosine the duke Casmir erected his army in Almaign in the like cause, he was
also untruly informed (as of purpose to draw him from succouring the Prince of
Conde) that it was against the majesty royal that the said Prince did
conspire, which notwithstanding was found otherwise, as appears by his
majesty's edictes of peace both first and last, approving always the actions of
the said Prince as done for the service of his majesty. And to take away all
suspicio^, he declared, that besides that, his meaning was to succor the said
Princes of Navarre and Conde, his enterprise in coming into France, stretched
also to relieve the little ones of the Religion dispersed into their several
miseries, to whom of very duty (being a Christian Prince) he could do no
less than offer and lend his hand to lead them to Jesus Christ. And to the
end his majesty may unfeignedly resolve in the integrity of his purpose, and
that he undertakes not this journey to spoil his subjects or make pray of
their welthes, or for any other particular profit, he protested that if his
majesty would grant them a safe use of their religion with a free exercise of
the same without limitation and distinction of persons and places, together
with assurance of their goods, honors, charges, and estates, he would not
only return and dismiss his army, but also defray the whole charges of the
same and the said Reistremaisters in their passage, amountyng in all to above
a hundred thousand crowns, protesting for end, that if (in refusing his
just and reasonable offers) the Quarrel do aggrauate by his coming into
France, to wype his hands in innocence of all imputations hereafter, and the
fault to be laid upon the authors and chief Councellers of the war, being
about his majesty.

The Duke having now received his Launceknightes, entered into France, and
passing by Bourgongue^, came to Charity, being coasted sundry times both
behind and before by the armies of of the dukes d'Aumall and Nemors, without
attempting any thing upon him: he arrived without let before Charity, the
Charity besieged and taken.
xvj. of May, which he battred so vehemently that he enforced forthwith a
breach, in the mean while the lord of Mouy, passing over Loere a little above
the said town, with three hundred harquebusiers, won the suburbs toward the
bridge, the same so occupying and amazing the that were besieged, that the Duke
entered the breach, and put the whole garrison to the sword: this town was
taken in good time, because that if it had lingered never so little, the Duke
d'Aumalle being very nere with succors, had endaungered the enterprise. The
town was no sooner taken, than he was discovered not far of with xviij.
hundred horsemen, who coming to short to withstand the dukes entry, returned
in hope to hinder him to join with the princes army, by means that he met
and assembled with the kings brothers power, who knitte together for this
purpose in the country of Berry.

In the end of May, the Princes informed of the approach of the Duke de deux
Pons, and the taking of Charity, began to march to join with his army, and
leaving the Lord de la Noue, to govern in the countries of Poyctou and
Sainctonge, took their way by Angoulmois, directly to Perigueux, and as they
passed through that country, the Lord of Chaumontes light horsemen, with
certain companies of footmen, took the town of Noutron belonging to the
Queen of Navarre, wherein were killed about four skore men that defended it:
this was the seventh of June. 1569.

The morrow after the said Princes dispatched the Count Montgomery into
Gasoyne, to command over the army of the Uicounts, who otherwise would not
agree, as not acknowledging one above an other: he took his way by Solliac,
where he passed the river of Dordone, and so beneath Cadenat, he passed also
over Lot and came to Montauban without any let.

They of the town of Perigueux, fearing the coming of the princes army,
desired the lord Montluc to send them succors, to whom he dispatched
immediately the Knight Montluc his son with xij. ensigns of footmen, with
the which he entered the town the iiij. of June.

In this mean while the Princes army kept the way drawing to Lymosyn, and the
duke de deux Pons hasted by great journeys to join with them, passing the river
of Viene two leagues above Lymoges. The Catholics had sent thither two C. shot
to defend y^ passage, who were all cut in pieces by the lord de Mouy, the ix:
of this month, on which day the princes army arrived at Chalus a town in
Lymosyn, departing the next day to join with the army of the Duke de deux Pons
in a village within two leagues of Chalus belonging to the Lord d'Escars,
governor of the said country.

The lord Admiral accompanied with two hundred horsemen, went where the duke
was to salute him: ye duke enduring certain fittes of an ague not many days
before, and not cured as yet, died the xj. of The Duke de deux Po^s dead.
this month 1569. in a village three leagues from Lymoges: before his death, he
called before him the chief and principals of his army, with whom he
communicated in many points, but chiefly in persuasion and request to pursue
the purpose of their coming into France, leaving for their general leader in
his place, the Count Wolrard de Mansfeld, before his lieuetena^t general: his
body was carried to the town of Angoulesme, to be there buried.

In the army of the said late duke, were Description of the dukes camp
xxviij. cornets of horsemen, containing viij. thousand and five hundredth
Reistres, whereof were Colonels, Hans Boucq, Reignold Grac, Henry d'Estam, and
Hans de There Is: six thousand Launceknights well armed on foot, and for the
most part Pikemen, divided into xxvij. ensigns, whereof were Colonels, the Lord
de Grauillar, and the Lord Guieryn Gansgorff baron of Grelezee, besides ij. M.
horsemen and ten ensigns of footmen of Frenchmen, whereof was Colonel
(touching the footmen) one of ye sons of the Lord de Bricquemau. There were
also in y^ said army diverse personages of high estate, as the prince of Orange,
his son, the Counties Lodouike and Henry de Nassau, his brethern, the Lord de
Moruilliers, the Marquis of of Renel, the Lords of Mouy and Esters ney,
besides many others: there were also xix. pieces of artillery, and they either
maine pieces, or field pieces, with others somewhat less, wherofhe left two of
the greatest at Charity. There were in the Description of the princes army.
Princes army about thirtene thousand harquebusiers, besides Pikes, whereof were
great numbers, about iiij. thousand horsemen, six cannons and two mean pieces.

The kings brother now having received Succors from the Pope.
from the Pope two thousand horsemen, and four thousand footmen Italians
under the conduit of the Count de saint Fiour, came to Lymoges with his army,
fronting alwais as near as he could the Almaignes, but not meddling with the^.

About this time the Queen mother accompanied with the cardinals of Bourbon and
Loraine, came to Lymoges, and there desirous to see in battle the army of the
duke The Queen mother encourages the soldiers.
her son, she visited the battles and squadrons of his horsemen one after an
other, persuading them to omit noduetie, to continue their service to his
majesty, and so departed the camp, and went to Lymoges, where she remained
certain days, and then retired to the Court.

The same day the Lord de la Love marshall of the Princes camp with his
regiment of horssemen, was sent to Aesse upon Vienne, to guard the passage,
whereof the kings brother having intelligence, came the next day being the.xi.
of June, and encamped within a league of the said Aesse, making out the same
day certain numbers of shot to undertake the skirmish, who being repulsed,
tarried not long there, but returned to the Camp: the.xij. day arrived at the
said Aesse, the footmen of the vauntgarde of the Princes and thither came
also other supplies of shot from the Caholikes camp, and that in great
numbres: they at their first coming repulsed certain shot which were within
the Subburbs on the other side Vyenne, albeit they were forthwith reskued, and
the other driven to retire, the skirmish endured long and hot, devouring of the
Catholic side about.CC. me^, and of the Princes part only twenty or thirty.

Within two days after the Princes army marched toward S. Tirier la Perch, in
the said country of Lymosyn, of purpose to refresh there y^ Lanceknights,
weryed with so long travel: the kings brother followed them, albeit so far off
as it was the xxij. of June before he came near the Princes, and then
lodged.iij. leagues from the said S. Tirier, where the said Princes were, who
sent for their army as well footmen as horssmen to come and camp there. The
xxiij. of the same month he adua^ced more near them, lodging within a league
and an half of S. Tirier in a vilage called la Roche, the same arguing to the
Princes, that he would give them battle the next morrow, wherefore they attended
to see if he would come any nearer, which he did not, albeit the Princes sent
for their army to be ready in the first show of the day, who accordingly
marched in good order to the said place de la Roche, where forthwyth they
bestowed themselves in squares: the forlorn hope were appointed to march both
on the right and left hand: they of the right hand were led by the Lord de
Pills, whose Regiment made the first wing, the others of the left hand were
guided by the Lord de Rouray: the Lord de Mouy with his regiment of horssmen
kept the left hand, and the Lords de Bricquemau, and de la Love with their
regime^ts of horsemen, the rightha^d, making y^ wing of the vauntgard: the
Lanceknights were ringed in two battles, the one a vauntgarde and the other a
battle: the vauntgard carried.viij. field pieces which were planted before
their battle.

The skirmish began of y^ Lord of Pills side against the Lord de Strossi, who
with ij.M. shot was behind a close pale, and sent thither for the defense of
the passage, he had a great advantage upon the Lord de Pills, because his
harquebushears shot in covert from behind the said close pale, and the said
Lord de Pills was open and in a high place. Besides, the Lord of Strossi had
to back him in time of need.iiij. cornets of Italians, who seeing y^ the
forlorn hope of the Lord de Pills could not discharge their pieces by reason
of the rain, charged so hotly upon him, as they forced him to retire a hundredth
pase within the wood, killing at that charge about ten of his soldiers,
albeit being reskued by two cornets of light horsemen of the Capteines la Motte
and Brilliam Gascones, repulsed with equal violence the Italians, and put them
to flight, in which mean while, the said forlorn hope renewed more hotly the
skirmishe, and yet did neither hurt nor amaze greatly the said Lord Strossi,
which caused the admiral to draw thither ward, who as soon as he had surueied
the place, caused to come to him ye shot led by the Lord de Rouray.

They began to skirmishe on the left hand against the Lord de Strossi, beating
him on the side: with constraint at last to habandon his shade and recule:
whervppon the Captains la Mote and Brilliam, with many other companies of
horsemen, gave upon his troops, and put the^ to the chase, wherein the Lord
Strossi was taken and led to the Admiral, who caused The Lord Strossi taken.
the victory to be pursued to a little river running fast by, and many
soldiers followed the fortune of this chase even within the tents of the
catholics camp, and hard to their enseignes.

On the left hand the Lord de Mouy offered to charge certain Cornets of
Italian horssmen, who refused to abide him, and so he returned back.

It rained so vehemently that there could be no use of any harquebushe, so that
without any other thing done, the army retired, the Strossi lost and left dead
on the place about.v. or.vj. hundred: Amongst others of account was slain his
Strosies men slain.
lieuetenaunt, called the Lord de Saint Loup, with thirty as well Captains in
thief, as lieuetenantes and ensign bearers, whose Targets remained also upon
the place: Of them of the Religion were slain and hurt of all sorts only
fifty, whereof were two Captains of footmen called Peyrol and la Merry
Dauphynois, this was the.xxv. of June. 1569.

The morrow after four hundredth Italian horssemen, with certain Pikemen of the
me^ of arms of the Duke de Nemors, came to see if the Princes army were
discamped as the kings brother was advertised, as they approached near the
camp, they were discovered by the watch, and so hotly set upon, as they were
enforced to retire out of order, some slain and some taken prisoners.

The.xxvij. of this month, the said Princes army were driven to discampe for
want of vittailes, drawing toward Perigueux, to relaue themselves.

The Lord de Moruillier, comen out of The death of the Lord ^f Moruil.
Almayne as you have heard with the late Duke of Deux Pons, was sick in this
time at Angoulesme, of a hot Ague, the same pressing him so sore, that within
few days he dyed in the said town.

The Count du Lude gouernoure of Poyctou, having assembled certain troops
as well of Touraine, and Aniou, as of Poyctou, departed from the Town of
Poyctiers, and the twelfth of this month of June, planted his seege before
Nyort, The siege of Nyort.
wherein was gouernoure the Lord de la Brosse.

The first day of the siege the Lord The Lord pluucau succors it.
de Pluueau, with his Regiment of footmen, and his company of light horsemen,
entered the Town in despite of the Lord du Lude, who notwithstanding those
succoures, began his battery the next morning on the side of the toure de la
Pigalle, and followed it forth with with an assault: which was so valyantly
repulsed, that, he seeing the breach filled up with such speed, removed his
battery, and forced a breach in an other place, albeit he durst not make it
good with an assault, but understanding of supplies of succor at hand raised
his seege the.xxij. of the month of June.

He had four Cannons and two mean pieces: Coming again to Poyctiers, he
left within S. Mesent, the Lord de Anuouy, master of the camp of the Regiment
of the late Count Brissac, with such companies as he had with the said
Regiment, with two Canons, two field pieces and certain other munitions,
leading the rest to Poyctiers.

At this siege, the Lord de Pluueau was lightly hurt with a shot, and soon
healed again: Of the du Ludes side were slain the Captains Flogeat, Gorbon a
Gentleman of Sainctonge, Fresouet la March, the Captain Colonel of the said
Regiment, the master of the mines, and Morlou guider of the Artillery carriage,
with a great number of footmen.

The Lord of Teligni, was sent for to go to the reskue of Nyort, with four
cornets of Reistres, with certain other cornets of Frenchmen, and the regiment
of fotemen of the Lord Bricqueman the younger. Notwithstanding before he came
there, the siege was raised, whereupon they went to the said S. Mesent, to
intercept the artillery: which in the end they abandoned, as hereafter shall
be noted.

The Princes army being in the country of Perigueux was still pursued, but
far off, by the catholics, keeping on the left hand: The Princes entered by
composition within the town of Brantbome, they took also two Castles in the
said Country, the one belonging to the Bishop of Perigueux, and therefore
commonly called the Bishops castle, the other called la Chapelle, in which were
killed about two hundred and three score men, with like number of the popular
sort withdrawn thither, and thereabout.

Upon the beginning of July, the Princes army departed from the country of
Perigueux drawing to Confluence or Confolance, a little town upon Vienne.
Near unto the which is a Castle called Chabauey, then in question between the
vidame of Chartres and the Lord de Montluc: within the Castle was a company of
footmen, whose captain refused to open the gates to the vit tailers of the
Princes army, and therefore the vauntgarde came and beseeged them, and the same
day battred and took the castle by assault, putting the soldiers to the
sword: The captain only was taken, who promised for his ransom twenty
thousand frankes, and withal to cause to be sent home M Peter Viret,
minister of the Gospel, taken prisonner in the territories of the Queen of
Nanarre: The castle after it was taken, the sixth of July, was burnt to the
ground. Within two days after the Lord de Mouy entered by composition the
town of S. Genais in Poictou: one chief covenant in the composition was, that
the Town promised to pay ten thousand Franks, so that their goods were not
put to the pillage or spoil, wherein they were duly dealt withal, as they
also paid truly their money. You have heard how the kings brother pursued the
Princes camp into Perigueux, who now seeing (as it seemed) into their several
purposes, turned away, and passing by Lymosin and Berry, came into Touraine:
Being at Loches, he licenced a great number of his horsemen, to recreate
themseiues abroad until the first of October, by which occasion his camp so
diminished, as he had not about him of the French nation above a thousand
or.xij. C. horssemen, and very few footmen: almost all the Captains went to
relieve and increase their companies.

The Princes being advertised, that the town of Chastelleraut, contained not
above three score soldiers in guard, dispatched thither the Lord de la Love
with his regiment of horssemen, and a company of Harquebushers on horssebacke:
At his first coming he sommoned the town, which without much resistance, was
rendered unto him, reserving only that their goods should not be sacked, nor
any the inhabitants hurt, upon which agreement the gates were opened, and the
Lord de la Love entered at one gate, and the Lord Villiers Knight of the order,
and governor of the town, issued out of an other, Upon the end of this
month, the Lord de Sansac, with.iiij. or.v. M. footmen and certain horsemen of
the Catholics, beseeged the Town of Charity, he battered it so vehemently,
that within small time he made a breach, and suddenly marched to the assault,
from whence he was repulsed with the loss of.v. C. men, the rest retiring from
the assault to the artillery, whereof one of small experience let fall his match
wtin a calk of canon powder, which in a moment flusht up such a general flame
and fire, yt it burned a great nu^bre of ye said soldiers, and blew one on y^
other side the river of Loere upon the grauel, and so burned him to death in
every ma^s sight. They yt defended the town, made great resistance, and
grieved many of the Catholics by their sallies which they made out of the
town: whereupon the Lord de Sansac not able to force the^, was constrained to
raise his seege, hearing wtal, that ye Princes had provided to succor the^ with
iij. or.iiu. M. horssemen, which notwithstanding was rather incerteine, than a
true report.

After the taking of ye castle of Chabaney, the princes army took way to
Luzignan, a strong castle, and (as it is said) builde^ long since by
Mellusigne: the guard of this Castle were two hundredth soldiers under the Lord
de Guron, captain and keeper of the same, who, being sommoned to render it,
refused, by reason whereof it was beseged the fourtenth day of the said month,
when the battery began very furiously with six Cannons on that side to the
Park, they within being sore shaken with the Cannons, and almost four score of
their soldiers slain, a breach being beaten open and flat, and the regiments
of footmen in order of battle ready to offer the assault, began to faint in
(...)a^^le (...)ig
heart, demanding parley, and immediately rendered the place under this
composition, that the said Lord Guron with the Lord de Cluseaux, should depart
with bag and baggage, and the soldiers with their lives and only sword and
dagger: within the castle were found four Cannons, two field pieces with great
store of munition: and as some say, huge sums of money. They established
there as governor the Lord de Myrambeau, a gentleman of the Country of
Sainctonge, with.vj. hundredth harque busheares to guard it.

The Baron of Adretz, who had bin at the d'Aumals camp, and seen his ensigns
but evil followed in respect of his slender numbers of men in his regiment,
took way to Dauphine, very slenderly accompanied, without displaying any
banner. Against his return the Lord de Gordes governor there, had put in
readiness two Ensigns of footmen to send into Languedock, whereof he
presented the conduction to the said Baron of Adretz, who refusing such charge,
the expedition was used by Captain Mestral, who led them thither upon the
beginning of July.

About this time the Queen of Nauar, the Prince her son, the Prince of
Conde, the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen with others that accompanied them,
presented a request to the King, entreating an assured peace of the present
troubles, which, for the importance of the matter, is here contained in every
singular word and point as follows.

Sir, it is a thing no less strange, than The Protestants requ to the king for
peace.
almost incredible, that amongst so many people put under your obedience by the
resolute will and provision of God, as a blissed pawn and witness of his
bountiful regard to wards you, and the same conte^ding in ordinary vau^t to be
so dearly inclined to the* upright proceeding of your affairs, and
preservation of your crown, there is not one, no not one amongst so many
numbers, that once offreth to put himself in endeavor to quench or qualify
this unnatural fire so burning daily with in your reaime, as there lackes
little of the utter confusion of the same: It is also no lesie true than the
other marvelous, y^ of the contrary, infinite numbres do travel infinitely, not
only to kindle y^ which is already burst into flame, but also by sundry sorts
of artificial sleightes, do study to entertain, aggrauate and increase it.

^ And albeit it ought first rather to move whom troubles ^t to be ^uted.
from such, who of a galantnesse of stomach, and to satisfy some particular
respect in them selves, have ince^sed these troubles against the will of your
majesty, making both peace and war at their pleasure: then from those, who
besides they are iniustly assailed and pursued in their consciences, honors,
lives and liuelyhoods, have no other purpose and meaning, than to defend their
lives against such heavy and violent tyra^nies, lothing always troubles and
emotions, and loving with a singular zeal both peace it self, and such as
labor to entertain it: yet the Queen of Navarre, the Prince her son, the
Prince of Conde, with the Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen that accompany them,
moved (before the rest) with a natural bond and affection to your Majesty,
and preservation of your Crown and Realm, neither can nor will suspend or
defer any longer, to search and apply for their parts (as always they have
done) such most propre and convenient remedies, as they thought most apt to
warrant and defend this your realm from a lamentable subversion, wherewith it
both has been, and is presently threatened: And as in respect to establishe a
peace and public tranquillity, they have hitherto more forwardly inclined
than the rest, happening by that means into such strange perils and
adue^tures, as if God had not kept an eye upon them, there had now remained but
a lamentable remembrance of their general confusion: so these things well
considered with their several circumstances, they have small reason of hope,
and less cause of expectation to effect that which so earnestly they desire,
if God (the incliner of al hearts) change not the minds of their enemies that
govern you, and give them a disposition to desire and embrace peace. The said
Princes, Lords, Knights with others parties to this humble request, persuading
rather that in place to allow this their frank and liberal will, with their
duetiful endeavor to advance a perfect unity and peace amongst your subjects,
they shall be charged with slanders and sinister interpretation of their godly
purpose, as here to fore they have been used by those who neither hate nor
fear any thing more than to see this reconcilement.

And as the said Princes with ye other parties to this motion, have neither had
nor holde^ any thing in more dear regard, than the publication to your majesty
from time: to time of their actions and procedings, the same as impressions and
witnesses of their singular desire to live and die in the natural obedience
and awe of your majesty, and withal to make known before the whole face of the
world, both how far their hearts and wills be from the slaundrous impositions of
the Cardinal of Loraine and his adherentes (pensionarie ministers and natural
enemies to your crown) and also that by their forces (whereunto they have been
drawn with their great evil will and grief) they intend no other than to
maintain their religion, lives, honors, and such portions of goods as God has
appointed to their shares in this world: Even so they persuade that such
consideracio^s, neither can nor ought to hinder their uttermost endeavor to
pursue and purchase the effect of so blessed and necessary a peace to this
realm, and yelding withal unfeigned testimony of the humble and reuer^t
respect they owe to your majesty, which they had long ere this put in practice
and proof, were not that their enemies would think and persuade others to
believe, that the only necessity of their case have induced them to it, seeing
first their untrue persuasion to your majesty, that there were no leuies of
men of war in Almaigne for the succors of the Princes: Secondly, that if any
such were, yet the Realm was of sufficient mean and force to withstand their
entry: Thirdly, if they did enter, it was impossible to join with the princes
in respect of so many deep rivers and passages of danger between the one and
other camp: Fourthly, albeit their armies did knitte and join, yet, (the
princes poverty considered) the charges could not be long defrayed, nor the
plentifully long contented: seming by these reasons to attend and temporise,
till they had both joined and paid their said forces, and assembled others
which were dispersed, and (as the world knows) of such numbers and faculty,
as besides their ability to resist easily their enemies, they wanted neither
way nor mean to execute any wicked attempt if they had had any will, as is
suggested and imposed upon them: If then in the former troubles, the late
prince of Conde with the Lords, knights, and gentlemen of his part, received
the conditions of peace concerning only the matter of religion and liberty of
their consciences, and that immediately after the death of the Duke of Guyse and
Marshall Saint Andre, and the late Constable of France taken prisoner, being
three principal leaders of the army: if also in the last rising, as soon as
was offered to the said prince and other lords and gentlemen of his company
the restablishme^t of the exercise of religion, notwithstanding their great
troops and strength of strangers joined with them, and upon the very point to
assault the town of Chartres in the view and face of the enemies camp, which
was for the most disordred, if at the only sound and pronou^cing of peace made
by a trumpet sent under the name of your majesty, the said prince did not only
forbear ye assalt, but also raised forth with his siege and retired his army,
reping notwithstanding of so ready obedience, but a bloody peace and promise
full of infidelity: if also during the same stir, the morrow after the
battle at Saint Denis: where both the Prince had the better, and the Constable
principal leader of the army was slain. The said Prince dispatched to your
majesty the Lord de Theliguy, as well ^o warn you of the ruin and desolacion
threatening from the instaunt your realm if the strangers were suffered to
enter houering there upon the fro^tiers, as also to mediate and solicit in
means and remedies to knit an absolute peace only in the cause of religion: if
(in short) your edictes have been alwais published, and the peace accorded, at
such times as they of the religion, (if they would have abused ye opinion of
your purpose) might, in respect of their forces, persuade and believe, that
as well in all your parleyes and treaties of peace, there was no other mention
than of the matter of religion, as also that their enemies have not been
brought to it but by necessity, being unable by open force to maintain any
longer against them: in what conscience or with what face, or countenance, may
it be said that these troubles move and continue for the matter and cause of
religion? And yet nevertheless the more to choke and convince the Cardinal of
Loraine and other his adherentes, of their lies and slanderous impositions
which they publishe daily: the said Princes, Lords, knights, gentlemen and
others of their companies forgetting the infidelity and all disloyal
attemptes heretofore conspired against them, declare and protest this day both
before God and your majesty, y^ what so ever has been done or offered to the^
in evil from the beginning to this hour, they neither have nor will once
impute it to your majesty, as knowing your nature to be nothing touched with
such iniust seuerities, whereof you have given so many public experiences, that
there is now no cause of doubt: neither have or do they think to change or
diminishe in any respect their duty and natural regard which they have
always bente to the true advancement of your greatness and royal estate:
wherein, and also in so many effects aforesaid, if it be both known and seen,
that they enterteine no other purpose nor meaning, than (under the obedience
and authority of your Edictes) to serve God according to his will, and as they
are instructed by his holy word, with desire to be maintained with equal care
as your other subjects, in their honors, lives, and goods, they are now
ready to give such further manifest proof and witness, as their most enemies
shall have lest cause henceforth to doubt the^: And y^ neither to enter into
any justification of their actions passed, as their innocence and justice of
their cause being sufficiently known to your majesty, and al other kings,
princes, and pote^tates what strangers so ever they be, if they be not of the
faction and party of Spain: and much less to seek to capitulate with your
majesty, knowing (god be praised) what is the duty of good and faithful
subjects to their sou^ reign prince and natural Lord. But (sir) in respect of
the large penny worthes and common merchandise which heretofore has been made of
the faith and word of your majesty, which (above all) ought to be holy,
sacred, and inviolable, and withal, with what vnseming boldness your authority
and name has been abused to ye extreme peril of all your people of the reformed
profession: it need not seem strange if the said Princes with their co^sociates
do humbly beseech you to declare by an edict solemn, per petual and irreuocable,
your resolute will in a liberty and exercise of their religion, to the end y^
by the same, such as heretofore at ^. several times both rashly and with all
impunitie have infringed and violated your former constitution in ye cause, may
by this third, be more brideled and restrained, where in because such as were not
able to endure the unity and universal rest maintained amongst your people, by
the good obseruacio^ of your edicts, have taken occasion to alter and corrupt
the^ by new constructio^s and modificacio^s contrary to the true substance of
the same and sincere meaning of your majesty. And y^ also the said Princes with
the rest of their faction confess to have borne a most just judgment of god
in more sorts of afflictions in time of peace, than when it was open war, as in
co^senting to easily to y^ treaties of peace which have been made, the same
providing a general contentme^t on all sides y^ good should be served only in
certain places of the realm, and by certain persons, as though (in a sound
conscience) there belonged no other thing to ye service of God.

They most humbly beseech your majesty to accord and grant generally to all
your subjects of what quality and condition so ever, free use of the said
religion in all cities, villages, and boroughes, and all other places and
corners of your realm and countries within your obedience and protection,
without any exception, reseruacion, modificacion, or restraint of persons,
times, or places, and that with suerties, necessary in so high a cause: and
besides to ordeine and enjoin to make manifest profession of the one or other
religion, to the end to cut of hereafter all means and occasions to many, who
abusing such benefit and grace, are slipped into Atheism and carnal liberty,
and who, standing upon no exercise and profession of religion, desire nothing
more than to see an universal confusion in this realm, and all order, policy
and Ecclesiastical discipline reuersed, and abolished, a thing so dangerous
as not to be tolerated in any christian state. And because (sir) we doubt not
at all, that those who hetherunto have pitched the foundation of their devises
upon slaundrous reproaches, impudently published to make us hateful, even to
such as (God be praised) be free from the servitude and tyranny of
Antichrist, will not stick to impose upon us an inctuile obstinacy, rather
to defend, (without reason) that we have once resolved to believe touching the
Articles of Christian Religion, than to correct or retract our erroures. We
declare and proteste (as hereunto we have done) that if in any point of the
confession of faith heretofore presented to your majesty by the reformed
Churches of your realm, it may be found by the word of God comprehended in the
Canonical books of the holy Scripture, that we swerve from the doctrine of
the Prophets and Apostles, we will forthwith lend our hands, and give place
to such as will instruct us better in the word of GOD (if we err in any
Article) than we have bin from the beginning: For which cause, and the better
to effect so happy a purpose, we desire nothing more, than a convocation of
a council free and general, and lawfully called, wherein as every one may
have hea^^ng and scope to deduce his reasons at large, so the same to be
either confirmed, or convinced by the only word of GOD, the true mean used
in all times of Antiquity upon like occasion. By which mean (Sir) also it
is not to be doubted, that GOD (by his special grace) will not vnseele the
eyes of your Majesty, and so give you speedy and true sight into the hearts
and wills of your Subjects, reconciled and knitte with an indissoluble
bond, and your Realm return into his first estate, beauty and dignity, to
the shame and confusion of yours and our common enemies, who by their subtle
and privy intelligences with the house of Spain, have with sinister policies
translated the late storm and tempeste of the low Countries to your Realm,
and almost thundered it upon the type of your Crown: Humbly desiring your
Majesty to enter into precise consideration and judgment, whether it be
better to exspecte, of two Armies already assembled within your Realm, a
fiery and bloody victory, yielding equal fruit to the Conqueror, and he
that is overcome, or else to employe them together in the service of your
Majesty's affairs, in so many goodly occasions presently offered, importing no
less the rest and advancement of your Crown and Realm, than any that ever
happened in your time, returning also by that mean, the storm to the place
from whence it came: wherein the said Princes, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
with all the rest of their companies, be unfeignedly resolved, (as in all
other things, tending to the greatness of your noble Estate) to employe their
lives, goods, with all other means wherewith GOD has endued them, even to the
last drop of their blood, acknowledging Office of true subjects
in this world no other soueraintie or principality than yours, in whose
obedience, and subjection they do desire to live and dye. The same being also
such and all that a sovereign and natural Prince is to exspect or desire of
his faithful lonyng subjects and servants.

This request thus devised and written, the Princes sent a trompet to the
Catholykes Camp to obtain passeport for a Gentleman to go to his Majesty
which being refused the Admiral found means to send a Copye of it to the
Marshall Mo^t^^orancy, to present to the king, who about the.xix. of Julie
following returned a messanger to the Admiral, to let him know that he had
presented the request to his majesty, who would not look on it, saying, he
would neither hear nor see any thing coming from him, before he had put him
self in obedience and favor of his Majesty, who then assured him to receive
and embrace him, when, and as often, as he would put himself in endeavor.

To this message by letter, the Admiral answered the.xxvj. of the same month,
that seeing his majesty would not receive the said request, he could not
otherwise choose, than leave the matter to the judgment of al Christian Princes
not touched with passion or partial affection, whither they used not endeavor
to come under the duetifull obedience of his Majesty or not, laboring for
their part by all their possible means to quench the manifold calamities
houering to ouerwhelme the woole Realm, and so set them selves within the
favor and grace of the King. But now, seeing that there be some will not
spare the universal destruction of the Realm, only to rauishe their lives
and exercise of their Religion, they would look more near than before for the
remedy.

The Kings brother being at Loches, had advertisement of the siege of Luzignan
dispatching withal diligence the Duke of Guyse, to get within Poyctiers, as
well to hinder the taking of the Town, as to turn the siege from Luzignan,
notwithstanding Luzig. rendered.
he was there no sooner than the Castle was rendered.

The Duke of Guyse arrived at Poytiers with the Marquise du Meine his brother,
on Frydaye.xxij. of Julie, entering by the Bridge An^^ubert with his companies,
which were about fifteen hundredth horsemen, amongst whom were.iiij. hundredth
Italians, governed by the Lord Paul Sforce, brother to the Count de Saint
Fiour, and one Cornette of Reistres. These succoures assured greatly them
within the Town, who otherwise might happyly have trembled at the coming of
the Princes Camp.

There were within Poyctiers before Lords and Captains ^ithin Poy^yers.
the Guyses coming, the Count du Lude, his three brethren, de Chastelliers,
de Sautere, and de Briancon, the Lords de Ruff^c, de la Riuiere, Bo^sequin, de
Ferraques, d'Argence, de Rouet, and other lords and Knights of the order, and
Captains of horssemen with part of their companies. There were also of
footmen, the companies of the Capteynes Passac, la-Prade, la Vacherie,
d'Arsach, le Lis, Bois-vert, Boneau, Boula^de larrie, with certain other, be
sides vj. companies of footmen raised by the inhabitants of the Town. The
general number of Catholic soldiors of al sorts, as well footme^ as horsemen,
strangers, as townsmen during this siege (whereof shall be spoken hereafter)
were v. or.vj. thousand men: they had. vj pieces of Artillery, as.ij. or.iij.
means, and certain less pieces in the Castle.

The Princes, after the rendering of Luzignan, and before they besieged Poytiers,
took Monstruel, Bonyn, Couche, Sasay, Viuone, with other little Castelles
about Poytiers, thereby to hold the Catholics more strait. In which mean
while the Princes horssemen made ordinary roades even to the gates of
Poytiers, burning many Abbaies, Priories, and Temples.

The xxiiij. day the said horsemen, as well French as Allemans, presented the^
selves in battaill before the town, on y^ side, which is above the Abbaye of S.
Cyprien, until very near S. Benoit, being divided into two great hosts:
Certain horssemen of the Town issued out at the gate toward the Bridge
Anioubert, with certain numbers of shot on foot, who without any thing
doing, retired into the town, and the horssemen of the Religion, into their
several quarters.

The.xxv. day of the same month, the Princes footmen and horssemen presented
again before the Town about noone. The footeme^ gave a hot charge upon the
suburbs De la Cueille, where the Capteyn Bois-vert, with his company, (l^dged
behynd a little trench) making negligent watch, were suddenly set upon, and the
most part killed: the rest being forced to retire more low to the suburbs S.
Ladre, were valiantly followed by them of the religion even to the posts and
houses joining to the gate of the suburbs: There began a hot skirmishe which
lasted almost five hours, until the night divided them: they (of the religion
being come but to make a first view of the state of the town) retyring with
loss of very few of their people. The.xxvj. day being tuesday, Poict. besieged.
the Princes beset the town on all sides, pitching their tents in the medowe
beneath Hostel-dieu nere to a milne, where they made forth with a bridge upon
the river of Ciyn to pass on both sides the town as need required: the same
day, certain principals of the army viewed the town on al sides, beginning
the next day to batter the defenses of the Castle with certain culuerines and
other meaner pieces. There was no other thing worthy of report done this month,
but making and filling of baskets, dividing of quarters, dyspesing the camp,
casting trenches, ditches, and digging of earth to cover and shroude the shot.

The battrie began the Monday being Battery against Poye.
the first of August on the right side of the Tower of the bridge Anionbert,
and the wall fast by, planting.viij. or.ix. pieces of battery upon the rock or
hill right against the said bridge, above and between the suburbs of Pympaneau
and S. Sornyn, which continued.iij. days: the reason was, that other ways the
said tower might grieve the army and other batteries: they forbear not also to
provoke skirmishe, wherein they that kept the suburbs beyond the bridge as
captains Arsach and Bonneau with their company were forced to leave the said
suburbs.

As Soon as the said suburbs were abandoned, there was brought down.ij.
Canons to beat the foot of the wall, piercing of purpose to make it a house to
serve for baskets of earth, the same being perceived by them in the town,
forth with discharged certain volues of the cannon against it, to make it
fall, and so enforced the said ij. cannons to be haled away: in the mean while
the protestants labored to win the suburbs of Rochreull, guarded by the
captain La Vacherie, skirmishing contynually within a vine, lying directly
between the said suburb and the castle, where was hot war without
intermission. The.v. of August the said captain la Vacherye as he maintained
the skirmish was shot through the head with a harquebush where of he dyed in the
field.

I have noted before that the L. d'Aunoux, master of the camp of the regiment
of the late count Brissac, was left within S. Mesen by the count Du-lude,
since his return from Nyort, who now by commandment from the Duke of Guyse,
coolled out.iiij. or.v. hundred of the best soldiers in his companies to come
to the succors of Poyctyers, sending the residue with his carriage to Pertnay,
where was the captain Allard, and so he aryued at Poyetyers about two hours
after mydnight the sixth of August.

The battery having ceased at ye bridge Anionbert, from the.iiij. of this
month, began again the* vij. of the same, albeit not on that side but against
a tower of the bridge S. Cyprian next to the suburbs, by mean whereof they
within were enforced to discende and leave the said tower, and Battery against
Poye.
entrenche themselves upon the bridge with vessels and hogsheades and other
such like things, ye Protestants from that time afterward, being unable to
grieve them within the Abbay of S. Cyprian, as they did before: The company of
captain Reynaut was ordained for the guard of this tower and quarter.

After the defenses of this tower were raised, the Princes removed their pieces
to the right side of the wall of the Abbots meade, thinkyng that place most
weak of all the town, and to that effect they planted their cannons the nynth
of this month to make a breach, bestowyng others in other places to batter the
flank and side, having y^ day before set up in this quarter upon the river of
Clyn a, bridge of pypes and boordes tied together with great cables.

The battrie was so vehement and fierce, that in small time they had enforced
two great breaches, the one near the other, skowringe such defenses as
annoyed them by reason of a tower and mylne which were there by: they within
labored to fill up their breaches, albeit with great difficulty and
distress, as not able to show them selves within the Abbotes meade without
great peril, because the hills governed all the said meadow.

The breaches thus battered, the Protestants were of mind to assault them,
bestowing (for this purpose) their people in squares and wings, and showed
themselves upon the hills in very good order. They first sent certain
Capteynes and Souldioures to view the breaches, who brought report, that they
could not be entered without great peril, the rather because the bridge which
they had erected upon Clyn (over the which they must pass to go to the
breach) was neither convenient for the matter, nor sufficient to bear the
souldioures that should pass over it, neither could the horssemen (what
distress or need so ever chanced) go to the succoures of the footmen within
the said Abbots meade if it happened that they were charged by the horsemen of
the Catholykes. Besides, they within had planted a counter battery of.iij.
or.iiij. Canons fast by Carmes, which dischargyng right upon the breaches,
might much endaunger them that offered the assault: these were the causes that
nothing was done yt day. Captain Caluerat being in a tower near the breach,
and going to see it, was killed the same day: in the night the catholics
descended to the river, and cut the cords of the bridge before mentioned and
so brake it, using this policy to cover and disguise their enterprise, they
brought down great volues and noise of Harquebushot, bestowing them against the
body of the watch being near the artillery, to the end they should be
neither heard nor seen whilst they brake the bridge. These things hanging thus
in train before Poyctyers, the king, and Q. mother accompanied with the
Cardinals of Bourbon and Loriain; came to Amboise, and from thence to Towars
whether the Kings brother came to them: there they deliberated upon means to
succoure Poyctiers, and to that end was dyspatched speedelye the knight
Montluc with five hundred harquebusiers on horsback, to get (if he could)
within Poyctyers, albeit he was so discovered in the way y^ his enterprise
quailed and he returned to y^ camp: The king sent for ye L. de Sancsac lying
before the siege of La Charity to come to him with all his forces: he procured
also a spedy leuy wtin Paris of.20 enseignes of footmen and certain horsemen,
dispatching special letters to all ye Nobility of France to repair spedely
to him to the camp, which he was determined to follow in person, and that upon
pain of confiscation of bodies and goods, or to be declared wtin the danger of
contempt, he raised also his arrear banks in many provinces, who forth with
came to him in the said country of Touraine, in effect he assembled with
wonderful diligence as much succors as he could for ye reskue of Poyctiers.
There were certain cornets which ordinarily used to beat the streets and ways
wtin half a league of Chastelleraut, amongst whom were specially, the L. of
Boniuets companies, son to y Lord of Creuecoeur, and of the baron of Numburg
a Normande: which being known to ye garrison of ye said Chastelleraut,
together with the certain place where the said Lord Boniuet was wont to come,
the x. of August.ij. or.iij. hundredth horsemen with certain shot of ye captain
Norman, made a sally upon them, and took y^ said L. Boniuet with his company in
a village nere to Liguers where they entered without let as keeping negligent
guard, and were found laid and lodged after the french manner, the Lord Boniuet
was prisoner, and almost all the rest of his company either killed or taken.
About the same time the Marquis of Rancon an Italian, was taken near to
Myrebeau as he bayted, and was led prisoner to Nyort The Lord of Tarri^les
governor for the King in Quercy, maintained war all this while in Bern, a
country belonging to the Queen of Nauarte, having almost brought all the
country under his auctority: wherefore ye count Mo^tgomery, sent (as is said)
into Gascoyne* assembled y^ forces of the.ij. vicountes to apply spedely to ye
succors and reskue of ye city of Navarre in Bearn beseged by ye said L. of
Tarrides: he divided his iornye into such diligence and speed as about ye.7. of
August he was very nere Nauarreis, at whose so sudden coming, the Lord
Tarrides raised his siege, and retired into a town there joining, where the
Montgomery besieged and took him with his brother and the Lord de S. Colombe
and of Negr^-pelisse, with many other great lords and knights of the order, and
captains to the number of xxx. The Lord of Tarrides lost his artillerye with a
great number of his horsemen and footmen: The count Montgomery, (by mean of
this discomfeite) restored the whole country of Bearn to the obedience of the
Queen of Navarre.

Touching the siege of Poyctyers, they within were in great amaze with the
breaches made in the abbottes meade, the rather because they could not defend
them, whereupon entering into counsel, they found most best and necessary to stem
the river of Clyn to the end to make it run over his channel and so drown
the said meade: this counsel was put to speedy execution, and planting stakes
and pales proper for the purpose beneath ye arches of the bridge of Rochercul,
they dammed the river, so that in a moment the mead was all overflowed with
water about. iij cubits high, the same so troubling the protestants, as it
drive them from their determinations, notwithstanding after they had considered
well of the subtilty, they began as in a counter policy, to beat the pales,
and give vent to the water, and therefore the next morning discharged so many
shots of artillery against the said waterworke, as the water retired and left
the meade dry, which the catholics the night following restored and
countergarded in this order: they cast behynd the said damme under the arches a
very thick wall, fastening certain fleeces or balls wol to the pales to
receive and damp the cannon shot, which made the water swell and ouerflow more
high than before: Notwithstanding the catholics were closed very nere and
strait, yet made they many sallies upon the protestants, who skowred them back
again even to the very posternes of their citys, not without great loss to
the one and other side: Amongst these sallies they made one of such a sudden
the.xij. of this month that they took a cornet of Reistres, and carried them
without let into the town.

In this month the town of Orillac in Auuergne, was taken by night by the L.
de la Roche, and Bessonniere, professors of the religion in that country,
accompanied only with.vij. or viij. score men. This was their mean and
policy: there is in the said Oryllac, a gate of quarrye in the wall toward
the river, which the inhabitauntes of the place caused to ram and wall up,
leaving only a posterne so strait, that one person could scarcely enter.

This posterne was cloased with two ports or gates of woodde, the one within
and the other without the Town: the said Lord of la Roche and Bessonniere
came to the gate without the po^terne and with a great iron instrument made a
hoale or creuish, by the which they cast in about a hundredth pounds of cannon
powder between the said two gates, and then closing up the said hoale or
creuishe, and making under the said first gate a train to the same powder,
they put fire to it, which forthwith flushed within the said two gates, and
blewe them both up, the one carried forty pace of, and thrown upon a house
within the Town, and the other enforced with the violence and strength of the
powder, pushed against a wall without the town, and brake a brea^he contaynyng
his own compass, by which they entered the town, wherein was no other guard
than of the inhabitants, whereof they killed a hundredth or six score
resicting them in armoure. The Lord of S. Heraut gouernoure of the country
appeared certain days after before the town* thinking to recover it, but
fynding such warm resictaunce he returned forth with to S Flower

The long continuance of this siege before Poyctyers, brought the Catholics
in a great necessity and want of vittails, alwell for men as horses, and above
all, forage was so ska^t with them, that they were driven for to turn abroad
part of their horses to the vynes, meadows, lands, and other void places of
the town: whereof the Princes having understanding by certain straggling
soldiers issuing out of the town, determined to break the mylne in the
bottom of the medowe near to the port de Tyson.

And for this purpose planted over.ij. cannons in that quarter, which they
discharged against the said mylne, and after retired them as being discovered
and annoied by the Catholics: who pinched now with an extreme want of
vittailes, determined to thrust out of the town a great number of unprofitable
persons, which as they began to execute the.xvj. of this month, so the
protestants (to pine and sterue the town more) drive them back with force to
enter the town again.

For want of powder and bollets, the battrie ceased for a time, whereof, the
Princes having received a new provision from Rochell, renewed also the battery
the xx. of August on that side toward the Abbottes meade, where the breach
being forced, they sent in the evening to survey it by certain numbers of
soldiers, whereof.xvj. or xvij. entered by the breach in to the said meadow, from
whence (being discovered by the watch in S. Peter's steple who ronge the alarm
bell) they were constrained to retire with speed.

The night following the protestants builded a bridge upon Clyn toward the
suburbs of S. Sornyns, to pass to the bishops mead, stretching toward the
temples of S. Radegonde and S. Sulpice: the bridge was made of quarreis of
wood, hurdles, pypes, earth and plankes of oak very large, also well fastened
and joined with nails, cables, and cords, yt the cannon might well pass over
it, and of such breadth that.viij. or.ix. men might walk a front. They made an
other of the same matter and fashion, and set it likewise upon the river
about.xl. pase distant from the other. These bridges thus made and erected,
they bestowed many baskets with earth, as well near the first bridge, as on the
other side that which was within the bishops meade, drawing to the suburbs of
S. Sornyn near the said bridges, part of their artillerye beating the defenses
of the wall, which are before and right against the said temples: Those
defenses thus beaten and skowred, the battrie began the morrow after being
the.xxiij. of August, in that place and the bishops mead. The catholics
labored to their best to repair their breaches, and had no assault that day:
The Lord of Briancon, brother to the count Du lude, going the same day to
view a platform near to Carmes, to supply some special want with his
advise, had his head stricken from his shoulders with a bollet: Likewise the
Lord d'Aunous, stryuing the same day to drive the Protestants from a Tower
which they occupied near the breach of the Abbottes meade, was stricken in the
head with a harquebush, whereof he dyed shortly after.

The Lord of Prunaye also being amongst his soldiers at the breach, had his
left leg taken away with a cannon and so dyed Of the protestants side were
killed the Lord of Chanay called Frauncis du Fay and one of the Marshalls of
the camp of the vauntgarde hurt with a musketie in the arm, broken in two
parts.

The four and twenty of this month in the morning, the Princes renewed
oftsones the batterye with twelve or.xiiij. pieces against the wall before the
said Temples, the same being of such vehement fury, that there was discharged
that day more than seven hundredth shottes of cannon, which beat a large breach
before three of the clock in the afternoon, and the protestants ringed in
battle upon the top of the hills toward the subburbes, ready to give the
assault, which they intended forthwith to do by the Abbots meade, as having
disposed most part of their army on that side: The catholics were busy to
releue their breaches with beds, faggots, and other matters apt to fill up.

The Duke of Guyse being at the one breach and the count Du-sude at the other,
seeing the enemy prepared strongly and spedely to the assault, rong the alarm
bell of the town, to the end that every one might retire into his quarter. There
was a captain of the protestants, who being followed with ten or twelve and
covered only with his target, ran over one of the bridges within the bishops
meade, and came even to the little corner or arm of the river that touches
the wall, and so viewed the breach, which he reported to the Admiral not to
be sufficiently assaultable, as well because the ruin and breakings of the wall
were feign within the town and had not filled up ye river which runs at the
foot of the wall, as also that they within had raised great trenches and
rampires, whereupon the army retired in the evening without any assault: This
day captain Gascourt Knight of Mal^e, was slain with a cannon, being sent by
the Guyse, to view the breach, and consider what was necessary to defend it.

The morrow being the.xxv. of August, the princes army was eftsoon ringed in
order as though they would go to the assault, the breaches were once again
viewed, as well that within the abbottes meade as the other at S. Radegonde, by
certain captains and soldiers, who in their return reported the perilous
estate of the same.

The same day, the Protestants bestowed certain shot of artillery as well
against the bridge Anioubert, as Rochereul, wherein were beaten certain holes
or creuisses to avoid the water out of Abbottes mead: the same being filled
and stopped again the same evening by the Catholics.

The rest of this August passed without any great effects, saving certain
light batteries to purge the waters and raze the mylne of Tyson, together with
certain sallies made sometime by the Bridge Ach^rd. It was thought that the
sickness of the Admiral and ye L. d'Acier was the cause why there were no more
attempts advanced.

The first of September, the Princes determined to win the suburbs of
Rochereul, to the end by that mean the sooner to rydde the waters. And
because they would cut off from such as kept the said suburbs all succors
and relief from the town, they bent first certain canons against the tower
of ye bridge of Rochereul, discharging upon it above an hundredth voleys, which
battered a great part of it, winning in the end the vine whereof is spoken
before, which houered and valted on high over the streate of the suburbs.
This was almost the chiefest place of skirmishe, since, and during the siege.

The morrow, they battered the defenses of the Castle and Rochereul bridge,
pitching also new batteries under the Nut trees near the River, between the
way that goes to Hostel-dieu, at the parting of the suburbs drawing to the
meadow toward Chastelleraut.

The saturday the.iij. of September, the battery began in the morning against
the wall and gate of the suburbs, which by.ij. of the clock in the after noone
had thrown open a wide breach, whereupon the protestants did speedely ring them
selves in battaill, as well on high de la Cueil, (where lay a piece that
governed the Offices of the Castle) as beneath the said Hostel-dieu, and
in.iij. squares near the Nut trees of the place, where the battery was made.
The Catholics restored the breaches as much as they could, with vessels, wood,
earth, and rampires: and there were the Capteynes Passac, Nozieres, the Lord
of Mo^tail, and Carbonieres, with others prepared to sustain the assault.
They had bestowed about four hundredth harquebusears in the Towers, galleries,
and offices of the Castle, which flancked all along as they should come to the
assault. All which notwithstanding, the Protestants about three of the
Clock in the after noone, came to the assault, the Lord Pills, with his
regimen was Three assaults given to the subburbes of Ro^l.
the foremost, being followed with diverse other regimentes of the French
footmen, who valtauntly came upon the breach, and stood till they had
bestowed diverse blows with their Curtillaxes: albeit, they were constrained
to turn face in respect of the flankers, which grieved them greatly.
Immediately followed the second assault given by certain numbers of horssemen
descended on foot with diverse footmen, and they likewise repulsed.

These first assaults being performed by the French men, the ^ansquenets
would needs follow with a third, which albeit was performed with such
courage, as they fought valiauntly upon the breach, yet seeing the present
defense, and general danger to maynteyne it long, they reculed, and retired
every one into his quarter.

In these assaults the Protestants lost an hundredth or six score
Souldioures, with certain numbers hurt. The Lord de Pills was hurt in the
thigh with a small shot, whereof he was speedely cured. The Lord Bricquemaus
son, Colonel of the footmen was also hurt with a harquebush, whereof after
certain days he dyed. The Lord de S. Marie of Dauphinoys, with others of
mark were also killed. On the Catholics part were killed, Capteyn Passac, and
the Lord de Montall, with a good number of footmen.

Before these assaults, the Catholics sent two men to the King and his
brother for succors, with charge to reveal the estate of the Town and
penury of vittails. The Kings brother having assembled as much force as he
could, came to La Hay, and to Port de Pille, determining to beset
Chastelleraut, to ye end to draw the siege from Poytiers: and therefore made to
march his vauntgarde right to Chastelleraut, lodging the monday, being the.v.
of September, a quarter of a league from the town. The morrow after, his
horsemen and part of his footmen presented in order of battaill before the
Town to view it, all that day being spente in skirmishing on the other side the
river of Vienne.

The Town was governed by the L. de la Loue^, Marshall of the Camp of the
vauntgarde to the Princes: He had first for the defense of it, his own
company of light horsemen, and then the Lords of Valauoire, Brossay, La-motte,
and de Roeysses, with.vij. Companies of footmen, and Capteyne Normantes
company of harquebusears on horseback.

The suburbs defaced by fire, was no place for the Catholykes to lodge in, so
that they were constrained to encampe further off, which they began to do
the same day they viewed the Town. The Artillery brought by the Suyzers,
arrived at midnight, and immediately approches were made, and the canons ringed
in battery in two several places, beating notwithstanding all one breach. It
began the wednesday the.vij. of the said month, very early near the gate
S. Catherine, between a tower of ye said gate, and an other tower more near
drawing to ye temple S. Iean. Such was the fury of ye battery, as by two of
the clock in ye afternoon, a breach was forced of three or four score foot
wide: the chance fell upon ye Italians, to give ye assault, which they ^^d
being backed and followed with certain French me^. They mounted upon the^ breach,
where, albeit they Assault of Italians.
presented.xvij. enseignes, yet found they such sharp and speedy repulse, as
they were enforced in a moment to turn their faces, receiving great loss by
the ^aulte of the said gate, wherein were bestowed.vj. score harquebusears well
appointed. The Italians lost at this assault ^ of their enseignes, which y^
Protestants took from them by force.

After this assault (and the Catholics retired from the breach) Capteyne
Bernier d'A^phinoys came to succor the Town with iiij. hundredth
harquebusears, being backed with the horssemen of the Princes vauntgarde led by
the L. de la Love and Telignie. The Italians were so crushed at this assault as
they had no will to make it good again, neither was any other thing worthy of
memory done that day.

The same day, the siege of Poytiers raised to come to reskue Chastelleraut,
marching no further that day than three leagues, by reason one of ye Canons
miscarried and was left on the place. The morrow after the Army approached
within half a league of Chastelleraut, which made the Catholykes raise their
siege, and retire to Port de Pille, having lost in this siege five hundredth
men, and almost all Italians, whereof the Colonel Fabiano de Rome was one. The
next morning the Princes vauntgarde pursued the Catholykes, cutting off from
the tail of their Camp about two hundredth footmen, and killed them all.

The same day, the Lord de Sanzay entered Poytiers with.x. or.xij. companies of
footmen, almost all Italians, and two hundredth horssemen. Immediately after
whose coming the Duke of Guyse and the Marquise du Meine his brother,
accompanied with.xv. hundredth horssemen, departed the Town to relieve
themselves with fresh air. The morrow after, being the.x. of September, began
a skirmishe on the hither side the said Port de Pille against ij. thousand
harquebusears which the catholics had left there within the trenches. They were
at last enforced to pass spedily over ^re^se, leaving about.iiij. or.v.
hundredth of their company dead on the place. The Princes army drew to la
Hay, to pass the said river the next morning, being the.xj. of the said
month. There was no worthy matter performed other than certain light
skirmishes.

The monday following, the Princes army ready ringed in battaill very early,
presented before the Catholykes to give them battle: Albeit, because there was
between the two Armies a little River with marise shoares, which neither the
Princes could pass them selves, nor yet conueye over their Artillery. After
the two armies had long remained one within view of an other, they retired
into their several quarters. The princes army, for want of vittayles, and
seeing withal the Catholykes had small disposition to fight, passed again
over Cr^use, and also Vienne, the.xij. of September, retyring so to Faye la
Vineuse in Poyctou, of purpose chiefly to refresh them. The catholics drew to
Chynon, expecting not only forses to be brought from many places in France, but
also such companies of men of arms as had leave til the first of October as
has bin said.

The Prince of Orange departed from Faye to return into Almaigne with a very
small company, he passed by Charity and Vezelay, and from thence by many
countries without any let till he came into Almaigne, The brute went that he
undertook this journey to have certain succors of Reistres.

As the Admiral lay at Fay vineuse, there was one Dominike Dalbe a Gascone
executed by sentence the xxi. of this mo^th. These were the causes proved
against him: First, y^ he being of the admirals chamber, and sent by him to the
Duke de deux Pons with letters, as well from the said Admiral his master as
other Princes, was taken at Brissac, a country in the marches upon the end
of May last, by the lord la Riuiere, Captain of the guard to the Catholics,
and being by him earnestly, solicited, he revealed to the queen mother, Duke
d'Aniow her son, and Cardinal of Loraine his journey with the purpose, with
further promise, that under color to go and deliver to the said Duke his
letters of charge, to espy his camp, and sound his secret determinacions, and
so being presented from that time with an hundred crounes, and an estate or
office roomth in the chamber of the said duke d'Aniou, he put him on the way to
effect his promise touching the view and report of the Dukes camp, from whom
having speedy dispatche, he returned to ye said la Riuiere, and imparted his
full expedition, not forgetting to describe at large what he had learned of the
state of ye dukes camp. Secondly, he was instantly persuaded and pursued as well
by one Laurence de Ruze, Secretary to the duke d'Aniou, as by the said la
Riuiere, to kill by poison or otherways the said Lord Admiral: which he might
be bold to do (say they) without fear of the Admirals children, who also
should be rooted vpto the uttermost of their race, neither need he stand upon
any dreadful respect of any his friends or kinsmen, seeing they assured him y^ no
one of them should ever be well received or welcomed to the court, as first the
Marshal Montmorancy his Cosine should be committed to prison, where he should
never come out with honor, and that of the rest of the said Marshals
brethren, there should not remain one. Finally, the (rather to allure him to
such an horrible act) they sealed their last offer with a dampnable promise of
xxx. thousand crowns in recompense, and xxx. thousand Frankes of perpettritie
out of the town of Paris, besides the favorable good will (all days of his
life) as well of the Queen mother, Duke d'Aniow, as Cardinal of Loraine, and
the whole court. Dalbe yielded so far to their murderous enticements, as he
gave his word and promise to kill the Admiral: Whereupon was delivered him by
the said la Riuiere certain white powder, which was known afterward to be
either Reagar, or Arsinicke, with a large pasport from the said kings brother,
wherewith he departed and came to the lord Admiral his master at the siege of
Poictiers: his long abode in the Catholics camp, together with other
suspicious circumstaunces appearing at his arriual, persuaded a ielous
judgment of his dealing, and thereupon was committed to prison, his process
pursued and ended, and sentence lastly pronounced in these terms.

Judgment pronounced the xx. of September 1569. in the council established by
the princes of Navarre and Conde present, and assisted with the Prince of
Orange, the Count Wolrard de Mansfelde, lieuetenaunt general of the
Almaignes, under the said princes, the Countes Lodouike and Henry de Nassau
brethren, Menard de Chomber Marshall of the Almaignes camp, Hans Boucq,
Renard Gracco, Henry Destain, Hans de There Is, Colonels of the Reistres, Guieryn
Gangolf Baron of Grelesee, Colonel of a regiment of Launceknightes, Theodore
Wegger professor of the law, and Ambassador from the Duke de Deux ponts, with
many other lords, knights, colonels and Reistremaisters of Almaigne: the lord
of Corras counselor to the king in the parliament of Toulouse, and
chaunceller to the Queen of Navarre and the army, the lord of Francourt,
Bricquemau, de Mouy, de la Noue^, de Renty, de Soubize, de Mirambeau, de la
Caze, de Puch-perdillan, de Biron, de Lestrange, with many other lords,
gentlemen and captains of France.

Seeing the process made by the co^missaries deputed by the said princes of
Navarre and Conde, against Dominique Dalbe, groom of the chamber to ye L.
Gaspard Count de Coligny, lord of Chastillon, and Admiral of France, the iij.
examinations of ye said Dalbe before the Provost general of the camp, and two
other before the commisioners assigned for ye purpose, lastly, ye confessio^s
of the said Dalbe reiterated v.iij. several times, wherein he acknowledges to
have been instantly solicited, urged and pressed by la Riuiere, captain of the
guard and one Laurence de Ruze, secretary to the kings brother, to practice and
procure the death of ye said L. Admiral, either by sword or poison, which he
promised to ye said la Riuiere to effect with poison only, receiving (to that
end, of the said la Riuiere certain money, and poison in form of white powder,
which he has showed since to the said Provost and commissioners, seeing also
the verification and proof of the said poison tried by Phisicions and
Apothecaries assembled at la Hay in Touraine, the xiij. of this month
together with a very large pasport granted to the said Dalbe the 30. of the
last month by the kings brother, lying then at Plessis les Tours: and now (for
due punishment and revenge to such a traitorous and detestable attempt so often
acknowledged, as well in his private co^fessions, as public assembly, the said
council has and does condemn the said Dalbe to be delivered into ye hands
of the executioner of high justice, who tieng him upon a hurdels, with a halter
about his neck, shall draw him through the streets and corners accustomed of
this town de Fay la Vineuse, with this inscription in parchment about his
body: This is Dominike Dalbe, traitoure to the cause of God, his Country, and
Master: trailing him first to the lodgyng gate of the said Lord Admiral, and
there with no other garments than his shirte* the halter remaining still about
his neck, holding in his hand a torch of burning wax, shall demand pardon of
God, ye king, the law, and the lord Admiral, confessing there ye wickedly,
disloyally, and traitorously he had professed, promised and practiced to kill
by poison ye said L. admiral his master, and at the same instant and in his
presence ye said poison which he confessed to be given unto him by the said la
Riuiere, to be cast into the fire and burned. All which being done, he shall be
led (keeping still the inscription about his body) to the place of public
execution, and there to be hanged and strangled on a gallows set up for that
purpose. And that also humble suit be made to the king to do justice upon the
said la Riuiere and Laurence, with their accomplices, and with all, (if his
majesty be of mind) to verify more ample their said conspiracy with the
said Dalbe (the same not withstanding resembling a sufficient truth against
them by his voluntary confession) to proceed against them with punishemente
due to so horrible a fact, and the same both to terrify hereafter others of
like villainous humor, and also to remain to all nations, as a President of the
noble nature and disposition of France, in abhoryng such traiterous
attemptes, declaryng the said la Riuiere and Lawrence, with all other sects
and sorts of traitors (keeping school and open shop to poison persons of name
and virtue) to be traitors, villains, and men unworthy of honor, either in
themselves or their posterity to the iiij. generation: Lastly, it is judged,
that before the execution of judgment, the said Dalbe shall be put on the rack,
to the end to confess further practices with his said confederates, with other
things contained in interregatories given to the Pronost: This sentence thus
pronounced, the morrow after being the xxj. of September the rack was used
accordingly, where he confirmed his former confessions, and so the same day the
sentence was put in execution.

Whilst the kings brother kept at Chynon in the country of Touraine whether
he was retired (as is said) great numbers of men of war flocked to him from
many parts of the realm, together with the horsemen to whom he gave liberty for
recreacion, and the xx. ensigns of footmen Parisiens, whereof we spoke before:
these forces assembled, he made march his Vauntegarde out of Chynon the six
and twenty of this month, under the conducte of the Lord Mont-pensier,
himself followyng with the battle, lodgyng near Lodune, the Princes camp
drue toward Partney the.xxix. of this month, whom the Catholics followed
near to provoke them to battle, as in respect of the advantage and favor of
certain towns which they held thereabout: either camp was within the view of
other, and both of equal desire to gain Mont-gontour, using like diligence the
rather to obtain it: For which cause the admiral made his footmen advance
all night, his horssmen being in point of battle the last of September in the
very first discovery of the morning upon a plain within a league of
Mont-gontour. There the Admiral sent the Lord de La-loue, and de La-noue^
with.vij. cornets of horsemen, and Captain Normant, harquebusiers on
horssebacke, to Mont-gontour to know if the Kings brother were there, who
finding no body, returned with speedy report to the Admiral accordingly, who
made march forthwith the footmen of the battle, then the Artillery, and so
the footmen of the vauntgard, as well French as Almains, following them himself
with the horssemen of both the one and other nation: He left in the tail the
Lord de Mouy with charge to govern the retraict with five cornets of French
horsemen, two cornets of Reistres, and a company of harquebushears on
horssebacke of captain Montarnaunt a provincial: The catholics coasted them
very near, exspecting their artillery, which was not yet come. The admiral
passed over a little river half a leage from Montgontour, very uneasy to march
over, by reason of a marrish along the brinke of it, the same making it
impossible on all parts, saving in a little strait or gutter beneath certain
houses along the high way: There lacked no more but the Lord of Mouy and his
troop, whom the Catholics with.xl. cornets of horsemen charged together with a
voley of Cannons discharged also upon them. It was thought this charge was
given by ^ lord de Tauannes governor for the king in Burgon: it was withstanded
a little by the Lord de Mouy, who unable to sustain it thoroughly, in respect of
the multitude, retired: The Admiral seeing his peril, gave back with the
horssemen, and returned (with no less sury) the charge upon them that had
laid it upon the L. de Mouy, who in the mean time retired with the rest of
his troop with the loss of some few, amongst the which was the Lord de
Entrichaut, ensign bearer to the Lord S. Auban Dauphynois: the Artillery was
by this at Mont-gontour, and the footmen of the battle very near, who seeing
that charge, turned back to the fight, as also the Lord de la Noue^, and
la-Loue with their cornets, all that day passed in skirmishing without offer of
other charge.

The Catholics shot vehemently, which albeit annoyed much the Admiral: yet
he left not the field till night, and then retired with those of the Religion
to Mont-gontour, and the Catholics encamped upon the place.

The next morrow being saturday, and first day of the month of October, the said
army issued out of Mont-gontour, and lodged in the Uillages thereabout:
leaving the Lord de Mouy with his regiment of horssemen, and two regiments of
footmen, within ye town to guard the passage. There were certain light
skirmishes, albeit neither of long fight, nor much loss: They moved by
certain disordered shot of the Catholics, who thought to win the Subburbs
on their side, but being repulsed, their purpose was also intercepted, and they
forced to return without any other thing doing.

The kings brother seeing that side closed from him, and that he could not
easly wade the River of Viue, (the same being his only impediment to follow the
Princes camp) determined to pass above the head of the river in a village
beneth Mirebeau. In the mean while the Princes, having been at Nyort to see
the Queen of Navarre, returned to the camp the second of October, where they
drue into counsel with resolution to take the way to Partney and Nyort, and
give battle to the Catholics if they assailed them in the way, sommoning (for
this purpose) the whole army to be ready by the dawning of the day: and every
Colonel and captain to labor accordingly in his charge.

The Catholics were also of opinion to go to Nyort and beseege it, and by that
means to provoke the Princes to battle. The Princes camp (according to the
order resolute aforesaid) was in a perfect readiness, ringed in battles and
squares, pitching the next morning the third of October, upon a little hill
near to Mont gontour, well disposed (as is aforesaid) to give battle if the
ennimie advanced, who also began to appear and discover on the left hand
upon an other round hill, from the bottom whereof they might easily discern the
disposition of the Princes army, which when he had well viewed, he retired his
march as though he meant to draw directly to Nyort, using notwithstanding such
order as his rings and companies kept near together. The Admiral bearing an
eye to their doings, espied their pollitie and purpose of proceeding, wherein as
he suspected, that they shot at his advantage, as laboring to win way upon
him, made descend forthwith the Princes army from the hill where it was
settled, of purpose to gain and occupy the plain before them, wheruppon the
Catholics, in place to march forward, commanded a sudden stay, holding their
Pikes upright, and ringing them in square and mean battles turned face to their
vauntgard, winning (by that means) the hill from whence the princes army were
but now descended. And being masters in this sort of the hill above the
opinion and expectation of the Admiral, began to dispose them selves to the
shocke. And at the first descending from the hill, they ordered and ringed their
footmen in the valey or side of the foot of the said hill, not without great
discretion and judgment, keeping by that means their footmen in covert, and
defended from the storm of the artillery, which discharged vehemently as well
on the one as other side. In the mean while the kings brother dressed and
disposed two batteries, not sparing his body to travel from one battle and
square to an other, with persuasion to the soldiors, to have good heart, the
like also did the Princes, visiting in person every rank as well of horssemen
as footmen, whose pleasant aspect, and specially in the prince of Navarre,
gave cause of singular courage to the soldiors, whose stomachs besides they
were firmly settled in the goodness of the cause, yet they seemed to redouble
in desire, the rather at the gracious view and persuasion of the young Prince.
Immediately after two of the clock in the after noone, the vantgarde of the
Catholics went to the charge with a square and wing of.xviij. cornets of
Reisters, and great numbres of horssemen, as well French as Italyan, who
charged altogether so violently upon the Lord of Mouy, and la Love, that they
were enforced to endure and take the charge, retiring through the battle of the
Lanceknights which grieved them sore, notwithstanding the Admiral supplied the
charge, and gave with such furye upon the Catholic Reisters, that he cut
great numbres of them in pieces, and immediately with the remainder of his
horssemen of the Uauntgarde, repulsed with force the Uauntgarde of the ennemy:
wheruppon was raised a cry on the Admirals side, Uictory, Uictory, the same
sounding with such noise of comfort in the ears of the main battle, that
diverse ran thither to follow the victory: When lo the Catholics maine
battle advanced, bending directly upon the Princes battle, where they were
in person. To the Catholics battle joined a wing of horssemen, which came
from the vauntgarde. At the beginning, the battle of the Princes sustained the
charge, albeit finding and feeling their own weakness, as being not able to
fight together (as the Catholics did) were enforced to disorder and fell out
of array, the horssemen of the vauntgard dispersed here and there without
order, and not drawn as yet into any safe policy or guard of war, followed
also the others, whereby both the French and Almaine footmen were left naked,
whereof the Frenchmen were first forced to break array, and then the Papists
horssemen on the one side, and y^ Suyzers on the other, began to buckle with the
Launceknights, who seeing themselves environed on all sides, neither present
help, nor cause of further hope, the rather for that the Artillery was
planted even at their feet, let fall their pikes and prosteate themselves upon
their knees, amongst whom rushed with no small fury the horsemen and certain
Suyzers using butchers mercy, and cut them all in pieces. The Count Mansfeld
and Lodouike retired always in order of battle: a thing worthy to be noted in
so general disorder, having about them xiij. cornets of Reistres, which had
not followed the others, with whom they gathered together certain cornets of
Frenchmen and so retired and never were charged. After the overthrow and spoil
of the Launceknights, the kings brother pursued the victory half a league and
no further, and so encamped in the plain of Cron, where the battle was given:
he was far stronger in horsemen and footmen, than the princes, who had, not
above vj. thousand horsemen of all sorts, as well strangers as others, viij.
thousand footmen French, and most harquebusiers, and lastly, three thousand
Lanceknights. In this battle the Princes lost their Launceknightes, a
thousand or xij. hundred French footmen, and about an hundred horses, vj.
Cannons, two coluerines, and three little field pieces: The lord d'Autricour
captain of a hundred light horsemen, a very forward and galland Gentleman was
there killed: the Lord d'Acyer and la Noue taken prisoners, and the Lord
Admiral lightly hurt in the cheke: In the catholics army were viij. or ix.
thousand horsemen, and xvj. or xviij. thousand footmen with great store of
artillery. They lost few footeme^ because they fought not, so that their
greatest loss consisted in horsemen, which, what with the chance of that day,
and the encounter before touched, grew to great numbers, with diverse of no
small estate, as the Count Mansfelde, and the Ringraue, the Marquis of Baden,
the young Count Cleremont Dauphynois, with many other Lords and knights of
the order: the Duke of Guyse, and the Ringraues brother hurt.

The retraite of the Princes and their army was to Partenay about vij. leagues
from the place of the battle, where, as they arrived the night following at
midnight, so the next morning the iiij. of this month, they departed from
thence with the Admiral, Count Mansfelde, the Count Lodouike and Henry de
Nassau brethern, with other great numbers of Lords, gentlemen, and Capteines:
coming the same day to Nyort, where they found the Q. of Navarre, remaining
there ever since they departed: in the mean time they laid the ways and
quarters by the Marshals of the camp, to the end the dispersed sort might
eftsoons resort to their ensigns, which was performed the same day by the
most part of the horsemen.

The third Book of the civil wars and last troubles of France, under
Charles the ninth.
NOt withstanding this last success and loss at Mo^tgontour, did both grieve
and amaze the Princes, yet they were not unmindful to reassemble their forces,
whereof ye most part of ye horsemen was forthwith under their standerdes, which
ye footmen could notdo with such speed in respect of their long retrait, and
therefore ye va^tgard of the battle were disposed severally into sundry
quarters and villages near to Nyort, by which mean the French footmen, who
(in respect of their good order) were not much distressed in this conflict,
resorted redily to their ensigns and companies. In the mean while the Princes
deliberated in the said town upon the sequel of their affairs, to whom
albeit the loss seemed great, yet (considering that in a general calamity
every one has his fortune, they covered their present grief, (and as the
necessity of their state required) with joyful countenance they assured
eftsoons the remaynder of their dispersed companies: In the evening the Queen
of Navarre departing from Nyort, went to Rochereul, and the princes ye next
morning took their way to Saintonge, leaving wtin Nyort both to make head
against the catholics, and let them to pass further, the Lord of Mouy with his
regimen of horsemen, and.ij. regimens of footeme^, beside the ordinary gar
rison, being perhaps.iij. hundred shot.

Such was the brute and heavy noise of this battle, that many companies of the
Princes army, as well footmen as horsemen, bestowed in several charges in
sundry castles and towns, as well in Poyctou as Touraine, determined to leave
their garrisons, as not able to endure a speedy siege, in respect they were
weak within themselves, and also had small hope to be succored in
sufficient time. As they which were within Chauigny upon Vien at Rochpose,
captain Belon within the Castle d'Angle with Chesnebrusle his ensign bearer,
which was at Pruly, together with captain Teil, captain of the castle of
Cleruaut, with his cornet of shot on horseback, departed, and abandoned their
several charges, taking their way to Charity: Captein Lornay governor of
Chastelleraut, as soon as the siege was raised, left the town the vij. of
October at xj. of the clock before noone with his own company of footmen, and
two others, whereof one was under captain Morans, being in all about three
hundred footmen, and two hundred horsemen, and took their way toward
Charity, passing by leblane in Berry, and from thence came to Bourgdien, a
town belongyng to the Bishop of Bourges, and heretofore taken by skaling by
the Lord de Bournay: there they joined with the rest aforesaid, and also the
Lord de Bricquemau the elder, who tarried there with his companies in respect
of his sickness.

In the mean while, the kings brother following his victory, came to Partnay,
which he found desolate, directing his way from thence to Nyort to besiege it:
certain forerunners of his camp were come already to the gates to terrify
those that were within the town. At this alarm the Lord de Mouy with
certain horsemen issued spedely out of the town, who were no sooner without
the gates, than the other were retired almost out of sight, whereupon he
returned, and being one of the last to govern the retraite, as he was at
point to enter the town, one Montreuell (yielded to him not long before under
color of religion) discharged a Pistolet upon him, and hurt him sore in the
head, flying immediately well mounted upon the The Lord de Mouy hurt.
self same horse which the Lord de Mouy had given him: who notwithstanding his
hurt, determined not to depart the town, albeit being specially advised by
his friends to be carried where his hurt may be cured, he left Nyort the
seventh day of October, and came to Saints, and from thence he was carried to
Rochell, where within few days after he died, to the grief of the army: for
he was of stayed counsel in any cause of estate, of great speed and justice in
execution, and of long experience in matters of war, as witness his acts as
well in the battle of Dreux, as other places of worthy memory: the rest
appointed under him within Niort, left also the town together with the Lord de
la Brosse, gouerner there, retiring with.iij. hundred shot to Rochell. This was
the same Lord de la Brosse, who with the aid of the lord de Pluueau made
headageynst the Conte du Lude at the siege aforsayd.

The kings brother finding the town forsaken, entered without let: whether
also came very shortly after, the king, the Queen mother, and Cardinal of
Lorain, being then near Chynon: they began there to devise and deliberate upon
their present business, accompting it of special purpose, to recover the
Castle of Lusignan, wherein was governor the L. de Mirambeau, and that before
the Protestants had either renewed their strength, or well assured their present
companies: In this mind they dispatched forthwith certain to summon the
Castle, who so prevailed with persuasions to the governor, that easily enough
he gave up the Castle only with lives and goods saved: certain days before the
battle, there were bestowed in this hold five Cannons which descended to the
catholics by covenant: this was.iiij. or.v. days after the battle of
Mont-gontour. Nyort being thus abandoned, the Princes went to S. Jean d'Angely,
the* ix. of this month, and so to Saints, and because they gathered, that the
catholics would besiege it, they determined to man it with great numbres of men
of war, causyng to enter forthewith the horsemen of the L. de la Motte, with
certain footmen: like wise captein la Mures company, being of the regimen of
the L. de Virieu: At that time was governor the L. d'Oryoll, a gentleman of
Sainctonge, who after was content to give order to the policy and state of the
town, leauyng the consideration of matters of war to the L. de Pills, whom
the prince established there for that purpose, and who as yet was not fully
cured of the hurt in his thigh, received at the siege of Poyctiers. He with
the Soldiers and the rest of the inhabitauntes, resolved to defend the
Town, and endure the siege. The morrow after, the princes came to Saints, and
there made their army pass over Charante.

The tent he of this said month, the Lord of Montbrun and Myrabell departed
from the Camp to go into Languedocke, a journey pretended by them long time
before, so that they might lead thither their Regiments, and for this cause at
the siege of Poic^iers, as is aforesaid, the Lord de Pontais Marshall of the
Princes Camp, as well in their own name as for other, Colonelles, Captains and
Gentlemen of Dauphyne, were suitors for leave to go for a certain time into
Dauphyne, and the more to enforce their motion, they showed how long they had
followed the Camp, and that their Souldioures wearyed with so continual
war, stood in need to be relieved with the fresh air and fellowshippe of
their Country, and lastly as their general fear to be so evil wintered as
the year before, drive diverse numbres to retire without order to the Towns
holden by the Religion in Viuares, where they had sure aboade, so if they be
not somewhat relieved of their long and loathsome travel always in a camp, it
is also to be feared that by little and little they do not abandon their
Ensigns, and leave their Colonelles in the fields without Soldiers: The same
being already revealed unto them by certain numbers of their Soldioures, they
could do no less than commend their suit with humble request in themselves for
leave and liberty to depart now that the siege of Poictiers is raised: The
Princes answered that they could not order their request and satisfy the time
together, because they were as yet incertaine what would be the end and issue
of the siege, and therefore they thought it conuenyent that they tarried till
the end of the Monthe of September, hoping (after they had seen the resolute
proceedings of the Catholyques) to bestow their army in garrisons to rest all
winter: This answer qualified their requests with expectation of y^ end of
Septembre. When the army being returned from the country of Touraiue, and
soiourning near to Fay la Vineuse, their suit was eftsoons put upon new
terms: for which cause the gentlemen, capteins, and colonels of those country
men, assembled to deliberate upon the motion: some were of opinion to pursue
in general a leave and liberty of the Princes, seeing their time of September
is expired: But others judged the present season most inconvenient to entreat
for leave, considering the state and disposition of the war, every day
enclinyng to battle, where they were bound in duty to be, unless they
would deface the honor of their actions passed. Which last opinion, so settled
into the most of them, that they resolved universally both to mortify their
desire to go home, and also to give over to attempt further leave, attendyng
either by battle, or by some happy peace, to make them selves free of the
war, and so return and remain quietly in their houses.

And thus the Lord de Montbrun and Myrabell remained in the Camp until the
time wherein they thought to execute their enterprise: wherein after they had
communicated with the Lord de Verbelet brother to the bishop of Puy in
Auuergne, and many other as well of Dauphyne, as the countries thereabout (as of
purpose to have their company in the voyage) they went to Angoulesme, to the
end to tarry there for their furniture and strength.

This being known in the Camp, many came to Angoulesme to assist the voyage,
so that they were in all, about four hundred horsemen in very good point to
fight, with certain numbreof shot on horseback, with the which the said
Lord de Mountbrun, Mirabell, and Verbelet, departed the foureteenth day of the
month of October, and taking their way by Perigueux, came to Solliac the
Sunday the sixteenth of October, about two of the clock at after noone.
They thought there to pass Dordonne, but it was so swelled by the great
raynes fallen certain days before, that it was not possible to wade over. By
which difficulty they were constrained to stay there, sendyng for such
boats as they could find, by which they began to ferry the same day and all
the next night, not with such speed (in respect of their few boats) but
certain numbers were not yet passed in the morning. Which being espied of the
Catholic garrisons thereby, and specially they of Sarba, sent out three skore
horssemen with certain footmen and Paysantes to view the number of such as
were yet to pass, and what watch and guard they kept. Who with others to the
number of two hundredth, seeing neither order used, nor any shot his match
kindled, fell upon them, and discomfited them without resistaunce: many were
slain, and the rest stripped into their shertes, and so sent over the passage to
follow their company: Some using a speed above the rest in passing the day
before, the better to refreshe them at their ease, were set upon in the
night within their lodgings, and led away prisoners by the Catholics:
Amongst whom were the Lord de Quintel, a Dauphynois, Mormoiron de Venesin,
guide to the whole company, A Physician called M. M^rle with three others: the
Lord de Sarraz a Gentleman of Viuares, was taken by the same a little before,
but forthwith set at liberty.

The noise which the Catholykes made in charging them in the water side, gave
the Alarm to those that had already passed the River, being in a Town not
far off, who falling forthwith into array and order of defense, after they
had tarried sometime to receive them that eskaped to their succoures, began to
march toward Acyer, wherein they entered the next morning, and from thence
without other let, they went to Oryllac in Auuergne, from whence they
departed, as shall be hereafter declared,

After Niort was taken, the Kings brother determined to beseege the town of S.
Iean de Angely in Sainctonge, and for that same effect drue his army and
power on that side. The Lord of Byron, marshall of his camp, about the x. of
October, acompanied with certain cornets of horsemen, came to sommon the town
for the King: to whom the garrison made an answer by the Lord de la Ramiere,
that they meant not to surrender the town by other composition than a general
peace including the public quiet and profit of the realm of France, whereupon
he returned. And captain la Motte accompanied with xv. or xx. horsemen, went
forthwith to skome and skoure the wais within half a league about the town,
and specially of that side to Niort, fynding within a village certain footmen
of the catholics, whereof some were slain, some put to flight, and v. or vj.
taken and led prisoners into the town.

In the mean while they of the town prepared for the siege, using great
deuyse and diligence in fortifying diverse parts of it, some did beat down
part of the suburbs of Aulnis and Tailleburg, too cut from the Catholics
all convenient means too encampe there. Some filled up the ditches in
necessary places, in effect they left nothing imperfect which necessarily
belonged to the fortification of the town, ye better to endure the siege. The
L. de Pills governor there for the matters of war (as is said) made a view
of the footmen, which were a thousand or.xj. hundred of all sorts, as well
strangers as others, Immediately after this muster, the L. de Person arrived
there with.xxx. or.xl. horssemen, and then (because they would omit nothing
tending to the defense of the Town) they began to make fire works, with
other artificial engines to annoye the enemies.

About the.xiiij. day of this month, S. Iean de Angeli besieged.
the Kings brother planted his siege before Saint Iean d'Angely, about three
of the clock in the after noone. The Lord of Gouas regimen with certain
other, was lodged in the Suburbs of Aul^^s: dealing not that day with the
Suburbs of Taillebourg, as fearing they could not enter but with great peril.
They within the Town had forsaken this Subburbe, because they would not put
their men to the hazard in keeping it: Albeit, the Catholics forbear not to
sease upon it the next day, and lodge within it. The Protestants fortifyed
the Fort or place of defense without ye gate d'Aulnis, and filling it with
earth, rammed up the gate, omitting nothing necessary, either to force or
policy, wherein, to enforce a general diligence in their fortificatio^,
proclamations were pronounced through the Town, that all people, as well men,
women, as children, able or apt to travel, should labor and work at the
rampires, and that every one should have always before his door, three or
four sackes full of dong, to be employed in necessary places. According to
these commandments, there was a common assistence at the ra^piers, as well
of strangers, as people of the town, by whom was performed a wonderful
endeavor.

As soon as the Catholykes had made them selves Lords of the Suburbs
aforesaid, the Protestants made a sallie with forty horssemen, by the gate
De Matta, and set upon the Suburbs of Aulnis, where they killed four or five
men, and then fell on skouring the ways toward Nyort, till the place of
execution, where they found an Italian on horssebacke, and brought him into
the Town.

About the.xviij. day of this month, the Protestants made an other sallie by
the gate d'Aulnis, and issuing out above the forte, they descended within the
ditche by a ladder: there were of this faction (and conducted by Capteyn la
Motte.) Cl. souldioures with white shirtes above their garments, who charging
so happily upon the Suburbs d'Aulnis, found the Catholykes playing at
Cards, and so without any watch to discover them, they killed about three
score or four score Souldioures, and then retired upon the false trenche of
the ditche by the help of their harquebusears, which were upon the fort of
the gate. They wanne in this exployte two footmen enseignes.xl. or.l.
harquebusears, certain morrions, corcelets, and pollaxes of steel, which
they carried into the town, loosing not above.ij. or.iij. of their company.

The Catholykes in the mean while drue near their Artillery which they
planted so aptely in a vine toward Nyort, as it might beat as well the gate
of Nyort, as the bulwark of the Port d'Aulnis, and also the tower between the
two gates. Their battery which they bestowed there, was four Canons and a
Colueryne: Before they discharged any battery, they demanded to parley, and for
that cause, would that the Lord of Pills should have come forth of the town
upon their faith, which the Protestants thought not convenient for their
safety: albeit, in his place, they sent out of the Town la Riuiere, who was
no sooner without, than the Canon began to beat, which caused him to cut
off his further proceeding with speedy return.

Thus the battery began the xxij. day of October, beating the Tower of the
Town near to the Port d A'ulnis, and continued all the day, and toward
night it enforced a breach a forty or fifty pase wide, whereupon the
Catholykes sent one of their company to view it, who being come to the brink
of the ditch, and discovering him self to survey the breach, was killed with
a shot: so that that day passed without assault or any other special
attempt or act. In the night the Protestants with great diligence repaired
their breach, and let down to the ditche certain laborers and
Souldioures, to ryd away the ruin and broken stuff of the Wall fallen into
it. These laborers and soldiers before they came out of the ditche, they
set up a pretty Wall of a man's height, to make the place less accessible.
Besides, the Protestants keeping still a careful mind of their Town and
estate, considered diligently where, and how they might be annoyed by the
battery planted in the Uyne, which had there remeyned about eight days,
without discharge of Canon: whereupon they cast a trenche well flancked behynd
the breach, upon the which they bestowed certain Vessels and hoggesheades
to paui^e their shot. In the effect, the breach was so supplied, as the
place was stronger than before.

From this battery, the morrow after came certain thunders of the Canon
against the Forte of the Port d'Aulnis: and likewise three or four discharges
against the Port of Nyort, not forbearing notwithstanding their first
battery. But seeing this battery, brought forth small effect (not many
days after) they bestowed in place of the Canons, five Coluerins.

Removing the said Canons to the entrey of the Suburbs d'Aulnis, both directly
before and also so near the said Fort, that only the ditche was between
them. From thence began a vehement battery against the said Forte, as well
by these Canons as the Coluerins planted in their place, which bestowed
certain bollettes flanker wise, within the said breach even to the Castle.
The battery continued all the day, all that night, and all the next morrow
of one violent fury without ceasing, so that both the Fort and the Portal (by
which is the ordinary entry into the Town) were almost beaten to powder.

In the mean while, the Protestants made a covert way between the Forte and
the gate, to the end, that the ruin falling from the gate, should not annoye
nor hinder the entrey of the Fort.

After this long and vehement battery, the L. de Guytinieres demanded to
speak with the Protestants, and under the honor and virtue of their word,
entered the Town the four and twenty day of this month, about two of the
Clock at after noone. He labored to induce them to render the Town, but the
Lord de Pills remained constant in his first answer, that there could no
other price buy the Town, than an assured peace, to the profitte and quiet of
the Realm. Whereupon the Lord de Guitinieres returned again and came to the
Camp without other effect of his purpose.

He was no sooner out of the said Town, then the Catholykes rushed fiercely
to the assault so unlooked for, that the Protestants doubted of their
sauetie, the rather because the assault was maynteyned as well at the breach
of the fort as on the right and left side of it within the ditch, the better to
come to the gate of the town which they had battered (as you have heard). And
for their more easy coming to the breach of the forte, they had provided
great numbers of pyonners to bear sackes full of earth and cast them upon the
breach: who besides turning up ye earth, threw stones against the protestants,
by which they greatly grieved diverse of them: They presented upon the
breach.vj. target men followed with a good number of shot, who albeit ventured
far to enforce the protestants, yet (being repulsed) they retired without any
great effects. This assault lasted from three of the clock in the after noone
till night, during the which was great waste of shot and powder by the
protestants in sustaining so hot assault: in the night they fortified and
repaired their breaches as well as they could, as they also for bare not to do
even in the time of the battery, filling them up as fast as they were made
with sackes of dung. In this night also they entrenched them selves within the
fort, whereby the breaches, the morrow after, were put in defense.

Albeit the Lord de Sansac (after the siege of Charity) was sent for to go into
Touraine to join with the catholics camps as is said, yet (whether it were by
countermaundement or other special occasion) he sturred not from where he was:
And yet in the same month of October, he besieged the town of Noyers in
Bourgogne, the which without great resista^ce he took by composition, the same
notwithstanding not observed, because forty of the soldiers that defended it,
being led to Troy in Champagne, and before they entered prison, were cut in
pieces by the people.

After he had taken Noyers, be determined to besiege Vezeley in Bourgogne
governed at that time by the Lord de Sarazyn. There was for the guard of it
only two companies of footmen under captain Rybaupierre, and the young Lord
de Sarazyn with two cornets of horsemen of the Lord de Blosset, and of
Belanseau, with certain numbers of gentlemen retired thither to aid the
siege. The Lord de Sansac had to furnish this siege about.xxij. ensigns of
footmen, whereof the Lord de Foysly was colonel of ten cornets of horsemen,
four cannons and two culuerines.

He arrived with his horsemen to survey the town the sixth of October, retyring
at night to lodge at Aquiens and S. Pere. villages seituate at the hill foot,
upon the top where of stands the city.

The eleventh of the same month he made approach with three of his companies
of footmen, at the gate du Barle, otherwise called S. Stephen: certain of the
town, but specially the Nobility that were there, issued out, and repulsed
presently the said three ensigns, whereof two were put to disorder and flight
before they could get to Aquiens, where they meant to make their retrait. In the
chase were killed about six and forty, and as many hurt, all the Captains,
Lieuetenaunts, ensign bearers, and sergeaunts of these two companies, were
there killed, saving three which were led prisoners within the town: the
third company hid them selves within a tuft of vynes from whence (being not
discovered) they retired in the night to Aquiens, notwithstanding this charge
and chase, the Lord de Sansac, marched with his camp the satterday, the eight
of this month, and toward the evening inuyroned ye town, the same euenyng he
approached his artillery, which the tenth day followyng in the morning began to
batter a Tower of the side of the gate du Barle, right against the watring
place, the same contynuing so vehemently two full days, that at the second
days end, a corner of the tower fell to the earth: The wedensday the twelfth
day he removed four of his pieces of the side of S. Pere, thundering a new
battery against the gate called the wickette, above the which eight ensigns
of footmen came and pitched the thyrtenth of this month, remaining there till
the whole army discampped. The fouretenth day he removed also two of his
pieces, and planted them against a Tower called the Colombs, to the end (with
more ease) to batter the said wickette, against the which the battrie endured
till the next day. When having now beaten two breaches) he gave the assault
to them both at one instaunte, offering to scale on that side of the
Cordeliers: His assaults were resisted, and his people so repulsed, that they
were out of heart eftsoons to return: and therefore the night following, about
midnight, he raised his siege, and retired to Auallon having lost at the
assaults and in the time of the siege iij. or.iiij. hundredth men as well
footmen as horssemen: Of the Protestants side, there were slain and hurt,
only ten men, whereof the Lord Sarazyn was killed with the Canon, being in the
first Tower that they battered, whom the Lord de Blossar succeeded in place
and charge, chosen by the common voice and opinion of the multitude, in respect
of his virtue and wisdom in defense of the Town. The Lord of Sansac raised not
his siege for other purpose tha^ to provide other Canons, all his others being
either cracked or burst in these batteries.

The Princes being at Saints, as soon as they were informed of the siege of
S. Iean d'Angely determined to go into Gascogne with two or three thousand
harquebusears on foot, and al their horsemen, leaving the remeynder of their
footmen to aid the Towns wherein were garrisons: they had two principal
reasons to induce them to this journey, as to draw the siege from S. Iean
d'Angely es^eming the camp would follow them, and also to join with the
Uicountes forces, over whom (as is said) the Mongomery commanded. They
departed from Sanctonge about the beginning of the siege, and with their
horsemen as well French as Almayns, (who after this voyage had sent their
carriage to Roche* and shot on foot, whereof some were led by the Lord de
Rouray) took their way toward Montauban: And because ye river of Dordoune,
(by which they must pas) was not at that time passeable without vessels, the
Lord de la Bessonniere (by whose means as is before said the town of Oryllac
was taken) departed with a hundred horses, and gathering together as many
boats as he could find along Dordonne, caused them to be brought to
Argentall, to the end the Princes army stayed not at the passage there, albeit
coming thither about the x^v. of this month, they were constrained to stay
there almost eight days before their whole army could pass. In which mean
while certain of their army summoned ye town of Sourd in Auergne to be re^dred
to ye Princes, to the obedience and use of the King. whereunto as they refused
at ye first: so, considering ye condition of their own state, with the present
force of the enemy, yielded upon covenant to set open the gates and pay six
thousand frankes, not to be committed to pillage: the L. of Montbrun and
Mirabell being come to Orillac (as is said) their companies lodged within a
league of the town in a village called Arpaion, to rest their horses which
were weary with long travail, where the L. de Montbrun fell sick of a continual
ague, y^ same partly causing y^ abode and stay of ye army, albeit feeling by ye
course of his sickness, y^ he was not able to make present departure from
thence, imparted ye same with the L. Mirabell, to ye end ye voyage lingered no
longer, whereupon the L. Mirabel with.4. C. horsemen put him self on ye way ye.24.
of ye same mo^th to perform his journey into Languedoc: he had (amongst others)
in his company ye L. Foulques, who not many days before came to to y^ said
Orillac with.lx. horsemen, of purpose to accompany the L. Mirabell: their
departure was neither so secret, nor their journey so ssrely conveyed, but the
Papists which were in certain towns and castells about Orillac, were spedily
aduertis^ed, who commanded ye towns me^ of every village to sound ye alaru^
bell, to ye end to warn and discover y^ place they passed by, and so set upon
and disco^fyt them. According to this charge the To^sain was sounded at the
same instant that the Lord Myrabell and his troop descended from a hill.ij.
leagues from Orillac, whereupon the garrison of Roilliac (having seen the troup
pass by the^ in negligent order, and leaving wtall their own charge made no
small speed by a cross way a thwart the hill, and set upon them sodamly in ye
village where the Tocsam was sounded and the same in such subtle season and
sort, as before they were discried) they killed.vj. or. vij of ye Mirabells
company and so retired, leading with them certain prisoner: sye troup
notwtstanding mounted above y^ village where being ringed and drawn into
battle order, they discouerd in ye tops of ye hills concours of people from all
parts to intercept them in a strait by which they should pass their guydes
(besides) bringing them further increas of fere and danger by general flocks
the popular sort to set upon them in that strait, whereupon they were
constrained to turn back, and retire to their quarter of Orpayon, and there
to consult of a safe mean to pass.

The Lord Verbelet, in the mean while remained at Oryllac, as governor in
Auergne, under the princes, according to the authority given him at his
departure from ye camp. Within few days after his coming to the town, and
being acknowledged of the garrison as their governor, ordained that three
hundredth har quebusears on foot, and three hundredth pykemen should be
enterteyned for the guard of ye town: for whose pay he levied of the
inhabitants a loan of ten thousand Frankes, and so mustered his men of war
upon the beginning of November.

And now (to let slip no necessary matter passed in October) The Lord of Saint
Heran, governor for the King in Auergne, departing from S. Flower, with
certain Gentlemen of his train, came to the castle of S. Salpic^,
wher-knocking with some inciuill vehemency at the posterne, the Gentlewoma^ of
the place, whose husband with certain soldiers, and guarded the Castle*
descended and simply opened the gate, to whom the Lord de S. Heran said he was
come thither to bestow garrison in the Castle: the gentle woman answered that
this errand was without need, because that as the place was already furnished,
so ber husband (as she thought) would not admit any new numbers, where with
as she offered to have shut the gate and return into the Castle, the Lord S.
Heran thrust so rudely at the gate, that the gentlewoman being thrown to the
ground, he entered the gate by force upon her, by whose skrike or cry, one of
the household servants descended spedely, and seeing his mistress upon the
ground, discharged his pistolet, and hurt the Lord S. Heran in the arm, who
also fearyng further peril, flong out of the posterne, which immediately was
shut upon him, albeit he caused all, or most of his troop to remain still
before the said Castle, to withstand that no man should enter till he sent new
forces from S. Flour, whether as he speedely repaired, so he dispatched from
thence certain numbers of footmen to join with the troop he had left before
the Castle, with charge not to depart till it were taken: M. de Sall^^^s, to
whom both the place and charge belonged, lay very sick, who in respect of
his small strength having not above six soldiers, and withal douting spedy
succors, made no great resistance but yielded the Castle by composition to have
only their lives saved, which albeit was faithfully promised, yet traitorously
performed, because both her husband was killed, and she led prisoner to Saint
Flower, charged to be the only cause of S. Heran's hurt.

The taking of the town of Oryllac, (whereof is spoken before) amazed greatly
them of Auergne, wherefore having gathered people from many parts, determined
to besiege it, before they within could have mean to fortify them selves. And
for this purpose, the Lord Rochebonne governor of Puy and the graunde pryor
of Auergne, with their regimentes of footmen, came to Marzillac in Roargues,
attending there (as it was said) certain cannons which should be sent from
Rhodes to batter Orillac. In the mean while also the Lord de Saint Heran, with
no less diligence aduaunsed at S. Folure the other forces and also the
Nobility of Auergne, whom he summoned speedely to repair thither: Albeit
hearing in the heat of his diligence, of the Princes coming to Argentall, be
let fall his enterprise.

The men of Auergne fearing the princes would sease upon the low country
called la Lymagne, and there to winter, in respect of the general fertility of
that place, drew in troops of paisants and comminalties into the straites of
the mountains, by which they imagined the army should pass, and there hewing
down great numbers of trees, bestowed them athwart the high ways to trouble
the passage of the horssemen.

The rest of the country were bestowed by the Lord de S. Heran in towns and
Castles* to the end they should not be suddenly taken: the princes beguyled
their opinion as not passing ye way, but directed their iorny over Dordone and
so into Quercy and beneath Cadenat, passed the River of Lot, and so from thence
arrived at Montaubon, in November. 1569.

The Lord de Mirabell and Foulques, (having remained about Oryllac, since the
charge they had near to Rolliat) took way about this time with their
troops to end their voyage: who passing the river of Lot beneath Cadenat, and
after they had trauersed the mountains of Rouarges and Sauennes, arrived
without let at Priuas and Aulbenas, towns in Viuarez, holden by those of the
religion.

The siege continued all this while before S. Fean d'Angely, where the King, the
Queen mother, and Cardinal of Lorrain, were in person, The morrow after that
the breach of the Fort was assaulted, the King procured the protestants to be
commoned withal, to the end to render the Town by composition: Wherein they
used this persuasion, the rather to entice them, that his Majesty had
determined to erect a puissant Army to make war in Allemaigne, wherein as
they might stead that service in special turn, so his Majesty was careful
not to spill men of such experience and value, and other ways, if they would
not embrace his Majesty's offer and composition, he would thunder upon them
all his forces till he had won the Town. They answered as before, that
they would not render the Town till there were a peace assured to the profit
and quiet of the whole realm: where upon the King required to speak with the
Lord de Person, as well in causes concerning the Town, as to send him to
the Princes in the mean and matter of peace: Whereunto the Protestants
condescended, and sent out of the Town the Lord de Person, receiving in
his pleadge and hostage the Lord de Guyteniers. After the King had conferred
with the Lord de Person, they grew to capitulations as followed:

First, that if the Lord de Pills were not succored within ten days, to
render the Town to the King, their lives and goods saved.

2 That for the assurance of this, there should be delivered in hostage.ij.
Knights of the Order, and they to be sent either to Rochel or Angoulesme, at
the Protestants choice.

3 That during this space of ye.x. days, truce should be between them, with
charge that neither they should fortify in the Town, nor they without upon
their trenches, nor yet approach the walls of the Town.

4 Lastely, that in the mean while the Lord de Person should go to the
Princes with a Gentleman of his Majesty, to treat of peace. According to the
which the said L. de Person with the Kings Gentleman went to the Princes in
the Gentleman's place the L. de Guytiniers was sent out of the Town to the
Camp.

They which the Princes left (as you have heard) at Saints, to defend the
Town, maynteyned their charge till now. And hearing that Saint Iean d'Angely
was in parleye, and at point to yield, fearing withal, that it was their lot
and turn to be besieged next: They forsook the Town and retired to the
other garrisones which were theraboute: wherein the King forgatte not to
embrace the opportunity, sending forthwith certain companies to sease upon
it, to the end, that by that mean the way might be cloased from them of the
Religion, being at Angoulesme and Coygnac, to go or come to Rochell: Likewise
they of Rochell should be hard to send succoures to them.

The Lord of Bricquemau lay all this while in the Town of Bourg-dieu in
Berry, (as has bin said) by reason of his sickness: During whose aboade
there, his troops made ordinary war upon the garrison of Chasteau-roux,
upon Indre, wherein the Lord of the place retained three companies of
footmen for the Catholykes. There were often incursions and enterviewes
between them: the same continuing almost six weeks, in which time were
killed of the one and other side, almost two hundredth men. After the said
Lord Bricquemau was restored to health, he retired in this month of November
with his troops to Charity.

During the siege of S. Fean d'Angely, ye town of Nimes in Languedoc was taken
by the religion the.xv. of this month, and by this mean: There is a mylne in
the town near to the walls, and to make it grynde, there comes a spring or
fountain not far of, through a sluse or creuish in the wall dressed with
grates or bars of iron: They of the religion in that country practiced
intelligence with the myller, by whose aid they plucked up by night the said
iron grate, and so conveyed into the town by that creuish and channel, about
a hundredth soldiers, who ^id them selves within the myll, attending the hour
to execute their enterprise, in the mean while they sent from Pryuas and
Aubenas two hundredth horssemen, and every one a harquebushear behind him, who
being in good point before the gates of the town at the hour appointed, they
within the mill issued out, and got to the gate, which with certain engines
and instruments apt to countermyne the lock, they set open, and so the
companies without, entered and made themselves Lords of the town: the Lord of
S. Andre governor there, considering of his present peril, thought to save
himself in the castle, albeit as he lept out of a window he brake his leg and
so was taken, dying within two days after: there were slain in the town at
this entry about a hundredth or six score men, and within few days certain
ministers of Justice: Incontinently arrived at Nimes the Lord de S. Romain
brother to the L. de S. Chaumont, sent thither by the Princes to govern in
their absence the country of Languedocke, he had with him in company a great
number of horsemen, besides many that came to him as the Lord de Foulques, with
the troops which he brought from the camp. In the mean while they of the
castle denied to render, making marvelous defense, notwithstanding they were
but few in number: there were sundry attempts in vain to win them, with
certain mines sorting to no effect, and yet after certain months the
Castle was put into the hands of them of the town.

And now touching the siege of S. Iean d'angely, it has been said that the
Lord de Pills promised to render the town if he were not reskewed within ten
days, which being passed, and he void of succors, the L. of Byron summoned
him to his promise, to whom the L. de Pills answered, that albeit he believed
that either they had stayed the L. de Person there, or else where, or at least
had not sent him to the Princes, yet if they would enlarge his term, he would
render the town, whereupon they gave him.ij. days more, wtin the which he
dispatched forth of the town by the port Matta, a gentleman to go to
Angoulesme and provide succors. In ye mean while, the thursday the.xvij. of
November the L. de Guytimers entered the Town with certain captains and
marshalls or harbengers for lodging, with intent to take possession of the
town, whereof Guytyniers gave this manifest inkling in saying to the L. de
Pylles, that as that night he gave ye watch their charge, so it should fall to
his lot to do it the next day.

The gentleman sent to Angoulesme for succors used such diligence as the L. de
S. Seuerin accompanied with.l. or.lx. gentlemen on horsbacke, entered without
let S. Iean d'Angely by ye port Matta, the friday being the.xviij. of this
month, which as it chanced contrary to the general opinion of the catholics,
so it amazed most of all ye L. de Guityniers, thinking nothing less than to go
out of the town again: albeit seeing in the friday morning certain numbers of
strange gentlemen mustring in companies about ye town, he changed his opinion
and was forthwith put out of the town with such as entered with him not with
standing the coming of these succors: ye L. de Biron co^moned with ye L. de
Pills at ye gate of Nyort, who^ as he su^moned to perform his promis to ye
King in yelding the town, the day of co^uention being expyred, so L. de Pills
told him that he had received succors, and therefore discharged of his promise
to render ye town, wherein ye L. Byron caueled with him in that his rescue came
not from ye princes, with persuasion also that he should not stand so much on
the help of four or five horses come to him, and thereupon caused to be read
alowde the capitulations agreed upon between the^. The L. de Pills was
constant in his opinion, alleging y^ of what value or numbers so ever his
succors were, they were such as both suffised his need and contented him,
charging them upon the instant to draw back from the walls. Immediately the
battery began of fresh, as well upon the old breach which was upon the forte or
tower of the wall, as against the forte of the gate d'Aulins, and also against
the castle, against which were bent three cannons: this battrie brought down
to the earth the castle gate, from which, they went upon a bastion or
platform of earth before the castle: this being well noted of the
protestants, they made an other passage within the ditche, beneath the first,
and near to that bastyon of earth, they made an opening or window in the wall
of the town, without the which and within the ditche they set up a close pale
or covert to flank the Castle. In the mean while the Catholics growing
cold in their battrie, and yet continuing it eight days, beat down a part
of a tower of the Castle of that side to ye subburbs of Tailebourg, called the
hangmans Tower, together with a great ruin of the walls from the castle to
the old breach.

During this battrie, the protestants made a sally with fifty or forty
horsemen, and three or four hundredth footmen by the gate Nyort, upon the which
they erected a brigde of woodde to discende to the ditch.

The horsemen of this sally were led by captain la Motte, who charged upon two
cornets of horsemen which were in guard on that side to Nyort, whereof certain
were killed, and some lost their standerds, and one of their ensign bearers
led hurt into the town, whereof he dyed forthwith: the footmen were governed
by diverse Captains, who, charging the Papists in their trenches, made them
forsake them, and lose their culuerynes, which were forthwith choked and fire
put in five or six barrels of powder. They took also in this disaray an
ensign of the footmen, with many other arms and armors of the Catholics,
carrying all into the town whether they retired as soon as they had effected
their enterprise: they killed in this sally about thyrty or forty Catholics,
and losing but one of their own which was hurt in the retraite, besides him
that set the powder on fire, who was a little singed.

Not many days after this sallie, the Catholics removed their Canons planted
in the entrye of the Suburbs d'Aulnis, and pitched them upon the brinke of the
ditche on the right side of the Castle, very near the battered fort of the
gate. There were in this battery six Canons, beating as well within the entrey
of the said fort, as against the Wall from it to the Castle, which was also
beaten with the other three Canons before said. The Coluerins ceased not also
to thunder as well flankerwyse as to the old breach.

This battery was of such violent force, that in.iij. days and an half
(which was the space it endured) there were discharged above xv. or.xvj.
hundredth shots of Canons, and many killed that labored to relieve the breach.
In which vehement extremity, the L. de Pills sent out by the Port Matta, the
same Gentleman, whom he used before in the supply of succoures: by whose second
diligence, the Lord de S. Auban, a gentleman of Daulphine accompanied with.xl.
horssemen, enterprised to come to the relief and succoure of the said Town:
Who (notwithstanding) was so encountered in the way, as he was forced to
retire with the loss of three of his people, and also the Gentleman his guide.

The.xxix. day of November, Sebastian Luxenbourg, Count de Martigue, Knight of
the Order, Capteyne of fifty men at arms, and Lieutenaunt general to the
King in his Duchy and country of Britayne, being at the battery, was stricken
in the head with a harquebushot, whereof he dyed, to the general grief of the
Papists.

In the beginning of December, about nine of the clock in the morning the
Catholykes demanded to parley with the Lord de Pills, whereunto he listened
with less difficulty, in respect he was not furnished with munition of war for
one assault more if it had bin offered, neither had he hope to be so speedily
succored as his peril required: which was the cause that the.ij. of this
month, after he had established extreme acts and provisions for the guard of
the said Town, he was enforced to render it upon the couenantes following:

1 That the Protestants should depart the Town their goods saved, with their
horses and armor and banner displayed.

2 That they should not bear Arms for the general cause of Religion in.iiij.
months after.

3 That their whole companies, as well strangers as inhabitauntes, might
retire whither they would in all surety.

4 That they should be safeconducted to their place of surety where so ever
it were, by the Lord de Byron: according to which composition* the morrow
after, the iij. of this month, S. Fean d'Angely was yielded into the hands of
the Lord de Guy^^iers. The Lord de Pills departing the same day about noone,
by the Port de Matta with.viij. hundredth footmen of all sorts, and about.C.
horsemen, taking his way to wards Angoulesme. Notwithstanding, the conduct and
presence of the said Lord de Byron, the most part of the footmen were
spoiled and diverse slain, and the baggage of the horssemen taken against their
promise of faith. During this siege, dyed in the town about a hundredth
soldiers and certain nu^bres of laborers: of ye catholics side, without ye
town, dyed as well of ye hand of the enemy as by diseases, about two thousand,
amongst which were many great Lords, gentlemen and Captains slain, as the
great Master of the artillery, whose office was given to the said Lord de
Byron: the government of the town was given to the Lord de Guitiniers, and for
the guard of it, the king bestowed eight companies of footmen: The same day
the King, Queen mother, the Cardinal of Lorrain, with diverse great Lords of
the Court, entered the town, and visited as well the forte of the ga^e* Aulnis,
and the Castle, as the first breach of ye Tower on the wall, and so returned
to their places, where they were lodged before.

Certain of the Catholics (immediately after the town was given over) went
toward the yles of Marans and Mare^^^es, holden of long by them of the
religion, from whence they were now withdrawn by special commandment from
Rochell, whereby the catholics entered and seized upon them without
resistaunce.

In this time were erecuted in France certain judgments diffinitiue,
pronounced before against those of the reformed religion, whose processes were
begone and pursued by the kings procurers from the beginning of ye wars, as well
against such as were out of the realm, as those that maintained part with the
Princes. The first sort sorsooke the realm immediately after the second peace,
as being denied to enter their houses and goods contrary to the couenauntes of
the same, and less able to live (without mortal peril to their persons) in
the towns of their propper habitation, being filled with garrisons of the
contrary faction, as has been touched in the beginning of these discourses:
the other sort, (forsed eftsoons to fall into arms) were knit and tied to
the army of the Princes, to resist the voluntary infringers of the peace, and
coniured enemies to the whole realm: both the one and other were proceeded
against by personal adiornements in three short days, and for default of
appearance their goods were seized to the Kings use, and governed by special
Commissioners of sequestration: many idle officers busied themselves to effect
the execution of their goods: in many provinces the said judgments did
suspend and hang, until after the battle of Montgontour, when they awarded
general and speedy process against all men by defaultes, proceeding to
execution in Effigy and adiudication of their goods to the King, wherein
(such was the liberal zeal of the Judges) that they executed by Effigy,
such as were dead long time before.

It has been said before that ye L. de Sansac left the siege of Vezeley by
reason bys cannons miscarried: and now having got new provision of Artillery
to the number of twelve or thyrtene pieces, and being withal advertised by
certain of the Town of Vezeley that the Lord de Traues, with a great part
of the Nobility present at the first siege, were departed and left the Town,
came to besiege it of fresh: He battered still the tower of ye Port du Barle,
right against the watering place: soon after he removed his battery to that
side of the gray Friars, following with so vehement an assault, that they came
to hand strokes upon the breaches, albeit he was repulsed. During this siege,
Albert de la Chasse, a Bourgeys of the Town, wrotte letters to the Catholykes,
revealing the partieular state of the Town: He threw his letters over the wall
into a field where the Catholykes came and found them: and as he was going to
the Wall with a letter, ready to conueye to the enemy, he was taken with the
fact, and charging a school master, as party to his treason, were both
hanged forthwith.

The battery was such, as there were spent above three thousand and five
hundredth shottes of Canon, and all not able to force the Protestants, which
made the Lord Sansac raise his siege the.xvij. of December. 1569. losing in
this siege about.xv. hundredth men, amongst whom the Lord de Foyssy, Colonel
of his footmen was hurt to death with a shot upon the trenches. Within the
Town, amongst others, M. Jacques Perrin, a Minister, was killed with a Canon.

The war did still aggrauate in diverse places of the Realm contrary to the
opinion of such as thought it should have qualified and utterly quenched by the
battaill at Montgontour. They of Charity (whereof has bin spoken before)
strengthened them selves with great numbers of men of war comme with the Lord
de Bricquemau and Borry, with their retinue: they maynteyned ordinary war
against ye garrisons of the catholics thereaboutes, making many enterprises,
and one winning of an other.

The L. de Lespau a gentleman of Berry and one called la Rose, sergeant mayor
to Sanserre, attempted an enterprise upon the town of Bourges in Berry, by
mean of intelligence with a Soldier of the Town, called Vrsin Pallus, to
whom was promised a great sum of money with a bill for the assurance payable
within two months after he had satisfied his promise: This enterprise had
bin of long practiced, and for the execution of it, the parties to the
practice, imparted it with the Lord de Bricquemau, de Guercy (Liuetenant to
the Lord Admiral, over his men of Arms, and Governor at the present of
Charity for the King, under the Princes) to the Lord de Borry, Baron of Reury,
des Essartz, with others Lords and Captains in those quarters: Who
understanding the enterprise at large with the means to execu^e it, judged
with it as a thing very convenient to be pursued.

This Vrsyn Pallus in the mean while revealed it to the Lord de la Charstre
gonernour of the town of Bourges and country of Berry, and also to Captain
Martyn keeper of the great tower of Burges, who aduysed him to enterteine the
enterprise and assure to them of Charity, day, place and mean to effect it,
who likewise applied him self to their instructions.

In the mean while the said Governor of Charstres omitting no preparatiue
fit to welcome them, devised gynnes of fire and traynes of powder within the
ditches of the place asseigned: He bestowed also two grates, the one at the
entry of the little Forte, and the other at the door or false port by which
they enter into the great tower: bringyng lastly into the town diverse
horsemen and footmen Italians, for their better surety and defense.

The day and hour special for this purpose, was asseigned by the said
Pallus, on S. Thomas night, the one and twenteth of December at two of the
clock at after midnight, which they of Charity failed not to observe in
point. And because they were dispersed in diverse places, the place of general
meeting was at Baugy, a Castle taken before by the barron of Reury, about six
leagues from Bourges: There met about a M. or twelve.C. harquebusheares on
foot of the troops of the Lord Borry and Loruaye, with three cornets of
horsemen guided by the Lord Bricquemau, all which in very good point observed
both the hour and place asseigned called la Grange Francois half a leage from
Bourges, where likewise met them the said Vrsin Pallus, assuring them still
of the facilytie of the enterprise, and that he bring them to the great tower
without danger, whereunto (to cover all cause of doubt) he offered to be
their first leader.

They of the religion under the faith of his word, made march first and
foremost, with him the Lord de Lespau, accompanied with twelve, as well
Captains as soldiers, and entered by a wicket toward the fort of the false
port, where they pitched ladders to enter within ye false port, which was five
foot above ground. After him entered the baron Reury with five and twenty men,
and then the Lord de Sarts with fifty soldiers to sustain the first: but as
his troop entered, the cords of the grate were cut, when they also within
applied their several engynes to use and put fire to the trains, and at the
instant the artillery bestowed in flanks thundered upon them that were to
enter, as also Captain Martyn, with his number of armed men, charged such as
were unhappily entered, who seeing them selves and enterprise betrayed, devised
and labored for their safety as well as they could: some lept from the wall
down, some gat out of the grate, the same being somewhat hyer because
Buysiere, steward to the late Lord d'Autricour was enclosed under it, being
notwithstanding taken from thence by his company, who not able otherwise to
effect their enterprise, were constrained to retire.

They killed of the^ of ye Religion twelve or fourtene as well captains as
soldiers, and almost as many kept prisoners within the town, besides such as
were hurt, the Lord de Lespau, the baron of Reurye, de Lessarts, des Milles,
with certain other were taken within the gross tower.

After this, they of Bourges fearing y^ courses y^ they of ye religion made
even to their gates, advertised the king of their necessity, who succored them
spedely with six cornets of horsemen, which had been before at the siege of S.
Iean d'Angely, they arrived at Bourges upon the end of December.

The Princes being come to Montauban, (as is said) executed the cause of their
coming, adjoining to their army the forces of the two Vicounts and Montgomerye.

In this time the king sent back to Poyctyers, the Duke d'Aumall, with three
cannons, and one culuerine guyded by the Lord de Gouas and his regiment of
footmen: And so bestowing his campin garrisons to winter (lycensing before the
Italia^s to go home) his Majesty came to the Town of Angiers, wherein has
bin since (as is said) certain conference for peace. ()

Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knight Ryder streat, at
the sign of the M^rmayde: For Lucas Harrison and George Bishop.


