The Enemy of Idleness: Teaching the manner and style how to endite, compose
and write all sorts of Epistles and Letters: as well by answer, as otherwise.
Divided into four Books, no less plesaunt than profitable.

Set forth in English by William Fulwood Merchant, etc.

The Contents hereof appear in the Table at the latter end of the Book.

An Enemy to Idleness,
A friend to Exercise:
By practice of the prudent pen,
Lo here before thine eyes.
Imprinted at London by Henry Bynneman, for Leonard Maylard. ANNO 1568.

To the right worshipful the Master, Wardens, and Company of the Merchant
Tayllors of London, W. F. wishes increase of worship with prosperous success
and eternal feliciti^.
THink not Appelles painted piece, Appelles.

ne yet Pigmalions skill, Pigmalions.

In present volume here to view,
fine fan^^es to fulfill.
But rather think a homly work,
whereat gros^e heads may grope:
And find therein some needful thing,
for their behoof I hope.
Thus thinking, shall ye surely have,
that which ye think to find:
A work that may right well I trust,
content the indifferent mind.
And such a work as needful is,
so does experience prove,
Wh^re urgent matters of our own^,
or friends to write us move.
As for example when our friend
in any foren land
Far distant is, and we desire
to let him understand
Of this or that, of wars, of peace,
of strangie news or else
Of other things that need requires:
this work the practice tells,
And shows by loving letter how
the mind shall be discust,
What order, and what Method eke,
therein observe we must.
How to begin, how to proceed,
and how the final end*
Must ordered be in each affair,
to foe, or else to friend.
So that observing of this work
in every point throughout,
A Letter, or Epistle well
compose we shall no dout.
The use whereof so needful is,
in uttering of our mind,
That no wi^e we may want the same,
as daily proof does find.
For why? by letter well we may
communicate our heart
Unto our friend, though distance far
have us remou^d apart.
By Letter we may absence make
even presence for to be,
And talk with him as face to face
together we did see.
By letter we may tell our joy,
by letter show our grief:
By letter from our friend thereof,
we may receive relief.
By letter what so heart can think,
or what can head devise,
To friend, or foe, the same we may
present before his eyes.
Our steedeat home in stable stands,
our purse also we spare,
When loving letter trots between,
and mind to mind declares.
It blabbeth not abroad the hid
and secret of our mind,
To any one, save unto him
to whom we have assignde.
And look what so we charge it tell,
it misseth not a jot:
When messenger by word of mouth
might hap forget his note,
And either tell somewhat to much,
or else leave some untold:
Therefore the littel Letter well
to trust we may be bold.
More might I prove in praise thereof,
but sure it smally needs:
For very need it self the proof,
in every brain now bredeth.
Therefore although perhaps this work
be not so finely pend,
As such a matter might require,
yet pardon do me lend.
For know you sure, I mean not I
the cunning clerks to teach:
But rather to the unlearned sort
a few precepts to preach:
A nedelesse thing of truth it were
unto the body sound,
To minister Physicians aid,
where no disease is found.
But if disdaining tongues do say,
it is proudly done of thee,
To take in hand so great a thing,
thou should have let it be:
That other some more learned head,
or man of years* more grave,
Might have depainted out the same
with words both fine and brave.
I Will say again it is better that
the body should be fed
With bread of Barley, than it should
for lack of food be ded.
So yet if Momus hap to mow.
or Zoylus chance to chide,
(Whose churlish checks each painful pen
of force sometime must bide)
Then to your worships I appeal,
for just defense therein,
Requesting that your lawful aid,
and favor I may win.
Which once obtainde, I know right well
Will fully conteruayle,
The baseness of my simple Style,
that else might hap to quail*
Through baneful bit of stinging tongs
which never cease to clatter,
In corners dark with deep despite,
against each modest matter.
Therefore I say your worships aid,
and patronage I crave,
From rude and rank reproaches all
this simple work to save.
So shall you still encorage me
to practice further pains,
And pray for your prosperities,
to him that rules and reigns
In heaven above, where I do wish
(when ye have run this race
Of mortal life) your worships all
to have a dwelling place.
Your worships. W. F.
The books verdict.
IF needless some do me suppose,
The Merchants answer here I crave:
Yea let the Lawyer eke disclose,
If he my help need not to have.
What should I say? for well I know,
That each degree does me frequent:
Both rich and poor, both high and low,
Sometimes tell me their minds consent.
But let the Lover chief of all,
Whose heavy heart, and pinching pain,
(I often release from careful thrall)
Now say, if that I be in vain.
And if that each degree me use:
Then me but love how can ye choose?
To the well disposed Reader.
ALthough (gentle Reader) I know my self both in wit, learning, and years,
to be far inferior unto diverse other: yet in good will perdy to profit my
native Cuntry, I give place unto none: which will (together the slacknesse I
perceive in many learned and wise) has pricked me forward, though unlearned,
according to that small talent that God has lent me, to bring to light ^uch
books, as in my judgment are both profitable, and needeful for this our
present time. Amongst which I here offer unto thine eyes this treatise,
called The Enemy of Idleness: which I have so entitled, for that as well
when urgent affairs require, as also at vacant times when leisure permits
the, (for the avoiding of Idleness, the capital enemy to all exercise and
virtue) thou may occupy and practice thy self therein, taking pen in hand,
and gratifieng thy friend with some conceit or other: whereby thou shall
both purchase friendship, increase in knowledge and also drive away drovvsy
dumps and fond fancies from thy heavy head. Play not then the part of the
folish Nun: Read not only Omnia probate, But also turn over the leaf and
read Quod bonum est tenete. Peruse over with indifferency the whole work,
and if there thou find any thing fault worthy, either gently correct the same
thy self, or else friendly give me admonition of it, that I may amend it: For
he that can make a fault, may perhaps also mend a fault. Alvvaies provided that
thy judgment be not to curious, lest (stepping forth with Appelles) I say Ne
suitor vltra crepidam. So doing thou shall bind me to further travel, I trust
for thy commodity. Farewell. *

The first book.
Instructions how to endyte Epistles and Letters* etc.
THe ancient Poet Lucanus does give us a very likely conjecture that the
invention of Epistles and Letters, was first found forth in the City of
Memphis, saying thus: Conficitur bibula Memphitis charta papyro. And to
describe the true definition of an Epistle or letter, it is nothing else but an
Oration written, containing the mind of the Orator or writer, thereby to give
to understand to him or them that be absent, the same that should be declared
if they were present, whereof there be three principal sorts, for some are
addressed to our superiors, as to Emperors, kings, princes etc. Some to our
equalles as to Merchants, Burgesses, Citizens etc. Some to our inferiors, as to
servants, laborers, etc.

If we speak or write of or to our superiors, we must do it with all honor,
humility and reverence, using to their personages superlatiue and comparatiue
terms: as most high* most mighty, right honorable, most redowted, most loyal,
most worthy, most renowned, altogether according to the quality of their
personages. And it is to be noted that of superlatiue, comparatiue, positive or
diminutiue terms, we must use but three at once at the most.

Note also that most commonly in Epistles and Letters, there be three necessary
points. The first is the salutation of recommendacion, which is made in sundry
manners, according to the pleasure of the enditer, as may well be perceived by
diverse styles hereafter following.

The second is the Subscription, which must be don according to the estate of
the writer, and the quality of the person to whom we write: For to our
superiors we must write at the right side in the nether end of the paper,
saying: By your most humble and obedient son, or servant, etc. And to our
equalles we may write toward the midst of the paper saying: By your faithful
friend for ever. etc. To our inferiors we may write on high at the left hand
saying: By yours etc.

The third is the Superscripcion, which must be upon the back side, the letter
being closed, sealed and packed up after the finest fashion, whereupon must be
written his name to whom the letters should be addressed, and his dwelling
place, (if it be not notoriously known) placing therewith the name of his
dignity, Lordship, Office, Nobility, Science, or Parentage: And if we write
more than one, the chiefest and permanent dignities must be written first, then
the consanguinitie: and afterward the mutable dignity, as for example: To my
Lord of such a place, my cousin, Master of the Requests of our sovereign
Lord the King. If we write to our Superior, we must use all honor and
reverence without embeseling his name, as to the King our Sovereign Lord: To
our reverend Father in God the Bishop of etc. To the high and mighty Lord, my
Lord of, etc. To my Lord of, etc. If we write to our equal, we must place in
the superscription his name, and the name of his dignity or office, furnished
with an honest and semely positive or two at the most, correspondent to the
manners and dignities of the person, as, to the right worshipful, such a one,
Merchant and Citizen of London: To his most assured, (or trusty friend) such
a one, etc. If we write to our inferior, we may use in our superscription: To
his loving son, such a one, etc. To his trusty servant, such a one, etc.

It is to be noted, that it becomes not an inferior person, speking or
addressing his words to his superior, to speak nor write by the imperative, or
commanding, as if one should say thus: Sovereign King, behold a valiant man,
make him knight: Behold such a one, who is a good Clerk, give him a benefice:
but with all humility we must say: worthy sovereign, I assure your majesty
that he is an expert man, pleseth it you to have him in remembrance: Such a one
seems unto me to be very learned and skilful, it were a charitable deed of
your majesty to provide for him, and therefore I am bold to commit him to
your remembrance.

If we address our speech to our equal, we must speak with a certain
familiar reverence, using positive and comparatiue terms, and very few
superlatiue, as wise, sage, honorable, worshipful, discrete, renowned, etc.

If we speak to our inferior, we must use a certain kind of modest and
civil authority, in giving them plainly to understand our intent and
purpose. A Merchant having many servants, to his chiefest may speak or write
by this term, you: but to them whom he less estemeth, and are more subject
to correction, he may use this term, thou, or otherwise at his discretion:
Also a Father to his son may do the like.

If Epistles or Letters should be written by fond, Lunatike, or folks without
reason, to such manner of people it were were but simplicity to give
instructions. Yet notwithstanding because that this place remains
unfurnished, and for that Stultorum infinitus est numerus. I will declare
something of that which I have seen and heard: For some write thus, Patrick
Spendal, Prince of poverty: to his Gossip Geffrey Graceless, Doctor of
Dronckenship sends greeting, etc.

Before that we take in hand the material instruments wherewith to write an
epistle or letter, we have to consider these points following: to wit, the
estate, dignity, or quality of him unto whom we write: whyther he be a
public person, or a private, whyther he be rich or poor, a friend or an
enemy: also whyther he be well known unto us, or but little. There be some
of so overthwart a nature, that they never take pleasure to read any thing that
is written unto them, be the matter never so pleasant and merry: unto such it
behooves to write succinctly and briefly: But to them whom we know do take
pleasure to read letters, we should, and may without danger write amply,
properly and eloquently.

When we write to the Spirituality, we must reverence them, and that by right:
for such persons are called of God to high dignities: and if we request any
thing at their hands, we must humble our selves, gyuing them that honor and
reverence which is justly due unto them. Yet we must warily take heed that we
exalt them not to much and more than reason would permit, for so might we be
noted of flattery and adulation, and they themselves also might therewithal
justly be offended: therefore let us take heed that we write not impudently or
unadvisedly.

But if we write to our friend, we may make our Epistle or letter, long or
short, as we shall thinck best, and as it shall be most delectable: For a
friend takes all things agreably and in good part, and excuses every thing
that he may reasonably excuse, whereas the enemy contrariwise quickly
reprehendeth and argues, yea where there is no fault nor offense. And
therefore he that writes to his enemy, or to a person of small acquaintance,
or where he douteth will be small estimation made of his writing, he must
wittily, and first of all declare that love is just or charitable for some
honest cause, without vau^ting himself, or speaking arrogantly, as to say, I
would that you should understand what I am, etc. And then afterward to be
brief and circumspect.

And above all things we must take heed, that we write not of higher matters,
than our understanding or knowledge may comprehend: for thereby are fools
known and manifested, even as they be that presume to dispute of things that
either they understand not, or else have very little knowledge in them.

Also we must not write to them that be simple and ignorant by terms that be
strange and unknown, for so should they have just occasion to suspect that we
deride and mock them.

And in fine, reteyne this for a principal, that the fairest language that may
be, is the common and familiar speech, and not that of rare and diffused
phrases, or inckhorne terms skummed from the Latin, nor of to base terms and
barbarous, or terms unknown except in certain places, for there is nothing
more decent, than to keep a mean in all things, and nothing more sure than to
swim between two Ryuers, Nam in medio consistit virtus. And as Horace says.

Est modus in rebus, sunt certi denique fines:
Quos vltra, citraque, nequit co^sistere rectu^.
A mean there is in matters all,
and certain bonds are pight:
On this side or beyond the which,
nothing can stand that's right.
Furthermore, it is to be considered, whether the matter that we write off be
honest, true, or such like: or whether it be slanderous, doutfull, obscure.
etc. For if the matter of yt self be honest and perfect, then needs it but
small persuasion: but if it be doubtful or obscure, it behooves to make large
and evident declaracion: if it be slanderous or dishonest, then must be added
thereunto agreeable remedies: as Terence does, excusing dissolute persons, for
he says it is thorough negligence of their parents or for poverty, or by
flattery. And so likewise he that would defend a thief, may allege that it
was done thorough company and ill counsel, or through poverty, or that he was
distract of his wits. Whosoever will more circumspectly and narrowly entreat of
such matters let them read the Rethorike of Master Doctor Wilso^, or of
Master Richard Rainolde.

Moreover there be sundry other sorts of Epistles and Letters, for some are
theological or of Divinity, as be the Epistles of Plato, of Denis, and of
thappostles S Paul, S. Peter, S. James, and S. John: other some are of manners
and virtues, as those of S. Augustine, S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, Seneca, Cyprian:
and other some are of great importance, as of peace, war, and governance:
other some of news: other of Recommendations: other of admonition: other of
love, as be those of Ovid, and of Propertius: other of domestical
familiarity: and other some are pleasant and joyful. But in this little volume
we will only entreat of the most usual, and of some diffusedly, and the
overplus shall remain to the imagination of gentle minds, who by the skill of
their pen, were able to repair the whole ruin of Rethorike, if there should
happen any destruction or detryment.

Every Epistle is either of Doctrine, of Mirth, or of Gravity. The Epistle of
Doctrine is that wherein are expressed all good and evil things to them that
be absent. That of Mirth is, which by plesaunt, long, and familiar language, is
made either to comfort, to rejoice, or to get the good will and benevolence of
them whom we write unto.

And that of Gravity is, when the matter is moral or civil, etc.

And all these three sorts do tend to their proper ends: For whosoever
writes of Doctrine, ought to have regard to this end and to profit and
instruct them unto whom he writes: he that writes of mirth must tend to
recreation and pastime, using joyful and merry language, pleasant speech and
iestes: he that entreats of gravity must have respect to honor and profit.

Example of an Epistle of Doctrine.
THe Epistle of Doctrine may be certain, or doutfull in his substance:
certain when we render a cause, reason, authority, or opinion of that which
we write: doutfull, when we leave the matter in suspense or not fully
condesended upon, as if we should write thus: You have written unto me to
certify you whether that sorcerers do use to ride upon a Byzom, and practice
such other like trim trams. For answer: Seeing that of many such like matters
there be diverse opinions, I leave the case even as it is: For in this matter
and other of greater importance, wiser men than I do stand in dout, I will
hold my peace, and make you none other answer.

Example of an Epistle of Mirth.
AN Epistle or Letter of mirth, must be endited with plesa^t language, as to
say thus: For news in these quarters you shall understand that one of our
neighbors is lately returned from Turkey, and has told me for a certainty
that ye great Turk does altogether wallow in worldly plesures, wherein he
sets his whole felicity. And amongst other his pastimes he deliteth in
Singing and Musicians, whom at the beginning of Winter he sends into a
certain cuntry so cold, that their voices and tunes as soon as they are out of
their mouths do incontinently remain altogether frosen until such time that
the Winter be paste: And then when the Spryng time approaches, this great Turk
accompanied with the Ladies and Damsels of his Country, causes sundry great
feasts and bankets to be made, remaining there til the Sun war warm. And
then begin the voices and tunes of the year past, to vnfryse and thawe,
resounding very melodiously in the Air thoroughout the whole Country, etc,

Example of an Epistle of Gravity.
AN epistle of Gravity, as is before said, must be of Moral or Civil
matter, tending to honor: as to say thus. Sir, seeing that the public weal is
to be preferred before particular profit, how can we honestly refuse this
combat? And if for the maynteining of the faith of Jesus Christ against the
Turk, we ought to spare neither body nor goods: what may be said of the
refusal, delay, or subtle reasons, but that we be cowardes, traitors, wicked
heretics, and worthy of perpetual reproach? For my part I will rather quite
abandone and put all in danger, than otherwise: The which I also request and
counsel you to do, to the end that we may get everlasting honor, etc.

The Division of an Epistle or Letter.
IT is to be noted that every Epistle contains three parts, even as an
Argument does, which consists of the Mayor, the Minor, and Conclusion, which
the Orators ^all the cause, the intent, and the consequence: The cause is in
place of the Mayor, which moves or constrayneth us to write to an other,
willing to signify unto him our mind: The intent is in stead of the Minor,
whereby we give him to understand what our mind is by Epistle or letter. The
consequent or conclusion is of it self sufficiently known.

The first style or manner wherein the Cause is specified.
Sir you have written unto me, and desired me that I would lend you, and send
you by your lacky, this bearer, one of my books for your recreacion and
pastime. And because that I know the great affection and desire of you, by
your Epistle so eloquently composed and endyted, I therefore am constrained,
and (by your letters full of humanity) compelled to make you answer as one,
who altogether is determined to show you pleasure to lend, and send you the
book that you demand: for in so doing I hope that (In casu simili vel
maiori,) you will answer me according to my desire, which may engendre between
us not only a mutual love, but also a perpetual benevolence, and a continual
good will.

The three foresaid parts must be in every Letter and Epistle, either covertly
or plainly. And a man may also add to other necessary and superabunda^t
clauses, every thing in as brief order as may be, and according as the cause
requires and imports: and it is not needful always to write the cause, but
it is requisite to write the intent, and the consequence or conclusion, for the
consequence depends of the two first the which must be very much either
persuading or dissuading.

He that can artificially and workmanlike handle an Epistle, may begin with the
intent, afterward tell the cause, and end with the consequence: or begin with
the consequence, after declare the intent, and then the cause, ordring the
whole matter as unto himself shall seem best and most decent.

The second Style, wherein the Cause is first, afterward the Intent, and then
the Conclusion.
THe thing which God and Nature would principally should be desired with most
hearty affection, The Cause.
and the which I perceive to be imprinted in my self more than any other
thing, (my singular and perfect friend,) is to know, to learn, and to practice
all honesty and humanity. The Intent.
And because that above all Orators writing of humanity, the sentences of
Tully are preferred, and because that he is esteemed of all men the Prince of
eloquence, (yet notwithstanding partly unknown in these quarters,) and
notoriously manifested at Paris, the Fountain of Science, therefore have I
thought good to write unto you, The Conclusion.
as to him whom I account my singular friend, requesting you above all the
pleasures that you desire to do me: and also that you hope (as I may imagine)
that it may be the cause to erect and make me a man of understanding, that it
would please you to send me the book of Tullie. And in sending, I will not
forget the recompense of your humanity, which shall not be defrauded of me
thorough ingratitude, etc.

The third Style in this order, the intent, the Cause, and the Conclusion.
I Would, The Inteut.
dear friend, that you took as great pleasure to lend me the Paradoxes of
Cicero, as I desire to have them of you, and thoroughly to peruse them over by
continual reading, but I have always deferred to demand them of you, because
they were nedeful for you in your ordinary lectures. The Cause.
Notwithstanding for yt I am now advertised yt your lecture has taken end, to
your great honor and good renown, I suppose that the book is out of your
service, together also as I understand, it is more corrected than any other.
For this cause I request you to send it me: The Conclusion.
ye which I hope you will easily perform. And so doing I shall acknowledge the
good will which you bear unto me, in sending me the book which perchance you
love best, and whereof it may be that you have most need: And shall be bound to
lend you what soever you shall demand me according to my possibility.
Promising moreover both my se^e and goods at your commandment, etc.

The fourth Style in this order, the Conclusion, the Cause, and the Intent.
YOu should do me a great and singular pleasure, Conclusion.
yea and also should bind me for ever, if it would please you to agree to my
request, the which is nothing prejudicial unto you, and unto me very necessary
and profitable: Cause.
It is to lend me your book of Rhetorike, for many times when I talk or
declare a matter to the end to persuade,or dissuade or otherwise, I perceive
my self so naked and unfurnished of terms and phrases for the purpose, and
such as I accustomably use, I apply them so ill, that eueryone is weary, and
ceasseth to give ear unto me, for the discord of my speech. But if any do
tarry to hear the end, they be either poor ignorant women, or else such as
deryde me, to my shame, confusion, and great dishonor. Intention.
Therefore I am constrained humbly to require you, that it would please you to
lend me your book of Rethorike, for to have thereof the copy, to the end that
I may avoid such inconvenience, which happens unto me through the fondness and
abuse of my language.

Here is to be noted that the conclusion is made but in three sorts only: to
wit by Amplificacion and enlarging, by commiseration and pity, or by Epiloge
and brief rehersall.

By Amplification, as inducing laughter, or joy: by commiseracion, as in moving
to pity and pardon: by Epiloge, as in collecting briefly together that which
has been amply and at large declared in the Epistle before, Why the Epiloge is
made.
especially when it conteyneth many and long parts: And the Epiloge is made to
the end the Readers or the herers be not defrauded of the purpose and
conclusion. But this is more decent and convenient in Epistles, than in
Letters, for letters ought to be brief and short.

And yet because this place shall not be left darkely and obscurely, I will give
more ample intelligence of commiseracion, amplification, Epiloge, and also of
demonstration.

Co^miseracion must be made of sweet, pitiful, and humble language, like to a
Co^medie, and must be brief, for it is enough if a man do but somewhat move the
Audience to pity: as to say thus with humble modesty: would to God, right
worshipful, that I had wept to you, and not have provoked you to weep: for
with great pain can I scarce utter one only word of mine intent, through the
abundance of tears which my heart causes to distill from mine eyes, etc.

Amplification is made, when for to move the Audience to honest mirth and
sometimes to indignation, or sometimes to pity, there is spoken in augme^ting
the terms of the Conclusion, something for to encrese the terms and phrases:
as to say thus, Right honorable, I advertise you that the cause appertains
to God, and to men of great authority. Also, if you will not accept this charge
you refuse a great goodness and honor which God does send you.

The Epiloge by nature should be brief, and is made always at the end of the
discourse, when brefly and in su^me, the reasons, and arguments in diverse
places dispersed, are reduced together to be the better fixed and imprinted in
the memory of the Audience, as to say, Right honorable, and worshipful, what
will you that I say unto you? I have first told you such a thing, and such a
thing, etc. and have proved it by such reasons, etc.

The conclusion demonstratiue is made, as if a man should say thus: For the
excellent beuties of women which are of such Angelical shape, having the book
of such ardent liuelyhood, and the speech so gracious, do passingly enamour the
minds of men.

Furthermore it is to be noted that diverse Epistles may begin with a perfect
sentence, authority, or common proverb: provided that it be altogether
agreeable to the purpose that we entend to persuade or dissuade: as for Example.

Denis the tyrant, vvriteth to the Burgesses of Naples.
Whosoever denies his sovereign that which justly to him is due, A
Confirmation.
is altogether inexcusable: For the sovereign Lord may and ought for the
affairs of him and his country demand aid of his subjects, for to co^serue
them in peace, seeing that for them he daily hazardeth him self in a thousand
perils of death. An other Confirmation which is in form of the Minor.
Now so it is that I have demanded of you an hundredth thousand ducats, and ten
thousand men, for to make war upon the king of Chipre: which demand you would
not, or else have disdayned to understand, Two other reasons, co^firming and
augme^ting that which goes before.
much less to accomplish: 1 waying then the oath that you made unto me, I
thought you would have kept promise and fealty: 2 and considering also that you
are not ignorant of the great necessity yt I have both of men and money, for
the which I have often sommoned and required you. Therefore seeing your
infidelity and rebellion, Conclusion.
I account you as enemies, and have determined to extend upon you mine
indignation and cruelty, even to the abandoning and ransacking of you and your
City, by fire and sword, and general pillage of all your goods without any
favor or pardon, the which thing you might have avoided by love, fidelity, and
obedience.

An answer to the same in like manner and fo^rme.
THe Law of impossibility is so great, most high and redouted sovereign, that
thereby every man ought to be, and is lawfully excused and free of all somoning
and request: The Minor.
for there as is not wherewithal, neither dominion nor payment takes place:
according to the common proverb, A proverb.
where nothing is to be had, the King loses his right. And as long as we had
wherwithal, our good will, and loyal courage has always obeyed you, plainly
manifesting unto you our fidelity and obedience, even to the very consummation
of our goods, and slaughter of the strong men, and youth of our City: in such
sort that now we have nothing remaining unto us, The Conclusion.
but only the good will: Beseching you most humbly to mitigate, and assuage
your anger and fury, considering the great pity and poverty of us.

Note that in all Letters, A three fold consideration to be had in all Letters.
or in most part of them three things ought to be observed: To wit, that the
demand be just, that it be possible, and to show the possibility, assigning
the reward of the benefit: and if these things be not expressly set, then are
they understood. For if a poor man write unto a rich, to lend him money, it
is not nedeful to declare his demand to be just, nor to declare his
possibility: but it suffiseth to praise the rich man of his virtue and
liberality, whereby he helps the poor which are succourlesse.

Also he that dema^deth to bynd himself, needs not to speak of the reward
of the pleasure, nor likewise when the Father writes to his son, or the
Master to his servant, nor when a man writes to his friend.

And here are to be noted four things which let and hinder the demaundant from
being granted. 4. things to be noted.


The first is to demand a thing to great and more tha^ a man ought wherefore
says Cato, Quod iustum est petito, ask thy duty and no more.

The second is the time: as to demand ye in so^mer, or that one should pay
an obligation, or rent before the time be expired.

The thrd is the place: as if my debtor should owe me. x. pound, to be paid in
Paul's Church, and I should demand it of him in Westminster Hall.

The fourth is the cause: as to demand that which has been promised,
notwithstanding any thing that is done or said within the certain time, and
that it be not satisfied. As for Example: O Lord Christ I ought to have and
possess heaven, I am a Christian, I crave it of thee: truly (he will say) I
have given thee heaven, if it be so that thou accomplish the will of my Father
which is in heaven.

Moreover if it happen that in Letters it be needful to make parts anb
divisions, let it be don with brevity: and likewise if there be a Narracio^,
as of news from the court, or of wars, it must be dispatched very briefly, and
plainly, in using common terms, without long clauses or parentheses.

Thus having now declared and set forth at large most part of the necessary
precepts, which belong to the well composing and endyting of Epistles and
Letters, (I say necessary, for if a man should make and compose an Epistle well
either in English or in any other language, it were good to have the perfect
understanding of all the rules both of Gramar and Rethorike:) presently shall be
described the Style and form of certain letters. And first when one man
writes for an other, comme^ding him, to the end he might obtain some dignity
or preferme^t: and such a letter must contain.iiij. parts.

The first way to get benevolence is in praising of him unto whom we write, for
his liberality, his bountifulness, his justice, his virtue etc.

The second way to purchase benevolence unto him for whom we write, is to say
that he is modest, gentle to every one, and a man not void of knowledge.

The third is, to make the demand honestly and modestly, which must be deuoide
of the four lets and impedimentes whereof we lately made mention: and in so
doing, that it be just, honest, facill, and for the which he unto whom we write
may have either honor or profit by granting it.

The fourth, to promise him all service and perpetual obedience, saying that
what soever is demanded for and in the favor of such a man, is esteemed as
though it were for our self: as in this Example.

A Letter written to the King, in favor of one pretending the order of
Knighthode.
IT behooves me not (most Christian King) to write familiarly to your sacred
Majesty, for so might I be noted of presumption and ^olish hardiness, but
considering your benignity and humanity, whereby you give favor and
supportacion even unto them that have fully deserved it and unto strangers: For
this cause therefore I have taken audacitie to write unto you under hope to
obtain that which I ernestly and most humbly require. It is in the behalf of
such a one, a man both wise and valiant, whereof I attest unto you by the
knowledge that I have had of long time, that his name, arms, and high prowess
are approved of all people, in such sort that (none dispraised) he ought to
have the praise and price above all. It is well known (worthy sovereign) what
enterprises, deliberacions, and subtilties in the feats of wars, he used at
the expeditio^ against the Turks and Infidels, especially at the voyage of,
etc. where he carried away the honor, by the report of men of good reputation
and credit that were there present: as namely of such a one, and such a one.
He is now determined and eue^ ready to depart homewards: But for the great
affection that he has to serve your majesty (as he promised me) he would very
gladly by you be made Knight, and has requested me to write for him. And
because that I consider his demand to be just, and very honest, and that it is
very decent and conuenable, that he should be preferred in honor, as one that
has rightly deserved no less, with great pain and trauail of his body, and
that this shall be an occasion giving to other good and valiant, hardy Champions
to serve you always better and better, waiting for such like or better
reward. Therefore do I humbly beseech you to have him in remembrance: Promising
your majesty, that as well I, as he and his, will render you immortal thanks,
beseching God to maynteine and preserve you in your triumphant and quiet reign.

Note that we are not accustomed to speak by thou, nor thee, as diverse other
nations whom we call strangers and barbarous people do, except it be in some
respects: whereby is easily perceived the love, the gentle nature, humanity,
courtesy, reverence, and honor that we have and bear one to an other: yea
even in writing and speaking to our enemies, and strangers. Notwithstanding I
will not take in hand to restrain any man by rule or otherwise, to use either
you, or thou, seeing that already many good Orators have used those terms, as
they have thought best: observing as I may rightly conjecture, the perfection
of the Latin tongue. And likewise the Emperor, the King, the Judge, and such
other personages, although their person be singular, yet they use these terms,
we say, we will. etc. And the cause is for that they neither say nor do any
thing without counsel. Because therefore that our elders and betters have so
used the^, and that they have been so observed time out of mind and together
also for other resons, I leave them to the judgment of such as have desire
further to search and find out the causes of things: for I intend to be brief.

How to write in a man's behalf, for a Civil cause.
WRiting in a civil cause, we must divide our Letter into four parts: First
to get the benevolence of him unto whom we write, by praising of his justice,
or other virtue, agreeable to the thing that we would obtain of him: saying
that the good hope that we have to obtayn the thing that we demand of him,
does move us to write unto him. Secondly, to purchase good will unto him for
whom we write. Thirdly, to get beneuole^ce through the just cause of the thing
whereof we intrete: saying that it is rightful, easy, plain and profitable,
and that thereof may ensue great honor, profit and praise. Fourthly, to open
the demand, requesting that he for whom we write may be had in remembrance, in
promising our service, etc.

The Example.
THere is in you so great equity of Justice, (right excellent and sovereign
Judge) yt it is manifestly known not only unto me, but also to the whole
country: in such sort that every one may safely without any advocate, commit
his just cause into your hands, how poor soever the man be, all fear, favor,
or disdain cast aside etc. For this cause, and for the mutual love betwixt
us: good and steadfast hope does encorage me to write unto you in the behalf of
one of my friends, unjustly oppressed by his adversary, trusting that you will
preserve unto him his right. For I advertise you (my Lord) that he for whom I
write unto you, is my ancient and special friend and agreeable to all men
through his wisdom and gentleness, yea and by his virtues gets the love and
good will of every one. And because he has before you my Lord, certain
process, of diverse wrongs and vexacions done unto him by his adversary, as he
has informed me, therefore has he requested me to write unto you in his
behalf, hoping yt by this means, you will be unto him a just and favorable
Judge. For this cause, and for yt he is my very singular friend, and also for yt
I would show him any service or pleasure yt I were able, I most earnestly and
heartily beseech you to have him in remembrance for this and other his affairs,
and process depending before you. And in so doing, my lord, he has promised
me to be your perpetual servant and daily Orator, praying to God for you and
all your friends, and so will all they do yt love him, whereby you shall be prayed
for and praised amongst many good and worthy men, of whom he has always ye
familiarity and good acquaintance

How to write in ones behalf for an Offense or cryminall Cause.
IN a criminal cause or just excuse the Letter must be divided into four
parts. First to get benevolence by expressing the vncorrupcion and equity of
the judge to whom we write: And as for the offender, to write that he has
always lothed and abhorred such a crime whereof he is accused or noted, and
that case may simply be aggrauated, howbeit without excusing any thing at al.
Secondly, we must say that although we never thought to have written of any
such matters, yet we were moved thereunto considering the commodity and profit
either publik or private or the miserable pity of him for whom we write, who in
all other matters was of good co^uersatio^, in whose person was never found any
other notorious fault, alleging his virtues and diligence: and co^seque^tly,
saying that the man is to be regarded and not the voice. Thirdly to commit to
memory the praises of the accnsed, recou^ting his virtuous acts and good
graces. Fourthly, to promise yt he will no more do any such thing, but yt from
the^ceforth he will exercise all virtuous acts, offering al service etc.

Example.
I Know for a certainty (most incorruptible Judge) that you have always hated,
abhorred, and had in abomination all sorts of malefactors and evil persons,
correcting them, and ministering upright Justice, as much as in you is
possible, especially such as through impie^ie are wilful murderers of their
parents, kinsefolkes or neighbors. And for my part (most worthy and rightful
judge) I do not only require to flee their company, but also detest their
cruelty, in such sort (that it is contrary to all humanity and to the public
weal) that I desire their banishment, imprisonment, or punishment with sharp
Justice. And although I have been instantly desired to write unto you in the
behalf of such a one, who (as it is said) has committed such a fact etc. and
is deteyned in your prysons in danger of his life, as I am advertised:
although also I thought the request reasonable, yet would I hot in any wise
have written unto you (right honorable Judge,) for so slanderous a matter, had
I not ben provoked thereunto by the consideration of the virtues which I know
to be in him, in such number that it were to long to recite them. I assure you
(my Lord Judge) that this evil excepted (if an evil it may be called, being
done in a man's own defe^se, as I am informed) he has always showed him self
an honest man, were it for ye defense of ye town, or to mayntein justice,
wherein he has not spared his body, goods, counsel nor friends. And when
there has been any good act in hand, to apprehend the body of any offe^der,
there has been no man more hardy, nor that without fear has more freely
ventured him self in danger, whereby yet many wounds and skarres are apparent in
him. And I ensure you (my Lord) that there is no lamb more gentle than he,
nothing more peaceable than he is: And there is in this Town none more
valiant, hardy, nor honester man, without dispraysing any. My Lord, I consider
that for such a case happened by fortune (as this is whereof I entreat) so many
virtues which are in the man of whom I write unto you, ought not to be
quenched, requiring of their own nature favor of grace and just supportation.
Therefore I beseech you (my Lord Judge) to whose pity and benignity I entend
to direct this Letter, and not to your severe Justice, that it would please you
not to have so much regard to this pitiful chance suddenly happened, but yt
above all you might have regard to his youth already wise, sage, and so full
of virtue, that he is beloved of many good men, for that he never offended but
in this matter, and is well willing to amend, and never to return to any such
fault: Pleases it you therefore to deliver him: whereof I humbly beseech you,
to ye end that he may yet again hazard himself, his body, and his goods, in
each just quarrel.

How to request the counsel of an Advocate.
TO demand favor in any thing that is called an vncororall benefit, as
doctrine, counsayl, etc. First of al we must divide the letter into four
parts: The first conteyneth that he of whom we demand, has power to give
that which we would request of him, for by that means he shall not excuse him
self by impossibility. Secondly, to show the demand to be just and honest,
to the end that he excuse not himself, saying that he would do it gladly if the
demand were just. Thirdly, to make the demand, declaring it self to be
facile and easy. Fourthly, to promise gold, silver, or other thing, and
perpetual service etc. And upon this point it is to be noted that in this kind
of style and sundry other sorts of supplications and demands, we must use
humble language, as much as may be: For humble speech is a great persuasion
to obtain that which we require and demand.

The Example.
THe Incredible Eloquence that is in you (right worshipful Advocate) shines
in such sort, that there are no Orators in Judicial acts to be compared unto
you: which thing gives me steadfast hope, that if it would please you to take
the charge of my cause and to conduct it, I should come to such end as my
heart desires. The quarrel that I have is just, and begoon against such a one,
mine adversary, who through deceyte and cauilacion, has induced me to make a
bargain with him very trublesome and hurtful for me, whereof I have been
dismissed by the King in his Chauncery, as you may perceive by ye specialties
which are in my bag. Therefore have I this recourse unto you, trusting of
your good counsel and that you will speak boldly for me before the Judges, to
sustain my good right, whereof I presently write unto you, hoping that you
will willingly employ your self thereunto, after that you have understood
the matter at large, wherein I have just cause, although the adversary party
say the contrary. And in so doing as my special trust is, and (as I humbly
beseech you) I will promise to recompense yeu with honest and lawful reward,
the which I will pay you largely, liberally, and incontinently at your
pleasure. And so shall you also have my aid in your affairs and business,
and command me as your humble servant to accomplish the full content of a
good heart, to the pleasure of our Lord etc.

How to answer in such a like matter.
IN the answer of a matter called an vncorporall benefit, that is to say of
Doctrine or counsel, the division must be made into three parts. First, to get
benevolence: declaring that for the love that we bear unto him, we do gently
agree unto his demand. Secondly, we must make offer of that which is demanded
and required, and of other greater matters, in purchasing good will on the
other side. Thirdly, we repete the offer by enlarging and amplifying of
services, and that we desire nothing more than to do him service, and that we
will therein do so well that he shall have occasion to hold himself contented.

The Example.
I Have receued the letters which it plesed you to write unto me (my singular
and perfect friend) by the which I perceive the desire, affection, and
confidence that you have in me, concerning the guiding of your cause, and the
matter of the allowing of the kings letters, obtained for you against such a
one etc. I advertise you, that not only for the good and just action yt you
have in this matter, whereunto every virtuous man ought to show favor: but also
for the singular love from the time of our youth mutually considered, (my dear
fre^d) I accord unto you, not only for ye which you require me, but also for
all other favor and service, even as one friend ought to do unto an other. In
such sort yt you shall not perceive in me any sign of appera^ce to refuse that
labor. For I will wholly and altogether endeavor my self for you in this
affair, even as for mine own: yea you shall understand (God to friend) that I
will do more and better therein than I am able presently to speak or write.
Certifying you (my singular friend) that I am ready to fulfill your desire and
commandment, whereunto soever it shall please you to assign me, and that
nothing shall more rejoice me, than to perceive by you to have done any thing
that does please and content you. etc.

How to thank an Advocate for a cause by him conducted.
TO render thanks for an vncorporal benefit, it behooves to divide the letters
into four parts. First to get beneuole^ce showing yt we know not how to begin
to render him condign thanks, by reason of our insufficiency. Secondly, the
beneuoleuce must be consented upon the thing: for we must say, that it is very
commodious and profitable for us. Thirdly, we must render thanks after the best
manner that may be, declaring all due recompense, and offering our selves. etc.

The Example.
I Know not (right wise and learned Advocate) by reason of the smalnesse of my
understanding, how I might express or write the form to render you condign
thanks and worthy praise, for the benefit that I have received of you: in that
you have not only with a good will taken the charge to conduct and follow my
process, whereof I wrote unto you, but briefly have made expedition therein to
my profit, with such apparent diligence, that you are greatly to be commended,
and unto you belong immortal thanks and praises, over and bisides my
reco^pe^ce and rewards. What greater joy could come unto me, than to be out of
care and trouble which I was in for this process, considering ye torment and
wrong yt mine adversary offered, and would have done unto me: whereof your
careful diligence has delivered me, made me joyful and quiet? this considered,
I know not how I may worthily reward you, which notwithstanding I desire to the
uttermost of my power. Now seeing that I esteem the goodness which I have
received of you to be perpetual and immortal, reason would that I should
render you perpetual and immortal thanks, which is impossible for me:
therefore because I can not do it, I offer you my body and goods, my self and
mine to remain to you in continual service. etc.

How to request a Corporal benefit.
AS concerning the manner how to demand corporal things, as a book, a horse,
or such like, the Letter must be divided into four parts. First, we must get
the good will of him to whom we write* by praising his liberality, and
principally of the power and authority that he has over the thing that he is
demanded. Secondly, we must declare our demand and request to be honest and
necessary, and without the which we cannot atcheue to our determinate end and
purpose. Thirdly, that the request is easy to be granted, considering his
ability, and that in a more difficil thing, his liberality is ordinarily
expressed. Fourthly, to promise recompense, as gold, silver, or some kind of
service.

The Example.
I Have known of long time (most renoumed Doctor) your zele toward ye poor
lovers of learning and knowledge, which you manifest by imparting to the^, not
only your Doctrine most effectuously and with good courage, but also do not
spare to distribut eue^ to ye unknown your temporal faculties, wherein you
show your wysdom and worthiness, getting thereby praise in the world, divine
grace, and innumerable merits. You know (right skillful Doctor) that I have a
long time sailed in the deep sea of Theological faculty, ordinarily hearing
your sacred Lectures, but the want of books does much hinder me from
profiting in that faculty, and I have no assured recourse, saving to your
liberality, without the which I should be constrained to frustrate mine
endeavor, and to abandon my study. The matter is not greatly difficill unto you
to aid me in this my great affair and urgent necessity, no more than to will,
and may: for you have in like manner kept diverse other from falling down, and
have erected them to high dignity. For this cause I beseech you to lend me your
book of Sentences, that I may escape the perils of diverse uncertainties and
dark ignorances: and in so doing I will not show my self ungrate toward you, in
ministering such thanks and service as for me is possible

How to answer, granting a Corporal benefit.
HE that will decently answer Letters requiring a corporal thing, must divide
it only into three parts. First, to get the good will, declaring unto him to
whom he writes, that he is affected to please him and to do him service.
Secondly, it shall be good somewhat to praise the gift and grant without
boasting or vayneglory, declaring that it is not only done for that the grant
is profitable, but for that he perceives that such a grant is acceptable and
pleasant unto him to whom he writes, and that therefore he desires to do it
for him. Thirdly, in offering the gift or grant, he declares him self to be
ready to do any thing that he knows might pleasure him.

The Example
THe Letters that I have lately received from you (my singular and perfect
friend) have given me great joy and spiritual recreation: for amongst ye cares
and weighty business wherewith you know that I am ordinarily occupied, I take
pleasure and consolacion to hear of your news, and chiefly that you should be
studious, to the end you might attayn to the perfection of a skillful and
learned man, which thing I conjecture will come to pass, for I see few that in
studying are more diligent than you, wherein you employ your self by continual
vigilacion, not losing one Lecture nor disputacion. You write unto me that I
should send you my book of Sentences: and seeing the earnest affection that you
have to profit in lerning, as you have written unto me, I do easily and with a
good will condescend unto you, and favoring your request I send you by this
berer the said book, to ye end that having received it, you may study at your
pleasure and for your profit: which shall be greatly to my contentation,
especially if God so grant that I may once see you a worthy doctor in ye
faculty. And I instantly desire you yt if in any other matter you have need
of any thing yt I may help you withal, that you would not spare me, but
command it, and by Gods grace I will acomplish it with a good will. etc.

How to give thanks for a Corporal gift received.
TO render thanks for the gift of a corporal thing received, the letters must
be divided into three parts. First to get beneuole^ce by reason of the thing
given. Secondly, to get beneuole^ce by reason of our self, saying that we have
neither wit strength nor goods, nor any other thing sufficient to answer unto
the gift, and the good will. etc. Thirdly, to render thanks in the best sort
that we can: offri^g al things at his commandment. etc.

The Example.
COnsidering with my self your great liberality (right honorable Doctor) and
waying the magnificence of the gift which it has pleased you to impart unto
me, I know not (as one altogether abashed) what thing I either might or ought
to do: For if I should not render you great thanks for the good turn that you
have done me, I were worthy to be noted of to much ingratitude: or if I should
take upon me to thank you, all my words would not be able to suffice that
which my heart wills and desires: whereupon I should by good right be
reprehended of ignorance. This notwithstanding (worthy Doctor) though I can not
set forth in effect, yt which with a good heart I would, for the which I hold my
self bound unto you, let it suffice for this present ye I confess neither to
possess nor have any thing which is thank worthy, save only ye good will,
which with his small power does most humbly tha^k you. Doing you to understand,
yt as long as I shall live I will remember your beneuole^ce and liberality,
wherein I will employ my prayers to pray unto God for your good prosperity and
health, for I know none other thing wherein I might better profit you: But if God
so provide for me hereafter that I may, you shall find me ready to employ my
self for you, even as I know and confess, that you have used your liberality
toward me. etc.

Here are to be noted six considerations of thanks giving, which may take
place as well in the judicial gender as in the deliberatiue: for thanks giving
is a kind of recompense: That is to wit, we must consider the benefit and
thing given, him that gives it, the time, the quality, the value that is
demanded, and the authority of him that dema^deth, together with the faculty
of him that is demanded. Concerning the gift or benefit, there is to be
co^sidred whether it be great or small sumptuous or paynfull, private or common,
easy or difficult, much or little, good or bad. As touching him that gives,
there is to be considered his liberality, and custom of giui^g. Also for the
time, whether we have extreme necessity, and that none other of our friends
either did it not, or knew it not, could not or would not do it, and that
without hope of succor as a chance unlooked for, he did us that benefit. And as
for the quality, whether he did it for our profit or his own, whether by
fortune or of set purpose, whether liberally or by constraint, or otherwise. As
concerning the value, it is by comparison, as to consider what it is that is
demanded, how much, considering also the comparion of that which is given,
and of that which is demanded. And as touching the authority, is to be
considered what manner of persons they be which demand, for what cause: there
is likewise to be considred the faculty of him that is demanded, as also the
faculty of the recompense. Moreover it is to be considered and noted, that he
which demau^deth recompense has three common places. The first is
Amplificatio^ of the benefits and good turns that he has done, of the pains
and losses that he has had in doing him good and serving him, and then
adnichilating and counting naught worth any reward that he has had, as to say
thus: I have served you at mine own proper costs, I have consumed my youth I
have destroyed my self for you and yet have I ben nothing reco^penced. The
second by comparison as thus: You have heretofore done me some pleasure, but
that does nothing approach, nor is not worthy to be compared to the benefit that
I have done you. The third is by remonstration, as for to say thus: do you well
understand that from henceforth there is no man that will do you service, nor
keep promise except you satisfy me, and therefore if you do not, I will declare
it unto every one. Now he that will deny such benefits done, or at lest not
recompense the^, may aid him self by the three reasons aforesaid in
confuting them: first by Amplification, saying thus: A man ought not to give
unto wicked persons any good or excellent recompense, for the pains of a
villain are to be made no account upon. By comparyson, saying: If any by
their virtues have had any benefit, the other vicious may not look to have
like preeminence. By remonstracion, in declaring that the men are more covetous
of money than of virtue, and that for a man's money he may always have
servants more in number, than virtuous. Moreover recompense or remuneracio^ is
made in three sorts, by will, by word, and by deed. By will when the faculty,
the time, and opportunity are not: and yet there remains in the man a
perpetual memory of the good deed which he has received, and would gladly
render pleasure for pleasure, or better. By word, when in giving thanks for the
good turn which has been done unto us, we bind our selves to do all service
to our benefactour. By deed, when beside the thanks of words, we recompense
the benefactour with goods, with gifts, with service, with mutual love: or at
the least by offering to satisfy.

Thus much have I thought necessary to be expressed in this place, and now it
is time to enter into the style of Missiue Letters under the demonstratiue
gendre.

How to write under the demonstratiue gender, in the praise of some body.
TO write in the praise or commendation of any man, in such a respect the
Letter must be parted and divided into three parts. First, to declare the
insufficiency of our wits, as not able to describe the virtues, merits, and
praises, which belong unto him for whom we write, the which we must say does
surmount all eloquent Rethorik, or other manner of writing. Afterward must be
expressed some excuse or cause which moved us to write. Secondly, we must begin
to declare one of the virtues of him whom we would praise, and consequently with
other general causes, saying that of such virtues and greater, he has such
number that we were scarce able to recyte them in many days. Thirdly, that
those things which we have written are but small matters in comparion of those
that we might write and that it is no flattery nor adulacion which we write,
etc.

The Example.
ALthough (right honorable Lords) I have taken upon me a thing very unfit for
my rude and small understanding, that is to express by my letters unto you
noble Lords, the praises and noble virtues of N. which are such and in so great
number, that I know not at which of them to begin, for the least which is not
little, surmounteth all manner of writing, and that such a personage can not be
counted to much worth, nor be to much extolled and magnified: This
notwithstanding according to my simple and rude manner of writing: I have
ventured to write unto you of his most worthy praise. In the first place, I
promise you, and assure you that amongst the noble, expert, valiant and hardy
men, he has always ben the chief: for if there be question of worthiness as
well of body as at weapon, if there be question of strength, and there withal
of warfaring prowess, be it on foot or on horseback, alone or in company, at
an assault or in a garrison, or if I should speak of Doctrine both moral and
politic, yea or divine, in all these and such other things, he as it were a
very mirror and spectacle: amongst birds he is an Egle, amongst fish (...)
Dolphin, and amongst men a very Hercules. For counsel of the City and
politic affairs there is not his like, who is (and will be) to your City no
small adornement, whereby you shall get great renown, and strangers the light
of most evident example. And because that my to rude understanding knows not
the manner how to write the tenth part of his virtues, and that my letter sheld
be to long and tedious, it may please you to be content at this present with
this small writing: for I do determine to write unto you an other time more
largely, and what soever I write it shall be nothing but mere truth, deuoide of
all faining and flattery: and I advertise you (my Lords) that so much the more
you shall know him, so much the more will you comme^d, praise, honor, and
esteem it a great benefit to have had the ^^^^ledge, acquaintance, service,
aid, support, familiarity, friendship confederation, alliance, recourse, and
company of such a personage etc.

How to write under the Demonstratiue gender, blaming or dispraysing another.
TO write in ye dispraise of a man we must divide our letter into three parts.
First to get good will unto our selves, declaring that in deed we do not love,
neither that it is our common use to write evil of any man, but that now we
are vehemently urged and constrained there unto etc. Secondly we must dispraise
the party in honest and covert terms, and so placed that it be not plainly
perceived that we speak for envy or anger, or otherwise: but only that in very
deed the great pride which is in him does cause us to say it, to the end to
abate his presump^ion, and to reform him. Thirdly we shall excuse our selves
toward him unto whom we write, that if we have written any thing unto him,
which might displease him, we suppose him to be wise enough to know the truth,
offering. etc.

The Example: vvherin a certain man writes to Cicero touching the conspiracy
of Catyline.
IT is not my custom, (learned Cicero, most renowned and worthy of honor,) by
detracting and speaking evil or blaming of an other, as many do, to go about
to get unto my self praise and renown, especially when the vices of the other
do touch me nothing at all: in so much that although I my self be standered
and greatly injured by mine enemies, I suffer it patiently, and hold my peace.
But yet considering with my self the great Treasons of Catiline, who
notwithstanding never did me any displeasure, seeing that he was determined as a
Traitor, to keep the whole City and cuntry in subjection, by the aid and
support of strangers, I could not abstain my self from declaring it unto
you, to the end that the whole being known, ye might give order, and convenient
remedy. I advertise you (worthy sir, and dear friend) that over and above the
other innumerable vices, pety trafficks, traysons and subtilties that are in
him, he communicates day and night with the cursed, perverse and wicked
rybalds, ruffians, and rascal Roges of the Town, he provoke and corrupts
them with money, and other damnable means, to conspyre with him the
destruction of ye good and noble Burgesses and Citizens: with full determinate
purpose to make a general co^motion, to kill the wise and learned governors,
to fire their houses, to ransack and spoil their goods, and to do all the
execrable wickedness that is possible. And this is now manifestly and
notoriously known throughout the whole City. For he now declares himself to
be such a one even in open audience, threatening them that are in chiefest
authority, in such sort that they are constrained to flee, fearing a greater
inconvenience: Therefore it is necessary (my singular friend) to give politic
order, and that brefly, to the end that a greater evil do not ensue. I have
not writ this unto you for any hatred or envy that I have against him, for so
should I do wrong to complain of him, but that which I do is in favor of the
public weal, and to move you as a good and diligent Judge, to redress it by
severe justice, so far forth as it is needful, to thend that we may remain in
civil peace and tranquillity: requiring and beseching you to address unto me
your noble desires that I may accomplish the^ according to my possibility.

How to write by manner of Complaint or lamentation, for an injury received.
IN such a case we must first get the good will of him unto whom we write, by
reducing to his memory the cause wherefore we are moved and provoked to let him
understand of our estate. Secondly, we must make honest remonstration and
reci^all of the wrong that our adversary has done unto us, by reproving him of
ingratitude, or some other villainous vice. Thirdly we must require counsel,
comfort, aid, or demand his counsel, offering in like manner. etc.

The Example: wherein Appius vvriteth to Caesar, of injury done him by Cicero.
THe fervent desire and singular love which you have always showed unto me
(most mighty Caesar) does constrain me to write unto you my complaint of an
injury which has been done unto me, to ye end to obtayn of you some comfort,
for I suppose that the injury does touch you as well as me, considering the
amity and friendship betwixt us, which through firm and steadfast acquaintance
ought to be common, as well in prosperity as in adversity. And because that
within this month I have sustained very discourteous and dishonest injuries, I
could not abstayn from writing unto you, to the end that you might be a
relieuer and comforter of this grievous trouble. You know (right renowned
Caesar,) the pains, travels, diligence, and the great perils and dangers,
wherein I have been for this wicked person of whom I write unto you, not only
for to do him honor, but also profit. And when I was judge, you know in what
magnificence he was received of the counsel, yet now has he forgotten all the
good deeds and service that I have done him. For notwithstanding that I my
self requested him and also caused him to be requested by men of good
reputation to defend my cause, and to plead it before the Senate, yet he
refused me, although he employeth him self to the like for every one, yea even
for strangers, and them that he never knew, nor that ever did him any pleasure
or service. Yea and that which is worse, (to do me greater displeasure) he has
counsayled my adversary, and found subtilties and cautoles to plead against
me, in such sort that I am deprived of my right: behold the godly rewards
and recompenses wherewith this wicked ungrateful person had paid me, for having
done him so much pleasure and service. Unto thee mighty and puisant Caesar, I
have yet my remedy to appeal, and to move him of the unjust sentence which
has been given against me. Therefore do I humbly beseech you that it would
please you to admonish him, that if remaining and perseuering in his
ingratitude he will not help me, yet at the least that he do not hurt me,
which thing I trust that in fine he will do, if it would please you to admonish
or command him. And you shall charge me with your affairs as I charge you
with mine. etc.

How to write when one friend comfort another in an injury received.
WHen we write to such effect we must divide our letters into three parts.
First, saying that we are marvelous sorry for that injury. Secondly, we must
show him that for such an injury he ought not to vex himself, adding the
cause. Thirdly, to comfort him, promising our aid etc.

The Example: wherein Caesar comfort Appius, touching the content of the
letters here before written.
I Have received thy Letters (right redowted Knight Appius) which have so much
grieved my heart that I can not express it: yea I should have sustained the
injury which was done unto thee more patiently, if Tully had done it unto me:
and verily I know how unhonestly he behaved himself in thy cause, before the
Senate, who through corruptions, against God and Justice, caused thee to lose
thy matter: which thing seemed unto me very strange at the first sight, to think
how he ^urst do it, considering the great good deeds that thou have done unto
him. For by that means, in ye judgment of all good men, he is greatly bound
unto thee, and therefore they would scarce believe that he would offend thee: But
when I perceived through thy Letters his great mischief, I made it manifest
unto most of them, who are very ill content with him, and are as much displesed
and as sorry even as I my self. But Appius, when I consider the malice and
iniquity of Tully, and that therefore in the end he shall sustain more
dishonor and damage tha^ the hurt which he has done unto thee does amou^t
unto, I then rejoice and comfort my self. For his ingratitude known, every
one will mock him, and will bewail thy damage, and by that means thy honor
shall increase, and in the end shall have victory and glorious triumph my self
to reduce him to thy service, showing him his fault. And I promise thee that I
will not cease, until such time that I have reduced thee victorious, and
joyful: and therefore I pray thee spare me not in any thing that I may
pleasure thee.

How to write a Letter of complaint for a misfortune, demanding counsel or
consolation.
SVch an Epistle or Letter must be divided into three parts. First to get
benevolence, declaring that the good love which we have together, does move us
to write our fortune, for to have consolacion and comfort. Secondly we must
declare the case. Thirdly, to demand counsel, aid. etc. saying that in him
consists our only hope, desyring that we be not defrauded of our intent,
offering our selves. etc.

The Example: wherein a Father lamenting the death of his son writes to a
friend of his.
I Would, my singular and dear friend, had it ben the good pleasure of our
lord, that within these three days you had been here with other my friends, for
to see the griefs, lamentations, weepings, and intolerable afflictions that I
had and yet have for the death of my son: for if you had been present, I know
for a certentie that you would not only have had compassion, with me and other
my good friends, but you should also have much aided to have relieved me of my
mortal grief. But because it is impossible, as well for the time and also for
the distance of place betwixt us, I have thought good to write unto you by
these presents the dolorous and grievous passions that since that day I do
intolerably sustain, hoping that for the friendship which you have had with
me since our youth, the which has always increased together with our years, I
might receive from you some comfort. You know well enough, and are well
advertised of the pouerties, afflictions, inconveniences, perils and dangers
which they suffer in this mortal world that bear charge in the common weal:
and likewise those that in the midst of the multitude of their riches do live
in tribulations, and are continually in sorrowful and miserable troubles and
vexations. But as concerning me, (to make a very heap of my ordinary
afflictions) I had one little son, so sweet, pleasant, and amiable, in whom I
took all my comfort and recreation. For his only presence, or his only
speech, did often resolve me from my great fantasies, taking from me all
melancholy, yea he was my only pastime: but now I pour out tears of sadness
so much the more, for that I know that death has been cruel unto me, who
through his envy has taken away my son, he has killed my only hope, my
consolation, my life, and him from whom came all my joy, and therefore do I
now sustain great wrath and melancholy, I know not where to seek comfort, nor
what I should do, or say. And therefore have I thought best to write unto you,
as to my singular and perfect friend, to the end that you might wayle with me,
and that it might please you to give me comfort, doing as you have been
accustomed to do: for you have many times released me from great calamities,
through your good council and reconciliacion.

How one friend should answer another, comforting him for his loss.
THe letter must be divided into three parts. First declaring the grief that
he has, which he estemeth to be even unto himself in augmenting it. Secondly
to give comfort by three or four or more reasons, concluding that it is good to
take comfort. Thirdly to give a certain hope, offering to do all things
possible, and especially for his consolation.

The Example: wherein one friend comfort another, for the death of his soon.
I Bitterly bewailed (my most singular and perfect friend, and could not keep
in my tears, when I red the Letters which you sent me, making mention of the
death of your son. And I advertise you that I was constrained so to do for
the good love that of so long time has been and is betwixt us two, the which
causes me to feel the like dolor and grief that you have in losing the
presence of a child so well taught and of so good a wit, and entrance of good
manners, wherefore I marvel not though in him did lie all thy consolation: For I
think that if our lord should not send you aid and succor in so great a
tribulation, you would be consumed with weping and wailing, and would dye
immediately after him. Notwithstanding through the providence that is in you,
you know ye a man ought not to vex nor grieve him self beyond the limits of
reason, by the which all desolacion ought to be chased from the hearts of men:
and if it were so that you were deuoide of reason, through the exessiue dolor
which you have suffered to rule in your heart (not considering that your son
was mortal, that you have begot him mortal, nourished him mortal, and that
he is mortally dead, rendering the tribute of nature even as it is appointed to
every one of us) yet should neither my letters nor consolacion serve to no
effect. But since in deed you know well enough that both young and old, yea
even your self shall wax ripe and dye, cease therefore such weepings and
lamentations, which better beseem the female kind, than a wise and prudent
man, such one as you are, and mitigate your strong passions with stronger
reasons, in doing the deed of a virtuous man: employ now your wisdom, seeing
that it is time and needful, to the end that every one, (yea they that know
you not) may see to appear in your person the constancy and patience which
you have told them to be in you: I well remember I have oftentimes seen you
rejoice in prosperity: and therefore if you should now show your self
otherwise, you should give occasion to think that it were your custom at
sometimes to rejoice, and afterward bitterly to sorrow. The remedy against
such mutabilities and vnconstantnesse, is equally to sustain all prosperous
and adverse fortunes. Therefore at my request, let not so many virtues which are
in you, remain deuoide of patience. I know that you understand this, and a
thousand other good reasons meet for such a purpose, better than I am able to
speak or write them unto you, yea you your self have accustomed to comfort
your friends being in adversity. And I advertise you that this which I write
unto you, is not to instruct or teach you, but only to give you to understand
the great good will that I bear unto you, and that I would according to my
possibility pleasure you both with body and goods without sparing of any thing.

How to write letters being in exile, under hope to obtain restitution,
aid, counsel, or comfort.
WE must divide our Letters into three parts: First, to purchase the
beueuolence of the person to whom we write, hoping of his love and prudence,
by the which he may understand, that such a fortune is common to all men.
Secondly, to show the good deeds that we have done to our cu^trey, or unto him
by whom we are exiled, nevertheless not using any arroga^cie, but to the end
that we may evidently show that we are wrongfully exyled, then shall we declare
through whose injury it was, as by our enemies. etc. whom we know do hate us
in that they show us ingratitude and injury: Afterward, we must say that we
hope to have upright justice, by the which we shall obtain honor, and our
adversaries be confounded and punished. Thirdly we must thereupon demand aid
and counsel, recommending us and our matters to our friend, which we willingly
present unto him.

The Example: wherein Cicero, lamenteth to Lentulus, that for the hatred of
Clodius he is exyled.
IT is my custom (my singular friend Lentulus,) when there happens unto me any
adversity, to have recourse unto my friends, for their aid, counsel, or
consolation. Therefore unto you, whom I repute not only my friend, but above
all other most especial, for ye you esteem my adversities to be yours) I have
thought good to write a misfortun which is happened unto me through malice: to
this end that by your aid and counsel, I might in so great an evil find
some comfort and remedy. Every one knows, and it is common enough to all men,
what great pains, trauells, and charges, I have manfully sustained, to
illustrate, defend, and preserve the public weal, and so doing I have
bestowed not only my goods* but also my time and labor, which leaving undone
I might have profyted in other great affairs. True it is, that in so doing, I
have obtained honor, but you know that the wicked do always malice the good,
and can not suffer virtue to have place: for through their wicked steights and
subtilties they have so wrought that all the profit and commodity that I
deserved, and had of the public weal, I have now in one hour lost it al.
Against me is raised up this wicked and hatred of God and the world, Clodius,
unto whom I have done many good deeds, whereof (as ungrate) he will not
remember him self, but showing his malice, does render me evil for good,
going about to put me to death: for he has inverted a thousand fictions and
dreams before the Senate, and with his false wicked witnesses like unto him
self, has so wrought that I am banished and sent into exyle: whereby I am
fallen into such sorrow and grief, that I esteem the death to be much sweter,
and less paineful, than to live in such torment. And certainly it were
impossible for me to live any longer, if there remained not unto me a certain
hope, which comforts me, that is, that a time will come, wherein the truth
shall be known, and my honor wholly restored, and then shall I have an end of
these evils. And to the end that you might haste^ this time, I pray you herein
give me aid, comfort and counsel, for of you only I require and demand it,
offering unto you reward and gift of me, my family, and goods, with humble
recommendations.

How to comfort our friend in his exile.
Upon such an occasion we must divide our Letters into three parts. First,
must be declared the grief that we sustain for the adversity of our friend,
which we must say to be common unto us by reason of our mutual love. Secondly,
we must get the benevolence of his person, by praising his great wisdom and
virtue, declaring unto him the vices of his adversary, who through envy has been the cause of his exile. Thirdly, we must put him in hope shortly to
return, and to be restored to his honor, with promise to employ our selves to
the uttermost of our possibility.

The Example: wherein Lentulus comfort Cicero, who through the malice of
Clodius was exyled.
I Can not give thee to understand by writing my (singular friend Cicero) nor
express unto thee by any means what and how great dolor and sadness I had
when I first conceived by your letters, that this false and wicked Clodius,
through hatred and ill will had banished and expulsed you out of our worthy
City. And certainly my friend, I am not only sorry for your adversity even at
the very heart, but also when and as often as I remember that he that has done
so many good deeds to his Cuntry is thorough envy exyled, then gusheth from
mine eyes such a spring of tears and in so great abundance, that by good
similitude they may rightly be called a very River, for the great love that I
have to you. And for a truth, it would be so continually with me, if I were not
restrained by thincking ye through great wrong, and to the great dishonor of
them that did it, you are thus exyled. Lord God, it is well known unto the^
what humanity and ge^tlenesse you have showed the^, insomuch that to none were
he never so base, you have at any time refused your pains and labors, were it
for the weal particular or public, but with a certain deliberate benignity
have studied to please al, without using any refusal, disdain, or arrogancy,
which are virtues worthy of great praise, co^mendatio^, and reward. And yet
through ye envy of a mischeuous flatterer, a seducer of the people, having
nothing misdone, are sent into exile, even as though you were a Traitor or
malefactor: but ye violence yt is done unto you and the violence of Clodius will
have an end, for they can not always endure. Therefore my dear friend, take
unto you a good courage, and setting a side sundry small co^clusions which can
but hurt, have a good hope, and consider ye till luck can not always continue
in one place, for fortune is mutable in her deeds. Consider yt you have yet
many friends, yea and though there were but only I my self, whom I think am
not one of ye least, yet I would hope by ye help of god, that within short space
ye malice of Clodius should be vanquished and the truth known: and for my part
I will spare nothing, to the end yt in short time you may be restored unto
your former honors and dignities, and he shamefully dejected and punished.

How to write expositiue letters, certifying the witness or notyce of a
thing.
WHen we write Epistles or Letters giving to understand of the witness,
history, or knowledge of the witness of any thing, we must part our Letters
into three parts. First, to get benevolence toward our selves, declaring that
al is for the love of Justice and verity, to the end that thinnocent and just
be not opressed, and that for the great love that we bear unto him, to whom
we write we testify the truth of that which is demanded. Secondly, we must
declare the full circumstance of the fact. Thirdly we must say, that we have
certifyed that which we know of a verity, and that if we shall know any more
either of ye or of any other matter, we will gladly show him pleasure.

The Example: vvherin Cicero testifies unto the judge, that Clodius was at
Rome, the same day that the sacred things of Vesta were violated.
I Am requested by you (Judges of equity) to say that which I know concerning
the controversy between the honest order of the Matrones of the one part, and
Clodius, for the violence of the sacred things of the good goddess Vesta, on
the other part, to wit whether the day of the same violence, Clodius was within
Rome. Although (my Lords) yt I desire not to hurt any person, but desire
Justice and equity to be re^dred unto every one: And to cause the same to be
observed and kept, I would rather choose to dye than to conceal the truth: my
Lords, I advertise you that the day of the said violence, toward morning I
saw Clodius in the field of Mars, and about seven of the clock in the Evening,
he supped with Pompeus, and almost all the day I saw him about the Temple of
Caesar, and about three of the clock in the after noone he went hastily into
his house, yet notwithstanding I know not wherefore. etc. This which you desired
to understand of me (my Lords) I have written it unto you according to the
pure verity: and if you know any other thing wherein I might do you service,
you have me to command, and I to obey and do it.

How to certify some news lately happened.
TO certify some novel or new thing, the Letters must be divided into three
parts. First, we must purchase benevolence to our selves, declaring that we
are inclyned to write unto him, as unto our friend, of news which happened,
as well in public affairs as in private: for we know well that he takes
pleasure to hear speak of them. Secondly, shall be declared the history, be it
of Battle or other business. Thirdly, we shall say that that which we have
written unto him was not to have bin left behind without advertisement,
promising him that we will not complain of our labor in wrytinge always unto
him like news, provided, that we know them to be acceptable unto him.

The Example: wherein one friend writes unto an other of news of the Court.
I Know (dear and perfect friend) the great desire that you always have to
understand and know the things that are done in this city of London, for the
profit of the public affairs, whereof you are a very pillar, and can not long
absent your self, but that your absence shall be lamented, for the good love and
godly favor that you always bear unto the commo^weale, in such sort, that
your heart can not be contented except you be advertised by some of your friends
of the news that daily happen. Therefore to pleasure you, and to do you
agreeable service, even as I am bounden, I have thought good to write unto you
ye which is lately happened since your departure. Upon Tewsday last in the
morning, news were spread abroad by a Poast, through out the whole City, and
even unto the ears of my Lords of the Court, and of the City, that there
was in this City great abundance of Ruffians, and other such hurly burlies of
wicked people, called Roages, who in the night time make and commit many
execrable crimes throughout the town. Through which occasion the counsel
assembled, did deliberate to know what was to be done. And after all opinions,
there was ordained a new watch of the burgesses and inhabitants of the City,
and that every one should hang forth Lanterns and Candle light, to give light
in the night, and that upon great forfeicts: which is done according to the
ordinance etc. Moreover. etc. Thus have I written unto you the news, which I
know at this present, and if there come unto my notice any other thing worthy
to be known, I will write it unto you inco^tinently, not thinking much at my
travel, as well in this, as in other things, by the which I may pleasure you.
Recommending me unto your good honor.

How to advertise one, of the conditions of another.
LEtters to advertise the conditions or manners of any person must be divided
into three parts. First, we must get benevolence to the person of whom we
write, saying yt we have don our diligence to enquire of the manners, and to
have knowledge of the person, or of the thing whereof we entreat: but if we
write of our selves, we must omit the first part, and in stead thereof
purchase benevolence to our selves, excusing us if peradventure we say any
thing of our selves, that it is not for arrogance, but even only to make us to
be known unto him, that desires to understand what we are: and that done go
forward with the third part as before. Secondly, we must make recital of
the manners and conditions, etc. Thirdly, we shall say that this is all that we
know at this present, of the person or of the thing, being ready to enquire more
and also cause it to be manifested. Offering our selves etc.

The example: wherein Cicero declares unto Caesar, the conditions of
Appolonius of Rhodes, Orator.
THere is nothing so difficile, weighty or paynefull (Noble Caesar) which with
a free heart, for the love of you, I would not take in hand, through the
singular and affectuall good will the which I do bear unto your most noble
Majesty: And thereunto I feel my self bounden, by means of ye benefits and
gratulations yt you have done and still daily do unto me. You have written unto
me that in all diligence I should enquire of the manners and conditions of
Appolonius of Rhodes, and that I would write unto you the verity. I do you to
understand, that in the judgment of all the^ that know him he is a singular
man, and not only in Rhetorike, but also in Philosophy, does get by his
works an immortal name. And I certify you, that when he departed from Rhodes
he went unto Athens, and there found not his like, in so much that the Students
said, that he was a second Pallas, yet once again descended from the brain of
Jupiter into their City. Many other things might I write unto you of him, but
wherefore? For whosoever you shall enquire of, you shall find them to have the
like good opinion of him: so that if you cause him to come to the City, you
shall do a singular commodity, not only unto your self, but also to the whole
common weal. And if you will that I shall do any other thing for you, behold I
am altogether ready to please and obey you, recommending me once again unto
your good grace.

How to write a Proficiat or Congratulation, for an Office, or Dignity.
WHen a man has obtained an Offiice or Benefice, or, any other thing by his
good fortune, and that we would show our selves to be joyful of it, we must
divide our letters into three parts. First benevolence to the person unto whom
we write, with commending of his merits and virtues. Secondly, to declare our
affection by the which we do participate of his joy. Thirdly, to pray unto
God that the same dignity, office, or fortune may be unto his profit, and
perpetual praise, offering our whole service. etc.

The Example: wherein one friend rejoices with an other of the office that the
king has given him.
I Know not whether unto me or unto you, singular friend, I ought to say
Proficiat, for the office which through your virtues and spedy diligence you
have obtained of the king, and I assure you that the profit, honor, yea and
glory, if it be lawful to glorify in well doing, are of no small estimation,
since in so young age, you have obtained such dignity, and surpassed the merits
of your elders, whereof I ought much to rejoice: for from hence forth your
virtues shall be manifested, and my honors and profit shall increase, seeing
that I have such a friend, who through the brightness of the glory happened unto
him, shall drive from me the darkness of grief, and shall cause me to have
good participation of his honors, joy and profit. Much good do it you
therefore this dignity, which you never obtained through ambition, but only
through the virtues that are in you, for the which there are yet greater
benefits due unto you. And as for my part, it is not without a cause that I
rejoice, for the benefits of fortune are common omongst friends, and causes the
love which is in both their bodies to have but one spirit, and in both of them
is perceived but one only mind. I beseech God that you may still prosper and go
foreward from good unto better, and that by your virtuous faith you may
purchase immortal glory, and as long as you live to remain in his holy favor
and grace

How to write Letters rejoicing for oun friends health, or safe return.
IF your friend have recovered his health, or be safely returned from his journey,
in such a case our Letters must be divided into three parts. First, to get
benevolence, of our own behalf, for that we were sore affrayde of his
sickness, or that there should happen unto him any misfortune or adversity
abroad in his voyage. Secondly, to declare the joy that we have had of his
mending, or return, praying unto God to keep him from all evil. Thirdly, to
offer our whole service. etc.

The Example: wherein one friend rejoices of another recovery to health.
IT is not possible for me to write unto you, neither is the heart of man able
to think, (my singular and perfect friend) what sorrow and grief I had when
it was reported unto me that you were grievously sick, and in great danger, for
then me thought that I even felt your sickness, through the good will and love
that I bear unto you, and would gladly that my sorrow might have diminished or
eased your passion. But by such and like means that I had great sadness,
and grief, for the first news: I have now inestimable joy, for that it is
told and affirmed unto me for a certainty, that you have wholly recovered
your health and welfare. I give unto you the Proficiat vobis. (my singular
friend,) for such a treasure recovered, and beseech our lord that he will
preserve and keep you in as good and long health, as I would wish even unto mine
own person. And I give you to understand that I. N. M. and all the rest
hereabouts, are (thanckes be given to God) in good health and welfare, pressed
and ready to accomplish all your good requests and commandment.

How to exhort to virtue and to good manners.
TO exhort unto Virtue and goodness, be yt to avoid grief, or to get
profit, the letters or Epistles must be parted into four parts. First, to
acquire benevolence by reason of the matter, declaring how worthy it is, how
profitable and necessary for him unto whom we write, and the^, that it shall be
a worthy praise for every good man so to do. Secondly, shall be expressed the
thing to be possible and easy to be done. Thirdly, that it is very necessary
for him to do it, and if he do it not, that there may happen unto him damage
and dishonor. Fourthly, and finally, to declare what is to be done: and this
latter part may be placed in such order as shall seem good unto the endyter.

The Example: wherein a friend exhorts a young man to obtain virtue.
THere is nothing in the world (witty young man) that more profits as well to
atcheue to common as private goods, nor which causes more to augment and get
honor and good renown, than the trade of good manners and virtue, for by that
means the wise, not only in their houses, have taken a form of regiment by
good order keeping, but also kingdoms and public affairs are by them governed,
mayntained, and augmented. Behold the Athemans, the Romans, and diverse other,
have they not always flourished when virtuous and wise men had the government
of their public weal? And further I may well say that a man which has
virtue in him, does shine with such a grace, that he may easily be exalted and
elevated from base estate into high honor, and get immortal praise. For this
cause, and for the singular love that I have unto you, I have willingly thought
good to move and stir up your courage to the attayning of vertus, considering
the good disposition, and the beginning of a good spirit that God has endued
you withal, whereby you surpass all other your companions: not yt I do
mistrust the courage yt you have to study, but more and more to animat you in
your good purpose: Nevertheless (my well-beloved) I consider that your study is
somewhat difficil, but I assure you yt ye fruit thereof is very profitable,
whereunto a man may easily attayn without great pain. There rests but only
to have a desire to become a worthy man, and a good courage to study well,
especially in good Sciences, to accustom to good manners, getting wisdom and
virtue, and by this means shall we please God, be beloved, praised, and
honored of men. Therefore I beseech you my friend lose not your young years in
idleness, which leads the blind to all gluttenous voluptuousness, and
makes a man weak, ignorant, poor, unfortunate, full of shame before old age
comes, which is altogether unprovided for, and to late to be remedyed.
Moreover (my well beloved) consider that in this City there is great need of
wise men, for to govern ye public affairs: And if you do your endeavor, there
is no man living that has a better mean, than you have, consydering the place
and house from whence you are descended, and the faculty that God has given
unto you.

How to dissuade our friend from rejoicing unadvisedly or foolishly.
IF we intend to dissuade a man, that he rejoice not unadvisedly or that he do
not a thing which he thinks to be good, and is not, then must we divide our
Letters into four parts, as before. First, shall be declared the disprofite of
the thing, if he do it, and how it may be hurt full, for that it is unjust and
dishonest, not agreeable to a good man. Secondly, that he cease and desist from
his purpose, declaring unto him what he ought to do. Thirdly, how easy it is
to leave it. And finally, how necessary it is to do that which we counsel
him, offering. etc.

The Example: wherein Cicero dissuadeth Curio from rejoicing that Caesar is
made Emperor.
THe common opinion of all Philosophers and wise men (worthy knight Curio,) is,
that there is nothing more dishonest, unjust, and pernicious, than to rejoice of
the destruction of the public weal: and he is so much the more worthy to be
blamed and dispraised, as to oppress he would receive praise, or glorify him
self with private utility, since that for the preserving of ye public weal,
we ought to hazard our selves even to the very death. And I understand that
you rejoice even to the uttermost for the victory of Caesar, in such sort that
it is openly perceived, and can not therefrom witholde your self, wherefore I
greatly lament your simplicity for letting your self to fall into so great an
error, as to rejoice of your own ruin, your parents and friends, your City
and the whole common weal. Therefore I ernestly request and pray you to leave
of this unconsidered and immoderate delectation and rejoicing. And
notwithstanding all this, I have so good an estimation of you, that you are not
deuoide of sense, but that shortly you will perceive your error, and convert
this foolish joy into bitter mourning, considering the evil that follows. For
like good and loyal Burgesses, you shall well think that the liberty of all
is converted into miserable captivity, the which to recover, every one ought
to expose him self even to the very abandoning of his life. And therefore in
all calamities, miseries and troubles, it is not necessary only to remedy this
your such rejoicing, but it is also very convenient and decent to bewail and
lament continually the damage of your country, of your nation, and of your
City, whose execrable ruin is now begoon, and from day to day will greatly
increase through the multiplication of most wicked people, and many other
apparaunt myseries and grievous perditions, which will be executed sooner than
you do think for, the which to avoid, it were rather to be desired to dye
than to live. Cease therefore to rejoice, and begin to lament your public
weal, and if you have no pity of ye public weal, yet at the least have
pity of your neighbors, and of your own self.

How to write letters exhorting to lamentacion.
BE it for misfortune private or public, the Letter must be divided in four
parts. First, to say that it is both just and honest to beewayle the
adversity of our friend, or of the affairs of the public weal, seeing that
in such a case the calamities are as it were our own. Secondly, to show the
case, thereby to move lamentation. Thirdly, to exhort to bewail it. Fourthly
that it is necessary so to do, to the end that after the grief and affliction,
remedy may be sought, promising to do for him. etc.

The Example: wherein Cicero, exhorts Plautus to lament the oppression of the
public weal
WE are constrained, (my friend Plautus, as well by divine as human right,
next to the honor of God to expose and venture all that we have for the
safegarde of the common weal, the prosperities whereof ought not only to
rejoice us, but also the adversities thereof ought to cause us to lament and
grievously sorrow even as our own: yea and further we ought for it to hazard our
life unto all dangers, for to preserve and defend it. This has caused me to
write unto you, for the miserable state of our desolate City, to this end
that you should lament with me and bewail our ruin and perdition. And for the
first, you should understand that I am dismissed and destitute of the dignities
and authorities wherein I shyned in the Senate, through the malice and iniquity
of Caesar, who causes himself to be called the Monarchal Emperor, and has
not only chased away the Fathers and Senators, but also from great and small
has taken away the name of liberty. Who can be of heart so hard, to abstain
himself from tears and lamentations, since our liberty is thus lost? what
rests there now but that with me and others you bewail, sorrow, and lament
such misfortune. And if it be said that it is necessary to augment my sorrow
and pour out tears, in such sort that there may be found some manner of playnt,
which may remedy our injury, by doing some laudable deed, I assure you that
with him that will enterprise it, I will not refuse that labor but will hazard
in all damages both head and life, and will be one of the foremost to have
again and recover the liberty lost.

How to dissuade from sorrow.
WHen we write letters dissuading from sorrow and lame^tation, we must divide
them into four parts. First, to declare that it is dishonor and damage in such
a case to show himself sorrowful, considering that every wise man ought of
duty to show him self equal, as well in prosperity as in adversity, and that
the matter it self gives no occasion of grief: and thereto may we add if we
will, a reason by the which we may show him that to remain to much in such
sorrow, it were dishonest. Secondly, it behooves to enforce our selves to
convert the same sorrow into joy. Thirdly, to show by good reason that he ought
to rejoice. Fourthly, that it is necessary to leave such grief and sadness,
alleging some reason for the same purpose.

The Example: wherein Brutus dissuadeth Marcus Antonius, from sorrowing for
the death of Caesar.
A Good man of duty (my friend Marcus Antonius,) ought not only to love the
prosperity of the common weal, but with all his power to advance it, and being
advanced to keep and preserve it, and also for it to hazard his life even to
the very bludshed, if it so be needful: and he that does not so, is worthy of
great reprehension, and grievous punishment: and certainly it is not laudable,
but very detestable and dishonest for a particular profit, to consume the
public profit, and he that so does ought shamefully to be thrown down to
death, and not worthy to be lamented of his friends. But because I see that for
the death of Caesar, you pour out abundance of tears, therefore can I not
choose but much marvel of you, since you have always ben a loyal Burgess, and
that not only the common weal has been through you augmented, but also unto
them yt have thereunto ben contrary you have always ben a rigorous hinderer, a
strait judge, and an invincible defender, more than though they had offended
your own person. Therefore take unto you again your old custom, and be not
grieved for the death of so cruel a tyra^t, which death all ye world ought to
desire, and thereof to rejoice, because he had taken away our liberty, and
destroyed our public weal, for his private pleasure. Wherefore me thinks
that for such a death you ought rather to rejoice than to sorrow: since that by
the death of so wicked an usurper we are returned into our former liberty.
Deliberate therefore to rejoice your self with us. And take good heed that in
our company you be not perceived to be sad in heart nor in countenance: I
assure you that it is necessary so to do for the avoiding of suspicion in your
person, praying you that if you would have any thing of me, do but command it.

How to write Inuectiue Letters, reprehending either friend or enemy, for
some crime, or ignorance.
INuectiue Letters must be divided into three parts. First, we must get
benevolence of our own behalf, saying that not willingly but by co^straint we
have written it unto him, and ye we have long time co^cealed it, but because he
still continues from evil unto worsse, we have thought good not to endure any
more of so evil a man, whose wickedness might do great hurt, if they were not
corrected. Secondly, to declare the matter whereof we will reprehende him, in
alleging resons fit for that purpose. Thirdly, if he be our friend, to declare
it with gentle language, admonishing him lovingly, and showing the
inco^uenie^ces which might ensue if he should hereafter do any such matter.
And if he be an enemy, to get benevolence on our behalf, saying that we do
not disdain him, nor that we would any more inuey against him, to the end
that he should not think that we have done that through hatred, which in deed
we have uprightly done, still deserving to speak somewhat more amply an other
time when place and time shall serve.

The Example: wherein Cicero inueyeth against Lucius Catilina, who conspyred
against the public weal.
I Know not any thing at this present (Lucius Catilina) wherewith I am more
intollerably grieved, and which is more painful unto me, than to have known,
and to have been advertised, by ye report of diverse through their Letters, that
you have conspyred against your cu^trey, the which to preserve, you ought
willingly, and with a noble courage, to choose even the death: and in as much
more as ye public profit is to be preferred before the particular, so much the
more is it a wicked and detestable thing unto him ye enforces him self to
hurt yt And I assure you, had it not ben for the great affection and love that
I bear unto you, I would rather have chosen to have holden my peace, and to
have passed under silence, than to write unto you of it: but I have thought
good to advertise you, to the end that of your self you may judge and know
your fault. What is the fury, rage, or rather diuellishnesse that might move
your heart to consent unto so horrible and brutish a matter? where is he that
durst th^ncke that such a damnable crime could be committed by any man? but
especially by a Lord, a Burgess, and a neighbors son of the City? Are you
of the Roman blood? dare you unto your neighbor, nay rather unto your
self, put to your hand for to shed blood? Do you take pleasure to hear young
children weep? noble dames lament? and good old men discomfort? when they and
even your own parents and friends, shall see the death of their Fathers,
husbands, wives, children, their goods spoiled, their houses burnt and
desolate? would you have no pity of the desolated Senate? Alas, have at the
least pity upon the Temples and sacred places, and set all these things before
ye eyes of your reason, and consider what pitiful end might follow. You may
peradventure say that I desire dignities, honors, and authorities: Alas, what
authority honor, or dignity, may a man find in the cominaltie desolated? in
ye public weal perished? in tears and depopulation of the City? Certainly
in my judgment, there are neither dignities, honors, nor authorities, but only
those which are gotten by virtue, and I know not any thing of greater utility,
or greater glory amongst men, tha^ to be virtuous in ye public affairs.
Therefore are you greatly deceived, if you speak for immortal glory by
oppressing the public weal. Take good heed lest hoping and thinkyng to get
name of immortal life, you lose not in a moment your temporal life, getting
shame, dispraise and dishonor for ever. Thirdly, cast of from you, I pray you,
such vnclemency, and apply your self to serve the public weal, which may
adorn both you and yours with great and precious riches, to the end that you
being gently reconcyled, may joyfully live with us, in the quiet peace of the
cuntry, to your glory and praise. And so doing you shall find me always ready
to aid you to the uttermost of my power.

How to write expugning Letters, either to friend or enemy, for charging us
with a fault.
LEtters repugning as well to friend as enemy, excusing our selves, or denieng
the matter, are made in two sorts: For if it be our friend that peradventure
does accuse us secretly, it behooves to use modest language by manner of excuse.
But if it be our enemy we must defend our selves plainly and freely of ye
crime by him imposed, and in both sorts we must divide our letters into three
parts. First, we shall say we are to be excused, either for that it is not so,
or that through imprudencie, malice or envy, he has invented that matter
against us. Secondly, be it to friend or enemy, we shall say to our friend
under correction, and to our enemy freely and stoutly that he himself may be
reprehe^ded of the like case, or of the very same, yea or else of a greater
infamy, saying yt he ought rat^^r to have regard unto himself, than to
entermedle with blami^g a another. Thirdly, if the Letters be to our friend and
under correction, we must promise never to return to commit such a thing:
exhorting him likewise to take heed unto him self, for the matter whereof we
have informed him. If it be to our enemy, we shall plainly exhort him to
leave of his detracting, and that if he continue to say what he will, he shall
hear what he would not. And if we write unto a third, we must pray him to
admonish our enemy to hold his peace, and shall excuse our selves, saying
that we would not have him offended, although we have spoken ill of our enemy,
for it has not ben for malice or ill will, but only for to cause his malice
and ill report to cease.

The Example: wherein Catilina purges himself to the Senate of Rome, for the
crime of coniuration imposed against him by Cicero.
IT is always my custom and condition (Notable Lords and Fathers) to flee
wicked detractours, and to have in great horror the diff^mers, who like wolves
ravish the good renown of good people: and there is nothing that seems unto
me more detestable, more dishonest, nor more abominable, than in the absence
of a man to dilacerate and tear in pieces his honor: and against them do I
manfully fight, this notwithstanding, I can not hinder their Serpentyne and
Viperous tongues, from committing such injuries. In number of whom, and of my
flatterers, is this wicked envious serpe^tyne Cicero, enemy to God and good
men, and to the public weal, who incessantly inuenteth new dreams against
me. I have refrayned as much as I could to answer unto his sclanderous lies,
because I would not be noted as he is, to be a babbler, and of dishonest
language. And because that from day to day his venom increases and is vomited
out from ill unto worse, under your corrections my Lords, and in your presence,
I have thought good to discharge me of two labors. The one to answer unto
him, and to purge my self of the crimes by him falsely imposed against me: and
the other to give you to understand and to declare unto you, his execrable
manners, vices, and cursed conditions, to the end that you might hear and
understand his deceitful and crafty enuies, and not give credit unto his
words. This wicked enuiour and seducer of the whole public weal, says every
where that I, who (with out boasting my self) am loyal, have conspired
against my country and public weal: this wicked stranger and sower of all
sedition cries against me, who am a patron and member of the common weal,
that I would destroy it, even as though the members should destroy the body: is
it credible? ought a man to believe it? And nevertheless he publishes it as
though it were true. I would feign know by what conjectures, or by what
signs, he could perceive it, if he would not say that he had dremed it. But
this wicked person turns such like and other evils as are in him, upon me.
Certes my lords, he is so stuffed with iniquities, ye he must needs burst and
vomit out his poison. He never did good in this City, he never loved any, but
day by day he spyeth how he may work displeasure and damage to some good man
or other. Take heed therefore how you give credit to this wicked and damnable
man: It is not yet long ago since he came into this City his feet all dusty,
and under color of vanity, and of a little Rethorike that he has, and which
he uses, he has converted a great quantity of poor people, whom he has by
his art, fraud and deceyt despoyled of their goods, and by that means is
grown up to great riches. Which way should there have come unto him so many
houses, pessessions, servants, and so lightly as he has them, had he not
spoiled and robbed the poor people? But by this unrighteousness and riches he
is become so proud, that he which is but newly come, would chase me out of my
City, and destroy me. And of him surely I could say innumerable evils, were it
permitted me to speak freely, and that I douted not to displease you. For many
times it does good men more hurt to hear recyted the evil of an other, than
it does this other himself, he being evil and wicked. Therefore pleases it
you of your grace, to deliver your poor Citizen and Burgess, from the false
throat of this cursed Serpent.

How to write inuectiue Epistles of contention, rerehending another for
ignorance in study.
EPistles and letters Inuectiue of contention and dispraise, must be divided
into three parts. But in this case there are two ways, either to write unto
him whom we mind to reprehend: or else better, to write unto a third person,
as judge, or arbitratour. First to declare that it is not our use to move
controversy, for we demand nothing but peace. Ye and although that we be
oftentimes injured by our enemies, and that they say all the worst that they
can, yet nevertheless we would give to understand that the insolency of our
adversaries is so presumptuous, and so tending to destroy our estimation, that
we can not any longer keep silence, but have thought good to write, to the end
that he might be judge. Secondly, to express briefly and plainly whereupon
the controversy depends, afterward to recite our reasons, and to confirm
them, and to confute those of our adversary. Thirdly, that we might say many
other things, whereof we will keep silence, to the end that we would not be
thought to proceed ratherby envy, tha^ to speak the truth: prayi^g and
beseching him unto whom we write, to judge of the ignorance of our adversary,
reco^mending our selves unto him.

The Example: wherein a certain Barber writes to a Doctor of Physic,
concerning his adversary a Chirurgian.
THere was never thing more detestable unto me, nor which I had more in horror
(worshipful Doctor) than to see a man rejoice in detractions, and evil
reports of an other, for thereby are wicked people known. And although I have
diverse times of many ben injured, fl^uted, skorned, and dispraised, reporting
by me a thousand dreams and lies, yet have I always suffered them, and turned
ye deaf ear toward them. And now steppeth forth a new detracter of me, who
by force constrains me to answer, and to defend me against his cursed
sclau^der, for the sauegard of my estimation, which he thinks to destroy. And
to the end that I be not accounted so ignorant as he, I have thought good to
write unto you, for to give you to understand that he offreth me evident wroug.
This wicked and ignorant Ass cries and publishes every where that it
appertains not to any man living, to meddle with curing of a wound, or ulcer,
within the city, except he be a Chirurgia^, and sworn to the City, at the
least, if the Chirurgian be not present and assistant to see the whole cure:
but behold his craft, and how covertly he would take away the practice gain,
and profit of ye Barbers. Who is he so ignorant that knows not yt always
hereto fore the master Barbers have accustomed to cure all kind of wounds
as well old as new? Who is it yt is so ignorant of the notable and good cures yt
they have accustomed to do? wherefore then should they not use to do as they
have done, without borowing leave of the gentlemen Chirurgians? seeing that they
do and have done their cures very well without their assistance. I would that
the ignorant Assehed should know, that that which we do is better done, and
that we understand better the art of Surgery than he does, or a great
multitude of Asses that call them selves Chyrurgians, who have not the
knowledge to apply one only instrument, or to make one incysion right, but all
their case is nothing else but sophistical arguments, which serve to no
purpose. Therefore it is necessary that it come to the handy operacion of the
Barbers, who understand Chirurgerie as well as they: together also that it would
be great cost for the poor pacients, to pay both the Barber and the
Chirurgian. Secondly, and if I would, I could write unto you more amply of his
enuies and ignorant detractions, but I love rather to hold my peace, to the
end that it be not said that I speak more against him of envy than to
speakethe plain truth. Therefore you that know the whole, ought to judge the
equity, and to cause him to keep silence in this matter: whereof I always
recommende me unto you, wholly offering my self. etc.

How to write a Defense in a Contention.
WHen we are accused and reprehended by contempt and dispraise, we may defend
our selves by letters or epistles, which must contain.iij. parts. First, to
declare, that we are provoked to answer unto him that writes evil of us, and
that it is not our custom to take altercation, especially of wicked and
ignorant people: And were it not for that it would seem that we accorded to
that which he says, we would not vouchesafe to answer unto their ignorance.
Afterward must be declared by manner of recital, the reasons of the adversary,
confuting them to our possibility. Secondly, we must show by opposite, some
faults and ignora^ces of our adversary, which shall be manifest and apparaunt
by lively reasons. Thirdly, to say, that although we could express many more
imbecillities and faults in him, yet nevertheless we will not declare them, to
the end that it apeare not that we speak against him rather through envy,
tha^ for the truths sake: saying that we would that he unto whom we write,
should be the just Judge of the matters.

The example: wherein the Chirurgian defends himself to the Physician against
his adversary the Barber.
I Am advertised (equal Judge) to be accused before you on the behalf of
such a one, a boasting Barber, who not only is ignorant in his science, but
also in all that a wise man ought to know: and I am sorry that it behooves me
to answer him, but that which moves me, is to the end that it be not thought
that I consent to his error, and to purge my self before you, that know and
understand al things: and to the end that expulsing his old injuries, I might
set silence to his new. First, for that he says, that ever heretofore the
Barbers have accustomed to cure wounds, as well old as new, and thereto has set
forth their goodly cures: Behold and consider the craft and subtlety, how
gloriously he boasts and vaunteth himself, and rises up to suppress and
overthrow the whole art and faculty of Chirurgerie Is it not well enough
understood and known, what peril there is in thinking to heal al diseases?
and that to make a good operation in such and other difficile matters, it is
needful that the cause be well understood and debated: and to know whether
that that which is to be cured be a simple wou^d, an ulcer, or a fistule, which
is the peccant matter, and what ointement or other medicine is proper for it:
and to discern and understand this thing rightly, what Barber is it (I mean
to speak of unskillful) that understands one only word of Latin, and with
much a do scarce good English? I know very few that can expound the
difference between Leporam, and Lepram, And yet notwithstanding most of their
Chirurgerie books are stuffed full of Eloquent Latin, and that difficile, yea
and the most part of our English terms, are very far different from our
vulgar and maternall speech, in such sort, that who so fully understands
not the Latin tongue, yea and also the Greek, can scarce understand them.
Through which error arise many times sundry inconveniences. For the asses that
are, of all diseases make the Pocke. And this comes to pass, because they
will never call for the Chirurgian, who in his faculty, is of all men
approved, skillful, learned and very expert, to know how to discern^ and
understand all the points of his Art, without erring or making fault: and
contrarily such ignorant which darkely give credit to their glorious heads,
and have no reason save only their propre will and foolish opinion, and
which of a deceiptfull argument, make a necessary demonstration, do give by
their dangerous promises, a very fallible hope, disalowing all good writings,
if they be not conformable to their opinion. Therefore (say I) that he ought to
be put to perpetual silence. Secondly, thus much shall suffice you, although
I might say more, but his ignorance can not bear it: For it is known to every
one, that thorough their fault they have committed a thousand evils, and say
that they may better kill an hundredth men, tha^ an other to heal one only:
and therefore take heed of them who may. Furthermore, I will hold my peace,
for it is no great honor to write the imperfections and ignora^ces that might
be told, yea and if I should say more, it would be said, that I speak more of
malice and ill will, than to open the truth. Thirdly, although I yet keep
back many other things, if time and place scrued: and although he shall meddle
to speak more of me, yet sir, you may judge of the whole: for you know well
what part bears ignorance and innocence. Wholly offering my humble service
to you and yours. etc.

How to write Domestical and familiar Letters or Epistles.
DOmestical or household letters are more in use than any other for so much as of
their nature they are very necessary, to let our friends understand of our
estate, and of our business, be it of health, prosperity, sickness,
adversity, or any other domestical and familiar things: and in such matters
the Letters or Epistles must be divided into three parts. If we write of our
own estate, health or sickness, or of the health or sickness of an other.
First following Tullie, and others, we may (as they do) add the Latin
sentence, Si vales, been est, ego quidem valeo, If you be in good health, god be
praised for it, for thanks be to God I am. Secondely, we shall recite our own
health, or the causes of the amendment thereof, and also the health or sickness
of our friend, which we shall esteem even as our own, glad of his recovery
or prosperity, rendering thanks unto god, who has so disposed it: and
likewise if there be happened unto us any fortune or misfortune, we shall write
the state thereof, be it riches or poverty, dignity, or depression, to
admonyshe our friend either to rejoice or sorrow with us.

Thirdly, we say commonly: Thus, not having wherewith further to enlarge at
this present, but beseeching the Lord to keep and preserve you in his holy
tuition: we finish. From such a place. etc. By yours altogether to command.
etc. or otherwise, as shall please the enditer.

The Example: of a common Style in that case.
IF you be in health and merry, I am very glad, for great thanks to be given to
God on my behalf, I find my self in very good health and welfare. You do
peradventure greatly marvel, for that I was wont to write often unto you, and
of late have deferred so to do, whereof it may be that you would accuse me of
negligence: howebeit it has not been through negligence, for an ague has so
weakened me of late, that I had small hope to have escaped without treading the
trace out of this world into another, yea I was brought so low, that even the
Physicians had quite given me over, and I had no hope save only in God, to
whose good aid I still committed my self. Secondly, his sovereign bounty
has brought me to my former health, notwithstanding it has not ben without
great expense of money: Behold therefore the causes why I could not write
unto you, but from henceforth I will write unto you more oftener, if God grant
me time and space so to do. Thirdly, I shall desire you to write unto me of
your prosperity, and of such a one, assuring you, that if there be any thing
that I may do for you, do but command me and I will do mine endeavor to
accomplish it, God to friend, whom I beseech to grant unto you your hearts
desire. From such a place. etc.

How to write other domestical Letters of familiar business.
WE must divide the^ into three parts. First, and Secondly, as in the other
going before. Thirdly, shall be put the conclusion, saying that we have thought
good to advertise him of such business, because he is our very friend.

The Example: wherein one Friend aduertiseth an other of the process that he
has won.
IF it be well with you (my singular friend) then is it very well with me: For
even as I am (God be praised) in good health, so would I desire that it
should be likewise with you. And because I know that the love betwixt us two,
has always made us equal in our fortunes, therefore have I thought good to
write unto you, of my business and affairs, because in deed you might be the
more joyful. Secondly, you are advised of the time, trouble and cost that I
was at in the suit that I had against such a one, and how often I have cursed
the hour whenever I heard talk of it, even ready many times to give it
quite over: Yet nevertheless by travel and diligence, and by importunate suit,
my good right, upon Tuisday last, (notwithstanding any clamor that my
adversary made (to his great confusion) I obtained sentence to my profit,
whereof I render immortal thanks to Almighty God. Thirdly, I know well that of
my profit, honor, and joy, you are as joyful as my self: and seeing that my
adversities do bring you desolation, it is good reason, that my prosperities
should bring you consolation. Therefore I pray you do it to understand to all
our friends there, to the end that they may participate of our joy. And if
there be any thing that it will please you to command me, be you well
assured, that of me you shall have an infallible friend. And thus end I at
this present, beseeching our Lord. etc.

How to visit our Friend with Letters, not having any great matter to write.
OFten times it chances that we have no matter to write to our friend, and yet
we would gladly visit him with our Letters, speaking of him or of his
business: and such Letters must contain three parts. First, to get
boneuolence on our own behalf, saying that because we love him, we thought it
good to write unto him, and to recreate him, by communicating unto him our
Letters, to the end that we may take pleasure, in that which he shall write unto
us again, considering that there is nothing more appropriate unto fre^des, than
often to write to and fro. Secondly we shall say that we are in health and good
estate, desiring to know of his health and prosperity: praying unto God to
keep and preserve him from all evil. Thirdly we shall desire him to visit us
often with his Letters, to this end, that hering of his health and prosperity,
we may have cause of consolation, offering our selves etc.

The Example of the Style in that case.
ALthough I have no matter to write unto you (my dear friend) for that I know
not of any news hereabouts chanced, yet nevertheless the great love equal
betwixt us, will not suffer me to let pass any messanger that I know goes
toward you, without sending you Letters by him, for I believe verily that you
have as great joy to read my Letters, as I have to read yours. Secondly (my
friend) you shall understand that I and all my family are (god be praised) in
good health, earnestly desiring to know of your prosperity, and how all our
friends thereaboutes do. For I assure you there is nothing unto us more
pleasant, joyful, nor agreeable, than to understand of your health, good
fortune, and prosperity: but this causes love (my friend,) because that from
the time of our youth, we have been joined together with that band. And
therefore my dear and perfect friend, I earnestly request you, that it would
please you to visit me often with your Letters, to the end that
notwithstanding the distaunce of the place betwixt us, our minds may yet
rejoice, and be comforted together, praying you with all my heart to command
me in your affairs, eue^ as he that is always ready to do you service, God to
friend, to who^. etc.

How to write of some small affairs, business or news.
Having a matter of great importance to write, yet many times we are desirous
to write of some small business or news of little importance, and so doing ye
letters must co^tain.iij. parts. First to declare the cause that moves us, as
in the style before. Secondly, to salute him ge^tly, telling some pretty and
merry news. Thirdly, to offer him our service, with hearty co^mendations unto
him, and others.

The example: wherein one friend vvriteth to an other of certain small news.
ALthough it be long since I wrote unto you (right dear and perfect friend) yet
is is it not for ye I had forgotten you, but because I had not any matter to
write unto you: and therefore having now found a trusty Messanger, I have
thought good to write unto you these Letters, whereby you might understand, ye
god be praised (who disposes al things) we are here in good health, beseching
him yt it be so with you, and all our friends there. I have bethought me and
considered with my self, whereof I might write unto you, and have found none
other thing, save only to certify you that by the commandment of the King
and the ordinance of the Court, this day was made a great general Justice,
which was a wonderful excellent thing to behold, considering the order that
there was kept: you have heretofore seen but I think not so passingly well
handled nor better ordered, for surely the chalengers especially with so valiant
courage and strength enforced themselves in the Justice, that wonder it was to
see: and on the contrary side appeared also such manly hearts and boldned
stomachs, that great commendations obtained both parts of all the assistants:
but yet in fine (after many sturdie strokes on both sides) the chalengers won
the price. etc. Thirdly, if I had known any other news, I would have written
them unto you, praying you that you will still bear me good will and often
times write unto me: Recommending me especially to you, and to such a one, and
to all our other friends thereaboutes. Beseching our Lord to send you comfort
and health etc.

How to write letters containing some pleasant Iestes of our selves, besides
other matter.
THere are yet other sorts of letters: for these before written, may be called
simple: now testeth there to express the composition of some mixed Letters,
which are of two or more things. And first we will show the style of a merry
letter provoking to laughter or rejoicing: yea and it oftentimes falls that
in weightye matters, there is to be mingleh some pretty co^ceate, be it through
jesting of our selves, or of some other. And such Letters must be divided into
three parts. First, we must pleasantly express the merry iestes or conceyte
that we entend to utter (our honesty and reputation still observed) for that
which we write is only to rejoice our friend. Secondly, to leave the jest or
merry conceit, and to change into some other matter, to the end that it be not
said, that we be altogether scoffers. Thirdly, to offer our whole service, as
in the letters before.

The Example: wherein a Soldier writes to his Captain.
IT is no marvel (redouted Captain) though you make great account of me for
if I should be in any reenco^ter against our enemies, where it were necessary to
part it with blows, you should see how I would handle my self, yea the great
fear that I have of it, does make me already trouble and quake, considering
ye I never fought but under the curtain, and with the pot and the spiggot: I
believe I durst not assault the snayle, if she were armed with her shell and
horns, for as hardy a fellow am I as ever was drawn out of a bowease: yea in
such a matter I would love well the sound of the retraicte: and if ever you
saw man of war play better with a two footed sword, then say boldly that I
am a liar, for I would run with the foremost to the forewarde of a good
Tauerue, there to give the onset. Secondly (my Captain) all this I have
written but only in jest. For in deed to say the truth (none dispraysed)
there is no man in the whole company, that more willingly or more coragiously
would adventure himself in the battle than I would do. For by the faith
that I owe unto the King and to you, I have so much before mine eyes the
public weal, and have so much pity of the misery and calamytie of the poor
people, that at all hours, both day and night, I am purposed to hazard my life
in the defending thereof, and repulsing of the enemies, to the end that
following the steps of other valiant Champions, I may purchase honor and
renown. Thirdly, nevertheless (valiant Captain) I pray you not to put your
self in danger without a cause, but if you see that it be needful either for
your own defense, or otherwise, you shall find in me such facts, as I will not
utter with mouth always pressed and ready to obey your good pleasure and
commandment.

How to write Letters concerning merry iestes or taunts by some other.
IF we would merrily taunt him unto whom we write, or some other of whom we
write, it must be done even as in the style before written, saving that in the
second part we must ernestly continue on the matter.

The example: wherein Cicero iesteth with Valerius.
COnsidering with my self at this present, (my perfect friends Valerius) the
great negligence that is in you, and that since your departure you have written
nothing unto me, I can not excuse you, but to say that you have the palsy or
else the sever lurden, and that the hands which were wont to write often unto
me, can now no longer hold the pen. If it be so, recommend your self to the
Saints of Paradise, or if not, learn so write with your feet, even as you
have well done with your hands. Secondly, although jesting and bourding, yet
know I not any other thing which might be more grateful unto me, or wherein
you might do me more pleasure, than now amongst the great affairs that I have
for the public weal, to give me some consolation by your letters, to the end
that I may be certain of your health: You know my heart how I love you, and
do not request any other thing of you at this present, if not that it would
please you to write often unto me. Thirdly, as for me, if there be any thing
wherein I may imploye my self to pleasure you, you may command me, even as him
ye is gladly ready to accomplish your good desire.

How to write letters giving general commission and charge of business or
affairs.
THere is yet another fort of letters, whereby we give commission or charge of
certain business generally or particularly, and such letters must contain
four parts. First, to purchase his benevolence, saying, that for the loyalty
that is in him, and also the confidence that we have of his person, and that
for the love of us he will entreat our business even as his own, therefore
have we deliberated to commit our business unto him. Secondly, to declare what
business, and with what persons, and how he has to do. Thirdly, to express
the authority that we mind to give him over our business, with all other
clauses necessary to the expedicion or execucion of the same business.
Fourthly, to promise to take in good part, whatsoever to him shall be done etc.

The Example: wherein Cicero commits to Scipio his authority over all his
business in Rome.
I Know not any thing so weighty or so di^^icill, (my more than dear friend
Scipio) yea though death it self should follow, that for you I would not most
willingly do. For so wills the love and benevolence that inwardly joins
and unites us together: and I do steadfastly believe, that you will do the like
for me, whenever I need. Secondly, the cause that moves me to write thus
unto you, is ye I have much business to dispatch at Rome, where personally
(for my other affairs, I can not be assistant, and therefore it behooves me to
have some friend resydent there for me, that may take the charge of my
affairs. Thirdly, and although that I could commit them to diverse other my
friends, yet notwithstanding I am affrayde in so doing, that I should to much
offend you: and should seem that I would wholly separate my self from you,
if I should not commit my causes and affairs unto you: and likewise if you
desist from giving me commission of yours, our natural and mutual love might
be diminished. Which case to avoid, I now send you plain and especial
procuration, in my urgent and needful business: having steadfast confidence in
you that nothing shall perish through negligence. And especially concerning the
cause and pursuyte between me and such a one, whereof I pray you, procure speedy
expedition, as knowing well the great wrong of the adverse party, and my good
right, which has great need of aid and succor. Fourthly, I beseech you
again to have my affairs in remembrance, whereof I give you the charge and
plain commission irreuocable: all which things I would have you to do and
procure, even as though I my self were personally present, and whatsoever you
shall do I promise to be content withal, under obligation and bond of all my
goods, according as more plainly is contained in the procuration (or Letter of
attorney, which I send you here withal. And thus fynish I my letter, praying.
etc.

How to write letters, giving particular Commission for some affairs.
OFtentimes yt happens that we commit, and give charge of some particular
business: and such letters must be divided into four parts, even as the other
before written. Howbeit in the second part we must express one or more
business and affairs by order, in every article, the things that we would
have dispatched being particularly showed, plainly and manifestly.

The Example: wherein Appius constituteth Cicero his receyuer in Sicilia.
THe perfectness of fidelity that I have in you, (my loyal friend Tully,)
and the which you use toward all your friends, as I have always perfectly
perceived it, does give me no small hope, (together the love and benevolence
wherewith we are united) that your wisdom and liberal humanytie, takes great
pleasure to employ it self about my business, if I commit any unto you.
Secondly, and to the end that I give you to understand, what business I
intend that you do for me at this present, you shall know and understand, that
in your province I have had to do for the Senate of Rome and that great
sums of money remain due unto me by diverse of my creaditours thereaboutes.
And seeing that I am at this point assured of the good will that you bear unto
me, I have thought good to constitute you my procurour or attorney, to
receive of such a one, so much: and of such a one, so much. etc. Whereof I
send you the cedules and obligations. Thirdly, and if any of them or any other
will resyst you, and refuse or delay the payment, I give you power and
authority to constrayne them by all ways of Justice, even as I might my
self, if I were there personally present. Fourthly, whatsoever you shall do
for me, I promise you to be content therewithal, and bynd me by the
procuration which I se^d you by this bearer, with ye bills and writings
serving to that effect. I commit the whole unto you, certefiyng you that in me
you have a friend pressed and ready to do whatsoever you shall command him. From
Rome the. etc.

How to write certain myxed Letters.
YEt is there another sort of Letters containing entermixed matters, which
are to be divided into two parts only. First, to declare the most necessary
business. Nevertheless we must always begin with some honest preamble, like
as if we write to our friend, saying though we be occupied and busyed with
many affairs, yet we intend to visit him with our letters. Secondly, to
declare particularly and plainly our intent. And if peradventure it behoue us
to answer letters received from our friend, in such a case for the preamble
we shall say that we have received his letters, the which were very comfortable
unto us, and that we intend orderly to give answer: in the end whereof we
may write that which we will beside, offering as in the other before. etc.

The Example: wherein Cicero writes to Curio concerning his business.
I Have by this bearer receued your letters (my singular friend Curio) whereby I
greatly rejoiced when I understood the good health and prosperity that is
with you and yours: yet notwithstanding I was something sorry when I saw my
self accused of negligence, for that I have not written unto you so often as
you desired and as I ought to have done. And certainly I confess that I am
greatly to be blamed, for in deed I was not very much busyed, and am very glad
that I know that my letters do so greatly comfort you: promising you that from
henceforth there shall pass no messa^ger, but I will visit you with my
writings, and will never think it any labor to write unto you, so long as I
may pleasure you. Secondly, you write unto me that I should certify you of
your business, in what state they are: I assure you that day and night I go
about to dispatch them, but the craftiness of your adversaries is so great,
that I am forced to defer, attending the good hour to break and frustrate
their malice, the which notwithstanding; I beseech God to mayntaine you in your
honor and dignity. And where as you will me to send you my books of the
law, I would gladly do it, but for the occasion of these troublesome times, I
think it needeful to tarry til things be more peaceable, and than will I
satisfy that which you desire, that is to say, you to command, and I to
obey. etc.

How to write Letters containing diverse and sundry matters.
LEtters containing many sorts of matters may be divided into asmany parts as
they co^taine sundry matters: and we must begin with the most principal part,
always observing the rules before written, and afterward the most necessary,
and so consequently even unto the end, so that the whole be finished in order
and by articles: howbeit it is good to place in the beginning some preamble fyt
for the matter: and finally to offer as before. Note also, that if there be
question both of our friends affairs and our own, then is it decent to begin
with those of our friends, and afterward to speak of our own, thereby to
give him to understand that we have his affairs as much or more in remembrance
than our own.

The example, wherein Tully writes to Pompilius of comforting, grave and
domestical matters.
I Understand (my very perfect friend Pompilius) by Letters received from some
of our friends, that your valyant Father is deceassed out of this world: and
this know ye, that in as much as we are firmly joined together in frendeship,
therefore it is very heavy for me to suffer, yea I esteem it even as mine own
adversity, as friends ought to do. But when I consider how well borne he was,
and that he came in marriage with noble and sage parents, and by his virtues got
such dignities and authorities as can not be recyted: yea and moreover (which
is almost impossible) that he was always in favor both with the Lords and the
people, that he has run his course of nature, and that he is godly departed,
I find no cause to lament, but with all my heart to render thanks unto god,
that has given him so many gifts of virtue in this world, and then after
many years, has called him from darkness to his clear light. Secondly, let
us now speak of other matters: you shall understand that it is reported us
even to the whole Senate, yt the french men prepare a great host against our
common weal, and have already over run our fields, therefore is it
condescended, that manfully and with a good courage we shall go against them.
And this to do is established by Pompeius, who in wisdom, counsel, and
warfare authority, has none like unto him for to conduct our army.
Therefore I counsel you to leave Cumane, and to come into this City, during
the expedition of this war, for to avoid the hurt that might come unto you.
Thirdly, you write unto me that I should receive money of your detters, I will
do it willingly: But during this tumulte, I determyne nothing in the Senate,
nor elsewhere, until that things be more quiet: and I dare boldly write
unto you, that if you come hither, you may get honor and profit: and you
shall see what dylygence I have used toward your creditours, and to magnify
your name: assuring you that I am wholly at your commandment.

How a Prince faithfully certifieth the vvorthie qualities of a man.
ALl, or most part of the styles before written, are addressed either to our
superiors, equalles, or inferiors, which might seem to suffice for this
little work: yet nevertheless, because I would have the gentle Readers, to
understand that I delight to express abundance of Styles, I have thought good
to recite some styles, which writers and learned men have accustomed to use,
following therein the example of diverse good Orators. And the first style shall
be a letter of fidelity, to wit, When a Prince writes to one or to many the
verity and truth of a thing, even as it is, giving perfect notice that it is
so: and such letters must contain three parts. First, the Prince puts his
name, his title, and other qualities agreeable to his highness. Secondely,
must be placed the discourse or entrance fit for the purpose, whereof we
intend to write. Thirdely, to purchase benevolence to the thing, or to the
person whereof we write, causyng credit to be given thereunto: expressing the
very truth of that which we commend, or the virtues of the person.

The Example: wherein the Duke of Venice certifieth the wisdoms and science of
G. A.
AVgustine, by the grace of God. etc. To all them that shall see these letters,
health and comfort. Secondly, the Majesty of a Prince, and his magnificall
authority is not only to punish and correct vices, but with his whole power
he ought to deiect and chase away all vicious persons: and eue^ so likewise
ought he of Justice and honesty, the good and virtuous, full of Sapience and
study, not only to amplify with goods and honor, but also in all things to
give them support, favor and praise. Thirdly, and for that it is many years
ago since we have perfectely known Georges Alexander Doctor very expert and
skillful, as well in the Greek as in the Latin tongue, yea loved, esteemed and
honored of all men, for the gravity of his eloquence: wherefore besides the
benefits that we have showed him, it is yet our mind, that by our faithful
witness, the virtues which are in him, should be known unto all men, and by
your relation to be magnified. And therefore we recommende unto you the said
Georges Alexander, in all his affairs: for that city or town, may think it
self very happy, wherein he shall vouchsafe to abide, for the excellent
doctrine that is in him. And if there be any service or pleasure done unto him
for our sake, we esteem it even as if it were done unto our self, and for the
same will give perpetual thanks. In witness whereof we have sealed this
with our Seal manuell. Youen here the such a day etc.

How a great prince writes of peace or wars etc.
THere is an other sort of letters when a great Prince writes generally to
all, or to a university, a town, a City, a country, a communaltie, or to
some public person, as to entreat of peace, wars, apointment. etc. And such
letters must be divided into three parts. First, the name of the Prince, and
al his titles, with salutation. Secondly, the cause moving wherefore we write,
declaring that it is just, honest, and profitable, the which we shall prove as
well by reasons as to depresse our adversary, and to desire always to
maynteine Justice and equity. Thirdly, the matter that we intend, be it of
peace, or of war, or of some other great matter, and let the conclusion be
tendyng to our purpose, contaynyng the fynall clauses, agreeable and necessary
thereunto, according to the rules before written.

The Example wherein the Emperor makes peace with the king of Hungary.
FRederike by the Divine grace, Emperor of the Romans, of Austrie, of Syrie,
Duke of etc. and Count of. etc. To Mathieu king of Hungary. etc. sends
greeting: Although that there be many reasons the which might provoke us to
make war against thee, m^e than are to be found, that do persuade us for to
make peace with thee, the which were to long to recyte, neither also shall it
be needeful for as much as thou do understand them well enough: yet to the
end that to thee and thine it may appear that there is in us more
Liberality, gentleness, and humanity, than desire of reuengement, against
your ingratitude, we have thought good to make peace with thee, to this end,
that our wars being thus ceased, our people and thine, being sore weried
and travailed, may return to their houses in their desired peace, to restore
their goods so dispersed and wasted. Thirdly, and for this cause I certify by
these presents, that from henceforth secludyng all discord and simulation,
which heretofore might have been betwixt us, we will with thee make and
establishe firm and steadfast peace, by the forms and conditions passed and
accorded between our ambassadoures. Wherefore we admonish you, that thou and
thine be pressed ioyefully and with a good will, to receive this desired peace,
and to keep it on your part inuiolated, even as we have enjoined to ours, and
as we our selves mind to do: to the end that thou might know the good
that we would thee in well and faithfully keeping this peace, and causing it to
be kept and observed without interruption,

How a noble man writes Letters for the promotion of a man.
WHen any Lord or noble man writes for the promotion of a man, or that he
writes to him, whom he minds to prefer, or to another to provide for him
of whom he writes, such Letters are to be divided into.iij. parts, as before.
First he puts his name and his titles, with brief salutation. Secondly he
gets benevolence to the person, whom he minds to prefer, by praising him
of some particular virtue, saying that therefore he deserves to be had in favor
and estimation with all men. Thirdely, he gets benevolence to his own
person, saying that for those causes he is moved to show him favor and
commodity: afterward he adds to take in good part the good will, for such a
benefit or thing given, is not sufficient to reward such virtues, offering.
etc.

The Example, vvherin the Count of Pauie, vvriteth in the promotion of A.
IOannes Galeas Maria, by the grace of God County of Pauie, and Lord of
Gennes, to Angelicke sends greeting: Secondly the excellent melody and
incredible harmony of Musical science, wherein thou excellest not only the
other Singers of our Chapel, but also there is none which may be compared
unto thee, with other great and innumerable virtues, for the which of all
people both privately and publicly, thou art renowned, praised, esteemed, and
reverenced: Such things I say, do provoke and incline me to bear thee good
will, to aid and succoure thee in thy desires, even as customably we do to
our servants and familiar acquaintance, to the end to stir and move other
to well doing, when they see the virtuous to be rewarded and honored. Thirdely,
and to the end that more plainly may appear to you the great affection and
love that we bear thee, we do constitute thee to receive in the Count of
Aquedoace, the fruits, rents, profits, and revenues due unto us, the which
we do freely give thee by these presents, and so do declare and command
it: willing thee gently to receive it, which is too little to be compared to
thy virtues, trusting hereafter, if we be of power and ability, that thou
shalt perceive how we desire the advancement of our good servants by
magnifying their virtues, offering etc.

How a prince ecclesiastical or temporal, writes Letters forbidding a thing.
WHen a prince ecclesiastical or te^porall writes to one or to many,
co^ma^dyng and forbidding not to finishe a thing already begone, or not to take
in hand a thing alredie pretended: Such letters contain.iij. parts. First
his name and his titles, with salutation. Secondly, he declares to
understand, that he unto whom he writes, has enterprised, and purposes
to finish a thing which he would not have him to execute showing the causes and
reasons, either true or like to be true, dissuading from the doing of such a
thing. Thirdly, he places his commandment and inhibition in brief terms,
and well to be understood, even as it appertains unto a prince, adding
thereto injunctions and royal thretnings if it be gaynsayd or withstanded: the
which threatenings nevertheless ought to be moderated with humanity, and not
ouercharged with rigor, to the end that thorough too great rigor, it be not
perceyned, that the Prince speaks of choler or anger, the which a wise man
ought not to do: and then to set the day and date. etc.

The Example: wherein the Pope forbids king Ferrand the building of a Castle.
INnocent Bishop, servant of the servant of God, to our son Ferrand, king
of ^ouill^ health and apostolical benediction. Secondly, by ye Letters of our
Reverend brother the Cardinal of S. Peter ad Vincula, by our commandment
gouerner of the Field Picenine, and Legate, we have had understanding that in
the ends and borders of the kingdom of ^ouill^ toward our field Picenine,
which belongs to us, thou will breaking the appoyntementes and concordes
made between us, build strong places and Castles, as he says, he knows by
the report of diverse people, worthy of credit, who do say, that they have
seen thy preparations: and as thou know, such manner of new buyldings,
especially erected upon the Front of the Sea coast, where they may give great
occasions of evil dooyng and hurt, are things which of their own nature,
induce a man to suspicion, and to think some evil conspiracy. Wherefore we
can not but greatly doubt, least thou intendest some treason against us.

Thirdly, we therefore will thy majesty, to desist from buyldyng such
Castles and Fortes against us, if thou wylt with us have peace and perpetual
tranquillity. But if peradventure thou will not cease, then understand thou
for a certainty, that we shall be constrained to repulse the injury, that
thou would do unto us, followyng those means whereby it is lawful to put
away injury. Howebeit we have a confidence that thou will do nothing that
might be prejudicial unto us, the which no good King may nor ought to do.

Youen at Rome etc.

Here ends the first Book.
The second book conteinyng the Copies of sundry learned men's Letters and
Epistles.
ALthough the instructions and styles here before written might suffice to
content the Readers of this Book: yet because courageous minds shall have
abundance and choice of matters, I will not here make a final end, but have
thought good (over and besides all the styles of the Letters and Epistles here
before written) to adioyne a number mo of Epistles and Letters of sundry
styles, as well of Latin Orators, as also of other learned and discrete persons:
trusting that the whole being well seen and considered, together with the
instructions and exquisite terms wherewith an auditour ought to be furnished,
except peradventure the mind and courage of the Reader be altogether ignorant
and sluggish, of the number of them that remaining in the gulf and botome of
rechlenesse have their sense so corrupted, their memory so slppery, and their
mind so dull, slow and astoonned, that they may rightly of every one be taken
and esteemed as brutall and barbarous: which ceassing, and a good will
succeding, there is no doubt but a man shall easyly learn to make a Letter or
Epistle so well adorned, and garnished, that it shall render unto the Readers
and hearers not only great joy and commodity, but also to the endytour
profit, honor and inestimable delectation.

Hirmolaus Barbarus writes unto George Merule.
PLato in that his divine institution of laws, amongst other sovereign
things, makes mention, that it is needful in the common weal to prescribe
and give order, that it be not permitted unto any man to show either pryuatly
or publikly any thing that he has composed, except it be first perused and
approved by the judges thereunto assigned. Would to God (O discrete Merula) at
this day we had the same law. Certainly so many people should not then write,
and so few should not apply them selves to good Letters: for now through the
abundance of many noughty books, we are greatly endomaged: and leuing the
approved and known authors, we follow the base and blind writers and (that
which is to be lamented) we judge of studies according to the good or evil
authors one with another, without indifferency or correction. From this spring
and fountain is risen this mortal and monstrous persuasion, that Philosophers
and Consules can not be both alyke and eloque^t, for the which sentence
(because in many places we have argued to the contrary, as well in speaking and
disputing as by writing) I dout not but of many I have incurred hatred and
office, or (according to thy common proverb) have angered the waspes. But ^ith
we have the oath of this Knighthoode, it were a capital crime to quite so
honorable a charge. And certainly I ordeyne and appoint (now that I have power
and authority not to chyde or make a noise, but by writing or interpreting to
prove my cause before wise and learned persons, even so as the thing it self
shall witness) that there is altogether no matter which this flourishing and
ready kind of saying and speaking, does not recey^e, and has not his
natural hystory, yea and contains not his very particular and sensible
reasons. For this is of Pliny the second (without all controversy) constituted
and made: but the same is that whereof every one universally makes question
and debate in such sort manner and form, as I think verily I my self have
first touched it, in Themistio That which I have proposed, I pray thee Merula,
as effectually as I can devise, that thou would say for me even as for thy
self, and that thou would be not only my defender, but my helper judge and
corrector. For certainly it can not be denied, but that in Philosophy there
are sundry places, the which to utter and express, it is needful and
necessary sometimes to feign, and renew. And this does Marcus Tullius, and
all the other ancient and great Philosophers grant and allow: the which is
now by manner of prelocution and reverence granted unto us: and as he says we
may name and place new words, where we see the Latin to be corrupted or
altered, as in the names of money and coin or such like. And herein would I
have thee to be an egall Censor or Judge, if peradventure thou find in these
books any thing either altogether feigned to the se^blance of certain voices,
or by license, that I say not rudely or hardly translated, or by abuse to
boldly transposed, or else by a certain imitation somewhat to co^firmable.
Howbeit I think thou shall not find many which might offend thee, or be
troublesome: ten at the most or thereabouts, thou shall find in the whole
work that I send thee here withal, the which a man may say are not taken
rightly from the Latin, and yet is there some of them that we have received and
taken even from the Latin ears, some we have newly made, for the other I take
no disdain of the usage of learned and wise men: howbeit I will not seem to
affirm my self to be wholly unreprovable, least peradventure some do object
and say, if thou excuse thy self that thou art not barbarous, what is it then
that thou say? And thus I wholly submit my cause to the indifferent judge,
void of parcialitie. Farewell. From Venice. 1480

Hirmolaus Barbarus vvriteth to Angelus Politianus.
IN that thou have conceived incredible joy for my prosperities, thou have
therein done no new thing, nor any thing which I had not before hand well
seen, and by imagination presupposed. I know with what carfulness and great
forwardness of understanding, thou have taken in hand this busy and
unspeakable charge to adorn and extol my name: and although that thou have
therein ben constant, diligent, and effectuous, yet since in so doing it seems
that thou speak for thy self, when thou speak for me) I do nothing
marvel in yt thou have thought to profit thy sel^, when thou have ben about
mine affairs. I give thanks unto thee, and will give continually, not only as
to a lover and a friend, but even as unto Politian, that is to say, unto a man
right wise. And certainly it is a greater thing to be praised of Politian, than
of a friend: for the testimony and judgment of a friend might be deceived: but
of Politian a friend, never deceived. And to my Lord Laurentius, no less my
prince than thine, I am greatly bound and beholde^. he himself thereof is
witness: I am in great danger least that in so many benefits and merits, which
it has pleased him to bestow upon me, I appear not to be ungrateful and
barbarous.

Marsilius Ficinus vvriteth unto Angelus Politianus.
IF now Politian, I should say, that I greatly marvelled at the hautinesse and
eloquence of thy style, some peradventure would suppose that I were to full of
maruelling: certainly in others I am accustomed to marvel at things for the
novelty of them, but in Politian, I marvel at things which are unto me of a
long time very well known, howbeit for a verity I now have in admiration not
old things, but new things. For my Politian, has so happyly increased within
short space since his youth, that for his style he seems unto me wholly
another man, and altogether new: and therefore he that being even a child, has
not smally pleased me, and being a young man greatly plesed me, now that he has
passed his youth, does perfectly and worthily please me: for even as his
beauty has daily increased, so also has increased his grace. And certainly
also this pleseth me well that it should so be, for this cause, for often
times I presupposed and as it were prognosticated, that it would so come to
pass, therefore I pray thee hold on as thou have begone. Divine, to the end
that thou may likewise make me a true Diuinator. In respect of that that thou
extollest ye Marsilian in every place with passing praises, I do marvel no
whit at all. Who is he that in pronouncing his proper praises, is not vehement
and warmeth not him self? who is he, so insensible, that delyteth not
himself in that which belongs unto him self: Francus declared unto us that
thou have had talk of us with all the wise and learned, especially with
Hirmolaus Barbarus. What will thou that I do for thee? certainly I will
willingly do it. Farewell.

Politianus answers unto Marsilius Ficinus.
THou perceiuest not in me every day new things which are worthy to be praised,
but rather new things in thy self, through yt which thou praisest me: and
that which seems unto thee such abundance, is thy exceeding love whereby (as
Propertius recyteth) of nothing is raised a great history. And verily I think
thou will make me a Diuinator, for thou have caused me to Divine, when as every
day I say and preach that thou art a Divine. Farewell.

Innocent Pope, to Angelus Politianus.
MY well-beloved Son, health and Apostolical benediction. The book which thou
lately did send unto us, translated out of Greek into Latin, we have heartily
and gladly received, as well for the novelty of the thing, as for the judgment
of diverse, whom in these parts we esteem for learned and wise: It is so well
furnished with learning and wit, that therewith our Lybrarie shall be greatly
adorned: and therefore we give thee most hearty thanks, recommending thy virtue
unto our Lord, and exhorting thee from henceforth to persevere in such like
things: to the end that by these honest labors, thou may one day get
greater praises, and that thou may deserve at our hands more fertile grace.
And in token, as well of the good will that we know to be in thee, as for the
great fatherly love that we bear toward thee, we have thought good to send
thee two hundred Crowns, by our well-beloved son John Turnabon, to the end
that by such succor of living, thou might more easyly support and
accomplysh thy labors and works. Youen at Rome, at Saint Peter's, under the
Seal of the Fisher. The.xvj. of August. 1487. The third year of our
Pontificalitie.

Innocent the eight Pope to his well-beloved son Laurentius de Medicis.
Well-beloved son, health and Apostolical benediction. We give thanckes unto
thy devotion, for that through the same our well-beloved son Angelus
Politianus, a man very learned and expert, has sent us a book, translated out
of Greek into Latin, the which he dedicated unto our name, and the which not
only by our own judgment, but also by the judgment of other wise men, unto
whom we have showed it, is greatly commended. It shall be of us as
appertains greatly esteemed and honored, and shall be an ornament in our
Library, the which shall be a Testimonye of his Virtue and Learning: we
exhort thee above all things to provoke and move the same Angelus by thy
authority to make and compose like works, which shall bring forth unto him
vulgar estimation, and unto us no small delectation: who for so honest labors,
partly by benefits, partly by other things, will cause that worthy thanks and
reward shall be employed and given unto him. And now in token thereof, we have
appointed to be sent unto him by our well-beloved son John Turnabon.ij. C.
Crowns, to the end that this book should not remain without recompense.
Youen at Rome at Saint Peter's. etc.

Angelus Politianus to Innocent the.viij. Pope renders Salutaion.
I Know not in what sort to render thee thanks, most holy Father Innocent,
Sovereign Bishop, which have with so great praises, and ample liberality
rewarded our small labors, which thing I consider and interpret to have been so
done for this cause: to wit, that it has pleased thy holiness and
blessedness by this means to erecte and stir up the minds of learned men
which of long time have lien still and as it were slombred when they
understand to be in such a worthy Bishop of this time, such and so great
humanity and liberality, that now even the basest and least in order, remain
not only praised and honored, but also liberally recompensed Certainly these
praises together with the present and unlooked for benefits on me bestowed, have
added unto me as it were spurs and pricks, and have charged me with a great
carfulness, so to keep and behave my self, that at no time or by no cause, I
be found to be unworthy of this thy liberality and favor, whereupon I will
take care, and will so enforce my self, that this our tender territory, (to
the tillage whereof thy magnificence has now given such and so great succoure)
shall bring forth hereafter new revenues to thy sacred Majesty. Valeat tua
sanctitas Florentiae. etc.

A certain man writes to a Bokebynder of Paris.
Worshipful Sir, assured I am, that if I should commend me an hundredth
thousand times unto you, yet should I do less than nothing, if it pleased you
not to account me for one of those that wish you well, therefore I pray you
commend me unto you: certifying you that since my departure, I have written
sufficient matter unto you, according to my rudeness, whereunto you have made
me no answer. Howbeit I marvel not thereat, considering that you have been so
busyed about the urgent affairs of the king, that you have had no leisure to
attend thereunto, wherefore you are worthily to be excused. And though it be so
that I am transported into a far cuntry to execute needful things, yet is it
not to be supposed, that true love should decay, through the visible seperatio^
made between two friends, whereof you are the one and I the other, at the least
I am yours, and believe that you are mine. And therefore as mine, I have not nor
will not defer to write unto you, trusting and being assured, that through the
receiving of my Letters, I shall cause you to be more joyful, and to have me
in remembrance. Doing you also thereby to understand, that if it would so
please you, I would gladly have certain little books (whereof I spoke unto
you) dispatched from the bynding, hansomely and fynely, as you know well how to
do them: yea far better than it is possible to express or write unto you.
Of a thing well done the praise remains to the Author and doer thereof,
wherein I know you shall be partaker, for that you work so perfectly that no
man will nor can find fault therewith. Moreover if there be any thing in these
parts wherein I may pleasure you, do but commau^d it, and I will obey according
to the possibility of your said friend, not to be compared to his good will.
Recommending me always most humbly to your worship unto your wife, and to all
your children, unto whom I will not forget the wine, my books being properly
and hansomly bound and dispatched. Thus cease I for this present, beseching our
Lord to send you health and welfare with long life. From Selurre, the.xj. day
of October.

An Epistle of Angelus Politianus to Laurencius de Medicis his Uncle.
BAptista Leo Florentius of the most clear and noble family of the Albertins, a
man of excellent sprite, of good and deep judgment, and of exquisite Doctrine,
having left unto his posterity many noble deeds, acts and monuments,
consequently and in fine thought good to report upon.x. books speaking of
Architecture, or the Science of Buylding: the which being amended, corrected
and polished, intending to set them forth to light, and to dedicate them unto
thy name, was by fatal ordinance prevented by death and so deceassed. His
brother Bernarde, a prudent man, always myndefull of thee amongst ye chiefest,
to the end to advance the memory of so worthy a man, and to render thanks for
thy merits on him bestowed: the foresaid books written according to their
true paterns and examples, and reduced into one volume, does offer and present
them unto thee, my good Laurentius: and in very deed he desired that I should
commend and adorn with words the same gift toward thee, and also toward
the author thereof, Baptista Leo. The which I have not thought good to do in
any case, to the end yt through the defaulte of my understanding, I diminishe
not the praises of a man so excellent, and of a work so well brought to pass
and finished: for unto that worthy work shall come more honor and renown by
the learning and reading of it, than by any words wherewith I am able to set
forth the praises thereof, fearing and douting the difficulties of the Epistle,
and douting also the imbecillitie and weakness of our Oration: for unto any
man not ignorant of the perfection and integrity of the removed Letters, and
of the secret and hid discipline, it might be doubted whether his speech
and style does more touch the Art of Oratorie, or of Poetry, whether it be
more grave or Civil. In this order he has followed the true trace of the
Antiquity, in such sort that he has by sense comprehended and reduced into
example, not only the reasons of the ancient Buylders, their engyns and
instruments to work withal, but also has wonderfully excogitated and
published the forms and styles of Buildings: yea and besides this, he was
also a good Paynter, and a cunning Caruer. Howbeit it in the mean time he
ordered all things according to true proportion and mesure, in such sort that
all people might report of him singular and worthy things, so that I judge and
suppose, that I were better to be silent than to speak to little, even as
Saluste said of Carthage. To this book therefore, O Laurentius) thou shall
attribute most principal and chiefest place in thy Lybrarie, and shall read
it diligently: and shalt take care to publishe it commonly: for it is worthy
to pass often by the mouths of expert and learned men, yea it is a fauorer
and a very patron of learning, amongst all men living now fallen unto thy
lorte. Farewell.

Angelus Politianus to a certain friend of his.
IF I had begoon to have loved thee for thy richesse, I should now have ceased
to love thee, or to be thy friend, for that thou now ceassest to be rich: but
moreover, if I had now ceased to have been thy friend, then had I not ben
thy friend neither when thou weart rich, but a flatterer: the which whosoever
can be, can not be free but a bondslaue.

Politian to his friends.
YOu are many which together demand Letters from me, but behold I send unto
many but one only: for it behooves to send one only Epistle unto many whom I
only love. The which shall be as good as many, when many of you shall read it.

Politian to an envious person.
THou art envious to every one of every thing save envy, but of that thou
art envious toward thy like, who is yet more envious than thou: and by that
means there is no envy in thee: and yet notwithstanding thou have envy at
his envy: and by that means he is less envious than thou. Who you are, I
will not express, because I will not make you more miserable than you are
already, for if I should publish your name, you would have envy even at your
very name it self, not only one of you at that of ye other, but either of you
at his own.

Politian to a Slanderer and detracter
Unto thee which speak evil of me, I intend not to answer evil, lest
peradventure thou should cease from saying evil by me, that is to wit, from
praising me: for in very deed who is he that is more rightly praised, than he
of whom evil is spoken by an evil man? And in respect that I call thee an
evil man, that is so far from being evil said, that nothing can be better
said.

Politian to his friend Caesar Carmente.
THou supposest thy self to be contemned, because I write not unto thee, I
should contemn thee if I should write unto thee: for if I contemned thee, then
durst I write unto thee these aunswers, either that I am busyed, or that I have
no leisure for thee. Farewell.

Politian, to James Modeste.
THou art sorry because I write not unto thee: be sorry no more, for now I write
unto thee. Farewell.

Politian to an unconstant person.
THou have not given me that which thou did promise me: I find my self
grieved if thou have forgot it: and yet more grieved if thou have not forgot it:
to forget, is ye property scarce of a friend and not to give when it is
remembered, is the property altogether of an enemy. Farewell.

Angelus Politianus to Picus Mirandula.
THat which I would should have been corrected by thee, thou praisest it, bnt
thou do that thing easily, which thou do always. Farewell.

Politian to a friend of his.
THou art angry and sorry because Simias does reprehend me, he does not
reprehende me, to the end that he might search the sauegard of his life, as
a man beset with some that do much rejoice of flatterers, and yet more of
detracters.

Politian to a promise breaker.
MVch more equal haddde it ben incontinently to have denied that which so
earnestly I have requested, than afterward not to perform the thing which
thou being a grave man had so liberally promised, for than had it ben no
injury, seeing that thou did owe me nothing: but now it is injury, for thou
do owe it me, and must owe it me, seeing that thou have promised it me: and
certainly I do not yet believe that thou art of that sort of people, whom
their promises do not bynd the^: and to the end that I have not hereafter
occasyon to believe it, I would wish thee to keep such promises to thy self.
Only this I request thee, that if thou will not give and perform unto me
that benefit, yet cease to be injurious unto me, which thou shall do if thou
forbid me to hope any longer in vain. Fi^nally, I shall be greatly beholden
unto thee, if thou give me yt which I request, and shall greatly marvel if
thou give it me not Farewell.

Politian to his friend.
I Was very sorry, and am very glad, because thou wast sick, and that thou art
hole. Farewell.

Politian to Picus Mirandula.
I Was first vanquished of thee by learning, and vanquished by spirit, yet
nevertheless I rejoice me to be vanquished, and do in such sort rejoice me,
for I love thee, and love that by the which I was vanquished: but now by thy
humanity am I vanquished, which thing certainly I can not suffer, because it
is dishonest, but I do suffer it, for there is nothing dishonest unto me, which
unto thee is not honest.

Politian to a certain friend of his.
THou art sorry because I which am thy friend, have vanquished thee in
disputation, thou ought not to be sorry: for if all things be common unto
friends, I am no more a vanquisher than thou: and no less vanquished than thou.
But peradventure thou art sorry, because that by such law of friends, I am not a
perfect vanquisher, I which have thee vanquished. Farewell.

An Epistle of Johannes Picus Mirandula, to his dear friend Iacobus Antiquarius.
AMongst all the pleasures which I took when I was at Florence, through the
allowable custom of Politian, (a man according unto my judgment, of all other
most learned and skillful, as touching them of our time) this was not the
least, but exceded, when he incontinently gave unto me thy grave Epistles sent
unto him, to the end that I might read them with their aunsweres, in the same
form and excellent order that they passed between you: In those letters and
Epistles I did greatly delight me, for the singular prudence therein contained,
whereby also in weighty matters and great affairs, thou art of the most
prudent and wise greatly commended, both for the sobriety and also for the
seemly adorning and beautifying of thy Oration. Furthermore thy Letters were
accepta- unto me, not only because in some of them there was honorable mentyon
made of my name, but also I delyted my self therein for the testimony of such
a perfect man, by reason of the conscience, granting and giving just consent,
which not dissembling any thing of that which it thought, did manifest and
discover the matter even as it was stryuing with great force, as nylling to be
deceued: And thus am I double beholding unto thee, by reason of thy virtue, and
also of thy benefits done unto us. I had thought by my Epistles sundry times to
have rendered thee thanks, least peradventure toward thee I should have been
thought somewhat ungrateful, or esteemed rude and uncivil: yet deferred I the
time (because I know thee and our good friend Politian, to be so exercised with
letters, passing to and fro between you,) as not willing with such importunate
have to babble against the Muses, and as the malepert gagling geese, to
interrupt ye white Swans entercha^geably singing: besides this I perceived by
Politian, that thou had understanding of our good will toward thee. And now
have we received thy letters sent unto us, (lately delivered to Bernard Ricius,
a young man of great towardness) wherein thou do attribute unto me, that
which I dare not request, neither think to have so much merited. The greatness
of thy humanity does now burst our silence, except we should seem uncivil
or proud, and therefore I can not choose but give the great thanks, and impart
unto thee immortal praises: not only because thou bestowest upon me no small
undeserved praises, but also by reason that thou so te^derly love me.
Therefore unto thee I ought to make recompense even above my power, neither is
there any thing so hard or difficile, which for thy commodity I would not take
in hand. Farewell. Made in the fields of Ferrare the.27. of July. 1494.

Here ends the second book.
The third book, containing the manner and form how to write by answer.
A Father vvriteth unto his Son.
Well-beloved Son after Commendations appertaining. etc. It is already three
months ago, and now at this present going on the fourth, since we received any
Letters from thee: me thinks thou might have coniectured with thy self (if
thy heart had not ben altogether stony) in what troubles and calamities I with
thy weeping and sorrowful mother do live. There are now.xxiiij. wynters gone
and past, since forth of thy mothers womb into this tra^sitory life thou wast
brought, and because even from thy youth upward, I was a careful and desirous
Father to see thee good, modest, gentle, kind, and with all other virtues
adorned (beholding then thy sharp wit and lively memory of thy natural
inclination and spirit) I thought good (as thou know) to send thee to
Paris. to the study of the Civil Laws, according to thine own desire: thou
have now ben there four years, and I determined to give thee yearly an
hundred Crowns for the sustentation of thy living, to wit, at the end of
every six months fifty: and moreover to send thee Clothes of Silk and of
Woll, for the apparel of thy body. Thou shall understand (my dear child)
that thy mother has been my wife.xxvj. years: I have had (by the goodness of
God) of her two children only, whereof thou art the first, and after thee
Loyse thy Sister, upon whose virtuous life the Sun beams having shyned by
the space of.xxiij. years, and I knowing her worthy of a husband, have thought
good this year to mary her, and to give her to Hely Loyer, for his legitimate
and lawful spouse: and because that he is a rich man, it behooved me for the
full su^me of her marriage to give three thousand pou^ds, so that I was
constrained to pay him not only all the ready money that I had, but also to
borow more than three hundredth Crowns, because I would not fail to the
fidelity and promise which I had made him. This therefore was the occasion
that with my Letters of the viij. of August last past, I had not the mean to
send thee more than thirty Crowns, within these.xv. or.xx. days I will send
thee the other twenty, for the full accomplishing of the term past, and the
fifty for the beginning of the year present: Therefore for default of the said
money cease not from any manner of study: but now it pleases me to talk a
little unto thee. Thou then drawn by disdayn, and moved with unjust ire, for
so light an occasyon (as voluntarily willing to work vengeance) stayest thou
to give answer unto ye human and gentle Epistles of thy Father, unto the
sweet and loving Letters of thy Mother? disdaynest thou to answer brotherly
the tender letters of thy chaste, prudent and new married sister? O thou
miscreant, think thou peradventure yt the pity of thy Father would not have
sent thee the twenty Crowns, which for the necessity and ornament of our
house could not then be done? O Neroical cruelty of a child, O heart of Iron,
O barbarous usage, O wickedness worthy to be carried to the uttermost ends of
the world: I see well enough how wise thou art made, to know how to molest me
even at the very heart root, together with thy miserable mother: who for that
thy plague of spirit, takes her daily nourishment with sharp and bitter
anguishes. The Virgilian Queen Dido of Carthage, was never so passioned with
love toward her pitiful child Ascanius, as by thy occasion the tenderness of
the charity of thy mother toward thee, is at this present afflicted and
desolate, and for thee only she living does account her self miserable and
unfortunate: Alack I pray you tell me, is this the Doctrine of the sage Plato?
are these the instructions of Aristotle, that prince of Nature: who say, that
it is not possible that children should make recompense to their Fathers and
mothers for the goodness of them received. Thou then my dear son, if thou will that thy mother live, take forth with thy pen and write, to comfort her.
Thou ought to remember (as a reasonable man) yt she brought thee into this
world, that thou wast tenderly and warmly norished in her womb, and that thou
did there receive thy life, lymmes, flesh, blood, synowes and bones: since
which time also how careful and diligent a father I have been for thee (to
avoid the vanity of wordly praises) certainly I demand none other witness
but even thy self. ^halar, although he was a tyrant and of notable severity,
yet sometimes appeared Civil, who writing unto his son ^aurolus, says unto
him, yt a child ought verily to be myndfull of the benefits of his Parents
Alas, I pray thee read the history of Valerus, where thou shall understand
the pity of Coriolan, toward his Mother: and the promptness of the pitiful
heart of Simon the Athe^^a^, toward his Father Miltiades. Finally, I had
purposed to have continued longer in this Epistle: but the tears which fall
from mine eyes will not suffer me to pass further. I believe that through the
great anguish of ye grief that thy pitiful ^^ther susteineth, if she should
see thee in her presence, she could not say to thee, O Son write unto me: but
I dout not but that those her distilling tears would forthwith prick thee
foreward to write unto her: and because she is thy Mother, (and that both good
and worshipful,) thou might peradventure learn the duty of true pity, not
bashing to accompany her, with sorrowful wayling and repentance, for the
error toward thy Parents, without consideraction by thee committed. God
keep thee, and vouchsafe to make thee worthy of his infinite grace.

Thy Father. etc.

The answer of the Son. unto his Father.
DErely beloved Father, after most humble commendatio^s unto you, and my
loving mother, beseching you both of your daily blessing. etc. Father although
I know your advise to be truer than the voice of ye human Sibyle, or the
oracle of Apollo, yet nevertheless I think it my duty to make brief
answer unto your sweet and learned Letters. You by them (together the great
pity of my Mother) have made mine eyes so te^derly moysted with tears, that
not only in one thing, but also in many, if I had been before your presence
(your Fatherly benignity, together with my Mothers clemency considered) you
would certainly have judged your only Son worthy of pardon. He that should
blaspheme God, yea or his Father or Mother, me thinks he were not worthy to
be reasoned withal, but rather to be punished: for in verity, there is nothing
more unseemly in a young man, than to give occasion of anger unto a man of ripe
age. Therefore as Marcus Cicero writes, wisdom is the knowledge of good and
evil things: And this goes morally, Aristotle disputing says, that it
falls not for youth: therefore the moralist Seneca swetely writes, that the
wise man is temperate and constant: and he that is constant and without
perturbation, and without wickedness, is he that is quiet and untroubled: then
to conclude, the wise man is happy. Therefore exte^d your pity unto me: for
according to the sentence of Fabian Quintilian, he that repents him of his
error, is worthy of pardon. But because I will not be long in writing, it may
please you to understand, that in this Town of Paris, we have great scarcity
of victualles this year. Corn is at a high price: I say nothing unto you of
wine, which at this day is risen unto such a price, that of many persons, it is
quite forsaken. I know well, my dear Father and Mother, that you would not have
me to endure scarcity of victualles, for the which my garments already four
months ago, are gauged to mine Host, which causes me to be more importunate
to demand money of you, which through your goodness I attend for with earnest
desire. To fynish, (my duty unto you both remembered) I humbly recommend me,
and also unto my well-beloved Sister.

Your humble and obedient Son etc.

The father vvriteth unto the Son.
VErily my Son, thou will be the occasion through thy evil behauior, to
haste me sooner than I thought unto my grave: for one of these days in this
Town of Lions, many gentlemen and merchants affirmed unto me, that all the
clothes of Scarlet which thou did carry with thee are lost. Also I am
advertised by my trusty friends, that sundry dames in Lions, go sumptuously
arrayed with our clothes of Silk, and thou of them have none other payment, but
that thou take account secretly in ye night. This is not the faith which thou
did promise me at thy departure: therefore thy mother continually weepeth,
and thy two virtuous and honest Sisters lament without ceassing. But tell me,
with what knyues thinckest thou that thou do wound the most secret parts
of our hearts: therefore be ready to amend thy error, or else verily cease to
call me Father, and hold thy self assured (except thou amend) that neither of
my goods nor money thou shall ever have any part hereafter.

Thy careful Father. etc.

The Son makes aunswer^^ unto his Father
MY dearly beloved Father, I have been advertised by your sorrowful letter of
evil adventure of our merchandise: but because you are my Father and a prudent
Father, it is lawful for you without occasion, to reprehende and to threaten
me: howbeit he that commits not the fault, is always accompanied with sweet
hope. Those that have told you yt I give your clothes of Silk unto the dames
of Lions, peradventure have taken it in evil part, that I have not given some
piece of silk unto their wives, and would peradventure have taken no ^ to have
asked them from whence ye garment had come, so yt they spare their pe^s. I pray
you therefore my dear Father, be content and glad: for I consume not your
goods, but I sell them as well unto women as unto men. I send you by your Factour
two thousand pounds for clothes of Scarlet, and six hundredth pounds for
clothes of silk: I will tarry to finish the rest, and the cursed envy
languishing, shall fall unto the ground: and you shall find me (God to friend) a
good, just and faithful Son etc.

The wife writes unto her Husband
ENtirely beloved Husband, after a thousand commendations unto you, with the
desire of your health and welfare rather than mine own. etc.

Since your departure hence, God knows in how many careful cogitations and
thoughts I have lived: and certainly in all my tribulations through your
absence, I have found none greater than in one whole year with much a do to
have received from you only two short Letters. It may be yt some great
affairs of the Court would not permit you time to write, or peradventure that
no care of us does prick you forward. These verily were not your promises
made unto me at your departure. It may please you to understand, that our two
children are in good Health, and increase in stature, but not in manners, which
to them should appertain: we are rich of substance more than otherwise,
therefore take heed least covetousness do surmount and overcome you: For
riches will be small ornaments for our Children, without the brightness of some
virtues. Besides this, forget you not yt I have not any lack of things
necessary for living: but know ye that I am a wife, and that young, not better
nor worse than other. Therefore I beseech and require you that you will come
unto us, for we have great need of you, and not of money: and thus with great
desire do we attend for you: beseching God to bless you and prosper your
affairs.

Your faithful Spouse. etc.

The answer of the Husband unto his Wife.
Loving Wife, after hearty commendacions with desire of your prosperity and
all ours etc. This may be to certify you, that within these few days I
reciued some very lamentable Letters from you, by the which you do greatly
complain of me, for yt I should be slow in writing unto you: you thinck
peradventure that from hence where I am in Ly^ns unto Amboyse, is like
distaunce of way as from Bloys to Tours. Verily I have written at the least
nine times in the year. And often it happens (as you might consider) that by
negligence of the Cariers letters are lost. But to proceed farther when I
parted from you, I had thought that I parted joyfully, leaving in your lap our
two children, with steadfast confidence to have committed them to a prudent,
sage, temperate, careful, diligent, and hearty wife, about the governing of
domestical affairs, wherein me thinks there should be no default in you. You
write unto me, that you are a wife and young, with that which follows: I say
that when I married you, I took you not only for a wife, but also for the most
virtuous, most cha^t, most honest and most skillful of all other of your age. I
am not covetous, as peradventure you suppose: true it is, that I am come unto
the Court to advantage us and our children as much as I can, which may hereafter
be cause of joyful quietness. At this present I will write no further: God
willing within these three months I trust to be with you. And thus I commit
you and all ours to the blessed Trinity.

Your loving Husband. etc.

A Sister vvriteth unto her Brother.
MY well-beloved Brother, after most hearty commendatio^s unto you etc. I can
not express nor declare in words what grievous sorrows and passions I have
received for the death of Frauncis your loving and faithful spouse. Therefore
were not ye extreme tears and great anguishes wherewith I am bitterly
accompanied, I might peradventure find out for you some manner of consolation:
but certainly very ill may he help an other that can not in any wise help
himself. Any other mean is there not, save only reason, which might comfort
you to take with a good heart, the fierce and uncertain death of that honest,
virtuous, and chaste wife: who through the merits of her virtues, I esteem
without al dout to be gone to possess the eternal Triumphs of ye heavenly
glory. Wherefore then ought we more to lament ye vnge^tlenes of envious death,
which in ye end destroys all things created, than we ought quietly to render
the money which we have borrowed? for the gift of life lent unto us by the
general Pastor, ought to be restored without any lamentation. Therefore I pray
you, study with me to praise God for the faithful departure of your well-beloved
out of this transitory life: And so bring up Loyse my dear niece, that she may
follow the manners of her Mother. Would the bitter rain of the humor that
falls from mine eyes have ceased, I would have been more large in writing
unto you. The eternal God of his infynite pity, preserve you and yours in
peace and prosperity.

Your loving Sister. etc.

The answer of the Brother unto his Sister.
DErely beloved Sister, after loving commendations unto you. etc. The
tenderness of the sweet Style of your humayne letters, has caused somewhat to
cease the abundance of the moist humor gushing from mine eyes: therefore I
can not by any sufficient words, express the thanks which I do owe, and even
until the last day of my life shall owe unto your pity, goodness, and
courtesy. I know how tenderly you take the memory of Francis: also I know the
effect of the singular love, which she bare unto you. Your Niece humbly
recommendeth her unto your benignity, I trust that she will follow in all
things the gentleness and honesty of that her virtuous Mother deceassed. We in
the mean time shall always be ready to accomplish your request in all things
at your pleasure. God have you in his blessed tuition.

Your faithful Brother etc.

A Mother vvriteth unto her Daughter.
Well-beloved Daughter Antyonette after due Commendations unto you etc. Very
acceptable (d^re daughter) were your letters unto me, partly for having advise
of your health, and partly to understand that Peter your son does so
diligently attend to the beginning of his study. To advertise you by motherly
charity, of that thing which apperteyneth both unto my honesty and yours, it
is so, that within this little while I have by diverse voices understood, (I
wot not what) of your ill renoume, from those parts of your Town of Bloys:
You know (my daughter) yt at sixtene years of age I was married, and at.xxiij.
remained widow with two children, and unto this my age of.lij. years, there
was never none verily that could say any thing against the integrity of my
life: neither have I at any time passed for a husband. Thou verily at.xvj.
years did take a husband, and now at.xxxv. years remainest widow with one
Son only.xix. years have thou possessed thy husband: therefore thou ought
to be satisfied of worldly things. Thou art rich, and art left under the state
of a widow: Oh, I pray thee for the love of the eternal God, and for the
obeysaunce that thou owe unto me, that thou will be well advised not to
maculate or blot that wydowish and decent habyte which thou berest, for the
worship of him, who of thy virginity gathered the first fruit. The Lord be
with thee.

Thy pitiful mother. etc.

The Daughter makes answer unto her Mother.
Dear and well-beloved Mother, after most humble and reverent commendations with
the desire of your long life etc. Through your last brief Letters I am become
altogether melancholic and sorrowful: and that not for the occasion springs
of you, but of the vnpappynesse of ye wicked world. Verily with most-humble
obedience, I receive al those admonitions which come from you my discret^
mother. Hippolit, as we read in the ancient histories, because he would not
consent to Thaedra his horrible Mother, was by her occasion cruelly put to
death, without deserts: so I by the pestiferous tongues of others, am
innocently sclaundered. Wherefore hearke^ I pray you my dear Mother, you know
Clare very well, who has a brother.xxiiij. years old, a dronkard, evil
taught, a gamner, and a glutton, these two years has he by letters, gifts and
promises gone about dishonestly to tempt me, and this does he not so much for
his own desire, as for the wicked will of his Sister Clare, who being
about.xxx. years of age and richly married, but unto an old man, is very
liberal of her love unto who so ever demands it. And because that she is my
neighbor, she would gladly have me joined in love with her brother: but that
shall notwithstanding nothing prevail him, though mistrustfull persons speak
their pleasure. No more at this time, you understand me well. God prosper and
preserve you.

Your obedient and loving Daughter. etc.

One Lord vvriteth unto an other.
RIght honorable Lord, after due commendations. etc. It is already three
months ago since your honor by your learned and prudent Letters, requested
me that if it were possible to use such means and diligence in speaking unto
William Ardiller, that it would please him to serve your honor, in the office
of a Secretary, because he is a man skillful, quiet, and of marvelous
elegancie in composing: verily I used all the means that I could to induce him
unto your honors desire: the assaults that I gave unto him of that matter in
the beginning did nothing avail: for he excused himself to be weary of
serving lords, and that he now loved to rest, and to give him self to
nourishe his little child: But in fine I so handled the matter, that within one
month he will depart hence to go unto you. I told him that your honor would use
such liberality as his virtue requires. I take great pleasure for that your
Lordshippe shall have near you a man prudent, loyal, learned, a wonderful
obseruer of antiquities, a great historian, and in the pleasant pastime of
poetry, a man without comparison: which shall be great satisfaction to the
ardent zeal of the divine understanding of your excellency: which I pray God
still to prosper and increase. etc.

The answer of one Lord unto an other.
RIght honorable after continual commendation. etc. Your Lordship knows in
how troublesome and weary exercises we have consumed the other part of our
transitory and miserable life, therefore your honor by the humanity thereof,
must pardon our unlearned letters: but now by virtue (...) your honor we
possess the gentle and quiet personage of William Ardiller, for the loyal and
good Secretary of our affairs. Certainly I love his humanity and
ge^tlenesse, his judgment does greatly please me, and the eloquence of his
speech deliteth me. If all ye holy church of the christians, had as well chosen
their bishops, deacons, and ministers, as I have done my Secretary, undoubtedly
ye true Religion of our Catholic faith would be had more in reverence, and
better spoken of, than we see it is in this our miserable time. I certify
your lordshippe that as soon as our foresaid Secretary came to salute us, we
immediately of our courtesy gave him Five hundredth Crowns of gold. God for
his clemency send prosperity to our affairs: for unto our said Secretary,
and to all minds like unto his, we will at all times enforce our selves to give
all commodity and favor. Here will I make an end, and commit your Lordshyp
to the blessed Trinity. etc.

A Gentleman writes unto a noble Captain
HOnorable Captain, after most humble co^mendations. etc. I am advertised by
Letters from my Son, that your honor through your gracious goodness has
placed him in the number of your men of arms. For which thing I with all our
parents and friends do so much remain bound unto you, that in verity we
are not able to express it in words. O how precious is the service that is
done to a liberal man? but much more happy and more praise worthy is that
lord, who knows his loyal and faithful seruitor. and rewards him with
condign benefits. The hautie worthiness of your magnanimity does cause us,
yt though we be absent in body, yet our ard^^^e love is always at hand, and
near you. No more at this time, but the Lord prosper your affairs. etc.

The answer of the Captain unto the Gentleman.
Well-beloved, I heartily reco^mend me unto you. etc. Right acceptable unto me
were your Letters replenished with love and humanity, by the which you with
your friends and kinsfolks do appear to be willing to give me thanks, for
that I have chosen your son into the order of my men of Arms. I will
answer you briefly: understand ye then that in feats of chivalry, where the
matter stands of life and death, of poverty and richesse, of honor and
shame, I make not election by friendship or favor, but I prefer me^ to higher
degree by their virtue: and therefore the wisdom, counsel, and manly courage
of your son, constrained me to honor him, who is ready to be further
preferred: you in the mean time live quietly, and if he do you honor, give
the praise to God and not unto me. The eternal have you in his keeping. etc.

One Gentleman vvri^eth unto an other.
RIght worshipful, my hearty commendations unto you remembered, etc. I have
presentely received your grateful Letters, which were welcome unto me for two
causes: First because they were yours* and secondly because with them I
received from your worship a liberal present, to wit, half a dosen
Phesants, and a couple of Kyds. I heartily thank your gentleness. We are also
hunters, but it behooves us to pray unto Diana, the ancient Goddess of the
forests, yt she would vouchsafe to send us some worthy pray, wherewith we
might strive to remunerate in price that gift of yours: but if peradventure
you surmount us in the worth thereof, yet in servitude of love, you shall never
surmount us.

Yours as a brother. etc.

The answer of one Gentleman unto an other.
RIght worshipful, after my heartiest recommendations. etc. Greatly am I
satisfied, to have had occasion to provoke you to write unto me: for there are
many days and months paste, since I have had any mean to know how you do:
it greatly pleased me that our gift seemed not base unto you, howbeit we sent
you not so small a present for the desire to have it changed, but only to
content the great good will and affection of our mutual love. If it plese you
to visit us this time of Lent we will go unto the hunting for us prepared. Thus
rest I.

Yours as a brother. etc.

One merchant vvriteth to an other, Laus Deo. In Bolo^gne. Le 25. April. Anno.
1567.
Trusty and well beloved I heartily commend me unto you. etc. After you were
departed from us, forthwith I dispatched the ship, and laded the same
with.xl. Toonnes of Malmeseye which the year past I kept for a better vent.
We understand by advise from Andwerpe, that Muscadyne is worth.xl. French
crowns the toonne at the least, and also other wynes of Candie, to be worth.
35. crowns the toon. I trust we shall come to a good account, and so much the
more for that I am only informed by our factours, that the Galeys of Venise,
shall not go this year into (...). I suppose that you shall not make sale of all
your w^^es at Diepe: therefore ^et it not be troublesome unto you to make your
voyage unto R^ane: there to dispatch the rest Peraduiso. It is understood by
Letters from Lions that there is such abundance of wine in (...), that it
bears no price. You therefore being arrived at Roa^, be careful to give me
advise from time to time of every thing that you shall do, and of the estate of
merchandise. Thus in have I commit you to the Lord, who prosper your
affairs. etc.

The answer of one Merchant unto an other.
In Diepe le. 3. of May. 1567.
Right trusty, after hearty recommendations. etc. Yours of the.25. of the
last month I have received, by the which I do gladly understand your
diligence in the exped^tion of our ship, which (thanks be to God) is in
safety arrived. The Merchants of Roane incontinentely came down, who
hois^ed up the.xl. Toonnes of Malmesey at.60. Crowns the Tonne, whereof I am
glad: I intend to send our other ship unto Nantes, and there to change our
wines for wools, which I trust we shall sell dear: for at this present they are
greatly desired, by reason that al France is like to be in arms. To give you
advise of the estate of marchaundises, as far as I understand. Wines at
Paris, are worth.xvj.li. Turnoys le Tonne: Prunes are worth.l.s. tur le C
Corrants are worth.x.li. tur le C. Pepper is worth.xv.s. tur le li Wheat in
Beauss is worth.30. shillings tur. the Bushel, Barley is at.16. shill. tur.
the bushel. Otes, Pease, and Beans are worth.14. in Britayne. All kind of
Fish is good cheap, save only Mackrel^, which in all places are had in such
estimation, that who so ever can make traffike therein, may surely say,
Attollite portas. Therefore I entende at this time therein to employ some
cashe. Be assured I will do nothing, wherein I shall not understand some gain.
That which I write unto you, take care to keep secret. And thus God prosper
you. etc.

A Merchant vvriteth unto his Factour.
AFter commendations. etc. Factor, it is now two years ago since I sent thee
to Barsellonna, a city of Chatelo^gne, and at sundry times I have sent unto
thee the valor of more than thirty six thousand Crowns in diverse sorts: and
by thine account diligently kept, I find to have received of thee but only
twenty thousand Crowns in change of Marchaundise: afterward to have
received of thee in argent about.x. thousand Crowns, and of six thousand
Crowns, I see none account. True it is, that I have some understanding of the
two thousand Crowns which Supplicus Gallier owes: but of the other four
thousand which remain, I can not understand any particularitie. I have
sundry times required account of thee, howbeit thou tournest thy deafe^eare
toward me: so that thou causest me not only for to have great admiration,
but also great suspicion. Therefore see that thou employe thy self to gather
up that, and every other account which thou have of mine, and like a man of
credit come thy way unto Paris, for I have determined not to trade any more
unto Barselonne, where we have but small gains. God preserve thee. etc.

The answer of the Factor unto the Merchant.
RIght worshipful sir, my duty being first to you remembered. etc. Your
Letters of the.viij. of August, I have received, whereby I understand the
disposition of your mind: Patience we have here at this present, a Galey of
Gennes, which will depart hence with in these.xiiij. days, I will take passage
therein to Marsilles, and from thence (God to friend) I will incontinentely come
unto you, and will bring with me all my books of accomptes, by the which you
shall confer your reasons and mine together. But in the mean time somewhat
to quiet your mind for the four thousand Crowns which you suspect, within
one year we have to recover two thousand Crowns of my Lord John de Louche of
Mousne for it is a year ago, since I did credit him with the said sum,
because I had of him sufficient assurance: And for a thousand five hundredth
Crowns, I have here in sundry expenses for your affairs already disbursed. I
will express the whole unto you by writing, bringing the particular note of
the Spanish Silks, that I sent you this month of July last past, which
were.53. pieces. And thus God preserve you, and prosper your affairs. etc.

One Cashyer writes unto an other.
AFter hearty commendations. etc. I wrote unto you of the first of the last
month, that upon the sight thereof you should deliver unto Sir Sebastian
Soison, of Mousne, six thousand ducates, for so much here assigned at our
house: I pray you deliver him the said sum making good payment thereof, and
send me the example of such writing. Have in remembrance how you deliver money
unto any: you know the seal that passes between us: I pray you in any wise
send me the copies of all the bills of exchange, which you have had from
us* within these.vj. months, for here is yet some discord. This suffices.
God keep you. etc.

One Cashyer to an other.
I Heartily commend me unto you. etc. because it is expedient to gratify our
friends: you shall deliver unto the bearer hereof, named David Berthon, viij.
hundredth French crowns: and cause him only there to give good and sure
pledge for the said sum. For so has the same David here promised us to do,
gyuyng him.vj. months day of payment. I pray you take sufficient assurance,
to the end that our goods be not lightly lost. It suffiseth to show
pleasure, you therefore fulfill the contents hereof. And thus fare you well.
etc.

One Friend writes unto an other.
Dear and well beloved friend, after most hearty Commendations unto you,
and your good bedfellow. etc. The chiefest cause of my writing unto you at this
present, is to let you understand, that we are still in great tribulation,
by reason of the men of Arms, and adventurers, by whom the poor people of
Mousne, do sustain inestimable damage. The countreye is altogether deserte:
and that which is also more pitiful, is that many worthy maidens, are by them
carried away into other places, and some by force violated, as also are many
men's wives both fair and honest: Consider you into what abundaunce of tears
they have been brought. O unfortunate France, now florishinge in arms: is it
possible that thy ancient virtue should be altogether extinguished? O my
perfect friend, the eternal God moved me to send unto your house at Bloys,
Jane my wife, and my daughter out of so great peril. Yesterday from my wife
and from my daughter I received comfortable Letters, by the which I am plainly
certifyed, that that your bedfellowe uses unto them al courtesy and
gentleness. O the eternal God grant me life, to ye end that if not in all,
yet at the least in part, I may render some recompense unto the benefits from
you received: for the which I am become a great detter unto your goodness.
And thus the eternal have you al in his keeping, and send us a merry meeting.
etc.

The answer of one friend unto an other.
Well-beloved Friend, I heartily recommende me unto you, wishing your health
and prosperity even as mine own. etc. Be well assured, that so long as I
live, my house and all that I have, shall at all times be at your commandment
or any of your friends: And that shall you manyfestly know in process of
time: And would to God that I might show such fidelity, love and charity
toward you, as at your house at Mousne, you discovered unto me and mine.
Thanks be unto God, we make good cheer, but certainly I and my wife do feel
great anguish for the loss of our goods, which through our mutual amytie we
suppose to be our loss: and assuredly we greatly lament also the vexation
which you sustain by the hands of the Soldiers, whereof we have understanding
by your letter. God of his goodness deliver you from them etc.

One friend vvriteth in a nothers behalf.
ALthough (worthy sir) I know that it is not lauful to molest your wisdom, in
any thing appertayning unto Justice: nevertheless to satisfy the duty which
I owe to this bearer, unto whom (through the fidelity and affection that is
between us) I am bound to do even that which I would do, if it were for mine
own cause: I therefore beseech your worthiness, that you will without delay
make a just end of his suit. And so doing, I shall remain always bound unto
you etc.

The answer unto his friend.
WHat needs it yt you should write unto me, in the behalf of him whom I
equally love as well as you? So great are his virtues, that of every man (of
what estate soever he be) he is worthy to be beloved, and defended: I believe yt
through his great wisdom, he will demand me nothing which shall be against the
dignity of mine office: for which cause, and for the duty of Justice I am
bound to administer unto him and every one favorable and lawful audience. But
though there were no cause at all, yet thy ancient amity would constrain me
to aid and favor him: for which cause be well assured, that I will so use the
matter, that he shall plainly perceive, that thy requests have not ben brought
in vain. etc.

To write unto a Prince in a Prisoners Behalf.
I Have heretofore continually known, and now at this present (more than ever)
do know, of what force true amity and friendship is, the which constrains a
man to be gentle and amiable, even unto the person whom he hates, thereby to
satisfy his friend that entreats for him: therefore knowing ye favor which
your highness bears unto me, I dout not to request you in the behalf of
Cleophas Orillat, who although through his crimes, he deserve to receive no
pardon, yet because William Ardiller (of whom I have received infinite
plesures, and am bound unto him for ever) does force me so hard by Letters
and messangers (and knows certainly what I can do with your Majesty) yt
there should be no damage done, neither unto his person nor goods, I therefore
most humbly beseech you, for the inestimable love yt bear unto you, yt he may
plainly perceive of what force and strength that goodness of yours is toward
me, and so trust at this present to make experience of the great affection
which is betwixt us, through our ancient and singular love. etc.

The answer of the Prince declaring the demand to be dishonest.
ALthough I have in times past had perfect intelligence and knowledge, what
thing friendship and good will has been and is, so that the demand of a
friend ought to be satisfied, especially when it is just: yet nevertheless it
ought always to be foreseen, that the demand be honest and friendly: For if
the demand be made against true Justice and honest life, it is nedeful many
times to leave the good will, least we fail of Justice. Otherwise many wicked
examples should be given to diverse and infinite persons to do evil. I
understand your Letter, by the which you pray me that I would grant to release
your friend out of captivity, not peradventure considering the great crime and
excess by him committed, the which is so great and abominable, that he
deserves not death in his person only, but also therewith cruel torments,
whereof I am sorry, for the mutual affection that is between us: because I can
not of mine honor in this case pleasure you. Though your demand be not
lawful nor honest, yet love and friendship moves you to demand, and to speak
for that which all law denies. And for that malefactors ar to be punished,
the good to be exalted, and safely to go abroad in the world, I pray you
though I do not satisfy your demand, yet at this time have me excused,
because that Justice does force me to deny that request. etc.

The excuse for that the demand was against Justice.
I Consider that many times the love and affection of one friend unto another,
harmeth the conscience, and suffers it not to discern the truth of reason and
Justice: but when we behold the estate of men, who by the crimes have deserved
all kind of punishments, then is it needful that Justice take place, thereby
to give example to other men from living evil: notwithstanding I have done the
duty which belongs unto a friend. And although that with small consideration
and wisdom I entreated for Cleophas, yet I beseech your majesty to excuse and
pardon me, not so much for mine ignorance, as for the love that I bare unto my
friend, writing in the behalf of that transgressour of true Justice, as
plainly your prudence expresses unto me, the which may be an excuse of my
unworthy demand. etc.

To aid thy friend being in prison for de^^e.
I Thank God, for that I never requested any thing of your Lordship, which you
granted me not, and now I yet hope to obtain this, the which is a woork of
pity. Within these few d^yes was imprisoned James Bar, my perfect friend,
who is in so much extremity, that it is scarce able to be expressed, and has
a great sort of children, for whom he labored both day and night to get bread
to sustain them: but now being absent, your lordship may consider how his
pitiful family should live. Wherefore I humbly beseech you, that you would both
for the love of God, and also for my sake, open your ears unto my request, and
give him some day of payment, in such sort that the poor man may be delivered
out of prison, to comfort and relieve his poor family, the which can not be in
greater calamity, plaint, and misery. And thus having sundry times received
benefits from your honor, I presently am bold by to great presumption, to have
recourse unto you, te^derly beseching you that you would vouchsafe to deliver
him out of prison. Thus doing I shall receive a singular pleasure from your
wysdom. And shall pray for a continual preservation of you and all yours. etc.

To show thy self sorrowful for the misfortune of thy friend.
WE ought always to participate with our friends of every fortune that happens
unto them. Having therefore within these few days had understanding, that you
were robbed, I receive such displeasure and grief, as of duty ought every
good and perfect friend one for another. But because I know yt it is not
needful to comfort them which are of them selves by wisdom comforted, I will
not enlarge any further, but only desire you to have patience in such
misfortune, as requires your singular prudence: whereunto I commit you etc.

The exhortation of a Captain unto his Soldiers.
ALthough Nature always appoynteth some puissant person, for necessary
occasion to govern the subject people in due observance of order, yet since
the time that I have been amongst you in the administration of warfare, I do not
esteem my self your superior, but equal, for that no exercise has more need
of skill and counsel, than warfare. You therefore my sovereign Soldiers
enforce your selves with all loving diligence, to subdue and bring down these
barbarous people, not so furious as perverse, at all times and in all places
our great enemies: For which occasion in this war show your selves not only
friends and defenders of our King, but also tutours and careful prouiders for
your selves, and preseruers of your wives children, and goods etc.

To demand enterteinment of a great Captain.
Courageous Captain, the celebrated renoume of wisdom, prudence, honesty, and
virtue in chiualry, wonderfully exercised by your lordship in our time do
inuit and provoke me to appeal unto your presence, offering thereunto my
whole service, ready at all times and in all places. Many men of great fame in
warfare, are at this present of me very well known, of all which none of them
in heart, counsel, manhood, nor prudence may be compared unto your
excellency: therefore all ye true champions of France, and other men of arms
are desirous to submit themselves unto your lordship: amongst which number, as
one of the meanest, I humbly request to be admitted. etc.

To excuse thy self, for being negligent in writing unto thy friend.
IF in times past I have not written unto you, as my duty was, it has been for
the urgent business and great affairs that let me: yet therefore it is not
but that my whole trust and fidelity in every kind of thing has always
remained in you: and especially when I record with my self the singular love
which you have always showed unto me in deeds and effects. And because it is
better to express some part of my duty late tha^ never, I am moved to write
unto you these presents, that you may participate with me of my profit and
prosperity, as you have heretofore of my hindrance and adversity, ayding,
cou^selling and favoring me, more than ever I half deserved toward you. etc.

To put thy friend in remembrance of thy business.
ASsured I am that no negligence has at any time kept you back from
satisfying of my demau^ds, which through your humanity you have always reputed
to be your own: and not only the offer which you have many times made unto
me, but also the experience which I have had of you, does bolden me now to
write unto you My urgent business therefore together constraining me, and
knowing that no affairs of mine (for the love and affection that you bear
unto me (shall be accounted troublesome unto you, I now again put you in
remembrance of that whereunto my business compels me: hoping to be
pleasured of you, as of him, in whom I fix my full trust and fidelity in all
things, and who also may dispose of me as of a dear and perfect friend etc.

To require aid at thy friends hand.
THe hope and fidelity which I have had in you, and in the offers which many
times with an effectionate mind you have made unto me, does comfort me, and
move me in this my business and necessity to have recourse unto you: being
very certain (for the humanity and affection that you here unto me) that your
effects will be correspondent unto your words, and that you will aid me with
that which I shall demand: which thing will be very acceptable unto me, and which
thing also you may easily grant me: for it lies as well in your possibility,
to give it, as in mine to ask it. And though my poverty be great, wherein I
find my self at this present, yeat does every man know, that it is not by my
fault, but by the impetuositie of fortune who casts down to ground each
person whom she lists: for siknesses, debates, change of time, and a thousand
contrarieties (as every man knows) have throwe^ me down so low, that
he^ceforth with my.xij. chiloren, I have more dout for dyeng of hunger, than
hope for to live, if your humanity do not succor me in this my adversity.
And thus I commit my self unto your charitable pity etc.

To write unto an Advocate.
I Dout not but that your worship does account me for a negligent man, seeing
that in a months space I have not written unto you: but certainly no occasion
comes unto my memory at this time more convenient: than to reason by writing
with a sage and gentle person, and one adorned with virtue: and thus
understanding mine excuse, I trust you will be inclined to pardon me. But to the
purpose, since your worship departed from us, we have been more pursued and
molested in our process before the commissary, (who arrived here the day after
your departure) than ever we were before time: we have been these.iiij. sundry
days sore troubled, because we had no man to speak for us: and our adverse
party had Master James Parcenall for his cou^seller. But (not to be
troublesome by over long writing) the whole matter of the process depends
until your coming: therefore I pray you make spedy return, and address your
writings orderly. Thus understand you our troubles one hour seems unto me a
whole year until your worship come unto us. We have found the last will and
testament of our Uncle deceassed, the which will make very much for our
purpose: we wait for you here ye week after Ester. etc.

To answer thy friend having praised thee.
YOur phrase of speech is so finely adorned and so eloquent, that in verity
unto a man even full of eloquence it would be troublesome thereunto to make due
and sufficient answer, therefore impossible unto me full of barbarism: But
peradventure I know not the love and affection which you bear unto me, for
which cause although I have not ye ornature of speech that were requisite, yet
notwithstanding I will enforce my self for duties sake, as also I trust to your
contentment, to write you some part of an answer: to the end that you might
rather blame me of insufficiency, than of ingratitude or negligence. And
therefore though I know my self to have been praised rather through your
humanity, for ye singular love yt you bear unto me, tha^ for ye merits of my
virtues yet nevertheless, I cannot choose but be glad and rejoice to be
praised of so prudent a person, and one adorned with such eloquence as you are:
for your authority is so much in estimation, yt not only men worthy but also ye
unworthy it beutifieth and extolleth

The Reply unto the same.
COnsidering with my self ye small puisa^ce of my weak spirit, and with what
authority of eloquence it were nedeful and necessary to send you my Letters:
I am as it were astonyed, and especially for the recept of your copious
Epistles: But certainly I am not he whom you have said to be prudent and
adorned with eloquence, for therein have I employde no labor: But assuredly
you are worthy to be called even eloquence it self. etc.

To show thy self thankful for a benefit received.
THough at this present through the contrariety of the time, I find my self
feeble in the gifts of Fortune, and that toward you I cannot use that
renumeration in effects which I ought: yet I trust you think, that my good
will is so great toward you, that I have thereby fully satisfied to every
default of my unfortunate Fortune. And so remain I assured yt through your
accustomed humanity, you will accept my good will. But if ever Fortune (who is
mutable) do return her self toward me (as I attend her sweet daliance)
and put her prosperous Sails to mine honest intent: there is not a man in the
whole world that more largely shall dispose of me and all my possibilities,
than shall your wisdom. etc.

The same, after an other manner.
IF God had showed such favor unto me, that I had been as sufficient to have
rewarded so many your benefits, as I feel my self able and desirous to render
you infinite thanks, assuredly I would have been as ready to the satisfaction
of the deed, as of the good will: therefore as far as extends at this
present my possibility; I mind not to be ungrateful unto you. And thus I
thank you for the fame, as much as if you had done me the greatest and most
singular benefit in the world, and offer my self always unto you, in all
that shall be possible for me. etc.

Here ends the third book.
The fourth book containyng sundry Letters, belonging to Love, as well in Verse
as in Prose.
Eurialus writes unto Lucretia.
IT is not without cause (Lady Lucrece) if all they of this city have their
eyes fixed to behold, regard, love and praise thee: when of the one part they
consider the great virtues wherewith thou art enriched, the good and honest
manners which adorn thee: and moreover they have in admiration thy richesse,
and yet more thy nobility surpassyng all other thy parents. And then when
besides they consider on the other part the great, singular and incredible
beauty which is in thee, they judge within themselves yt thou art a very
spectacle of Natures work, and are not deceived: for they view thy Angelical
visage, so fair and clear, that it would lighte^ a firmament altogether
cloudie: thy eyes bright, clear and shining, like ij. stars, whose sweet
aspects drive away all sorrow and sadness, and bring in place all joy and
pleasantness: The fair die of thy pleasant face, passes all other lively
color: thy large forhed, thy crystal neck, thy coral lips, thy golden
hair, thy comely body, and other me^bres so well proportioned, yt I can not
desist nor abstain from praising thee, in praising thee to love thee, and in
loving thee to honor thee. These causes with many modoe constrain me to love
thee: and though nobility, richesse, and youth he in me, and also (that thanks
be unto God) I am fortunate enough, yet much more happy should I be, if it would
please thee to love me. For as for my part I am determined not only to love,
esteem, and honor thee, but also to die for thee in thy necessity, or at thy
pleasure: and I assure thee, that both waking and sleping, I have no thought
but of thee: and though some of my companions do say, that I am happy, because
in me are some small gifts of fortune, and virtues: yet these notwithstanding,
I accomp^^ny self unfortunate, if I obtain not thy favor, for thou ar^ the
same, wherein rests my only hope. Turn therefore (if it please thee, my
sweet Dame and gracious virgin) thy sweet eyes of humanity, and with
clemency behold thy humble Seruitour. O what a thing is Love? now do I know
it by experience: and marvel not though the greatest Lords and Ladies be
thereunto subject: for many willing to obey his commandment, are fallen into
great inconveniences. Remember thee of Daphne, and of Siringue, of which ye one
despising the love of Phoebus, and the other of ^an, cruelly ended their lives.
Take thou heed of so doing, and rather follow Penelope, who unto her Lover
observed Loyalty, and lived notably. And to be brief, grant unto my request,
for in so doing I promise thee to be loyal, honest, and secret in the
accomplishing of all thy desires.

A certain Lover writes unto hi^ Lady.
MY Dear, if the gentle Emperor of the Firmament, with all his study (as it
plainly appears) has vouchsafed to ad^^^e you with heavenly and Angelic^ll
beauty, with virtue more than human, with apparent modesty, and with royal
customs: who then douteth but that you are pleasant, pitiful, gentle, and
gracious? certes none. Because that in your fair forehead and shyuyng eyes,
love shows it self always apparelled with Liberality, which things have
b^ldened my half alive heart, (now of long time linked unto you with ardent
sighs) to say with mated mind, these few vnadorned words, which shall be
the secret messangers of me, your assured seruitour, humbly requesting you not
to deny me your sweet love, whereupon continually cogitating does day and
night, I am forced eftsoons to record and call upon your sweet and delectable
name, from which. ^^^pecte comfortable succor. No more, but that I still
intend to receive from your clemency, gentle favorable and convenient
answer.

A Lover requesteth his Ladies love.
COnsidering (my sovereign joy) the great virtues of nobility, beauty, and
courtesy, wherewith nature by (...) perabundant measure has in such so^^
decored you, that above all other terrestrial bodies you are judged by common
voice to obtain the Crown and principality: And on the other side waying the
want and insufficiency of my former services toward you, my trembling hand
is scarce able to hold the pen, neither dare my stammeryng tongue express
that which the afflicted heart through ardent appetite desires to manifest
unto you. Yet Love (which above all animated creatures, holds in his
domination my inflamed mind) does so exceed, that it gives me doutfull
boldness, to take in hand to open unto you the secrets of (...) breast: which
is to do you to understand, yt ever since mine eyes did speculate and behold
your great beauty, my heart has remained so bound and entangled, yt of it own
freewil it has chosen to be included in your sweet prison. By reason whereof,
and seeing the vexations and grievous passions of my languishing corpse, caused
through the sweet regard of y^^^r eyes, and augme^ted by yt great eclipsatio^
of your absence; I am constrained to implore and demand your aid and succor.
And because you are she, who only and none other, may se^d remedy in this
case, I therefore most^ humbly pray and request you, that eue^ as in all other
virtues you ar souerain, so likewise in this matter you would show your self
charitable and pitiful. And since you are ye cause of this so great and grievous
martyrdom, and that you only may help and remedy it, extend therefore the
true remedy, by sendyng a benign answer, the which I most effectuously
desire and attend.

The answer of his Lady.
MY trobled thought so discordeth from your fo^de affection, that I cannot
marvel enough to imagine what cause moved you, and gave you such presu^ptuous
boldness, as to trouble and interrupt me of mine accustomed rest, through
your abominable letters and wanton words. Your said letters (to the end
that they should not come unto the hands of any other person) I have
received* and beholding the contents thereof, with great pain co^ld I bridle
mine Ire, and witholde my self from ^earing them in pieces: but considering
that such fault is not to be imputed unto the letters which are insensible, but
unto the composer and doer of them, I therefore refrayned my self from that
purpose, willing to exercise that mine anger and rigor upon the messanger: but
likewise for report sake, I refrayned, gyuyng him special charge, not
thenceforth to return unto me with any such message. And to the end that you
shall not presume to continue any longer in this sure, understand ye that I am
not she, unto whom such abusiue letters should be sent. I have thought good
(contrary to mine accustomed manner) to write unto you at this present, which my
spirits with much ado can scarce abide to finish, through the great offense
that it feels: certifying you, that if you persevere any longer in this
matter, you shall do unto me a most displeasant thing, and unto your self
shall purchase great and evident damage. Wherefore I pray you (for the
avoiding of all these inconveniences) that you will condescende unto my request:
and so doing you shall do me a singular pleasure.

The Reply of the Lover.
Having (my singular Lady) received your honey sweet letters, and them
beholding, I find my self in such a co^trariety and discord, that my
perplexed thought can find no way or mean to recreate it self. For of the
one part considering the wise and sage words of your said Letters, my heavy
heart desired to be it own homicide: and of the other part seeing the thing
which your white and pleasant hands had touched, so much joy did abound in me,
that I could not refrain nor withdraw my greedy eyes from still beholding it,
nor my revived tongue from often reding it. Yet seeing it much moystened with
the flowyng flood of my weping eyes: and fearyng thereby to hurt or tear it, I
did moderate and bridle my ardent appetit, minding to bear it alwais nigh my
heart, in sign of veneration and honor. By your said letters (my dear and only
mistress) you blame me of presumption, in being so bold to write unto you:
certainly if you consider well the manner, you ought not to impose ye fault unto
me, but to at tribute it unto your excessive beauty, worthiness and
benignity, which eue^ at their first apperance, together ye sweetness of your
gracious cou^tena^ce, did so penetrate and enter into al my exterior and
interior powers, and so assailed hurt and wounded my afflicted heart,
unprovided of resista^ce, that it is not only robbed and spoiled of al frank
and free liberty, but also in such sort submitted and yoked with all affection,
fidelity mind and thought unto ye perpetual conte^plation of your
excellency, yt I am not able to separate nor remove it from yt subjection and
servitude, ne yet to reduce it to ye former liberty. And for yt you say, you
would have rent my letters, and ill entreat the messanger let the continual
torments (which for your sake) tear me in pieces, suffice to satisfy your
ire, and not distain your tender hands with cruelty: and touching yt which is
more grievous and bitter unto me, that you command me not to write unto you, nor
to continue my purpose: Know ye (my dear) ye like as it is impossible for any
man to separate from you your great beauty: eue^ so none other but death can
take a way or diminish my purpose and intent, but every hour augmenting does
double it self, together we most grievous anguish and sorrow: for reward and
remedy whereof I demand none other recompense, but only that you grant and
permit me to be your loyal lover and seruitour.

A Lover vvriteth unto his Lady.
TO express unto thee (my dear) the inward griefs, the secret sorows, the
pinching pains that my poor oppressed heart pitifully endures, my pen is
altogether unable. For even as thy excellent virtue, beauty, comeliness, and
courtesy, far surmounteth in my conceipte, that of all other humain
creatures, so my piteous passions both day and night are no whit inferior, but
far above all those of any other worldly wight. So excel not thy gifts, but
as much exceed my griefs. Therefore (my sweet) vouchsafe of thy sovereign
clemency, to grant some speedy remedy unto the grievous anguishes of my
heuie heart, detract no time, but weigh with thy self, the sicker that the
pacient is, the more deadly that his disease is deemed: So much the more
speed ought the Physician to make, so much the sooner ought he to provide and
minister the medicine, least coming to late, his labor be lost. But what
painful pacient is he, that sustayneth so troublesome a state, as I poor
soul do) (except thou vouchesafe to pity me?) For the party being
disco^forted at one Physitia^s hand, has recourse unto an other: Where as I
discomforted at thy hands, have recourse unto none, but still la^guishing to
look for a lothsom death. Consider therefore (my dear) the extremity of my
case, and let not ca^kred cruelty corrupt so many golden gifts: but as thy
beauty and comeliness of body is, so let be thy humanity and clemency of
mind, draw not (as the proverb says) a leaden sword out of a golden
skabberde. And thus hopyng to have some speedy comfort at thy hands upon that
hope I repose me, till further opportunity.

A constant Lover does express, his gripyng griefs, which still increase.
AS Troylus did neglect the trade
of Lovers skillful law,
Before such time that Cresseid fair
with fixed eyes he saw:
So I likewise took little keep
of love within my breast,
Before I viewde the graces well
which in you hidden rest.
And like as he with furious flames
was forcibly annoyde:
So I likewise (through force of love)
do lack that which I ioyde.
For now my restless mind does rave
which constant was before:
And sundry strange conceits do cause
my grief t'encrease the more.
Thus far our fates I may compare
in all alike to be.
God grant in sequel I may find
such Fortune as did he.
Then shall I have just cause to joy.
then shall my mirth abound,
Then shall I want no wished hap
that may on earth be found.
Then shall my rauings all rebate,
with constantnesse in place,
Then shall my strange conceits avoid
my grief shall be solace.
But since I lack some such a friend
as he of Pandor had,
Who brought his purpose well about,
and made his mind full glad,
Therefore I say for lack thereof,
my self now forced am I,
My furious flames for to unfold,
and for redress to cry,
To thee which art the only stay
of those my troubled veins,
Of these my secret griping griefs
of these my pinching pains:
Which long have boiled in my breast,
where they suppressed have bin:
But now through force of flame burst out
and will not be kept in.
Much like to burning Aetna hill,
whose flashes never cease:
But boiling sore both night and day
do freshly still increase.
So fares it likewise with me,
whose faithful heart does bourne,
And often with secret ^ighes and sobbes
constrained is to mourn.
Redress whereof may none be had,
but only thee dear dame,
In whom the water does remain
that well would quench the flame.
Therefore grant grace, as Cressida,
did unto ^roylus true:
For as he had her love by right,
so thike to me is due.
Else shall I living daily die,
thus rest I in thy hands:
As thou shall please at liberty,
or else in careful hands.
FINIS.
A lover pearst with Cupides bow, thinks long till he be rid from woe.
When sturdy storms and whirling winds
the waters wan do toss,
The seely ship is troubled sore.
in danger of his loss.
So in likewise when Cupide has,
with dynting Dart in hand,
Pierst through the hearts of lovers true
as all aghast they stand,
Before his godhed forced straight,
down for to fall and yield:
No struggling strength may him withstand
no buckler nor no shield.
This Cupide he this cruel god,
with fyry flaming Dart,
Has wounded me in every vain,
but chiefly at the heart.
There does the sting abide and stay,
there does the shaft remain:
All remedy is past I know,
to ease me of this pain.
Except that thou to whom I write,
true comfort to me show:
For thou art only she that may,
release me of this woe.
Thou only art (and none but thou)
mine only joy, or grief:
My happy state, hr great decay,
send therefore some relief.
Destroy not him, whom well thou may
without thy loss preserve:
Show faithful constancy to him,
that myndeth not to swerue.
He naught desires but love for love,
and faith for faith again:
That both together in great joy
and comfort may remain.
Detract no time, consider well,
when pain does men oppress,
Each hour think they to be twain,
till they have found redress,
And thus because my griefs increase,
I say my dear adieu:
And pray thee to have mind on him,
that unto thee is true.
FINIS.
A secret Lover writes his will, By story of Pigmalions ill.
I Read how that Pigmalion was
A cunning Caruer in his days:
And therein most men did surpass,
His worthy works deserved due priase.
Such was his skill to grave in stone,
That like to him was never none.
This cunning caruer thought in mind
Some passing piece so fine to frame,
As worthy were to leave behind:
Thereby to get immortal fame.
That men might say when (...)
This picture gr^^^ (...)
And for because his cunning great,
In every point might well appear:
A woman he would counterfeat,
(Who of all Creatures is most clear.)
That worthy work might well compare
With worthy creature, was his care.
Pigmalion passing pains did take,
To bring this worthy work about:
The which in Marble he did make,
That like was not ye world throughout.
Each point ^o perfect did appear,
That naught but life the^ lacked there.
And to be brief, it was so wrought,
That he him self enamoured fell
With this fine piece, and still he thought
She was a live, and loved him well:
And yt she smyled with smirking lips,
Thus to and fro his fancy skips.
Full often he kissed, and braste also,
This marble maiden, made of stone:
He set her at his table tho,
And gave her meat but she would none.
The meat still in her mouth remaind,
which thing Pigmalion greatly paind.
Yet fancies fond so fraught his head,
With blind delites of burning love:
That he this stone laid in his bed,
And thence could not his mind remove:
But often in arms he can her close,
A cold companion I suppose.
If thus Pigmalion pynde away,
For love of such a Marble stone:
What marvel then though I decay
With pitious plaint, and grievous groan,
That love a lively Lady bright,
who has dame natures points aright
Oh would I might Pigmalions part,
In some respects now fully play:
Her to embrace that has my heart,
And sometimes in my bed to lay.
I should find better pastime sure,
Than poor Pigmalion could procure.
But oh I dare not burning breast,
Ne lingering love, to her unfold,
For fear of further dangers pressed,
If that the same disdain she should:
Therefore with Sisiphus I moan,
Thus rolling still the restless stone.
FINIS.
A lover has his Ladiees heart, And writes to her, as is his part.
Like as the valiant Soldier stout,
when conquest he has won
Rejoices much (expulsing dout)
for such a practice done.
Or as the Shipman when that he,
the struggling storms has past,
Does joy in mind, at length to see,
the calm and gentle blast,
Or as the Merchant when great toil
and travel he has had,
In many a foreign country soil
at his return, is glad.
So I likewise whom Cupid sore
has troubled with his war,
And tossed with his raging rore
of Seas that make or mar:
With danger great at length I have
(the gods I thank therefore)
Attaynde the thing which I did crave:
so that I joy much more,
Than any of the foresaid states:
and just cause is there why,
For if I had not had good fates
right well this know do I,
My grief had been much more than theirs
with nothing less than death,
Or living else in deadly fears,
whilst I had ioyde this breath.
But since that all my doutes are past,
I joy, and joy again:
For that I have obtainde at last
redress of greatest pain.
And you dear dame to whom I write,
mine only joy and stay,
Be glad with me, revive your spirit:
as well I trust you may.
For though the time not yet be come,
it is not long behind
Ere we shall joy the total some,
and have our wished mind.
Which time when that it come shall be,
I know, and that right well,
Our joys we shall then perfect see,
our comfort shall excel.
Then shall be tryde our truthfull hearts,
then shall our love be shown:
Then shall be left our lingering smarts,
then shall no grief be known:
But in the mean time faithfully,
(as does of right behoue)
Let each show other constancy,
with steadfast fixed love.
Let both our minds together gre^
as though they were but one:
Since both our hearts so fixed be,
as can be better none.
Whereof I dout not, god I take
to witness at this time,
For I had rather life forsake,
than chance should such a crime.
The like in you I know does rest,
and shall continue still:
As faithfully you have expressed,
your true love, and good will.
Therefore these lines I do not send,
because I stand in dout:
But only thereby to extend,
our faithful hearts throughout.
So take it then my heart, my dear,
who makes my joys excel:
The gods us guide from douting fear,
and thus my heart Farewell.
FINIS.
A Lover sick for very love, To pity does his Lady move.
Since God does guide the course of man,
directing all his ways:
And ordreth every living thing,
as his good will does please.
We mortal men must needs submit
our selves, to gods decree:
And look what fate that he does send,
therewith content to be.
Sometimes by health and wealth he does
declare his fervent love:
And often again with sickness great,
our vessels frail does prove.
As for example, I my self
of late his hand have felt:
But now at last he lovingly
with me again has dealt.
Yea Atropos, he had almost cut
my vital threede a sonder:
If the other Sisters had not said,
it should continue longer.
Yea dreadful death stood at the door,
and would have stepped in:
If mighty love, (who rules all)
had not contrary bin.
Thus have I tossed the toyling strife,
twixt lingering life and death.
Which almost had bereft from me,
this present vital breath.
Then judge nothing amiss my dear,
ne let me blamed be,
Although in deed of many days
I have not ben with thee.
For sure thou have ben still with me,
and present in my mind:
Though feeble joints and lack of strength
at home my corpse assignde,
So that I could not come to thee,
as I would feign have done:
And as I will by gods grace sure,
when I my health have won.
But in the mean time this shall be
thee heartily to pray,
That if thou have occasion for
to come, or go this way,
To take the pains to visit me,
with passions yet oppressed:
For sure thy presence will me joy
and send to me great rest.
Thus being bold now for to crave
this favor at thy hand,
With fingers faint I finish here,
and still thy servant stand.
FINIS.
A faithful Lover feling smart, does nippe his Lady false of heart.
Like as the Crocodyle,
that beast of cruel kind,
Does weep and wayle, and make great moan
man's senses so to blind,
And does dissemble much,
with flattring false intent:
As though great love, and friendship eke
to him poor man she meant.
Until such time that she
have caught him in her claws:
But then alas with bloody teeth
she kills, where is no cause.
So thou dear dame have done,
(or would at least) by me:
Not forcing for to hurt thy friend,
though no just cause there be.
May I not justly say,
Oh cruel Tygar than,
What meanest thou in raging wise,
to kill a faithful man?
Is faith full firmly fixed,
is promise perfect made,
Of thee dear dame no more esteemde?
then cruel is thy trade.
W(...)ldest thou destroy,
(...) that would thee well:
An(...)easant friendly words,
(...)y self so fell?
How can thou then excuse,
thy double dealing heart:
When undeserved certainly
thou causest me to smart?
But for thy fickle faith,
and promise broken so:
The gods no dout shall thee reward,
with pinching pain and woe.
Then shall thou justly feel,
how thou have dealt with me:
And then also shall I rejoice,
thy punishment to see.
I read how Harpelus
fair Phillida did pray:
But she with checking tau^ts and mocks,
his purpose did gainesay.
The gods regarding this,
took pity on his case,
And punished her cruel fact
within a little space.
For why her heart was set,
on fire, with Corins love:
Who passed not a pin for her,
as she did plainly prove:
Whereby she pynde away:
the like may chance to you,
Or greater punishment no dout,
since you have been untrue.
Think not therefore you can
unpunished remain:
For why? your fault is worse than hirs,
an hundredth fold certain.
Well, well, I say leave of
thy cruel scourging mind:
And practice not thy faith to be
so false and so unkind.
Else shall thou surely feel
the force of Cupids bow:
Whose arrows have not touched thee yet
as thou do plainly show.
And thus dear dame adieu,
since that thou art so strange:
For certainly I know right well,
that England is no graunge.
Therefore I will take hold,
upon some steadfast stay:
And force not for the slippry Eele,
since she will needs away.
But as the burned child:
the fire still does dread:
So am I warned now at first,
hereafter to take heed.
Finis
quod W. F.
A Table of the principal matters contained in this book.
The Epistle dedicatorie. The Epistle to the Reader. The books verdicte.
The contents of the first Book.
INstitutions how to endyte Epistles and Letters. etc. Folio. 1. The
diffinitio^ of an Epistle or letter. eode^ Example of an Epistle of Doctrine. 8
Example of an Epistle of Mirth. 9 Example of an Epistle of Gravity. eode^ The
Division of an Epistle or letter 10 The first Style or manner, wherein the cause
is specified. eodem. The second Style, wherein the cause is first, afterward the
intent, and then the conclusion. 11 The third style in this order, the intent,
the cause, and the conclusion. 12 The fourth style in this order, the
conclusion, the cause, and the intent. eodem. Denis the Tyrant writes to the
Burgesses of Naples. 15 The answer in like form. eodem. A letter written to
the King, in favor of one pretending the order of Knighthode. 18 How to write
in a man's behalf, for a Civil cause. 20 The Example. 21 How to write in ones
behalf for an offense or criminal cause. eodem. The Example. 22 How to request
the counsel of an advocate. 23 The Example. 24 How to answer such a like
matter. 25 The Example. eodem. How to thank an Advocate for a cause by him
conducted. 26 The Example eodem. How to request a corporal benefit 27 The
Example. eodem. How to answer granting a corporal benefit. 28 The Example.
29 How to give thanks for a corporrll gift received. eodem. The Example. 30 How
to write under the demo^stratiue ge^der, in the praise of some bodies. 33 The
Example. eodem How to write under the demonstratiue gender, blaming or
dispraysing another. 35 The Example, wherein a certain man writes to Cicero,
touching the conspiracy of Catiline. eodem How to write by manner of complaynt
or lamentation, for an injury received. 36 The Example, wherein Appius writes
to Caesar, of the injury done him by Cicero. 37 How to write when one friend
comfort an other for an injury received. 38 The Example, wherein Caesar
comfort Appius, touching the contents of the Letters before written. eodem
How to write a letter of complaint for a missefortnne, demanding counsel of
consolation. 39 The Example, wherein a Father lamenting the death of his son,
writes to a friend of his. How one friend should answer another, comforting
him for his loss. 41 The example: wherein one friend comfort an other, for
the death of his son. eodem. How to write letters being in exile, under hope
to obtain restitution, aid, counsel, or comfort. 43 The Example: wherein
Cicero lamenteth to Lentulus, that for the hatred of Clodius he is exiled.
eodem. How to comfort our friend in his exyle. 45 The example: wherein Lentulus
comfort Cicero, who through the malice of Clodius, was exiled. eodem. How to
write expositiue Letters, certifying the witness or notice of a thing. 46 The
example: wherein Cicero testifies unto the Judges, that Clodius was at Rome,
the same day that the sacred things of Vesta were violated. 47 How to certify
some news lately happened. eodem. The example: wherein one friend writes unto
another of nevves of the Court. 48 How to advertise one of the conditions of
another. 49 The example: wherein Cicero declares unto Caesar the conditions of
Apolonius of Rhodes, Orator. 50 How to write a proficiat or congratulation for
an office or dignity. 51 The example: wherein one friend rejoices with an
other of the office that the king has given him. eodem. How to write Letters
rejoicing for our friends health or safe return. 52 The example: wherein one
friend reioiceth of another recovery to health. eodem. How to exhort to virtue
etc. 53 The example: wherein a friend exhorts a young man to obtain virtue.
eode^. How to disuade our friend from rejoicing unadvisedly, or folishly. 55
The example: wherein Cicero diswadeth Curio from reioicing that Caesar is made
Emperor. eodem. How to write letters exhorting to lamentation. 56 The exampl^^
wherein Cicero exhorts Plautu^ to lament the oppression of the public weal.
57 How to diswade from sorrow. 58 The example: wherein Brutus diswadeth Marcus
Antonius, from sorowing for the death of Caesar. eodem. How to write Inuectiue
letters reprehending either friend or enemy, for some crime or ignorance. 59
The example: wherein Cicero inueyeth against Lucius Catilina, who conspyred
against the public weal. 50 How to write expugning letters either to friend
or enemy, for charging us with a fault. 61 The example: wherein Catilina
purges him self to the Senate of Rome; for the crime of coniuration, imposed
against him by Cicero. 63 How to write inuectiue Epistles of contention,
reprehending another for ignorance in study. 64 The example: wherein a certain
Barber writes to a Doctor of Physic, concerning his adversary a Chyrurgian.
65 How to write a defense in a contention 67 The example: wherein the Chirurgian
defe^deth him self to the Physician, against his adversary the Barber. eod^^
How to write domestical and familiar Letters or Epistles. 69 The Example of
a common style in that case. 70 How to write other domestical letters of
familiar business. 71 The example: wherein one friend aduertiseth an other of
the process that he has won. eodem. How to visit our friends with Letters, not
having any great matter to write. 72 The example of the style in that case. 73
How to write of some small affayre, business, or news. eodem. The example:
wherein one friend writes to an other of certain small news. 74 How to write
Letters containing some pleasant iestes of our selves, besides other matter. 75
The Example: wherein a Soldier writes to his captain. eodem. How to write
Letters containing merry iestes or tauntes by some other. 76 The example: wherein
Cicero iesteth with Valerius. 77 How to write letters giving general commission
and charge of business or affairs. eodem. The example wherein Cicero
commits to Scipio his authority over all his business in Rome. 78 How to
write Letters giving particular commission for some affairs 79 The example:
wherein Appius constituteth Cicero his receiver in Sicilia. eode^. How to write
certain mixed letters. 80 The example: wherein Cicero writes to Curio
concerning his business. 81 How to write letters containing diverse and sundry
matters. 82 The example: wherein Tully vvriteth to Pompilius of comforting,
grave, and domestical matters. eodem. How a Prince faithfully certifyeth the
worthy qualities of a man. 83 The example: wherein the Duke of Venise
certifieth the wisdom and science of G. A. 84 How a great Prince vvriteth of
peace or wars. 85 The Example: wherein the Emperor makes piece with the king
of Hungary. 86 How a noble man writes Letters for the promotion of a man. 87
The Example: wherein the Count of Pauie vvriteth in the promotion of A.
eodem. How a Prince Eclesiasticall or Temporal, vvriteth Letters forbidding a
thing. 88 The example: wherein the Pope forbids King Ferrand the building of
a Castle. 89
The contents of the second book.
HIrmolaus Barbarus, writes unto George Merula. 91 Hirmolaus Barbarus, writes
to Angelus Politianus. 93 Marsilius Ficinus, writes unto Angelus Politianus.
94 Politianus answers unto Marsilius Ficinus. 95 Innocent Pope, to Angelus
Politianus. eodem. Innocent the eight Pope, to his well-beloved Son Laurentius
de Medicis. 96 Angelus Politianus, to Innocent the.viij. Pope, renders
salutation. eodem. A certain man writes to a Bookebinder of Paris. 97 An
epistle of Angelus Politianus, to Laurentius de Medicis his Uncle. 98 Angelus
Politianus to a certain friend of his. 100 Politian to his friend. eodem.
Politian to an envious person. eodem. Politian to a slanderer and detracter.
101 Politian to his friend Caesar Carmente. eodem. Politian to James Modeste.
eodem. Politian to an unconstant person eodem. Angelus Politian to Picus
Mirandula. eodem. Politian to a friend of his. 102 Politian to a promise
breaker. eodem. Politian to his friend. eodem. Politian to Picus Mirandula.
103 Politian to a certain friend of his. eodem. An epistle of Johannes Picus
Mirandula, to his dear friend Iacobus Antiquarius. eodem.
The contents of the third book
A Father writes unto his son. 105 The answer of the Son unto his
Father. 107 The Father writes unto the Son. 108 The Son makes aunsvvere
unto his Father. eodem. The wife writes unto her husband. 110 The answer of
the Husband unto his wife. 111 A Sister writes unto her brother. 112 The
answer of the brother unto his Sister. eodem. A mot^er writes unto her
daughter. 113 The daughter makes answer unto her mother. 114 One Lord writes
unto another 115 The answer of one Lord unto another. eodem. A Gentleman
writes unto a noble Captain. 116 The answer of the Captain unto the
Gentleman. eodem. One gentleman writes unto another. 117 The aunsvvere of one
Gentleman unto another. eodem. One Merchant writes unto another. 118 The
answer of one Merchant unto another. eodem. A Merchant writes unto his
Factor. 119 The aunsvvere of the Factor unto the Merchant. 120 One Cashier
writes unto another. 121 One Cashyer unto another. eodem. One friend writes
unto another. eodem. The aunsvvere of one friend unto another. 122 One friend
writes in another behalf. 123 The answer unto his friend. eodem. To write
unto a Prince in a prisoners behalf. eodem. The answer of the Prince
declaring the demand to be dishonest. 124 The excuse, for that the demand was
against Justice. 125 To aid thy friend being in prison for det. eodem. To
show thy self sorrowful for the misfortune of thy friend. 126 The exhortation
of a captain unto his Soldiers. eodem. To demand entertaynement of a great
Captain. 127 To excuse thy self for being negligent in writing unto thy
friend. eodem. To put thy friend in remembrance of thy business. 128 To
require aid at thy friends hand. eo. To write unto an Advocate. 129 To
answer thy friend having praised thee. eodem. The reply unto the same. 130
To show thy self thankful for a benefit received. eodem. The same after an
other manner. 131
The contents of the fourth book.
EVrialus writes unto Lucresia. 131 A certain lover writes unto his Lady.
133 A lover requesteth his ladies love. eodem. The answer of his Lady. 134
The Reply of the lover. 135 A lover writes to his Lady 136 A constant lover
does express his gryping grief, which still increases. 137 A lover pearst
with Cupids bow, thinks long till he be rid from woe. 138 A secret lover
writes his will, by story of Pigmalions ill. 139 A lover has his Ladies heart,
and writes to her, as is his part. 141 A lover sick for very love, to pity
does his Lady move. 142 A faithful lover feeling smart, does nippe his Lady
false of heart. 143
FINIS.
Imprinted at London, by Henry Bynneman, dwelling in Knightrider street, at the
sign of the Mermaide. For Leonard Maylerd.

Anno. 1568.


