A DECLARATION OF THE TRVE CAUSES OF THE GREAT TROUBLES, PRESVPPOSED TO BE
INTENded against the realm of England.

Wherein the indifferent reader shall manifestly perceive, by whom, and by
what means, the realm is brought into these pretented perils.

Seen and allowed.

Anno, M.D.LXXXXII.


TO THE INDIFFERENT READER.
THE present estate, that the realm of England is in a few years come unto,
and the sundry aduersites sustained by the inahbitants of the same, are such,
and somany, as the lamentable and general cries and complaints of the
oppressed multitude, ca^ declare them to exceed all those of all ages past, in
the memory of man.

And yet of the redress of these calamities, so little hope is given, that
naught else, but the terrors of far greater trobles, are daily sounded in the
ears of the afflicted people: which can be to no other end, then to enduce
them to bear such further extreme misery, and poverty, as by the new
intended exactions, pressures, and pillages, they are like to be brought unto.
But strange it is to consider, that the auoydance of such great dangers, as
are pretended unto the realm (and expected; as is insinuated, by a spanish
invasion) is neither sought nor desired, by giving that king satisfaction of
the manifest injuries don unto him, nor in the restitution of his towns and
cities wrongfully possessed by the English: But falsely supposed to consist in
the persecuting and killing of a few poor priests and Iesuytes within the
realm, that there do secretly practice their priestly functions, to the
consolation of such afflicted Catholics as live within the same, or to the
conversion of such well minded protestants, as will not obstinately refuse to
understand their own errors, when they are made manifest unto them, by which
means many are confirmed in Catholic religion, and some numbers brought from
heresy to embrace the truth. which albeit the malice of the adversary has not
let to withstand, even with the effusio^ of blood, yet considering that the
force of truth is great and does prevail, the violence of the enemy is also
mightily increased, who directly seeking the lives and goods of Catholics, for
their conscience and religion, laboreth by all means possible, to make the
cause of their sufferance to some to be for treason. Under pretext whereof, by
a late proclamation published in London in November last 1592. in the name of
the Queen, their are yet more exquisite means of inquisition devised, to
bring them unto the slaughter, then were ever used before.

And because all men can not without some demonstration so rightly discern the
truth of this case, and the causes of the supposed perils, as it is requisyte
for every man to know, and the sway of the time not permitting the same
otherwise to be uttered, they are in the ensuing treatise briefly set down.

In the which, albeit that every fryuolous point of the aforesaid proclamation
be not expressly answered, yet is the intention of the inue^tor thereof directly
impugned, and the just blame imputed where it is justly deserved. It may
therefore please the discreet reader (laying a side all partiality) with an in
different eye, to behold the manifest truth, that shall (in this treatise) be
laid open unto him, the which for his own safty he must use with secreesie,
and silence, because of the great a-do, that the great Lord Threcherer will
keep, to depresse and conceile it from the sight and knowledge of the world, the
which may serve for one especial motive, to prove that he knows himself to
be guilty in conscience, if he have any at al. And thus leaving the reader out
of the matter ensuing (with some addition of something here omitted) to make a
commentary upon Chaucers prophecy, I wish him well to fare from Colen the 26.
of March 1592.

Of the fained happiness of England.
The vaunt of the pretended Gospel.
NO triumphs of the Gospells light,
But truth that shyneth clear.
Not words, but actions just and right
Makes virtue to apeere.
See then what force this faith has found,
More then of elder days.
And let the vices that abound,
Confirm the present praise.
The boast of continual peace.
The tokens of continued peace,
By plenty best are shovven.
But signs of war that does not cease,
By common wants are known.
Such is the peace we then prefer,
And eke our plenty so:
That thovvsands has consumde in war,
And millions left in vvo.
The present fear of troubles.
And all expyred days and years.
And fained pleasures past:
Converted are to sundry fears,
Of dangers at the last.
Would God no former cause had been,
Reuenges to attend.
Since happiness is ever seen,
Best by the happy end.
WHen Queen Marie, that lately possessed the crown and kingdom of England,
had resigned her soul unto God, and her body to nature: the lords spiritual
and te^porall, and the commons of the realm received into that crown and
dignity, the lady Elizabeth her sister, a Princess young and beautiful, and
abundantly adorned with the gifts of nature, and princely education. The King
of Spain, albeit he had been married unto the deceased Queen, yet did he never
seek to possess himself of the crown, nor to appropriate unto him, any
Cities, Castles, Ports or other places within the realm, nor in any sort to
oppugn the entrance of the new Queen, but in all love and acts of amity,
he did manifest his well lyking of her high advancement: as well in the giving
unto her all his late wyves Jewels, which were of great value, as in his
earnestly laboring with the French for the restitution of Calis, to the
increase of her dominions.

A little before the death of the aforesaid Queen, there was a treaty of peace
begun, between England, Spain, and France, including by consequence Scotland,
and Flaunders, the which peace notwithstanding the aforesaid Queens deceasse,
went forward, and was fully concluded.

Thus stood the realm of England shortly after this Queens coming to the
crown, in perfect peace and amity with all the countries next adjoining, and
those also, neither in civil broils among themselves, nor in dissension with
their neighbors abroad. The Moors of Granada, lived in obedience to the king
of Spain, the names of Huguenots and Gheuses, were in France and Flaunders
utterly unknown and unhard (...), and in Scotland was no contention for
government.

But as the Serpent, being subtiler then all the beasts of the field, did
sometime seduce the first woman and Queen of the world, to break the
commandment of God, whereby herself was forced to exile, and her posterity
made subject for ever after to such infinite calamities: So wanted there not
now a fly Sicophant, to suggest this princess to break the unity of Gods
Church, and eft-soones to prosecute such violent attempts against other
princes, the old allies of her predecessors, as thereby herself and realm is
brought unto these present fears, and to expect such ensuing dangers, as God
may permit to fall upon them.

Very probable it is, that the Queen, so she might have enjoyed the kingdom,
could as well have been contented to have continued the faith of her auncetours,
as to be brought unto her coronation with solemn procession of the Catholyke
clergy, and at a mass by a Catholic Bishop to be both crowned and anointed:
at what time, she vowed by oath to defend and maintain that Catholyke faith
and religion* the which point I do only here allege, for proof of her meaning
not to change religion, wherein if she had firmly remained, she should have
left unto the world a far greater memory of her gifts of nature and
educatio^. But having once reposed confidence in this suggester, he shadowed
his sinister practices under her authority, and left the obloquie of his
own unjust actions, to redound unto her, and her estate. For this person, unto
whose wiliness was joined a wonderful ambition, who being by birth but of
mean degree, and thereby denied to be set in equality, with the nobility and
peers of the realm, for the better satisfying of his insatiable desire of
greatness, resolved that the best way for his advancement, must be by
innovation, and that in no less matter, then in points of faith, and religion,
for that by experience late before in the other Queens days, he could neither
by the greatness of his beads, creeping to the cross, nor exterior show of
devotion before the high altar, find his entrance into high dignity, to be
so speedy as by this means he deemed it. And therefore among other his
fraudulent reasons, he sinisterly persuaded the Queen, that she could not
stand permanent in her crown and kingdom, unless she did condescend unto the
alteration of religion* and hereby he so far abused the sex and capacity of
his Princess, that the gate unto all ensuiug iniquity was spedely opened. He
then promoted unto authority one Nicolas Bacon, with whom before he was
lyncked in ba^des of affinity, who being also of mean birth, but of an
exceeding crafty wit, was the more fit to be joined with himself in the
menaging of the new government.

I do not here deny, but that any man how mean soever, may by just
prerogative obtain credit, and honor, by his virtuous endeavors: neither ca^
any honor be more due, the^ that which is atchiued by desert. But how this
person with his compagnion have usurped their reputation, their actions have
since manifested to all the world, as hereafter shall be showed: espetially in
the suruiuer, being the beginer, prosecutor, and continuer of the ruin of
England, and the disturba^ce almost of every Christian regio^. And he that (as
is said before) was far inferior to be matched in rank, with the nobilite of
the realm, has in a few years so ouermatched them al, and either by fained
crimes cut them of, or by one means or other, so maimed them of their due
honor and authority, that he has now made himself Dictator perpetuus. The
Queen now being brought, to condescend unto the change of the old religion,
he brought also the election of the new, to lie in his own choice: and
neither followed the doctrine of the Lutherans of Germany, nor that of the
Caluinists of Geneua, but prescribed a composition of his own invention.
Almost all the old Bishops and clergy he thrust into prison, and there
consumed them, and forced the others in exile to end the rest of their days:
and to supply their places, he shufled together the very rif raf, and refuse of
the world. A wedded ministry he would have (albeit the Queen never lyked it)
because the fugitive Apostataes that were now returned into England, and
fittest for this new function, were for the most part coopled with yoke
fellows, and had united the flesh unto the world, and the devil: and the
defects that wa^ted to make up tale, of this ministerial multitude, were taken
up without partiality, from tapsters, ti^ckers, and such deep diuynes, and
these were sent abroad to preach, and starve the cures throughout the whole
country. Some vestures of the old clergy he left in the churches, whereby the
bearded ministers, his tra^sformed apes, might so much the better imitate the
outward appearance of Catholic priests: and the more to diminish this great
conceit, of mutation in faith among the people, and to make them wene, that the
old service was but turned out of Latin into English, and some ceremonies only
altered: the Gospels, Epistles, perte of the Letany, and the very Collects used
before at Mass, were ordained by a book of In iu^ctio^s to be daily red in
the churches. The name of this new profession was borrowed from Germany, for
the professors would be called Protestants (a name unknown unto all our
Catholic auncetors, in all ages, since first they received Christianity) but
the chiefest substance of dotrine, was taken from Geneua, whereunto the
compositor, added of himself, an Ecclesiastical superiority to the Queen,
which John Calvin whose doctrine they lyked nearest to follovv, does term
to be Antichristian in any te^porall prince, Much more in a vvooma^.
and it was never challenged by any prince Christian, before king H. the eighte:
nor never atributed to any heathen potentate, except by one only people of
Persia called the Asasynes: for they in the year of our Lord 1253. admited
their religion to depend wholly upon the will of their Prince.

Thus was the protestanticall congregation of England created, and erected,
most repugnant to the old Catholic faith, participant of some new he resies,
and yet not consonant to any one religion else: but different and disagreeing
from all sects and religions, past and present under heaven: and what
confusion it has since declyned unto in it self, shall here after be declared.
The apology of this Church was written in Latin, and translated into English
by A.B. with the comendatio^. of M.C. which twain were sisters, and wives unto
Cecill, and Bacon, and gave their assistance and helping hands, in the plot and
fortification of this new erected synagog.

But because so strange and extraordinary a doctrine, being in an antipathia
to all, and in unity with none, was unlikely to have long endurance:
espetially wanting such deep root of succession from Christ and his Apostles,
as has these many hundred years preserved in vigeur one only entire faith*
and religion, against all heresies, schisms, and disse^tions whatsoever, and
the author fearing least with the decay of this late erected Church, the
creator with the creature might fall: he then as impudently rejecting all show
of moral honesty, as late before he had don his hipocriticall cloak of
devotion, studied to put all countries in garbroiles round about him. And for
the effectuating of this his heroical intention, he began to use the excercize
of a new skill, and that was always to persuade the Queen, that other
princes meant to invade her dominions, when himself meant to draw her to any
violent attempt against them. It is a world to see how his experience has
since increased in this practice, and how well he has made this device to
extend, to the increase of Englands enmity with all the world: and how for his
labor, he has purchased among fools the reputation of wisdom, albeit he
has lost among wisemen the esteem of honesty.

The first proof of this device, to stir up tumults in other princes
dominions, he put in practice with Scotland the country next adjoining,
whereupon sone after followed the wars of Lythe, the success whereof,
because it fell not out so well as to his purpose he wished, himself went
thither to patche up a peace, the which he so well disposed of, that they were
never since out of continual wars. And for the better and more assured
maintenance of discord, he has not let ever since, to hyre some principal
persons for yearly wages, to nowrish and continue rebellions, quarrels, and
factions, by which means, the treasure of the realm has not only been
infinitely wasted, but at sundry times, diverse gre^^ troops of English forces
have been sent ^^ether, conducted by the Earl of Sussex and others, whereof
has ensued very great effusion of blood of either nation, diverse horrible
murders, the exyle of the Scottish Queen, and the transposing of the realm,
to the rule of an infant, under the government of a bastard. But what
unfortunate ends, this usurper and sundry others there set up for regentes
have come unto, is manifest to the world, and the great murders that have
sprung, through the seed of dissension first sown by this pacifier, have not
ceased eue^ with the slaughter of that queen, but will end the lives of many
before they be ended.

Now, as one that of hatred unto idleness, would rather choose to be occupied
in iniquity, then to offend in slothe, in the mean while, that these
dissentions were entretained in Scotland, considering that by the marriage of
the French king unto the Scottish queen, their two realms were lynked
together, and that the French king was but an orphane, he neglected not his
opportunity, to bring France, to stand in as good terms as Scotland, and
therefore he sent over Sir Nicolas Throgmorto^, to persuade such French unto
rebellion as he found to be mutinous, and disco^tented: and for furtherance
thereof, he promised them assistance of money, and munitio^, out of England. The
which promise, was accordingly performed. For M. Cecill seldom failed, to
keep his word in any such couuenant, and the seduced French, so well kept tutch
on the other side, that they proceeded unto a very flatt rebellion, and so
purchased the new name of Huguenots. Hugenotes.
But this assistance not being found sufficient, the more to engage the realm
of England in that cause, the Huguenots were wrought to deliver unto the
Queens hands, the towns of Newhauen, Diepe, and diverse others: the
accepta^ce whereof, some of the ancient nobility of the realm (that yet
remained of the council) utterly misliked, and aleaged, that it was an ill
president to assist the rebels of other princes, least the like might be offered
unto the Queen: which considerate council auailed little with him, that me^t
to make this, no more but an introduction to greater mischieues. For Vaughan,
Pellam, and one Portinato, an Italian, were sent over to take the view of
Newhauen, and these returned with relation, that the English were able with
2000. to defend it against all the world: and here upon the matter was
resolved, notwithstanding all former alleagations: and forward it went, but not
without a vizard: for their was a book written in justification of that
action, to signify to the world, that the intention of the English, was but to
keep the possession of that town until the king came to age: as though the
master of the wards in England, Cecill.
had had the wardship of the French king also. And another reason was, for that
the other party (to wit the princes and peers of the realm, that were of the
kings council) did mean to bring strangers into the country, from whom (of
all other places) they had great care to preserve this town: whereupon a very
difficill question might be moved, to wit, whether the English in those days
were more natural Frenchmen then other strangers. But leaving the resolution
of this doubt, certain it is, that there were sent over unto Newhauen 4000.
men, which were but 2000. more then were needful to withstand all the world:
perhaps to remain in provision against Nouus orbis, which peradventure might
come against it also, but how this town was defended from France only, by
the shame-full abandoning thereof it did appear. And this loss was not
vnaccompagned with a greater evil, for the soldiers that returned back again
into England, brought with them such a plague of pestilence, as generally
infected the most parts of the realm, and in the city of London, and the
suburbs, there died in 12. months, 20000. persons. And the very Huguenotes
themselves, abhorring the fraudule^t dealinges of the English, having obtained
a peace and perdon of their king, became the very first, that bent their forces
to expulse them, wherein may be noted, with what firm amity the English and
French are united, in the discordant unity of the new Gospel. It is further
to be observed, that the French king fynding the English (whose name among the
french people is so odious) to have gotten footing in Normandy, to the end
that he might be delivered of them in that province, offered to deliver the
town of Calis presently back again, into the Queens possession: The which he
was not bound to do, until certain years were expyred, and this offer by the
only persuasion of Cecill was refused, who told the Queen, that she might well
keep the one, and recover the other: but in fine all was lost. For the English,
as is already touched, dishonorablye forsook Normandy, and the French hostages
that lay in England for the rendering of Calis, were privily let go again into
France (and as it is very probable) by the only device and woorking of M.
Cecill. The matter of Newhauen, being thus begun with injustice and ended with
shame, the authors practizes for the maintenance of the French rebellio^s,
there withal ended not. But he had gained the skill, better to contriue the
execution of his own plots, under the authority of the state, and to be
least seen, in those things, that most he prosecuted. And there fore
procured, that with diverse great sommes of money from England, diverse troops of
Germans were leuyed from time to time, and brought into France, for the
assistance of the Huguenots: by which means, the confederatie between the
English and them, was now grown so strong, that they would never in any treaty
with their king, conclude any conditions without the counsel and consent of
their English confederates (as it was always manifestly fonnde, and proved)
By whose crafty direction they were so governed, that they ever obtained more
by making their peace, then by the success of their war. And at such time as
the opportunity served not to stir up the Huguenotes against the king, they
let not to stir up his own brother, and the house of Montmorancie against
him, for the prosecuting whereof, the brother of the said Montmorancie, and the
Prince of Condie came into England, and there received the sum of 50.
thousand pou^des: which was past over by exchange, by way of Antwerp, and
Colen, for the first leuy of men, and bringing in of Casimire. By means of
which forces, the king was constrained to give unto his brother, Aniow, Main,
Towrain, and Tours, whereby his partage was made greater, the^ any brother to
any king of Frannce before him.

Now when by this means the French king was thus-much feebled, then was the
said Duke of Aniow brought into England, to be made the make-fyre between the
two most potent realms of Christendom, Spain, and France: but under the
color and countenance of matrimony: which being in the end converted into a
mock-mariage: Monsieur received his errand to go into the low countries of the
king of Spain, and there was he made, Antiduke of Brabant, the which laudable
device, if any in England had co^triued except M. Cecill, or if it had ever
been practiced in any other princes time the^ in this, it could have been no
less then high treason. For that, to put an heir apparent of France in
possession of Flaunders, is a matter of no less moment, the^ to give dooble
strength unto an ancient enemy, and to leave England, for a future breakfast,
unto a French king. But it pleased God soon to quench the fire, that mo^sieur
was sent to kindle. For the new duke of Brabant, being subdued by his
subjects, was in the nonage of his reign, forced with much dishonor, to
return into France. Where the remembrance of the deceatful dealinges of
England, and the shame that lately he had sustained in the low countries, did
make his own indiscretions apparent unto himself: and so aggrauated his
sickness, that the revenge which he threatened unto England, he was feign to
leave unto God, and his duchy of Brabant, unto the right owner: For soon
after his arryuall in France, with very much grief of mind he died.

Monsieur being thus departed this world, it was necessary, that some new
occasion were sought out, for the continuance of M. Cecill his eternal
resolution, To sovv sedition.
which the sinister practizes past, and the iniquities of the time present,
suffered not to be o^g sought for. For he foorwith discovered, that the French
king had entretained an il opinion, of the princes of the house of Guyse, unto
the which house, albeit that the King and his brethren, the late kings before
him, had been as much beholding, D. Espernon.
as a king could be unto his subjects: yet by the suggestion of a lewd
mignion, all their manifold deserts were ungratefully forgotten.

And then for the better now rishing of these dislikes, an extraordinary
league of amity was concluded with the french King, who soon after, became so
attentive unto good instructions, that he committed most horrible murders,
upon two of the princes of the said house: and what end himself shortly after
came unto, is manifest enough.

But to leave Scotland and France in those terms, whereunto they are now
led: we will come unto Spain, as to the matter of greatest moment, and the
subject of this discourse. The King whereof, having left the Q. of England,
presently upon Q. Mary's deceasse, in full possession of that kingdom, and by
sundry demonstratio^s given proof of his entire love and amity unto her: and
also of his firm intention to continue the old concord, that had so long
endured between the kings of England, and the house of Burgundy, being also
at peace with the French king, and having placed for the government of the
Netherlandes, the Duchess of Parma, he departed into Spain.

And albeit (as it is well known) he has ever been a prince, that by nature is
disposed unto peace, yet considering the greatness of the Turk, and his
incessant attemptes in the inuading of Christendom, whereof some universal
danger might be feared to ensue, he determined to employ such means as God
had given him, to withstand the intention of this common enemy. The which soon
after, he began to put in practice, as hereafter shall be declared.

But this course of proceeding lyked not him, that had designed his plots unto
other purposes, and that rather sought to woork some special damage to the
king of Spain, then to have the pote^cie of the Turck diminished. And
therefore for an introduction thereunto, to make him odious unto the people,
certain players were permitted to scof and jest at him, upon their common
stages. And the like was used in contempr of his religion: first, to make it no
better the^ Turkishe, by annexing unto the very psalms of David (as though
the prophet himself had been the author thereof) this ensuing meeter.

Preserve us lord by thy dear word,
From Turck and Pope defend us lord,
That both, would thrust out of his throne,
Our lord Jesus Christ, thy dear son.
And after, by making it far more odious and woors, then was the religion of
Mahomet. As diverse ministers, did at diverse times insinuate unto the people.
And one of them in a sermon at Paul's cross, affirmed that it was a more
better act to assist Turks, then Papists. For the which words, the L.
Buckhurst the same day reproved him, at the shirif of Londons table: but M.
minister stood unto his tacling, and had (as it seemed) learned his lesson, of
the superinte^dent of Winchester, Horn.
who published in a printed book, that it was better to swear unto the Turk
and turkery, then unto the Pope and popery, and that the Pope is a more
perilous enemy to Christ, then the Turk. But in the meanewhyle it is a good
Gospel, that makes him that tearheth us to believe that Christ is the son
of God, and savior of the world, and him by whose means, our forefathers were
baptized in the name of the Father, Son, and holy Ghost, to be woors then he,
that denies Christ to be the son of God, and constreyneth Christians to
renounce their christendom.

These preparatiues being thus made, the Moors that inhabited the kingdom of
Granada, were excited to rebellion. Unto whom, although the English would not
openly send forces of men, yet they sent them succors of powder, shot,
artillery, and other munition of war. There were also, Jane d Albret.
certain French pirates, that under color of authority from the Q of Nauar^
(that then was) the prince of Condie, the Shatillion, and others, were sent
forth to rob and endomage the king of Spain, and his subjects and all
these: had free passage and entrance, to and from the ports and havens of
England. And soon after, one Kirkham, and diverse other English of the
westcountrey, were permitted to go forth to rob and spoil the Spaniardes,
whereof the Spanish Ambassador then resident in England, instantly demanding
redress and restitution, was denied of either. And the goods thus taken by
piracie, were brought into diverse towns west ward, and there openly sold.

But in the mean while, that these less injuries were continued, a matter of
far greater mischief was practiced, to wit, the rebellion of the kings
natural subjects of his Netherlandes. Where the people, by reason of their
great wealth, were brought unto pride, and the nobillitie through ouer-lauish
expenses, declyned unto poverty, and the newness and liberty of heresy, ready
to find acceptance with either party, they were the sooner and more easily
seduced by the English. The first attempt, being begu^ by certain rogues and
vagabo^des, appointed to the spoiling of Churches, left the name of Gheuses,
to those rebels ever after: Name of Cheuses.
and these Gheuses being thus stirred up, there was (to begin withal) 60,
thousand pound sterling, sent over unto the prince of Orange, for the leuying
of those Ryters, that he brought against the duke of Alua. The which sum of
money, was paid by sir Thomas Gressam in Antwerp.

By these attemptes and practizes, the king was co^streyned to withdraw the
forces that he had intended and bent against infidells, to employ them in his
own countries against his own subjects. With whom, being now enbranled in
wars, there was sent by sea from Spain for the payment of his soldiers
about the sum of 600. Some write 800000.
thousand ducats, the which money, was ceased upon in the west parts of
England, notwithstanding the Q. had given her pasporte for the saf passage
thereof: by which means, the kings affairs were greatly let and hindered, and
thereupon followed, a general arrest of all merchants ships, and goods, in
the low countries. And this action tending to some further great
inconuenie^ce, the council assembled at Hampton court, and consulted at
sundries times in the Queens presence, whether it were best openly to break
with the king of Spain or not, and after long deliberation, the whole body of
the council concluded, not to break with him in any wise. But to make
present restitution of the said money, for diverse causes: and the rather, for
that they had but late before displeased the French king, in assisting his
Huguenotes, and taking his towns, and might not without imminent peril,
incurr the enmity of two such pote^t princes. But notvvithstanding this their
general resolution, being also consented unto by the Queen, M. Cecill did
afterward secretly persuade her unto the contrary, whereby the decree made
by the whole body of the council, was broken: contrary to the prerogative of
the council of England, which is known to be greater, the^ the authority of
any kings council else in Europe. And hereupon was the arrest of merchants
goods continued, and a stay of trafyke, between Spain, England and the lovv
countries, for three years together, to the undoing and detriment, asvvell of
many of the subjects of England, as of sundry the marchantes of the other
countries. But in the mean while, al such fugitives and traitors, as had in
the low countries committed any enormious crimes, or could pilfer, or
violently rob or take away, any thing from the king, or his other subjects,
were received and harbored in England, which was now become the open
receptacle of churchrobbers, and priest-kilers.

Yea the very belles of the steeples of Churches, were carried into England,
and there cast into artillery. And one called Monsieur de Lumay, being also
fled thither, received there such instructions, that he came over into Holland
and surprised the town of Briell, which was the first town in all those
parts, rhat was possessed by manifest rebellion, and the president that
Flushing, and diverse other towns shortly after followed. And to assist them in
these proceedinges, there were sent over with troops of English forces,
Morgan, Sir Humfrey Gilbert, and Chester. And then followed North, Cotton,
Candish, and Norris, all being Coronells, and coming the therewith whole
regiments. And albeit these supplies were still continued, and men mustred and
pressed perforce to go over unto this service, yet was it colourably shadowed
to be don without consent of superior authority, and the sending of the^
thereby dis-auowed. But on the other side, when any English for their encreasse
of knowledge in military affairs did come over, or did inte^d to come ouet to
serve the king of Spain, they were either before their departure, or upon
their return, imprisoned and punished. I may not here omit, that after the
wars of Barbary, made by Sebastian king of Portugal (wherein the
Mahometaines were assisted with munitio^ against the Christians by the English,
and thesaid King was slain) the nobillitie and people of the realm of
Portugal, having according to their laws and customs, received the Cardinal
(as the eldest of the blood royal) to be their king, and he being very aged,
and not lykely to marry and have issue, were entered into consultation about the
succession of the crown, which being understood in England, and also that the
Cardinal was enclyned unto the king of Spain, as his next heir, there was an
Ambassador forth-vvith sent over from England, to offer the Portugales
assistance, for the exclusion of the king of Spain.

But this and the former practizes, being cloked with much conning, were
either deemed able to pass unespied, or else these kinds of molestatio^s were
not thought sufficient* And therefore it was held necessary, to attempt the
robbing of the kings treasure else where, the better therevvith to maintain
his rebels against him in the low countries. And albeit M. Haukins and some
others, had had but ill success in such attemptes before, there was now one
Franncis Drake sent forth unto the West Indies, where in the straight of
Darien, understanding of certain mules, that were to pass laden with gold
and silver, from Panama to Nombre de Dios, he put himself in ambuscade with an
hundred shot, and set upon two whole companies of mules, which came only
with their driuers: and there very resolutely took away their gold, A
terrible encounter.
not being able to carry the silver with him through the mountains. And
coming two days after to the house of Crosses, he slew 6. or. 7. marchantes,
and valiantly set the house on fire, vvherin was burnt the value of 200.
thousand ducats in merchandise. And so he retired home again toward
England, where (not long after for that he had given such good proof of his
dexterity) it was determined that he should be employed again, as being the
fitest man to atchiue an enterprise of stealing. And therefore with ships
well furnished and provided for his purpose, he was sent forth to atte^d and
lie in wait, for more of the Kings, and his subjects treasure. And in the
southe seas, on the back-syde of America, where no pirates had been before
him, and therefore the less provision made to vvithstand them, there he and
his company, met with a ship in the port of Valparizo, vvherin were but 8.
Spaniardes, who taking the English for freindes, received them on board,
where being once entered, they courageously took out of it 37. thousand ducats
in gold. And at another place called Taurapaza, they boldly ventred on shore
unto a Spaniard that lay a sleep, and had lying beside him the value of 4.
thousand ducats in 13. vvedges of silver: all which they overcame and carried
vavay, courteously leaving the Spaniard as they found him. They ryfled also 12.
shipes that lay at ancker, in the haven of Lyma, and cutting all the ropes and
cables, let the^ drive unto the seas. And in another ship called the Cagafuego,
they found precious stones, jewels, 80 pound weight of gold, and 20. tonne of
silver: where of having put themselves in possession, after some smaller
pilferies, and sacking of the town of Gnatulca, M. Drake and his company,
returned from this very hot and hardy service, and in the end, brought all this
treasure into England. Where he was so well vvelcome, and so liberal in the
division of shares to some Courtiers, that notvvithstanding the gallovves
claimed his interest, it never gat so great a brauado, for in very despite of
wapping, he was at De^ford rewarded with the honor of knighthoode, and in the
same ship, wherewith he had been abroad a ro^ing.

And albeit that now and then, some poor pirate or other (rhroughe the
importunate suit of the parties endomaged) have been cast away upon wapping
shore, yet was their sildome or never, any restitution made of the stolen
goods. Neither should such great mis-hap have betyded those pirates, had not
their chiefest offense been, in stealing to little. For M. Drake himself, and
diverse other principal Captains, have been much disgraced, at such times, as
they returned home with small booties.

But this good success of an il enterprise, gave great desire to the like
attempt again. And the new knight of the order of theui^g, by the inequal
deuisio^ of shares, having, had perhaps the least part alloted unto himself,
was ready enoughe to undertake it. And not long after, he was sent forth with a
greater number of men and ships, wherewith he arrived at the I Will of Spagnola,
and there sacked the town of S. Domingo, and other places: where he committed
many barbarous cruelties, upon religious men and women, and returning from
Carth agena, took in his way sundry ships, the people wher-of, he cast into
the seas.

These continual robberies, and spoils made by the English, upon the King of
Spain, and his subjects, in and about his Indies, grew in the end to be so
many and so ordinary, that even the very remembrance that it was injustice, and
the every* forgotten. And for their greater shame and co^fusio^, they have not
let to put down many of their actions them selves in print, to the view of
the world. And among others which for brevity I must omit, M. Thomas Candish
in his letter to the lord Chamberlain writes, that he had nauigated all
along the coast of Chili, Peru, and Nouaspagna. Where he made great spoils,
and burnt and sunck 19. sail of Ships, small and great, and burnt and
spoiled all the villages and towns, that ever he landed at: and that he took
a ship of the Kings at Califorma, wherein was the sum of the some is omitted
in the printed copy.
in treasure, and so much other costly wares as he was not able to carry away:
and therefore took all the treasure, and set the ship with the other goods
on fire. But I will here end these matters, and to avoid prolixitie omit
sundry of the same kind, which by very many have been put in practice. And
albeit that every one of the^, has not returned with like spoil, yet
certain it is, that there were never any western voyages made from England,
these many years past, but (howsoever they were in outward show diuulged) the
very mere meaning and intention of the^ all, was to rob the king of Spain
or his subjects, of their Indian treasure. In the continuance whereof for
so-many years together, as the king never, attempted any act of hostility,
either against the Queen her dominions, or subjects, which no prince in the
world could have forborne to do, after so great prouocatio^: so the English on
the othersyde, did contrariwise deem, that the to-many injuries which they
had done him, were al to fevv. And therefore they resolved to offend him much
more, and in a far more apparent and inexcusable manner, in the sight of all
the world, then in any their former actions, how manifest soever.

For when the Archtraitor to his King, and destroyer of his country (the P. of
Orange) was taken out of the world, and the head-lesse rebels of the
Netherla^des, first seeking patronage of the K. of Denmarck, after of the
French king, and being by both those justly denied and rejected, the English,
dismasking themselves of all former vizardes and shadows, did ouertly receive
them into their protection, to defend them in all open hostillitie, against
their natural and lawful sovereign, the king of Spain. And thereupon they
resolved, to put themselves in possession of sundry the principal port
towns, and other places of those parts. And by a printed declaration, went
about by diverse weak and indirect reasons, to justify that action: whereof
among others, one was, in respect of the ancient league between the kings
of England, and the house of Burgundy, and the people of either of those
princes: as though the Q. of England might by prerogative of that league,
maintain the subjects of the Netherlandes, against the King of Spain, their
sovereign, and the chief Prince of the house of Burgundy.

An-other reason was, to the end the natural people of the country, should
not be oppressed by strangers, as though the English* Scottish, Germans, and
others brought in by the States, were less strangers, then the Spanish.

But to confirm and make these reasons more sufficient, M. Norris was first
sent over to take possession of certain port towns, fortes, and other places
in Holland, and Zealand, and soon after the Earl of Leicester (whose
experience in chamber woorck exceeded his practice in war, and the L. Audley,
the L. VVilloughbie, and the L. North and sundry other of name* came over
with an army of 10. thousand men, as well for the garnisons of the places now in
their possession, as also to come unto the field against the forces of the king
of Spain. And in what sort, the supplies of the garnisons in Holland,
Zealand, Brabant, and Flaunders, have since from time to time been continually
maintained from England, as also the English troops for the field being
pre^ently in our view and memory, I will omit the recytall.

And thus at the last, by this ouert entrance of the English into hostility,
there was more manifest occasion given unto the king, to use the like again,
and to attempt that, whereunto no former injuries could provoke him. And the
matter now coming to an open war on either side, either party was to use his
advantage as he best could. Che piglia piglia, and che non puo, suo danno. And
therefore omitting that which since has been done in those parts, I will
briefly touch the Portugal voyage, not in comparing it with the double faced
actions before rehearsed, but as an ordinary expedition of war.

It shall be nedelesse to examine the right, that Don Anthonio pretends to the
crown of that country, since it is soon answered in his illegitimation.
Which being by M. Cecill dispensed withal, albeit he be but vicar general,
and not the supreme head himself, requires no further question. Don Anthonio
then, accompaigned with Sir John Norrice, and Sir Frauncis Drake, departed from
England with above 20. thousand soldiers, and mariners: Don Anthonio with full
resolution to take possession of Portugal, but M. Drake, with a far other
secret designement, which being vttred by him self unto the queen, I would be
loathe here to repeat, were it not for fear, of leaving the reader in erronius
suspitio^s. M. Drake forsoothe, did promise the Q. very co^fidently, to bring
the king of Spain to kiss her pantofle, or else to bring him, I know not to
what woeful lamentation But such was the disastrous effect of that journey, that
neither Don Anthonio obtained his expected kingdom, nor Captain Drake would
once enter on shore in Portugal to take the king of Spain with him.

Whereof two mighty inconveniences have ensued, the one is, that the realm of
Portugal is still possessed by the right owner: and the other, that the
Queens pantofle is yet vnkist, by the king of Spain.

Nevertheless, excepting some 2. or 3. thowsa^d, all the rest of the soldiers
and mariners, showed more valor the^ their leaders, for that they never
returned back again, but either remained still in Portugal, or about that
coast. It is further to be noted, that albeit in that voyage, they could not
effectuate their desire against their enemies, they did yet without partiality
so set upon their freindes, that they seized upon 50. ships of the
Easterlinges which were bound to Spain with merchandise, and carried those away
with them, and so returned home unto Plimouthe. Where enen at their very
landing, there happened a more stra^g encounter, the^ before in the whole journey
they had found. For the women of Plymouth, whose husbands by ill usage were
lost in that voyage, being armed with distaues and other unusual weapons,
without any respect unto kingship, or knighthoode, began so fiersly to assault
Do^ Anthonio, and Drake, that they were feign to defend them selves by force of
legs. This voyage being thus ended, the progress thereof was printed and
published, both in Latin, and English. But the author thereof (in mine opinion)
might well have spared his pains, because all me^ manifestly knew without
book, what success the said voyage had had. What sithence has been do^ne,
in the sending of Ships and forces toward the Terceraes and else where, and
the successes thereof being ryf in our memory, I will here omit: and proceed
to give the reader such satisfaction as the scope of the premises have
directed me unto.

Not withstanding the manifold injuries, done by the English unto the king of
Spain, where-of many have here been recyted, and the most of the^ do lie open
to the view of the whole world, it is strange, that they cannot yet conteyne
their malice against him, within the limits of civil speeches, who not only
permitting every hedgeminister, and co^temptible person, to rail upon him at
his pleasure, to make this base kind of dealing more authentical, have not
let in the very preambles, and fore frontes of sundry late proclamations,
to note him to be ambitious, Of Noue^ber 1591.
an usurper, and a Tyrant: and in this later to call him, the only disturber of
the universal peace of Christendom. Which unseemly and disordered speeches,
does il beseme the public writings of Princes, which ought to have no
affinity with defamatorie libells. A thing which the King of Spain, has
ever detested to do against the^, or other his enemies: who leaves the
directnes of his cause to sustain it self, without the credit, which might be
given thereunto by railing.

Let us therefore now consider, whether thesaid King has sought the
disturbance of the state of England, or of any other potentate or state
Christian: or whether any may justly complain, that ever he has endeavored to
patronize himself of, their crowns or countries, or to encroache or
incorporate ought of theirs unto his, considering his incomparable greatness,
and the near situation of his, and their dominions.

Let us look first into Italy, whether the territories of the Church, Venice,
Piemont, Florence, Genua, or any other prince or state else, have cause to
complain. Look whether he has been offensive to Lorraine, Treuers, Cleue,
Cole^, Liege, or to the Esterlinges. Did not the realm of Portugal (next unto
him) stand in it self, with all the isles and remote places, belonging to
the same, in all peace and security, til by just descent the title of all fell
unto him? and do not the people now live under him (excepting the trooble they
sustain by the English) in as great felicity as ever they did under any their
former princes? what great impude^cie is it then, for any so palpably to
be-lie him, in whom the clean contrary (to their slanderous reproaches) is
most euyde^t? and to the end, that the unjust calumnies of the adversary may be
more apparent: let us also consider the Kings procedinges, as well toward
some other Christian princes, as to the Queen and realm of England in
particular.

First it is very manifest, Anno. 1559.
that after his departure from the low countries, at which time he peaceably
possessed those, and the rest of his kingdoms, and dominions: his firm
resolution was, for the general defense of Christendom, to make war against
the Turk, and other Mahomertaines. And to that end, he first upon his peace
made with France, called all his forces of Spaniardes and others, out of
Flaunders, and sent them into Italy: and thence employed them, against the
enemies of Christianity. First at Pinion de velis, then to Zerbi, then to La
Racha, and other places of Africa. And the Isle of Malta being strongly
besieged, and in very great peril to be lost, he sent thither a great army to
succor it, and defeated the forces of the Turk. He also provided such troops,
for the year ensuing (which he sent thither under the conduct of the Marquis
of Piscara) that the Turk was forced to give over, and leave his second
enterprise: albeit he came very strongly provided, for the taking thereof, and
therein to recover his honor, lost the year before. And after all this, the
king of Spain for the more repose and tranquillity of Christendom, joined in
league against the Turk with the Pope, and the Venetians, whereof followed the
great victory, obtained by Don John de Austria his general, at Lepanto. These
points albeit but briefly touched may serve for a demonstration of his
princely resolution, to maintain the concord of Christians, and to offend
their common enemy. Yea the king of Tunis, being by the Turk expulsed, he
restored him again unto his kingdom.

But most ready he was to give aid and assistance, to Christian princes. When
being oppressed by the insolency of their rebels, they desired his help: and
among others, to the French king. Unto whose aid, he sent in the first
troobles, 3. thousand Spaniardes, who were present at the battle of Dreux.

And afterward from the low countries, he sent the Count of Mansfeild at two
several times, both with horse, and foot. He sent also, the Count of
Arenberg, the Baron of Erge, and diuets others, to assist thesaid king, at
sundry times. All which forces, sent by the King of Spain, from time to time
into France, himself of his princely and liberal mind, ever maintained and
paid at his own charges. And there is nothing that more declares his
moderation, justice, and equity, toward his Christian neighbors, then his
sweet and Christianlyke demeanor, toward the realm of France. Where
neither, by the minorites of the late kings, nor civil discentions of the
subjects, he would take advantage, to challenge or encroache, any part of that
country. Whereas if he had been so greedy and ambitious, as his adversaries
do belly him to be, he would not have omitted in so many oportunities, to have
challenged all France to himself. Who has at this present, the same right by
his daughter, and far more clear, then had sometime the noble prince, King
Edward the third of England, thereunto. And yet as the world sees, he neither
the^, nor now, has chale^ged any such thing at all: and this is a singular
praise and an eternal glory, to this most puissant prince of all ages, and in
this time especially to be maruayled at, that he atte^pteth nothing, nor wageth
any wars, that are not just, honorable, and allowed both by the laws of God
and man. And as touching the Queen of England, I will omit some great and
especial acts of amity, showed by himself unto her, when he was married unto
her sister, whereof her self is not ignorant, but does best know them: And I
will briefly relate some points before touched.

First upon the deceasse of Queen Mary his wife, he gave unto this Queen al
her Iewelles, which rightly appertayned unto himself. And being about the
conclusion of a peace with the French king, after the taking of S. Quintynes,
he dealt very instantly for the rendering of Calis unto the English, insomuch as
without the restoring thereof, he refused the accord, and stood so resolute
upon this point, that in the end the French were feign to tell him, that
albeit the English did solicit him to include the delivery of Calis in his
peace, yet had they secretly already concluded their peace with them, without
that condition. And this was done by a close practice of M. Cecill, who sent
over one Guido Caualcante an Italian, to conclude it without the knowledge of
the Queens Ambassadors, who were there appointed to solicit it. Which
extreme duble dealing, could not yet bread any auersion in his mind against
the English, insomuch, that after they began to fall from the doing unto him,
one injury in the neck of another, which still increased from a few to many,
and from lesser to greater: yet would he never begin any attempt against them,
nor never make so much as any show of any one act of hostility whatsoever,
until such time as they came so far, as to the very taking of his towns into
their own possessions, as is aforesaid. Which is a most great and sufficient
argument, of his grounded affection unto that Queen and country. For most
rarely is it found, that any King or Prince could so continually digest and
ouersee, such great vvronges and injuries, as he has received from England:
and much less himself, that has greater means to revenge them, then any
other potentate living in the world. And had doubtless long since do^ne it,
had it not proceeded of a most singular affection unto that Prince and people,
and hope of redress and amendment.

Thus much may serve to show, whether the King of Spain has sought so many
years to trooble the state of England. But contrariwise, whether the state of
England has so long sought the disturbance of him, and almost of all other
their neighbors, I leave the reader to judge by the premises, and the
confirmation of those, I referr to the testimony of all the nations of Europe,
to the end there may be a sufficient number of witnesses, to check the extreme
impudenof the malicious adversary, In the late proclamation.
who is not ashamed to say, that the repose of Christendom, by the king of
Spaines vvarres, and by no other means, is nowdisturbed: which otherwise
might come to an universal peace. But as touching the universal peace, if it
were to be such as this pacifier would prescribe it unto him, I must needs
confess, that I do greatly doubt whether the king of Spain would thereunto
be persuaded: because in al-lykelyhode, it must be in this manner. Conditions
of an universal peace.
First, that he should recall such forces, as of great compassion unto the
natural people of France, he has sent thither to defend them, against a
relapsed Huguenote, that would make them renegates from the faith, as himself
is.

Secondly, that he should suffer his rebels of Holland and Zealand, quietly to
possess the places they do hold, and to take unto them all the rest of the low
countries also: conditionally, that the English might still keep the
possession of such port towns as they have, and have some half a dosen more
annexed unto them, Thirdly that the English rouers, might peaceably go to his
Indies, and there take away his treasure, and his Indies also. And these few
aricles being thus accorded, then might England France, the Netherlandes, and
Germany, be in far better possibility, to extirpate the Catholyke religion in
Italy, to bring the Moors into Spain, and then to conclude that universal
peace, which passes all understanding: And include in the-same, the great Turk
the king of Fesse, and Marrocco, and other infidells, with whom England is
already leagued.

And thus having declared sundry of the injuries, do^ne by the English, unto
other princes and people, and espetially unto the King of Spain and his
subjects, and also in what laudable, and most honorable manner, the said King
has demeaned himself unto the^, and other his Christian neighbors: It shall
now be necessary, to touch the present estate, wherein the realm of England
stands. The which for the better intelligence of the reader I will reduce
into four points, and in conclusion, it shall manifestly appear, whether
some few persons accused, or their chiefest accuser, are or is the cause, of
the present and expected calamities of England.

The first shall be, touching matters of faith and religion. wherein there was
never such great and wonderful confusion.

The second, touching exterior enemies, whereof the realm had never somany nor
none so puisant.

The third, of the sundry competitors for the crown, and the uncertainty of
the successor.

The fourth and last shall concern the overthrow of the Nobility, and the
general oppression of the people.

THE realm of England has at sundry times been subject, to diverse great
molestations, as well through civil dissentio^, as invasions, and forreyne
wars. And howsoever the vvisdome of the writer of the late Proclamation,
has overmuch presumed upon the readers ignorance, in extoling the continual
peace and tra^quillitie of England, yet if the present state thereof be rightly
looked into, it will be found to exceed all former afflictions what soever. And
first for matters of religion, let us consider what they are come unto. The
Protestantized Caluinisme being but of 33. years antiquity, and peculiarly
chosen and compounded of many, and fully agreeing with none, is now grown unto
such division in it self, as is very wonderful: and being established by
authority of a Parlamentall synod, and advanced unto the high title, of the
glorious Gospel of Christ, has not yet been able so few years, to retain
that credit and esteem, but is grown co^temptible, detected of Idolatry
heresy, and many superstitious abuses, by a purified sort of professors of the
same Gospel. And this contention is yet become more intricate, by reason of a
third kind of Gospellers called Brownistes. Who being directed by greater
feruor of the unholy ghost, do expressly affirm, that the Protestanticall
Church of England, In the co^futation of Brovvnisme.
is not gathered in the name of Christ, but of Antichrist, and that it
woorshipeth not God truly, but after a falls and idolatrous manner: and that if
the Prince or magistrate under her, do refuse or defer to reform the Church,
the people may without her consent, take the reformation into their own
hands. Yea, and that the ministry if their ensue not reformation, may for some
causes excomunicate the Queen. And one William Hacket, affirming that he had
within him the very soul of our Savior, did send his two prophets to depose
her. Into such terms, is the unity of the Gospel now come, insomuch, that
there was never more bitter, and vehement writing, between any Catholics and
Heretykes, then of late there has been between the professors of one same
Gospel, Whose false faith is not only detected in their own words and
writings, scoffed at, and turned by themselves into a fools cote: but
confirmed in the evil lives and conuersations, of their very ministers. And
yet notwithstanding their manifest treasonable atte^pts, dissension in
religion, and practice of evil life, the whole force and rigor of persecution
is bent against the Catholykes, whose great virtue, modesty, and patience,
does manifest in them a far different spirit from the others. They never
discharged pistoles, nor yet threw daggers at preachers in there sermons in
this Queens time, as did the others in the days of Queen Mary. At Paul's
cross.
Neither have they entered into Churches and wounded Ministers at Service, At
west minster.
as one of them did a Priest at Mass in the time of the said Queen. Nor yet
during the reign of the Queen that now is, have they committed any violent
acts in Churches, as Puritaines have not let to do in her own chapel, by
overthrowing, and casting down the ornaments thereof, even in dispight of her.
Neither have they attempted to murder any principal person of her Court, as
did Burchewe, in wounding a Gentleman instead of Sir Christopher Hatton: M.
Haukins.
but have suffered with exceeding patience, the greatest injuries, vexations, and
barbarous usage, that flesh and bloudis able to endure. Only puritaines are
tolerated to say, do, and write what they list: be it either in flat denial of
the Supremacy, or other rebellious actions: and these they can excuse by some
device or other, or else they can call with full exclamation, Dimitte nobis
Barabam, but against Catholykes only they cry, Nos legem habemus, and Crucifige
Crucifige Neither had VVillia^ Hacket been excuted for his blasphemy or
treason, if he had not openly before so many people, pronounced the Queens
deposition. And seeing that so many barbarous laws, as with great diligence
and all extremity, have these many years been used, could nether extinguish
the Catholyke party at home, nor ruin the Semenaries abroad which more and
more have increased, not by force of arms, but by euydent truth: To give the
more color unto a more cruel persecution, the very author of all present and
future mischiues, does seek by imaginary fears, to draw men's
considerations from greater calamities and miseries, and to turn the hatred
which himself has deserved, upon a few poor Priests and Jesuits, by
publishing that they are sent into the realm, to persuade men to assist the
King of Spain in an intended invasion, whereas they are not otherwise sent,
but to exercise their priestly office and function, as they go unto the Indies,
and other places where the exercise of their religion is also prohibited.

Neither are they in their Seminaries otherwise exercised, then in other
Scooles and Colleges: as are also the Germans and other nations, in their
Seminaries in Room and else where: which is not of their countryme^ falsely and
maliciously said to be in treason and sedition, as England only, and no place
else does proclaim.

And it is wounderfull to consider, that notwithstanding the odious clamours of
treasonable practizes daily raised against these men: it is well known, Cecill
and other his instruments.
that some of their greatest persecutors have not let, to offer free
liberty and secret protections unto priests, to reroncyle Catholykes, to say
Mass, to hear Confessions, and to do such like offices appertaining to their
function, where, and to whom they listed: conditionally, that they should
afterward discover unto the^ in what places, and with what persons they had
been. Yea they have not let to appoint some of their spies to go to
confession, of purpose to apprehend and betray their ghostly fathers. Such is
the impious treachery of the adversaries, that will not let to urge men to
the breach of their own laws: which argues, that it is not sincerity and
zeal of religion that they stand upon, when they will directly apoint the
contrary unto theirs to be exercysed, as also, that themselves do little fear
such treasons, as they pretend to be wrought by priests, when they seek to
license them, and not to prohibit them: which proves also, that themselves do
well know, that Catholics are exercysed in the offices of their religion, and
not in practizes of treason as they untruly report.

And yet for confirmation of the ill opinion they do labor to make the people
to have of them, the Archpolitike has fraudulently provided, that when any
Catholic or Priest is araigned, the enditeme^t is ever farced with many odious
matters, as of conspiratie, killing the Queen, stiring the subjects to
rebellion, drawing them from their obedience, and the like: and yet when they
come to proofs, they can prove nothing in the world, but only that he is
Priest, or has relieved priests and nothing else being witnessed, and somtymes
that not known neither, but by the priests, or other parties own confession,
the Jury cries guilty to all the endytement, and the whole enditement is
enroled, as if the party had been justly convicted of all that therein is
contained. And upon this do they so impudently report, that none have been
condemned but for treason, as they say their enditementes do show in the
records. Whereas if they had recorded no more then had been proved, as in
all law and justice they were bound, they should not find any one priest (
Ballard only excepted) that ever had any imagination of treason proved against
him. And notwithstanding all the aforesaid enfarced treasons and conspiracies,
it is commonly seen, that almost at every araignment and execution, Catholics
are offered their lives and liberties, if they will but go to the Church: which
doubtless can-be no satisfaction for any temporal treason, but only for
matters of religion. VVhereofno man of any understanding can remain ignorant,
except such as was the wise gentleman, that told a friend of his that he had
seen a Priest executed, that let not at the very time of his death, to
co^mitt High treason: and being asked what it was, answered that he began to
say his Pater noster in Latin. Is it possible quoth the other? I assure you
quoth this party, it is out of all doubt, for he began to say it before a
multitude of witnesses and would have said it unto the end, but that as hap
was, the hangman was ready to dispatche him, before he had half done. This
diepe conceited person, and such as was his compagnion, will without any great
scruple believe the proclamation, in saying that none are put to death for
religion, but for treason. And the adversary in so much laboring to detain
from Catholics, the deserved honor and glory of the cause for which they
suffer, does thereby proclaim his own iniquity and injustice, to all the
world, making that to be new Treason, which is nothing else but old faith and
religion. A thing as repugnant unto common sense, as if the Pope should make
murder, theft, or extorsion to be Heresy. Yet such is his great and absurd
impude^ce, that there is no treason that seems greater, nor no crime more
unpardonable in England, then there to be a Catholic, nor yet any offense so
severely punished. There was never Scythian, nor savage Tartar, that could use
more inhumaine cruelty then to rip up the bodies of innocent men, being
perfectly alive, to tear out their entrails, to be consumed with fire. There
was never Turk, nor Barbarian, that imposed upon Christians so great and
continual a tribute, The year divided into 13. months.
as twenty pounds, for every eight-and-twentie days absence, from their
Moskeyes. Nor there were never Arrians, or other enemies, since the general
persecutions of the Roman Emperors, that more vexed, spoiled imprisoned, and
tortured Catholics, then does now the state of England. And thus have I
abreuiated unto the reader, a huge volume of the present lamentable state of
religion.

TOuching the second point, concerning the number of exterior enemies, how
might the case be other with England, then now it is, seeing that during the
continuance of thirty and three years, they never sent forth any one
soldier, nor never drew sword in any just quarrel, or honorable action. They
never sought to endomage the Turk, the common enemy of Christendom, nor never
defended any lawful prince or King in all the world: But have invented, and
prosecuted, the most dishonorable, inglorious, unjust, and tyranicall actions,
that ever were practiced by any Christian state.

When the Queen of Scotland was in her own realm, and they acknowleged her
for the lawful prince of that country, did they give aid unto her, or unto her
rebels? In the times of Frauncis, Charles, and Henry, the late Kings of
France, was their assistance given to the^ whom they knew to be lawful
Kings, or to their rebels? and as for the succor they do now give unto
Nauarr and his Huguenotes, it is no otherwise then it was before, when they
acknowledged the^ to be rebels. In this long rebellion in the low countries,
whether have they taken part with the King their old co^federate, or with
Orange and the other rebels? when Sebastian king of Portugal warred with the
Mahometaines of Africa, gave they aid unto the Christians, or unto the
infidells?

And since in the realm of Portugal, gave they help unto the lawful prince,
or to the bastard his rebel? In the wars of Colen, did the English succur
the lawful Bishop, or the unlawful deposed apostata? And if we shall look
into sea matters, see who it is, that has set up a public piracie, to spare
neither friend, nor foe. Ask the Spanish, the French, the Scottish, the
Flemish, the Hau^ce towns, yea the Indies, and further parts of the earth,
who they are, that do so continually rob and spoil the^. If the English had
but only procured the king of Spain to be their enemy, they needed not to have
sought any others: for neither England, nor any other Christian country else,
has ever had any so great. And as they have made espetiall choice of the
enmity of the greatest, so have they employed the time of 33* years to
deserve it.

And as for the King of Scotland, albeit he do dissemble among many less
injuries, one so great, as the cutting of of his own mothers head, yet some of
his own nation, being of good intelligence, have said unto strangers in
defense of their Kings honor: that albeit they of England have cut of the head
of his mother, he must not therefore by vn-tymely revenge, cut him-self from
the possibility of that crown* But having once obtained the same, he will then
fall to the cutting of of the heads of those, that assented to that action:
and to the confiscatio^ of their lands and goods, therewith to reward his
freindes and followers: and so demonstrate unto the world, that he could
politikely choose a time convenient to discharge such duty, as is incident unto
the honor and reputation of a King.

And touching France, albeit that by the death of the three late Kings, the
injuries do^ne unto them cannot be by them remembered, yet the people of the
realm, that were participa^t of the wro^ges, are still living: in whom the
desire of revenge, is of late newly reuyued, through the assisting of the
Huguenote of Nauarr, their capital enemy, but not their lawful King.

And last of all, which of al other is the greatest, there extreme enmity with
the chief Bishop, and pastor of Gods Church. Whereof ensues their general
discord with all the Catholic Christians of the world.

Thus the realm of England, being brought into breach of amity, not only with
the Church of God, but with all their old alies and freindes, if we now
consider with whom they are joined in true freindship, we shall find them to
be so few as none at all, since they have neither spared, to offend friend nor
foe. But if we look what new confederates they have chosen, instead of the
old, we shall see them to be the great Turk, the kings of Fesse, Marocco, and
Algiers, or other Mahometains and Moors of Barbary, all professed enemies to
Christ. Against whom, some of the most noble and famous kings of England,
went in person with great armies, and obtained such victories, as will for ever
recomend their glory to all posterities. They are also in league with a few
Bere-bruers, and Basketmakers of Holland, The States.
and Zealand, with a company of Apostataes, and Huguenotes of France, and with
their feed pe^sioner, the Chau^celor of Scotland, who by abusing of the King,
has gotten credit to woork his ruin. And the English thus leagued with
infidells, heretics, and rebels, cannot yet presume of any true frindship of
them in their hearts. For the French albeit they be Huguenotes, yet are they
still French unto the English, and as heretofore, so even of late they have
showed themselves unto such, as were sent from England to assist them. The
states of Holland, and Zealand, if they could possibly thurst out the English,
they would not let to do it. And it is well known, that some of them of
chiefest authority have secretly concluded and resolved, either presently upon
the Queens deceasse, or so soon as any opportunity serves, to bring all
their forces together to attempt it.

The freindship of Scotland, although it have cost many English angels, yet
will it prove Scottish in the end. And the great Turk and his consorts, may be
by the English excited to invade some parts of Christendom, near unto them
adjoining (as already upon such persuasion they have attempted) but good unto
England they can do none, albeit the English would excha^ge their Geneua Bible,
for the Turkish Alcora^, because their situations are to far distant. But how
so ever their new freindes may congratulate with them, their old alies may
rather rejoice in having their enmity, then their amity. For that by the
unhappy and mischievous ends, of somany of their late confederates, it is
observed that to be in league with England, is malu^ ome^. Et for proof
thereof, I will aleadge some examples.

First the Earl of Arren in Scotland, after that he had by the espetiall
suggestion of the English, prosecuted the rebellions and dissentions in his
country, became distracted of the use of reason, and has these 30. years
remained madd.

The Earl of Murray, bastard brother to the Scottish Queen, was slain with an
harquebushe, in the town of Lythquo.

The Earl of Lenox was stabbed with daggers,

The Earl of Mar was poisoned.

The Earl of Murton behedded: All which were regents and governors of the
realm, and set up by the English. For I will omit recytall of diverse other
Lords, and gentlemen, that followed their factions, whose ends also were
violent: Besides the great numbers that have perished in diverse battles.

In France, the Prince of Coundie was slain at the battle of Iarnac.

The Admiral Shatilian, massacred at Parris, with mumbers of his consorts.

The Cardinal of Shatilian his brother, was poisoned in England.

The Count of Mountgomery, behedded.

Monsieur the Duke of Aniow, brother to the late King, died of an extraordinary
sickness, supposed to be poisoned.

And what end the last French King came unto is manifest enough. As also that
Lanowe, being joined with the English forces in Britany, was there slain.

And to what end Nauarr shall come (being as firmly leagued with the English as
were the others) is yet to be expected.

In the low Countries, the Count of Lumay before mentioned, that surprised the
town of Briel, and had been the murderer of some hundteths of Priests, being
bitten in the arm by an English dog of his own, died mad and raging, in the
town of Liege.

The Prince of Orange, that could neither be warned by the unfortunate ends,
of three of his own brethren, Henry, Adolf, and Lodowick, nor by one or two
atte^pts made upon his own person, was lastly slain with a pistol in the
town of Delf, in Holland.

THe third calamity whereunto England is brought, is of the vulgar multitude
unseen, because it is yet of them unfelt. And that is, the great confusion, of
somany competitors to the crown, both within, and without the realm. Which
must needs prognosticate such slaughter and cruel murders, as never were in
that, nor in any other country, for such quarrel. When the crown of England
was in contention only, between the two howses of Yorck, and Lancaster, how
long it lasted, how many of the blood Royal and Nobility lost their lives, and
what great numbers of thowsandes were slain, the histories of those days can
declare. But far greater extremities are we now to expect, among somany do
mesticall, and some externe competitors. Every one of which, thinking himself
to be justly the first, ca^ aleage many causes for the exclusion of the others.
And therefore in all lykely hoode, each one of those, that live within the
realm and I Will, will not forbear hereafter to attempt by what means he may,
to prefer himself, and to depresse the others. For the crown remaining among
so many in equal balance, and each almost in like possibility, who of them
is it, that will not dare to adventure the uttermost of his means, for the
gayning of no less a thing, then is the kingdom of England? And what
authority of any dissolved council shall prohibit any of the competitors to
attempt the same upon, the dereasse of the Queen? What great appare^ce is
there then, of the effusion of the blood of many thowsands, and to what
desolation is the realm like to be brought? how feigned will then this present
seeming peace be found, when it shall conclude in such intricate mortal
wars?

And how infinite will be the cursinges, and maledictions of all sorts of
people, upon him that has caused it, when it shall appear unto the^, that as
he never sought to co^serue the^ in peace during the Queens life, so he never
me^t but to leave the^ in wars after her death? At what time he may rejoice
as once did the tyra^t Nero, to see the city burn, which himself had, set on
fire. And how soon this great quarrel shall be begun, is as uncertain, as the
thing that each hour is to be expected. Seeing it depends upon the only life
of the Queen, whereof there is as little assurance, as of the life of any other
mortal creature: and her deceasse so-much the nearer, in that she is now
declyning in age.

TO come unto the fourth and last part, concerning the ouer-throwe of the
Nobility, and the great and general oppression of the people: it is first to
be considered, that albeit the unjust molestations of other comon-wealths, and
the oppressions and cruelties used within the realm, were both by M. Cecill
begu^ and prosecuted, yet has he so cuningly disposed very many of his
affairs, into the hands of other principal actors (espetially since the
death of his brother Bacon) that very often times, his own plottes and
inventions have seemed the practizes of others. Of these his actors, the late
Earl of Leicester, and the secretary Walsingham, were the chiefest. The
former of the twain, for that he had in his youth, by overmuch attending his
pleasures, neglected the observation of many secrets, which M. Cecill
practiced out of Machiauill: yet in the end, he did in few years profit
so much, and so recover his negligences past, as that he soon grew old in
iniquity: and left no mischief unattempted how abominable so ever. And at
the last (as it seems) even by the just judgment of God, the same day seven
night, that he had caused diverse Priests and other Catholics, to be cruelly
murdered in diverse places, within and with out the city of London, he
sickned: and as it is thought was poisoned, and prevented by one, whom
himself had thought by such means to have dispatched, he died without any
signs of a Christian, more like a dog then a man, and being dead, was as ugly
a corse, as he was filthy in manners in his life: and in his stomach, were great
holes eaten through with the poison. His lands were presently ceased upon,
for his debtes unto the Queen, whereby he was as much disgraced, as if he had
rather been hated, then favored of her.

And he that but late before, seemed to carry in himself the very glory of the
realm, and that in his life time was feared of many, though loved of none: was
no sooner dead, but justly condemned of all. Yea exclamed on, cursed and banned
to all mischief, by all the people of the land: who generally reioysed, that so
wicked a monster was dead.

And albeit that toward his later days, he became the only patron of the
purest professors of the Gospel: yet immediately after his death, a friend of
his bestowed upon him this Epitaphe.

Here lies the worthy warrier,
That never bloodied sword:
Here lies the loyal courtier,
That never kept his word.
Here lies his noble excellence,
That ruled all the states.
Here lies the Earl of Leicester,
Whom earth, and heaven hates.
The Secretary Walsingham, a most violent persecutor of Catholics, died almost
in like manner, never so much as naming God in his last extremities, and yet he
had both speech and memory, as he showed by telling the preacher that he
heard him, and therefore he needed not to cry so loud, and these were his
last words: and in the end, his vryne came forth at his mouth, and nose,
with so odious a stench, that none could endure to come near him. And not
withstanding his great credit and authority, he died a beggar, and more
indebted, then his lands could satisfy, and has left no fame of virtue
behind him.

These twain, and sundry other inferior instruments, being gone to render an
account of their infynite evils, and the same impious course of proceeding
still continued, and daily increasing from ill to woors, does plainly manifest
unto the world, who it is, that has been the author and supporter of all
mischief, and consequently the direct occasioner, of whatsoever inconuenie^ces,
the realm of England does presently sustain, and what distresses, miseries,
perils, or, dangers, it is threatened hereafter to suffer. Whereunto it
seemerh, he is bent with a very full resolution, to hazard and bring it.

And touching the present estate of the Nobility, wherewith the stately
courts of former princes were adorned, their armies in the field conducted,
the commons of the country by their great hospitality relieved, look whether
they are not brought unto that seruilitie, that if they apply not themselves to
Cecils humor, they must not live in their countries, but be tied unto the
court, or allotted their dwelling, as if they were his perpetual wards? yea
rather as pupils, that are kept under with rods, not daring to speak what
they think and know: but are set to be ayme-giuers, while others do hitt their
marckes. Some of them, he has vnde seruedly brought into the disfauor of the
prince. Sundry he has drawn upon fained favors of the court, to consume
themselves to beggary. Others he has sent forth, to become pirates and
sea-rouers. And the lives of some of the principal, by guylefull pretended
crimes he has taken away, and by one means or other, he has brought such
as be yet living into those terms, that none may be permitted to carry any
credit in the comon-welth, except it be some very few, whose wisdoms he can
easily ouerrule. By which means, there is no subject in England of more
opulence, none of more authority, nor none of more power, then himself: and
therefore none to withstand his intended match, between the Lady Arbella, and
his grandchild. Whereby England may happen to have a King Cecill the first,
that is suddenly meta morphosed from a grome of the wardrobe, to the wearing
of the best robe within the wardrobe.

Concerning the general oppression of the people, it is no less, but rather
more lamentable the^ the overthrow of the nobility: in as much, as it tends
to an universal destruction of the whole body of the realm. As the E. of
Darby and others
The Lyftenantes and Justices of shires, who are reputed to live in best credit
in their countries, are no more but the subjects of pursuiuants, catchpoles,
and promoters, and must night and day be ready, to wait and attend at every
call, of this vile and abject sort of people. But the meaner gentlemen and
commons, are brought unto the greatest slauishnesse, and misery, that ever any
free borne people have lived in. Which whosoever shall rightly consider, shall
easily perceive, whether England has these 33. years enjoyed peace and
tranquillity, as it is impudently reported to have do^ For if we first look
what often and general musters have been made, what pressinges, and sending
forth of men, what provision, chopping, changing, and consuming, of armor,
munitio^, artillery, and powder, since the first year of the Queens reign:
we shall find it to give small proof of a continual peace.

Let us call to remembrance what troops of men have at sundry times been sent
into Scotland, what forces almost yearly into Ireland, what infynite numbers
into the low countries, and continued with daily supplies, how many thousands
into France and Britany, what an huge army into Portugal, besides all the
brave men and mariners consumed in sundry voyages or piracies by sea, sent
forth to seek new habitations in Virginia, and by one such means or other
made away: and we shall find the number to be far greater, then any King of
England has employed within or without the realm in any his honorable
watres. And if any man should think, that al these troops have been but set
forth in May-games he may call to memory that their coming home again
declared it not.

Let us also consider, what great numbers of pore women are often times left
in misery, and with their children to pyne at home in famyne, while their
husbands are sent forth in forreyne wars: and how-many by this means are
become widows, and their childeren fatherless. And further, what great
trooble and vexatio^ generally all artificers, farmers, and husbandmen are put
unto by attending and following so many general musters: wherein are also,
diverse great and foul abuses committed. What infinite numbers of freholders,
yeomen, and others (diverse of the^ being charged with wife and family) are
pressed and sent forth of the realm unto the wars of foreign parts, contrary
to the laws of the country, by the which it is provided that none ought to be
pressed, but only to defend the realm, or to recover some lost patrimony of
the crown: whereof it is not known that either Spain, Portugal, the low
countries, or the Indies ever were. And yet so exceeding great have been the
multytudes of men, that by compulsio^ have these late years been sent unto
those parts, that (being well employed) they might have conquered whole
kingdom: and not withstanding this great injustice and injury done unto them,
when in these services and evil actions they have lost their lives, they are
rewarded with infamy after their deaths, even by those, that constrained them
thereunto, and most contemptibly called the scum and rascallitie of the
country, whereof it is happily delivered. And such as after the great miseries
(which commonly they do sustain) do return home again into England, they have
by the very report of being Soldiers, purchased the hateful names of rogues
and vagabondes: and being for want of payment, brought unto poverty and
nakedness, are made subject unto the conductio^ and punishment, of every
beadle and catchpole: and lastly even for very trifles, to the fynall dispatch
of the hangman. What a most vile and hateful usage is this, to men of any
valor? and how intolerable to be borne by any that bears in his breast the
heart and courage of a soldier, or has ever been conducted by a captain in
the field? what wrong and injury can be greater to any one that retayneth the
shape of a man? or how is it possible for any English soldier to endure it, or
for any other to extend it unto him except this only natural enemy to all men
of arms? that could never abide that ever any man of service, captain,
soldier, or person of brave spirit, should be rewarded but with reproach and
misery: whose condition and state of life is in all countries in the world most
honorable, and was never made slavish in England before England came unto a
Cecilian government.

Thus rewards he those whom himself employeth to his own purpose, in the
loss and hazarding of their lives. And if we shall now consider, what infynite
numbers of the inhabitants of the land he has by one means or other
consumed, and daily entendeth to consume, we might justly fear, that this his
course continuing, he would in time bring the realm to be a Republike of
Amasones, if he had not already drawn into it treble as many strangers, as King
William the co^queror planted therein after his subduing the same, wherewith
himself (as it seems) does mean to erect and fortify his new imagyned
kingdom.

Let us also consider the great decay of Trafike, that of late years the
country is brought unto, whereby not only many principal marchantes, which
were wont to transport great riches and commodities to the realm, are become
banckruptes, and sundry of them enforced to turn their trade of merchandise
into mere piracie, but also diverse whole towns are decayed, and the people
compelled to beg, that before were honestly sustained by the trade of clothing.

What should I speak of the general abuses of the realm, since they are so
great, and so infynite.

There were never somany suits in law, nor there was never less redress of
wrongs.

The law is exempt from Justice, and all causes are governed by bribes and
partiality.

Conscience is least accounted of, and coosinage is in summo gradu.

The prisons were never in any princes days so full of debtors, and
malefactors.

The high ways were never so replenished with thieues and robbers, and yet
were there never so many executed for stealing.

There were never such numbers of beggars in all parts of the realm, and
except lawyers and usurers, very few me^ are furnished with money.

But it is a wonder to consider, what great and grieueous exactions, have from
time to time been generally emposed upon the people, as all the Lones, the
Lottery, gathering for the steeple of Paul's, new impostes and customs of
wynes, clothes, and other merchandise, forfaictures, and confiscations of the
goods of Catholics, forced been uolences for the sucouring of rebellious
brethere^, huge masses of money raised by privy seals, and last of all, the
great number of subsidies, which have been more in the time of this Queen,
the^ those that have been leuyed by diverse of her predecessors, and do amount
to many millions of pounds: and yfall these do not lie hoorded up in the
Queens cofers, the Lord Trecherer I trust ca^giue her majesty and the realm
good accomptes of them in books and papers. But in the mean while, the commons
are brought unto common beggary, and by the continued and intended exactions,
they are lykely to be daily more oppressed then other. Infynite are the
domestical miseries that he has delivered the realm unto, and most infamous
has he made the English name and nation abroad, for vice, for cruelty, for
unfaithfulness and breach of all laws with their freindes and confederates.
In France, they are counted Churche-robbers, bloody, and unmerciful, in
Portugal, disordered and fool hardy, of all nations in general, the pirates
of every sea the sowers of sedition in all countries, the maintainers of all
rebellions, and the only Butchers and persecutors of innocent priests, and
Catholics, that peaceably live under their subjection.

Behold then good reader into what condition, the late so goodly and
flowrishing estate of England in a few years is brought, and how justly it
may be said to be blessed with peace and tranquillity in regard of former ages.

Call to remembrance, in what amity that realm was with other countries, at
the Queens entrance to the crown, and those likewise at the same time one
with another: which might happily have continued for many years together, if
the unhappy enemy of Christian concord had not been the only let and hindrance,
and as neither the princes of France or Scotland, notwithstanding their great
molestatio^s by the English, did never attempt any revenge: no more did the
King of Spain make any show of hostillitie against them, albeit the injuries
don by them unto him, without intermissio^ have been lo^gest co^tynued:
insomuch, that the English have scarsly left him or his subjects, any country
of quiet habitation, but disturbed the^ in Spain, in Portugal, in Italy, and
in the Indies, and let not to rob and spoil them, in all parts of the
occean and mediteranea^ seas. And having for the space of twenty years
together assisted the rebels of the low countries, and lastly in the open
view of the world, put the^ selves in possession of diverse of the kings
towns and cities, being part of his patrimony: he was in the end eue^ drawn
by extreme violence to some attempt, for the recovery of his right, having
before somany years together, for borne the revenge of all former wrongs: and
now (as it seems) because he will not give the^ assurance to remit all
injuries past, and to put up as many as hereafter they may do unto him, and
quietly let them continue their wrongful possession of his right, M. Cecill
is become so mad and angry with him, that he raileth upon him in open
proclamation (wherein I suppose I mistake not the person) for albeit the
proclamation be published in the name of the Queen, yet must it needs be
written by the direction of him which is Domine fac totum, who as it seems,
being in some great choler, was over hasty in the choice of his Scribe, or
so much ouer-weened in his own wisdom, that he thought no one of his fond
impertine^t and frivolous reasons could be controled. And therefore with much
impude^cie he says, that the king of Spain has continually disturbed the
state of England 33. years together, and he greatly laboreth to make the world
believe, that either the king did never know, or else had utterly forgotten,
whether the English had ever don unto him any injuries at all, and therefore
could never think upon any means of remedy or revenge, if he were not urged
forward and put in memory of them, by a few priests and Jesuits.

He accuses the Pope, of exhausting the treasure of the Church, without
consent of the college of Cardinals. Wherein he seems as though he pitied
the wasting of the Churches treasure, who could wish in his heart that the.
Pope and all his Cardinals, were as poor as ever was Iobe.

He would make it seem an injury, that this treasure is employed in the wars
of France, because that realm has been a defender of the Roman Church in
all their oppressio^s: where as it rather might seem an injury, if the Pope
should not now relieve them, that had assisted the Church in former
oppressions, who I think he cannot mean to have been Nauarr and his Huguenotes.

And verily it seems, that this man's great prosperity do the make him to
forget himself, and does bereave him of his judgment. For who may else imagyne
that his vanity should be so great, or his lack of wiser matter so little, as
to set forth in proclamation that the King of Spain did practice with men of
base birth of the English nation, who gives credit unto none, but unto such as
to whom all Christendom yeildeth honor, for their known virtue and wisdom,
being also of honorable, or very honest pare^tage and therefore not base of
birth. Neither seems he to remember with what woorshipful squyres he
practizeth withal against the King, The States.
in Holland and Zealand: nor yet what Sir walter Rawleghe dreamed of himself,
M. Rauleghes dream.
how King Henry the eighte told him, that he did very much woo^der, that one
Cecill was now come to bear so great sway in the court, whose name in his
time was so obscure in the countri. Neither co^sidereth he, that albeit by his
own pare^tage he is but mean, that he has little betred himself by his
matches, his first wife being but the sister of a Peda^te, and his later so
lately come out of the kitchen, that her posterity for some discents, must
needs smell of the fat of the frying pan: which were nedelesse here to be
aleaged, were it not to manifest his Lordshipes insolent vanity, in standing
upon such toys, as with wisemen are esteemed as feathers in the air: who in
respect of mean parentage do never account the less of wise or worthy men's
qualities.

It is also a like matter of moment, that he speaks of the Kings charges for
the maintenance of students, unless it be to insinuate compassion, as well of
his as of the Popes expenses: but his saying that they are a number of
dissolute young men, is an exceeding shameful and malicious flaunder.

He would prove that none are put to death for religion, because as he says
numbers of men, of wealth of contrary religion, are not touched in their lyves,
lands, goods, or liberties, but with the payment of a pecuniary sum (which
being but a trifle of 20. pound the month he names not) and yet many have
scarsly the liberty of their prisons, while their lands, and goods are
seized on, for this pecuniary trifle. And if any few for some color of
clemency be set at liberty, their license commonly excedeth not above 20.
days, and it is both under bonds and sureti^es, with limitation of their
residence. And because these numbers are not put to death for religion, he
seeks to prove that none are put to death for religion: which he thinks he
may the rather avouch, for that neither Jesuits, Seminary priests, nor other
Catholics, are expressly condemned to death for saying or hearing Mass or the
like, but the one is condemned and put to death because he is a priest, and the
other for receiving him. Whereby the world may understand, that no Catholic
should be put death for any exercise of his religion, so he would not come in
the company of priests: nor priests, if they would remain and use their
functins in Italy or other countries, should not be put to death for treason in
England.

It is no less ridiculous, to call the Lord Cardinal a scholar, who being now
threescore years of age, has been chosen to be a head and governor of
colleges and scholars, both in England and in other countries, above 36.
years past. And has professed in diverse famous universities, and written so
many excellent books, as the adversary will never be able to answer: and in
the opinion of the best and wisest of Christendom, was woorthely chosen unto
his present dignity, and was of late in very near election to have been
preferred unto the highest estate of all others in the world. And it is a
parsonall ly, to say that F. Parsons does arrogate unto himself the name of
the King Catholics confessor: whose just credit and reputation, for his known
wisdom and virtue both with this King, and many other noble princes, no
English proclamation can be able to diminish.

If M. Cecill himself, had obtained his estemation for virtue and honest
endeavors, and so had been the beginer of his house, it had been far greater
honor and comendation for him, then by the ruin of somany both honorable and
virtuous, the consuming and oppressing of the people, and the hazard of the
destruction of the realm so arrogantly to advance himself, and to extole his
own glory in painted pedegrees, borrowed and far fetched: and his posterity
might then more longer have retained their honor and renown, then perhaps
they are now like to do, because great treasure heaped together by rapyne
wrong, and violence, is never enjoyed with long felicity. For De male
quaesitis, vix gaudet tertius haeres. And if the fears that he does feign be
true, it is not impossible but his house as it has begun, so it may end with
himself. And this perhaps he somewhat suspecteth and therefore as all tyrants
are wont, does seek to fortify himself by the effusion of innocent blood: as
though that were the only way to avoid all reuenges of injuries, done to the
king of Spain. And that his unjust accusing of innocent me^ of treason, could
color his own exceeding treasons, that has brought the realm into such
present misery, and delivered it unto so-many ensuing perils and dangers, as
it now does attend.

For it is he, that neither of conscience, nor any other cause, but merely for
his own ambition, has wrought the mutation and change of religion, where of
such wonderful inconuenie^ces have followed.

It is he, that has procured the enmytie, which England has at this present
with so-many Christian Princes and states, and chiefly with the most potent
King of the world.

It is he, that for the prosecuting of his impious intentions, has sent
forth so-many thousands of the natural people of the realm to be consumed
in forreyne countries.

It is he, that has caused so-many great and general exactions, and that
has exhausted the treasure of the Queen and realm for the maintenance of
rebels, and purchasing of enemies to his natural country.

It is he, that has been the occasion, that the Queen (contrary to her own
honor, Leicester Hatton.
and the well lyking of her other counselors which she most affected) has
made so many offers of marriage to forreyne princes: and yet notwithstanding
has ever utterly persuaded her from marriage, thereby to bury her posterity
in her own body.

It is he, that was one of the most principal contriuers of the devised plott,
for the treacherous slaughter of the Scottish Queen, which will redownde unto
the eternal infamy of England, and does threaten a continual revenge.

It his he, that because he could not sometime establish such heyr apparent as
he listed, has left the succession of the crown so confusedly among somany
competitors, both within, and without the realm: which tends unto the
effusio^ of the blood of infynite thowsandes, more then already he has brought
to destruction.

It is he* that has been the causer of all the inconveniences troobles, and
dangers, that the realm has already past, These 33. years.
or does presently sustain, or hereafter may suffer, being now brought into
such a labyrinth of calamities, as never the same, nor any other can be
remembered to have been brought unto. And as this has been wrought by himself
and not by Catholykes, so himself and not Catholykes, is justly therefore to be
accused and blamed. And howsoever he do now in supreme authority falsely
impute unto others the crimes of treasons, and trecheries: if the matter might
come to any equal hearing before indifferent judges, it should clearly be
proved, that he which wishes the reformation of his country, cannot be a
traitor to his country: but that Cecill being the causer of the most enormious
evils thereof, is a traitor himself, and the greatest, that ever England
nowrished, and far more noisome and pernicious to the realm, then ever were
the Spencers, Peeter of Gauerstone, or any other that ever abused either Prince
or people. And because no man dare frame an endytement against him, I will
here omit many other articles of high treason, but if any will undertake to
justify his actions in his course of government, let him know, that there is
sufficient matter of reply reserved for him, which is not extracted out of
Mother Hubberds tale, Prosopopoia or mother Hubberds tale.
of the false fox and his crooked cubbes, but is to be vttred in plain prose,
and shall lay open to the world, his birth, his life, and perhaps his death,
seeing his detestable actions are such, as do ask vengeance of heaven and earth.

It is a lamentable grief to consider, that the manifold harms which commonly
the afflicted subjects do suffer, the Princes themselves do never feel, and
that the perils and dangers wherein they do stand, are kept from their sight
and knowledge by such, as in whom they repose overmuch trust and confidence,
until with violence they do fall upon their own heads, and commonly when all
remedy is past to avoid the^. And thus the great evils which are caused by
one man, do redownde unto the universal harm, both of the Prince and people.
How greatly dangerous is it then for any Prince, to be wholly led and conducted
by the persuasion of one man, and to deliver the possession of his or her
ears, unto the deceitful tongue of a flatterer. By such means was the puisant
Emperor Charlemaigne, misguyded, whose ouer-great affyance in the wicked
counsel of one only Gano, was the occasion of wonderful harms, that fell
both upon himself and his people: which great inconvenience is by a modern
Poet greatly lamented, Ariosto.
who among other his verses to the same purpose, has these ensuing.

Ben saria il dritto, che tornasse il danno
Solamente su quei, che l'error fanno.
And happy were it for the Queen and realm of England, if all the sustained
or expected harms of that Prince or people, being directly caused by one man,
might justly redownd upon the causer himself. But more happy had it been, to
have sought in time by just satisfaction of injuries, to have avoided the
deserved reue^ges of the^. But most unfortunate is it, that he which has been
the beginner of these mischieues, and has no meaning to redress them, is yet
permitted to plunge the realm into what further calamities himself lists,
and to hazard the shedding of the best blood of the Nobility and People, for
the only establishing of his own house and posterity: to make the ruinated
families of the one, and the dead bodies of the other, the steps to mount
unto his intended height.

He commands both England and Scotland, he labors incessantly with the
Queen to make his eldest son deputy of Ireland, and (as it is aforesaid)
entendeth to match his grandchild with the Lady Arbella, and so to put in for a
kingdom if not for the Monarchy of Albion. And for the better contriuing of
the whole domination to himself, This keeping of the ^^iue seal has a mystery
in it.
he has lately brought in his second son, to be of the Queens council*
and keeper of her privy seal: the which of wyse-men is much maruailed at, and
the rather for that the Queen is reputed learned, and therefore seems to be
the more ouerseene in the choice of so il shapen and crooked a counselor
(having neither wisdom nor experience) to forgett the precept of the grave
Philosopher, who gives espetial warning of such so marked by nature, in these
words: Cave ab his, quos natura signauit. And albeit she had forgotten such
wise advice of so ancient an author, I wish she had called to mind the
words of a later (though of less authority) which perhaps for her
recreation she may sometime have red: who in his Macaronicall verses gives good
notes, to beware of such deformed creatures, saying in admiration.

O Deus, a guerzis, Zoppis, gobbisque cauendum est
Nulla fides gobbis, mancum mihi credit Zoppis.
Si sguersus bonus est, inter miracula scribam.
And if her Matie. had been disposed to prefer him, it seems unto me, that to
have made him a writer under some clerck or officier of the court, had been
very convenient for him, because as a courtier told her, he was fittest for
such purpose, for that he carried his deske on his back. But such is the
omnipotency of his father, that he plotteth to effectuate greater things the^
this, and thinks to determyne both of crown and kingdom, and to dispose of
prince and people, and to purchase his desired greatness with the effusion of
the blood of somany thowsandes as he shall list to send unto the slaughter.

He has of late been very vigila^t to find such in the Queens debt after
their deceasse, As Leicester and others.
as before by her favor and countenance, used extorsions in the common wealth:
but himself if he were well looked unto, would be found much more in her debt,
by how much more he has menaged her treasure so long a time together, and
wrong himself into so many matters of gain, and was never yet accomptable for
all the thirtene score pounds by year, which he has exacted of somany
Catholic recusants. What should I speak of his plurality of offices,
wherewith he can never be contented, but makes a monopoly of all things
within the realm, that any way may turn to his comoditie. By which means his
gettinges are so infinite, that his servants with the very shreddes of his
briberies and extorsions are able to purchase great reneuewes and to buyld
stately palaces: and yet himself is so encroching, that he lets not to
entrude into Church matters, yea and to contend with the B. of Canterbury,
about the appointing of preachers.

He keeps (I know not by what unhappy co^stellation, or rather deuilish
enchaunteme^t) the favor of his prince, which never subject so much abused. He
has made himself the very owner of her determinations, not permitting her to
recompense the service of her other officers and servants, and diverse times
when she has promised reward, he denies her the means of performance, and
so forces her to break and go from her word: yea he makes her acco^ptable
to hi^, how she ente^deth to dispose of her own: which yet must never be, but
as himself lyketh. Al men may justly lay unto him the undoing of the realm,
not so much co^demning her whose sex is easy to be misled, nor the rest of the
council whose wills by him are violently ouerruled. He is neither embraced in
the court, nor beloved in the country. He is freindly to none, but for his
own profit. He is not welcome to his peers, nor of affection followed of his
inferiors: but resembles a storm in the air, which all creatures do fear
and shun, and none do love or desire.

And albeit that he now in his altytude, does manifest in himself the very
nature and condition of a Tyrant, whose vile and abject courage is to murder
and butcher such as innoce^tly live under his jurisdiction: let him not think
that thereby he can divert the just judgment of God, unto whom their sacred
blood do the incessantly call for ven geance: Nor that all the reuenges of
injuries, wro^ges, and violences, don unto other princes, and espetially unto
the King of Spain, ca^ possibly be avoided by his killing of a few poor
priests, and Iesuytes, which (he may assure himself) should be remembered, if
there were neither Iesuyte nor Seminary Priest living in the world.

And he that preserved his Prophets, Apostles, and the holy men of the
primitive Church in caves, dens, woods, and wildernesses, and fed the^
miraculously from heaven, will not forsake those that shall serve him
sincerely, but will give the^ courage and means also, both to enter and to
abide in the realm, and there to serve such numbers, as of mercy he will have
saved. Against which apostolical practice, let him prosecute what new
Cecillian Inquisition* he can devise, and to vex foreign princes abroad, let
him make as many ships to the sea as he list, and to fortify himself at
home, let him command as many musters by land as he pleases, our hope and
confidence is in God, who can dissipate the council of Achitophel and all
others that are against him.

During the time of thirty and three years, both law, sword, and all
human force has been used, to extinguishe the Catholic party, pulpites,
proclamations, and all means else employed against it: their liuinges and
commodities, disposed of by the adversary: and yet the same stands, and puts
him in more fear then ever before. And if he were not blind, and perhaps by
God himself blinded for his sins, he would seek another way to save himself
ab ira ventura, which is to cease from persecuting of Gods Church, and to
return unto the obedience thereof, where is mercy, and the only way to remedy
all these fears, and to escape that which he fears not, and that is,
eternal damnation.

THus good reader have I briefly ended this precedent discourse, The conclusion.
and declared unto thee both by whose means, and in what manner, the realm
of England is distressed with somany present calamities, and delivered to such
fears, of greater future troobles.

The mature consideration of the premises, I refer unto thy indifferent
judgment. The just blame of these evils, where it is justly deserved. And the
reformation of so great iniquity, to the infynite mercy of almighty God: who
voutsaf to woork the same, by the sweetest, and easiest means, that his justice
may admit.

And now in conclusion I have not deemed it amiss, to give the some caveat of
a vile and hateful kind of dealing, which the adversary of late has used,
in diuulging numbers of false and defamatorie libells: which it seems custom
has made so familiar to the libellers themselves, that by an ordinary habit
which therein they have gotten, they seem to have forgotten, that there is any
difference between lying, and telling ttuthe: for otherwise it might be
presumed, they would never so greatly busy themselves, so egregiously to abuse
the world. And albeit as the Psalm says Me^tita est iniquitas sibi, and that
these libells do commonly carry their own discredit in themselves, by being
ouercharged with most palpable lies: yet because they tend unto the furtherance
of the pretended Gospel, and that the necessity of that cause so much
requires it, they must pass without contradiction of them that can detect
them of falshoode, and be taken for verities, of those that are not able to
discern them for untruths. And therefore in respect of pity of the abused
multitude, I will make recital of some few of this kind, to the end that the
reader may give such creditt unto the like hereafter, as he shall well perceive
the former to have deserved.

Of these sorts of libells, many do declare great numbers of French and
Flemish victories, which are so famous, that sundry of them were never known
nor heard of in all the world, but only in England.

Others are of obscure and tryfling matters, Printed by vv Blac wall.
except such as is that of the happy conquest of the suburbs of Paris, etc.

Others tell of visions in the air, Printed by Nelson. 1590.
which are enterpreted to presage detriment to those of the league.

Somtymes they are of prophesied victories before they happen, Printed by
VVoolf 1590.
and appointed times of the death of Princes, as that the duke of Parma should
die at martinmas 1590.

Some are of triumphs of victories, Printed by Allde. 1591.
before they be obtained, as when the Earl of Essex, was to go with his forces
into Normandy.

Some have been set forth to make losses seem victories, Printed 1589.
as the discourse of the Portugal voyage, And by ponsonby 1591.
and the loss of the Revenge.

And whereas there was one Cacalla and others of his company, Printed by Nelson
1591.
executed for Heresy and Apostasy at Validolid in Spain 30. years past: the
manner of this execution is in an English libell newly set forth, and said to
be for profession of the Gospel, and to be done but of late.

In like sort is very perticularly set down, the glorious and constant
martyrdom of an Englishma^ (not long since) in the town of Dunkerck, Printed
at London. 1590.
whose torments endured four days: and yet there was never any such man, nor
any such matter hard of in the said town, as all the inhabitants will witness.

So was it published, Printed by Purfoot 1591.
that the King of Spain (whom the libeller calls the Archtyrant of the
world) was dead.

And another libell that came forth of late entitled A fig for the Spaniard
co^tradicteth that lie, Printed by VVoolf 1592.
with another as manifest an untruth, and says that Phillip of Spain is not
dead, but lies bedred.

In all these and sundry other like lybells, As in the forged confession
Printed by VVoolf 1590.
it seems they have challenged unto themselves a kind of privilege, to rail
and rave at Princes, and to be-ly and slander whom they list: and this good
dealing is used, for the advancement of the cause of the Gospel, but argues
in deed, that all the plotts and practizes of the aduetsary as they first were
begun, so have they been continued, and so are they still vpholden and
underpropped, with cogging, foisting, lying and coosining: which equity and
truth has ever detested, and all honorable states and honest minds, do
utterly abhor. Neither is the same able to continewe the usurped credit of the
newnamed Gospel, but must needs in time bring it to extreme hatred and
contempt.

And it seems that the exceeding malice of some of these libellers, The
figgiuer.
has transported them into such a fervor of folly, that they imagyne all
Christendom (without any question to the co^traty both to know and
acknowledge, John Caluyns exposition of the Gospel (as it is understood in
England) to be the very Gospel of Christ in deed: else would they never so
peremptorily rail at other princes and people, for not embracing the same.

The Sacred Scripture and true Gospel of Christ, as it has ever been
inuiolably preserved in the Catholic Church, so is it only of that Church
most highly esteemed, and followed. And no Caluinists or other Sectaries, have
any scripture at all, that they have not had from that Church. And by this
true Gospel and word of God, the word of Caluyne, and misnamed Gospel of
Protestants, is clearly proved to be false and flat heresy. And if the English
Gospellers, will not stand to the judgment of Catholics in this point, all
the Lutherans of Germany will resolutely offer to prove the same also out of a
supposed Gospel of theirs, which they as confidently challenge to themselves,
as any English Gospellers ca^ possibli claim any other. And therefore my
masters in England, must not so run in cry with their peculier Gospel, as to
chyde others for nor following the same, when they believe it not to be true,
but do truly believe it to be false. And so leaving this later clause for A fig
to the figmonger. I wish the reader to suspect the discordant English Gospel
of heresy, and the Gospellers libells, of malicious lies.

FINIS.

