AN EXQVISITE COMMENTARY UPON THE REVELATION OF SAINT JOHN. WHEREIN, BOTH THE
course of the whole Book, as also the more abstruse and hard places thereof
not heretofore opened; are now at last most clearly and evidently explaned.

By PATRIK FORBES of Corse.

REVEL. 1. 3. Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this
Prophecy, and keep those things which are written therein: for the time is at
hand. monogram TOBIAS



LONDON Printed by W. HALL, for Francis Burton, and are to be sold at his shop
in Paul's Churchyeard, at the sign of the Green Dragon. 1613.

TO THE MOST MIGHTY MONARCH, MY MOST GRACIOUS SOVEREIGN LORD, JAMES KING OF
GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, etc. GRACE AND
PEACE, WITH ALL INCREASE AND CONTINVANCE OF HAPPY AND ROYAL STATE FROM GOD THE
FATHER IN OUR LORD JESUS CHRIST. THE KING OF KINGS AND LORD OF LORDS.
FOr a token, though poor in my part; yet that gratefully I remember your
Highness Princely mind, in keeping me an ear against sinistrous delation,
and giving so gentle warning of your good pleasure therein, this part of my
misreported pains, I humbly present unto your Majesty: to whose Souer aigne
skill in these divine secrets, (by your royal writings well witnessed to the
world) besides common allegiance, all pens, and of all men employed on this
Prophecy, owe proper homage: as not only to the most glorious patrocinie, but
therewith also the most learned censure. In both which, I do yet more rely on
your Majesty's experienced benignity, then I presume either of merit for the
one, or sufficiency against the other. I know the too just complaint of the
wisest, upon the great abuse of that excellent gift of printing, both to the
disgrace and detriment of learning, while (each man dotting after the brood of
his own brain, and vainly promising to himself the same applause of others,
which his own partial heart yields him) no end is of making many books: so
as the inexpert student, in search of letters weilding amidst infinite variety,
is cast in such doubt of choice, that, tasting about, before he happily fall
on oughtworthy to feed on, appetite is spent, and he filled with he cannot tell
what. I know also that as it was not permitted each Painter to practice his
skill on the royal Effigy of Alexander, so were it intolerable presumption
for each Pamphlet to usurp the shadow of your Highness Name. Neither has
selfe-weining so ouersiled mine eyes from the sight of mine own slenderness,
but that sincerely I acknowledge, in this so learned an age wherein much is
excellently well written, and yet infinitely more paper miserably spoiled, that
hundreths more gifted then I, might well be pardoned to put up their pens,
and, so, much less to currie credit to their unsuitable works, by shrowding
them under the shelter of so sacred a veil: yet how great soever be my
imparity to so high attempt, the subject of this my labor is of such a
surpassing eminency, as, if it has pleased God onelie^wise by my weakness to
bring forth any one sparkle of new and true light for more clear understanding
thereof (wherein, for ought that hithertils has been said of any, the most
learned yet acknowledge an untried depth of which any one point opened may be
a competent recompense of much pains) I hope it shall somewhat excuse me of
too great temerity, either in writing or in vowing, what I write, so highly:
and shall heerewithall encourage the better gifted soberlie to search out what
herein has escaped me also. Now hereof as your Majesty can best of all men
judge, so am I the bolder to undergo the hazard of so high a sentence, for
that of your Majesty's known clemence I am certain to report either praise or
pardon.

Your Majesty's humble Subject PATRIK FORBES of Corse.

Ad eundem. IOANNIS FORBESII filij Epigramma.
INgenio pollet, pacisque Minerua refulget
Artibus, ast eadem parmamque hastamque trementem
Fulmineumque ensem bello metuenda virago
Concutit, ac trepidare vetat virtutis amantes,
Peste per argolicas late grassante cateruas,
Placandum missa num^n Chyseide Calchas
Fretus Achille canit. Cantu Philomela secunda
Dicetur Cuculo; calamis ex virgin factis
Cedet Apollineus Pollex; Asinoque Midaque
Iudicibus: vulgus praeponet Stentora Vlissi.
Non humili subiecta toro, at laquearibus altis
Fax appensa domum illustrat fulgore corusco.
Haec tria Forbesius vasti intra maenia mundi
Alte vestigans oculis, ac mente peragrans
Europamque Asiamque rotaeque ardoribus altae
Candente^ Lybiam, and queis nomen Americns olim
Addidit inuentis, seris radiantia flammis
Littora; quaeque Magellanus circu^ aequora vectus
Antipodum procul arua polo subiecta notauit:
Illis doctrinam, validas contingere vires
His, alijs decus esse videt; sed cuncta sub vno
Pectore non habitare locis quae Diua triformis
Noctiuagis ambit per muta silentia bigis.
Vnum vsque excipio, cui Magna Brita^nia tanto
Rege beata subest, Iacobi nomine Magni
Clarum, hac tergemina qui fulgens laud per orb,
Finitimos, stellas veluti Phaebaea minores
Lampas, e solio reges intermicat aureo.
Ergo huius (tenuis que^ nostra Camaena vocandi
Affari casu metuit) conamine multo
Et precis and studij expressas and ab aethere missas
Luminis aetherei scintillas (queis liber olim
Visibus humanis septena ob claustra negatus
Agno post reserante legi, patefactaque vati
Porta poli posset penetrari) subijcit acri
Censurae patrocinium mentemque priore,
Sperans Forbesius fretus comitate benignam:
Vt tenebras valeat tam celso e culmine terris
Pellere, tutelaque ingenti spernere caecam
Inuidiam, victorque virum volitare per ora.
THE AVTHOR TO THE Christian Reader, grace and peace from God the Father in our
Lord Jesus Christ.
IF God did but command, yet were all disobedience excuselesse; if but promise,
yet were we holden, against all apparent impossibilities to believe, and hope
even against hope. But this magnifieth his mercy exceedingly, and takes from
all men all pretext of defection, that in his written word (in a singular
compassion of our weakness) he not only sets down the rule of our
ways, and proponeth the ground of our hope; but also to his servants in all
ages, he has foretold such future cases, as the strangeness whereof, might
either discourage them in the course of the one, or shake their constant
keeping of the other: and that so far forth, as the wise in each time, had
not only enough whereon to stay their hearts, even in the midst of most
grievous calamities; but, being placed as it were in the light of divine
revelation, they might clearly perceive the course and reason of God his wise
dispensation, and rejoice in the assured expectation of such events, as neither
the World dreamed of, and were much contrary to all their ungodly designs.
Thus the Lord always armed his Church, but most carefully in these last times,
under the Gospel. Which albeit it might appear to have been less needful,
for the huge measure of light and graceful dispensation, therein beyond all
former ages; yet, in respect that Satan, seeing his time to be short, then
chiefly bended his whole rage and full force of deceit (specially in that huge
mystery of iniquity growing on so in all effectual working, with all power,
signs, and lying wonders, in all deceiueablenesse of unrighteousness and such
strong delusion, the son of perdition sitting as God, even in the Temple of
God, that, if it were possible, the very elect might have been deceived)
therefore the Lord himself in the days of his flesh, gave hereof not obscure
warnings; his Apostles diversely thereafter; and lastly, in this prophecy, is
the whole mischief, in the parties, their practices, the Church, her condition
thereby, God his manifold wrath thereupon, to the full overthrow at length of
all the enemies, and deliverance of his Church; so at large and clearly set
forth; as we are not only now to believe the things told us before; because
they are already in a great part come to pass: but also, by the clear light
here opened to see what yet rests to be performed: and with calm and ioifull
minds (in a most delightful light) to behold and despise all this present
terrible and restless endeavor of Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, by their
emissary frogs: as where by they are but hastening on to themselves such a
foil, as the wonderfulnesse thereof shall make the place to be called, even
in Ebrew Harmageddon, and shall give matter even of an Ebrew song: When
thereupon, not only a great multitude in Heaven, the four beasts and twenty
four Elders: but by a powerful voice from the Throne, all God his servants,
all that fear him both small and great, as the voice of many waters, and as the
voice of strong thunderings, shall sing together Halleluiah.

Now the golden programme (blessed is he that reads etc.) set over the gate
of this goodly edifice, as it gives to conceive, and both wakeneth and
warranteth to search after some rare insight, so did it chiefly encourage me to
step in and much stirred, in soberness, to survey the singularities. Wherein,
as the Queen of Saba seeing Solomon, by help of God, and to the praise of his
truth in this, I found so much more then I presumed, as no spirit was left in
me. Now, here withal, the earnest petition of Saints poussing thereto, and
after the story of Christ in the flesh, and of his Church raised by Apostolic
labors, this falling in fitly in the course of my travels to be handled: yet
nothing so much carried me to the public reading thereof, as a holy
indignation at the dealings of Romanists in our quarters too carelessly exposed
to their seduction. They had nothing more frequently in mouth then the
antiquity, glory, and multitude of their Church, the consent of Nations,
Counsels, and succession of many Ages, with disdaineful demands, where our
Church was before Luther; and whether we esteemed all our Forefathers so many
ages past to be condemned, who lived and died all in the faith and Communion
of the Church of Rome? with such speeches largely amplified and cunningly
colored, amongst a simple people; as sheep for the most part without
shepherds; I found by experience and credible information, that not only many
altogether ignorant were corrupted, but even diverse instable souls, who had
showed some beginnings of learning, and loving the way of truth, were rather
quite alienated therefrom, or cast in dangerous doubts: so as oftener then once,
men otherways well stablished, have even with solicitude both by word and
writ required of me how the hearts of the weak might be stayed against these
objections. To whom as both ways, in the time, I gave satisfaction, so, it
hasted me to the public interpretation of this prophecy: whereby even the
most simple, not wilfully shutting their eyes against an ingyring light, may
clearly see how that whereof they glory most, turns most to their shame, and
that, wherewith they most reproach our Church speaks strongly for us. If this
seems strange to any, they have not yet learned, that, as great is the
mystery of godliness, so also is that of iniquity: and to know the hid
secrets of either, none ever shall attain: who by the heavenly light of the
word, goes not higher then all authority, multitude, custom, or consent of
men. Now, albeit, at first, I minded nothing less then to write any further
thereon, but some short note for mine own use, of such things wherein my
judgment did vary from most part, or all enterpreters: yet cloied with
continual requests to write at large, what by voice I delivered, I was induced
to take a mid course, neither to write so shortly as I intended, nor at such
length as they required: but so, as who were my auditors, reading it, might
remember what further they had heard, and others might so far be set in way,
as by their own easy pains, to find out what for more clear explication is
requisite. I have labored, though not so far as my own disposition would have
carried me, yet so far as giving to suitors some contentment I could, to be
short, and not burden the reader with any tedious discourse of commonly known
matter.

On the first three Chapters to busy my self, except so far as was
necessary for coupling them with the rest of the prophecy. I thought it
needless: so much being already written thereon, and by so many both learned
and godly men. Whose travels on the rest of this prophecy, by this my doing, I
am so far from either despising or condemning, that from my heart I both
reverence their godly and learned labors, and sincerely acknowledge my self
to have been much helped thereby. But this being such a work, as wherein one
wrong stich will carry through all the seame a sensible error, and being of
such inestimable worth, as meriteth still to be wrought on, till, in whole and
each part, it keep sentence, I have, hereto, in all singlensse and sound
affection contributed my sparkle: expecting and heartily wishing others after me
to do the like, for more and more clear light, till the Whore be evidently
set naked before the eyes of all the World, and the Bride, in her upright
beauty, be discerned of all men. Use it therefore with such heart, as thou have
it of me: praising God for that which is clearly from him, and in Christian
compassion, excusing what is of mine infirmity.

IOANNIS FORBESII filij.
Epigramma de scopo Authoris.
FOrbesius, Romapompam iactante, dolebat
Vno orbem obtundi nocte dieque sono:
Ostenditque feram hoc signo ac Babylonanotari.
Inunc, consensum maecha molesta crepa.
Eiusdem ad Zoilum.
CAece, Theonino quid dente incognita mordes?
Non tibi, sed doctis, Zoile, scriptalegis.
Eiusdem ad beneuolum lectorem.
NEleuiter summam solum, bone lector, arenam
Liba, neu ^icco rade profunda pede:
Hic sulcanda via est, huic te duce numine oportet,
Etpoteris placi^ae credere tutus aquae.
The Sum of the Book.
THis Book is that written record of the things in Vision, heard and seen by
John in Patmos; which according to the commandment given him, he sent to the
seven Churches of Asia. Whereof it is, that besides the inscription in the
first three verses, the whole is an Epistle, having a salutation to the ninth
of the first Chapter: a valediction in the last verse of all: and the body of
the matter in the rest.

This body has for the most part a prophetical narration to the sixth of the
last Chapter: and thence the general conclusion.

The narration has two parts: the first is of things which partly then were,
and partly were also to be done thereafter. And this part has, first a goodly
vision of Christ's presence, operation, and dispensation, in and toward these
seven Churches, and which in common concerns them all. And secondly, a
particular accommodation thereof to each one according to their proper
condition, good or evil, or mixed at that time: In which respect, this part is
said to be of things which were then existent; as it is also of things to be
done thereafter, because of the future good or evil promised, or threatened.

The second part of the narration, is of things which were to be done
thereafter; concerning first and properly the whole militant Church. Like as
the whole events thereof were to fall out after the time of this trance: how
soever for clearing the working on of these events, some circumstances and
beginnings are in one or two places deduced higher. And this second part has a
general introduction to the special Story: Chap. 4. and 5. and the story of
special events thenceforth.

The introduction has two parts: first a goodly type of the true Church
militant, according to that constant and inuariable condition she ever holds
in all her changes, wrestlings, sufferings, victories, kythings and eclipses.
For expressing accordingly of all which, as diverse and convenient types through
this Prophecy are taken; so always in all cases this of the Throne, Beasts,
and Elders, ever holds through all. This constant condition has God his
constant presence as King and Lord, fixing his habitation and ruling in the
midst of his Church: her graceful state herethrough, as which is a royal
priesthood to him: his general and constant dispensation to this end, terrible
for her, and gracious toward her: and her dutiful worship of him again.
Chap. 4.

In the second part of the Introduction is showed by whom, and in whom it is
that she has all this presence, protection and graces, and specially (thus
artificially to bring on the story of special events) by whom it is that she
has this singular benefit of this revelation. The dignity whereof is showed,
first in the retired eminency of the matter, and secondly, in the worthiness
of the Person reuealer. Chap. 5.

The special story is thence of which the abstruse secrecy locked up in God
his counsel, as by a sealed Book in God his right hand it was figured: so the
manifestation thereof to us is typically expressed by opening of the seals: in
which the whole Story being comprehended, six of them opened, yield also many
types of these first sorrows, wherewith God plagued the world for rejecting the
Gospel. I h^ seventh yields 7. Trumpets, whereof the first six have the
second evils: and the seventh (upon induration against all former punishment)
affords seven vials of the last wrath for full and recurelesse destruction of
the enemies, and the Church her constant, graceful, and quiet state thereupon.

The beginnings of sorrows, are, first the powerful preaching of the Gospel,
in it self properly the first blessing: yet to the world ^adly impugning that
which must Conquer and Overcome becoming the savor of death, is the first and
mother plague, begetting bloody wars, strange famines, grievous pestilences,
and not some beasts, God his four great plagues severally and jointly. Against
all which notwithstanding, the rage and induration of enemies still grows,
and that to so huge and cruel effusion of the blood of Saints, as in God his
justice, cried for no less then the full and final destruction of that
afflicting state. Which nevertheless, in God his wise dispensation, is
reiourned till the accomplishment of the rest of Martyrs in that honor of
suffering. And that the Church might attend this the more patiently, she
gets in the time, relaxation from open persecution, and the sufferings of
Martyrs become honorable. Thereafter that bloody state, through invasion of
barbarous and vnco^th nations, suffers such strange alteration as the whole
face thereof is turned, and it receaueth a deadly wound, so far as might make
way for the succeeding huge mischief in the seventh Scale. Chap. 6.

Before the opening whereof to a particular manifestation of the evils therein
(for more clearing of the matter, and, in a divine artifice, to imply that this
second mischief was hatching even in time of the first sorrows) a summary
view of the whole sequel thereof is given: in a deadly evil to ouergoe all
the face of the visible Church, worship and professors therein. Against which
the care of Christ for preserving his true Church is showed, and her double
condition first under and in time of the mischief, by a mystical number of
sealed ones, and of whom, and how that number is made up, to the ninth verse:
and secondly her condition victorius over the evil, as the same condition is
offered to John his perception; first by seeing and hearing: and secondly by
information to the end of the seventh Chapter.

For particular explication of that which in the seventh Chapter was summarily
portended, the seventh Seal is opened, and yields seven Trumpets, as also
many signs given of diverse degrees of judgments, whereby God was, as it were,
to charge upon the World: these in comparison are lighter or heavier. The first
four are lighter: first through cold showers of selfeloue and fiery
contention, mixed with cruelty in the visible Church, follows a destruction,
in part, of true spiritual life and religion both in weak, and in such as
appeared strong Christians. Secondly through the fire of ambition amongst
Churchmen, a corruption, in part, of the common worship and a death in
superstition. Thirdly through heretical prauity, arising upon despitefull
pride, bitterness, and presumption of great knowledge, the very grounds, and
chief Doctors are poisonablie infected to the death of many therein. Fourthly
dark ignorance, and a decay in part of true light and learning, both in divine
and humane sciences, Chapter 8.

Now these four lighter evils were but alse many steps to the fifth, and
first of three great woes in the fifth Trumpet. When not in part only, but
through the fall of great Pastors from Heaven to the love of the Earth: and
thus, losing the Key of knowledge and of the Kingdom of Heaven, and becoming
Ministers of the Keys of darkness and of Gehenna; so great a smoke
ouergoeth the whole face of the visible Church, as all light therein is
eclipsed. And out of this darkness arises that huge mischief of Antichrist,
in the abominable army and hellish head thereof, for punishment whereof (if so
be they could have been cured) the Mohammedan armies are loosed from the East:
after they had been a space in God his patience tied up from their first
ranging, now again with Turkish fury to make desolate both by sword and
poysonable doctrine the third part of the Earth. This sixth evil and second
great woe working no repentance, but rather further induration in Antichristian
works Chap. 9.

A preparation is for Antichrist his full, recurelesse, certain, and near
approaching overthrow. Christ, in a sort, returning with the weapon of his
warfare, the little book now open, and the bold and powerful preaching
thereof: setting thereto fit instruments: who, by diligent study of scriptures
are inabl^d to preach the Gospel widelie Chap. 10.

And being instructed with faculty thereto, by assistance of Christ they apply
the right rule of examination, and thereby find that Antichrist has long
obtained the place and title of the visible Church. The true Church all the
while larking within the compass thereof: and being secretly entertained with
a hid but powerful dispensation of grace: by few, unknown, and albeit
afflicted Ministers yet preaching long without great bloodshed: till at ^ength
Antichrist perceiving them to apply the rule, they are for a space cruelly
murdered and barbarously entreated, even with applause, thorowout all
Antichrist his domination, but God stirring up others in the same spirit, who
vigorously oppose themselves, a visible separation by divine warrant, is made
from Antichrist his fellowship and contagion: fear takes him and his
followers: great commotions ensue thereupon: and his Kingdom is in a part
weakened. This far preparation and beginnings of his fall having wrought on
even in the height of the sixth evil and second great woe upon men of the
Earth: then the seventh Trumpet sounds to his utter fall, by seven Vials
which it yields of the last Wrath. The summary effect whereof (in a
preconceiued joy upon the sign given) is in a gratulatory song of the Church
denounced in the end of the 11. Chapter.

Before the particular explication whereof (for more clearing the reason of so
huge a joy of the Church, and the equity of so determinate a judgment against
the enemies) according to that clear sight which the Tabernacle of Testimony
now opened in Heaven yields to God his servants of the enemies and their
dealings, a large narration thereof is incerted: and thereafter their great and
just destruction (summarily above denounced) is exponed at length. Both which
parts of story the holy Ghost sets forth under the names of two great signs
seen in Heaven. The first in the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters, the other to the
end of the narration.

The first sign is double, in the party assailed, and the assailer: the
assailed party is the Church, in her first seed, and in her seed of succeeding
times. The assailing enemy against both, is the Devil that old Serpent, but in
different manner. Against the Primitive Church or first seed, directly, in open
rage, by his instruments thereof the Roman Emperors: first laboring to keep
down the Church from rising: next cruelly persecuting her being raised:
third^, being restrained from open persecution, through that protection the
Church got by Constantine the Great. Whereby as by wings she was freed from his
open rage, laboring to drown her by that inundation of barbarous Nations,
which, nevertheless in God his wise disposing providence, turned to the
defacing of that persecuting Empire. Yet so, as, in the time the true Church,
by degrees, passed to the Wilderness (whereto the wings gave occasion) and
lurking there, was fed, as was Israel and Elias: no more any true visible face
thereof appearing, then those three years and an half of famine in the days
of Elias: or the same space, when Antiochus Epiphanes abolished the daily
sacrifice, and set up the abomination of desolatio^ in place thereof. Chapter 12.

Satan highly incensed for his misgiuing endeavors against the first seed, tak
th occasion of this flight of the Church to the Wilderness, to bring in room
the Beast of his working and authority, by him to make war against the Church
in her seed of succeeding times. This Beast is the same kingdom of Rome: but
under the pontificality, by lying signs and wonders, and false pretense of
Christ his power, so bewitching the world, as, through voluntary submission of
the ^en of the earth thus deceived, the kingdom of Rome, under it, recouereth
that ancient glory, luster, estimation and subjection of Provinces, which it
had lost in the deadly wound it got in the fall of Caesar's, all the earth
wondering and following the Beast. Chap. 13.

All the time of this prevailing evil, even in the greatest height thereof,
Christ had still his true Church first lurking; and albeit not perceptible to
the world, yet inioying the presence of her head, having powerful and
plentiful dispensation of grace from him, and worshipping him heartily and
truly. Secondly, by degrees breaking out, and contesting with Antichrist in
great suffering and much bloodshed, to the 14. verse of the 14. Chapter. Where
the Story falling in again to the same point of time and matter, whereat (for
incerting this interiected narration) at blowing of the seventh Trumpet Chap.
11. it had left off: what, there, in a gratulatory song was summarily
denounced, the summary execution thereof is here propounded (so to bring in the
large narration of the effect of the seventh Trumpet in the seven Vials
thereof) to the end of the 14 Chapter.

This summary proposition is at length handled in the 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. and
20. Chapters: and thereupon the graceful estate of the Church showed Chap. 21.
and 22. And this whole matter is that other great sign seen in heaven: having
the greatness of the errand, and the disposing of the instruments for
execution thereof, Chap. 15.

The execution in seven degrees: first by discovery of the filthiness and
hypocrisy of the Beast his characterized followers, their persons are
despised. Secondly, their common worship becomes ahominable. Thirdly, even
their grounds and chief Doctors are seen corrupted and deadly: and therewith
in God his justice, because they had been bloody murderers of the Saints, they
in their course get blood to drink. Fourthly, the still waxing light of the
Gospel, as the Sun discovering their dark works, burns them up with
indignation and despite. 5. Thus Antichrist his kingdom becomes
contemptible, losing much of the wonted luster and magnificence* to the great
torment of their minds, they even gnawing their tongues for sorrow. Sixthly,
Peoples, tongues, and Nations falling from the obedience thereof, it is left
naked and weak: whereby a way is prepared for the Esterne kingdoms, and most
specially the Jews sparsed amongst them, to come into the obedience of faith.
In which perilous case of their kingdom the Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet
bestirre themselves, and jointly bend their whole malice, power, and deceit by
their emissarie false Teachers, to seduce the Kings of the earth in their
quarrel against the true Church. But for such a mighty foil to both the
seducers and the seduced, as shall make at length the long blinded Jews,
turning to the faith, to concelebrate the victory. 7. This miserable event in
the enemies, prognosticated against all their busy indeauors in the sixth
Vial, is now in the seventh fully executed, with so strange a commotion,
alteration and ouerturning of the state of the earth, by so uncouth plagues, as
was not since the beginning of the world. At all which notwithstanding, that
Antichristian body, devoted to destruction, still obstinately blasphemeth.
Chap. 16.

This so huge a destruction, so summarily in the seventh Vial delivered, is
henceforth more largely and clearly exponed, according to that grouth of light
which that time shall bring with it, laying open to the view of the Earth, the
parties destroyed, and the manner, measure, and events of their overthrow.
These are, the Whore, Chap. 17. and 18. The Beast and false Prophet Chap. 19
and the Dragon (for an absolute victory) Chapter 20. Of the Whore is showed,
who she is, and by whom she shall be destroyed: The Whore is the City of Rome
borne up to be a Lady of Kingdoms, and a mother harlot corrupting the Earth
with spiritual fornication, by the pontificality the eight and last sort of
sovereign heads ouer-ruling that state, and with whom it shall fall for ever.
Her destruction shall be by these self same Kingdoms and States, who, before
deceived with her, had been special props of Antichrist his power. but at
last espying the abominations thereof, fall from him and become instruments of
God his just indignation against the Whore Chap. 17.

The greatness, certainly, instant performance, and equity of her irreparable
ruin, is Rhetorically amplified, Chapter 18.

Whereupon, and the conioined fall of Antichrist her aduancer, by the sword of
his mouth who judges and fights righteously, whose name is that word of God,
is ministered to the Church such matter of joyful praise as stirs also at
length (God powerfully turning their hearts) the Jews to join in the
concelebration of the same victory, Chap. 19.

The Dragon, Satan, who by Constantine his conversion and Christianity by laws
established, had been bound up, from open rage, a thousand years, (all which
time, howsoever the most part of the World, through Antichrist his prevailing
deceit, were dead in superstition and blindness, yet the true Church, who
received not his character, lived the life of God, being partakers of the first
resurrection, and Christian religion was in account) is therefore again let
loose to practice open cruelty; and thereto, stirs all his forces from all
quarters. But yet by the power of the Gospel prevailing, maugre all his
endeauours, the rest of men who have long laien dead in blindness and error,
rise also the first resurrection: there is a new face of a world, all enemies
being so overthrown, as the Church has a most graceful and quiet state, for
that Satan is now taken again this second time, and so as he never gets
any liberty hereafter, either by error to deceive, or persecution to disturb
the Church her quiet; he being now not only bound up for a thousand years as
that first, but so as his destruction now begun holds on till that full
point it shall have in the last judgment, and the Church her reign hereupon
shall accordingly, not be for a thousand years only, as at the first, but for
evermore; having now performed in her and to her whatsoever rested (foretold by
the Prophets) unaccomplished for her graceful and quiet state and her enemies
full destruction here; and, in that, the mystery of God is fulfilled: she
having no more to expect but the coming of her Lord for translating her to
glory.

From the sixth verse of the 22. Chap. is the conclusion of the Book, wherein,
for procuring to this prophecy due regard and careful observation, it is
commended from the truth and fidelity of the matter which is from God by a
glorious dispensation, and ministry deserving credit, from the near
approaching performance of things prophesied, and from the perfection thereof,
in this, that it closes up the Canon: so as no more is to be expected either
for light or manners, but hearts to be erected in earnest wish and attentive
expectation of our Lord his coming. Even so come Lord Jesus.

DIuinus quidquid vates, contexerat altis
Sphingibus hic dextre Forbesius referat.
Sic sibi promeruit nomen per saecula; foelix
Qui simili expendit pauca talenta modo.
Andreas Aidius Scoto-Britannus.

Ad patrem suum colendissimum Patricium Forbesium a Cothari de pererudito eius
in Apocalypsin Commentario Johannes Forbesius filius.
VAtibus haec olim sanctis imperuia, Ioua
Innuit: Isacidis quisque Propheta suis:
Post vatum Deus haec, etiam tunc aspera, nato
Fulminis ostendit, caetibus ille Asiae:
Presbyteri Deus haec patefecit, peruia tandem,
Patricio, varijs gentibus indepatent:
Peruia nulla via est talis sine Flamine Sancto,
Quo duce (test libro hoc) inuia nulla via est.
Ingentem veteres, amplam Zebedeia proles
Obtinet hinc laudem, Forbesiusque suam.
Pectus ob haec tacitae pertentauere Sionis
Gaudia, quae prae se vate canente tulit:
Hinc etiam Ionias Hilarauit Apostolus vrbes,
Oblectauit enim littera missa viros:
At duce Patricio lector pius intime noscens.
Gestit, and exultat; laetitiaque fremit.
Propter aquas vitreas ignitas, mosis and Agni,
Turbae tenens palmas, nobile cantat epos;
Diuinum, a quo lux, numen super ardua tollens,
Forbesij, per quem, nomen in alta ferens.
Hinc tua progenies noua pectore gaudia voluit,
Dum te, chare pater, Nestora quisque cupit.
Nestor eris, nec Nestor eris, sed corpore quanto
Men's prestat, tanto Nestore mayor eris.
Victa cadunt ictu annorum, collapsa putrescunt
Corpora, at ingenijs stat sine morte decus.
Esto quidem, arctatam vinclis and suspirantem,
Admeliora animam liberet inde Deus
Quantaque terricolis tua per spicientia praebet
Gaudia, caelicolis men's tua tanta ferat;
Te tamen haud triplicis venturi terminus aeui
Finiet, aut lucem nox ruitura tuam;
Daedala sed magni dum stabit machina mundi
Ingenij viues per monumenta tui:
Te monstrante micat primoque orient relicto
Ardua caelorum Phosphorus vsque petit,
Donec protulerit vultus splendore decori
Aeternum aeternus Phoebus ab axe diem;
Tum clarus multis in milibus era carpens
Te sistes album Principis ante thronum.
Indeque cum Christo clamore per astra secundo
Coelica tendentem turma sequetur ouans.
Ad Papam Romanum idem. Apoc. cap. 13. verse 2. commentarij in id caput
sectionibus 1. 2. 5.
QVis renuat diadema tuo submittere sceptro?
Nam merito in terris diceris esse Deus:
Cui sua mundi huius Deus imperiumque thronumque
Tradidit, and vafris vincere posse dolis.
Ad ciues Romanos idem. Apoc. cap. 17. verse. 16. Sect. 14. and cap 18. verse.
8. 21. 22. 23. Sect. 8. 14.
QVid gelidae torpent dextrae, salientia pulsat
Cordapauor, mutat pallidus or a tremor?
Non Elephante vehens Pyrrhus, non feruidus oris
Currit ab hesperijs Hanibal arma ferens:
An quiae terribilis magis est Cotharistius heroes,
Qui Romaman cipiti coelitus ense quatit?
Ad Iesuitas idem. Apoc. cap. 16. verse. 13. 14. sect. 8. 9.
VOsne estis triplici ranae de gutture, iussae
Obstrepero regum corda ciere sono?
Quis iubet ergo sacrum praetendere nomen Jesus?
Number fucata gerens cornua front fera?
Quid ruitis veluti stimulis furialibus actae?
Spesne Orci in vestro totalabore sita est?
Ad Papistas omnes idem. Apoc. 7. verse. 10. sect. 7.
ADeo nostro veluti perenni
Font promanans and ab eius Agno
Lux salutaris fluit atque pleno
voluitur alueo.
Ad Authorem commentarij idem. Apoc. cap. 16. verse. 9. and 10 sect. 6 7.
NOn Troas flexit Nereus, non regia Virgo
Exitium patriae vaticinata suae:
Maternum est, soboles si sit Troianarebellis
Diuinisque minis consilijsque tuis.
Ad Iudaeos idem. Apoc. cap. 9. verse. 11. sect. 7 and cap. 16. verse. 16. sect.
10. and cap. 19. verse. 2. 3. 4. 6. sect. 4.
SAncta sanctorum soboles parentum
Quae dementra (proh dolor)
Fascinans vestros animorum ocellos
Messiam prohibet sequi?
Scilicet promptos, simulans Abaddo^
Agni cornua, territat.
Ergo cum magnis petit Armageddon
Vis Papistica copijs:
Per Perathaeum via siccaeois
Fietregibus alueum.
(...) sine fine quando
Ibit dirus (...),
Omnis Abrami canet Halleluiah
Laetans progenies boni.
Voce clamantes alacri Halleluiah
Gentes gaudia proferent.
Halleluiah, ter, quater Halleluiah
Tota Ecclesia concine^.
AN EXQVISITE COMMENTARY UPON THE REVELATION OF SAINT JOHN.
CHAPTER 1. 2. 3.
THis Book is the third part of the Euangelike Story, and has the condition
of the Church, from the Aopstolike times, till the finishing of the mystery. It
is for the most part Prophetical, and accordingly, uttered in a style
agreeable to the majesty of so high mysteries, which were revealed to the
beloved disciple, and in goodly and convenient types, in one continual trance
exhibited: with commandment of sending a written record thereof to the seven.
Churches of Asia, and under their names, the whole militant.

2 Of this it is, that besides the inscription, in the first three verses, the
whole is an Epistle: whereof, the salutation is to the 9. of the first Chapter.
The valediction in the last verse of all. The rest is a narration of things
heard and scene, to the 6. of the last Chapt. Whence is the general conclusion.

3 These things, for their distinct time, end, and manner of revelation, are
two, and accordingly, the parts of narration. The first, is of things which
are, and which shall come hereafter, that is, which both, in propriety of
Chap. 1. 19.
story, then were existent, according to the constitution of these seven
Churches trewlie expressed, and for their particular instruction: and yet so,
as the things to come are therein also revealed, for that the promises or
threatenings, to, and against each, according to the good or evil, praised or
taxed in them, are future: and for that, in these seven Churches, the holy
Ghost has, in great depth of wisdom, so lively paterned the diverse cases that
may befall, as none ever has been, or in any age shall be, which in one of
these, as in a lively example, may not clearly read her own cause, and learn
wisdom. Wherethrough it is, that this first part of narration, in the first
three Chapters, for end and manner of revelation, differs from the second, in
that, albeit in some respect, the first be of things to come, and for
instruction of the whole Church, yet it is properly, of things then existent,
and first, for the use of particular Churches: whereas the second through the
rest of the book, is only, of things which must be done hereafter; and whose
use, is first and properly, for the whole militant Church, and therefore, to
the perception thereof, John behooued to go up to heaven, Chap. 4.

4 Before the first part is a goodly and glorious vision of Christ, not
acording to the proper verity of his person, but according to his presence and
operation in, and toward his Church, and in special regard of these seven of
Asia: and therefore, commonly concerns them all, as we see that from it are
taken these properties and attributes which are fit to express his particular
dispensation toward each, and severally applied, as in them he works.

5 The Church of Ephesus, is commended, in that she has such a presence of
Christ, so painful, powerful, zealous, watchful, patient, and constant a
ministry, that albeit the mystery of iniquity was working, and false teachers
were busy to advance it, yet they were so watchfully marked, and mightily
resisted, that error was borne down, and truth held place: but so, as at
length, through falling from the first love, a step was made to Apostasy. And
therefore she is warned to repent and do the first works under pain of
remoouing the Candlestick.

6 In the Church of Smyrna, error and lies did so far prevail as heretics
durst blast of the name of the true Church, and depise the poverty and abject
state of true professors, yea cruelly persecute and blaspheme the way of truth.

7 Pergamus is praised, that, albeit, she dwelled where Satan his throne was:
yet she kept God his name, but having this note of weakness, that albeit they
kept themselves pure, yet Idolatry and spiritual fornication was tolerated by
them, even the doctrine of Balaam and Nicolaus Against them and their
followers, the Lord fights with the sword of his mouth.

8 Thyatira is praised for her works and love, and service, and faith and
patience, and that her works are more at the last then at the first. But has
this note of infirmity, that albeit she drank not of Iezabel her cup, nor
committed fornication with her, yea and was waxing in love and works thereof,
yet she had not either the knowledge or the courage to challenge her whoredom
as she ought, but even tolerated, that Whore, whom God will cast into the lake
of fire and brimstone, even the bed of torment, as also he threatens that he
will cast into great affliction that commit fornication with her, except they
repent, and kill her children with death.

9 In the Church of Sardis, if they could remember what they have received and
heard, they were happy: but upon defect hereof they are taxed, that having a
name that they live they are dead, and that their works are not perfect in
Christ his sight: Howsoever among them God has his number, whose hearts and
lives are answerable to their profession. To whom is promised that they shall
walk with Christ in white. And the rest are warned to repent and watch; least
he come upon them in an hour that they know not,

10 Philadelphia has an open door set before her, into which to enter for any
humane aid, she is of little strength, but what Christ opens, none shall be
able to shut; and what he shuts, none shall be able to open: so that at the
feet of this Church, notwithstanding her little strength, yet the enemies, are
feign to bow and give their names. And hereupon she has the promise to be
established as a pillar, not to go out any more, and that on her Christ will
write his name, etc. So as to have this honor permanent to be Christ his true
Church, that new Jerusalem from heaven, which shall never be moved.

11 In Laodicea they think themselves so settled, gifted, and strengthened as
they become secure and vainly presumptuous. This brings in a cold
indifferency, in matters of God his worship, men beco^ming Luke warm and
neither cold nor hot, the very next sex to plain Atheism. Christ, for
sovereign medicine against this evil, calls up to his true riches, wisdom,
banquet, and hope of his throne whereto we attain by fighting and ouercomming,
as did our Head.

CHAP. IIII.
THe second part of this prophetical narration, is henceforth to the 6. of the
last Chapter, of things to fall out after the time wherein John had this
revelation, and concerning, first and properly, the whole militant Church.

2 In this, is first, the preparation of the Apostle to the perception of these
mysteries, and then, the things revealed. The preparation is in the first and
beginning of the 2. verse. of this Chap. and is, by sight, by inuiting voice,
and the event of both in John.

3 In the first, besides the thing which he sees, are two circumstances; of
time, and the seer his disposition. The time, is after the perception of the
former things, wherein no intermission is to be imagined, but only the order
of manifestation noted, all being but one continual trance, upon one and the
same Lord his day. The seer his disposition is, that he yet looked, showing a
holy desire and earnestness, not resting in things already seen, but
intending still his eyes to see more. Which disposition, being in sobriety and
sincere affection, is never fruitless in any. That which, for preparation,
John sees, is an open door in heaven, a sign of an entry, opened unto him
to the sight of heavenly things, which neither are earthly, nor of earthly
minds comprehended. Mat. 3. 16. Acts 7. 56. Genesis 28. 17.
Thus, John Baptist saw the heavens opened, so did Stephen the first Martyr:
Jacob, upon such a sight, called L^z, Bethel, the house of God and gate of
heaven: and the Lord most plainly, showing what by this frame of speech is
meant, when he would tell of a more plentiful dispensation and sight of
heavenly things: hereafter, Joh. 1. 51.
says he, ye shall see the heavens open.

4 In the inuiting voice, are two, what the voice was, even one and the same of
a trumpet, which first spoke to him Chap. 1. And next, what the voice uttered:
wherein, is the commandment, and end thereof. The commandment is, Come up
hither, whereby is required, in John and all hearers and readers hereof, a
rising above themselves, from the earth and all earthly affections, to enter at
the door, opened by God, to see his secrets. For as God his true Church,
consists of such as are not 1. Cor. 2. 14.
of the world, so neither is God his dispensation toward them, neither their
graceful state thereby, to natural and worldly men perceptible. And hereof
it is, that throughout this Prophecy, heaven, in opposition to the earth, is
taken for the state of the true Church, as the earth is for the worldly sort.
The end of the commandment is, that he might show him things which must be
done hereafter; which sort of things, are most difficile to know, and yet we
must desire to understand. But the Lord does nothing, but that he reuealeth to
his servants Amos 3. 7.
the Prophets.

5 The event, in John, cleereth the end of the commandment. This event is, he
is ravished in spirit: not as if this were an other trance the former being
past; but, to show a further intending of spirit and degree of rauishment, now
requisite, for perception of more hid and retired matters then were the
former; which were, first and properly, of things then in earth existe^t, and
concerned particular and visible Churches: whereas the things following are not
only future, but concern, first and properly, the whole militant, which with
the eyes of faith, we must behold, as also her condition. And this is, to all
flesh impossible, to whom God opens not heaven, yea and whom he brings not
up, and to whom he shows not the same, when they are come thither. For in
these matters, before we enter in the Lord his Sanctuary, we are but beasts,
Psalm. 73. 17. 22.

6 This is the preparation. The things offered to John his perception, follow
through the rest of the book and have two parts. For as the whole, concerns
chiefly the state of God his Church, and God his administration in grace
toward her, and wrath against her troublers: so before the story of special
events, is put, in this and the next Chapter, a goodly vision of the general
condition of God his Church, and his administration for and toward her. As we
see in the beginning of the prophecy of Ezechiel, the like vision of God his
general Ezekiel. 1.
administration in the world: and as, before the first part of this
prophetical narration, a vision was put, to show the operation of Christ in
his Church. The first part then of the two, is in this and the next Chapter,
and may well be called a general introduction to the special story. The other
part, has the story of special events, to the 6. of the last Chapter.

7 In the introduction, are first, a goodly type of the Church militant, as in,
and against all troubles, it has, and ever shall stand stable, through God her
King, in the midst of her resident, and his general dispensation, toward her
gracious, and for her terrible, in this Chapter. And next, his particular
dispensation of this present revelation and things therein, for her instruction
and comfort: the excellent dignity, of which particular benefit, is by many
arguments, showed in the 5. Chap. And both these, are here for great use. The
first, for stablishing the heart of John and all Christians, against the
manifold dangers, wrestlings, decaies, and apparent eclipses of the Church, in
the course of the subsequent story, by setting down in type, such a state
thereof, as whereto always, at least with the eye of faith, we may look in
the midst of most desperate calamities. The other again, endeareth the
particular gift, and should greatly stir to study, as whereof, with good
reason, it was said in the beginning, Blessed are all that read and observe,
etc.

8 In this type of the Church in this Chap. her graceful state is showed:
first, in the presence of her King, even God himself, dwelling and ruling in
the midst of her: secondly, in her dignity, which she has of her Lord:
thirdly, in God his dispensation for, and toward her: fourthly, in her
dutifulness again to her Lord, in all true worship and hearty praise.

9 God is described from his office and from his nature. His office, in that,
as only King, Lord, and Head of his Church, he rules therein, and steadfastly
fixes his habitation in the midst thereof, as which he has chosen to be the
place of his feet, even the mountain wherein he delights to dwell, yea
wherein he will dwell for ever. This is showed by one only throne set in
heaven, Ezekiel 43. 7. Psalm 68. 16.
and one only sitter thereon; the other thrones being in the circle, but His
only in the center. His nature, more to our capacity, then as it is in it
self, incomprehensible, is shadowed by three jewels; all of great worth; a
Jasper, Sardine, and Smaragde: the Smaragde has this singular, that ^t is
diffundit in manner of a Rainebow about the throne. Now, albeit I am persuaded
that the perfect knowledge, of the natures and virtues of these jewels, would
give a sight of some analogy to God his nature, so far as earthly and
senseless things may express him to whom nothing is like, and that some thing
also might be pretily spoken hereof, yet in so high a matter, being my self
in expert in the nature and qualities of precious stones, I dare not be bold:
and what others, perhaps upon more knowledge deliver, I rather it be sought in
themselves, then I should speak in such matters, upon any man his credit. This
seems certain, that herein, the holy Ghost gives us to take up, the
trinity of that one, who accordingly, after, of the beasts, is praised thrice
holy. Wherein, as the Father, by the Jasper, and Son, by the Sardine, so the
holy Ghost, by the Smaragde is signified: Whose singular note, of being
diffundit about the throne as a rainebow, has a sweet analogy both to his
procession and name, particularly given him by the Lord, of Comforter. Neither
is this to be esteemed a vain speculation, because in this same Chap. the
holy Ghost is set out in seven burning lamps, and the Son at length, in the
next: for the consideration is much diverse, and no less necessary, for a
distinct understanding of the persons, as in them, and each of them, one and
the same deity subsisteth, according to their inward relation, so, sitting in
the throne: and for the knowledge of them, according to the outward economy or
dispensation toward us. For hereafter in this Chap. the holy Ghost is
described, more according to his graces and virtue in us, then in the former
consideration: and the Son in the next Chapt. is described, as Christ and
Mediator betwixt God and man: in the first consideration, both being one with
the Father, sit in the thron; in the second, for expressing God his outward
dispensation of grace, in the Mediator, by the spirit of sanctification, they
are described before the throne.

10 Thus is the presence of God the King of his Church. Now her goodly and
graceful state, herethrough is set out, in the type of twenty four elders;
whose place, number, and dignity, are to be observed. Their place is round
about the throne, noting their attendance, open sight, and easy access.
Confer with this whole type, the form of the camp of Israel Nomb. 2. Their
number is twenty four, for all elect, (for this is the type of the true
Church, according to the purpose of grace) who are of Israel his twelve and
Israelites indeed, and who are builded on the foundation of the lamb his
twelve Apostles: for these are the first borne written in heaven to whom Heb.
12. 23.
we all come. For as none had lot of inheritance in Canaan, who could not
deduce his pedigree from one of the Chap. 21. 14.
Patriarchs, so the new Jerusalem is builded on twelve foundations, bearing the
names of the twelve Apostles. This Church is larger then that of Israel
properly. And as of Christ and his Church, David and his state was a 1. Chron.
24. and 25. and 26. and 27.
type, so accordingly, he not only distributed all the Priests, singers, and
porters of the Temple in twenty four orders, but also the King his servants
monthly were twenty four thousand. Such a divine harmony is in the word of
truth. Now the dignity of these, is first, in their venerable and respectfull
majesty, through the image of their Lord and ripe knowledge, being no more
children, but all Senators. Secondly, they are all Kings, by their thrones and
crowns of gold. For, there are thrones set for judgment, the thrones of the
house of David. Thirdly, they are all priests as clothed in long white robes.
Psalm. 122. (...).


11 In this Church, the dispensation of her God in her, is twofold. The one
terrible, against her enemies, for her protection: the other gracious, toward
the saints. The first is expressed by lightnings, thundrings, and voices
coming out of the throne; as in Scripture commonly, his terror in judgment,
is by these expressed. At the giving of the law, God gave out his terror Exodus
19. and 20 Heb. 12. 18.
in a mount that could not be touched, in blackness, darkness, sound of
trumpet, and in voice of words, which they who heard, besought they should
hear them no more. But specially, when his judgments are set forth in
delivery or auenging of his Church, thus they are described Psalm. 18. and 46.
and almost every where. This is the more to be aduerted, for the often occurring
of these words in this Prophecy, and always in this sense. His lightnings,
are his swift consuming punishments compared to arrows Psalm. 18. His
thundering, is his horrible terror, as blackness, darkness, and tempest, with
which, thunder ordinarily is joined. His voice, is his fearful rebuke, when
he speaks in displeasure Psalm. 2. and 9. 5. the Lord speaks fearful
things in his wrath, but he will speak peace to his people, Psalm. 85. For
we are not come to the mountain which cannot be touched, nor Heb 12. 18. 24.
Psalm. 89. 7.
to the sound of words, etc. but to the blood of the Covenant that speaks
good things Now, these are said to come out of the throne, for that, as he
shows salvation out of Sion; so is he zealous for her: and all men
heere-vpon, feel either, mercy or wrath, as they are of her, or fight against
her. For, in the palaces of Jerusalem God is known for a refuge: Psalm. 48. 61.
There is he great, there he breaks the Bow, the Spear, the Sh^eld, the
Sword, and Psalm 68. 35. ^er. 25. 30. Amos 1. 2. Joel. 3. 16. Psalm. 61. Psalm. 27.
the battle. He is terrible, out of his holy places: He roareth out of Sion,
and utters his voice from Jerusalem. This protection made David to place all
his security, in being in the Lord his Tabernacle: where the Lord would place
him on a rock, and where he would repose under the wings of the Lord.

12 The other part of God his dispensation is gracious in threefold graces, as
the first was in threefold judgments. The three graces, are the spirit of
sanctification, the pure word of God, and the faithful Ministry thereof. The
type of the spirit of sanctification, are seven Lamps burning before the
throne; seven for perfection of all graces: burning, both for illumination, and
purging power: Lamps, for this work in our hearts, in which he infundeth and
nourishes the oil of grace to faith and love: our sound state wherein, is
compared Math. 25.
by the Lord to wise Virgins, having oil in their lamps, and we are warned to
have our lamps burning, and that we quench not the spirit. They are said to be
before the throne, as Chap. 1. for the Spirit his ready and 1. These. 5. 19.
plentiful outward operation still joined with his two subsequent instruments
in his own children. Sect. 9.

13 The second grace, is the first outward mean of the spirit, the pure word
of God: the type whereof, is a gla^^ie sea like to Crystal. It is before the
throne, as ever joined in his Saints with the spirit, and for that therein we
may see the glory of God with open* face: Isai 59. 21. 1. Cor. 3. That the word
of God for the purging and refreshing virtue thereof, is compared to water, is
evident by the ordinary speech of al Scripture. Hereof, the Lauer placed in the
entry to the Tabernacle, was a type, to which in Solomon his Temple succeeded
the brazen sea, whence this, here has the name. It is of Exodus 30. 1 King. 7.
gla^se, for the calm stillness thereof: for God his word is not as those
raging waters which stir up mud Isai 57. 20.
and dirt; but like those still running waters, by which David was led, Psalm.
23, And as the soft running waters of Siloam which refresh the City of God.
Psalm. 46. Therefore, Isai. 8. (...).
besides their stillness, they are clear as Crystal, much excelling that Sea
in Solomon his Temple, which was of Brass, both for the open and clear sight,
(for which it is also before the throne, as I have touched) and also for that
this Sea admits no mixture of any other Cisterne. It is not mixed with
blood, as that, Chapter 8. much less with bloody worsum, as that, Chapter 16.
Finally it admiteth nothing except the fire, Chapter 15.

14 The third grace, and second outward mean of the spirit of sanctification,
is the faithful Ministry of this Word: for it pleases God to save the world
by the foolishness of preaching. The type hereof are four (...). Cor. 1. 21.
bodied wights, translated in our books, beasts, through the poverty of our
tongue, which affords but one word for (...), and (...). They are called (...)
in relation to the two former graces. For, albeit the spirit be the spirit of
life, and life it self; yet as we see neither what way the wind comes, nor
which way it goes, so know we John 3. 8.
not the way of the spirit, although we feel the force of it. And howbeit the
word of God be lively, and of it, as of an immortal seed, we are begotten
to immortality, yet it has not that outward natural and bodily life in it,
which men have who minister the same, who therefore are called living wights by
their Ministry, begetting in us the life of God, and so are our spiritual
Fathers, Gal. 4. 19. And this is the third great grace of God upon his Church,
that he has given gifts to men, and raised up to us Prophets of our Brethren.
In them are showed first their properties, common and singular, and next their
function. Of their common properties, the first is their place, betwixt the
throne and the Elders, as Ministers and dispensators of grace from God to the^,
as also for all their function, whereof hereafter. Thus placed, their number is
four, as sufficient to go to all quarters, like these four Ministers of God
his general providence and dispensation, Ezech. 1. four Chariots of Brass,
Zach. 6. the 4 Angels, Cap. 7. Their next common property is, that they are
full of eyes, noting vigilance and knowledge, for they are Watchmen, and should
be able to teach, exhort, rebuke, improve and convince. For their place, and
calling, whereby they have to look continually to the Throne, to the Elders,
the Church, and to themselves, as placed for lights and examples to their
flocks; they are full of eyes before, behind, and within. Act. 20. 28. 1. Tim.
4. 16. Their last common property is, that each has six wings in all,
answerable to the number of the Elders, and so placed, as all are for flight
(not as of the Seraphim, Isai 6.) in such sort as they can intend flight no
where, whether they have not wings to carry them, having wings round about as
well as eyes; to show, as well as knowledge and care, so promptitude and fitness
to help diligently, and minister a word in season to the weary, to strengthen
the weak, to confirm the strong, to raise them who are fallen, to bind up the
broken hearted, to beat down the lofty, to seek what is loosed, and bring
home what is strayed. The singular property of each is: the first, had the face
of a Lion, showing courage; the second, the face of a Bullock, noting patience
and labor; the third, of a man, for prudency: the fourth, of a flying Eagle,
to signify, as a contempt of base, so, a sharp sight in heavenly things; as
the Eagle soareth high, and is able to look in the Sun at No one-day. Now,
these are not here so attributed, singularly, to each; as if they were utterly
depruied of the other properties, which cannot consist with their virtues,
which ever draw all these together in some degree, as these four. Ezech. 1.
are described, each to have all the four faces: but here, they are distinctly
attributed, to show God his wise dispensation in his Ministers of grace, so
dealing abundantly to all, as yet his diversity of graces is to be seen in
each one. Further, if we consider rightly, since the Apostles who excelled in
all: the first succeeding Ministers of the Gospel, were like Lions for
courage, subduing all, and taking the spoil, none able to rescue it. The next,
for bloody persecution and constant suffering, were bullockes. The third, for
prudent spying out of Antichrist, were men. And therefore Chap. 13. to count
the number of the beast, is counted wisdom, and the witty are invited thereto,
and Chapter 17. the mind which has wisdom, finds out who the beast is. The
fourth sort are of them, who, Antichrist being revealed and known, shall see
as Eagles, and soar up to the beholding of the hid secrets of God his word;
when the Angel stands in the sun, Chap. 19. as the daily growth of
knowledge in these and other mysteries of the Kingdom, give not only sure
esperance, but already great proof. Now this diversity of gifts, God gives as
he finds expedient, and as they may best serve for his honor and good of
his Church, he requires the use: sometime courage, sometime patient
suffering, sometime prudency in both, sometime a deep search of Scriptures,
and of the dealing of God; as according hereto, we see these four to utter
themselves, at the opening of the Seals, Chapter 6. Consider always, how
conveniently these eyed and winged wights are joined to the glassie Sea: as the
sea in Solomon his Temple was set on twelve bulls, and on the borders of the
bases for the Caldrons were Lions, 1. King. 7.
Bulls and Cherubins: the Cherubins, for their face and flight, answering to
both the man and flying Eagle, in this place. So sweet is the consent of
Scripture. Thus are their properties common and singular. Their function is
first described in general, and next, from the special end thereof. The
general is, God his worship, wherein, are two things; First, their continual
diligence night and day, in season and out of season, waiting on nothing else:
for who is sufficient for these things? see Paul his example, Act. 20.
Secondly, is the function or worship it self, wherein they kith such diligence,
which is, they are public Heralds of God his praise, even thereby teaching
others to do the same: according to the special end we see hereafter;
whereto, the form is substantially framed. For they ascribe to God all
holiness, even triple holiness to that triple one. Now, if our God be holy
who sanctifies us, that, as he is holy, we may be holy also; this teaches
us to study to our sanctification; for holiness becomes his house. He is
only Lord, therefore to be served; he is God therefore to be feared; and as
Psalm. 93. 5.
he is not holy without authority, but is Lord and God, so has he not
authority without power, for he is almighty: so that we may and ought to put
our whole trust in him alone; and as he has all power, so is he constant and
true, as he who is eternal and without shadow of changing, who, yesterday,
and to day, and the same for ever, is, was, and to come: his holiness is the
more admirable, as joined with absolute power, and such a power as is not
alterable: his truth gives assurance of his promises, to repose thereon: here
is all Religion. Thus is their function in general. The special end is, to
be leaders of the Elders, that is, the Church, in this same duty of public
worship and thanksgiving, by going therein before them. This end is clearly
showed in that when the four beasts gave praise, the twenty four Elders fell
down, following their very words, as it were, saying Amen to them: and this is
that fourth point which we noted to be in this Chapter, the worship
returned to God by his Church.

15 Their worship is by outward gesture, and by speech. The gesture is
threefold, prostrating, adoration, and casting their Crowns, all down to him
that sits on the Throne, and to none else, in casting their Crowns,
confessing their unworthiness in themselves, of that high honor whereto they
are called. Their speech, has the honor given to God, and the reason thereof:
for, God will have all our worship and reasonable service to proceed of
knowledge, not as the Samaritanes, who worshipped they knew not what. The
honor given to God, is, all whereof, by sign they confessed John 4. 22.
themselves unworthy. The reason is, for that he created all things, and that
for himself, as whereto no foreign cause, but his own will stirred him,
above which to search any cause, is not only gross ignorance, but
presumptuous impiety. And this reason concludes strongly: for he, of whom
are all things, and for whom are all things, ought only of all things to
receive all honor.

16 Thus have we the type of the true militant church of Christ upon earth, but
heavenly, such as always, by powerful protection, and gracious dispensation
of his Spirit, Word and Ministry thereof, he has preserved in the greatest
power of darkness, which, though the World cannot see, nor learn their song;
yet the lightened by faith will perceive and rejoice. This sight made Moses to
despise the pleasures of Egypt, and choose to be Chap. 14. 3. Heb. 11. 24. Psalm.
122. Psalm. 84. Psalm. 27. 4. Psalm 48 2. Psalm. 87 3. Ephesians. 2. 5.
afflicted. This made David to make so great account of the Courts of the Lord,
as to make it the head of all his desire to dwell in his Tabernacle, to behold
his beauty. Jerusalem is fair in situation, the glory of the whole earth, and
City of the great King. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O City of our God.
Even here, we are quickened together with Christ, and raised together with him,
and sit with him in the heavenly places. This is the Church Math. 16. 18.
builded on a rock, against which the gates of hell prevail not; which,
though men have often afflicted from Psalm. 129 1. 2.
her youth, yet have they not prevailed against her. For the Lord her God is
with her, and the joyful shout of Numb. 23. 21.
a King is in the midst of her. Herefore it is, that through all this Book,
howsoever to express the diverse conditions of the Church, in her special
wrestlings, sufferings, eclipses, victories, diverse types are brought, yet this
of the throne, elders and beasts, in all her alterations, still holds through
all.

CHAP. V.
THe first part of the introduction to the Story, was in the fourth Chapter, in
a goodly type of the militant church, and God his general dispensation in her.
The second part is in this Chapter: wherein is showed, in whom, for whom, and
by whom it is that the Church has all this presence, protection and graces:
and in special, (for bringing on the second part, in the story of special
events) by whom, and for whom, she has this particular benefit of this
Revelation; the great dignity whereof, albeit it appears sufficiently by
that which in the former Chapter was seen, it being from such a King as God,
to his own Church; yet here it is more plainly showed in two great points.
The one is, the retired highness of the matter, surpassing the reach of all
Creatures: the second is, the singular worth, and prerogative of that personage
by whom it is revealed.

2 The retired height of the matter, is declared first by the natural
condition of it, in it self: and next by the imbecility of all Creatures in
attaining thereto. The condition of the matter is, according to the manner of
men, set forth in four circumstances. 1. That it is in the hand of him that
sits on the throne. 2. It is a book. 3. Copiously written. 4. It is most
surely sealed. That it is in the hand of God, not only is showed the eminency
thereof, but also that the whole case of his church, and wrath on the world for
her hard entertainment, are directed by him as the work of his own right
hand; as also his careful memory of it, keeping the record thereof in his right
hand, as men do of these things they hold most dear. It is a book, for the
certainety of things, registered in God his book: Psalm. 139. according to the
manner of men, who carefully put in Register that whereof they would have the
record abide sure. For properly God has no book, but is his own book. It is
copiously written, in that the inside of Fzech. 2. 10.
the roll (for books must be understood, according to the manner of that
time) not suffising to contain the whole; it is written also on the back: and
this shows, besides the certainety of the matter, so carefully and amply
recorded, the special providence of God in all the particular cases of his
Saints, as, whose wanderings are counted, tears are registered, and hairs are
numbered. It is sealed with seven seals, to show the abstruse Isai 29. 11.
secrecy, as perfectly closed up, which the number of seven implies.

3 Now besides this condition of the matter in it self, the retired eminency
thereof is declared also by the imbecility of all creatures to attain thereto,
proved by a most sure argument, even experience, which is here set out after
the manner of men: in that all being by public edict provoked to the opening
of the book, all come short of it. Which first event of imbecility of all
Creatures, is more cleared by a second event in the Apostle, who thereupon
mourns a sore mourning: Here then are to be observed, the Herald, the tenor
of the Proclamation, and the double event aforesaid. The Herald is a strong
Angel, having a strong voice, such as becomes the Herald of a great King,
for making all Creatures hear him. And even herein is employed an amplification
of the imbecility of creatures, as which all are provoked, and have lawful
warning. The tenor of the Proclamation is, Who is worthy to open the book, and
loose the seven Seals thereof? showing, as a free essay offered to all, yet
that to atchieue it, was required great worthiness. The first event, is the
insufficiency of all creatures, whereof, according to the ordinary manner of
Scripture, is put a perfect enumeration, of those in heaven, in earth, and under
the earth: neither Saint nor Angel being found worthy of this work. And their
weakness is amplified, in that al were so far from the worthiness of taking and
opening the book, as none were able to look upon it. The judgments of God
are so great a depth. Upon this first event, follows a second, in John: who
having been called up to heaven, to see such things as afterward were to be
fall the Church, he is at the first, brought almost to despair of seeing
ought: whereupon, in a holy, albeit infirm, affection (having forgot on whose
breast he had leaned) as zealous of the Church her good, and heartily sorry she
should remain deprived of so great benefit, he mourns, and mourns much;
an affection now rarely found in any. And certainly, so long as, for obtaining
ought out of God his hand, for our comfort, we look to any creature, we
shall reap but mourning, till we see him, who only is worthy, to bring us
grace from the father.

4 The second great argument, of the dignity of this revelation, is the worthy
personage by whom it is revealed, to whom God gave it Chap. 1. And of him are
to be observed two things. First, his performing of that, wherein all
creatures had succumbed; and secondly, the event and effect following
thereupon. In the performer, are first, John his knowledge of him, and next,
the fact performed. John his knowledge, is first, by information, and secondly,
by sight. In the information, are the occasion, the informer, and what he
informs. The occasion, is John his mourning, whereof the informer would
comfort him. For it is most true, that as, holding our eyes on creatures, we
can reap but sorrow: so, till in conscience of our own wants, and felt
experience of the vanity of all refuge to any creature, we learn to mourn
and mourn much, we find no solid joy, either for peace of conscience, or
light of revelation. Our devils are not cast out but by prayer and fasting.
Daniel had then greatest revelation, when he had been in heaviness Mat. 17.
21. Dan. 10. 1.
three weeks of days. The informer, is one of the elders. Now we must
consider, whereof, these twenty four elders are the type, and, what personage
John here bears: which duly weighed, we shall not marvel, how this son
of thunder is informed, of one of the elders. John, here, is the type of one
entering in heaven to know God his secrets. Now heaven and the twenty four
elders, are the type of God his true Church, as has been cleared. As then,
the true Church is the pillar and stable seat of truth; so without it, is
neither salvation, nor any true knowledge: for God is known in Judah. Hereby 1.
Tim. 3. 15.
then is signified, that all true knowledge of Christ, is in Psalm. 76. 1.
his Church. The information has, first, a dehortation from mourning:
secondly, a designation of the singular personage: and thirdly, his prerogative
to perform: the dehortation, as it is grounded on the comfort, he was to show
him, so has it this use, that true light brings ever true joy. The
designation of the person performer, is by two titles. 1 That Lion of the Tribe
of Judah. 2 That root or syour of David. In these are to be observed, first the
titles, and next, whence they are brought. He is a Lion, but with this note,
that he is of Judah. Satan is a Lion, and a roaring Lion, that Lion, whom
Sampson rent, and out of whose mouth David, pulling 1. Pet. 5. 8. Judge. 14 6 1.
Sam. 17. 35. Genesis 49. 9. Nom. 24. 9.
his sheep, killed him: but this Lion of Judah, takes the prey, and none is
able to rescue it, whom, when he lies down, who dare stir him up? He is
the root or syour of David, by Judah and David to show the true Messiah promised
of their seed. These titles, are brought, the one from Genes. 49. the other
from the 11. of Isaiah, the one from Moses, the other from the Prophets. They
have Moses and the Prophets, says Abraham in Parable; thither Christ sends
the Jews, for true knowledge of himself. So then, the elders inform, but out
Luke 16. 29. Ioh. 5. 39.
of Moses and the Prophets; to show, that as, only in the Church true
knowledge is to be had; so, no voice should, there, be heard, but of the
Scriptures. Search the Scriptures, for they bear witness of me. The third
Ioh. 5. 39.
point, whereof the elder informs John is the prerogative, of this great
personage to perform. And it is set down in this one word, he has obtained
to open the book, etc. of which, more hereafter in the song. This far
knowledge John gets by information; the other degree of knowledge, is by
sight: wherein, the ordinary degrees of true illumination, for stablishing of a
soul in certainty of truth, here, in great wisdom set down, are carefully
to be marked. The first is the information of the Church and authority thereof,
as Augustine calls it, Opportunum inquirendi exordium. In which respect,
Libro de vtilitate credendi.
he says in another place, and in the person of one ignorant of Scripture,
Ego Scriptur is non crederem, nisi me ecclesiae commo^eret authoritas. Yet, in
this degree, albeit Contra Epist. fu damentalem. cap. 5.
of great moment, the soul rests not, but has, next, to aduert not only
what, but also whence the Church speaks: neither in this yet can thou
acquiesce, till, besides both these degrees, God by his spirit open thine eyes
to see and behold: so as now, thou beleeuest, not only for that the Church so
says; but because by her testimony, out of the word, God has lightened thy
mind to see and know, Non iam hominibus, sed ipso Deo i^trinsecus mentem
nostram firmante atque illuminante, Ibidem cap. 14.
as says the same Augustine. In the sight then of this person privileged
above all creatures, as John sees him, are first, his place and gesture in it,
and next his description. The place is betwixt the throne, and the four beasts
and twenty four elders: his gesture is that he stood. In both which is
expressed, his administration betwixt God and his Church, toward both (...).
His description is that he is a lamb, but of strange note. He is the lamb of
God, which takes away John 1. 29. 1. Cor. 5. 7.
the sins of the world, and our true passover. His notes are first, that he
stood as though he were killed, not that so it was in appearance and not in
truth, but this form Heb. 10. 14.
of speech is put, to show the continual recent virtue of his death eternally
effectual before God, as whereby Heb. 9. 12.
once for all he has purchased eternal redemption. His Zach. 3. 9.
second note, are his seven eyes, and seven horns, the seven spirits of
Jehovah, even that full perfection of Psalm. 45 7.
wisdom and power wherewith he is anointed above John 3 34.
his fellows, having received the spirit without measure, to rule all things
according to the high authority given him of the Father, of whom he has
received all power Mat. 28. 18.
in heaven and earth: ab^^dantly so instructed with all that serves for
perfect execution of his royal, priestly, and Prophetical offices. Thus is
the knowledge which John had of this personage, follows his fact, which is,
that he went and took the book out of the hand of him who sat upon the
throne, etc. for, as by him only we have all blessing from the Father (whom
none knows but the Son,) so particularly, this divine revelation. Mat. 11.
27.


5 Thus is his fact and performance of that which no Creature was able to look
upon. Follows the event ensuing hereon, in all which the dignity of this
Revelation appears clearly. And this event is much different from that,
which, despair of getting the book opened, wrought in John. For, now upon
clear sight, and assurance of one taking the book, and worthy to open the
same, is raised an excellent joyful song of praise; wherein fall to be
marked, first the occasion. 2. The Singers. 3. The quality and tenor of the
song. And 4. the order of singing: That they see the Lamb take the Book, it
occasioneth the song. The Singers are the 4. Beasts, the twenty four Elders,
the Angels: And lastly, all Creatures. Of these, the four beasts, and with,
and following them, the twenty four Elders, raise the song: the Angels in
course succeed, and sing their part: then all Creatures. Lastly, these who
raised the song, sing the last passage, and so close it. The quality and tenor
will appear through all, in the parts thereof. In the four Beasts, and twenty
four Elders, who are Precantors, are noted; first, their disposing of
themselves to sing. 2 the quality of their song, and 3. the tenor or substance
of it. They dispose themselves by convenient gesture, and by fit instruments
of praise. Their gesture is, falling down, and that before the Lamb, as
before they did before the throne; for he is to be honored as the Father,
and such is the Father his will, that who honoreth the Father, they honor the
Son also Their Instruments John 5. 23.
of praise are th^^^ Harpes, golden Vialls full of odours, and voice joined
therewith. Harps are known Instruments of praise through all the Psalms. The
Odours are interpreted prayers of Saints, powered out of golden Vials, that is,
faithful and pure hearts: the speech is from the Leuiticall Ministry, wherein
Incense was offered on the golden Altar, and had a typical relation to our
Christian sacrifices of prayer and thanks giving, Psalm. 141. 2
(which David sought that they might be directed before God, as incense) the
golden Vials of the Legal worship being types of faithful and clean hearts,
for faith is more precious then gold, and our prayers are odors and smell
sweetly through Christ, the golden Altar. 1. Pet. 1. 7
Now with both these the voice is joined, to show all earnest endeavor to
magnify the gift of God in this benefit, even with instrument, heart, and
voice, as David in the Psalms often. For God will have all, outward, Romans 10.
9 10.
and inward. Here is no ground for prayer to Saints, departed; an Idolatrous
error fondly builded here on Scripture mistaken: and yet, even in their sense,
giving thereto no warrant: for, give, that here the Saints departed, were said
to offer up praises to God, as no doubt they do always; what reason is that
for us to pray to them? but, as I have showed, all this is of the Church
Militant, here spoken. Thus they dispose themselves to sing. The quality of
their song is, that it is a new song, which sort ordinarily is of most account,
the destruction of Satan his works, ^estitution of all things, redemption of
man is a new work. Behold I make all Isai. 43 19. Chap 21. 5. 2. Cor. 5. 17.
things new. In Christ Jesus we must all become new Creatures: for old things
are past away. These same, Chapter 4. did sing a song to him that sat on the
throne: but it was the old song for the old work of Creation: here is a new
song, so much the more magnifically set forth and sung, as the work of
Redemption (that is the new work) in all degree of comparison passes the old.

6 The tenor or substance of their song has first, the praise of the Lamb his
worth^nesse to take and open the book, and next, the reason thereof. The
praise, for the form (whereby, in ^maeb^an manner, they answer to the
Proclamation of the strong Angel) is exceeding delightful; showing now als
triumphing joy, as before, the sight of impotency in all creatures bred to ^ohn
a dumpish sorrow. For, where the Angel proclaimed, Who is worthy to take the
book and loose the seven Seals thereof? These, now in exulting joy answer,
Thou art worthy to take the Book, and loose the seven seals thereof. The
reason of this the Lamb his worthiness and merit is his slaughter, and the
great effect and fruit thereof. Where, take heed, we esteem not, this to be
the reason of his worthiness absolutely, but in relation only to this fact,
and all grace procured to his Church. For that we have any access to God, or
that any blessing is obtained to us from God, it is through the slaughter of
the Lamb, and merit thereof; and this is that prerogative which the Lamb
has: the third point which I showed was to be observed in the Elder his
information, in these words, He has obtained, etc. And great reason is there,
why his slaughter should be of such merit For the only begotten son of God
died; and none took his life from him, but he willingly gave it, as who had
power to lay it down, and take it again. Joan 10. 18.
The effect and fruit of his slaughter, is our Redemption; which is amplified,
first, by that which buying implies: albeit not put here expressly, that is,
our wretched state, from which he redeemed us: for Redemption, of necessity,
presumes bondage, and miserable was our bondage. Secondly, to whom we are
redeemed, to God. Thirdly, by what price, neither gold nor silver, nor any
corruptible thing, no blood of Goats or Bullockes, but by his own, that is,
God his 1 Pet 1. 18. Heb. 9. 12.
blood. Fourthly, is the large extension of his benefit, even to all peoples,
kindreds, tongues and nations; not as that of the Paschall Lamb in Egypt, to
Israel only. Neither thus, for that all, of all peoples, etc find the fruit,
but the elected of all, Therefore it is said, thou have redeemed us out of all,
etc. The fifth and last point, amplyfying the effect of the slaughter, is to
what condition and estate we are redeemed: even to be Kings and Priests, Chap.
1. 16. 1. Pet. 2. 9.
to reign even here upon earth, where we have the kingdom of grace, under
hope of that of glory. Now, by all these, consider if his slaughter be not of
great worth, why he only should obtain to take the book, etc. and
therefore, alone to have the praise of it. In all this song and tenor of it,
are diverse infallible Arguments, that these four beasts be no Angels, but
Saints redeemed, as this whole type is evidently of the Church militant, and
not of any state in heaven.

7 Thus was the song of the four beasts, and twenty four Elders: the Angels
in course sing the next part: in whom, are notable three things. Their place,
their number, and their song. Their place is about the throne, beasts and
elders, for two respects: one of protection, and defense, The Angels of the
Lord pitch round about Psalm 34. 8
them who fear him, as ministering Spirits for the good of the Elect. The other
respect is, in the Church, and Heb 1. 14.
by the Church, to behold and learn the manifold wisdom of God, For, they
desire to look in these things: Ephesians. 3. 10. 1 Pet. 1. 12.
And this is one maine point of the mystery of godliness, that God in the flesh
is seen of Angels. To whom the 1. Tim 3. 16
Church, for God his wonderful dispensation, in, and toward her, is the
clearest looking glass of God his infinite wisdom. Whereupon, that reason is
brought by Paul for women their modest carriage in the church: For the Angels.
This should much stir us to a careful 5 Cor. 11. 10.
beholding of that, whereby even the Angels are made wise; and to a deep
consideration of our dignity, and care of our ways, whom God has made looking
Glasses to the Angels. Their number, first is set down indefinite, in the word
many: Next in a definite, but huge number, to show innumerable Angels, and God
Psalm. 68. 17. Dan. 7. 10.
the only Lord of hosts; all set for defense of his Church, for both their
place and number; consider the story of Elisha and his servant, In their Song
is showed 2. King 6. 17.
their earnest affection to the Lambs praise, as which they sing with a loud
voice. Next, is the Lamb his worthiness to receive all praise: whereof they
give him seven points, as he has seven horns and eyes. First, power, or
authority: for he has all in heaven and earth. With authority are requisite
riches. These he has, as who is abundantly rich toward all that believe, is
the 2 Cor. 8. 9. Romans 10. 12. Colos 1. 27. Chap. 3. 18.
riches of God in us, and only has gold tried by fire, to enrich the poor.
Now authority and riches without wisdom, are but the weapons of mischief in
the hands of a fool. But he has also all wisdom, and with wisdom strength:
so as nothing is lacking to him, or can let him to perform what him pleases:
therefore of all to be honored, in all things to have the glory, and of all
things to report the praise. Next to the Angels, all Creatures sing their part,
of whom a perfect enumeration is put, as verse 3. and in their song, they
affirm what the Angels had sung before them. This they have singular, that to
the Lamb they join him who sits on the throne; to show that they are one,
and their praise one. That singing of praise is attributed to unreasonable and
insensible Creatures, it is the ordinary frame of Scripture speech; to show
that all things, in their own kind, praise God; and that not only, for that
the glory of God, Creator and Administrator of all, is in them set forth; but
also, for that after a sort, they rejoice for the redemption of the sons of
God, hoping thereby to be freede from the vanity whereto they are subject Romans
8. 19.
through the sin of man, and under which they groan together with us. The last
passage is sung by these who first raised the song, wherein as the angels joined
him who sits on the thro^e with the Lamb; so these, to show the unity, and
that in praising both, they praise but that one eternal living God, they give
all praise to him who lives for evermore. Now in this course and order of
singing, we have to observe, that as the ben^fite belongs first and properly
to the beasts and elders, that is, the Church, so they begin the song. The
Angels who gather matter of praise out of beholding the church, succeed in
singing. Hereupon all Creatures in their kind rejoice (for certainly this type
has a true relation,) the Church lastly closes the song: to show, that as
from them it ought to be ginne, whereby all the rest may magnify God; so the
singing of the rest should serve the Church for a new vpstirring to insist in
his praise. And truly it is a great shame, that all both Angels and other
Creatures should joy at our good, and we remain senseless: and that the very
senseless creatures should groan under the burden of our sin, longing for
our full redemption, and we be nothing moved. And a huge sin is it, in
place of raising the song of God his praise, and stirring all both Angels and
other Creatures to the same duty, when we mar all that heavenly melody grieve
the good spirit of God, contrist the Angels, who joy at the conversion of one
sinner: and in place of gladness, make all both senseless and s^ikelesse
Creatures to groan for grief of ingratitude.

CHAP. VI.
THe general introduction was in the two preceding Chapters: hence is the
story of special events, prophetically foretold, and that, by proponing the
same under goodly and convenient types: of all which, as they are closed up
from the knowledge of all creatures, the sealed book, in the right hand of God
was the type: like as the revelation of them to us is, by opening of the
seals, expressed. Now then, all being comprehended under seven seals, six
of them are opened in this Chapt. and the events accordingly showed. The
seventh, holds to the end of the prophetical narration: begetting first,
seven trumpets, the last of which, begets seven vials of the last wrath.
Thus the course of the prophecy is heavenly and clear: all being, ^o
comprehended under seven seals, as the first six contain the beginnings of
sorrows: the seventh brings forth the succeeding heavier evils in the
trumpets, in six of which, the second dangerous mischief, in the degrees
thereof, is showed. The seventh, has the third and last wrath, powered out of
seven vials, to final destruction. All which evils are against the world and
worldly sort, in vengeance of the Gospel and true Church, persecuted and
contemned by them: till, by final destruction of all enemies and troubles, she
be beautified with fullness of grace here, to the attent expectation of glory
hereafter.

2 The six seals opened in this Chapt. afford six types of the ensuing
evils: to all which, this is common, that the lamb opens, and, that to each
proceeding type, is joined a speech, giving the signification. To the first
four, is common, first, that their types are horses and riders; and next, that
to each of them is adjoined a wakening voice of one of the four beasts, to
stir to attendance and perception, as of things, whereof, albeit many felt
the smart, yet none could discern the reason, but the valiant, patient,
witty, and sharp-sighted, and such as by them were wakened to perceive. Horses
(whereby not unlike events are in Zachary expressed) as swift, fierce, and
courageous beasts, show the celerity and the irresistible invasion of these
judgments. The rider, guiding the horse, and receiving power to work, shows
God his providence, directing and ruling all these events. What in each type,
is singular, the particulars will show.

3 The first seal opened, brings out a white horse and his rider armed with
a bow, and adorned with a crown. To the beholding whereof, the first of the
four beasts warns. Whose Lions face, as it shows courage, so his voice
like thunder, shows powerful preaching: such as were the ministers of the
Gospel in this time, abashed with no fear. The speech giving the
signification, is, that He went out conquering and that he might overcome.
White color, besides that it is the note of gladness, truth, and simple
pureness, both in Scripture and heathen speech: it is also, a note of
triumph. And ordinarily, triumphing Captains rode upon, or had their
triumphing Chariots drawn by white horses. The bow, is a weapon smiting
swiftly, and hitting both near and far off. The crown given him, shows
undoubted prevailing, for victors are crowned. The type, thus we see, accords
fully to the speech uttered of it. This is the type of the power of the Gospel
preached, whereby Christ subdueth all to his obedience, as riding on the word
of truth and meekness of righteousness, Psalm. 45. 4. 5
his right hand teaching him terrible things: having arrows sharp to pierce
the hearts of the King his enemies, whereby peoples fall under him. This rider
triumphs always, both in them who are saved, and in them who perish. These
arrows kill all, but differently. Some are slain to live, and being killed,
are cured, who will be cured and hear his voice, while it is to day. Others
are killed to utter destruction, in whose refractary souls, is shot in the
seal of their just condemnation, and of Christ his terror, verse. 15. 16 17.
For this is a strong archer, not like those of Ephraim, who being taught to
handle the bow, gave back in the day of battle: but even the true Joseph, the
feeder of Israel, who, though the archers Psalm. 78. 9
shot at him and grieved him, yet his bow abode strong, Genesis 49. 23.
through the mighty God of Jacob, and the stone of Israel. This occasioneth,
but improperly, the subsequent evils: and being in it self, the first of all
blessings, becomes to the world (madly rejecting, and foolishly impugning,
that which must conquer and overcome) the first of plagues, and cause of all
misery and destruction.

4 To the perception of the second type, upon opening of the second seal, the
second beast like the bullock, gives warning: while the patient sufferers,
and who, as calves, yield themselves to be sacrificed for the Gospel; both
themselves see, and stir others to perceive, in this second type, a just
recompense, on the world, for their blood shed inhumanly. The type is a red
horse, with a rider, to whom is given a great sword. A fit type for expressing,
both in color and kind of weapon, that, which the speech, joined for
explication, shows: that, to him was given power to take peace from the
earth. This is the type of bloody wars, a just punishment of the Gospel
persecuted. That who embrace not the word of peace from God, be embrued in
bloodshed. I came not to send peace but the sword, says our Mat. 10. 34.
Savior.

5 At the opening of the third seal, the third beast warns to behold a
judgment, albeit terrible, yet, which none but the wi^e-hearted, should
understand, that for contempt of the Gospel it was inflicted: others feeling
it, but mistaking the cause. The type, is a black horse, with a rider, having
a balance. The opening speech, has this, singular, that it is uttered by a
voice from the midst of the four beasts, even the voice of the Lamb, who
stands amidst the throne, beasts, and elders: Chap. 5. 6.
to show, that by his direction, all these events are directed and ruled, who
has the seven horns and seven eyes the spirits of Jehovah sent through all the
earth. This is the type of famine, fitly expressed by a black horse, a
doleful color. And what more lamentable case can fall, then that a mother
should eat the fruit of her own womb, even her children of a span long?
Famine, makes Lam 2. 20. Lam. 4. 7.
such as were purer then snow, whiter then milk, more ruddy then the red
precious stones, and like the polished Saphirs, to have visages blacker then
coals. To this horse and rider, is attributed a balance, to design exceeding
great scarsity, when according to the curse of the law, men shall Leuit. 26.
26. Ezekiel. 4. 16.
eat their bread by weight. Agreeably whereto, the voice denounces strange
scarcity; but with a caution of not hurting wine and oil: so as the want,
should be of wheat and barley, the ordinary repast of all men, and which might
worse be wanted then wine and oil, which serve for the great and dainty sort,
and are spent commonly, more for superfluity then natural necessity. Here
then, is a grievous famine, when the most necessary things for fustenance are
abstracted. The degree of scarsity is showed, in that a measure of wheat should
give a penny, and three measures of barley a penny, three of barley
counteruailing one of wheat: the Roman penny being in value near our teston
or ten pennies sterling: and the measure Chaenix, being of all measures the
sharpest, as which was the ordinary stint of a bondslaue his days allowance,
out of which, at most, four bread could be baked.

6 To the perception of the fourth type, upon opening the fourth seal, the
fourth beast warns, like a flying Eagle: to show, that albeit God, now, upon
continuance in rebellion and contempt of his former judgments brings on
heavier: yet the induration of men's hearts should be such, as none should be
able to perceive God his working, but such as rising above the earth with
sharp sight looked on his dealing. The type is a pale horse, a deadly color,
and well fitting such a Rider as death, and who is accordingly accompanied,
even with the grave, to express great mortality; whereto, the commission is
large over the fourth part of the earth, the executors many; in respect that
the judgment chiefly here meaned (pestilence) which commonly follows upon
famine, as famine upon war, comes seldom out single, but accompanied with the
former, both sword and famine, and moreover with noisome beasts, God his four
great plagues, to show here a heap of all judgments jointly on the world for
their induration. Ezech. 14. 21.


7 That to the perception of the two types following, none of the four beasts
gives warning, it is because the fifth type it self speaks, and the sixth
brings so sensible a judgment for greatness and strangeness, as all, how
endured soever, are compelled in it, to see and acknowledge the day of the
Lamb his wrath: so in it Christ his dealing speaks for it self, and these
who made the souls of Martyrs cry in the fifth type, in the sixth again, by
just recompense, are made to cry in their course, and that justly, to the
confusion of such as would rather hear the beasts crying, at God his first and
gentler strokes, than regard the pitiful cry of the slain souls. The fifth
type then upon opening of the fifth Seal, are the souls of Martyrs, lying
under the Altar, crying, receiving answer, and White robes. The speech opening
the scope of the type, is the tenor of their cry, and answer made thereto.
Then to come by the right sense of this type; we must weigh the souls their
demand, and answer made unto them. In the demand consider, first, who cry;
secondly, the place attributed to them: and thirdly, their demand or petition.
The Cryers, are the souls of these who were slain for the word of God; as to
which they gave testimony, and held that testimony; for it is the cause that
makes the Martyr; and he that perseuereth shall be saved. Their place is,
that they lie under the Altar, by frame of speech from the Legal worship,
wherein no sacrifice was lawful or accepted but at the Altar: at the foot
whereof, round about which, and upon which, the blood and offering in diverse
respects were powered, sprinkled, and offered. For it is the Altar that
sanctifies the offering. From thence hither a typical speech is borrowed, to
show, that all our obedience and sacrifices of praise yea the offering of our
lives and blood for the honor of God and testimony of his truth, is only
accepted in Christ, who is our Altar, and sanctifyer of all our oblations. For
properly, neither, souls lie nor cry, nor have robes: so as the Romans
grosenesse, who hereupon build their superstitious laying of Saints Relics
under Altars, is not only ridiculous, in that upon things typically spoken,
they build Arguments of existence in propriety; but also impious and
idolatrous. In their demand, is first their affection or disposition, in that
they cry, and with a loud voice: and next, the substance of their demand. How
long Lord, etc. This their demand is strengthened with an Argument from the
Nature of God, who is holy and true; whereto it seemed very agreeable that
speedy vengeance should be taken upon men of the earth for shedding their
blood so cruelly and abundantly. Now this cry is not here attributed to the
souls for any such affection in them, who are far from that, as resting from
their labors, and free of all perturbation: but by this frame of speech, to
show, that notwithstanding all God his preceding judgments against the world
for cruelty against his Saints: yet now it had come to such a height therein,
as it might well seem that no longer it could stand with God his justice, to
delay the final overthrow of that bloody state, by which the Martyrs suffered:
whose blood now seemed to cry for no less, and to cry loud; as crying is
attributed to the blood of Abell, as the cry of Sodom is said to have come up
before God, and as the Genesis 4. 10 and 18. 20. etc.
earth is said to cry out of violence.

8 Thus was their demand. The answer has in it a twofold consolation against
the reiourning of the sought vengeance. First, by word, and next by sign. The
first has two arguments of comfort, one, that the delayed punishment of their
persecutors should be but a space. For the hope of the righteous shall not
perish for ever. And the judgment of the wicked sleeps not. The second is,
the reason of the delay, the perfecting of the number of their Brethren in the
same honor of suffering: whereby, as the guiltiness, so the judgment of the
enemies behooued to grow. Thus a great benefit it is to die for Christ, and
foolish is the world, in troubling the Church, but hastening on so their own
destruction: from which it has no respite, but till the Saints be fulfilled,
as had Sodom till Lot was in surety. The other consolation, by sign, shows
a present benefit given to the Church, the more patiently to attend the
revenge of their blood on the world. The sign, is long white robes, which in
Scripture have a triple consideration: First, they are the note of our State
toward God: in which consideration Christ and his righteousness, put on by
faith, is our white garment. The second is our condition toward men, where our
inherent righteousness, through Christ dwelling in us, and making us to shine
as lights in the midst of a froward generation, to the conviction of
gainsayers, is our White robe; God bringing forth our righteousness as the
light, and our innocence as the noone day. The third respect, is to our selves,
in which, our garment of glory, in heaven is understood. Of these three, in
this place. The second is meaned, as a most necessary consolation to the Saints
of that time, who were not only murdered in heaps, but also traduced with
horrible calumnies, to eclipse the glory of their sufferings: whose innocence,
God now would bring to light, even in the consciences and confession of those
who had persecuted them, to the great glory of their sufferings, and high
account of Christianity, which had been so far abhorred. In sum, the event
signified by this fifth type, is, that notwithstanding the former judgments of
sword, famine, and pestilence, severally and jointly executed against the
world, for resisting the victory of the white horse, and his Rider, whereby
they ought been terrified; yet the fury of the enemies should still increase,
and that to such degree of cruelty, as in God his justice required their
speedy and final destruction, which nevertheless should be delayed for a
time, but so, as the rage of persecution being mitigated, the Church should
become of great account even before men. Therefore, in this fifth Seal, is put
the cry of Souls against cruelty, not that here it began, but for the hight
whereto the enemies were come now therein; as also a reason of God his patience
in such measure of wrong, was needful. And further, hearts are hereby wakened
to see the equity of the great plague in the sixth Seal, when God in a great
degree performs the promised vengeance, albeit then fully it shall be
executed, when upon pouring out of the seventh Vial, they shall be absolutely
destroyed who destroyed the earth, and the kingdoms of the world shall become
our Lords: the rest of Saints being slain by the beast, even the rest of the
woman's seed, Chap. 12. 17. and 13. 7. and 14. 12.

9 The sixth type, upon opening of the sixth Seal, (...) a great Earthquake,
the darkning of the sun and moon, the fall of stars, the departing of
heaven, and removing of mountains and Islands from their places, the speech
opening the signification, is the Kings of the earth, great men, rich men,
chief Captains, and mighty men, bondmen and freemen, should have such
commotion and alteration of state, carrying such imprinted sense and clear
sight of Christ his wrath and vengeance, as they should be filled with
desperate terror: so sore a judgment coming on them, as in a sort, the state
of the world should be ouerturned; these, who were as the Sun, Moon, and
Stars for glistering show in their Kingdoms, wealths, honors, commandments,
and great rooms, being darkened, and falling from their places, all their
glory and honor (compared to Heaven) euanishing as a scrole rolled up: such as
seemed most closely hedged about, as Islands being driven from their places, and
who appeared to be settled as mountains, yet removing. Which plague should be
so much the more grievous, as no condition of men (bond or free) should escape
it: all feeling such desperate terror and sorrow, as felt these, Isai 2. as had
the Israelites at the destruction of Samaria, Ose 10. and as Christ foretold
should betake the Jews at the destruction of Jerusalem, Luke 21. Neither is
this type to be drawn to any other, or extended to any further sense. To take
it of the last consummation is ridiculous ignorance, the seventh Seal as yet
not opened, and yielding more then four times as much story, both for time,
and events in time, as all these six preceding, and to extend it to the decay
of the visible Church, is impertinent, as which matter is handled properly in
the seventh seal, and six trumpets thereof. For albeit, that in this
Prophecy, both before, and hereafter, stars be put for Pastors of Churches,
and the eclipsing of Sun and stars for darkening of spiritual light, and
fall of stars, for falling of Pastors from the truth: yet here, where that
matter is not handled, and where the holy Ghost so plainly joins the
interpretation, we ought not iumble so distinct matters: and the frequent use
of these same Allegories, in the Prophets, for events of this same kind might
have taught so much, Isai 13. verse 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. and 14. 12. and 24. 19.
20. 21. 23. and 34. 40. Ezechiel 32. 7. 8. Joel 2. 30. 31.

10 Now, for right accommodation of Story to these Seals, we must fly two
extremities, wherein many Interpreters falling, breed to themselves great
difficulties, and darken clear matter. The first, is of these, who tying
themselves to more strait rules of interpretation the^ the holy Spirit has
laid to them, will needs have these seven Seals, as also the Trumpets and
Vials to be so many knots or periods of time exactlie cutted, within which,
the accommodation of each is to be sought; whereas they are no knots of time,
but types of distinct matters; and the whole matter comprehended in seven
Seals (whereof, the seventh affording the trumpets and vials, has the matter
of four times alse much time, as all the former six) shows the weakness
of this conjecture; yea, the effects of them are seen clearly, to be often
of one time, the former holding out long after the beginning of the next. The
other extremity, is of these, who well perceiving the absurdity of the first,
neglect in the accommodation, all consideration of distinct time; so iumbling
Seals, Trumpets and Vials, to the confusion of all order, and light of Story,
which in this Prophecy is most orderly set down, with special relation to
distinct events. Then let us hold this rule, that these six Seals have the
story of the first sorrows, as Christ calls them, Matthew 24. 8. as the
seventh Seal has both the second sorrows in the six Trumpets, and the last
wrath in the seventh, by seven Vials. Thus far then we have to respect time
in accommodation of these Seals, that albeit they show such ordinary
judgments, whereby God at all time has punished, and will punish the contempt
of his grace; yet here they have a special relation to the first time from the
writing of this Prophecy, to the ouerturning of the state of the Roman Empire,
so far forth as might make way to the succeeding more dangerous evil in the
seventh Seal, and six Trumpets thereof. Now as these beginnings of Sorrows
(so called, and of Christ himself recorded in the same order which here is set
down) fell out in diverse places, Matthew 24. 7. 8. So also in diverse times of
that first time: now and then here and there, yet always in this order, that
first the white horse goes out: after, the Sword, Famine, Pestilence, and
noisome beasts (God his four great plagues, Ezech. 14. 21) sometimes
severally, sometimes jointly, as God saw it expedient, fitting his judgments
to the growth of induration against that persecuting estate, till at length all
the glory and face, almost of that wicked Empire was ouerturned. And these are
the proper evils of that first time, for that albeit in succeding ages, God
has inflicted them on the world, yet neither in such degree as then, neither
for any degree thereof upon the world thereafter, come they in account, in
respect of heavier woes the^ they.

11 How the preaching of the Gospel went forth, conquering to overcome maugre
all opponents, besides the success preceding this Revelation, it had after
Domitian, who now let it with all his might, a great propagation, as in
story is clear, and whenever by persecutors it was crossed, immediately the
red horse and his great sword, in God his justice, comes forth, in bloody
wars, partly with forrainers, but most tragically of the Caesar's amongst
themselves, whereof the Stories are known, and too long here to be repeated.

12 Now famine ordinarily ever accompanies or ensues hard upon Wars, but
these times had as strange bloodshed, so vncou^h examples of scarsity, which
the godly who were men, (for that is all the man, Eccles. 12 13.) ^oted to be
in punishment of the Gospel rejected, See Tertullian in his Apology, and to
Scapula, and Cyprian contra Demetrian.

13 As induration grew and cruelty against the Gospel, how God sent out all
his four great plagues on these persecutors: consider the tragical time of
Antoninus surnamed the philosopher, a most bloody persecutor, and the record
thereof in story, Ab Armis nusquam quies erat, perque omnem Orientem Illiricum,
Italiam, Galliamque bella feruebant: terra motus non fine interitu ciuitatum,
inundationes fluminuns, lues crebrae, locustarum Species agris infestae:
prorsus vt nihil prope quo summis angoribus anteri mortales soleant dici se^
cogitariqueat, quod Antoni^ imperante non seuierit. The times of Gallus and
Volusianus were more miserable, and yet more, that of Valerianus and Galienus:
but most of all that of Maxentius Maximinus, and Licinius: all these four
plagues raging mightily, their Stories, will make any Reader aghast, and
comparing therewith these praedictions, to wonder at God his both wisdom and
justice.

14 Now all these plagues working no amendment, but stirring them to further
rage against christians, whom they took to be causers of all these evils, the
fiercenes of persecution was more intended. Dioclesian set himself to root
out Christianity: his Colleague Her^uleus no less bloody. Hereupon a great and
loud cry of martyred souls ascends, which till the appointed time of full
vengeance obtain long white robes. Thus God in some degree had comforted them
before, by imprinting his terror in the hearts of cruellest persecutors. The
Edict of Traia^ spoke for them when he was forced to put forth, that no
Inquisition should be made for Christians, much more the Edicts of Adrian, and
Antonius Pius, who under pain of death commanded, that none should be delated
for Christianity, except guilty of some other crime. Antonine the
Philosopher, whom no Apology could mitigate, yet in the Marcoman wars is
convinced of Christ his power: when in confession that he and his Army were
saved at the prayers of Christians, he called that Legion Fulminatrix, the
terrors affrighting so, Dioclesian and Maximianus; as, weary of Massacring
Christians, being overcome by their constant sufferings, they bequeth their
states, and seek secret corners wherein to hide themselves: what was it else
but a quiet confession of Christians innocence? Maximinus at his tragical end,
setting himself to blasp^eme Christ, yet is forced to confess him, and to
acknowledge himself justly punished for persecuting the Saints. Licinius is
feign to connterfet Christianity. But then it was, that the souls got the long
white robes, when Constantinus embracing Christianity, by public edicts,
Christian Religion is approved and established, and heathen worship abrogated:
The Church so becoming glorious, and of high account: and all former horrible
accusations, now seen and known to the world, to be lies. At this point of
time Satan is bound a thousand years, seats are set up, and they sit on them,
Chapter 20 The commemoration of Martyrs was always honorable amongst
Christians, and laudably of them, used at first (howbeit it turned afterward to
foul Idolatry) but that the heads of that same bloody state, should submit
themselves to Christ his name, and the Church thereupon to have so goodly,
free, and peaceable state as we see ensued: that was indeed, to receive long
white robes.

15 The promised vengeance yet behooved to come upon that bloody Empire, whi^^
in the sixth seal, comes in a high degree, when the whole state thereof is
shaken, and in a manner, defaced by the Goths and other barbarous nations,
whose names had been till then, not heard of: who (occupying the fairest and
goodliest Provinces of the Empire, erecting new kingdoms and states, and
changing the names of countries, every part, almost, receiving new inhabitants)
altered, as it were, the face of the world, and eclipsed the glory of that
pompous and bloody Empire. And this, out of all doubt, is meaned by the sixth
seal: and is that deadly wound which the beast gets in his sixth head,
which wound being afterward cured, that state, in the cured head, continues
the enemy and murderer of Saints (the rest of the brethren) albeit in an other
sort, till, for the full, final, and recurelesse overthrow thereof, we expect
a greater earthquake then this, or any since the beginning of the world, by
pouring out the seventh V all of the last wrath. That, some enterpret this
seal of these sturres, whereby the heathen persecuters were dejected, about
Constantines time; who prevailing against them ma^e, at it were, a new face of
an Empire, by abrogating heathenisme: it has no convenient analogy with this
type, and less clear accommodation to the signification, here set down by
the spirit. The slaughter and deiection of diverse Emperors from their states,
so long as, in the succeeders, the Empire retained the luster and strength,
(as, in Constantine, it was more confirmed and enlarged) was no such uncouth or
strange thing in that state, (which was but a very stage of Tragedies) as that
in such speeches, as the spirit uses in this type, it should have been
expressed. It is true, that the coincident case of Christianity established,
and heathenisme abrogated, was a great and uncouth thing: but which, in all
men's confession, cannot, by these speeches of darkening the sun and fall of
stars, etc. be signified. For that advancement of Christianty, was in the
fifth seal by long white robes expressed: whereby the souls were the more
patiently to attend the vengeance promised, which is here in a great measure,
but then, fully shall be executed when the rest of the brethren, even the rest
of the woman's Chap. 12. 17. and 13. 7. and 14. 12. Chap. 11. 17. 18. and 19. 6.
seed, against whom the Dragon makes war by the Vicar of his throne, being
slain^, the kingdoms of the world shall become our Lords: and all, both first
and last dead, shall be judged and aduenged, by the final overthrow of that
bloody state; which, first and last, is the murderer of Saints. Which now, in
this sixth seal, receives a deadly Chap. 13.
wound, but having it cured again, in the eighth head (therefore called one of
the seven) recouereth glory and Chap. 17.
worship of nations, and holds on the adversary still; till out of the
tabernacle of testimony open in heaven, at the Chap. 15.
seventh trumpet, seven ministers of the last wrath come against it: whereof,
the last brings a greater earthquake Chap. 16.
then this, to utter destruction of that state for ever.

That which has led exceeding learned men in this error of accommodation,
both here and in other parts of this Prophecy, is that wrong conceived
ground, whereof I spoke before, that these seals and trumpets are sections of
time; and, finding, that at the opening of the seventh seal, such effects
ensue, as are anterior in time to this fall of the Western, and great
weakening of the Eastern Empire, they draw back the accommodation. But, as
the evils of the six seals, which from Christ his own words, I called the
beginnings of sorrows, being taken whole and together, are anteriour, both in
consideration and in time, to the evil of the seventh seal and six trumpets
thereof: (as whereby are showed the judgments of God against the open rage of
the Dragon in his ministers, the Roman Emperors, by all the degrees thereof,
till induration, at length brings this ruin) and as the the second great
evil, of the seventh seal and six trompets thereof, taken whole, according
to that height of mischief whereto it grew, is posterior, both in
consideration and time, to the former: so in comparing parts, the second in
some first degrees of her grouth, is before the full end of the first. Here is
the deceit, that men think the effects of the six seals must have a full
end, before the opening of the seventh, upon their forelaid prejudice. For,
even in the time of Satan his first open rage, he was busy hatching the second
evil, the mystery of iniquity working, even then; albeit before it could be
reveled, or come to any great height, that which withheld, behooved to be
taken out of the way: the sixth head behooved to be wounded deadly, and the
seventh, rising by the wound, euanish in a short space: that the eighth, by 2.
These. 2.
cure of that deadly wound (the beast which was, and is not and yet is (might
bewhich all the world, and perish in the Chap. 17.
cup of the last wrath. So that Areth as says fitly, that this sixth seal
makes way to the Antichrist: who, though he was before this well far
advanced, yet the holy Ghost delivers his who^e grouth in the seventh seal:
thus distinguishing diverse cases, and not preciselie cutting times. And the
next Chapter, containing summarily the whole story of the seventh seal (before
it be opened for particular explication) shows, that as that mischief was
in some degrees working on, in time of the sixth seal: so, this Prophecy is
penned for clearing of matter, and not for calculation of times. Albeit each
evil (considered in the height thereof, and taken whole and together) is
delivered according to their order in time.

16 The sum then of all this Chapter is, that the Gospel, going forth in
power, should by Satan, stirring the Empire of Rome against it, so be
resisted; as God in his justice should punish that state, with sending bloody
both intestine and foreign wars, strange famines, and grievous pestilences,
severally and jointly, and all his ordinary plagues. Notwithstanding which,
they should still so grow in cruelty against the professors of the Gospel, as
in God his justice, required no less then full and final vengeance: the
patience of Saints being extremely proved. Which vengeance, in respect, that
for good considerations, in God his wise administration, (specially, for
fulfilling the sufferings of Saints, and therein the cup of the enemies
iniquity) it was to be for a space, delaied: left the Saints thereupon should
be tempted above measure, God gave them in that time, great relaxation from
persecution, and high account before men. And soon after (in such degree, as
in the time, might witness his wrath even to the consciences of the
adversaries, endured against all the former judgments) he powers a great
measure of indignation upon that bloody sta^e, giving it so, a deadly wound.

CHAP. VII.
THe sixeseales opened, exhibited the particular types of the first sorrows.
The seventh, is to bring forth so huge an evil, as the heart of John, and all
hearers and readers, were to be strengthened against the horror thereof.
Herefore it is, that before the seal be opened, to the manifestation of so
many degrees of a detestable mischief, in this Chapter a summary view is
given, of the rest of this Prophecy; in a general type of the evil arising,
of the provident care of Christ to preserve to himself a Church, under and in
the midst thereof: the victory of the Church over this evil, and her graceful
state thereupon. Thus, not only, by a timous praeception of deliverance, from
so dangerous a case, fortifying hearts, which otherways, at long and
particular explication thereof, without this praemunition, might have fainted:
but also, by this order of handling, in proponing these things before the
opening of the seventh seal, (whereof they are the proper events) implying,
not obscurely, that this second great evil, was, even in time of the former
sorrows, greatly advanced.

2 The mischief, is showed in four ministers of indignation: by their number,
place, and action; portending plainly, that evil which at more length and
particularly, in the six trumpets is exponed. Against which inconvenience upon
the world, how Christ entertaineth his Church, during the time of the evil, is
declared to the 9. verse: From thence to the end of the Chapt. is first, the
Church her victory, (at length in the seventh trumpet, and seven vials thereof
declared) and next, her graceful state thereupon; which is amply in the 21.
and 22. Chap. enlarged: here, both summarily proponed.

3 The number, of these ministers of indignation, is four: for the four
corners of the earth. See Chapt. 4. their place, the four corners of the
earth: to show an evil, which in the height of it, should ouergoe all: as is
clear in the fifth trumpet and end of the 13. Chapter. Their action, is to
hold the forue winds, etc. Winds when they are tempestuous, are noisome, but
blowing temperately and mildly, they bring a sweet influence of fertility to
the earth, and of purification both to sea and air. We live by emitting and
indrawing of breath: and without wind, all things would putrify. Hence in
Scripture to signify the influence of spiritual graces, speeches are
borrowed: Ioh. 3. Act. 2. Cant. 4. Arise o South and come o North, blow on my
garden, etc. See Ezech. 37. 9. whence most clearly, this speech is in this
sense. The withholding then of winds, signifies the restraint of spiritual
life and grace. The earth, sea, and trees, are also typical, as is evident in
the fifth trumpet, Chapt. 9. where the maine point of this foreshewed evil,
taking exec^tion, the ministers thereof are interdicted, hurting of these trees
who had the seal of God on their foreheads. This frame of speech, is also
from the practice of enemies in extreme destructions. As of Israel, Judah, and
Edom, against Moab. Marring every good field, stopping every fountain of
water, and felling every good tree, 2. King. 3. 19. Destroying so, the fields
wherein, the moisture whereby, and the things themselves, which in fields and
by moisture do grow. The earth then, is the place of the visible Church,
wherein are trees good and bad, some bearing fruit, some but leaves: but, as
here it is hurt by this plague, it signifies only the earthly ones, who are
in it, but not of it: for the sealed ones are not of Chap. 12. ^2.
the earth, but, albeit in the earth, yet the citizens of heaven. The Sea, is
the common worship, wherein men are joined, pure or impure, as it falls,
through the lothsomenesse or deadliness of the waters, making accordingly
Ezech. 47. Psalm. 1.
the trees which grow thereby, good or bad. Trees are men: of whom, such as are
planted in the courts of God, are always fresh and flourishing; like these of
paradise. Psalm. 92. 13. and 52. 8.
Christians, good and bad, are in Scripture, so ordinarily called trees, as it
were a vain thing to heap testimonies. This evil then, was to ouergoe the
whole visible Church, doctrine, worship, and professors therein.

4 Against this danger, the care of Christ is showed, ordering the state of his
elected ones, by imprinting on them such a mark, with the seal of God, as
thereby, they should escape the evil. Herein, come to be observed, the person
actor, and the number sealed. The person is of great note, as being an Angel,
but of singular quality, even the Angel of the covenant. This is clear, by his
notes, and by his action. His notes are two. His coming up from the East: and
having the seal of God. In the first, are notable, the quarter whence he
comes, the East: and that he ascends therefrom. He comes from the East,
not only, as our day star and Sun of righteousness, by frame of speech
from natural lights, which all arise from the East (and here, conveniently,
shows him to be the light and life of his sealed ones, when spiritual
darkness should possess all) but this has also a special allusion to the
last Chapters of Ezechiel: wherein, the goodly state of the Church, under the
Gospel, being described under legal types, not only is the glory of the God
of Israel, seen enter into the Temple by way of the East, and the forefront of
the house noted to be toward the East, and the land so divided amongst the
Tribes, as one end of each portion should reach to the East: but also, at the
east door of the inner court of the Temple (so situated, as, to each door
thereof, men behooued ascend by degrees, as this Angel ascends from the East)
none were permitted to enter or come forth but the Prince. All, both Prince
and people, worshipped before that door, but the Prince only went in and out
thereat. Neither might the people come in the Temple at all to worship, but
when the Prince was in the midst of them: they came in together and went out
together, yet at the East door, none but he. And out of the East door came
the waters, which did grow to a Sea. All, no doubt, to show; that no light
ought to come in God his house, but the Prince his light; neither any Doctrine
flow from the Temple but his; who only enters and comes forth at the East
door: in his light, all must walk, and worship; and therefore, no entry but
when he enters, no worship but when he is present, as in whom and for whom,
only it is accepted, and from whom only we are to take the rule thereof. His
light rises on all his own children, having all their portions reaching to
the East. That this Angel then, comes from the East, it shows him to be the
Prince: that he ascends, it notes his coming to be into his temple, to be
life and light to his sealed ones, in the midst of this darkness: even that
lamb upon Mount Sion, in the midst of those 144000. Chap. 14. when all the
earth followed the beast, Chapt. 13. Consider well, for this state of Christ
his Church, and his manner of presence in it, the 11. Chapt. His second note
is, that he has the Seal of the living God. This seal, he has essentially,
as he is the Image of the invisible God; and ingraued Col. 1. 15. Heb. 1. 3.
John 5. 26.
character of the Father his person: having life in himself, as the Father
has life in himself. And he has this seal, to seal others therewith:
giving life to whom he John 5. 21. Ioh. 6. 27.
will, as the Father quickneth whom he will: for him has the Father sealed.
All faithful, have this seal; that is, are sealed therewith. But to have it
in this degree, as therewith to be the sealer of God his Saints, it is above
the dignity of all creatures. He only is the Master of God his great Seal,
sealing all God his children, with Ephesians. 1. 13. 2. Tim. 2. 19.
the holy Spirit of promise. The foundation of God abiaeth sure, and has this
seal, the Lord knows wh are his. And this also he seals up in us, by his
spirit of sanctification; so, as, who call on the name of the Lord, depart from
iniquity. Having this Seal, we need not fear any darkness of Antichrist,
for our anointing teaches us all things: and the honor of our God 4 John 2.
27.
so requiring, we have our Seal in our foreheades, ready to give account of
our hope to all that ask 1 Pet. 3. 15.
us.

5 Thus are the notes of his person. His Action is that, he cries with a loud
voice, etc. His loud crying shows the greatness of the mischief: for
preventing whereof, as men in such cases do, he is said to cry with a loud
voice, so bewraying care. The Substance of his cry, is in a commandment, and
the end thereof. The commandment is, not to hurt, etc till we have sealed etc.
His commandment shows authority, whereby he rules all things in heaven and
earth, both in mercy and justice. As our brother, God is his God. I go to your
God, and my God, your father and my father, John 20. 17. The end of the
commandment is, that the servants of God may be in surety through his Seal
in their forehead. The speech is from the 9. of Ezechiel: where, upon, the
destruction of Jerusalem, Temple, and all to ensue by the state of Babell: such
a type of caution is put for preservation of such as mourned, and sighed for
the iniquities committed in that City: so, here a spiritual desolation, and
Captivity being to come on the visible Church by mystical Babylon: the like
Caution is provided for the like sort. The marking on the forehead, is put but
according to the manner of men, who imprint a conspectible mark on what they
would have easily discerned from common, so as the beholders cannot miss to see
it. Not that this Seal was perceptible to Antichrist, or Ministers of his
deceit and cruelty. For the world saw not these sealed ones, neither could
learn their Song, Chapter 14. 3. but as I have said, by this frame of speech,
to show their sure protection by the providence of their God.

6 In the number sealed, consider of whom it is, and what it is. It is of all
the Tribes of Israel, that is, of all true Israelites, the Elect of God, and
Israelites indeed, Gal. 6. 16. For properly it cannot here be taken: but the
speech is from the Church of Israel, and the ordinary manner of the
Prophetical denunciations: for, as when the Church consisted only of Israel
properly, the same was little in comparison to that time, when by the Gospel
the Gentiles join thereto; and as, even of the Church of Israel, though their
number were as the sea-sand, yet but a remnant was saved: even so, in time of
Antichrist his darkness, the true Church of God Isai 10. 22.
should be narrow (as Israel, yea, but a remnant of Israel, as the Temple,
while Court and City are given to the Heathen, Chapter 11.) in comparison to
the state following in the victory, when (as by joining of all Nations, the
Church of Israel was enlarged) by the coming of these out of great
tribulation, who with palms and white robes celebrate the victory, and by
rising of the rest of the dead after a thousand years, an innumerable
multitude shall fill the Church. The number then Chap. 20.
is a few secret select ones, abiding with the Lamb on Mount Sion: while all
the earth follow the beast. This number is 144000. to show a competent Company,
even then when none appeared to be left, Of the further mystery of this
number, see Chapter thirteen in the end.

7 (...) the 9. verse is the third type and part of this Chapter, of the Church
victorious over this mischie^e: set down two ways. First, as John had the
knowledge thereof by seeing and hearing that company which are the type
Secondly, as he is otherwise informed of their case. The first to the 13.
verse, the next to the end. That which John did see of them, is their number,
place and habit. The number is innumerable, and that of all Nations, Kindreds
and Tongues: to show the largeness of the Church in this state, far beyond
that under the evil, and here expressed by the names of Nations, Kindreds, and
tongues, according to the manner of Prophetical speech, as is before touched.
These have notes, far differing from the former, arguing evidently this type
to be of the Church victorious over the evil. The former, were few marked and
secret ones, closed up from a common plague, whose song none could learn but
themselves: here are innumerable with public Ensigns of victory, in high and
loud song celebrating the same, and praising him by whom. These come not in
place till the Tabernacle be opened in heaven, and the Vials of the last
wrath, be a pouring out on the beast, Chapter 15. 5. Their place is standing
before the throne, the place of the true Church, Chapter 4. and accordingly
interpreted of the elder, verse 15. So in this sense, it is said, Chapter 11.
to the two revived witnesses, Come up hither. Their habit is white garments,
so interpreted v. 14. with palms in their hands, as victors over great
tribulation, out of which they are come, verse 14. the Palm with all nations
is the sign of victory: so justly in remembrance whence they are come, these
celebrate now the feast of Tabernacles, victorious over the beast, his
character, name and number thereof, Chap. 15. 1. Thus far John sees of them.
He hears them cry, and with a loud voice. Here now these sing, and with a
loud voice, so as all may hear and learn, who will not harden their hearts.
To the former was no song attributed, they had one, but which none could
learn, Chap. 14. 3.
except themselves. Here is a Song in the ears of heaven and earth; The Song
of Moses, and of the Lamb, Chapter 15. The substance of their Song, as it is
excellent, so it well fitteth their case. Salvation is of our God, and of the
Lamb. Antichrist derived salvation from so many, and divided the praise
thereof among so many, as little part thereof remained to God and the Lamb:
These to show a plain crossing of all Popery, and a triumph over it,
acknowledge all salvation to be of God in Christ, and therefore all praise
thereof to belong only to our God and the Lamb. This overthrows all wherein
the Romans contest with us, we pleading nothing, but that All Salvation is of
our God and the Lamb: In which song if they would join with us, al debate were
ended. This Song, by times the Jews (no obstinate) shall learn, and washing
their garments in the blood of the Lamb, shall come out of great tribulation,
being at last fully wakened by a voice from the throne to sing with us
Haleluiah, Chapter 19. All Angels affirm this Song, of whom their place and
song, Chapter 5.

8 Thus far John heard and saw of the case of these. Now from the thirteenth
verse is, what he learned by information; wherein come to be considered, the
Informer, one of the Elders, see Chapter 5. Sect. 4. and what he informs.
Wherein, again is the occasion, and the matter whereof, upon that occasion he
informs. The occasion is, John his ignorance, and desire of knowledge: to the
consideration of the one whereof, and so to the desire of the other, he is
stirted up by an Interrogation, What are these? she wing an admiration, as of
an vncouch and strange thing in the eyes of the world, when men in so great
numbers shall arise from under Antichrists darkness, to the true light of the
Gospel, whereof the daily increase makes the enemies gnaw their tongues for
sorrow, and amaseth the world: but greater wonder shall yet be, when upon the
beast his fall, the Jews forsaking their own righteousness, which is by the
Law, and taking hold of the righteousness of God, by washing their long white
robes in the blood of the Lamb, shall join with us in this song: so as the
Church herself with joyful admiration shall be moved to say, Who has
begotten me these? behold I was barren, whence are these? For the speeches
after following, see Isai 25. and 49. and 60. John his answer has a
confession of his ignorance, and a modest request of information: whereupon the
Information follows; first, showing what and whence they are, according to
the double demand: and next, showing their graceful state upon this their
victory, through God his dwelling amongst them, and copious dispensation of
grace. Their coming out of great affliction, is the coming from under the
bondage of Antichrist: which how great spiritual affliction it is, they know
who have gotten the victory, in whose mouth God has put this song, Salvation
is of our God, and of the Lamb. For this tribulation, see the fifth Trumpet,
Chapter 9. And when God opens the eyes of the Jews to see their common
Savior, then shall they well understand what both spiritual and bodily
affliction they now are in which shall endure, so much the more their victory:
He shows their long white robes to be their justification in the blood of
Christ apprehended by true faith, expressing the action of faith in these
words, they have drpt, etc. Thus noting a great difference betwixt them now,
and when their garments were dipte in the mire of men's merits, in the filthy
sincke of Antichrists Indulgences, and puddle of Purgatory: and in Jews now a
great change, no more seeking to establish their own righteousness, which is
by the law, or placing it Romans 103.
in diverse washings, rites and carnal ceremonies, which cannot purge from
sin: but dipping their robes Heb. 9. and 10. 4
also in the blood of the Lamb. So lively the holy Ghost painteth out these
things. Thirdly, he shows of them, that their standing before the throne,
notes the true Church of God, worshipping him in truth.

9 Thus is the victory, now their graceful state hereupon is showed in a
freedom from all evil, and affluence of all good, and that through God his
presence, and protection, and the Lamb his gracious dispensation, set out in
so goodly a manner, as many think the things here promised to be of the
Kingdom of glory; but here in magnifike terms, the goodly state of the Church
is expressed according, as for plenty of light and peace, she shall be upon
the destruction of Antichrist, and all open enemies he^e in the Kingdom of
grace, and no description of the glory to (...) revealed in heaven: which
neither the eye can see, nor the ear hear, nor heart of man conceive, and in
heaven is no such dispensation of the Lamb as here is noted, who then shall
surrender the Kingdom to his Father, that God may bo 1 Cor. 15. 24.
all in all. As in Antichrist his prevailing, the state of God his Church was
showed in the 144000. and the Church victorious over him (now discovered, and
going to destruction) in the number innumerable, and their victorious gesture:
so here the goodly state of the Church (now free of all invasion or bondage,
and having plenty of light and quiet state) is magnifickly expressed, and yet
but in such frame of speech, as is ordinary in the Isai 25. and 49. and 60.
Prophets for such cases. This state of the Church is largely handled in the
end of this book, as the first (in the hid and sealed ones) is in the six
trumpets, and the victory in the seventh, and seven Vials thereof. Now as I
have said, according to the phrase of the Prophets, these blessings are set
forth under things corporal, and amplisied each by removing the contrary
evil. They shall not hunger for the Lamb shall feed them, they shall not
thirst, for he shall lead them to the fonntaines of waters, they shall feel
no burning, for God shall ouershadow them, etc. the ouershadowing is from the
cloud in the wilderness: for the leading and feeding, see and weigh, Psalm. 23.
a profession of these graces, which the man of God felt. See John 4. 13. and 6.
27. etc. It is marvel, how men acquainted with the ordinary style of
Scripture, should have drawn this to any other sense; but hereof more upon the
21. and 22. Chapters. This state is in these few words expressed, Chapter 19.
The Bride is prepared. And accordingly, in all her goodly ornaments showed to
John Chap. 21.

CHAP. VIII.
THe sixth seal being opened, first was exhibited the proper event thereof in
the end of the sixth Chapter; and in the seventh Chapter, a summarie view given
(for strengthening hearts against the terror thereof) of the whole matter of
the seventh seal; which here, now is opened, and special events thereof
declared, through the rest of all this prophetical narration. Of these, we
have, first, a general preparation; and next, the particular execution. The
preparation, has an incident effect immediately following upon the opening of
the seal: which is, Silence about half an hour. To show an attent
expectation of great things; whereto well, the portending of them in the former
Chapter, might have erected the minds. And the waiting for rare or fearful
events, works a silent attendance. When the wise speak, then all keep
silence: and Job 29. Habac. 2. 20.
when the Lion roareth, all the beasts of the forest hold their peace. Besides
this, great things commonly come forth with process and preparation. And
truly, God who is slow to wrath, is, in a sort forced to pour out heavy
indignation.

2 After this incident effect, is the preparation in the ministers, and in the
orderer of the whole errand. The ministers are described by their nature,
Angels. Quality, ministering Spirits, as who stand before God, Luke 1. And
instruments of ministration, Trumpets. In the instruments, are noted two
things. First, that they are trumpets, and secondly that they are given to
them. That the instruments are trumpets, it shows that their ministry in this
ensuing matter, is to be sounders of the alarume, and giuers of the figne for
invasion of the world by each woe, as als many armies of him who is Lord of
hosts: as also, that they are denouncers, and that of great and weighty matter.
For, Trumpeters are messengers of great things, and, but for great personages.
In this also is implied, that the end of their ministry and of these judgments
denounced and executed, is to waken up the dead world to repentance, or make it
inexcusable against final wrath. See the end of Chapter 9. Therefore when the
world is not wakened with Trumpets, it feels justly full cups of wrath
tumbled out. That these Trumpets are given to the Angels, it shows them to
do nothing without special warrant and mandate.

3 Thus are the ministers; the master and orderer of the errand, is described
by his office, and his actions. His office, that he is an Angel: for that, is
here the name of office and not of nature. And this angel differs far
from the other seven: for he is the Angel of the covenant, clearly by all his
notes. He stands as the other seven, for he also, in some respect, is a
minister: but he has a particular stand, which is at the Altar, as High
Priest. He is furnished also with an instrument, but which is proper to the
Priest, and belonging to the most holy place; to wit, the golden Censer. He
has also somewhat Heb. 9. 4.
given to him, but a rare gift; that is, Many odors, whereby all the prayers,
and of all Saints is acceptable. For by him we offer up sacrifices to God. In
the fifth Chapter, Ebr. 13. 15.
the prayers of Saints are called Odors, and here the odours are distingushed
from the prayers: only to show, how it is, and in whom that they are odors;
that is, acceptable to God. These odours are said to be given him, according as
he acknowledges all things to be given him of the Father; as he who is both
sealed and sanctified, and as mediator, has received the spirit without
measure. This is by allusion to the Leuiticall ministry, and not to the Mass.

4 His actions are two: one, of gracious dispensatio^, another of wrath; as
he, who is both the propitiation for Saints, and trcader of the winepresse of
Gods indignation: both an elect precious stone, and a stone of offense. And our
consolation herein is great, that to him all judgment is committed. His
action of grace, is the offering up of the Saints prayers, and making the
grateful smoke of them go up before God through his odors: and this has a
double consolation: first, that God always in the midst of wrath remembers
mercy, and is never so carried in wrath to pour out heavy indignation on the
sinful world, but that the loving care of his elect comes first in place:
secondly, that the prayers of Saints haste on indgement on the world, while
they send up sighs and groans for God his dishonor, a great encouragement to
prav. If Israel had turned to me, how soon would I have humbled their
enemies? Psalm. 81. 13. 14
His second action, is a sign given to his trumpeters, who stand attending it
from him, to set too, to particular execution. The sign is, He fills the
Censer with fire, etc. In token of burning wrath: and with fire of the Altar.
For, as the acceptance and sanctification of all the Samts and their offerings
is of him, who is the true golden Altar, so all his wrath on the world is from
him: in whom, all men, in God his predestination, are ordered to their diverse
ends, according as they are either given to him, and builded on him, or passed
by, and stumble at him. This fire, is also from the Altar, for the spiritual
judgments that it works. For the fire of this Altar has double effects. It
is gracious, nourishing, purging, renewing, and strengthening to the elect, Isai
6. And it is a fire devouring the adversaries, and burning up the world as
stubble: for our God Deuteronomy. 4. 24.
even a consuming fire. Christ, coming into the world, brought both the one
and the other, though the one improperly. Thus, from one and the same Censer,
and one and the same Altar, one and the same fire, both sends up a sweet
perfume, and down a consuming wrath. As the prayer of Elias brought both
fruitful rain and devouring 1. King. 18.
fire: and as the two witnesses, Chapter 11. are to the godly, candlestickes
and refreshing olives; but, with fire out of their mouths, slay their
adversaries. If I be the man of God (says Eliah) let fire come down from
heaven, 2. King. 1.
etc. Upon this fire cast on the earth, follow Lightnings, Thundrings, Voices
and Earthquakes, evident types of horrible judgments and commotions, Chapter
4. And so hereby the attending Trumpeters get sign to blow the alarm, and
denounce particularly the judgments whereby God was now to plague the blind
and obstinate world. And upon the sign thus given them, they set too in order
to blow. See Ezech. 10 for this casting of fire, in sign of wrath and God his
departing from his sanctuary.

5 Thus far is the general preparation. The particular execution, has in
each, the denunciation, by the trumpet, and the effect ensuing. And are divided
in lighter or less woes, and heavier and greater. The first sour, in degree
of comparison, are lighter, and are in this Chapter. The three other, are
heavy: whereof, two are thorowout the 9, 10. and a good part of the 11. Chapt.
The last holds to the end of the whole narration. The first four, are als
many degrees of the mystery of iniquity working on to that fearful height,
which is in the fifth trumpet accompanied with a no less deadly evil, for
just punishment thereof, in the sixth trumpet: which being ineffectuall to work
repentance, comes on the last wrath in the seventh trumpet.

6 Upon the first sound, are seen hail and fire mingled with blood: which,
cast on the earth, that is, in the visible Church, Chap. 7, Section 2. Produce
then a terrible effect, That all green grass, etc. The judgments of God in
Scripture are ordinarily expressed by hail, fire, Psalm 11. 6.
and stormy tempest. God borrowing speeches from natural things to set forth
his terror. But this speech here, has a special allusion to that plague on
Egypt, Exodus 9. and Psalm. 105. Now then, to find the analogy, as here the
burning up of grass and trees, is to express the decay of spiritual life,
and moisture in all true Christianity: and that not only in weak ones, as
grass; but in the strong, as trees: so, here we are to search, agreeably to
this effect, what is answerable to hail and fire. It is the fire of God his
spirit, begetting in us faith and love, which makes us Christians weaker or
stronger, according to the measure of grace given us, and our grouth therein:
and that by the watering and moistening of sweet showers of grace, as dew upon
the mowne grass, or rain on the thirsty ground. For of heat and moisture
comes all flourishing greenness. Hereof it is, that so often, in Scripture,
we are exhorted to edify on another in love. This burning heat did eat up our
Lord, and in it the Apostle burnt: this fire of love is the band of perfection,
whereby we grow up, as one man in Christ. And hereupon, are Col. 3. 4.
in Scripture, so many attestations to be like minded, and detestations of
debate and division. Now when this fire of love is turned into the fire of
contention: then they, from whose mouths should drop, wisdom and refreshing
showers, send out the could hail of their own affections and frosty showers
of self-love: which in place of comforting and nourishing the herbs and
trees, by wholesome word and sound example of life; in contrary, burn them
quite up, as does hail and fire. This was the first evil, which entered into
the Church, for the first degree whereof, the Church of Ephesus was taxed.
Which degree betime growing, not only to coldness in love, but also to fiery
contention, and mixed with frosty hail, wrought this fearful effect, and
first step to antichristianisme, even want of true religion, and of the life of
God in a great part. This fire and hail, is said to have been mixed with
blood, for that not only this evil of fiery debate began even while as yet
hot persecution lasted against the Church by heathen Emperors; but also, for
that it entered in the Church, in such degree as proceeded to cruelty and
bloodshed. This evil, Satan labored to bring in from the first times of the
Gospel, but that the fire of love and sweet showers held things green. The
first that greatly kindled this flame, was Victor Bishop of Rome: whose fi^ie
headines in a frivolous matter, had it not been repressed by the grave rebukes
of Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, and Policrates of Ephesus, had made a great
burning. Eusebius records (Lib. 8.) of the persecution by Dioclesian, that it
was a necessary correction of the Church, which had fallen to over great a
custom of sin (see how greenness was burnt up) and whose pastors were begun
to savor of pride and tyranny (see the step to the next evil.) Thus we see
how the fire was even mixed with blood: but soon after, how far this fire
brake out, upon the first relaxation under Constantine, it is wonderful: so
as, if the prudent care of that Prince had not been the greater, that first,
and famous Council of Nice, had been a miserable proof of this fire: which
being but restrained, there, for the time, how vehemently, to the disgrace of
christianity, and burning up of all true religion in the hearts of men, it
brake out thereafter, is manifest in the story. So, as Constantine, in his
Epistle to the Synod of Tyrus, exprobrateth to them, that he saw nothing in
Bishops dealings but an overthrow of all religion. This, made Nazianzen to
utter that hard speech: That he never did see a good effect of any Synod:
because, in stead of the fire of love, mixed with the sweet rain of
health^ome doctrine, and spirit of Christian lenity, the fire of contention,
and frosty hailestones of destruction ruled all. Yea, so far herein, were
the Bishops carried one against other, as it is monstrous, what malice,
falsehood, and cruelty, they practiced: so as in the times of Constans,
Constantius, and Valens, the fire and hail were mixed with blood. This made
still a decay of true religion both in small and great.

7 Upon sounding of the second trumpet, a mountain of fire is cast into the
Sea; whereupon the third part thereof becomes blood, etc. Mountains in
Scripture, are put for high and proud States. Then a burning mountain, is the
fire of ambition, as the first was of contention. For, albeit contention
arises of pride; yet at first, the debate was not directly for prerogatives
and places, as now, in this second evil is meaned. Remember always, as I
touched Chap. 6. Sect. 10. and 15. that so, these evils are ordered, for course
of time, as both the first holds on with the succeeding, and the succeeding,
in time of the formers height, is begun to work. This is cast in the Sea,
whereas the first was on the earth: to note a decay in a higher degree then the
first, as the sea is a higher and purer Element then the gross earth. The
first decay was of religion, in the hearts and lives of men. This second, is in
the ordinary worship, which in great part now becomes corrupted; and thereby,
a great part both of common professors and Pastors, become dead in
superstition. The creatures living in the Sea, are common Christians. The ships
are the occupiers therein, designing Churchmen; as is plain Chap. 18. where
shipmasters, mariners and occupiers in the Sea, bewail the fall of the Whore.
The first death was different from this. That, was in life and manners,
objected to the widows, 1. Tim. 5. and to the Church of Sardis, Chap. 3. 1.
This, is of another kind, objected to Ephraim by the Prophet. When Ephraim
Hosh. 13. 1.
spoke there was trembling, but he is dead in Baal. The allusion is to Exodus 7.
19. etc. When the waters are healthsome, all things in them live, Ezech* 47.
The love of riches and honor is the root of all evil, which, while men lust
after, they err from the faith. To this evil, Constantine (...). Tim. 6. 10.
his preposterous zeal to indew the Church with riches and pomp, much helped.
As the voice (then uttered, if their stories say true) did verify. Hodie
seminatum est virus in Ecclesia. The common saying is well known. Ecclesia
peperit diuitias, and filia deuorauit matrem. And that, of golden Bishops and
treen Chalices, and golden Chalices and treen Bishops. This fire of ambition,
was much kindled in the hearts of Pastors, before the Council of Nice, they
beginning to savor thereof (as says Eusebius) before Dioclesian his time: but
there was laid a ground of ambitious contention, by ordering the seats and
prerogatives of Patriarchs. Ante Concilium Nicenum, ad sedem Romanam paruus
habebatur respectus, says Aeneus Syluius eftsoons a Pope. What shameful
digladiations followed about dignity and priority of place, what bitter
contentions about limits of Diocesses, would make any sound hearted christian
blush for shame to read them. Julius Bishop of Rome, albeit topping a good
cause, yet seeking therein the advancement of his own seat, is so checked by
the Bishops of the East, as feign to yield to time (says Sabelli^us) the whole
sway and majesty of religion, remained with the Bishops of the East, till
Phocas the Emperor restored it to Rome. It is shame to hear, how Leo Bishop
of Rome, otherways a learned and wiseman, did chafe at the act of the Council
of Chalcedon, in favors of the Bishop of Constantinople. How hardly did the
Bishops of Rome take it, that it should be inacted in Affricke, that no
appellation were made to them? what a stir they made thereabout? impudently
bold to falsify the act of the Nicene Council, for maintenance of their
ambition: till by authentike copies from Greece their fraud was detected: and
they but too meekly, admonished to beware, they labored not to bring into the
Church famosum typhum seculi. The contentions of the Bishops of Rome and
Rauenna, of Milain and Papia, would even amongst secular Princes, be counted
detestable. The Patriarch of Constantinople, first usurping the title of
universal Bishop, is worthily taxed of Gregory Bishop of Rome. Thus then,
while men were ambitiouslie seeking themselves, and careless of religion;
corruption entered into the worship, in manifold rites and superstitious
ceremonies: as even diverse godly men in that same time, heavily regreated.

8 Upon the third blast falls a great star, etc. Stars are Pastors of
Churches. This great Star is the type of great and learned Pastors: men of
high account, yea and of great shining: but who fall from the heaven, (from the
truth and true Church) and so, their shining which ought to have been clear,
gentle, and comfortable light becomes like a burning Torch, noting fiery
contentions and burning despite, as a blazing flame, in place of a pleasant
calm, clear light, (...), Romans 2. 8. For this disposition in it self, and
working the like in others. This star has the name of Wormwood Deuteronomy. 29.
18. Heb. 12. 15.
as being in the gall of bitterness, and making bitter. Simon Magus is said to
be so, Act. 8. 23. the Holy Ghost in that one Arch-Heretike, showing the
common disposition of all, as full ever of contentions and burning despite,
which manner the Church of God has not. The effect here wrought is, that this
star falling in the rivers and fountains the third part, etc. Here is yet a
higher degree of corruption, working on to the great evil. For Rivers and
Fountains are in a degree of purity and subtle Nature, above the Sea, as the
Sea is above the earth. Now, as there may be a decay of Religion in the hearts
and lives of men (which is the burning of grass and trees) the ordinary
worship yet abiding pure and unmixed with superstition; so may both Religion
in men decay, and great corruption enter in the ordinary worship (the sea
beco^ming in a part bloody) and yet the fountains and rivers (that is the
Scriptures and interpretation thereof) abide sound, as experience teaches, how
many abuses will creep in, and with custom take place, while yet both the
word and interpretation thereof is uncorrupted. The teachers (who are also Wels
and Rivers, bringing waters to the common Sea) teaching more purely then is the
practice in ordinary worship. But when not only corruption enters in the
common worship, but even the Scriptures are corrupted with false glosses and
heretical interpretations, the fountains being poisoned, and the rivers which
should carry douce waters to purify the common Sea, bringing thither bitter
waters, and turning 2 King 2. 19 etc. Exodus 15. 23. etc.
the sweet water of life to be like these of Ierico, and of Mara, then is the
evil grown to a high and dangerous degree, and their multitudes, who for any
blood in the third part of the sea, would have lived, become dead in heretical
prauity. The verity and accommodation hereof is more then clear, as
principally in Arrius; so in all the other Arch-heretikes of that time, men
more learned then holy, and more quick then modest, like blazing Comets
corrupting the truth of doctrine in a great part. And therefore for the full
perfection of evil in this kind, when not only the third part, but wholly al
both earth, Sea and fountains shall be burnt, turned into blood, and made
bitter, and al light eclipsed; the like type is used in the fifth Trumpet, but
with this notable difference, that that star falls to the earth, and so
breeds the mischief.

9 The fourth Trumpet brings a darkness in part upon Sun, Moon, Stars,
day and night. A kindly degree of evil to follow on the former: and there
withal noting yet a higher degree of Apostasy, and advancement of the mystery
of iniquity, as the heavenly lights are above fountains and rivers. This is
the type of dark ignorance, coming on the world, first in a great part. The
former evils arose, more upon contention, pride and bitter despite, then upon
ignorance (while men either not aduerting, or maliciously miscarried they
took place) but now together with these, comes also gross ignorance in a
great part, darkening all true knowledge. Christ is our sun whom we behold
in the true light of his Gospel, whereof when the third part is darkened, so
far is our sun darkened to us. The Moon and stars are they in whose
hearts God so shines, as they are able to make the light of the knowledge of
God, to shine in the hearts of others, in the face of Jesus. The day is that
light, thus ministered from our sun by these stars, wherein we walk, who
are children of the day, and not of the night. For stars here must be
considered, more as receiving light from the sun, they dispense it to us,
then for that they shine in the night, And here the night signifies that light
which natural men who are not children of the day but of the night, yet have
in humane sciences and liberal arts (in comparison to the light of the
Gospel. but a night of darkness) whereof now by this Trumpet came a great
decay, as in story is more then manifest. Now as these evils are said to work
but on the third part in each kind, to show that the first degrees came on but
in part: so as first the love and life of God abode in the most part of the
Church, as in the second degree, yet the most part worshipped purely: and in
the third, held still the Orthodox faith: like as now in the fourth yet
continued great measure of learning, both in divine and humane sciences.
Whereas, in the next Trumpet, al falls to the height of evil, and a total
and common Apostasy is set down. And therefore for preparation to it, a
heavy warning is given of a triple woe. But this warning is by an Angel
flying through the midst of heaven, and so far removed from the perception
of earthly men, it being so far and obscurely delivered, as few were capable
thereof, or aduerted it: see Chapter 14. and 18. 1. Diverse learned and godly
men, (of whom this Angel is the type) saw the mischief coming on through
these evils more and more Lib. 4. Ep. 34. and Ep 38.
prevailing, and gave warning of it, even Gregory Bishop of Rome saw so much,
and made him say, Rex superbia prope est, and quod dicinefas est, Sacerdotum
est paratus exercitus, and vbi est ille Antichristus, qui appellationem
vindicabit vniuersalis Episcopi, and cui Sacerdotum exercitus paratus est ad
assectandum cum? prope est and in foribus. He did hit very right, for within
little more then three years after him, his own successor Boniface the third
took to himself the title of Vniuersalis Episcopus, which all the succeeding
Bishops retain: and so by sufftage of a most famous Bishop of Rome, they are
that Antichrist.

CHAP. IX.
FOllow the heavier woes, denounced in the fourth Trumpet, to fall on the
earthly sort, on whom are all these judgments, from which the sealed ones are
exempted. Of these three, the first is in this fifth Trumpet: even that huge
mischief of Antichrist, to which height of iniquity, the former evils were als
many steps. The other two woes, following in the 6. and 7. Trumpets, are the
consequences in God his just indignation, of this great woe: the one, for
punishment, to provoke repentance in the 6. Trumpet: which being ineffectuall
to conversion, upon obstinate impenitency, verse 20. 21. the seventh Trumpet
brings the third great woe and last wrath, to Antichrists utter destruction.

2 In this evil, are the origin whence it arises, and the evil it self,
the origin, is first and secundarie arising of the first. The first is the
fall of a great star from heaven to the earth, the type of Pastors of great
mark falling from being heavenly, to become earthly, from the true state of
Saints to the state of the world, and to the love thereof: from light to
darkness, from the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to the keys of the
bottomless pit. Now as this fall was not in one instant or point of time (nemo
repent fit turpissimus) but by degrees, so is it not to be taken of one man
personally, but is the general type of that evil, wherein Pastors falling,
they became ignorant, and ministers of dark ignorance: out of which arose the
mischief of Antichrist and his poysonable Army: the evil is the love of the
earth, where through comes this change of Keys, by an Apostasy and falling
away of these who had been stars of heaven and ministers of light, as having
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, to be the ministers of other Keys, even
these of Gehenna. This is that succession, and these are the Keys, the Church
of Rome and Bishops thereof so much brag of, as this whole prophecy
euinceth clearly. The secundary origin of the evil, is darkness arising
through this fall and change of Keys, and that in a strange degree; for this
darkness is not in part, as that of the fourth trumpet, but it eclipseth all
light, active and passive, sun and air. Christ is our sun, whose beams
lighten our spiritual air, whereby we both walk in light, and draw in a
pure breath for intertainement of our spiritual life. This by this darkness
of the bottomless pit, (which arose through that pastors falling to the love
of earthly things, lost the key of knowledge, and became Ministers of
darkness) is wholly eclipsed, so as all the face of the visible Church is
darkened, and common life in it corrupted The evil of the third Trumpet, was
by fall of a great star, but that fell in the fountains and rivers, so
making them in a part bitter: but here the desire of riches and love of the
earth makes all err from the faith.

3 Of these beginnings arises the mischief, wherein are two things, the
abominable Army of darkness poisoning all: and the head of so damnable a
band, the Army is described, first summarily by their quality, and their
annoying power, verse 3. Hereafter more at large, this their annoying power is
exponed, and their properties, whereby they are enabled to the harmeful
execution thereof, are declared. In all which is a most lively representation,
and most convenient type of the Roman Clergy, who are evidently this army of
darkness, whose monstrous swarms nothing but hellish ignorance brought in
the Church: as earthlinesse of great Pastors, brought the ignorance. Their
quality, first is showed, in that they are Locusts: both, for their swarming
multitudes, and for their destroying and eating up al green Nahum. 3.
thing in earth: as, who not only devour the best of things belonging to this
life, but also destroy all spiritual life in men. For their grouth and
success in both see the Story and be amazed.

4 Their annoying power is summarily set forth, in that they sting as
Scorpions. A venomous and bitter kind of Serpent, walking waiwardly, and
stinging when it would appear least to do so. This their power (in the larger
exposition thereof) has this general note, that it is limited and not
absolute. The first point of their limitation is, of such as they are permitted
to harm. The next is, in what degree they might do it. As for the first, they
are restrained wholly from hurting the sealed ones, of whom Chapter 7. Which
restraint, is here pertinentlie recorded, both to show that this evil, is the
height of that mischief portended in the 7. Chapter. Against which the elect
were sealed: and also, to show here the truth of their preservation; and so,
how it was, that Christ, in this total eclipse of light by Antichrist his
darkness, yet preserved a Church. Wherein yet, be not so gross as to think
that one number still of the same persons continued all that time. But it is to
show God his continual course in helping his own, all the time of this
mischeife on the world. Observe here also, that by grass and trees, men are
meaned, as I showed Chapter 7. And, as fitliest thus The allusion is to Joel 1.
and 2.
expressed, in the evil of locusts. Now, of these, in the first trumpet, only
the third part was burnt: here all feel this plague, except the sealed ones.
The second point, in their limitation, is the degree of hurting. Wherein are
two causions. First, the quality of the harm permitted them to practice: and
next, the time limited to their working. The quality of their harm is cleared
by a diverse kind, from which they are restrained. For it is permitted them to
torment men but not to slay. This their tormenting, again is cleared by a
comparison, that it is such as arises upon the sting of a Scorpion, that is so
painful, as death is more tolerable, as the effect thereof well shows. Now
consider well, that this torment and plague is on the inhabitants of the earth,
and, here to be taken up as God his judgment on the world, whereof the true
Church is free. And so, this army has not power to slay: as neither, that way,
plague they the men of the world, as do the ministers of the sixth trumpet;
who, both sting with poisoning tails, and slay with heads, as having power in
both. But, these have their power in their tails, only to torment with
poisonable sting, and not to murder openly. For other ways, as they are
considered in their dealing against the Saints (which is not in this place)
their blood is found with them: yea and all the blood shed on the earth: albeit
not for direct professed power and practice of the sword: Chap. 18. 74.
but, as on the Jews came all the blood from that of Abel the righteous to the
blood of Zachary: who, yet Math. 23. 35.
professed that it was not lawful for them to put any man John 18. 31.
to death. This is here put for an evident note of Antichrist his dealing: of
purpose, to discern this evil from that of the sixth ttumpet: and that so
eleerely, as it is wonder, how, men of learning and judgment could confound
things so notably distinguished, and which can receive no other accommodation.
Now, that this their tormenting of men, is less tolerable then death. We
know, that no vexation is comparable to that of a conscience, wherein is put
the sense of God his terror and eternal wrath, if therewith the true remedy be
not applied. For, as Skin for skin, and all that a man has he will give for
his life: so Job. 2. 4.
life and all a man will give for his soul and the peace* thereof, who once
has felt the terror. For, a troubled spirit who can bear? and a good
conscience is a continual Prou. 18. 14.
feast. But all the doctrine of the Church of Rome, is such Prou. 15. 15.
as puts in this sting in the conscience, whereby the torment is bred, but
never applies the true remedy: But such bastard cures, as augment the anguish.
Hereof it is that superstition is most busy and restless. For, He
multiplieth Psalm. 16. 4.
his own sorrow which offers to an other God. Hence arose, painful
pilgrimages, deuoting to sacred wartes, Kings bequeathing their Crowns:
husbands their wives and children: wives their children. Hence were so many
erections, and fond donations for soul Masses: if so be after death they might
find that repose and comfort, which they never felt in their life. Heerefore
is this vexation fitly compared to the stinging of a Scorpion, most painful
of any. How many strange policies and treacherous devises (as of walking
spirits, and forged miracles) these Locusts have practiced, and still do, to
subdue to themselves the consciences of men and hold them in torment, is more
then manifest. And by such as they have stung deeply, it is that ordinarily
they acchiue all their desperate Treasons and murders of Princes: Acts,
forsooth, of such merit as will obtain heaven to a person otherways
condemned. And what is it; that upon this presumption, the tormented spirit
will not run to? what a strange practice is that (amongst many more) of the
Jesuits with their nouices in their chamber of meditations?

5 Thus is the quality of their harm. The time limited to them so to torment
the world, is Five months. In which, for ought I know, the mind of the holy
Ghost has been highly mistaken of all men. For clearing then, of an The times
recorded in revelation.
obscure matter; In this whole book, are but seven times recorded. That of
ten days, Chapter 2. That of half an hour, Chap. 8. This of five months,
here. Thatof a year, month, day, and hour, in the sixth Trumpet. That of
forty two months, Chapt. 11. and 13. with which, that of 1260. days. Chapt.
11. and 12. And of a time, times, and half a time, Chap. 12. are all one. That
of three days and a half, Chap. 11. 9. And that of a 1000. years, Chap. 20.
Of these, all sound interpreters, (for how maliciously the Romans, to obscure
clear story, do expound them, shall appear after) fall to one of two
opinions. Some taking these times indefinitely. But, while they bring no
reason, why such and such, are put of the holy Ghost for indefinite times, they
rather cut the knot then lose it. Others, and some of the most learned, take
these times for definite, in exact calculation, but that they are not to be
taken in propriety of speech, except the last: and that by a Prophetical frame
of speech, a day is to be taken for a year, and so by consequence, a month
for a month of years, and a year for a year of years. But in my judgment,
there is hereof, neither ground nor example in all Scripture. The 4. of
Ezechiel, whereon all this opinion is builded, yields to it no ground at all.
Where God commanding the Prophet, in a typical action, to express the long
rebellion of the people, being impossible to do it so many years: that some
analogy at least, might be, he bids him lie so many days: and therefore
the interpretation is added, that a day was enjoined him for a year. But that
in any part of Scripture, calculation of time, either propheticallyforetold, or
historically recorded, is thus expressed, I see it not. That place Nom. 14. 34.
makes less for it; God showing but the analogy of his judgment to the
peoples rebellion: whereon, if any thing of this sort might be built, it should
rather seem that a year were for a day then a day for a year. Now, upon this
weak or rather no ground, to infer, that as a day in Scripture, is found put
for a year; so here by consequence, a month is put for a month of years,
and a year for a year of years: without so much as a show of example; for
me, I think it too great license in interpreting God his Oracles. As for these
places in Daniel, where years seem to be, by days, calculated: they are of
the most learned, taken in propriety, and the accommodation of story fitly
given. which makes me much marvel, that an exceeding learned man, even so,
interpreting Daniel: yet in his notes upon this place, for warrant of the other
interpretation, should say, apud Danielem passum. And for what reason shall
days in Daniel be taken for years in other places, more then Chap. 10. 13?
that he counts years by the hebdomades, and only Chap. 9. it strengthens
their opinion nothing. For, in the common use of Hebrew speech, hebdomades, are
no more properly of days then of years, but alike of both, as the count
falls, either for the sabbath day or sabbathicall year, whether common in the
seventh year, or great in the Iubily: and, as in the 9. Chapter of Daniel, the
matter evidently shows the account, to be of years, so Chap. 10. 2. (where
doubt might have troubled the Reader, with an apparent strange thing, if they
had been taken of years, as in the former Chap.) he adds the interpretation
for a clear distinction. If it had been the purpose of the holy Ghost, through
all the rest of this Prophecy, to set down in these forms of speech, the
exact supputation of time: I see no reason why in the last, of a thousand years
(which only of them all, is to be taken definitely, and for great reason, as
shall beshewed) he should have altered his ordinary manner of style. This
wrong conception of these times, has marred all the accommodation of this
Prophecy: making even notable learned men, and who otherways have had deep
insight in these mysteries, to iumble and confound distinct matters; while
still, according to this forelaid prejudice of definite calculation, they apply
things, but give no satisfaction: and the matter here handled, and the manner
of leading, being opened up, will show clearly, how by this prejudice, they
have laid, both before themselves and others, great blocks, to impede a
clear way. This time, then here, of five months, is to be taken indefinitely,
and put here, for a consolation: to show, that this terrible plague, should not
always prevail over the world. But besides this, we must find out some
reason agreeable to the majesty and wisdom of the holy Ghost, why this time, in
this place, and the other, in their places are taken of the spirit, more then
any other time. As for that of ten days, Chapt. 2. it is easy, by common
frame of Scripture speech, both for time and number. The parents of Rebecha
entreated her abode ten days: Jacob his wages were changed ten times:
Wisdom strengthens more then ten Princes: Ruth to her mother in law, and
Elkana, to his wife, were better then ten sons: ten Virgins have ten
lamps: and Chapt. 11. the tenth part of the great City falls: ten men take
hold of the skirt of a Jew, and many such. So as for this number, or of seven,
in matter or time, the ordinary use of Scrpture answers. The reason of others
is more difficulte, and most of all, that of this time here put: why it is
(seeing this evil of the fifth trumpet, is all one with that beast which
works 42. months, Chap. 13. All which time accordingly, the heathen trod
under foot the holy City, and the Prophets prophecy in sackecloth 1260. days,
Chap. 11. and the Church is so long, fed in the wilderness, Chapt. 12.) that
here, to the Locusts should be attributed five months: a time, through all
this book, no where else recorded. And this is indeed wisdom, for perceiving
whereof, we must understand, that as all the types, yea and frames of speech in
this Prophecy, are from the old Testament; the collation whereof, brings to
both great light: so these times here, are put by allusion to the like times
there: not only to show, that these evils should have an end, as had the
others: but also, by the same time attributed, to take up the conformity of
case, in things here prophesied, to those, to which, the same time in the old
Testament is given, for more clear light in both. And to stir us to aduert
this purpose of the holy Ghost in using these times, not only is the same
time, but also the same speeches put: to move us to the collation of things,
and so, therein to find, both great light, and delightful satisfaction. Now
then, albeit this time, as the others last mentioned, be of the working of
Antichrist, yet the evil here, has a far different consideration from the
same evil, where the other times are thereto attributed. Here it is delivered
to our consideration as the plague of God upon the whole world, from which the
sealed ones (the true Church) are free; as the other times are attributed to
it, it is put, as the wrestlings, sufferings, and troublesome state of the true
Church, under, and by this evil are to be considered. Therefore to the evil
here such a time is given, as may lead us by the like time and like frames of
speech joined therewith, to find out and consider such a like case in the old
Testament, of a general plague on the world, which yet the sealed ones escape;
that by comparing, we may find what a huge wisdom here in two words is
comprised Now in all the story of old, no such case occurreth, but only the
deluge of Noah, in all things semblable to this. That was the only general
plague wherewith ever at one time the whole world was punished: and this
darkness of Antichrist is a spiritual plague, ouergoing once all the
Christian world. In that only they escaped whom God sealed up, and enclosed in
the Arc (the type of his true Church) here none escape but the sealed ones who
are on Mount Sion with the Lamb, while all the earth follow the beast. That
plague ouerwent the earth by opening the fountains of the great depth, Abyssi
magnae, Tehom Rabbah, and of the windows of heaven. This by fall of a star from
heaven, opening the bottomless pit, and smoke bullering out thereat, ouergoeth
all. That by degrees grew, till at length, it ouerwent the highest mountains
five times three cubits: this by degrees rose to ouerwhelme sun and air.
These waters prevailed over the highest mountains five times thirty days,
that is five months: this evil growing by degrees to a height, shall have a
time of preuayling, and obtaining place over all. These waters prevailed not
still, but after an hundred and fifty days, that is, five months, they
began piece and piece to decrease, til at length the earth was dried, the
Arc opened, and the closed and sealed up ones came forth, and replenished the
earth. This evil after a time of prevailing over all, shall abate, and by the
light of the Sun of righteousness, and wind of God his mouth by degrees be
consumed, as by degrees it did grow, and the true Church shall break forth,
the Tabernacle of Testimony shall be opened in heaven, and these 144000. hid
ones shall become a number innumerable with palms in hands. And as Elizabeth
the mother of John Baptist bearing the reproach of barrennes, hid her self five
Months, thereafter to appear with big belly: so in this prevailing evil of
Locusts, and their King Abaddon, Luke 1. 24.
the true Church as barren shall lurk five months (that is, for a time) to
break forth thereafter big with child. Of these, who should be preachers of
repentance from Antichristian works, and forerunners of the Lord his last
coming, as John was of the first. Finally, as the waters of Noah was such an
evil, as never Gen 9 11. Isai 54. 9.
shall come again, and thereof the Rainebow made a Seal: so the darkness of
Antichrist once dispelled shall never again ouergoe all: for he must go to
destruction. And for this it is, that agreeably thereto, the great Angel
coming to his overthrow in the next Chapter has the Rainebow about his head.
Now weigh what plenty of light and depth of wisdom lie hid in these two words,
of five months, which the spirit repeateth twice, of purpose to waken our
negligence, to take it up. Of the other times we shall speak in the own
place.

6 This was the general note of their limitation. Now follow the properties of
these Locusts, whereby they are able to vex: first, they are like horses, not
common horses, but prepared to battle, lusty, f^d, strong, and fierce, over
coming all opponers. Hereto they are strengthened by usurped spiritual
authority, expressed in Crowns, which are neither upright in form nor matter.
With this is joined hypocrisy; for they look like men, who measure their
affairs by judgment, as full of reason and humanity. For simulate modesty and
simplicity, and for force of alluring inticements, they have hair like women,
with fair and flattering speeches, deceiving the hearts of the simple, and
provoking to spiritual fornication. But under this, they are cruel deuourers,
as having teeth of Lions, devouring widows houses under color of long
prayers, whiles within, they are ravening Wolfes. They are armed against all
invasion, having privileges and immunities from all secular power, shaking
their tippets on Kings, as being only subject to their King Abaddon. Now al
these make their invasions terrible to the greatest, they being therefore like
horses and chariots rushing to battle, and Joel 2. 4. 5.
it is well known, how the contesting with them has often brought Princes to
the pinche of their estates: and their daily treasonable bloody attempts and
suggestions against the lives of Princes, prove this clearly. All this is
effectuate by the stings in their railes, that is, their poisonable doctrine:
The ancient and honorable man is the head, and the false Prophet teaching lies
is the tatle, Isai 9. 15.

7 Thus is the Army. Their head is described, from his state and his name
agreeable thereto, his state is, that he is their King, even setting himself
up against the great King, (...). 2 Thessalonians. 2. the quality of this his Kingdom
is showed, in that he is the Angel of the bottomless pit, that is, the
Devil his Lieuetenant: for to him the Dragon gives his throne and great
authority, Chap. 13. He is the man of sin. His name, fit for such a King, is
destroyer, (...), both for destroying the faith of others, and for that he
goes to destruction, Chapter 17. Paul calls him accordingly, (...), and he
goes (...), Chapter 17. 11. It is wonder, in so clear consent of scripture,
how any learned could doubt who here is described, He is so called both in
Hebrew and Greek, to show that he shall be no proper head of Jews or of
Gentiles: but a common deceiuer of both Jew and Gentile professing
Christianity, and whom, at length, both Jews converted to the faith, and
Gentiles shall know, and call the Antichrist, when the place of his foil shall
be called in Hebrew Armageddon: Chap. 16. 16
for even in this, that he shall be so called in Hebrew, is employed a
prophecy of the conversion of the Jews, as in the same sense, Chap. 1. with
(...) in Greek, is put, Amen in Hebrew.

8 This is the first great woe, now said to be gone, and the second to come
anon, in respect of their description here, not that for event in time, this
woe was fully past before the beginning of the next, as is evident by the end
of this Chapter, where, after the description of the sixth Trumpet, the
impenitency of men still continuing in Antichristian works is showed: so as the
first woe holds on all the time of the second, and this second woe had his
beginning soon after the open beginnings of the first! God so punishing sin
by sin, and according to the growth and induration of men in the first
impiety, giving the more free scope to the second, till desperate obstinacy
brings on the last woe and final wrath; for as the woe is not said to come
till the height thereof, at least in such degree, as wherefore it may justly
be esteemed the soarest judgment in the time, albeit in some degrees it has
been working on before: so the next woe coming in such height, as the former,
in comparison is not so much felt, the first is said to be gone; and that we
may take up this course and reason of God his working, the sixth Trumpet has
this singular in it, that upon the sounding thereof, commandment is given to
loose the four Angels, etc. and accordingly the Ministry of the fixed Trumpet
performs, only to show, that the plague therein was in God his just
indignation, the punishment of Antichristian Idolatry; if so be, thereby men
could have been moved to repent before effu^ion of the last wrath: but they
persisting notwithstanding in obstinate impenitency, the great Angel in the
next Chapter swears final overthrow. And this is the reason of that which
this sixth Trumpet has in it, singular from the former; so wisely is this
prophecy penned.

9 In this sixth Trumpet then are the evil, and the event. In the evil, are
noted how it is brought on, and the particular description of the mischief. It
is brought on by commandment from Christ, who is the golden Altar, to the
Angel of the sixth Trumpet; the tenor whereof is to loose the Ministers of this
woe, for working of it. The reason hereof we touched. The Ministers of the woe,
are the heads, and the destroying army. In the heads are noted their number,
condition, place, and end of loosing. In number they are four, as a number
competent, yet not for that respect which is of the four, Chapter 7. (for the
four corners of the earth) for this plague goes not so wide, being but
against the third part of men (a clear distinguishing note of Mahometisme from
Antichrist) but here, they are four, for all occasions, as the other were for
all places: and therefore four times are put (an hour, a day, a month, a
year) not to design the space of this woes durance, but to show that these
were ordained, and in number competenr, to execute God his wrath at all
occasions, short, or long, as God should be stirred to indignation, and send
them forth. Agreeable hereto the commandment comes from the four horns of
the Altar, to show Christ his sufficiency of power, to raise up instruments of
his justice according as by the sins of men he is provoked. For, from this
Altar both the prayers of Saints, go up before God, and the fire of vengeance
is powered down on the world, Chapter 8. this makes the allusion, and
conueniency in number of four Angels, four horns, four times.

10 The condition of these heads is, that they are bound, whereupon is the
commandment of loosing; this shows the severity of these four Angels of
wrath, in that they are bound up as ragefull beasts, and gives certain
expectation of cruel effects, they being loosed. God his patience is here also
noted, restraining his judgments, till the wickedness of men extort them from
him. These four Angels are the heads of the Mahometane and Turkish Armies.
Not for so many heads in propriety, as many vainly vex themselves to find
out, but for the reason above touched; who how they were tied up at Euphrates,
that is, restrained in the East parts about Babell and Persia, partly by their
own intestine discords and wars, partly by some great victories of Christians,
from working this horrible desolation which now upon this their loosing
ensues, is clear in the story. Mahomet arose soon after the open and auowed
beginnings of Antichrist, and spread his poison, advancing it so with fire and
sword, that in short years his Successors ouerranne all Arabia, Egypt, Africa,
Spain, and Persia. This swift course was after tied up; (as the commandment of
loosing them from their binding necessarily implies, showing that both before
this they were, and from raging tied up) for a good space, till at length
Turks joined with Saracens, and becoming one people, and of one poisonous
religion, upon huge increase of Antichristian impiety, they got free scope
from Euphrates in God his justice, to slay the third part of men, from which
kind of working the Locusts were restrained*

11 Thus are the heads, their army is described from their number, kind,
disposition, horrible effects, and power of working, their number is huge, to
show their innumerable forces, wherein the Story is clear. Their kind is that
they are horsemen: both because their chief forces consist of such, as also to
show their fiercenes and irresistible invasion. Their cruel disposition is
expressed, in that their habergeons were of fire, brimstone, and Iacinth. For
when the Scripture describes horrible executions, it is ordinarily by fire and
brimstome, and ascending smoke, as in the Psalms and Prophets often. Now
brimstone inflamed, yields both a flame and a smoke of a Iacinth color, and
accordingly they are here put, to show in these a bloody disposition to work
utter desolation, like that of Sodom. For this, their horses also are said to
have heads of Lions, to design open rage and professed cruelty, whereas the
Locusts covered their Lions teeth with faces of men, and hair of women. Fire,
smoke and brimstone are said to come out of their mouths, not only to
amplify this their cruel disposition, as breathing nothing but utter
desolation; but also to show their facility of destroying all things, as with
a breath or word. The third part of men are said to be destroyed by them, to
show according to the Phrase above in the first four Trumpets, that this
plague should not ouergoe al, as did that of the Locusts, but yet should work
a horrible and great vastation, conveniently to their cruel disposition, set
forth in three things, and this effect is most evident: for never any
conquering people before them wrought such desolation as they in the parts
which they have ouerrunne; so as in the most plentiful and best peopled parts
of the earth, they have scarce left so many villages, as were sometime famous
Republikes. These are their effects. Their power of working is both in their
heads and tails, for they have also tails like Serpents, stinging: all the
power of the Locusts was in their tails, at least by them they wrought all,
that is, by poisonable doctrine, therefore they pretended no power of open
murdering men of the world: but these have power both in heads and tails,
that is, both by their policy and government they use and profess plain
hostility and practice of the Sword, and also by their false Prophets they
sting as did the Locusts, poisoning also with false doctrine: so manifest a
note of distinction is put here betwixt these woes, as they could not have
been mistaken, if forelaid preiudices had not forced the wresting of clear
things to wrong accommodations.

12 Thus has been the evil, the event is obstinate impenitency, and
induration of men in Antichristian works, which are here so plainly set
down, as any having eyes may see, whose impiety has loosed these Angels, and
whose obstinacy still makes them to prevail; and so by just consequence,
albeit to them directly was not permitted to be open murderers of men, yet
that with them truly, is found all the blood shed upon the earth* Chap. 18. 24

CHAP. X.
AS the sixth Seal, besides the own proper effect gave a preparation to the
seventh, by a summary view of the whole effect thereof in the seventh Chapter:
so here the sixth Trumpet (besides the proper woe of it in the four destroying
Angels from Euphrates, and their Armies of desolation in the end of the last
Chapter) makes way now in this and a good part of the next Chapter, to the
effect of the seventh Trumpet, and last woe: which, impenitency now justly
brings on. Now all this preparation, even to the blowing of the seventh
Trumpet Chapter 11. 15. albeit it be to clear the way, yea, and has some no
small beginnings of that great woe, which by the seventh Trumpet is fulfilled,
yet it is comprehended under the second great woe according to their
distinction by Trumpets: because even in the height of this second great woe,
these degrees toward the last, were working So wisely and artificially is the
course of this Prophecy led forward, and parts thereof clearly coupled
together. This preparation then, for Antichrist his just and full overthrow,
upon obstinate impenitency against the pun^shment from Euphrates, is by a
magnifike description of that great party who foileth him: and of the means
of his victory. The party, is Jesus Christ, here typically setforth (as
always throughout this Prophecy) not according to the veriry of his person,
but to express his operation in this work. His means of victory are, the
little book opened, and the bold and powerful preaching thereof: and that,
for Finishing the mystery, in the full overthrow of the enemies, and perfecting
the Church in all grace; here as a prepared Bride for her husband: whereto,
he fitteth ^pt instruments, who by divine motion, studying diligently the
Scriptures, preach every where the Gospel. So, as by the true rule rightly
applied, the true Church of God is discerned from the false: and light growing,
Antichrist his kingdom is in a degree, shaken, and begins to fall: and in
the seventh Trumpet is utterly and for ever destroyed.

2 We have, then in this Chapter, the coming of the great personnage
performer of this work, and the end of his coming: For effectuating whereof,
prophecy is restored. This great perso^nage, is that stronger Matthew. (...). 29
one then Satan, who foiled him, and now, after a sort returns to overthrow
the beast of his power, the Angel of the bottomless pit, king Apollyon. In
this personage, are to be observed, whence he comes, the form of his person,
and his actions. He comes from heaven, as the adversary came out of the
bottomless pit, not in propriety of speech, as if he personally descended: but
that he, who through antichrist his darkness was not seen, now again
shows himself. As, God is said often, in Scripture to depart or hide, and
again to show himself. The glorious and magnifike form of his person is
showed in a note of divine majesty, that he is cl^athed with a cloud, Luke 2^.
At the erecting of the tabernacle, a cloud Exodus 40. 34 1. King. 8. 10.
filled it. So also, Solomon his Temple, The Lord has said he will dwell in
the cloud. He gave his presence to Israel in the wilderness, in a pillar of a
cloud. He makes the Psalm. 104. 3. Acts 1. 9.
clouds his Chariot, and he went up in a cloud. Secondly, he has the
Rainebow about his head, as he, whose presence brings peace: the rays of his
face imprinting the seal of peace in the darkest so^le and most clowdy
conscience. The shining of the Sun against a cloud makes the Rainbow. So
Christ, whose face shines like the Sun in his strength, Chap. 1, being clothed
with a cloud, has conveniently a Rainebow about his head. His flesh is the
veil covering his Deity, whereof the manefestation therein, makes our peace.
But here specially, has he the Rainebow about his head, as coming now to
dispel the great deluge of Antichristian darkness: which shall never again
ouerspread the face of the Church, more then the waters of Noah shall the
earth: giving thus a sure pledge of serenity, Chapter 9. Section 5. Thirdly,
his feet have two notes. They are pillars, and they are fire. The first, for
stable firmness and solid strength, wherein he now comes both to stablish
his Church in peace, and to tread down all his enemies. The fire, shows with
light and purity, dispelling darkness and purging all uncleanness, yet fiery
affliction conioined, in this conflict with Cha. 11. 3. 7. 8. Chap. 13. 7. and
cha. 14. 12. 13.
Antichrist: against all which notwithstanding, his Church should stand stable
as the Pillar of truth. He has fourthly in his hand, a little book open. This
is the weapon of his victory. It is little, in comparison to Antichrist his
great book of humane Traditions, unwritten Verities, Apocriphe Scriptures,
Decretals, Canons, and manifold Legends, all joined and equalled by them in
their practice, at lest, with this book. It is open for that clear
understanding of holy Scripture which now Christ should bring: whereas, in
Antichrist his darkness, the same was buried in ignorance, which, with them
is the mother of devotion, it being held capital for common laicke men to read
Scripture in vulgar tongue.

3 The actions of this great personnage, thus furnished, are in his gesture and
in his voice. His gesture is, that he set his right foot on the Sea, and his
left foot on the Land: as he who has power over all creatures. Who stablisheth
the mountains by his power, and appeaseth the noise of the Seas, the noise of
the waves thereof, and Psalm. 89: 9.
the tumults of people, Psalm. 65. His right foot is set on the Sea, as whose
rage is most terrible, and the left, on the earth, to show that he is
sufficiently furnished with all strength, and accordingly utters it, as for
the party opponer is requisite. In the 13. Chapter, to express Antichrist his
estate, two beasts arrise, the one out of the Sea, the other, out of the Earth.
These he comes to undo, and conveniently therefore sets his feet in this
manner. So is his gesture. His voice, is a loud cry. Wherein, as the little
book is the weapon of his warfare, so the use and welding of it, is here
expressed; to wit, Preaching. Whereof to show the boldness, his voice is
compared to the reoaring of a Lion. And to express the power, and that,
perfect, accompanying the bold Preaching of the Gospel now restored, seven
thunders are said to speak. As at the going out of the Gospel in the first
seal, the first beast having the face of a Lion, Spoke like thunder: So, now
at reviving of the Gospel to Antichrist his overthrow, it shall be accompanied
with boldness and perfection of of power. The great Angel coming down to
fight for Sion and the hill thereof, Isai 31 4. Now, consider that Christ is
here described according to his virtue working in his servants: whose voice,
if it be his, is bold and powerful, If their voice be, as it ought, the echo
of his cry, it will be like thunder. For thunders speak as he roareth Amos 3.
8.
and except he roar, no thunder utters any voice. His sheep know his voice
and not the voice of a stranger. All Ioh. 10. 4. 5.
this is, to show, that the ministry of the Gospel, through the power of
Christ accompanying it, shall consume Antichrist to powder. That notable things
were uttered by these Thunders, John his readiness to write, argues clearly.
From which he is stayed by commandment, not to write, but to seal and close
up what they had spoken. We must be sober, and contented with what it pleases
God to open, as not able at all times to receive al things. I doubt not, but
now in clear manifestation of Antichrist, these thunders have been, and are
still thundering that openly, which here for the time was sealed up. But, for
this time their speeches have been, as I think, so plain, as Christ thought
not meet to put in register. For these mysteries are (as it becomes) so
delivered, that the wise, in time, shall understand them, but the wicked shall
do wickedly. To them things are spoken Dan. 12.
by parables, that, hearing they may hear, and not understand, and, seeing
they may see, and not perceive. That Matthew. 13. 10.
these speeches were uttered, and yet closed up, was partly, for John his
particular information and strengthening. As to such effect, God in revelations,
shows to his servants of high imploiment, sometimes, more then in either,
Mark. 9. 9. 2. Cor. 12.
lawful or possible to utter. And truly, I am of this opinion, that none can
be an able minister of the Gospel, who, for his own both light and feeling,
has not more then he can publish. It is partly also, for all readers and
hearers of this Prophecy, to exspect and aduert, in their time these
thundering speeches: as to the praise of God, we now do clearly. For, that
here Christ commands to seal them up, and that, hereafter in this
Prophecy (which is but one continual trance) they are uttered, I neither see
any reason of it, nor any place yielding any probability that so it is.

4 Thus is the great personage instructed with his weapon, the word, understood
and preached in all boldness and power. The end of his coming thus
instructed, is to Finish the mystery of God, and that without longer delay Act.
3. 21.
or protraction of time: So, as upon the sound of the seventh trumpet, and in
the days thereof, all shall be accomplished, whatsoever the Prophets had
foretold either of the destruction of the enemies or the Church, or of God his
plentiful mercy and grace, in her deliverance, and her goodly, graceful, and
peaceable condition thereupon. For this is the mystery of God, which in the
days of the seventh Trumpet shall be fulfilled. Which trumpet as it has
begun to blow long ago, and (praised be our God) we see the effect of it in
good degrees advanced: so how long it shall blow, God only knows. This
always is certain, that Antichrist his destruction, already begun, shall
hold on to everlasting woe; neither shall he recover strength. As also the
increase of light and grace toward the Church, shall continue, till Antichrist
being overthrown, and the Jews io^ning to the faith: she inioie a graceful
and peaceable state here, as a Bride prepared for her husband. This to be the
mind of the Holy Ghost, the whole course of this prophecy shows evidently.
And the many goodly promises of the Prophets gathered together in the Church
her description, Chap. 21. and 22. prove clearly that therein is the mystery
of God fulfilled according as he foretold, By his servants the Prophets. Now,
the things in this Chapter, and to the 15. verse of the next, having such
congruity of argument with that of the seventh Trumpet and last woe (as
whereof, they are not only the preparation, but even such great beginnings)
yet notwithstanding, they are delivered under the sixth trumpet, and second
great woe. Because, albeit it be true that these Trumpets no more then the
seals or Viol^ be put for knots and periods of time exactly cutted, but for
distinguishing diverse matters: yet thus far in them, time must be looked to,
that they fall out in course after other, as they are here ordered by the
spirit. For, though the evil of the sixth Trumpet was ever in time of the
fifth: and the evils of both fifth and sixth Trumpets hold on in some degree in
the beginning, yea a good space of the seventh,: yet the world, felt first, the
fifth Trumpet, and woe thereof; whereupon, the sixth Trumpet and second great
woe, ensuing, albeit the first woe ceased not, yet when the world felt most the
second, as in the height of it, being then the most sensible plague, all evils
and punishments whatsoever of whatsoever kind, are joined with the greatest
woe in the time. And thus is it, that albeit these beginnings of Antichrist his
fall here, and to the 15. verse of the next Chapt. agree, in argument with the
matter of the seventh trumpet: yet, because these beginnings and first degrees
fell out in the greatest height of the second woe, and were yet of no such
weight or measure as the worldly sort and Antichrist, feeling a heavier woe
upon them, did so much regard: therefore they are put under the second woe and
sixth trumpet. But when these small beginnings grow on so far as Antichrist
and the worldly sort following him, become first afraid, Chapt. 11. 11. and
upon the seen danger of his kingdom already begun to fall, then falls to
count light of the other woe in respect of this: then is the seventh trumpet
said to blow and the second woe to be past, the third now coming in place.
And this order of delivery, which the spirit uses, as it is exceeding
artificious and pleasant, so being well aduerted, it brings great light and
satisfaction. Now, because this end, of this great Angel his descending,
seems incredible, Antichrist and his kingdom being so strongly settled, as
the overthrow thereof appeared impossible: the great Whore presuming thereupon,
to sit still as a Queen, and Chap. 18.
to see no mourning: therefore, that the promise may be the mo^e sure, it is
confirmed by an oath. Wherein, for instruction, are to be observed, the
swearer, his gesture, the form of oath, and the point sworn.

5 As we have heard the end of this great Angel his descent, so is showed how
this end is effectuate. And this is, by fitting and preparing fit instruments
thereto: who are stirred up by divine instigation, to take the little book
from him only in whose hand it is open, to eat it up, receiving in their hearts
all God his words, etc. Ezech. 3. 10. This eating has a double effect in the
eaters, of sweetness and delight in the mouth, and of bitterness in the
belly; that so they may be meet for that effect set down in the last verse,
where is the interpretation of all this sign. Showing in John, (who here, is
the type of these whom Christ shall thus, and to this end, stir up) that, for
raising again the true light of the Gospel, and by the powerful and wide
preaching thereof, gathering of his Church and defeating darkness: he will
raise first in men's hearts a love of knowledge, and of the book of God, who
thereupon, by his motion shall study the same most diligently, as eating it
with appetite: and shall find in studying it, exceeding sweetness and
spiritual joy to their souls: and letting it as it were down in their
stomachs, and filling their bellies with it, they shall be so filled, as not
able to contain it, they must burst forth; though the preaching thereof beget
them of the world great trouble, and many tears. For all this frame of speech,
see Ezech. 2. and 3. and Ierem. 15. and 20. and withal, observe herein the
distinct degrees of a true inward calling, whereof none can be lacking in the
true minister of Christ. First, a love of God and of the knowledge of his word,
begotten in the heart by divine motion. 2 A heart to pray for light. 3 A
diligent and careful study of Scripture. 4 A sweet delight and taste found
therein of spiritual joy to their own souls. Now all these any good
Christian may have: but, to make a Pastor, thou must also find the last, that
is, bitterness of belly. The accommodation of this is so clear in story, of
these, whom God thus first stirred up to the love of learning, and by whom
the true light both of divine and humane sciences was restored, so as
Antichrist was discovered and noted for the man of sin; that it needs not
here to be enlarged. Read the story and accommodations of Writers on this
place.

CHAP. XI.
Here, the effect in some degree is showed, of that which typically was spoken
of John in the last verse of the former Chapt. in that the little book, being
eaten, gives to the eaters, a faculty to discern the true Church from the
false; by assistance and instigation of the great Angel who gives it. And this
is, by applying the rule and measure thereof (sound and straight as a reed,
strong, apt, and maniable as a rod, and as Aaron his rod, which devoured the
rods of the Inchanters) whereby the body of the true Church is found to be
Exodus 7. 12.
small, as the Temple in comparison of the Court and City: and hid, as the
Temple, wherein none entered but the Priests, as a small center in the midst of
a large circumference, and closed up within it. The Ministers in Deuteronomy. 17. 6.
and 19. 15. John 8. 17.
number few, being but two, the smallest of numbers, and yet sufficient for
witnessing of a truth. In calling, witnesses, and of divine things, being
Prophets and standing before God. In condition, afflicted, as doing it in
sackecloth, in much heaviness and many tears. In this condition, yet having
great and divine power: toward the Temple, dispersing plenty of grace as
olives, and true light as candlestickes: and outward, having vengeance in
readiness against all disobedience, as Elias and Moses, having, nor using,
against their enemies, no armor but spiritual, and that for the space of a
1260. days, all the while the Gentiles occupy the Court and holy City and tread
them under foot, that is, all the time, Antichrist possesses the name and
title of the visible Church (defacing and down treading therein true
worship) which therefore is cast out, and has not with God, the account of
his true Church, now-onely closed up within the Temple. The frame of speech is
from the Jews Temple, thereby to express the condition of the Christian
Church, under and within the compass of Antichrist, usurping the title, and
glorying in multitude and visibility: who therefore, after the same frame of
speech, has with his false Church, the name of Gentiles, obtaining a good
space, the whole City and Court of the Temple; even that beast, who works 42.
months, Chapt. 13. All which time, God had his own Church, albeit small and
not seen of men, even within the bowels of the Antichristian usurpation, as
the Temple is within the City and Court. Which true Church, he entertained in
the life of God, by a hid, but powerful dispensation of grace, of a secret
unknown and small number of true Chap. 14. 2. 3.
Ministers. Whose state and condition, in course of time and Antichrist his
opposition, is threefold. First, they prophecy long and powerfully, and albeit
in sackcloth, yet without bloodshed being hid in the Temple. Secondly, the
Angel of the bottomless pit, King Abaddon, smelling them out, they are openly
murdered, and cruelly and barbarously entreated, even with applause and
congratulation of the world, in all parts of the Antichrist his power (the
great City) so as they seemed In orb Romano qui sunt Ciues sunt Romani. Lex
Antonini Pij. Bodin in metho. historiae. cap. 6.
to be utterly undone and extinguished: and the earth, and earthly men
thereupon, reioysed as freed of them, who by the light, reproved their dark
works, and thus tormented them: not as the Locusts tormented men, Chap. 9. But
as Elias and Micheas did Ahab: Ieremias, the Land; and Amos Israel. Thirdly,
the spirit of life from God, which never can be killed, (for the truth can
never be bound) raises them, that is, others, having the same spirit and
power: who stand up on their feet, that is, stoutly and vigorously set
themselves to fight against Antichrist, so as he shall then begin to be
afraid, and his former great mirth shall be troubled: and that so much the
more, when he and his sectators shall see (to their great both grief and
fear) these few, hid, afflicted, slain, and mocked ones, (of whom, they
thought they had been rid for ever) by divine calling, called up See Chap. 12.
Sect. 8.
to heaven, that is, separated from the fellowship and all communion with
Antichrist and his earthly sort, to be, with account and protection
acknowledged and seen the true Ministers of God his true Church, which now,
from under Antichrist his darkness (under which it lay veiled as the Temple
within the Court) shall become visible, in a degree even to the enemies.
Whereupon immediately, ensues a great commotion and stir: so as a part of
Antichrist his kingdom falls, and the power thereof is much impaired, by
overthrow of a great number and conversion of others. And thus, way is made to
the seventh trumpet; wherein, not a part, but all Babel falls an eternal
fall.

2 Consider now, how distinctly and clearly ^heere, Antichrist his whole
dealing in the diverse degrees thereof, and the true Church her case all the
while, is even painted out before the eyes of any that is not blind. So great
light comes by the little book eaten, and rod applied. The first of the
three conditions was, of the Church before this time of application of the rod,
but the measuring and finding it out, is of this time. The other two
conditions, come now, upon this applying of the rod, by such as through eating
the little book were enabled thereto: which Antichrist perceiving, they are
killed and lie dead, etc. And as, for course of time and story, this Chapter is
orderly put, so also exceeding pertinently for order of matter. For where, by
the restoring of prophecy, in the last Chapt. it might be presumed that no
true Church could be before, seeing, that where no prophecy is, the people
perish; and this doubt, might greatly trouble the resolution of a godly soul:
for clearing this doubt, and showing how always, even in the midst of
Antichristian darkness, when no such thing appeared to the eyes of men, yet
the rod rightly applied, made the applyers to see, that God always had a
true Church, in which was a dispensation of grace, though unseen. And this
Church breaking out, first in few, and outwardly weak persons, albeit it
received so hard entertainment by Antichrist, as it seemed even utterly
extinguished in the rising; yet still it prevailed by evident degrees, till
manifestly at last the Temple was opened in heaven, and the Arc of the
Testimony seen. The accommodation hereof shows it self: and the two last
cases are so much the more clear, as they were seen, and are of recent memory.
To clear the first state and secret dispensation of grace, and light when it
appeared impossible, a speech is taken from Zachary, and having allusion to
the Temple of Jerusalem, as has all this Allegory. Zach. 4.
For as light in the Temple by burning lamps of the Candlestick, was
ordinarily entertained through bringing in oil, daily to keep them burning;
so the Temple being closed, and not only the City, but even the Court of the
Temple (except through which no passage was thereto) being possessed and trod
down so long of the Gentiles; it might appear impossible that any light could
he preserved in the Temple; thus closed and compassed. Therefore in this
estate God compares the Ministers of grace to two olive trees growing up by
the sides of the Candlestick within the Temple, and letting drop from their
branches oil in the lamps. Oh, how sweetly the spirit expresses that which
the foolish world can never learn, while still they cry, where was your
Church? Neither by an Army, neither by strength, but by my spirit, says the
Lord.

3 For more clearing of this matter, as before, Chapter 9. in the time of five
Months, the state of the Locusts and their working was much cleared; so here*
to the whole rage of Antichrist during which, the Lord had still his own
witnesses, a time is attributed, that by comparing the places and cases from
which this time is taken, and to which the holy Ghost here purposely all^^^th,
we may learue great wisdom. And to lead us hereto, we have not only the
like time, but also the like speeches: the spirit as it were pointing to us,
whither he will have us to go. The time then attributed to Antichrist his
whole rage, is forty two months, all one with the 1260. days of the two
Witnesses prophesying (to show that all that time God had them, and
continually, therefore is the time counted by days) and all one with the time,
times, and half a time of the woman her abode in the wilderness, Chapter 12;
all alike making up half a week of years, or three years and a half. And
thus the spirit counting one and the same time, by all the spaces of time,
years, months and days, to show evidently, that the years are of months,
and both years and months are of days, as also that the days are properly
to be taken, it is wonder, how learned men could have so far mistaken them.
Now in all the Scripture we shall not find a condition of the Church, with any
circumscription of time answerable in condition, and points of Antichrist his
dealing, here pointed at, (that is, wherein the true worship is so defaced, as
in place thereof, a false worship is erected, and truth trod under foot) but
the two here alluded to, as in the speeches brought hither from both is more
then manifest, of treading under the holy City, prophesying in sack, killing
with fire, shutting of heaven that it rain not, etc. The one is of the time of
Elias his lurking and famine upon Israel three years and a half, when 1 King.
17. 1. Luke 4 25. Iam. 5. 17. 1. Kin. 19. 10.
God his worship was overthrown, his Prophets killed, and worship of Baall
erected, no true Church appearing to be left in Israel, even to the Prophet;
who yet all the while tormented the adversaries, no rain coming but at his
word. The other, is that of removing the daily sacrifice by Antiochus
Epiphanes, and the abomination of desolation, set up in place thereof for a
Joseph. lib. 1. de bello Iudaic^. Dan. 127.
time, times, and half a time, Dan. 7. 25. so long our Savior under great
affliction and contempt preached in the days of his flesh, even half a week,
and was ^ast out of the Synagogue: the Priests, Scribes and Pharisees all the
while obtaining the name and account of the true Church. To the second
condition of these witnesses in this whole rage of Antichrist, are attributed,
three days and a half, that is half a week of days, as the whole is of
years: only to keep thus the allusion to the half week: but so as therein
to imply this consolation, that howsoever the whole time of Antichrist were
long, which yet should have an end, as had these miserable times of Iez^bel and
Antiochus: and that all that long time, the true witnesses should be in
affliction and heaviness: yet that time of cruel and open murdering, and
barbarous ferity should be but short, as is half a week of days in
comparison to half a week of years. And this in story is most clear. For as
their cruel and open murdering began with the reviving and new breaking out
of the Gospel, what time Satan was loosed the second time, Chapter 20. And
the beast became of his color, Chapter 17. So, as the truth prevails by
increase of light, they are feign to relent though nothing in malice and rage,
(which grows more and more, they even blaspheming and gnawing their tongues
for sorrow) yet from unbridled liberty, in murdering the Saints in this
degree. To the last condition is attributed no circumscription of time, because
it is the beginning of that victory to the Saints, and fall to Babell, which
shall have no end of time. For right understanding of these times, see more
Chapt. 9. Sect. 5. as likewise for this, that here is said (The second woe is
past) see, there Sect. 8. Now here is well to be considered, that what in this
Chapter is showed of Antichrist his rage against the Church, and her suffering
by him, is here handled, but by the way, and not of purpose, to show that Story
(which comes in the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters) but only so far as was
requisite for clearing the story of the witnesses, how the world is plagued by
them: which is here the scope of the spirit, See upon Chap. 14 Sect. 10.

4 Thus was the sixth Trumpet, and the second great woe, follows the seventh:
to which we see how fair a way is made in the sixth; to make us understand,
that even in time of the second woe, and greatest height thereof by the
Mahometanes let loose again from their binding; this last woe was working in
such degrees as have been showed; as in like manner in the sixth seal was
given a view of the mischief of the Trumpets, to learn us, that even then,
before the overthrow, and shaking of the Empire, the mystery of iniquity was
working. And in all God shows his power and providence, that even with the
sin and wickedness of men, has his judgments preparing long before, for
their due punishment in time. Now marvel not that, here that which is to the
Saints, chief joy, is a woe to the World: for our victory is the worlds ruin.

5 Upon the blowing of the seventh Trumpet, the effect thereof is, in the rest
of this Chapter, summarily denounced, by a gratulatory song of praise of the
Church to God for the joyful effect to them, though woeful to the world, which
now they preconceiue is to ensue. And this effect summarily here denounced, is
through the rest of all the Prophetical narration exponed at large. The sum
and matter of their fong, which stirs them to thanksgiving is in this, that
God now reigns. And this reign is cleared by two great effects, the one is
the destruction of all enemies, the other is a sequel hereof, the good estate
of God his children, the time of whose reward now is come. The Justice of God
in the destruction is showed, in that these enemies were angry, and had in
their fury destroyed the earth, and murdered the Saints: so as now God had
just reason to be angry in his course, and to judge and revenge his dead fully
on the world, by prosecuting still his, now begun wrath and judgments
against the adversaries, till they be closed up in everlasting torment: and
redressing the estate of his Church in continual deliverance and increase of
grace, till as a Bride fully prepared, she be received to glory; all being
here performed now in the days of this Trumpet whatsoever by the Prophets was
foretold, either of the Church her perfection in grace and peaceable state, or
of the enemies destruction. And this is that finishing of the mystery sworn,
Chapter 10. this is that vengeance promised to the slain souls, in the 5.
Seal, but which they were to attend till the rest of Saints were slain: and
this the Gentiles in their anger having performed (having trod down the holy
City, even that beast that works forty two months, making war with the
Saints, and ouercomming them, Chapter 13.) Now the Lord comes in great
indignation to repay the world their cruelty. This double event thus denounced,
is by figne also forshewed, to signify the rising of the Church in great light
and deep sight of the most hid mysteries, the Tabernacle is open in heaven,
and the Arc (which stood in the most holy place) is openly seen. Here is a
great degree of knowledge. In the end of the sixth Trumpet, was a great measure,
even that first visible separation from Babel, and her earthly ones, when to
the witnesses it was said, Come up hither: but her clearenesse of light is
advanced greatly, and the truth hereof is evident All praise to him who has
taken his Kingdom; for since the seventh Trumpet began to blow, the
Antichristian kingdom thinks light of the sixth Trumpet, and now this is
their heauiest woe, as will appear in the effects of the Vials; but it is our
song. The sign of the other effect, in the destruction of the enemies, and God
his horrible judgments to that end, are thunderings, lightnings voices,
earthquake, and much hail See upon Chapter 4. Sect. 10. thus, Babel, whereof,
but the tenth part fell, at the first essays, in the time of the sixth
Trumpet, now at the sound of the seventh, takes a total ruin, as did Ios. 6.
16.
Ierico at the seventh Trumpet, for to that is the allusion.

CHAP. XII.
THe seventh Trumpet sounding, the effect thereof was summarily foreshewed in a
congratulatorie song, and signs expressing the maine points of the event to
ensue, in the end of the last Chapter. Now hence through this Book (to the
general conclusion of al) that is largely and particularly exponed: in the
story of two great wonders or signs in Heaven. The first in the 12. 13. and
14. Chapters: the other thence to the end. The first sign or wonder has the
story of the enemies, and condition of God his Church oppressed by them, and in
some degrees coming out under that bondage. The second has the story of full
victory, in the perfect overthrow of the adversaries, and the Church her goodly
and graceful state thereupon. The first in the 12. 13 and 14. Chapters, is of
one time with that story, which in the fix seals and six trumpets of the
seventh has been showed: but yet is not the same. And where it would appear
to have but one and the same matter; yet the purpose and respect of handling is
much different, whereof see more upon Chapter 14. Sect. 10. And here this
Narration comes exceeding fitly, both for time and matter. For time, because,
albeit it be of things fallen out before the seventh Trumpet, yet so clear a
sight of them was not got, till upon the blast of it the Tabernacle of
testimony opened in heaven, afforded to God his children a more plain sight of
the enemies, their course and success of working. For matter, because, that
upon the souuding of the seventh Trumpet, so great a joy of the Church uttered
in such a song, upon preception of so great a deliverance to her self, and
destruction of her enemies, requires for clear understanding thereof, and how
great the work is, that these enemies be known, and their dealings: and to
endeare the more to the Church her own; deliverance, that her troubles and
wrestlings with these enemies be also seen: that so, both the equity of the
former judgments, and specially of this last and final wrath to come on them,
may be clear. Till now the Story has been of wrath upon the world, from
which the sealed ones were free, the Church her sufferings nothing, or but
sparingly touched: the Story of the Witnesses, Chapter 11. being delivered but
as they were a Woe upon the world; but now in these three subsequent Chapters,
the Story of the Church her sufferings, and of the parties by whom, (upon
whom, and for which came all the former woes, and now final wrath is
denounced) is most pertinently, both for time and matter inserted. The not
aduerting of this purpose of the holy Ghost has bredde to many in reading this
Book great obscurity, while they took not up the sweet and plain way
thereof, so led, as falling in again, in the end of the soureteenth Chapter,
to the point where it left in the end of the eleventh, (for inserting of this
necessary Story) the summary execution is, their preponed of that which in the
end of the eleventh Chapter, was summarily denounced. And so in the second
great Wonder or Sign seen in Heaven, throughout the fifteen, sixeteene,
seventeen, eighteen, nineteen and twenty Chapters, this effect of the
seventh Trumpet, as touching the destruction of enemies, and Church her victory
is largely exponed, and in the twenty one, and twenty two, as touching her
graceful and peaceable state thereupon.

2 The first wonder or sign is double, according as therein the enemies
inuaders, and party assailed, are expressed. The party assailed is the woman
and her seed, first and last. The assailing enemy, is the Dragon, by himself
openly, and by his Lieutenant, the beast of his power, covertly. Against the
woman and her first seed, is set the Dragon, directly in this Chapter. Against
her in her other seed, the beast of his power, throne and authority, in the
next Chapter. This is that war proclaimed in Paradise. Genesis 3. 15.
In this Chapter are; first, the description of the parties by their habit, and
disposition to do. Secondly, the event; which makes way to the next enemy in
the next Chapter. The party assailed, is the woman, in habit clothed with the
Sun, treading the Moon, crowned with twelve Stars. In disposition of
present endeavor, big with child, traveling, pained, and crying through pain.
The assailing party, for habit, is a great red Dragon, having seven heads
crowned, ten horns, and a tail. His endeavor to do, is, he casts stars
from heaven with his tail, and stands before the woman to devour her child
with his heads.

3 The event hereof is (according to the ordinary form of Scripture) first
Summarilie proponed in the 5. and 6. verses. And next, thenceforth more largely
cleared. And this event is double. The child is borne and exalted: and the
woman flies. In the summarie proposition of this double event, the child his
quality, dignity, and exaltation to high estate is proponed: and the woman's
flght, by the place, whither; her condition in it, and time of this her
condition, is described.

4 Having, thus summarily in the 5. and 6. verses, proponed this double event:
he shows after, how it fell out, and by what means. And first how it came,
that the child so narrowly watched, and by so strong an enemy, yet, not only
escapes, but is exalted to great honor. This, of the child comes by a
great battle in heaven. wherein are the Captains of either side, their
Armies, and the event of the conflict. The General Captain of the one side is
Michael: his Army, are his Angels. The Captain and Army opposite, are, the
Dragon and his Angels. The event of their conflict, is, the Dragon is foild,
and the degree of the foil is, that he and his Angels are so dejected, as they
have no more place in heaven. This is cleared by two contrary effects. The one,
in the heavenly Citizens of joy: the other, in the Dragon of rage. The joy of
the heavenly Citizens is set forth in their song of victory: which victory,
is amplified by the greatness, cruelty, subtlety, maliciousness, enmity, and
perverse diligence of the Dragon, who is overcome: by the nobleness of the
victory, for the price of it: by the Soldiers constant suffering to attain
it, which endeareth it the more: and lastly, by the miserable condition of the
earthly sort through this his foil. Thus, is declared how the child escaped,
and was exalted. Next is showed, how the second part of the general event,
that is, the woman's flight, did come. The Dragon his rage for his foil, and
misgiuing endeavor against the Child, stirs him to peisecute the woman.
Thereupon she flies, being healped thereto by the means given her of two
wings, Of that great Eagle. And her flight, here, as before in the summarie
proposition, is cleared by the place of her retrait, her condition there, and
the time thereof. This rage of the Dragon against the woman, has two degrees.
The first is, he persecuteth her, wherethrough she is brought to fly, by the
means given her of the wings. The second degree is, his endeavor, for her
overthrow in her flight: the flood cast out against her. This double rage is
eluded; the first, by the wings; the second, by the help of the earth, which
swalloweth the flood. This general event of all this misgiuing endeavor
against child and woman, works in the Dragon increase of rage, whereby he is
stirred to make war against the rest of her Seed. Against these (having
misgiuen in his open dealing against her first seed) he stirs up that
beast, whose rising and working to behold, John stands on the Sea shore.

5 I have joined together, and at length, the resolution of this Chapter, the
mistaking whereof, in my judgment, has marred all the accommodation here,
and much obscured all the rest of this Prophecy. The right accommodation shall
yet be the more clear, if we observe after what manner, in this Prophecy,
the holy Ghost describes the enemies of the Church, and whence the whole frame
of speech, in this Chapter, is taken. First, then, the course of the Church her
sufferings, and her enemies, by whom, is framed to the course of the old
Testement: wherein, the first great enemy was Phaaro. The second great foe was
Babel, and these Beasts in Daniel. Ezech. 48. and 49. and Dan. 7. and 11.
Of which, the last extreme enemy, was Gog and Magog, even the Kings of Syria:
and of them, most of all, Antiochus Epiphanes. To these their enemies, and the
old Churches sufferings by them, that here in the story of the Christian
Church her foes and sufferings, the Spirit alludeth, it is most clear. To move
us to compare and find not only light here, but to see also that these
former were stamps of greater things to come. Now all the speech of this
Chapter, is from the state of the Church in Egypt: which, in her infancy there,
was as a woman big with child, and crying through cruel burdens: Pharao that
great Dragon, even that great Leniathan, first Psalm. 74. 13. 14. Isai. 51. 9.
Exodus 1. 10. 16 Exodus 12.
wrought, wisely with them, as with his tail, and next stood cruelly, ready to
devour all her Male Children. But Michael fought for them, and in the blood of
the lamb, they overcame, and all the first borne of Egypt are slain. The
Church flies, as carried upon Eagles wings, to the wilderness where she is
fed with Manna. In her flight, Deuteronomy. 32. 11.
the Dragon Pharao minded to have drowned her in the red Sea, but the earth
helped her: for earthly Pharao and his earthly Army drank up that flood. And
all this is to make us understand, by conformity of case, that here, the first
great enemy and sufferings of the Christian Church, in her infancy are set
forth.

6 The woman, is the Primitive Apostolic Church, glorious in the clear light
of the sun of righteousness, whom she put on for her wisdom and
justification. Treading all borrowed, spotted, changeable, transitory and light
things under foot: glorying only in the Chap. 21 14.
light ministered by the twelve Apostles, which is her crown. She is big with
child of all peoples, whom she was begetting to God, through obedience of
faith in Christ. For her great troubles and sufferings, she is said to Gal. 5.
Isai. 66. 7. Isai. 54. 1. Mich. 4. 10.
be in traveling and to cry of pain, traveling in birth of all nations, till
Christ should be formed in the^. The speech is from the Prophets, with who^ it
is ordinarily in this sense.

7 Now, against this woman, according to the old war proclaimed in Paradise,
is set in appearance, a very unequal match, but that Michael fights the
battle. This adversary, is Satan. (for so the spirit interprets verse 9.)
He is a great Dragon, for great malice, force, and subtilty. He is red, for
his cruel and bloody disposition: as who was a murderer from the beginning
Ioh. 8. 44.
He has seven heads and ten horns (the arms of Rome) because of this the
Devil his fury, against the Chap. 17.
Primitive Church, the Emperors of Rome were the instruments and executors.
And therefore, to show Rome in that state of persecuting Emperors, the heads
are crowned, for an evident distinction of Rome then, from Rome thereafter in
the beast. The heads and horns are put in both, that we may know what state
the spirit designeth: but by the different note of these heads and horns. To
take up the different time, and condition in time. Against the Primitive
Church, the Devil, albeit working by Rome, is made the direct enemy, because
then, Christianity was directly oppugned, and open rage practiced against the
name of Christ: Heathenisme, and worship of Devils, plainly maintained. From
which open dealing and licentious murdering, Satan being tied up afterward by
power of the Gospel: he dealt more covertly by the beast of his authority,
under name and profession of Christianity, and pretense of Christ his power,
deceiving men of the world: till, after a thousand years, the revived light of
the Gospel breaking out a fresh, and discovering the deceit of the beast, he
is so chafed, as he falls to murdering of Saints. In which respect the
Dragon is said to be loosed Chap. 20.
the second time, Chap 20. and thereby the beast falling to open murder,
becomes of his color, Chapter 17. Of these heads and horns, see upon the
13. and 17. Chapters.

8 This Dragon then, imployeth head and tail, that is, cruelty and lies: for,
he was a lier and murderer from the beginning. By his tail, that is, by his
alluring deceit, whether effectual error, or deceitfulness of honors,
riches, and worldly lusts, he insinuates himself amongst these, who seem
shining stars of heaven, and draws them to fall from light and grace, and
to become earthly: such as go out of the Church (that is heaven) but were not
of it. Mark always, that Satan his first attempt against the Church, is with
his tail amongst the stars. Thus he stirs his tail. With his heads, that
is, his power and force, he sets himself, first, against the child, to
devour him in the bearing. Whereby, the fury and rage of Satan, by the Roman
Emperors, to keep the Church of Christ from rising, is signified:
notwithstanding whose malice and cruelty, the Isai. 66. 7.
child, and a man child (alluding to the story of Egypt, and also, for that,
as Christ was in person, and as the paschall Lamb, and other expiatory
sacrifices of the flock; so all Christians, in Christ Jesus are consecrated as
males, for perfection of strength and spiritual vigor) is borne, that is, the
Church is brought forth to the partaking of the honor, first proper to
Christ, and in him to all his Psalm. 149. 9.
members. To rule all Nations with a rod of iron, Chapt. 2. 27. And not only
thus brought forth, but, in evident presence and power of God ruling in and
amongst them, established here in earth against all Satan his fury, and visibly
separated to God, from the rest of the world; becoming Kings and Priests to
God, in Christ: so as, according to Christ his own prediction, the son of
man was seen come in his Kingdom with power, by his Church raised in the
world. The throne, as the iron rod, is first and properly Christ his right, but
it is also the honor of the Saints in him, to whom he gives a Kingdom, as
he has received one of the father: and to whom John 17. 22. Chap. 3. 21.
he gives to sit in his throne, as he overcame and sits in his fathers
throne. For even here, we sit with him in the highest places. So the taking up
of the child, is the erection of the Church amongst men visibly: in that same
sense that the two Witnesses were bid come up hither, Chap. 11. And the casting
of the Dragon from heaven, is all one thing with this. For the exalting of the
child, is the deiecting of the Dragon from heaven: and the deiection of the
Dragon, is the vptaking of the child. Satan is said to be in heaven, when, so
by lies and error he has prevailed in the visible Church, as no apparent, or
very small face thereof is seen. Like as the Church, is in the earth (even
where Satan his throne is) when it is so compassed with error and ignorance, as
it appears Chap. 2. 13.
not, till it be said, come up hither: that is, till God, by purity of worship
and open profession thereof, make his true Church visibly separated from the
contagion of the worldy sort. And even in this case, Satan is dejected from
heaven, and sent amongst his own earthly ones. He is said to fight in heaven,
when by slight and might, he laboreth to keep down so the true Church, as it
can not be discerned from his company: and is dejected thence, when truth
openly in the Church is maintained, so as he can have no place for dominion,
but amongst the Mat. 8. 31.
children of disobedience. For being cast out of men, he goes madlings in
the swine of the world, and shut out of God his house, he furiously mistra^meth
his own: putting forth his rage where he may, seeing he cannot where he
would. Woe to the Inhabitants of the earth. This is it, which makes, that
where ever the Gospel is purely preached, there immediately by Satan are
raised stirs and tempests. For, while he brooketh all peaceably, Luke 11. 21.
he is at ease: but when that stronger comes, who spoileth his house, then
he chafeth and becomes mad in his Instruments. This event Christ in these
same words foretells; so as we need not doubt of the right sense. Now is the
judgment of this world, now shall John 12. 31.
the Prince of this world be cast out. And in another place speaking of the
effect of the Gospel truly preached. I saw Satan fall from the heaven like
lightning. Luke 10. 18.


9 This victory is by Michael and his Angels fighting in heaven, that is, by
Christ who is Michael our Prince, and the Angels of the Churches, Apostles, and
faithful Pastors fighting by the powerful preaching of Dan. 10. 21.
the Gospel against Satan and his Ministers of darkness, heathen
Philosophers, heretics and all such: for Christianity, is a warfare against
Principalities and powers, and against beasts, wherein we must all fight the
good fight of faith; and strive for that victory which stands in salvation of
the elect from God in Christ, and in the foil of Satan, and that by the blood
of the Lamb, apprehended by true faith in the word of Jesus his Testimony,
with perseverance, and a ready offering of lives for his honor.

10 Now Satan so dejected in rage, that thus against all his endeavors, the
Church rises, sets himself to cruelly persecute the same. For except in
distinct considerations, the woman and child are all one: but that the holy
Ghost will thus express, how Satan first by craft and cruelty labored to
destroy the Church in the rising that it should not spread: whereof misgiuing,
and she multiplying wonderfully, he inforceth still thereupon ragefull
persecution, The first and second both are more then clear in the persecuting
Emperors, and state of the Church in that time. Now this second endeavor
against the Church is eluded, and the woman retired from his fury, but yet so
as she goes to the wilderness, this is to show, how by the protection and
maintenance of Constantine the Great, and his Successors becoming Christians,
and who according to the Phrase of the Prophets, are called that great Eagle
(as the doubled Ezech. 17. Dan. 7. 4.
Article (...), and Constantine his peculiar surname, (...), prove clearly)
this open and furious persecution was stayed, the souls receiving long white
robes, Chapter 6. but yet so as the great honor and riches, wherewith as with
wings he upon good intention endowed the Church as an occasion to make her
fly to the wilderness, all true and sincere religion, by degrees decaying in
the visible Church. And so by Satan his craft (who now is bound up a thousand
years) the beast steals in and sits in the Temple of God. The true Church
in the mean time lurking in the wilderness, as Elias in the time of famine:
and no more any face of true worship appearing, then was in Israel Chap. 11.
Sect. 3.
that while; or then when the daily sacrifice was removed, and the abomination
of desolation erected in place thereof for a time, times, and half a time.
Now, this flight was not in an instant, but by long and yet Dan. 7. 25. and 12.
7.
sensible degrees. And therefore we have an other degree of Satan his fury
against the woman, after he seeeth her so furnished with wings, as he (being
now chained Chapter 20.) could no more persecute openly, or come at her. He
casts a great flood out of his mouth after her to drown her in her flight.
This must be a filthy flood which springs from so foul a fountain. Hereby
then is meaned not only that inundation of barbarous Nations, which in Satan
his intention no doubt were set forth to drown the woman: but also all these
poisonable heresies, whereof upon this restraint he spued out an Ocean: both
which by God his providence turned to the destruction and punishment of the
earthly sort. For the bloody Roman Empire was ouerturned by these Nations; and
the wicked of the world poisoned with these heresies. Thus, then Satan
misgiuing of all his attempts against the woman and her first seed, and finding
so little success in open dealing, from which also he is now bound up: he
prepares a beast of strange working to deceive the world, and to make war
against the seed of succeeding times. Whereof Chapter 13. So as the whole sum
of this Chapter is this. Satan (seeing the Primitive Apostolic Church by the
clear light of the sun of righteousness ministered by the Apostles, whereby
all borrowed, spotted and transitory light was trod under, like to bring
Nations to the obedience of faith; and so, to bring forth a church in the
world, as he who had long miscarried all men, was now by the light of the
Gospel to be dejected from his place) he uses all both craft and violence to
impede the success of the Gospel, and notwithstanding it is so fruitful
through Christ his power, and endeavor of faithful Ministers, that the son
of man comes in his Kingdom with power, and Satan is dethroned. This makes
him in ragefull despite, not only to raise terrible broiles in the world to
the earthes great woe, but to enforce also cruel persecution against the
Church: against which she is armed with that great Eagle his wings, so as
Satan is restrained from open rage. His next endeavor therefore against her,
thus protected is by inundation of barbarous nations, and poisonable heresy to
drown her: but this the Lord turns on the world; yet so as the Church goes
to the wilderness and lurketh. Where-through the Beast in the next Chapter
steals in to occupy City and Court, Chap. 11.

CHAP. XIII.
THus was the open rage of the Dragon against the Woman, and her first seed:
now follows his covered dealing against her seed of succeeding times, by the
Vicar of his power, described in this Chapter, from his quality, that he is a
beast: origin, that he rises out of the sea, and earth, in distinct
consideration: shape exceeding monstrous, having seven heads and ten horns, as
had the Dragon: but other ways busked, as having his horns crowned, and on
his head, the name of blasphemy: in body like a Pard, footed like a Bear, and
mouthed like a Lion. Besides this, he has for right discerning of him, two
notes of great mark. The first is, his great power and authority, as
Vicegerent to Satan in his power, throne, and authority. The second is, that
one of his heads having been deadly wounded was cured again, where-through,
all the world astonished at the beast of so great majesty and unmatchable
power, worship him and the Devil his aduancer.

2 These two notes, and effect thereof, thus summarily proponed, are from the
fifth verse, throughout the chapter exponed more largely, and first, this his
authority practiced in two mischievous effects, the one of speaking
blasphemies, and the other of doing what he list uncontrolled. This double
authority is cleared, first by the time thereof, forty two months, and next by
the practice of it: his speaking of blasphemies against God, his Church and
members thereof. In his doing are noted, what it was, making war: against
whom, the Saints: and with what success, that he overcame them. Thirdly, how
largely this power was extended: Over every Tribe, Tongue and Nation. Through
al which he obtains, that al follow and worship him (^he elect only
excepted:) a case so dangerous and fearful, as a warning is,
Epiphonematically, set down to all of attention: and therewith, a consolation,
upon two reasons. First, that according to the general law of God his justice,
whereby every oppressor is oppressed, and the slaier slain, this beast should
come to destruction. Next, that it pleased God thus to try the faith and
patience of his Saints.

3 His second note, of his deadly wound cured again, how it was, is showed by
a new vision of an other Beast, rising from the earth: in all outward
semblance, like to the Lamb, and pretending simply his power, but that his
speech was like the Dragons. This Beast his actions, and end thereof, are first
summarily proponed: in that he did all that the first beast could do, before
him: and to this end, that all the earth might worship the first Beast in the
state of the cured wound. Then is exponed, how he efsectuateth this great
point. To wit, by signs and wonders which were permitted him to do, and
thereby to deceive the earth wherein, he seemed to match Moses and Elias in
master points. That, whereto by all this deceit, he induces the earth and
men thereof, is to make up the image of the Beast, which had the deadly wound
and lived. Which he works so luckily, that he gives spirit and speech to
the Image: and obtains thereto worship of Nations under pain of death: and
subjection to receive the Beast his mark in work or profession, as his proper
good, and: and under pain of confiscation of goods, and interdiction of all
humane commerce, that all, of all estates, ranks, and conditions, should
receive his mark, or bear his name; or, at least, be accounted of his number:
so, making up the whole body and frame of his Kingdom. Which in respect of the
number of his name, comprehending all the sorts of his followers, will appear
(to any, who is not endued with heavenly wisdom to count it) so large, so
fair, so perfectly and proportionably builded and stablished, as he will
undoubtedly be overcome thereby. And yet, who is wise to count it, will find
it to be but a man his number and none of God his building. And the number to
be counted, is 666.

4 That these beasts are the state of Rome, all sound Interpreters agree. But
in what time, and of what policy, there is great disagreement. That which has
bred greatest difficulty in accommodation, is, because that the two Beasts
here set forth, are taken of all men to be diverse, or at least, of diverse
time and condition: whereas they are both one. And are here distinctly and
diversely set down by the spirit, only for clear explication: as in the
deduction shall be made plain. The common opinion, that the first Beast is the
heathen state of Rome under persecuting Emperors, and the second, the
Popedom, cannot consist with the clear notes of this first Beast, proper to
Popedom. The first note, is the attire of his heads and horns. Rome, in the
persecuting Emperors (as they were the ministers of Satan his open wrath) is
noted by seven heads and ten horns of the Dragon: but so, as the heads only
are crowned. The horns, that is, the Provincial governments under them, and
wherein was their strength, having no Crowns: because the royal and
sovereign government, was then only in the heads of the state, so, designing
the Emperors of that time. But this Beast here, has his horns Crowned: to
show that the proppes of his power are crowned Kings, as Chapter 17. is exponed
plainly, that they are Kings which had not as then received a Kingdom.
Whereby is manifest that the ten horns, as they are crowned, were not in
John his time: neither this beast, as it has crowned horns. The beast indeed,
was before, in the five heads who were fallen; he was not in the state here
described: for he was to rise out of the bottomless pit: and yet, even then,
he was in the state of the sixth head; that is, the Caesar's: by curing of whose
deadly wound, in the Pontificalitie erected, the Popedom afterward became the
lively image: that is, the state of Rome under the Popes a lively image of the
state of Rome before. And therefore, in distinct consideration, The
Pontificality, is the eight head of the Beast, and yet one of the seven. And
whereas the former heads were crowned: now the heads arise to a higher
presumption (having horns crowned) to attire themselves with the name of
blasphemy, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

5 The next note, here proper to the Popedom, is, that the Dragon has given
him his power, throne, and authority. The Dragon in his openrage, used
Emperors but for the Ministers of his fury: but the Popes are the Vicars of
his power, and therefore, are properly the Son of perdition, King Apollyon,
and the Angel of the bottomless pit: whose coming is in all effectual
working of Satan. For, albeit the Dragon bequeateth not utterly his Kingdom,
yet finding that his open rage had not the desteined success, he substracteth
himself in a sort, and substituteth this viceroy of his kingdom, the most
effectual promoouer of darkness that ever was. Satan offered to Christ this
bargen, but was repulsed: here, he finds Math. 4. 8.
his Merchant, who accepts of it, and both himself worshippeth and makes
all the world to worship the Dragon. That the Popes have Satan his throne in
a peculiar manner, is plain, by their practice and by their challenge. Their
practice, for that it is not only (as of all the former heads, or other
tyrants whatsoever, instruments of Satan his rage) to subdue to themselves
bodies, goods and states of men, to dispose thereof at their pleasure: but, he
further will impire over the conscience: and all his administration, as the
proper angel of the bottomless pit, is to plunge men in darkness. Wherein
the Dragon, as almost in all things, is an Ape of God his dealing. For, as God
has given to Christ, his throne and authority, all power in heaven and earth,
for conquering a kingdom to him: so has the Dragon given all his power to his
anointed, Antichrist, the man of sin, for setting forward his kingdom of
darkness. Their challendge also argues this. For, albeit great Monarchs,
for the largeness of their dominion are said to have the kingdoms of the
earth: and the Romans, to magnify their Empire, would call it, Imperium orbis
terrarum: yet, never King or Monarch challenged ever any further right, then
either by apparent just title he might claim, or by Arms he had subdued. But
the Pope challenges right over all, as whereof he may dispose at his
pleasure. And that ye may clearly discern the Dragons mouth, he only of all
men since the beginning of the world, stoutly affirms, All the Kingdoms of
the world are mine, and I give them to whom I will.

6 The third note here put, is the time of his working, 42. mouethes. The very
time of Antichrist his obtaining place in the visible Church, Chap. 11. of the
Temple closed, and witnesses preaching in Sackcloath: and of the woman's abode
in the wilderness, Chap. 12. An infallible argument that here Antichrist is
described.

7 The fourth note is clearest of all. For, as the description of the Beast,
his heads and horns, shows him to be the Roman state or Kingdom: so,
here a special note is given whereby to discern of what time, policy, state
and condition of Rome, this Beast is to be taken: namely, in the state of the
wounded head, cured again. And, because this, beingshortly touched might be
obscure: therefore to make it plain, a special vision is given of the curer
and manner of the cure, whereby this Beast in this state, is made up: so as, if
it may not be esteemed absolutely the fame which it was before the deadly
stroke; yet at least it is a lively image thereof. The Curer, is a Beast like
the Lamb, and simply pretending his power in two horns like to his: but
speaking like the Dragon. Here, two hones like the Lambs, are not put for any
answerable number of Kings, but to show a humble and simple pretense of the
Lamb his power; and not out wardly, of that ferity and strength of the Beast,
like a Pard, footed like a Bear, and mouthed like a Lion. For, that to the
Lamb Chap. 5. we attributed seven horns and seven eyes, was to show his
perfection of power and wisdom. Here the Lamb is put according to the
natural verity of such a beast, so to express lively the simulate hypocrisy
and affectation of simple humility in this Beast so masking himself, while yet
under this pretense, he but animates again the beast with seven heads and
ten horns, etc. That so under himself (the eight head in number and order,
and one of the seven, that is the sixth, by cure of the wounded head) the beast
that was in the five heads fallen before John his days, and in the sixth head
was even then in his time, but was not in the condition here meaned, might
arise in the own time out of the bottomless pit: and deceiving the world by
the cup of fornication, may perish for ever.

The means how he works this cure, are by deceit of signs and wonders, 2 Thessalonians. 2. The manner of cure is, that by these signs and wonders, the world is
induced to make up the image of the Beast which had the deadly wound and
lived. And this is nothing else, but that the Kings and States of the earth,
should so submit themselves to the Popes of Rome, by signs and force of the
cup of fornication bewitching them, and faining of himself to be the Lamb
his Vicar, whereas he is the Dragons, as the state of Rome, which in overthrow
of the Caesar's, had received a deadly wound, should rise to the same or greater
dignity then it had in the Emperors: and the kingdom thereof, reerected in the
pontificality, should be as it were a lively and speaking image of the beast
before it was wounded: and all men should worship als far, or more, the
Popes, as they had the Emperors: the Beast, that is, the kingdom or state of
Rome, becoming in the head cured again, that is, in the Pontificality, als
famous and wonderful as it was before the wound. And in this respect, the
Pontificality, is both the eight head, in number and order, of that kingdom or
beast, and also is one of the seven, as in which the sixth head is revived, or
rather the kingdom which in the sixth head got a deadly wound; according as
Chap. 17. the Beast has his denomination from the eight head. For clear
understanding of all this matter, read that Chapter. The sixth head was
wounded, when by incursion of Barbars, many great and famous Provinces were
taken from the Empire. Yet more deeply, when not only Italy was trod under
foot, but Rome it self was spoiled and burnt by Athalaricus; after by
Athaulphus and their Goths: miserably rifled by Gensericus and his Vandales.
The wound yet was more deep, when Odoacer and his Heruls flew Augustulus, and
seized upon Italy fourteen years. But then it became deadly, when the
Emperor and Senate, dispairing to keep Italy and Rome any more, willingly
bequeathed them to Thcodoricus: who thereupon, defeating Odoacer, was received
in Rome as their lawful Prince. Where he reigned, by himself and his
successors Ostrogothes, in peace and flourishing state many years.

This deadly wound, Justinian afterward by the valor of Belisare and Narset,
labored to have cured, but it auailed not, by new invasions the wound still
remaining deadly. But the Popes, by signs and cup of fornication, bewitching
even all these Kings, who had risen by the fall of the Empire, to submit their
crowns to them: and that dignity and glory, which Rome had lost by fall of the
Empire, the Popes recovering the same to it by the authority of the Apostolic
seat and keys of Peter: then the image of the Beast was so made up, as for
lively resemblance, it seemed to have spirit and speech. Even in a manner to be
the same; and so gets worship and slavish subjection of the world. For the
liveliness of this image, read the donation of Constantine, and Steuchus, in
defense of it. His words are these.

Euerso Imperio, nisi Deus Pontificatum restituisset, futurum erat vt Roma
nullo tempore excitata, ac restituta, inhabitabilis posthaec, faedissima boum
porcorumque futura esset habitatio. At, in Pontificatu, etfi non illa veteris
Imperij magnitudo, species certe non long dissimilis renata est, qua gentes
omnes ab ortu and occasu haud secus Romanum Pontificem venerantur, quam omnes
Nationes olim Imperatoribus obtemperabant. And thereafter, to show the
resemblance. An non amnia quae Romae quondam profana erant, sacra effect a
sunt? quemadmodum omnia Templa deorum facta sunt Eoclesiae sanctorum, ritus
item profani coperunt esse ritus sacri: Nonne Pantheon Templum omnium idolorum,
effectum est Templum sanctae virgiris? nonne in Vaticano, Templum Apollinis vbi
condita erant corpora Apostolorum, conuersum est in Ecclesiam ipsorum
Apostolorum vt superius demonstratum est? totque alia.

This made Prosper to say:

Seeds Roma Petri quae pastoralis honoris Libro de ingratis.

Facta caput mundo, quicquid non possidet armis,
Relligione tenet. --
And, Roma per Sacerdotij Principatum amplior facta est Lib. 2. devocatione
gentium. cap. 6.
arce religionis quam solio potestatis. But this seems greatly to withstand
our interpretation, that here, are put not only two beasts but also having
diverse origin: the first from the sea, the second from the earth. Whereby some
learned men, seeing that clearly the Pontificality was meaned in both, were
brought to think the same to be in them, differently expressed, as it is to be
taken up in diverse times and conditions in time: and so, esteem the Popedom
to be both the seventh and eight head, Chap. 17. But as in this (in my
judgment) they have mistaken, so this difference imposes no necessity to
think so. For the vision of the second beast is only brought, for more clear
explication of that last note of the Beast ^ouching the eure of the wounded
head. In the first beast the Antichrist is expressed, but so as we may take
up of what kingdom and state he is head, namely of the kingdom of Rome.
And therefore, in the beast, that kingdom is so painted forth to us, as to
know it rightly, she has all her heads attributed to her, which ruled in her
from her first rising to her last fall: yet so, as here, the beast is to be
considered, only in the condition and state of the last head, arising by cure
of the deadly wound. As to the Dragon, all the heads were attributed (to make
clear what state he wrought by) yet so as his rage then, is considered only
in the sixth head. He having seven but for discerning the kingdom; five having
ere then fallen, and two not as yet risen. The second beast is put only for
clear explication of the condition, nature, quality, and working, of this last
head, considered a part and by it self: and how this great work, of quickening
that mortally wounded kingdom or beast, is wrought by it, so as under it, the
Beastreuiueth: and now, (howsoever for discerning the kingdom, all the heads
be mentioned) comes only to be considered in that state and respect: in
which (for great diversity from the former condition before the wound yea and
before the the cure) this head is in a sort a different beast, as having this
singular in shape, that it is like the Lamb: in working, that it does by
signs and wonders: in condition, that the beast under it, is rather an image
of the former then the same, and yet a lively image: therefore called the eight
head and one of the seven. In which respect, but seven heads are attributed to
the beast, albeit in number there be eight. That the first rises out of the
sea; and the second out of the earth; it is but to note the different manner of
rising; of the last head and state under it, from the rising of the Beast in
all his former conditions and heads. They both, in their distinct manner of
rising, have this common, that they are from below. For, albeit the earth and
sea, in degree of account with other creatures; as the fountains, sun,
moon, stars, Chap. 9. and. 16. according to the effects wrought in them, and
that whereof they in these degrees are the types, are to be taken so, as
agrees with the course of the mystery, as in these places is declared. Yet
when Sea and Earth are set in opposition to heaven, as here, and Chapter 10.
when the Angel descending from heaven for overthrow of this beast, sets his
feet on the sea and earth, whence in distinct consideration the beast arises.
And Chapter 12. rejoice O heavens, woe to the Inhabitants of sea and earth:
then things arising from sea and earth must be taken as Christ speaks to the
Jews. Ye are from below, I am from above. And even the four beasts in Daniel
(whose Ioh. 8. 23.
whole ferity, cruelty, fraud, and destroying power is in this one) whom in the
beginning of his seventh Chapter he sees rise out of the sea, are said in
that same chapter verse 17. to arise out of the earth, as all one thing: except
that as the earth shows the origin to be earthly, and from below, so the sea
shows their rising to be of the troubles, tossings and alterations of the
earth: whose commotions are compared to the stormy sea, and according to this
to show the peaceable and calm estate of the Church upon utter destruction of
this Beast, Isai. 57. 20.
it is said Chapter 21. that there was no more sea. Then, this second Beast is
said to rise out of the earth, not only for that it was from below (for so is
the whole beast first and last) throught the star falling from the heaven,
chap. 9 But because this last head (howsoever the beast or kingdom of Rome
considered absolutely rises out of the sea) in the particular consideration
thereof by it self, and apart, arose in a far different manner from all the
former; which all arose by great commotions and sensible alterations: but this
last head arose slily, subtlely, and almost insensibly, by slow degrees, as
things that grow through the earth; and so became head of that Kingdom, which
under it is the beast going to destruction. See Steuchus against Valla.
Paulatim imperare incipiebat religio, habenas imperij caper^, ius suum
acquirere, nihil subitum, nihil tumultuarium. Where the second beast is said to
work before the first beast, it is not to be taken for impudent or violent
usurpation, but according to the Phrase of Scripture; as John Baptist Luke 1.
17.
to go before Christ. And this is only for clearenesse of explication of him
and his manner, who makes the Image: as traveling with all sedulous endeavor
by lying signs to conciliate authority, honor and submission to that state
under himself, as head thereof. Neither hereupon must we think the second
beast working to be an other from him, before whom he works, except so
far as the spirit, so will distinguish betwixt the Kingdom wholly and
absolutely, and this last head peculiarly considered, in comparison to the
former, and as after a deadly wound he quickneth so that state again as he
procures to it worship of Nations. In one word, the first beast is the Kingdom
of Rome under the Pontificality: the second beast is the Pontificality,
wonderfully quickening the wounded beast, to that estate: therefore Chapter 17
but one beast, even this first, is put and called the eighth head: so evidently
telling us that both are one and the same, except in consideration as I have
said. According to this it is, that hereafter the beast is distinguished from
the false Prophet, not that they are two, as many fondly imagine: but only to
take up so the State and Kingdom, as the false Prophet is head thereof, and so
the false Prophet as he is head of that state. See upon Chapter 17. Sect. 11.
18. and 19. Sect. 27. These two beasts, then are to express one and the same
state (even Antichrist in his Kingdom, and in himself head thereof) both for
condition and time. For from the Pope his first degree of rising, he never got
any such crossing, as for which it might be said of him, that he should abide
a short space, Chapter 17. For even in the most miserable times of Rome by the
Goths, he not only retained his old got account, but was still laboring to
advance the credit of his Chair: as his supercilious dealings in these self
times, with foreign Churches sufficiently proves. And whatsoever hinderance
be had by Gothik tyranny from rising to the height he after attained to, it
is too weak a ground to say of him, that he abode a short space: thus to make
him both the seventh and eight head, against clear Text, which makes the
seventh to be soon gone, and if such had been the meaning of the holy Ghost,
he might much both clearelier and easier have called him the eight and seventh,
then the eight and one of the seven: thus clearly implying which of the seven
he meaned: to wit, that whose deadly wound, by his arising he cu^ed, and made
up; thus so lively an Image of the beast, as he may justly therefore be
counted one and the same with it: that is with the sixth: whom for glory,
account, worship of Nations, and Monarchike state he resembles lively, and
the Kingdom under him, the Kingdom then. The mistaking of the seventh head
makes all the error, and in such light of Story, agreeing fitly with this
Prophecy, it is wonder that all should have erred. This is certain that
Caesar's are the sixth head that which then was, and before which five (Kings,
Consuls, Dictators, Decemuirs, Corn. Ta^it. l. 1
and Tribunes) had fallen. And seeing that in the fall of Caesar's that state
received a deadly wound, the curing whereof makes the beast here, and Chapter
17. the eight and one of the seven; out of all doubt, the head rising by the
wound must be the seventh, as the Pontificality rising by the cure thereof, is
the eight and sixth in a sort. The seventh head then of Rome was, Theodoricus,
the Ostrogothe, and his Successors, who were not yet come, and when they came,
abode but a short space. For their kingdom endured not above 70. years, or
thereby from Theodoricus beginning to Teias his fall. The inuaders before him
were but riflers, none settling there a Dominion. Odoacer, who only of them all
aimed at it, yet was never fully and solemnly acknowledged. But Theodoricus
pleaded for his right, which by the Emperor his consent, and decree of Senate,
was bequeathed to him, and whom accordingly the Romans received for their
lawful Prince, as before I touched. The Emperor Zeno, Theodoricum sacro texit
velamine in Signum rei ab imperio coucessae says Sabellicus, Enn. 8 2. And as
having in nothing wronged the Empire, he reigned peaceably over Rome, and all
Italy, Sicilie, Sardinia, Illirium, Dalmatia, Narbone and Pannonia many years;
all which time he had both peace and friendship with the Emperors of the
East, Zeno, Anastasius and Justinius.

This beast then is the great Antichrist, working forty two months, in the
holy City and Court of the Temple, and treading down all true worship
therein: who is the eighth and last head of the Kingdom of Rome, or the
Kingdom of Rome under the last head, and in whom, and with whom it shall have
an eternal ruin. His quality, form and origin is by allusion to the four
Kingdoms troublers of Israel, as I showed Chapter 12. typically expressed Dan.
7. by four beasts, a Lion, a Bear, a Leopard, and a best with ten horns.
This beast has a note from each, as in whom all is compacted, what soever was
mischievous in them all: to express the height of impiety, now come to the
full, even the man of sin. Men falling from piety and righteousness are
beasts; and most of all Tyrants set over great States, as having most liberty,
and least restraint from wickedness. A man in honor if he understand not, is
like to the beasts that Psalm. 49. ^0.
perish.

8 As for the number of horns attributed to this state of Rome, both in the
Dragon, and now in this beast, albeit some thing may be said probably and
pretily both for the first state, out of Strabo his last book of Geographes.
And for this last out of Steuchus, making near this same count, as by some
learned enterpreters has been noted; yet according as I can take up the manner
of all this Prophecy, I acquiesce in this, that this number is indefinitely
put, by allusion to Daniel 7. wherein, yet what singular difference is betwixt
the horns here of Chap. 17. Sect 22.
this beast, and of that beast in Daniel. See more Chapter 17. They show the
great power of this beast, and so much greater, as these horns are not Kings
in succession, but all reigning together, as receiving a Kingdom at one hour
with the beast.

9 We have yet to clear one point, of all men widely mistaken, wherein yet the
holy Ghost places wisdom. The counting of the number of the beast his name The
most received opinion hereof, (...), is so childish an Egypticall toy, as I
marvel much how ever any solid mind could propound it for a rare point of
divine wisdom: the other opinions that I have heard or seen, are in my
opinion little or nothing more solid. The words mistaken have led men
infinitely aside, while they seek what different things are the Character, the
name and the number; and because it is called the number of the name of the
beast, and the number of a man, seeking to find it in his name, they so to
find it out, give to him thereupon a man his name, which neither Scripture
gives him, neither he takes to himself, and then forsooth, to find out this
deep wisdom of the holy Ghost, they will pick out of the letters of that
name, which themselves have forged this number 666. But why do they not labor
as much to find in the letters of this name his Character, as his number?
seeing the Character, is the Character of the name, als well as the number is
the number of the name, as is evident Chapter 14. 11. Neither says the Text
here, that the Beast his name is a man his name: but the number of his name is
a man his number. But thus it is; All that follow Antichrist have his name; but
in diverse manner. Some have the Character thereof, that is, the name imprinted,
and are his proper good, as having his burne-yron and mark, a familiar Phrase
from the manner of men. Some have his name, yet so as they have not his Mark:
who have not learned the deepenesse of Satan, neither are Antichrists sworn
bondmen. And yet, some have but the number of his name: that is, are so far
from being his sworn and marked slaves, as they are no otherwise his, but in
so far as they are counted to be so, and numbered amongst Christians must be
called Catholic Romans.
his. For he is such a tyrant as will have all men in one of these sorts: and
because within these, who have the number of his name, both the former sorts
are comprehended: the number of his name shows the whole body and frame of
his Kingdom. For albeit many have his name, and more have his number, which
have not his Charecter: yet all that have either Character or name, are of his
number. The man then to whom God gives wisdom to count his number, that is,
the whole frame and building of that Antichristian Kingdom: by counting of it
shall find it but the number of man, and none of God his building. As God
numbered and weighed Baltasar King of Babell, and found him light. Now Dan. 5.
26. 27
here is wisdom indeed, which to find out, the Lord has left to us in this
prophecy not obscure traces, as he ordinarily in Scripture does, of things
obscurely delivered. The very next words in the beginning of the 14. Chapter
being rightly marked, will rid all the way. In them we have the Lamb set
against the Beast, his Character against his, a name against the Beast his
name, and a number against the Beast his number. The Character of the Lamb his
followers, is the Seal of God: whereof Chapter 7. The name which they have is
the name of the Lamb his father, and the number characterized with this name,
is 144000. which number herefore, may well be called the number of the name of
God, or God his number, as 666. is called of the name of the beast, or the
Beast his number. Now these numbers are not set down for the exact count of
persons followers of Christ or Antichrist: but are taken of the holy Ghost, as
fit numbers in consideration both of their building and figure, to express the
different condition, frame and building of these two so opposite bodies, that
is, the true Church and body of the Lamb, and the false Church and body of
Antichrist. This notable difference, always is to be aduerted, that the Lamb
his number, all of them have his Character, for they are sealed with his
fathers name in their fore-heades: (for here the true Church, and true members
thereof are meaned) but in the beast his number are many that have not his
name, and much less his Character. Wherefore in the 14. Chapter, and 9. verse
thereof, and every where hence throughout this Prophecy, eternal fire is
denounced only against his worshippers, and the receivers of his character.
See upon that place Sect. 8. That the Lamb his number is 144000. and the beast
his but 666. It is for great purpose. For, as it was needful in the number of
the true Church (which now in Antichrist his wide dominion appeared to be
small, or none at all) that to a hundredth forty four should be joined
thousands, to show a competent number, and of God his building, even when
Antichrist appeared to brook all: so to the Antichrist his number, where no
doubt is of multitude, all the earth following him, it was not meet that
thousands should have bin added. That thus we might the better take up, how
these numbers are not so much put to express the difference in number of these
two bodies (which if thousands had been added to 666. would have been all we
could ever have scanned thereof) as to note the difference in condition, frame
and building. That is, that the one is the number of God his building and
frame: the other, but the number of a man. That is, a building and body,
howsoever in all outward appearance more bellisant and greater then the first,
yet but of a man his invention. For the mystery is in these two numbers 144.
and 666. whether of unities, hundrethes, thousands or millions. Upon which, a
man looking, who is not furnished with wisdom from above to count the numbers;
he will much more admire, and be taken with the Beast his number, as larger a
great deal, and better compacted in all the parts of it, each answering and so
sitly agreeing together, as it runs all on six, in unities, tennes and
hundreds: and arises of six, the first perfect number, multiplied by ten,
and in so far proportion of parts, as, six is ten times in sixty, and
sixty, ten times in six hundred. Against which to set 144. without wisdom
to count, a man shall think there is no comparison. Hereby the spirit will
teach us, that an unwise man, and not skillful in divine wisdom to count,
looking on the body, building and frame of Antichrist his Church, shall be so
taken with the goodly appearance thereof, as he shall think it to be the
only true Church: but a wise man, able to count the number, shall find it but
the number of a man, and none of God his building. And, this is that which
Chapter fifteen is called, to overcome the number of the Beast his name. For,
who cannot count, will be overcome by it. Now the only way to count it
rightly, is, first to count the number of God his name, and thereby, examining
the other, to find it neither in building nor frame agreeable. That we might
find out this wisdom, the spirit exactly counted this number 144. Chapter 7.
And here again in fit place, records it, for taking up the mystery. In that
7. Chapter this number expressing the body of the true Church in Antichrist his
usurpation, is said to be of all the Tribes of Israel: not in propriety of
speech, as their was showed. Next, is declared at length how the number is made
up: namely by twelve thousand of every Tribe: which Tribes, are at length,
numbered for special purpose, to hold the number of twelve: which number,
albeit in effect, there were thirteen, yet in all records both of old and new
Testament is kept. So, as Moses, that no more should be counted but 12. left
out Simeon, as then, for the murder of the Sichemits, bearing greatest blot:
which Deuteronomy. 33.
Levy had lately before purged, by sanctifyng his sword to God his honor: for
which, in that record, he is highly commended. In the Chronicles, Dan is
omitted, for Deuteronomy. 33. 8.
his race is not reckoned, in detestation of his first erecting public
Idolatry. For which reason also in the 7. Chapter Judge. 17. and 18
he is left out. Not that in propriety we have to think that Tribe to be more
then others rejected; but to show, that the sealed ones are noe Idolaters, but
all spiritual Virgins, Chap 14. 4. Where in Scripture none are omitted, then
Ephraim and Manasse come, jointly, under the name of their Father Joseph, as
Genes. 49. Ezech. 47. Now, 1. Chro. 22.
as these twelve are the Fathers of Israel according to the flesh: so as none
were counted Israelites but who could reduce his Genealogy to one of these
twelve: so, Christ, accordingly choosed twelve Apostles to be the twelve
spiritual fathers of his Church (the Israel of God) upon whose foundation he
would have it builded: so, as whosoever is not builded on their Doctrine,
holding the foundation, and all the building arising proportionably thereto,
Ephesians. 2. 20.
the same is not of the new Jerusalem from heaven, Cha. 21. which has twelve
foundations, and on them the names of the Lamb his twelve Apostles: twelve
ports, and on them written the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel. Which, in
all dimensions, was twelve times twelve thousand, that is, 144000. furlongs
(for so the place ought to be read) the Angels conductours twelve, and the wall
Chapt. 21. section 16.
in thickness twelve times twelve, even 144. cubits. In this number, to epsy
the wisdom, are to be considered the building, and the figure. The building,
is by twelve upon twelve; to show, that the true Church is builded, so, on the
true foundation of Apostolic doctrine, as it holds still the foundation,
nothing being built thereon, but agreeable thereto: as this number is no ways
multiplied but by twelve upon twelve, the multiplier and multiplied being but
one. The figure of this number is fouresquare, and of equal sides, and whose
sides all consist of twelues. For, as it is only builded by multiplication of
12. with 12. so can it neither be halfed nor quartered but in twelues: and
has in every square three twelues. According to the figure of the new
Jerusalem, Chapter 21. having in each square three ports, and on them the names
of three Tribes, whereof each having twelve thousand, make up in length, height,
and breadth the new Jerusalem, (...) 144000. The Camp of Israel, Numb. 2. is
agreeable heereto. All to show, that the true Church both in structure and
figure holds ever the foundation.

10 Now hereby, let us count, number and weigh Baltasar and find him light.
This number 666. for als Dan. 5.
fair as it shows, can never be builded upon twelve, by twelve. Yea, which
is more, take what multiplier thou will, thou shall never raise it upon twelve.
It cannot be divided nor quartered in twelues: and, possibly thou shall never
reduce it to equal sides. So as it neither rises on the foundation, much less
keeps it: neither in frame or figure, is it any way like to the New
Jerusalem. In sum, here is wisdom, by true rule of Apostolic doctrine (the
reed given John Chap. 11,) to measure, count, weigh, and examine, the whole
frame, doctrine, building and body of the Antichristian Church: and so, how
fair a show soever it has to deceive fools, yet, by true wisdom, to find
it all but the work of a Man. The very conscience whereof makes them flee so
much this rule of examination. But the holy Ghost tells us what is wisdom.

11 That this number 666. is choosed rather then any other number, where others
may be found having the defect observed in it, to represent the state and
condition of Antichrist his body: besides the fear perfection of the number
before touched, and even of the Romans themselves highly esteemed (Boniface 8.
praefat. in sextum Decretal.) The special purpose here of the holy Ghost, is
to allude (according to his manner) to the fourth Chapter of Daniel. Where, by
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel an Image is erected, which under pain of death,
he will have all peoples, Nations and tongues to fall down and worship. Which
Image had of breadth 6. cubits, and of height 60. Thence hither the allusion is
brought from Babel and her King properly, to spiritual Babel and her King:
from that Image of the first Babel, to this mystical image of mystical
Babell, which, all under pain of being killed, etc. must worship. Yet to show
the greatness and prerogative of this image, much exceeding that of
Nabuchadnezzars, in bigness, glory, and worship of Nations: and specially to
keep the analogy against the other number 144. as that of Nabuchadnezzar had
six and ten times six to make sixty: so this, has ten times 60. to make
666 in all.

CHAP. XIIII.
IN the 12. Chapter was the Dragon, and estate of the Church in his open rage,
against her and her first seed. In the 13 is the Beast of his authority, the
Antichrist, and his strange success by hypocrisy. Now, in this Chapter, is
the estate of the Church and her other seed of succeeding times: first, lurking
and hid under Antichirst, to the sixth verse: next, breaking out, and wrestling
with him, in much suffering, to the 14. verse: and lastly, in his ouerthow,
victorious, to the end.

2 In the first of these three cases, the Church her state is described. First,
from her Head and Captain, the Lamb: her place, Mount Sion, the true
habitation of God, and place where his honor dwells, even the mountain
immovable amongst mountains: her number, 144000. Whereof, in the end of the
last Chap their badge and mark, even their adoption, to have the Lamb his
Father, whereto they are sealed by the holy spirit of promise, with heart
believing, and mouth confessing, verse. Romans 10. 9.
1. Next, the heavenly dispensation of grace toward this his fellowship, is
noted, according to the three degrees of operation, which the word of God has
in the hearts of his own: which are expressed by a threefold comparison. The
sound of many waters, the noise of great thunders, and sound of harpes harping,
verse 2. Thirdly, their worship returned to God is singular: in spiritual joy,
known and approved of him, and performed in the unity and fellowship of his
true Church (through the ministry of the word made unto him a royal
Priesthood) in the midst whereof, he always sits King and Lord: which
Church, as it remained unknown to the world, the time of Antichrist his
absolute prevailing; so their worship was perceptible to none but these secret
sealed ones, whom God of his special grace, had bought with his own blood,
out of the world, verse 3. to be a holy and chaste spouse to himself (for
none are sealed of Dan, Chap. 7.) by true faith, cleaving only and always to
the Lamb, and following none other: keeping the liberty whereto God had made
them free, and not serving men: singled from the world to be a peculiar people,
Gal. 5. 1.
holy unto God and Christ Jesus, verse 4. even true Israelites like Nathaniel,
and in Christ and his righteousness accepted and approved of God, verse 6.
This is the state of the Church, closed in the Temple, John 1. 47.
Chapter 11. Lurking in the wilderness, Chapt. 12. And here stablished on
mount Sion, while all the world follow the Beast.

3 Now, to clear the threefold comparison put ver. 2. The voice of the Lord is
compared to many waters, for the irresistable force, and admirable noise,
breeding wonder: to thunder, for terror and power shaking all: to the douce
sound of harpes, for the work of peace and joy in the conscience. By which
three, is signified, that as the Church, lurking in time of Antichrist his
absolute prevailing, had the presence of the Lamb: so, howsoever unseen of
the world, she had also plentiful dispensation of spiritual graces from
heaven. Which the spirit here expresses by these three, according to the
three degrees of operation, which the word of God has in the hearts of men.
For, first it falls to men's ears, as the sound of many waters, a mighty,
great, but a confused sound, and which commonly, brings neither terror nor
joy, but yet a wondering and acknowledgement of a strange force, and more then
humane power. This is that effect which many Mar. 1. 22 27. Luke 4. 32. Ioh. 7.
46.
felt, hearing Christ, when they were astonished at his doctrine, as teaching
with authority. What manner doctrine is this? never man spoke like this man.
This effect falls even to the reprobate, which wonder and vanish, Habak. 1.
5. Acts 13. 41. and whose hearts are convinced, hearing the word, that it has
more then humane force, even like the noise of many waters. But, as the first
hearing of the roar of waters is most admirable, and the more one is
acquainted therewith, the less he hears it, as Cicero. in somnio Scipionis.
these at the Catadupes of Nilus: so, in whom the word works but this first
effect, his ears wax duller and duller, as daily experience proves. The next
effect, is the voice of thunder. Which brings not only wonder but fear also:
not only fills the ears with sound, and the heart with astonishment, but
moreover shakes and terrifieth the conscience. And this second effect may also
befall a reprobate, as Felix Act. 24. The third effect, is proper to the elect:
the sound of harping; while the word not only rauisheth with admiration, and
strikes the conscience with terror; but also, lastly, fills it with that
sweet peace and joy, which none feel, but they whose hearts thereupon,
again, as well sounding harpes, are tuned up to sing a new song unto God. And,
albeit the first two degrees may be without the last, yet none feel the last,
who have not in some degree, felt both the first two. For the voice of the Lord
is mighty, the voice of the Lord is glorious; it breaks the Cedars, and
makes the wilderness to tremble: But in his Temple only men speak of his
glory, Psalm. 29. This gracious dispensation (incredible and unseen to the
world, which could not therefore learn the song of praise thereupon) was in
the 11. Chap. expressed by two witnesses, which for dispensing grace and light,
were two olive Trees, and two Candlestickes in the Temple, while it seemed
impossible that any such could be, Antichrist brooking City and Court: and for
force and power, fire went out at their mouths, and they did strike the earth
with all manner of plagues. Now these comparisons of the voice of waters,
thunder, and harping, as they express fitly what I have told so, in them is
employed a sure prognostic and argument of the next ensuing estate, in the
Angels breaking forth and crying. For albeit, this sound of water, thunder, and
harping, the world, in this lurking condition of the Church, perceived not, yet
they could not still remain unheard. Who can restrain the breach of great
waters? what congealed cloud can keep in thunder? and, excessive joy, a
heart, of any thing, can least hold up. Forth therefore, this hid Church
behooved to come. The bellies made bitter, with eating the little book, behooved
to burst or break out: according as we see in the three Angels following, who
come forth like the swelling of Jorden, like sons of thunder (according as
Christ Chapt. 10. preparing for this outbreake, his roaring voice, was seconded
with seven thunders) and like the bursting out of a blythe heart, which cannot
hold up a surfeit of joy.

4 This second condition, of the Church breaking forth, has the velitation or
skirmish, and a coincident case with it. The velitation (I call it so, in
comparison to the great battle in the seventh trumpet and seven vials thereof,
summarily proponed in the end of this Chap. and exponed largely thenceforth)
according to the first degrees of the light of the Gospel reviving, is set
down in three Angels; types of these Ministers whom God stirred up, to be the
first open contesters with Antichrist to the 12. verse. The coincident case, is
in the 12. and 13. verses.

5 The first rank of Preachers are expressed by an Angel fleeing through the
mids of heaven, etc. for open and swift course, which notwithstanding, was yet
far removed above the perception of men of the earth, whereof few understood
or embraced the first warnings and light arrising, it being but yet obscurely
preached: like as few understood the warning of Antichristian darkness coming
on, Chap. 8. and in respect of that Angel there, it is, that this, is called an
other Angel, as who is the next, using his form. See a contrary dispensation
to this, which clears this sense, Chap. 18. His doctrine is set down first
in general, and to whom he preached: and secondly, the special points
thereof. In general, it is an everlasting Gospel: even that truth which was
from the beginning, and which, when heaven and earth passes away, shall abide
for ever: the immortal seed, Math. 24. 35. 1. Pet. 1. 23.
and begetting to immortality. So it is called, against the calumnies of
nouelty, and in opposition to the doctrine of men. He preaches to them who
dwell on the earth, even in Antichrist his darkness: above whose reach, it is
less marvel that this first light was yet far removed; as a fleeing flash
through the mids of heaven. He preaches to all Nations, Kinreds, Tongues and
Peoples, who had worshipped the Beast; and of whom, by restored light of the
Gospel, an infinite number was now to be brought out of great tribulation, to
sing, with Palms in hand, and having washed their garments in the blood of the
Lamb; Salvation is of our God and of the Lamb; and to be made partakers of
the first resurrection, the thousand years being expired, Chap. 20. Chap. 7.
Now the hid ones begin to break out, and the song unheard, to be tuned up
loudlie in the ears of all the earth: therefore, this Angel is said to cry
loud. In his special doctrine, is the substance thereof, and his manner of
teaching. The substance is, that all fear, glory, and worship, be given to
God only, and that, both for avoiding his judgments near to be executed,
and because he is creator of all things. A doctrine exceeding fite for that
time. His manner is to be marked: in that he urges only true worship, not
bold yet to challenge directly the Antichrist, as the succeeding Angel does
roundly; but more the third, so wisely and plainly as the Spirit shows the
course: and the accommodation of Story is evident. Now as this was the first
degree of the conflict with Antichrist; so accordingly in the song of victory,
God is praised for these same points, Chapter 15. 3.

6 The second Angel roundly denounces the fall of Rome that spiritual
Babell, Sodom and Egypt, and that because she had not only been an
Idolatresse her self, but as Jeroboam made Israel to sin, she is the mother
of Whoredoms through the world, making men drink up superstitious worship
greedily as wine, and so to be besotted therewith. To the which, God both gave
over the world justly in his wrath, that they who would not believe the truth,
should be taken with deceivable illusions, and for which, now again the world
justly feels 2 These. 2. 10. 11.
the cups of the last wrath. As he gave to Israel Kings in his wrath, and
took them away in his displeasure. Ose. 13. 11.


7 The third Angel yet more vehemently touches nearer. Warning all to leave
the Beast his worship and character either in work or profession, under
pain of eternal damnation. Wherein, they against whom the judgment is
denounced, are exactlie noted, and twice set down in the beginning, and in the
end of the denunciation, for special purpose, and the quality, durance and
continuance of their judgment expressed. In the quality of judgment, are two.
First, as they drank greedily the Whores Wine, so get they to drink the pure
unmixed wine of God his wrath: and next, they get it in the cup of his wrath:
God sometimes gives a bitter cup to his own children: but as strong wine
for mitigation, is tempered with water or sugar: so are all God his
chasticements to his own mixed with mercy: but to the wicked is powered out
merciless judgment. Next, the Cup propined to the Saints, is not the Cup of
wrath, but of love, and medicinal: but the wicked drink out of the cup of
wrath. Lord reprove me not in thy wrath, Psalm. 6.

8 Now, this judgment is denounced against such as worship the Beast, and
receive his Character, etc. And they are twice repeated, as I have said,
wherein is no Tautologie, but divine wisdom, for to make us take up a great
point. In the 13. Chapter, all the Beast his followers have his Character, or
his name, or his number: whereof, as I showed there, the difference is ill
observed. For many have his name, and are content to be called his, being so
far deceived with his show, as yet they receive never his Character, as his
mancipate slaves. And yet, more have the number of his name, that is, are
counted and numbered to be of his body, who yet in effect neither have his name
nor his Character. This has deceived men, that they have imagined the
Character to be some other thing then of his name. But as is clear by this
place, his Character is of his name, and they receive his Character; who so
have his name, as they are characterized therewith, and upon his mark. A
speech Liers and murderers like their father the devil.
from common use. Hereof it is, that in Mount Sion all have the Character, that
is, all who are of the true Church elected according to the purpose of grace.
But as in the visible Church many have the name of God, and more have the
number, that is, are accounted Christians, who yet are not of the number
sealed: so in Antichrist his Church, are many having his name, and more having
his number, and so are tolerated to have commerce and trade with men, who yet
never received his Character. Therefore it is, that the judgment is denounced
only against those who worship him and receive his Character: and
accordingly the Vials of wrath, Chapter 16. are powered only upon these. Who
are here twice repeated, that we may be wakened to aduert; how here the holy
Ghost teaches us, not to judge so hardly of all that follow the Beast, as that
eternal damnation abides them; but only such as have received his Character.
For no question, but many have been, and are still named his, and counted of
his number, who learned Chap. 2. 24.
never the deepenesse of Satan: as simple sheep fallen into that slocke of
his, because they saw there the public Ensign, and the Lamb his horns in
semblance; because he brooked the holy City, and Court of the Temple. Even
like these two hundredth, who in simplicity of heart followed Absalom from
Jerusalem, knowing nothing of his treason. For we must consider what 2 Samuel 5.
11.
sort of enemy Antichrist is. That he is no fortaine inuader, but an inward
Traitor. None directly fighting against the name and Ensign of Christ, but by
pretense of the name and Ensign deceiving. And sitting even in the Temple of
God, as if a hid Traitor, pretending the King his Masters service and
commission, would summon all true Subjects to follow him, while he were but
minding usurpation: even good Subjects might be thus far deceived as to follow
the public Ensign, till the treason were detected. Further consider, that the
true Church in Antichrist his greatest prevailing, was always within his
compass, within which, all were ever accounted to be his own, but yet were
not. As within the compass of the holy City, and Court of the Temple, were the
Temple and witnesses in it, Chapter 11. besides, as no way could be to the
Temple, but through the City and Court: so no way ever was or shall be to
become a member of the true Church, but by coming through the visible Church,
wherein Antichrist forty two months working and obtaining without
controlment: all behooved to join to that body where was the Ensign, and seek
in through the City and Court to com to the Temple. Now, no marvel, though
many in the passing through were taken in admiration of the City and Court
before they got sight of the Temple. And the providence of God was wonderful
in this, that in greatest corruption he reserved always a sure way through
Antichrist to the Temple, the Sacrament of Baptism in substance remaining, and
the doctrine of the Trinity abiding sound. So thus all coming through him, had
his name or his number, of whom yet many never received his Character, but
espying the pollution of City and Court, stepped into the Temple. Where still,
though quietly, God preserved two Candlestickes and two Olives; till at length
his impiety came to that height by murdering the Saints, that it was said to
them, Come up hither, and so a visible separation was made, not from the
Church, Chap. 11.
but from the thief and Traitor in the Church, his mouth bewraying it self to
be the Dragons. And certainly, this holds true, (so as we need not so much
iangle with the Romans thereabout) that the Church has and ever shall be
visible, because always the common Ensign is seen. But this Ensign the
Traitor craftily took upon him to bear, and thereby deceived. Here is the
fallacy, that by aequiuocation they conclude, if the Church has always been
visible, then are we the true Church. Here more is added. For albeit the
church be always visible, yet the truth and true professors in it are not
always so. For the witnesses were closed in the Temple, the woman lurked in
the wilderness, and the sealed ones were, albeit singing, yet unseen and
unheard upon Mount Sion. Three distinct speeches used of the Spirit for great
purpose. The first, to show that howsoever the true Church was hid, yet where
she was, to wit, within the compass of the visible where Antichrist ruled,
and where Satan his throne was. The second, to show that albeit she lurked,
yet she was fed, as was Israel in the wilderness, and Elias in the days of
famine. The third, that in that great prevailing of Antichrist, when all the
earth followed the Beast, yet she was stablished on Mount Sion: so as against
her the gates of hell could not prevail. The true Church is in some sort ever
vlsible, though not in her self, yet in her infallible Ensigns, as who sees
the City and Court, he sees in a sort the Temple, because albeit he see it
not distinctlie, yet seeing the City and Court, he is certain that the Temple
is there. So seeing the visible Church, within whose compass, though no eye
see them: yet God has his true worshippers, one sees also the true Church.
For within the Church are truth and lies, Christ and Antichrist, and either of
them now and then obtain in it, and hold place communiter in toto, but never
vniuersaliter in singulis. From the Apostolic times, as witness Paul and
John, Antichrist was in 2 These. 2. 7. 1 Ioh, 4. 3.
the Church, but he appeared not some ages after, In his time he rises and
obtains all the holy City, and Court of the Temple, erecteth a throne in
Pergamus, and domineth as Iezabel in I hyatira. Truth is hid, and true
Professors, till the noise of many waters, the voice of thunder, and sound of
well tuned Harpes, break out of Sion and the Temple, and the woman return
from the wilderness. It is a great Sophisme to conclude from the Church
visible to the Church absolutely, or true Church: or again, from these to
that: or to reason a toto communiter, ad vniuersum singulariter. Albeit
Antichrist was commonly acknowledged of all, yet never universally of each
one. For he never set his foot in the Temple, nor upon Mount Sion. The Romans
press sore upon us, to show who in former ages have been of our Religion, and
our men but busy themselves more then is needful, the holy Ghost having so
plainly foretold the case. And how common do we see in our daily
experience of particular Churches, that things will by custom or tyranny so
obtain, as none are found to resist, while yet in the mean time great numbers
not only disallow, but even hold themselves pure there from? Here, who would
ask the succeeding age, what had been the estate then: he could find
nothing, but that all had erred; because the common Records bear but what
obtained in the time: no Record remaining of these, who, though for fear they
durst not contest, yet misliked and mourned for the iniquity. And if perhaps,
they did utter any thing which to the posterity might have carried testimony of
their mind; the same being smothered by them who violently possessed and
disposed of all: I have no doubt, but in every age, even in the greatest height
of darkness, diverse have not only been enemies thereof, and both children
and ministers of light: but even have been in their time known to the godly
then. Albeit to enquire the succeeding ages of their story, it is ridiculous,
and we but fashe our selves unnecessarily to hail therein the cord of
contention with the adversaries: having otherwise so clear, and solid
answers furnished us by the holy Ghost to close their mouths. Yea, the
Antichrist his prerogative, and his long and peaceable obtaining in the visible
Church, dismayeth us so little, as thereupon we build a sure argument, that
there all the time was the true Church. For he is a proper sore of the body of
the Church. And as such a pestilent boil or leprosy, which can be in no
other but a man his body, albeit the whole body should be so covered, that
nothing could be seen but the boil or leprosy: yet even thereby the
beholder is assured that there is a man his body, because that soar can befall
none other. So, by Antichrist who is a proper evil, and sitting no where else
but in the Church, we discern and perceive clearly where the true Church
has been, and still in great part is. For even before the last fall of
Babell, the Lord his people are exhorted to come Chap. 18. 4.
out of her. In the visible Church the truth has always been: but so a long
time, as the Book of the Law was within the Temple before Josias. Now then the
objection 2 King. 22.
of the Romans whereby they labor so much to shake unstable souls, is more
then ridiculous: where was your Church before Luther? what became of all our
Fathers? to which we answer: Our Church was even where Satan's throne was. And
of our Fathers we judge well, as who, howsoever they received the Beast his
name, or at least the number of his name, yet might have been free from
receiving his Character: and so out of the danger of this sentence of eternal
fire. If they had eyes to see, and hearts to understand this Prophecy, they
would be confounded in that wherein they glory most: and ashamed to object to
us that which most approves our cause.

9 Thus was the velitation. The case coincident, is terrible persecution. The
weight whereof is cleared by a warning, verse 12. and a consolation, verse. 13.
The warning, together with the weight, declare against whom this heavy
persecution is intended: to wit, the Saines, and those who keep the
commandments of God, and faith of Jesus. The weight is showed in this, that
their shall be need of Christian patience, as which shall be greatly
exercised: and that the trial shall be such, as, the constant keepers of God
his commandments and faith of Jesus, shall find wherein to be proved. This,
the phrase of speech shows, as that Chap. 13. Here is wisdom. Now, this
warning implies clearly, the party persecuter to be the Beast, to whom was
given, To make war with the Saints and to overcome them, Chap. 13. 7. who
thereupon, got the same warning there, verse 10. And, seeing that the remnant
seed of the woman, against whom the Dragon was to stir up warte, Chap. 12. 17.
are described by the same titles Of keeping the commandments of God, etc. This
warning here given, has also this end, to waken us up to consider the
special time and heat of that war, their foretold to be then, when
Antichrist, being chaffed with these three Angels, made all Europe to feel
cruel fires and bloody massacres: whereof the memory is yet recent. That so,
the rest of them who should be killed for Jesus, being fulfilled, Chap. 6. 11.
final and full vengeance may come on that bloody state. The weight of this
persecution is yet further amplified by the consolation given against it. Which
besides the substance thereof, is notable in many circumstances. Of the
delivery, from heaven: the commandment how to receive it, in that it should
not only be heard, but also written, as worthy of lasting record: Chap. 19. 9.
Isa. 8. and 30. Aabac. 2. 2. Job. 19. 23.
of double asseueration: and that by the holy Ghost. The substance of the
consolation is, Blessed are the dead that henceforth die in the Lord. The
reasons are, They rest from their labors: and their works follow them. Our
days here are but a shadow, and in them, even our strength is but labor and
sorrow: all, wherein a man seeks happiness under the sun, being but
vanity and vexation of spirit, from whence to remove in the Lord, and enter
into our rest, is a great blessedness; in so far as our labor is not in
vain in the Lord, but great is our reward in heaven. Now, howsoever all men
go naked out of this world, as naked we come: and nothing of all our great
labor and works goes with us. Yet, as every one shall be indged and receive
according to that which he has done in the flesh, good or evil; so every
soul carries with it an instamped sense of the works done in the flesh: so as
either a speaking and self accusing guiltiness follows a man; or then, as
by grace he has been enabled to make his election sure by good works in this
life, so shall the testimony of peace in his conscience follow him. For, There
is no condemnation for them which are in Christ Jesus, which walks not after
the flesh but after the Romans 8. 1.
spirit.

10 From the 14. ver. is the third part of this Chapter Wherein is the summary
proposition of the full overthrow of the enemies: which at length, in the
subsequent Chapters, is explaned. Now here, the course of this Prophecy is
The course of this Book.
carefully to be marked, for a great light through all. The judgments of God,
first, and second upon the world, were in the six Seals and six Trumpets of
the seventh. To the 15. verse of the 11. Chapter, there the seventh Trumpet
sounds, and the last wrath is denounced. Before the particular declaration
whereof, that the justice of God, therein might the better appear, it was
requisite, that the History of these enemies to be destroyed, in their
dealings against the Church, should be cleared: for which it is, that the world
feels all this wrath. That story therefore was in the 12. 13. and thus far
in this 14. Chapters. Wherein, is no idle repetition of what appears before
set down. For the consideration is much diverse: in that, whatsoever before the
12. Chapter was spoken of the enemies, or their dealing, was to show, how by
them, the world and worldly sort, in God his justice were punished. The case of
the Church sparingly touched: so far as might show her to be free from these
evils (even in the midst of them) which were poured on the world for her hard
intertainement. And what in the eleventh Chapter seems wholly agreeable for
time and condition with that which, hithertils in this Chapter is said of the
Church in her two declared states, yet has a far distinct consideration from
this. In that there, the witnesses, first, in the Temple, next in their war
with the Beast, slaughter, rising again, going up to heaven, and terror of
their enemies thereupon, with the fall in a part of the Antichristian kingdom;
are put, as plagues on the world, and men thereof; whom they first plagued,
next tormented and vexed, after terrified, and in part overthrew. For, the
Gospel, to whom it is not the savor of life, is the greatest judgment that
comes on the world. But from the beginning of the 12. Chapter to this place,
the enemies are handled, as by them the Church is exercised. First, fighting
and prevailing to Satan his deiection and exaltation of the first seed. Yet
so, as through Satan his rage, but aided thereto with the two wings of that
great Eagle, the true Church at length, flees to the wilderness and there
lurketh. Wherethrough, the Beast coming in place, obtains, and deceives
all, except these who on mount Sion enjoy the presence of the Lamb. Who at
length, by degrees break forth, and albeis in much suffering, yet still
fight, till at length, by him who sits on the white cloud, the iudgemeuts
of God are made manifest. Chap. 15. 4.
The story of the eleventh Chapter and of this, are for time and matter, the
same: but the consideration and respect of handling much different. Which, is
yet, for course and order, in so divine an artifice led on, as here the story
falling in again to the same point, from which, for inserting this narration,
it was since the eleventh Chapter, broken off: of that, which from the 15.
verse of 11. the Chapter at the sound of the seventh Trumpet, was upon
preconceiued joy denounced; here, from the foureteenth verse of this Chapter,
to the end; the execution is summarily proponed. Exceeding fitly, so falling
in, to the large explication of the seventh trumpet in the subsequent Chapters.

11 This summary execution is declared by two comparisons. One of the Harvest:
the other of the Vintage. From Joel 3. In both, are to be considered, the
Actors, and their actions. The Harvest has two actors: and so has the
Vintage. The actions of both Actors, both in harvest and vintage are, that the
one works, furnished with convenient instrument, and the other stirs to
the work. Which in the Harvest, is reaping the harvest of the earth: in the
Vintage, the cutting down of the Grapes, casting them in the winepresse,
treading, etc. The arguments whereby the inciters stir the executers, is the
readiness of both, for reaping and cutting down. Thus by similitudes familiar
in the Prophets for such judgments, the destruction of Iere. 51. 33.
the enemies of the Church is expressed: who in God his wrath as an unclean
thing, without the City, are destroyed Heb. 13. 11:
with so huge a slaughter, as all the earth is filled far and deep with
their blood: by Hyperbolike speech expressing the greatness of the plague;
and, as to the holy City, so also alluding to the Land of Canaan, which is in
length 160. furlongs, as witnesses Rabbi Menahen, upon Genesis fol. 60. For
clearing hereof, the Actors, and their distinct actions must be diligently
aduerted, so much the more, as to the obscuring of all the Prophecy, this
place is widely mistaken. In them are to be noted, their properties, their
doing, and their order of doing: for course of time to be carefully observed.
In the harvest, he that works, being accordingly furnished with fit
instrument, by all hi^ notes, is undoubtedly, Christ the Lord of the harvest.
For, he is one like the son of man, which, in all Chap. 1. 13.
this Prophecy, is put but in one other place, and that for Christ: he
fitteth, as a Judge: on a white cloud, both for eminency and majesty; as also,
by the whiteness, to show the clearenesse and pureness of his judgments,
which Now were to be made manifest, Chap. 15. 4. The first flying Angel
foretold that they were near, now Christ is clearly to show himself: by
showing, hence, The sign of the son of Man in heaven. The speech is from
Isai 19. 1. Behold the Lord rides on a swift cloud. He has, with a sharp
sikle, a crown: to show him to be the Lord both of Harvest and Vintage. For he
not only gathers Matthew. 13. 30. Isa. 63. 3.
the Saints, but also the Tares in bundles: and treads the Winepresse of God
his wrath: and in both, he conquereth and ouercometh, Chap. 6. The other,
coming out of the temple, is the type of Saints and faithful ones, whose
habitation is in the Temple, out of which they are now bold to step out and be
seen: and perceiving the ripenes of the Harvest (whereto it was not yet come
in the fifth Seal, and therefore, this execution, craved of them then, was
delaied) and yet not being able, in that weak estate of the Gospel reviving,
for so great a work: (therefore it is that this Angel has no sikle) they
beseech the Lord of the harvest to put too his hand, and Have mercy on Sion.
For the time to have mercy, for even the full time is come. The harvest of the
earth is ripe, and the rest of the Saints slain. Neither is this thus
expressed, as if even then, or at any time, Christ did not work by
instruments: but to show the beginnings; such, as, in respect of the greatness
of the work, and little humane aid, it was in a sort, Christ his own arm
which helped him. But in process of time, by the powerful progress of the
Gospel, he gets to himself ministers of executing his wrath, even out of
the Temple, furnished with convenient weapons. And to express this, in the
Vintage, the Actor comes out of the Temple having a sharp sikle: as Christ,
betime got himself, and daily raises of his own faithful ones fit
instruments enabled and furnished with power to execute his just judgments
against the enemies: To do to her as she has done to us, and to render her
double. For this it is, that this second Actor has these different notes from
the first. He sits not; he is not crowned; and he comes out of the Temple.
So then, this Angel is the general type, in this summary proposition, of that
same, whereof the seven Angels are, in the large explication, Chapter 15. As is
most clear by comparing the Angel, stirring this to execution, with that one
of the four beasts, furnisher of the Vials to the seven Angels, Chapter 15.
This last inciter, has this common note with the former two Angels, that he
comes out of the Temple: but this he has singular, that he came from the
Altar. So then, he is a minister of the Altar, by allusion, still to the Temple
and Legal worship. Next, he has power over fire: as Christ who came to send
fire in the earth: as the two Witnesses, Cha. Luke 12. 49.
11. and Elias: out of whose mouths fire proceeded to devour their
adversaries: and who had power to plague the earth with all manner of plagues,
als often as they would, as having vengeance in readiness against all
disobedience. 2. Cor. 10. 16.
Now then, as by the Angel out of the Temple armed with the sikle, are
expressed here generally and summarily, in this summary proposition, all
faithful Christians; of whatsoever calling, instructed with power from God to
execute his wrath against the enemies: which executors are more largely
expressed in the seven Angels, Chapter 15. So this, coming from the Altar, is
the type of true pastors: by whose plain and powerful preaching, the other
are informed and stirred to consecrate their hands to the Lord. Even to serve
Babel as she has served us. As accordingly, Chapter 15. The seven Angels
receive the vials of wrath from one of the four beasts. Of whom Chapt. 4.

CHAP. XV.
HEnce, is the story of the last wrath, for final destruction of the enemies,
to the peace of the Church, that the kingdoms of the world may be Gods Chap.
11. 14.
and Christ's. Upon obstinate impenitency against six trumpets, Chapt. 9. 21.
The fulfilling of this wrath was sworn to come in the days of the seventh
trumpet, Chap. 10. Upon sounding of the seventh trumpet, summarily denounced,
Chap. 11. And summary executing thereof proponed, Chap. 14. in the end. Whereof
here, the larger narration, has the executers, Chap. 15. Their execution in
order, Chapt. 16. Cleared more largely, Chapters 17. 18. 19. and 20. Whereupon
the graceful condition of the Bride victorious, is magnifickly set down,
Chapt. 21. and 22. This whole matter, is that other great sign seen in
heaven: to distinguish this part of story, from the preceding in the last three
Chapt. called also a sign in heaven. This is that, which Mat. 24. is called,
the sign of the son of man. For he and his judgments, now are made
manifest. As not inconueniently, the other might be called the sign of the
Dragon.

2 In this Chapter, from the beginning to the fifth verse, is set down the
greatness of the erand: thence to the end, the disposing of the instruments
for execution thereof: the greatness of the matter, is first summarily
proponed in this, that he saw a sign, a great, yea, a marvelous sign, and,
in heaven. That Chap 12. was a great sign; but this is both great and
wonderful: even the sign of the son of man in heaven. This great
wonderfulnesse, is showed in the Ministers, Angels: their number, seven; their
employment, to be executors of God his last wrath, for finishing of the
mystery, Chapt. 10. For his spirit would no longer strive with men, verse. 1.
Next in the effect and end of their work, to the 5. verse. Which are, the
destruction of Antichrist: that the Saints, victorious over him, may praise
God; and by the greatness, equity, and truth, of his judgments manifested,
all men may fear, glorify, and worship him, who only is holy. For expressing
of this effect and end, the Church and her condition, in, and upon this
execution to follow, (joyfully upon sight of the instruments prepared,
preco^ceiuing the certain event) is set down, in the victory and song thereof.
In the victory, are the means whereby, and the party over whom. The means,
are a glassie Seamingled with fire: the pure word of God mingled with the
virtue of the holy Ghost, Chap. 4. The victory, is over the Beast, his image,
his mark, and number of his name: to show it now, full and perfect. In their
song, are first, the quality, that it is a song of praise, for a marvelous
deliverance, and overthrow of a great enemy: such as Moses, upon such a case,
did sing at the red Sea, Exodus 14. Secondly, it is in praise of the Lamb,
through whom they obtain this victory, and in whom the Father is glorified:
and not in praise of Moses, who is the servant of God, Heb. 3. 3. Chapt. 22. 9.
and 19. 10. Thirdly, their disposition is noted, in that they have the harpes
of God, given by him, for his praise: that is, well tuned hearts, filled with
joy and love, in conscience of his benefits, and bursting out in thanksgiving.
For he only puts a new song in the mouths of his servants. Lastly, the
tenor of their song is in two: the praise of God his works and ways; and the
sequel thereof. The praise of his works, is, that they are great and
marvelous: according whereto, he has a competent title, Lord God almighty.
The praise of his ways, is that they are just and true: and competently
thereupon, he has the title of King of Saints. In infinite authority and
power, yet to hold ever a just and true way, is a great praise. Now, the
sequel hereof is, that he only be feared, glorisied, and worshipped of all.
And that for two reasons. First, because he only is holy, and not the Beast,
who sacrilegiouslie busketh his head with that blasphemy. Next, his judgments
are now made manifest to all: so as, who before, worshipped and wondered after
the Beast, as having none equal, or able to fight with him: now, in his just
and manifest overthrow, may know, and praise God only holy. For Christ now
sits on a white cloud judging him. Compare this 4. verse with the 7. of
Chap. 14 and see what wisdom.

3 Before we enter in the second part, in the disposing of the instruments for
this great execution: the interpretation given of the glassie Sea mingled with
fire, is to be cleared.

4 That the glassie Sea is the type of the pure word, and pure worship
according thereto, see upon the 4. Chap. Here the allusion is to that story,
Exodus 13. and 14. When Moses and Israel with him having past the red Sea,
standing on the shore thereof, and seeing Pharao and his host drowned therein,
they praise God, singing the song of Moses, etc. Of this allusion, while men
mark not narrowlly all the points of conueniencie, the place is diversely
mistaken. Some taking this Sea mingled with fire to be but the type of great
troubles, through which the Church now has escaped; according to the speech
Psalm. 66. Thou have brought us through water and fire. But this is not all
whereto here the spirit will lead us. Others, take it for the treasure of
means, which God has ever in readiness, as before his throne, to destroy his
enemies. But this is too general. For here, a special treasure is meaned of
the means, whereby, as Antichrist is overthrown and drowned, so God his
Church is saved. And this is, the treasure of the pure word of God, and power
of his spirit mingled therewith. For, we must all, be begotten of the word and
of the spirit; and be baptized with water and with fire. And by this word and
spiritual virtue thereof, must Antichrist be foiled. As in the red Sea, the
people of Israel were baptized, 1. Cor. 10. wherein Pharao was drowned. And as
Israel was baptized under the cloud, which to them, was a pillar both of a
cloud and of fire (of refreshment and light) but to the Egyptians a pillar of
darkness. In which respect, the red Sea, wherein, and the pillar, under which
they were baptized, were types of the true word and spirit, whereby the true
Israel of God are begotten to immortality, and the enemies overthrown. So, by
allusion thereto, the Church^victorious over Antichrist, and that great City,
which spiritnally is called Egypt, is said to stand at a glassie Sea mingled
with fire: that is, in the clear light of the word mingled with the virtue of
the holy Ghost; whereby they are victorious, and furnished with the harpes of
God: but Antichrist therein is drowned, 2 Thessalonians. 2. From this Sea, they labor
to divert us to cisternes of their own digging, which are full of blood. But
here, is our victory and wisdom, whereby to count the number of the Beast his
name; and so, to overcome him, his image, his character, name, and number. The
Sea of the Fathers in a third part is blood, Chapt. 8. So as thence, we may
(if we be not wise to discern) draw death als well as life. The Sea again
of the Church of Rome, in latter state, is all bloody worsum, Chap. 16. This
Sea, has this different note from that, Chapter 4. that this is mingled with
fire. The fire is there also, but set out in seven burning lamps distinct from
the Sea: here the fire is mingled therewith, and that of purpose, to lead us
to take up a great point of wisdom in the diversity of God his dispensation in
this last clear light of the Gospel, for Antichrist his overthrow, from that
first, in the Apostolic times, for casting the Dragon on the earth. At the
first going out of the Gospel, to conciliat thereto the more credit, and to
show plainly whence the virtue, accompanying it came, there was then a distinct
dispensation of the spirit, in outward and visible signs, as cloven tongues,
and fire: extraordinary effects and operations: as gifts of tongues, healings,
and working of miracles: and by a singular and visible manner of donation, as,
imposition of hands of the Apostles. But, in this last reviving of the Gospel,
the word should be clear and pure as at the first, and accompanied with the
force of the spirit: yet the dispensation, donation, and operation of the holy
Ghost should not be in that manner, but should be mingled with the word: the
spirit and virtue thereof, accompanying the preaching of the Gospel; yet so,
as no visible or distinct symbol thereof should be as at the first, (for now,
the preachers are feated by swallowing of the little book, Chapt. 10.) no
miraculous operations: finally, no donation but such as, with the word and by
the word preached, the spirit should work in the Saints. So as miracles, in
these last times, are no notes of true preachers. And this diversity of
dispensation is exceeding wise, and requisite for the times. At the first the
Gospel was not, only to be opened, to the world lying in darkness, but
also confirmed, to be from God. Now, it has that credit with all; but being
buried in ignorance, was to be cleared. Neither must we take this so, as if
at first, the preaching of the Gospel had wanted that accompanying virtue. For
even then it was not in words 1. Cor. 4. 20.
but in power, and was mingled with fire. No doubt, but John his doctrine and
baptism, had with it the virtue of the spirit in those that believed: for
faith is the effect of this fire. And out of all question, Apollos had the
spirit in some good measure, when he knew but the baptism of John. And these
Samaritanes, who by the preaching of Philip received the Gospel and were
baptized, had the spirit before the downe-comming of Peter and John. But at the
beginning, were joined the visible symboles, donation, and miraculous effects
of the holy Ghost, to procure reverence and credit to the Gospel, and to show
whence comes all spiritual virtue, to faith or conversion: and the outward
healing of diseases, to lead us to know the power of the word and spirit, in
the quickening and life of the inward man, and curing spiritual diseases of the
Soul. Neither must we imagine that now the spirit is so tied to the word, as
who ever hears it, receives necessarily the spirit. For many hear whom it
profits nothing, because it is not mixed with faith: but Heb. 4. 2.
the gift of the holy Ghost is now no other way dispensed, but by the word
preached: we feeling the force thereof, but neither seeing whence it comes,
nor whither John 3. 8.
it goes. So, whatsoever spirit one pretend without Isai 59. 21.
the word, it is the spirit of error.

5 Now, how these Ministers of the last wrath are feated and prepared to this
great execution, is showed from the fifth verse to the end. And first, whence
they are, 2. How disposed, 3. Wherewith instructed, and by whom. 4. By what
power it is, that so great a work is effectuate. They come out of the Temple
of the Tabernacle of Testimony in heaven, now opened, that is, out of the true
Church militant (this is employed in the word Tabernacle) now made patent and
visible. This first note shows, both what they are, and of what time. They
are members of the true Militant Church, who by the light of the Gospel, the
Church being reformed and opened, are stirred to the work. For God turns the
hearts of Kings, who erst gave their Kingdoms to the Beast, and were his
horns; to hate now the Whore, and eat her flesh, Chapter 17. For her fall
shall not be by Kings of the East or Mahometans, but by reformed Christians:
whereof we see already good degrees, praised be the King of Saints. This note
also points the time of this execution, to be in the days of the seventh
Trumpet, according to the Oath, Chapter 10. Upon the sounding of which, Chapter
11. followed the opening of the Temple in heaven, and clear sight of the Arc
of the Testimony, and thereupon lightnings, thundrings, etc. Now here, these
seven Angels, Ministers of God his last wrath come forth of the Temple opened,
and go to execution. Thus the spirit by clear notes, leads us to couple
rightly the course of this Prophecy. Which, from the beginning has so plain
a way, as all being comprehended in seven Seals, six thereof bring the first
sorrows,: the seventh opened, yields seven trumpets, whereof, six bringing
the second evils: and these working but further induration, Chapter 9. The
seventh Trumpet sounding, yields these seven Angels with seven Cups of the
last wrath. Whose story by the narration, wisely and exceeding purposely in
the 12. 13. and 14. Chapters interiected, was till now delayed.

6 The disposition of these Angels is showed in their apparel, which is
linen, and that both pure and bright, and girded to the^ with a golden girdle
about the breast. White linen apparel is the garment of all Saints: who in
Christ are made Priests to God, by putting on and girding to, or applying Jesus
Christ to their hearts by the girdle of faith, more precious then gold to
righteousness and holiness. But here in these Angels, this common 1 Pet. 1. 7.
garment has a special relation to their special calling, To show that this
execution should be just and upright, not only in respect of God the just
Judge, whose ways are just and true, but even in respect of the Ministers
also, who in the light and assurance of faith, should in the zeal of God and
of his worship bring down Antichrist. For blessed shall he be called that
rewards her as she has served us. Psalm. 137.


7 They are instructed hereto with golden Vials or Cups full of wrath, even
the wrath of God that lives for ever. Golden cups were also holy vessels of
the Sanctuary to show hereby likewayes this to be a pure work like gold, and
holy, and acceptable. And the wrath powered out is everlasting, as he whose
wrath it is; for according to his name, so is his fear: and as is the man, so
is his strength. Hereto also serves the kind of Instrument. At the judgments
by the six Seals, some cry was always joined to waken, if it had been
possible men to learn. The Trumpets sounded loud, in six of them God giving
Iezabel time to repent, Chapter 3. and 9. Hereupon obstinate impenitency, out
of golden bowls, wrath without noise is tumbled. The several degrees whereof,
in God his patience, Chap. 16. yet more argues and aggrauateth the obstinacy
of the enemies still more and more endured to endless wrath.

8 These cups are given to the Angels by one of the four Beasts, that is, by
the true Pastors of the church, Chapter 4. to show, that through the clear
light of the Gospel preached, Antichrist being laid open, the hearts of God
his faithful servants shall be filled with holy indignation and zeal to
employ their power to God his honor, in his overthrow, stirred there to by the
preachers of the truth. Reward her as she has rewarded you, etc. according to
the Cup she filled to you, fill her Chap. 18. 6.
the double. This was summarily touched in the end of the 14. Chapter, when the
Angel from the Altar having power over fire, stirred the other to cut down
the grapes of the earth: the which same thing is here more largely explaned.
That this is said to be done by one of the four Beasts, as it shows them to
be the stirrers to work, so (according as their diverse faces expressed
diversity of gifts, as for diverse times and cases is requisite) to signify the
employment at this time of such as were fittest, whether for wisdom, as Men to
spy out the Beast, or rather (that being already done) for leonine courage,
roaring and thundering, Chapter 10. to encourage and terrify. How it be, what
of one of them is done, is done of all.

9 The power, whereby this great execution is borne out, that it cannot be
stayed, is God his glorious and powerful presence in his own true Church
opened and made visible, before fuming in wrath against Antichrist: so, as
neither dare these Ministers but execute their charge: The fear and love of
God, and knowledge of his terror stirring them: neither any enemy impede the
course of God his judgments till they be finished. For the Beast must go to
destruction: and the Whores lovers shall stand a back afraid at her burning,
Chapter 18. And what is it else, that miraculously has and yet does bear out
against Antichrist his power and malice; Who, if the Lord were not on our side,
would have eaten Psalm 124.
us up, and as mighty floods have overwhelmed us in the depth: but the Lord is
our helper. Peoples hear it, Exodus 15. 14.
and are afraid. Sorrow comes on the Iuhabitants of Palestina. Now this type
is not so put, as if the Saints this time should be debarred from the presence
of God in his Church. But by allusion to the 40. of Exodus, 1. Kings, 8. Isai 6
to show a great and powerful presence of God in his Church, newly reerected
from under Antichrist his tyranny, where through the execution shall have no
let. It is true, that the resort (albeit very frequent and daily increasing)
shall not be such during the plagues and smoking wrath of God, as when
Euphrates is dried up, the high places taken away, and Baal destroyed. When the
twelve Ports of the new Chap. 21
Jerusalem shall be cast open continually to receive from all quarters both
Jews wakened by a voice from the Chap. 19. 5. Chap. 16. 12. Zach. 14. 9.
Throne, and the Kings of the East with them coming to worship Jehovah the
Lord of hosts, who then shall be the only one Lord in the earth, and his name
one. To which, the sixth Cup shall in the own time prepare the way, and which
in the seventh shall be fulfilled, and so the mystery finished, in the
accomplishment of all fore^old Act. 3. 21.
by the Prophets, Chapter 10.

CHAP. XVI.
IN the 15. Chapter was the preparation for the last wrath. Here is the
particular execution in seven degrees, according to the number of the Ministers
thereof, which degrees in order and manner have a great resemblance and
relation to the degrees of Antichrist his rising in the Trumpets, to show the
wisdom and justice of God, in rendering measure for measure, and bringing him
down as he arose. The resemblance has made many to think both to be of one
matter and time. But these Vials are all powered on the Beast and his marked
ones, whose height in working began but in the fifth trumpet.

2 This execution is commanded verse first, from the Temple, as a holy and just
work, with aloud voice, as a matter important, and to be performed with care:
to the Ministers, who being prepared attend the sign. The execution is upon
the earth; that is, the earthly sort of men, through all the plagues, evidently
designed to be Antichrist and his adherents, It is executed by seven degrees,
to show God his patience in his greatest wrath: in each degree is the common
sign, of pouring out the Vial, and the ensuing effect first or secundary.

3 The first Vial is powered on the earth. Where, the earth must be understood
according to the relation it Cap. 13. Sect. 7.
has in collation to the subsequent things, and degree which in that respect
it holds: to the sea, rivers, sun, throne, Euphrates, the air. For, as when
the earth, or the earth and Sea opposed to heaven, then things below are
opposed to things above: earthly or unstable things, to things heavenly and
permanent: so in this place, as also in the first Trumpet, it must be taken,
as the order of arising degrees in comparison requires, for the first and
lightest degree of judgment, as the earth is the lowest and lourdest of
elements: as the earth is taken in the first verse, all the Vials are powered on
the earth, because all are on the earthly* Antichristian Kingdom: in this
other sense of the earth, the first particularly, is powered thereon. The effect
thereof is, that the filthiness, loose life, hypocrisy, avarice, pride,
symony, and other vices of the Clergy, and Church of Antichrist, break out to
the view of the world (long blinded) as filthy boiles. The allusion is to the
sixth plague of Egypt, where-thorow the Enchanters were no more able to stand
before Exodus 9. 11.
Moses, This was the first degree of the fall of Rome, when God to make them
detestable, discovered their sores; so as these enchanting bewitchers were
confounded, and could no longer abide the light. The accommodation of Story is
most clear: where by numbers their avarice, pride and hypocrisy is highly
exclamed against: Few daring yet challenge their doctrine and worship: yet
their persons thus falling first in contempt, it made way to the next Cup. Now,
as in the first Trumpet, contention and self love joined with cruelty, like
fire and hail mixed with blood, cast on the earth, made the first great degree
to Antichrist his rising, by burning up all true love, life, and holy zeal of
religion: so, the first open degree of his fall, is by the cup of wrath powered
on the earth, even the discovery of their hypocrisy and filthiness, whereby
they were seen to be void of all true Religion.

4 The second Vial makes a higher degree, in that not only the persons, who
worshipped the Beast, and received his Gharacter, are for their silthinesse,
odious; but now, even their common doctrine and ordinary worship becomes
vile and corrupted as bloody worsum, deadly to all that drink thereof, and
abhorred of men, who in the clear glassie Sea before the throne perceine the
stinking rottenness of this Asphaltites. How after the contempt of the persons
for their abominable filthiness; next, all their, worship and doctrine of
pardons, relics, indulgences, holy water, crossings, soul-Masses,
pilgrimages, processions, invocation of Saints, baptizing of bells; magical
coniurations, forged miracles, foolish Legends of lies, and the rest of that
sea of rotten blood began to stink in the noses of men, is more then
evident: their whole worship and common school Divinity now standing as the
Sea of Sodom. Compare this Vial for kind and degree to the second Trumpet.

5 By the third Vial, their rivers and fountains of waters are turned into
blood. When by Moses the flood and al stanks and ponds of Egypt were turned
into blood, Exodus 7.
(for thereto in this and the former Vial the spirit alludeth) the Egyptians
dug to themselves wels to drink of. When in the days of Ahab, through
parching drought, all other waters failed, he and Obadiah seek 1 King. 18. 5.
to the rivers and fountains. So the common Sea of Popish worship and
doctrine becomes vile: the last refuge, for preserving the lives of their
Beasts, is their rivers and fountains, whereby their Sea is enriched, and
which by kind should be more clear and sweet. But these are also made blood,
and that in two respects. Their rivers and fountains are their great and
learned Doctors, and grounds, whence these as rivers carry waters, as from
springs, to sweeten if it were possible that rotten sea. But howsoever, in some
outward degree they apeare to have some more freshness; yet they are but
blood, and to drink of them it is deadly. They labor much to excuse and mask
the gross rottenness of their sea, and to sweeten it with eloquence, aid of
Arts and Philosophy: and yet all is blood. They busy themselves to bring
warrands from the Fathers: but almost, all from that third part of that ancient
sea, which in the second Trumpet was made blood: and from these fountains and
rivers which in the third Trumpet were for the third part made bitter and
mortal. And what clear and sweet water might both from Scripture and Fathers
be brought for cure of their Sea, they by false glosses wrested
interpretations, cuttings, and caruings turn all into blood. The second
respect, in which their rivers and fountains are said to become blood, that
we should not miss to take up, the Angel executer, praises God his justice
therein, and another from the Altar (a sure testimony from Christ himself)
confirms his saying. And this double testimony both of the executers and
ministers of the Altar, true Pastors encouraging to execution, so Chap. 14. 10.
warranteth the equity of this point, that men need not be remiss or stayed
with any faint doubts, from executing this just work. And certainly the
Spirit in this double proclamation of God his justice herein, seems in divine
wisdom to have foreseen and foreshewed the faintnes of men in this so
approved an errand. The point is, because their rivers and fountains, even
their head-Clergie men, entertainers, nourishers, and vpholders of all that
stinking sea, have been bloody murderers of the Saints and Prophets, and
occasioners of all bloodshed in the earth (the Whore Chapter 17. being drunk
with the blood of Saints, and all the blood of the earth being found in her,
Chapter 18.) Therefore the Lord in Obadiah 16. Isai 49. 26. and 51. 22. 23.
his justice, now gives them blood to drink, even measure for measure. And
the Cup that she filled to us, she now tastes in her course. Wherein is
performed what for consolation was spoken, Chapter 13. If any kill with a
sword, he must be killedby a sword. The performance of this we have in some
measure seen, and daily see, in such Countries wherein the Lord has raised
the light of his Gospel, while their continual conspiracies and tteasons
against the states and lives of Princes, compel men (otherwise, but
preposterouflie pitiful, and for all this double denounced warrant of the
equity of the work, but too slow) to give them the due recompense of their
bloody practices. But the effect hereof will be still more and more perceived.
For there will be no end of their tragical attempts, till that bloody state be
destroyed for ever. These are the Martyrs, the Church of Rome can glory of.
Here a diuiue artifice of the spirit is not unworthy the marking: that as in
expressing the first suffetings of the church by the dragon Chapter 12. who
gives his power, throne, and authority to the Beast, allusion was to the
condition of the old Church in Egypt: so here in the first degrees of final
wrath, allusion is to the plagues there. Like as in the Chapter 15. upon
preception of the last degree, the song of Moses was sung at the glassie sea.

6 The fourth Vial is on the sun; whereby the beast his marked ones are
plagued: the clear light of the Gospel (showing Christ the sun of
righteousness) now so shining, as in place of glorifying God by repentance,
and acknowledging of their errors and works of darkness, they as the
Children of darkness, and hating the light, whereby their works are
reproved, boil in despitefull rage, and are burnt up with envy and malice, as
Iohu 3. 20. Ephesians. 5. 13.
were the Pharisees at Christ his clear doctrine and evident miracles: and
that Stephen having his face like the Sun. And they blaspheme God in
blaspheming his Act. 7. 54.
truth, and true Church; speaking evil of the way of righteousness: their
desperate rage still increasing as the light grows, because induration in
impenitency is a common effect of all these plagues. In that, showsoeuer God
has his own single ones to pull out of that Kingdom, yet the body is not
reclamable, but must go to destruction. Compare this with the fourth Trumpet.
The light of the Gospel is a plague and torment to the reprobate world, as the
two witnesses, Chapter 11 were a vexation. Here the first effect of this Vial
is rage, the second blasphemy.

7 The first is on the throne of the Beast, that is, on his Kingdom, as the
next words interpret, and as the whole frame of Scripture speech euinceth. The
throne of David is for his Kingdom. The Throne is established: for the
Kingdom is established. Satan his throne, Chap. 2. and 13. for his kingdom.
The first effect here of is, their kingdom loses the glory, luster, pomp,
and wonted estimation, and becomes contemptible. Whereupon the secundarie
effect follows, in them, of desperate sorrow, expressed by a gesture of men,
extremly grieved. Gnawing their tongues: and obdnration in impenitency and
blasphemy, their^ores by the light of the sun being more and more laid open,
and thereby their sorrow augmented. For their works, see Chapter 9. And
withal, consider what a wise and just retribution. As, by falling from heaven
to the earth, and from being stars of light to become ministers of
darkness, they opened the bottomless pit, and let out darkness, by the
smoke thereof eclipsing all true light, and so erecting the kingdom of
darkness. So here, by the clear arising light of the sun of
righteousness, all the earthly and worldly account of their Kingdom becomes
contemtible, and is darkened. And as, by the doctrine of darkness, they, like
Scorpions, stinging men, tormented their consciences: so the light op^ned, and
discovering their treachery, tormenteth them with anguish and sorrow. This
effect, both first and secondary, we see already in great part, but shall yet
see more. For, albeit these plagues here, have their own degrees for order of
working, yet still the former hold on with the subsequent, till all together,
in the end, bring final destruction.

8 The sixth vial is notable in many circumstances. It is poured on Euphrates:
the effect is, drying the waters thereof. This effect is for a special end,
that the way of the Kings of the East may be prepared. Against this effect, and
apparent sequel thereof, a great endeavor is showed, and the event thereof.
The endeavor, is of the principals, Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, by their
instruments, (a pestilent brood, and well resembling their origin) foul
spirits, and spirits of Devils: so is their quality. Their dealing is, to go
to the Kings of the Earth, strangers from heaven, whom they may persuade
importunely cronting like frogs, night and day in their ears. Their force of
persuasion is, by working signs, thus to show them to be fase Prophets,
seducing. The end of this their endeavor, is to gather these earthly Kings
together, in their purpose, to uphold their tottering Kingdom, now threatening
a fall: and to impede the apparent effect to which this Vial makes
preparation: but which God shall turn to an other fine then they purpose: even
to be glorified in their just destruction, as the event proves. Now, both in
respect of the great danger to be deceived and misled by these frogs, and of
the great day of God his wrath, to come on them (so much the more perrilous, as
it should come like a thiese in the night) warning is given to watch, and hold
the true faith: whereby, putting on Christ, and girding him to us as with a
golden girdle, we be not found naked, and so ashamed, but blessed through our
garment. The event of all this their busy travel is expressed in this, that
they gathered them to a place called in Hebrew Armageddon.

9 Now, because for the most part, the effect and sequels of this Vial are yet
to come: in seeking the accommodation, we must walk warily, as the light of
holy writ may lead us. Euphrates, properly, is that great River whereon
Babylon, properly so called, did stand, and whereto, it served for beauty,
commodity, and fortification. It was also the march bordering David his
kingdom on the East, separating, and in a manner debarring the Eastern
peoples therefrom. To both these considerations, in this allusion, the spirit
has respect. In the 51. of Jeremy, prophesying the destruction of Babylon, he
threatens that he will dry up her waters. Thence, hither, to the destruction
of the mystical Babylon, the speech is brought. In the next Chapter, the whore
Babylon, is said to sit on many waters. Which are interpreted, Kings, Nations,
Peoples, and Tongues. To show, in great dominion and authority, great dignity
and strength. The drying up then of her waters, is the decay of her authority,
dominion, glory, and power, by the substraction of these from her obeience, in
whom was her strength and fortification. Even that same, which Chapter 17. is
expressed by eating her flesh and making her naked. Thus, fitly for this
respect, and yet more for the second, the drying of Euphrates is here
mentioned, in a depth of wisdom: to show, how that River bordering the
kingdom of David on the East, and set betwixt the Eastern Kings and the
blessed land, being dried up, the Kings of the East, should therethrough have
easy access thereto: the debarring impediment being removed. The sense is. As
Antichrist his rising was the occasion of darkness, and defection from the
Gospel to Mahometisme in the East and of the obstinate abiding of Jews (who
are most part in the East, and whom specially here the spirit points at, as
the event clears) in their infidelity: and as the greatness and power of
Antichrist still debarreth both, from embracing the Gospel, as Euphrates
flowing over all his banks, and so letting all free passage to the Kingdom of
David: both Jews and Mahometans, through the superstition, idolatry and
corruption of the Romish Church, abhorring Christianity: so now, her waters
being with the heat of the sun of righteousness dried up, an open way shall
be prepared for them to receive the Gospel. I know, how some, from the story
of Cyrus and Darius King of the East, diuerting the course of Euphrates, and so
surprising Babylon, think this allusion taken, to show how mystical Babylon
shall in like manner, be destroyed by Eastern Kings. But the spirit of God
fetches nothiug from Xenophon or Herodotus, but all his allusions are to holy
writ. As this speech is, plainly from Jeremy. And, the Prophets (who in
respect of Media, by whose forces specially Babel was taken, denounce her ruin
Ier. 50. 41.
from the North) show the weakness of that coni^cture. And this Prophecy
cleereth evidently that her destruction shall be by Western Kings even the
horns of the Beast, who having long drunk of her cup, and given their
Kingdoms to the Beast, at last have their hearts turned by God, to hate the
Whore, eat her flesh, make her naked, and burn her with fire: and so shall
make way for the Kings of the East, that is, whole States (that particular
persons be not thought here to be designed, as were the Sages, who at the
nativity of Christ upon sight of his star, came from the East to worship him,
whil Priests and Phariseis abode in blindness) which, by Babels fall, the
clear star of Christ shall bring to bow unto him. Whereat Herod and all
Jerusalem shall be troubled. As their endeavor hereupon well shows. Now,
here, a Matthew. 2. 3.
great wisdom and delightful congruity, in the order of God his working, is
to be observed and admired. By Antichrist his usurpation and darkness,
prevailing on the fifth trumpet, as by the swelling of Euphrates, the East was
alienated and debarred from the Kingdom of David: God in his justice, losing
thereafter, in the sixth Trumpet, from Euphrates, these Armies of desolation
and poisoning error. So here, in the fifth Vial, the kingdom of Antichrist
becoming dark and contemptible, and in this sixth Vial, all beauty,
strength, and fortification being dried up, the East shall come again to the
Gospel, and Jews ^epent from their obstinate blindness and induration. God,
thus wonderfully, and to the high praise of his wise grace, bringing a more
io^full effect from Euphrates in Antichrist his fall, then he brought a heavy
woe in his rising. And consider how wonderfully hereupon the case varieth. In
the sixth Trumpet, out of the mouths of these destroiers, from Euphrates, came
Three things, Fire, Brimstone, and Smoke: By which three, the third part of
men were destroyed. Here, to disturb als ioifull an effect from the East, ^u^
Of the mouths of the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet, three foul spirits even
spirits of Devils. That is, men led with the spirit of Satan, liars, and
murderers like their Father, and accompanied with the effectual
deceiuablenesse of his working, authorized by Antichrist his state, and in
special by the false Prophet head thereof, are sent abroad, as crouting
froggs, to bestirre themselves. Who these are, the state of our time and
practice of Jesuits and Seminary Priests, compassing Sea and Land, specially
busy about Kings, makes more then manifest. They begin to see their waters
drinking in, and Euphrates erst so great a river, now running in a narrow
channel; and this sets them madlings a work. Besides their origin, they
have a special note of distinction whereby to discern them, that they are
workers of miracles; so to show them false Prophets, to whose begetting,
authorizing, and setting a work, all the power of the kingdom of darkness,
Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, have jointly bended all their malice, force,
and intising hypocrisy, as to the last puff of Satan his mouth, and of the
Vicar of his throne, for underpropping Babylon. But she can not be cured. For
the Beast goes to destruction. Here, the Beast and false Prophet Ier. 51. 9.
Chap. 17. 8.
are distinguished, as the first and second Beast, Chap. 13. That here, may
be showed a joined endeavor of the head and whole body of the state. See upon
the next Chap. Sect. 11. 18. and upon the 19. Sect. 27.

10 The unlucky event, of this their endeavor, to themselves and happy to the
Church: specially these to whom by this vial the way is prepared, is showed in
these words, that they gathered them to a place called in Ebrew Armageddon.
Wherein, much matter is comprised and offered to our consideration: partly in
the name of the place, but specially, in that it is so called in Hebrew. The
place is Armageddon, a word composed of Har a Mountain and Mageddon a plot of
ground in the of lot Manasse: famous in Scripture, for two notable events, the
one of great joy, the other as sorrowful. The first is in the 5. of Judges,
where a great victory is obtained against Iabin and Sisera at the waters of
Mageddo: when the Kings fought and were swept away. This was so noble a victory
to the Church, as the Psalmist makes it the measure of his wish against the
enemies. The other Psalm. 83. 9. 2 King. 23. 2. Chron. 35
als mournful, is, when Josias by Necho is slain at Mageddo. Whereupon, to
the Jews, insued most bitter mourning. To both these events the spirit here
alludeth; yet with this remarkable point of difference, that where the first of
them was at the waters, the second in the valley of Mageddo. Here, the place
is Armageddon, that is, the mountain of Mageddon. This difference is
purposelie put of the spirit, to show that the enemies here, should be in
some great endeavor against the Church of God, in all the old Testament
bearing the name of a Mountain. Not only for God stablishing her against all
assailers, and for her eminency, but also, in respect of her type in Mount
Sion, and land of promise, which is a land of Mountains, and for the Church
her abode therein, called of Daniel Hartsebikadosh. This is Dan. 11. 45. Ezekiel.
20. 6. 40 Isai. 25.
the Mountain of Mountains, wherein, the Lord will destroy death: and thresh
Moab as straw is threshed in Madmena: in which the Lord will destroy all that
rise against her. Herein then is implied, that this great destruction of
Antichrist and his aiders, by persuasion of the frogs, shall be in a high
enterprise against the true Church: as God foiled Gog upon the Mountains of
Israel. And the King of the North entering in the pleasant Land, and planting
the Tabernacles of his Palace in the glorious and holy Mountain. Now, as for
this their purpose, causing their destruction, the place is called Har, a
Mountain. So, to express a double event of this their enterprise, it is
called Megiddon, by allusion to the two stories before mentioned. To that in
the 5. of Judges, to show, that the same shall befall all these enemies
assembled by the frogs, which did befall Iabin and Sisera at the waters of
Megeddo. And thereupon, such a like song of joy to the Church, as is that of
Deborah and Barak. To the other story of Josias slaughter, the allusion is, to
show, that upon this victory, should arise such a mourning, and that proper to
the Jews, as they had for the slaughter of Josias in the valley of Mageddo;
but of a much different kind. Even that mourning whereof Zachary prophecieth in
his 12. Chapter. When by this victory, the way being prepared for them to come
and see him whom they pierced they shall be sorry for him, as one is sorry for
his first borne: and when, in that day, there shall be a great mourning in
Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Mageddon. When
Ezech. 20. 43. and 36. 31. Zach 12. 10.
every family shall mourn apart: and when they shall judge themselves worthy
to have been destroyed. God pouring on them, to true repentance, the spirit of
grace and compassion. And for this double effect, of the Jews common joy with
the Church, and proper mourning, the place is called, in Hebrew, Armageddon. To
express Ch 19. Sect. 4.
that the Jews, converted to the Gospel, shall celebrate this victory, both
with joy, and also with godly sorrow causing repentance, for their by-gonne
induration and pearcing of their Savior. In the first Chapter, speaking of
that sight of Christ, whereby all families should mourn before him, even they
who pierced him through; for this same purpose are put (...)* and Amen for
Grecian and Jew, who jointly should see him, and mourn upon sight of the sign
of the Son of man in heaven, Mat. 24. The same which here is showed in the
vials, as upon Chapt. 15. Sect. 1. was declared. In like manner Chap. 9. to
show, how both Jew and Grecian, should at length know and detest Antichrist, he
is called in Hebrew Abaddon and in Greek Apollyon. But in this place, that we
may take up the spiritual drift of the holy Ghost, in these who shall come,
upon this victory, from the East, he tells us that the place shall be
called in Hebrew Armageddon. Not, but it shall be ^o called also in Greek,
that is, the Gentiles Christians shall also celebrate this victory: but, to
stir us to the vp-taking of a special effect hereof in the Jews, of common
joy with us, and proper mourning for their own induration against the common
Savior, so the place is called in Hebrew. The conversion of the Jewish people,
by clear warrant of Scripture, we look for. And that, not only of certain
persons, now and then, here and there: but assuredly, that the body of that
people shall solemnedly turn, to the great admiration of the world, and praise
of God his both wisdom and mercy. This the Prophets foretell clearly: the
Apostle Paul most plainly; yea the Lord himself, in the prediction of their
overthrow, Luke 21. limitteth the time of their being trod under, till the
fullness of the Gentiles be brought in. Which self words, the Apostle using,
Romans 11. he exponeth clearly the Lord his meaning. It is a wonderful
providence, that the Jews, fifteen hundredth years, not possessing one foot
of property in the earth, yet are kept a separate people, that in his own time
the Lord may be magnified in his mercy and truth, toward them, to the
astonishment of all the world. That the great deliverances promised them in the
Prophets, have all their performance in Christ, it is certain: but whereof,
that the full accomplishment comes not til their solemn conversion, it is
evident, by the Prophecies cited and applied, by the Apostle, to that purpose.
Now, whether they shall be brought to inhabit again their own Land, albeit I
dare not determine: because (it being typical) all, promised theranent, may
be performed in their conjunction to the Church, which is the true Jerusalem
from heaven: yet certainly, my heart inclines to think so. Because their
solemn conversion must bring with it, the remoouing of their reproach, and so,
of necessity, a gathering from their dispersion, to brook a state in the eyes
of the world. And the Lord his own words, limitting their being trod under
foot seem to implie no less: O the deepenesse of the riches both of the
wisdom and knowledge of God! The Jews, misconceiuing the Prophets, are
strengthened in their error of Messiah yet to come, because they think, that
before his coming, the Roman Empire must be utterly destroyed; which now
stands only in the Pontificality. Whereby, any may well know, how great a
way his fall, and of all that state with him, shall open unto them. So much the
more as in place of his idolatrous superstition (whereat they now stumble) done
away, they shall see the purity of true worship erected.

11 The seventh and last Vial is poured in the Air. The effect whereof is
summarilie, in one word denounced, and then typically declared. The
denunciation is great: first for the authority, as being not only from the
Temple, but also from the throne in it, even God his own voice. And next, for
the weight of the matter; that now, all is done. Not as if in that instant all
things were accomplished; but, by pouring out of this Vial the sign being
given, to show that in the days thereof all should be finished according as
Chap. 10. was sowrne. Neither is this to be taken for the last consummation,
as neither is the great day of God almighty in the former Vial, for the last
day: any time of God his great execution, being in Scripture speech so called
ordinarily. But here it is said to be done. Because now at last, God is by
this plague to destroy all enemies of his Church, and beautify her with peace,
liberty, and plenty of grace: so as all whatsoever by the Prophets has been
foretold and promised of either, shall now have the full accomplishment. The
Church being freed of all troubles, and having but to expect her bridegroom,
for whom now she shall be prepared. This Christ himself foretold. Lu Le 21.
28.
When ye therefore see all these things come to pass, then lift up your
heads. These words then (it is done) are all one with these (now all is come to
pass so as ye may lift up your heads. See this same speech in this same
sense, Chap. 21. They are as I think, much deceived, who interpret the
commotions here subioyned, of the last consummation: which shall not come
thus, but as a thief in the night, upon a peaceable, secure, and sleeping
world: when all these broiles and whole effects of the seven Vials, called of
Christ, Matthew. 24. the sign of the son of man, shall have past before.

12 This great effect, thus summarily in one word denounced, is declared by
continual allegory. When the Air is clear and quiet, all, both sea and
land, rivers, fountains, and heavenly lights, are calm and shine clear. But,
the Air being troubled, all here below is troubled, and for their use toward
us, the heavenly lights are also darkened: and these fearful effects of
thundrings, lightnings, voices, etc. ordinarily do follow. Hereby, the spirit
will express an universal and horrible commotion and alteration of the state
of the earth; which in one word he calls an earthquake: yea and that so
strange and huge, as the like was not since men inhabited the same. It was a
great earthquake (that is alteration and vicissitude of things) when upon
opening of the sixth seal, the state of the Roman Empire was shaken, and in
the sixth head, received a deadly wound. But in the overthrow of Antichrist,
the Beast going to destruction, when the cured head and Beast quickened, therein
again, shall be slain and destroyed: there shall be another kind of commotion
and alteration of the states of the world. So as, who seem best fenced and
hedged from all peril, as Islands; and who seem strongliest stablished in
greatness and strength, as Mountains; shall flee away, and be so undone, as
they shall be found no more. And so, it is no marvel that this alteration
shall be conjoined with terrible plagues and judgments upon the wicked, like
hail from heaven of a Talent weight: who notwithstanding, remain endured
against God, and blaspheme still.

13 The effect of this earthquake, is declared to be on the state of
Antichrist and his aiders; under the names of the great City divided in three;
the Cities of Nations falling. Wherein, great Babel is now remembered and
rewarded. The Nations did tread under foot the holy City, Chapt. 11. And here
their Cities fall. In the streets of the great City God his Prophets they
murdered, unburied and mocked three days and a half. Here, that great City
is divided in three. And so, that bewitching Babel, whose fall was denounced,
Chap. 14. now comes to ruin. For, by all these, that one state is meaned;
but that, with her fall, shall be conioined the fall of many great kingdoms,
and all the face of the earth shall be altered. Which, besides the reason of
her greatness, is yet the less wonderful for this, that with her fall shall
come on, the conversion of the Jews and orient with them, and apparently by
them. The subsequent Chapters, wherein this is more amply set forth, makes
the matter clear. Now what particularly is meaned, by renting of the great
City in three, till the event declare it, I dare say no more, but that
apparently it shows the overthrow and dissipation of all the strength of that
State: which consisted in the joined power, counsel, and working of three. The
Dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, verse 13. Or if hereby, the holy Ghost will
give us to take up such an utter exterminion as is showed Ezech. 5. or 6. 12.
Or, if this dividing in three, has relation to the order of destruction set
down in the subsequent Chapters, in three degrees: first of the Whore, Chap.
17. and 18. next of the Beast and false Prophet, Chap. 19. and thirdly, of the
Dragon, Chapter (...)

CHAP. XVII.
WE have heard the seven degrees of the last wrath, whereof the seventh has in
few words, so strange an effect summarily employed, as a larger manifestation
thereof was necessary. Which accordingly the Spirit gives; in the parties
destroyed: manner, measure, and events of their overthrow.

2 The parties destroyed, are the Whore, in this and the next Chapter. The
Beast and false Prophet, Chapter 19. And lastly for an absolute victory, the
Dragon Chap. 20. Whereupon insueth the goodly and graceful, state of the
Church, Chapter 21. and 22.

3 To the sight and perception of the damnation of the great Whore, John is
first exhorted and disposed by one of these Angels which had the seven Vials,
1. 2 and beginning of the third verse. Secondly, a vision is exhibited till
near the end of the 6. verse. From thence, to the end of this Chapter, the
vision is exponed by the Angel.

4 In the action of disposing John to the perception of these things, are the
Instrument and his endeavor. The instrument is one of these seven who had the
Vials. To show, that the time when the vials should be a pouring out, would
bring with it a more clear knowledge, of Antichrist, and of the trumperie of
this Whore, great by his power and credit: and should waken up and dispose
men to see more evidently these things which before were but of few, or then
obscurely known. Thus by degrees light grows. The Angel his endeavor to
this end is twofold, in that both with voice he stirs up, and carries John
in spirit to the wilderness. To let us see, that for perception of such things
we are not only to be wakened up from our natural dullness, but must in a
manner ^e separated from our selves, and all common conversation of the world:
which yet stands not so much in the retreat of the body, or retiredness of
place, as in right disposition of spirit. The Angel stirs John to
perception, by an argument from the great sight he was to show him, the
damnation of the great whore, which according he performs, in showing the
Whore, this Chapter, and her damnation Chap. 18.

5 The greatness of this Whore (for further wakening up of John (and us in his
person) is yet amplified by 3. Arguments. First, her great Dominion in these
words, which sits on many waters. So interpreted, verse 15. therefore fitly
is the decay of her estate called drying up of her waters, Chapter 16. 12. Ier.
50. 38. and 51. The second argument is from the persons, with whom she plays
the harlot. First, for quality great, as being Kings; next for number, many, as
indifferently, committing whoredom with all the Inhabitants of the earth: thus
being both a great and a common whore. The third argument is, her whorish and
deceiuable persuasion, like that Proverbs 5. by her allurements, subtlety,
deceiving men as with wine, and making them drunken, so to dote more and more
on her, as men drunken lust aye the more after wine, till becoming altogether
senseless all true judgment be stolen from them. This is it which makes all
pains taken with superstitious Idolatries for their conversion to be
unprofitable: as it is but folly to deal with a drunken man while his wine is
on him. This is that Babylon, Chapter 14. against which, the heavy wrath there
denounced, here takes full execution. And for clearing the equity thereof, it
is most plainly here opened what she is, and of what time, and state.

6 To John thus prepared, appears the vision of a woman sitting on a beast,
and properties of both. Of the Beast his properties we will speak in the
Interpretation of the vision which the holy Ghost himself gives. The woman is
glorious in all worldly pomp, and royal magnificence, whereby she dazeleth
the eyes of men; she is a most abominable Harlot, provoking to detestable
Idolatry and superstition, and in place of the healthsome waters of life,
propining her own traditions and devises (for stolen waters are sweet) which
in detestation thereof, the holy Ghost here names by an Ier. 51. 7.
abominable name, This she does under fair pretenses, deceiving with a
golden Cup. She is an impudent professed Harlot, and mother harlot of the
world; and yet with such deep subtlety covering her practices, as none shall
read that which is openly written on her forehead, but the lightened by the
spirit, to find out the mystery. For she is like that adulterous woman, Prou.
30. 20. which eats and wipeth her mouth, and says she has done nothing.
Finally, she is a cruel murtheresse of Saints. She sits on the Beast, as
borne up by him, and having all this glory and bewitching power to deceive,
only through that credit and estimation which she has by the Beast her
aduancer.

7 This vision works in John admiration, yet not such as was that Chapter 13.
of them who admire and follow the Beast, and that hereafter verse 8. but no the
less having mixed with it some such infirmity as required a wakening of him
from a vanishing astonishment, wherein many lie benumbed in these our days,
who Cap. 14. Sect. 3 Abac. 1. 5. Act. 13. 31.
yet wonder not the first wondering. This effect of the vision occasioneth the
Interpretation. First, of the Beast who is summarily described ver. 8. and
after more plainly exponed in the interpretation of the heads and horns. His
summary description is by his stable and yet variable condition, which in those
who are not written in the book of life, works such admiration as was that,
Chapter 13. This Beast then in some sort and respect, had been before that
time, wherein John sees him, and in some respect and condition was even then,
albeit not as it was before, neither as it should be thereafter: and was yet to
come in a different respect and condition from either. And as it was yet to
come (which is the condition and time, wherein, here it is to be taken and
considered) it has two remarkable notes. One is, that it should arise out of
the bottomless pit, which albeit in some sort it may be said of all wicked
powers, yet it is in a singular manner proper to Antichrist, Chapter 9. and 13.
the Vicar of the Dragon his kingdom, the Angel of the bottomless pit, the
adversary, the man of sin, and son of perdition. His other note is, that he
goes to destruction: whereof hereafter.

8 This description, so obscurelie proponed, as in a ridle, the Angel most
clearly opens in the interpretation of the heads and horns: so as it is
marvel why any should seek after any other sense of the Angels words, then
that which himself gives.

9 First then the heads are both seven hills, on which the woman sits, and
also seven Kings. The first is so clear a note of Rome as Grammarians know it,
and both are put here jointly, for clear demonstration what state he points
at; as also to show that the heads of that state (as they are Kings) must only
be taken of such as alwayas held that City, and not of such as are, or were
heads in bare title, neither abiding in that City, nor making it great and
glorious by their power, such as were the Grecian Emperors after the fall of
the western Empire. And much more ridiculously since, the Kings of Germany,
bearing the title of Roman Emperors, while they have not one foot within
Italy: yea, and of all Princes, who now domine within the compass of the old
Roman dition, brook the smallest portion thereof, and whatsoever either now
be or before was the Title of other yet seeing the Beast bearing up the
woman, makes her glory and grandeure; none can be esteemed for heads now,
but these, by whom she retains her credit, luster and pomp. Neither are
Kings here to be taken for so many persons, but for so many kinds of soueraign
governments, in course, ruling that state, according to the known frame of
Hebrew speech. Now, in exponing these seven Kings, he does interpret the
former dark speech, and leads us even by the hand, to the Dan. 7. 17.
time, and that state and condition of Rome in time, which here properly is the
Beast bearing the Whore.

10 The Beast had been in a sort, in the five heads who were fallen. It was
even then, in respect of the policy at that time ruling: but as the Beast here
is discribed, and specially to be understood, that is, as by him Rome
becomes the great whore, he was yet to come. The five fallen were Kings,
Consuls, Dictators, Decemuirs, and Tribunes. Caesar's the sixth head ruled in
John his days. A seventh was to come, which notwithstanding is not the Beast,
or head making this beast, as here it is set down. For that head was soon to
euanish: but the eight head in number, and which in a sort, is one of the
seven, has here peculiarly the name of this beast.

11 Of this head, three things are noted. First, that he is the eighth in
number and order. Secondly, that yet in a sort, he is one of the seven: to
show, how notwithstanding that eight are here counted, it stands yet true,
that the Beast had but seven heads. Not that it was one, and the same properly;
but for viue resemblance, Chapter 13. As making up the image of the Beast by
cure of the deadly wound, and bringing kingdoms and provinces in als great
subjection to Rome by the cup of fornication, (thus bearing up the Whore) as
did erst the former heads by force of Arms: so it is both the eight, and in a
sort the sixth, wherein the Beast had got a deadly wound, which this head
cures. For the lively resemblance in Monarchy, state, laws, rites,
vestments, etc. Read the donation of Constantine and Steuchus in defense of it.
This eighth head then is the Pontificality by which Rome is extolled and borne
up to be a Queen and Lady of Kingdoms, bewitching the world: and because in
the summarie speech, he had said that the Beast was to come, and seeing seven
heads had only been attributed to the Beast, whereof none of the six could
be he (as he is here proponed) lest hereby we should think that of necessity
the next head after Caesar's, being the seventh, behooved to be this Beast (the
Antichrist:) the Angel in great wisdom and plainness pulls us from that
thought, in showing that one was then to come, who yet was not he; for that
should soon be gone: but the eighth and last should be this Beast. I showed
on the 13. Chapter, that the seventh head was the Kingdom of the Ostrogothes:
to whose King Theodoricus, the Emperor of the East, with advise of Senate,
willingly bequeathed Rome and Italy, and sacro texit velamine, Sabellic. En.
(...). lib. 2.
in Signum reiab imperio concessae: and who of the Romans was received as their
lawful Prince, and by himself and his Successors reigned over it many years:
during which, was both peace and friendship betwixt them and the Emperors of
Constantinople, all the days of Zeno, Anastasius, and Justinius. The third note
of this eighth head, called peculiarly the Beast bearing the Whore, is, that
he goes to destruction. And in this, he is also singular from all former
heads, who albeit they all did fall, yet the beast in some sort remained. For
the State and credit of the Kingdom abode in some degree in the subsequent
heads. But this eighth head shall draw that whole state with him to utter and
everlasting ruin, and this is that which Chapter 19. is meaned, where it is
said, that the Beast and false Prophet are taken, and both cast in the Lake.
Whereupon many fondly imagine, that the Beast and false Prophet be two diverse.
But this is it which the spirit would show us, that the false Prophet who is
the head shall so fall, as the body of the state and Kingdom shall perish with
him. For none shall be able to cure his wound, or revive any image of that
state again, as he did the wound of the sixth head. So then, taken absolutely,
this Beast is Antichrist, that is, the Pontificality reigning over Rome, or the
Kingdom of Rome under the eighth head the Pontificality. When the Beast and
false Prophet are distinguished, it is but for explication, to show the state
or Kingdom, and who is head of it. And thus I show, that Chapter 13. were the
first and second Beast to be understood, as by this place is evident, where
the first Beast is only mentioned, and peculiarly called the eighth head, who
is also one of the seven, and not the seventh as most part make him: for so the
spirit had more easily called him the eighth and seventh, then one of the
seven, but that hereby he would lead us to know which of the seven he is said
in a sort to be. How far Theodoricus and his wise daughter after him
labored, See upon Chap. 13. Sect. 7.
that Rome might both recover and hold her ancient glory and magnificence,
albeit he seldom made refidence there: the Stories give clear Testimony.
From the fall of the Gothike Kingdom, the growth, pomp, and estimation of
that City has only been by the Pontificality, bearing it up, and by semblance
of the Lamb his horns, procuring to it worship of Nations. For otherways
says Steuchus, it had remained foedissima boum, porcorumque habitatio. So as,
since that time, to make any other the head or King of Rome, whereby she had
growth or honor, it is ridiculous, and against all evidence of story. The
Grecian Emperors, except an idle title, neither made any abode in that City,
neither ever durst openly attempt any further power therein then it pleased the
Popes to allow them. And such of them as at times did exercise any therein, it
was not only by surprise under false semblance, and presence of peace: but
their dealing also with it was in plain hostility as strangers. So as in
effect they were rather spoilers and rifelers then bearers up of her. The
French and Germane Emperors advanced her, but as horns of the Beast who
bears her up. Who, that he might the better push with them at his
pleasure, has ridiculously, fed them with idle titles, as he does his other
horns, whom he crowns and decrowneth as he lists. But he himself is this
Beast, bearing up this harlot.

12 Thus are his heads. The horns have many distinct and clear notes to show
the Beast, who, and of what time he is. Of their number, see upon Chapter 13.
Section 8. First then, these horns are crowned Kings: that inferior Rulers,
as Liuetenants, or Presidents of Provinces, be not here imagined. According
to the condition of this Beast, under the former heads, who themselves only
were crowned and not their horns. Secondly, their time of being is noted: that
they were not as yet risen, but were to come. Thirdly, they are not so many
persons in succession of one Kingdom, but so many Kingdoms, which all at one
time should reign, even with the Beast, under the eight head. The Beast,
Daniel 7. with ten horns, has no mention of heads: For that there, the
horns have the consideration of the heads of that Kingdom, wherein
successively should reign so many Kings. Here (which some Interpreters should
have better observed) this Beast has both so many heads, and besides, ten
horns by all^sion to that: because here the horns are not to be considered
as heads of the state, signified by this Beast, or sovereign Kings ruling it.
Which, if the spirit had minded, he had not attributed thereto heads also, more
then to that in Daniel. But the sovereign policies being expressed by heads,
the horns are put to express the strength of this Kingdom, in so many props
of her power: and that so clearly is uttered by the Angel, as it is wonder
what should make men to miss of his meaning: while he tells plainly, that
they are Kings, Which shall receive a Kingdom at one hour with the Beast.
Which cannot consist with the making them Kings of that same state, which by
the Beast is signified: so confounding heads and horns which the holy Ghost
has distinguished so clearly. Fourthly, their subjection to the Beast should
be voluntary, and with uniform and free consent: not enforced by Arms, as
was the servitude of Nations to the Empire, but by the bewitching power of the
cup of fornication, and these deceivable signs and wonders, Chapter 13. This
is the unity of the Church of Rome. This note also euinceth clearly, that
these horns are kingdoms voluntary subiecting themselves to the pontificality
and Roman Kingdom under him, and not so many successiue Kings of any, much
less of that kingdom, to which they gave their Kingdoms. Fifthly, they with
the Beast, should fight against the Lamb. But to their own confusion, for two
reasons. One, in the Captain, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. The
other in his Army, who are called chosen and faithful. Not that he needs any
army orforces to overcome these horns: but it is to show, that their fighting
against the Lamb should be in his members. Who yet should overcome in the
strength of their King, by whom they are effectually called, so, as their
calling confirms to them their election, and that by true faith wrought in
them, which is the victory wherewith they overcome the world: resting on their
Lord, and being 1. Ioh. 5. 4.
faithful to him even to the death. and this is not repugnant to that which
was said, Chapter 13: 7. For that ouercomming of Saints was not absolute either
in degree or time: but only the slaying of their bodies and bearing down of
truth for a space, Chap. 11. and 14. 12. Which, with them notwithstanding,
revived again, not only to the terror of their adversaries, but also to
their overthrow.

13 Thus is the Beast bearer up of the woman. Even the same, whereof Chapter
13. but that process of time, in the progress of iniquity, gives him, now,
two notes somewhat different from that. The one, is scarlet color, for
increase of cruelty, wherein, by this time, he has come to such height, as,
for that, he has now the Dragon his own color. Who before this, a space was
let loose, Chap. 20.
the thousand years of his restraint being expired: so as for bloody rage, now
this suffragant of his throne, ^arst like a Pard, is all of a bloody color:
and the Whore is drunk with the blood of Saints. The other note is, that
where, first, he had but his head busked with the name of blasphemy, he is now,
for growth of impiety and of sacrilegions usurpation of divine honor, full of
names of blasphemy. The head which at first was busked therewith, both waxing
therein, and defyling also all the body. So as, now it is high time to come out
of her. The Beast was, first, like a Pard; a cruel, yet a fraudulent Chap. 13.
beast, and less horrible to behold: But afterward more violent and raging.

The Whore borne up by this beast, is showed here, first by her great
dominion, touched in the beginning of this Chapter, and here now interpreted.
This dominion she has through the Beast, her bearer. Secondly, her judgment
is here summarily foretold, which at length is handled in the next Chapter.
And thirdly, in proper and plain terms is told who she is. Even, The City
which rules over the Kings of the Earth So plain a circumscription of Rome,
as the Adversaries are ashamed to deny it.

14 In her judgment, are three things. First, by whom it is. Secondly, what it
is. 3. How it comes on. It is, by the horns of the Beast, who shall work
her overthrow. What it is, is showed by a natural order. They shall hate her:
they shall leave her desolate, by defection from her, upon sight of her impiety
and abominations: they shall make her naked, pulling from her, her ornaments,
rents and clothing: they shall eat her flesh, feeding on her spoil as she was
facted and grown great with the spoil of Nations: lastly, they shall burn
her with fire. Now, here, we must not imagine that all these kings, who have
given their Kingdoms to the Beast, shall at one instant revolt: many still
cleaving to him till his last foil, after the Whore is burnt, and so made
pertakers of his judgment, Chap. 18. and 19. But the holy Ghost will tell us,
that her destruction shall be by these same kingdoms and states which have
drunken of her cup, and had been the stays of the Beast his kingdom, and
so, of her magnificence. And, what is done of any of these, is said,
indefinitely of all. For, her destruction must be by Western Princes, that
so, a way may be prepared for the East to embrace the Gospel. Hereof, in no
small degrees, we see the execut. on begun and well far advanced, and the
last degree is coming on quickly. How this so strange a case falls; that,
who were the horns of her power, and her darlings committing fornication with
her, should now turn to be her haters and destroiers, is showed, that it
comes by God his disposition and allruling providence: who, as in his
justice, he gave over these Kingdoms to the efficacy of error to believe
lies, for not believing the truth 2 Thessalonians. 2. So, in his own time, when his
judgment therein was fulfilled, for her just destruction who had so bewitched
the world, he should turn their hearts to hate her who had so long and
vildely abused them. Confer heerewith the 16. Chap. of Ezechiel.

15 Lastly, as I touched before, is told in so plain terms who this Whore
is, that the Romans are forced to confess it. Bellarmine lib. 3. de Pontifice,
cap. 13. Ribiera upon this book. The Rhemishe doctors are so straited, that
seeking shifts, they against a clear light bewray an evil conscience. See
their annotations on this place.

16 So then, by all the course of this Prophecy, yea and the Romans own
confession, this is manifest that Rome is the Whore. And so, by necessary
consequence, the seat of Antichrist his kingdom. Whereby it is that she is
the mother of Whootedomes, and Lady of Kingdoms: through herexaltation and
being borne up by the Beast. Neither shall ever the Jesuits be able,
confessing, once Rome to be this Whore, but of necessity to grant also that
the Beast must be the kingdom of Rome. Whereof, many of themselves perceiving
the inevitable consequence, fall next, for exepting the Pontificality from this
blot, to despute of the time. Some making Rome, under the persecuting
Emperors, to be the Whore: as Bellarmine in the place above cited. But, she
is, so, the Whore, and then, the Whore, as, and when she is borne up by this
Beast, which foolishly he divides. Others, reiourne this to a future time,
when as Antichrist arising, forsooth, Rhemists'on this place.
shall possibly expel the Pope out of Rome, and sit there. So, forgetting the
long boasted privilege of Peter his Chair: and while they seek to escape,
snaring themselves more; by granting that to be possible, upon the alleged
impossibility whereof, they long ago build al defense. But the holy Ghost,
evidently, here spoileth them of all shift, by clear demonstration: Whereby,
as Rome is cleared to be the Whore, and the kingdom of Rome to be the Beast:
so are we led, as it were, by the hand, to the time when: and particular state
of that kingdom, wherein it is to be taken for the Beast, here, and Chapter
13. described: and that by three infallible tokens. First, by a full and
perfect enumeration of all the heads (that is, sovereign sorts of Rulers) from
the first beginning of that state, to the last and utter fall thereof: and
therewithal telling us, that in none of the five fallen before John his time,
is that state, the Beast as he is here understood, or, consequently, Rome, the
whore: neither in the head then ruling, namely Caesar's: neither in the seventh
head, which, upon the deadly wound of the Beast in the sixth head, should arise
and soon euanish. But in the eight head, arising by cure of the wound, and in
that respect, one of the seven, which was to come out of the bottomless pit,
that kingdom is the beast under that head, the false Prophet. And therefore
the Beast here is peculiarly denominate by that head.

17 The second infallible taken is the singular and different manner of working
of the Beast and Whore, in that state and head, wherein, properly, the Beast
is to be holden for Antichrist, from all the former: and so properly,
competent to the last head, as can in no way agree to ame of the other. For the
horns in time of that head, under which that kingdom is peculiarly this
Beast, are crowed Kings, and such as are not subdued by violence or force of
Arms, but willingly and with one consent give their Kingdoms to the Beast:
being bewitched by the cup of fornication, and deceived by lying signs and
wonders under pretense of the Lamb his horns, Chapter 13. So as, then only
the kingdom of Rome is to be holden by this beast, when it is under such a
head, as, by whose domination, Rome be comes the Whore, that is, the
bewitcher of the world by superstitious and idolatrous worship, signs and
miracles, and pretense of Christian power and holiness. Not having or
pretending so much, a power to slay men's bodies, as, by poisonable error, to
sting and forment their consciences, Chap. 9. and bringing Kingdoms in
subjection, more by fear of conscience then force of Arms. Which is properly
to be the whore. For, under all the former heads, Rome was rather a murdering
fury, then an enticing harlot: drinking more the superstition of al other
Nations the^ propining any to them. Neither were any peoples subjected to her
willingly, but by compulsion and Arms. But then she became the harlot, when
under pretense of Christ his power, and by deceit of the cup of fornication,
she made Kings, voluntarily and with one consent, submit their Crowns to her:
so making up the image of the Beast.

18 The third proper note and token is, this Beast goes to destruction. For
under this last head that state and Kingdom must be undone for ever: and shall
not be as in the fall of the former heads, when in the next succeeding, it
held place: but this head shall so fall, as with him he shall draw that state
to eternal ruin. In which respect, it is said, Chapter 19. that the Beast and
false Prophet are both taken and cast into the fire. Thus, for a most clear
opening of all this Prophecy, the Holy Ghost here in this Chapter, has
joined the Beast, Head and Whore: and exponed so evidently in a huge wisdom.
To make us see, that what Chapter 13. he spoke of two beasts: what, through
the book, he speaks distinctly of the Beast, and the VVhoore, Babylon: of
the Beast and false Prophet: is all, but for clear explication of Antichrist.
What a King he is: of what Kingdom: of what time, and manner of working:
clearing the Kingdom, by the head: and both Kingdom and head, by the head
City of their power: with evident and infallible notes to take up the right
time and condition of all. So as the Romans, mocking our incertainety, (as they
think) whether the Beast, the VVhoore, or the falfe Prophet, be Antichrist,
bewray but their own ignorance, or malice, or both. For the Beast is
Antichrist: but so, and then, as, and when the head is a false Prophet: under
presence of the Lamb his power making Rome the VVhoore, and bewitcher of the
world. In which respect, the false Prophet is the Beast: the eight head and one
of the seven. And thus, the Beast is only Antichrist, as the Beast is the
eight head, even the false Prophet. And the false Prophet is Antichrist, but as
he is the Beast that is head of the kingdom of Rome. And Rome is the Whore,
but as she is borne up by this Beast, the false Prophet. How plainly the holy
Ghost tells this, take up in this argument.

19 That sovereign policy, ruling in and over the City, situated one seven
hills, and, in John his days, bearing rule over Nations: which in number and
order is the eighth head or sovereign policy, after the five fallen before
John, the sixth then ruling and a seventh to come, but soon to euanish: which
eight head recouereth, to the state he rules, the luff^e, estimation, and
subjection of Provinces, which by a deadly wound, in one of the former heads,
it had losed: thus reerecting, if not the same properly, yet a lively image of
the decayed state: and, for this respect, as he is the eight in course, so is
he in a sort, one of the seven heads and is peculiatlie the Beast: and, which
sovereign policy and eight head (peculiarly the Beast) works all, as a
Porphet and under pretense of Christ his power: and thus, induces the Kings of
the earth, voluntary and with free and vnanime consent, to submit their Crowns
unto him: so, procuring to his seat such account and credit, as the whole earth
drinks her superstitious and idolarrous worship: wherethrough she becomes
a great and mother harlot. And which eight soueragne policy or head, shall be
the last head of that kingdom, for that, in the fall thereof, that state shall
be destroyed for ever. That souerainge policy o^ head, is the Antichrist.

20 But the Pontificality is the sovereign policy or head thus, for place,
order and number in succession, manner and effect of working, here peculiarly
called the Beast: and which, as he is from the bottomless pit, and angel
thereof (...), so he, and with him, that state goes (...).

Ergo, etc. We speak not of conjecture: but as it is written, I believed and
therefore I spoke. We believe, and therefore speak, 2. Cor. 4. 13.
CHAP. XVIII.
THe great Whore was described in the former Chapter. Her judgment follows
in this: showed by three heavenly voices: in each whereof, the same is
magnifickly amplyfied, by the certainty, the instant performance, greatness.
and equity thereof. And peculiarly, in the last, by that, her ruin is
irreparable. The first voice is to the 4. verse. The second to the 21. And the
third to the end.

2 In the first voice, are the person denouncer, and the point denounced. The
denouncer, is an Angel, remarkable for gesture and dignity. His gesture is:
that he comes down from heaven. His dignity, in that he has great
authority; which is cleared by the effect, in that all the earth was lightened
with his glory. At the second degree of the out-breake of the light of the
Gospel, from under Antichristian darkness, Chapt. 14. an Angel denounced the
same which this does: but that, did flee through the midst of heaven: that is,
albeit swiftly, and in the public view of men, yet the clear perception, of
what he denounced, was far removed above their reach: the preaching of the
Gospel, not having then for clear evidence, the authority which since it
has, and daily more and more shall obtain, through the Angel, no more fleeing
far above (as these Chap. 14. in the reuerting, and that Chapt. 8 in the last
degree of decay of light) but now. in plenty of glorious light, as it were
coming down from the heaven, and lightning the earth with a near and evident
sight of that, which before was revealed, but far often This Angel then, is the
type of the clear light and powerful ministry of the Gospel, now in a near
degree, both showing clearly, and working powerfully, Antichrist his fall. The
ministers of light^, are of Christ, the true light, called the light of the
world: and their ministry Mat. 5. 14. 1. Cor. 3. Isai 52. 7. Romans 10. 15.
is glorious, even glorified as concerning the exceeding glory. For, how
beautiful on the Mountains, are the feet of them that preach good tidings?
etc. The description of this denouncing Angel, implies not only the certainty
of what he proclaims, as from heaven, and with great authority and evidence:
but also, the instant performance thereof; in that he comes down in such
abundance of glorious light, as Babel can stand no longer, no more then could
Sodom, after the Angel his downe-comming Genesis 18. 21.
to see i^ For Babel the glory of Kingdoms, shall be as Isai 13. 19.
the destruction of God in Sodom and Gomorrha. Therefore, the point denounced,
albeit it be the same in substance, which Chap 14. was threatened: yet here, it
comes in another degree of clear manifestation, certain performance, in the
persuasion of hearers, and near approaching execution: God now being to pass
by her no more, for she is come in remambrance before him.

3 Of this denounced point, is showed also the greatness and equity. The
greatness in these words, and she is become, etc. So to show a horrible
desolation: such as should not only make her waste and solitary, but also
detestable and abominable: as are ghostly and Elphrish places full of Panike
terror, and the ordinary retrait of Isai. 13. and 34. Ier. 50. Zeph. 2.
all these things, which both flee humane society, and the sight whereof, men
most abhor. The speech is from common sense, whereby we esteem these
desolate and foreleited places to be full of foul spirits: which resort most
in filthy rooms, as the damoniake of alegion abode Mar. 5.
amongst the graves. Whether their delight be in such places, or, if God in
his justice, so confine them, or, if in such places they appear most, to move
the more terror.

4 The equity of this great fall, is for bringing all the earth into the sin of
spiritual fornication; so making Nahum. 3.
it guilty of wrath: and that so far, as the greatest Kings were besotted
with her. While she by covetousness, and deceitful efficacy of error, so
makes merchandise of all men, as the ministers of her abominations waxed Kings
fellows, swimming in all abundance of wealth and carnal pleasure. And
therefore it is a just thing with God, that she who with false semblance, drew
all the earth after her, should be now no less abhorred, then is hell the
dwelling of Devils: that she who was the darling of Kings, committing
filthiness with them, should now be a receptacle of foul and filthy
spirits: and she who for frequent resort and multitude of trade, was not only
her self the Lady of Kingdoms, but also, made all her merchants rich, through
her superfluous luxury, should now, become so desolate and forsaken, as to be
the nesting place of all unclean and hateful birds.

5 The second voice from heaven, amplifieth and clears these same points of
certain and instant performance, equity, and greatness of her judgment: that
so, in the mouths of two or three witnesses, and from Deuteronomy. 17. 6 and 19. 15.
Ioh. 8. 17.
heaven, the matter may be stable. And this is by a threefold exhortation to
the Saints. 1. To forsake and come out of her, proper to such, as at this time,
shall yet be within her. So little reason has she at any time to glory in the
number of the Beast his name. 2. To repay her with just recompense. And. To
rejoice of her fall. The first, are stirred, first to come out of her, by
argument of a manifest peril to the remainers, of being infected with the
contagion of her sin, and consequently, inuolued with her in the same
judgment. For society in sin brings fellowship in wrath. Secondly, they
are stirred to do it with diligence, both for the greatness of the judgment,
and present effusion of wrath, which can have no delay, in respect her sin is
come to the height, she having so, still heaped sin on sin, that her
iniquity has mounted to the heavens: so as Ier. 51. 9. Ezr. 9. 6.
God, who for his patience and long-suffering, appears often to forget the
ways of men, is now to pour out on her such a full cup of wrath, as shall
well witness him to remember her sins, and to be a just repayer of
iniquity. Thus, as the exhortation to come out, by a voice from heaven,
shows the certainty of a present fall, like that of Sodom, when Lot was bid
of the Angels to come out of her; and that of Babel properly, when by the Isai.
48. 28. and 52. 11 Ier. 50. 8 and 51. 6.
Prophets, the people of Israel were exhorted to come out of her and be as the
hee-goats of the flock: so is both the greatness of her destruction herein
employed, like that of Sodom where was no remnant, and the equity of it is
clear, in the degree of her sin. The Angel whose voice Chapt. 14. succeeded
the denouncer, there, of Babels fall, gave sharp warning not to worship the
Beast, or receive his character. But, now absolute deserting Ier. 50. 40.
of Babel is needful, and even the name and number, are now dangerous.
Wherefore, come out of her, and remember Lot his wife.

6 The second point, whereto the second heavenly voice exhorts the faithful,
specially the ministers, of Babels fall, is to do the work of the Lord
diligently: for negligence therein is accursed; in all which, the equity,
greatness, and certainety, of her fall is showed. For, what is more equal
then retribution, and that every one receive according to their work? then, as
they have measured, that so it be measured to them again? what more just,
then who exalts her self, that she be brought low? and that she who has
wallowed in pleasures and carnal delights, receive torment and sorrow? what
more equal, then who presumptuously, glorying in her greatness and strength,
securely promised to her self perpetual stability, she find again
unexpected destruction? Now, how great again, shall the fall of Babel be, if
she receive double for her ways; and that so much the more, as by the hands
of these, whom she has highly wronged; thereupon stirred in just disdain
against her? if she be als far pressed down, as she 2 These. 2.
has exalted her self, whose fall shall be like her fall? if she receive
torment and sorrow according to her pleasures, what torment and grief shall
be comparable to hers? That this her judgment is inevitable, als well as just
and great, is clear in this, that it is God, even that great Lord of heaven
and earth that condemns her: and who then shall absolve her? wherein as the
inevitable certainety of her judgment is evident, so is employed the equity.
For, shall the Judge of the world judge unrighteously? the greatness also: for
it is a hard thing to fall into the hands of the Lord: before whom all Nations
are but as the drop of a Bucket, or as the dust of a Trebuschet.

7 For more clearing of her presumption, and confident glorifying her self, it
is expressed in her own speeches, and her judgment accordingly set down: I
sit being a Queen, and am no widow, neither shall I see Isa. 47.
mourning. The word Sit is Emphatike. Steuchus against Valla, pleading the
privilege of the Roman seat, affirms stoutly, that all Kings have by her
left unto them but the use and administration of their Kingdoms: and that the
right in property belongs to her, and she will be holden domina and regina.
Thus while they know not what they speak, the tongues and pens of these
Parasites are led to verify against themselves the truth of this prophecy.

8 Her judgments here specified are such, as befall the most distressed in
strightest sieges of Towns, when mortality, doole and famine, all jointly
consume, as it may perhaps fall that thus she be sacked. And these judgments
are amplified, as by the measure, so also by their manner of coming on, as
which come inexpected in one day. Not that in one instant she shall fall,
which Isa. 47. 9.
were a great relaxation to her grief: but to show two things. One, that her
fall shall have no turning, but from the time it begin, she shall fall still
till utter ruin. The other is, that even her last and full destruction shall
come far against her expectation, in a day whereof she shall not know the
morning. For albeit she feel already Isa. 47. 11.
her judgment begun, and in good degrees advanced, so as they are gnawing
their tongues for sorrow: yet she is still as Iezabel, who upon the very point
of her last fall, painted her face, and looked as a Queen: 1. King. 9. 30.
and like Baltazar and Babel properly, who although they were straitely
besieged, yet imagined nothing less Dan. 5.
then the surprise of their City; in so far, as that same night of their
final overthrow, they had given themselves to all manner of profane riot. So
Rome amidst her plague growing on, yet dreameth to her self a perp^uity. But
when she says, Peace, Peace, then shall come upon her sudden destruction.

9 That God stirs his children to recompense her according to her work, and
to render her double. We must not imagine, that either God louseth the raines
to carnal appetite of revenge, or yet is unjust in his judgments. For, first
we must consider, that their doing is warranted by commandment of God; in
execution whereof, as he will have no man remiss, so will he that we have him
and his honor single before our eyes: which even in our persons as his servants
may be interressed, and in that respect should move us with such motions, as in
Moses, David, Elias, Elisha, and other Saints we see are approved. In which,
as all carnal and private respects are damnable, so is negligence in God his
work accursed. Saul his pity of Agag was not only preposterous, 1 Samuel 15. 2
King. 20.
but profane, and brought the declaration of his reprobation. Ahab his foolish
pity of Benhadad bred him heaviness. Next, every man his calling must be
eyed: to the rule whereof, God restrains all our actions (for extraordinary
deeds warranted by extraordinary motions, are not ordinary, or to be drawn
into example) the Magistrate has another part then a private man. Therefore
every man ought to keep his Station, and all concur so to the downe-bringing
of Babell, as Israel had commandment to invade Jericho, who Joshua 6.
were not only to attend the Trumpet and Shoute, but to go up also each
straight before him from his own station, no where diuerting. Moreover, there
is a diverse consideration of that state ordained for destruction, and of every
particular member in it, of whom particularly we know not the counsel of God.
In the donble acquitall is no injustice for the double measure is in relation
to the wrong done to the Saints, and not to the merit of their sin against
God which is infinite, and the honor of God and due consolation of God his
Saints, require that she be recompensed to the full: for assurance whereof,
we must not look to the apparent possibility, or impossibility of means, but
to God the righteous Judge who is a strong Lord.

10 This great judgment of the Whore is yet amplified by a lively
representation of the mourning of her adherents upon the sight of her fall. As
by the contrary thereupon the godly are stirred to joy. The lamenters are of
three ranks. Kings, Merchants, and Seamen: who all have these things common,
Astonishment, Fear, and Sorrow: so much the greater, for the sudden and
unexpected fall of the Whore, whose greatness, might, riches, and magnificence
were so conjoined with the pleasure and delight of Kings, gain of Merchants,
trade and uphold of Seamen, as the world standing, who ever could have
imagined the fall thereof, and in one hour? Thus the sudden and strange case
breeds astonishment. The smoke of her burning, and terror of her torment
brings fear: so as how grieved soever with her fall yet: they stand back,
not daring to help her. Their sorrow arises to each order upon the special
consideration of their several interests. Kings sorrow for loss of their
darling and their pleasures. For these commonly delight in an easy worship
of man's invention, and of any can least submit their necks to the yoke of
Christ, which might restrain licentiousness. Ahab had hundrethes of Prophets,
but he could not abide Micheas, 1 King. 22. 8. and 21. 20. and 18. 17.
and held Elias for his enemy, and troubler of Israel. The two witnesses,
Chapter 11. vexed the earth. Princes most part are much given also to fleshly
liberty, whereof under the Popedom they had no restraint, so being otherways,
they showed themselves favorers of that state. Merchants sorrow for that
through her fall, none buy their wares any more: and they waxed rich only by
the abundance of her pleasures. To amplify this occasion of their grief, the
sorts of wares are recounted, thereby showing the wonderful greatness of her
trade, by which her Merchants behooved to be enriched, as having the trade of
all nations, and of all manner goods from all parts. All that serves for
glorious and princely attire, as gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine
linen, silk, purple, scarlet: or for delightful and sumptuous plenishing,
and fabric, as Thymwood, vessels of Iuorie, all vessels of most precious
wood, brass, iron and marble: or for pampering the person, and dainty fair,
as Cinnamon, odours, ointments, incense, wine, oil, flower, wheat Cattle,
sheep: or for royal and princely Port, as horses, chariots, servants. The
decay of all which from her, and so the matter of her Merchants sorrow is
closed up with a general, of all that her soul lusted after, all fat and all
pleasant thing, uttered in a sarcastik apostrophe to her self, for amplifying
her fall, and argument of their sorrow, so much the greater, as she should
never recover her losses.

11 Now albeit it be true, that Rome through her greatness and luxury,
makes great change to all Merchants, of these same wares properly taken, and
that her fall shall endammage many, who now live by ministering to her delights:
yet this is not here chiefly meaned. For neither are the great men of the earth
properly Merchants of these things: neither can her fall stay the sale of such
wares in the rest of the world. But all this Allegory is by allusion to the
prophecy of Ezechiel against Chap. 27.
Tyrus. VVhereto as to the most noble Merchant City in wares corporal, Rome is
compared for spiritual merchandise; wherein, as a glorious deceiving Whore, she
tradeth with such gain amongst all Nations, that her Merchants have gotten the
riches of the world, by selling of Pardons, Indulgences, Relics,
Soule-Masses, Bulls, Remissions. Dispensations, Confirmations, and infinite
other trash, wherewith they have now long time so bewitched the foolish world,
as in each Country they had, and somewhere yet have the half of the Kingdom.
For their Locusts stinging like Scorpions, with a pain Chap. 9.
less tolerable then death, made mad men search with loss of all things to
redeem that peace which they never showed them. The recent story of the state
of Venice, forced to contest with these Merchantes before they should devour
all, gives hereto a clear Testimony. What the Pope gained by Episcopal
Palles, annates, and extraordinary imposts, is well known. Besides the daily
great Market of al which things at Rome, and thousands living thereby: for
their greater commodity, Iubilies are, to the contumely of Christ instituted:
but that all their Market is much fallen through the drying up of her waters,
already in such measure, as they are gnawing their tongues for sorrow. And that
we may take up what sort of wares, and what kind of Merchants are here meaned,
the holy Ghost in a divine Artifice, closes all with the Souls of men. And
that none think according to the frame of Hebrew speech; and the like words
put in the cited place of Ezechiel, that hereby bondslaues should be meaned,
we have (...) put before to express that, and then the construction is
altered, (...), so giving clear note, that such Merchants are here to be
understood, as Peter speaks of 2. Epist. 2. and Panl 2. Cor. 2. 17.
Successors of Simon Magus.

12 The Seamen mourn, for that by her fall, their trade and life also fails.
And first, their astonishment with the reason thereof, and next, their
desperate sorrow are distinctly set down. When Merchants have no sale or
change, then of necessity ships lie at a full sea; for none fraught them
more, and the life of Mariners depends on the trade of Merchants. By these
then are meaned the rablement of inferior orders of the Clergy, which albeit
not in a like degree with the Merchants, yet lived all on this trade, and were
nourished with the magnificence of the Whore. And the holy Ghost to show their
swarming multitudes, as Locusts of diverse kinds, puts a heap of words in a
heavenly wisdom. Shipmasters, Occupiers in Ships, Mariners, all Seamen. This
Allegory clears what Chapter 8. is meaned by the sea, things living therein,
and ships. They had indeed a large Sea, and have occupied both busily, and
with great gain in it, but now all must fall. In all this, this is seen, how
miserable and unhappy is the condition of such as build their maintenance, and
moyen of life, on such trade or course of living, as agrees not with
godliness. For there particular either pleasure, or commodity makes them
enemies to God, and their own salvation. Kings seek to her for their
pleasures. Prelates, for that by her they are rich, honorable, and made great
in the earth Inferior orders, for that in her standing and magnificence is
their life. Thus the love of the wages of unrighteousness blinds men in God
his justice, to prefer lies to truth, and to remain endured enemies against
God and their own salvation. The Jews crucified the Lord of glory, for fear
lest all believing John 11. 48.
in him: the Romans should come, and take their place. Demetrius the
Siluer-Smith, for his particular Act. 19.
gain by ungodly Trade, resisted the Gospel, and put all Ephesus on an
vproare. Blessed is the man which lives on godly means, and loves not the
wages of iniquity.

13 The third point whereto the second heavenly Ier. 51. 48.
voice exhorts the Saints, is to rejoice for her fall; specially Pastors and
Teachers, who, as they felt most of her malice, so God gives them the greater
measure of consolation. This is the time denounced, Chapter 11. When the Lord
rewards his Servants the Prophets; etc. Now they are destroyed, who destroyed
the earth. Now the Dead are judged, and the blood of Saints shed first and
last, Chapter 6. 11. 16. is avenged on them that dwell on the earth, by final
and full vengeance, all being now perfected, who should be killed for Christ.
And by this reason they are stirred to joy, as accordingly in their song,
Chapter 19. they acknowledge. Not that God pousseth his Children to any corrupt
affection, but with pure hearts to rejoice for their own deliverance, and God
his honor, in the overthrow of his and their foes, as David. The righteous
shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, he Psalm. 58.
shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, and men shall say, verily,
there is fruit for the righteous, doubtless there is a God that reigns in the
earth. Thus the mourning of Saints is turned into joy, which never shall be
taken from them, and the rejoicing of the wicked porisheth, and they mourn for
ever.

14 The last heavenly voice, for clearing and confirmation of an irreparable
destruction, has a sign conjoined, from the 5. of Jeremy, whence and from his
50. much of all this speech is brought. The sign, is a great Millstone cast in
the Sea, the meaning whereof is showed, first in general terms, that so Babell
shall be thrown away, and never be found any more. Next more at large, in
singular points declared: concluding lastly in the reason, and so the equity
of her so great and irreparable ruin. In the Sign, almost each word has a
gradation; in that an Angel, a strong Angel, takes a stone, and a great
stone, even a Millstone, which he lets not bairely fall, but casts, and
with impetuous force, thrusts in the bottom of the Sea, whence nothing
ordinarily is recovered, much less a Millstone thrust from such a hand, and
with such force. So the Lord casts the sins of his Children in the bottom
of the sea, to be buried for ever with Babel. Thus is showed the irreparable
ruin of Rome. Much. 7.
And the same is amplified by pleasant speeches from Jeremy 25. to show an
eternal desolation: as of her, in whom never again shall be any thing for
stirring up pleasure, or showing triumph; no, not any thing serving for
commodity of life, as craftsmen: no, not for necessity of life, as providing of
necessary sustenance. Nothing but desolate darkness, with perpetual, and
fearful silence: for, as light is sown to the righteous in darkness; so
the Candle of the wicked shall be put out. Finally, no mean of propagation,
without which no state can endure.

15 The reason of all, is her bewitching of the whole earth with idolatry, for
her own pride and luxury, wherein she exalted her self, and made all her
Merchants rich: and herewithall, horrible cruelty, being not only a Whore, but
a bloody Whore; as not only the murderer of Saints, but the occasioner of all
bloodshed in the earth. So, not only in her self extremely sinful, but as
Jeroboam made Israel to sin, bringing sin on the world, and making it
sinful. The blood of Saints is evidently found in her, and this, if no more,
makes her guilty of all the blood in the earth, in that almost, all God his
wrath is for the Sanctuary. But besides this, what bloody war has been since
the Beast his stealing up out of the Earth, whereof she has not been the
vpstirrer; or which, her sin has not brought upon the world? whose
bewitching vanity and poisonable sting tormenting superstitious minds; for
near the space of two hundredth years, made the force and flower of the world
to fall by Millions, in the foolish Conquest of Jerusalem? whose sin loosed
these four Angels from Euphrates, after they had been a space in God his
patience bound up; at length, by Turkish fury, and poisonable Mahometane
error, to make utterly desolate the third part of the World? What war has
been in Europe, which she has not either raised or fostered? and whose
emissaries as Frogs by seditious and treasonable practices and suggestions,
presently disturb the peace of the Earth? therefore just and righteous are thy
judgments, O King of Saints.

CHAP. XIX.
THus has been the description of the Whore and her judgment. Follows now
thereupon, the joy of Saints: and that it may be full, the final overthrow of
the other enemies. Of the Beast in this Chapt. and Dragon in the next, for an
absolute victory.

2 This Chapter, has first, the joy of Saints, in their song of praise: and
next, the foil of the Beast. The song, for the form, matter, and event, is
admirable. In the form, are the singers, the strange manner of singing, and
the course or order of their song. The singers, according to the course and
degrees of the song, are three. First, a great multitude in heaven, Secondly,
the 24. Elders and 4. Beasts. Thirdly, the voice of a great multitude, as the
voice of many waters, etc. Stirred thereto by a voice from the throne.

3 By the first, a multitude in heaven, by all the frame of speech through this
Prophecy, are signified the Saints in common. In whom all and generally, the
destruction of the Whore, works this joy which breaks forth in
thanksgiving. Their manner of singing is, with a loud voice, both for their
force of affection in them selves, and for the aduowed open proclaiming thereof
before the world: and that, first in a general and uncouth word, they praise
God and stir all others thereto: and next, they utter special points of
praise, with the reasons, wherein is the matter of the song.

4 The general word is, Haleluiah, two well known Ebrew words, and of frequent
use in the Psalms: but never till now, in all the new Testament recorded. And
here are put sour times, not for any special holiness or mystery, that in
the frame, sillables, or letters thereof is contained, and for which, it must
be religiously kept untranslated, as the Romans, after a foolish and
cabbalisticke form, esteem and use it and others: but yet, it is not without
great purpose, and high mystery, that the faithful now, not only first,
begin their song, but also therein, so often in course, use this word, and in
Ebrew. Which purpose and mystery, to take up clearly, the occasion of this
song, and course thereof, as orderly it goes on, being compared with what at
length we spoke upon the sixth Vial, Chapt. 16. will evidently lead us. For,
by the judgment of the Whore, the way is prepared for these of the East; who,
upon the victory here ensuing over the Beast, shall celebrate the same, by
calling the place in Ebrew Armageddon, and mourning the mourning of Hadadrimmon
in the valley of Mageddon. And shall be brought with us Gentiles, to sing
Halleluiah. As the course and matter of this song show evidently. But we must
not esteem, that this first Halleluiah is sung by the Ebrews, albeit it be in
Ebrew, to waken us to aduert the mystery. For this first Halleluiah, the
Christians of the Geutiles do sing: only to show the way now prepared, by the
judgment of the Whore, for them to come in, and concelebrate the victory.
Neither thus, so much, for any such intention of the singers toward that end,
as that hereby, the spirit will show, that the fall of the Whore, and loud
praise of God, by Christians, for it, shall in a degree, waken up the East, and
Ebrews principally, and shall serve for a great step for them to come in to the
Church. And yet an other greater step is laid for them, and they more stirred,
upon the higher intending of this song by a second Halleluiah, for the
euerlastingnesse of her ruin. And yet more, by a Halleluiah of the Elders and
Beasts, falling down and worshipping him that sits on the throne. Wherein,
we must take heed, that we esteem not the multitude in heaven, and the
Elders and Beasts to be otherways diverse, then in distinct consideration, for
the more clear explication of the degrees whereby God wrought on, this great
effect. Which, as it shall be in a good degree promooued, by that common joy
and praise of Christians, such as confusedly, and suddenly, at the first
joyful event, is raised in all hearts: so, a greater and more effectual
degree thereof shall follow, when the praise hereupon, shall be solemn, in the
Church assemblies and public actions thereof: which is meaned by the song of
the Elders and Beasts, who are the type of the Church, as for solemn and
lawful worship, it is ordered, in the Beasts going before, and elders
following them: having God his presence in his gtacious dispensation of the
spirit, word, and faithful ministry thereof: such as (albeit it has not
always appeared to the eyes of men of the earth) yet God had at all times as
by conference of the 4. and 11. and 14. Chapters herewith, is manifest. When
this Church thus, for a lawful ministry, serving God in the communion of
Saints, is hid from the world, then none hear or learn their song but the
sealed Virgins. But at this time, their Halleluiah and public solemn praise,
shall be seen and heard widely, even to the wakening of the East thereby. For
it is now a long time since it was said to the revived Chap. 11.
witnesses, Come up hither. The 144000. sealed ones are said Chapt. 14. to
sing a new song before the throne, Elders, and Beasts: not that the 144000. are
one thing, and the Elders and Beasts another. But, as the 144000. are put to
express the state and condition of the true Church, in Antichrist his
usurpation; so they are said to sing, before the Throne, Beasts, and Elders. To
show, that albeit the world perceived it not, even then God had still a Church,
in the midst whereof he dwelt, and had in it a ministry, and was worshipped
lawfully, in the assembly and communion of Saints. For this it is, that through
this whole Prophecy, howsoever, to express the diverse conditions of the
Church, sundry and diverse types are used; yet this, of Throne, Beasts, and
Elders, ever holds in all. Thus then, the first common and confused joy and
praise, thereupon, is a double degree, (according as it rises upon the Whores
eternal fall) and effectual, to waken. But, when even these same, in solemn
assembly, professedly praise God; it both inhanceth the service done, as done
in the Sanctuary; and shows a deeper sense and regard of the benefit, moving
that duty in the hearts of the praisers: as also, the public, well ordered,
and holy exercise, in the Congregation, stirs more, them who are without,
to reverence, and conversion, then common and private carriage, Psalm. 5. 7. and
1. Cor. 14. 24. 25. These same two degrees are, Chap. 11. Where, upon the sign
given by the Trumpet, and preconceiued joy of these same events to ensue, this
same praise is summarily sung. Now then, this third Halleluiah, of the Elders
and Beasts, falling and worshipping him that sits on the Throne, is a nearer
degree of vp-stirring, and step of in-comming, of Ebrewes and Orient, to sing
Halleluiah with us. But lastly, the voice from the Throne, even God his own
powerful voice, shall fully waken them from their deadness, and pull
perfitly, the veil from their hearts, pouring on them the spirit of mercy and
compassion, and taking from them their stony hearts, that they may see him whom
they pierced. And 2. Cor. 3. 16.
this is called peculiarly, the voice from the Throne, to note God his
powerful working of their illumination and full conversion at this point,
whereto their hearts, by the victory of the Christian Church, and praise
offered to God therefore, were in some good degrees, before, prepared and
mollified. So as now, all the servants af God, all that fear him, both small
and great, shall raise up a song to God, for multitude, majesty, and noise,
admirable: for exceeding great power and motion of spirit, full of thundering:
for newness of matter, passing joyful. For raising of this great Halleluiah,
a strange order of working (as would appear) is here set down. For, where it
might seem, that according to the ordinary dispensation of all grace, the
voice should, from the Throne, have gone first to the Beasts and Elders, and
from them to the multitude: in a heavenly wisdom, the first motion is from the
multitude, next, from Beasts and Elders, and lastly, from the Throne: to show
this great work (as I have showed) at last, by God his own power, fully
effectual. The order is from I say, A voice sounds from the City, a voice
from the Temple, the voice of the Chap. 66. 6.
Lord who recompenseth his enemies. Then, Sion before she traveled, brought
forth her children, and before her pain she was delivered of a man child.
Then, The earth was brought forth in a day, and a Nation was borne at once.
Confer diligently, and epsy deep wisdom.

This voice, is to all Gods his servant, to all that fear him both small and
great, the time of whose reward is now come, when God destroieth them who
destroyed the earth, Chapter. 11. Now, Rachel barren while Lea bare children,
shall break forth in the thousands of Manasse, and ten thousands of
Ephraim. So, by this voice from the City, from the Temple, and lastly, from
the Throne; even from him Who fully recompenseth his enemies, is raised, for
multitude of singers, for manner and matter of song, an Helleluiah of a
wonderful note. While, not only, a great multitude even all the sernants of
God, small and great, Jew and Gentile do sing it, but also their song is like
the voice of many Waters, and as the noise of great thunders; not as these Cha.
14. which none heard but the sealed ones: but Chap. 14. Sect. 3.
such as shall fill the world with astonishment, and make the heavens resound.
So sweetly and mightily shall the Harpes of them, whose receiving shall be
life from the dead, be tuned up, with us Gentiles, to praiseour common Savior.

5 Thus, for clearing the mystery here implied, having showed the form, in
the singers uncouth manner, order, and course of this whole song: Now let us
return and first consider the matter of all, and then the event in John.

6 The matter of the song in the first three Halleluiah, and two degrees of
singers, is all one. In the last Halleluiah and last singers, when all small
and great sing, it is larger. The song of the first singers has two parts, and
accordingly, to show the rising of their affection, the word Halleluiah is
doubled. The first part has the special points of praise, and reasons
thereof. The special points; are, Salvation, glory, honor, and power, etc.
Thus in joyful song professing, that the only praise of their salvation, the
only glory, that is, the estimation and high account they have God in, as
only author of all their good: all the honor, that is, all dutiful worship,
which according to that estimation and account they owe, are due to him only.
Lastly, they acknowledge his only power and strength in all their deliverance,
and overthrow of their foes. This song, is the same in argument, with that
Chap. 7. Salvation is of our God and of the Lamb. The reasons of this their
praise, are first, generally given, and next, specially accommodare to the
present matter. The general is, that his judgments are true and just, in
relation to his promises and nature: and accordingly in the special case here
meaned, the truth of his judgments is clear, in that the Whore is judged and
destroyed: as he promised, not only to destroy her, but also all that do
evil to the Sanctuary. The justice and equity, is manifest in her sin, who
was a great Whore; and therewithal, the corrupter of the whole earth: being,
both her self, extremely sinnfull, and inducing others to sin: next,
extremely cruel, as in whom all the blood of the earth was found, and who,
specially was drunken with the blood of Saints. Now, God is a requirer of
blood, and singulary of his holy ones, whose death is precious in his eyes.
This, both truth and justice of God, in this special act of the Whoores
damnation, is yet more cleared in the second part of their song: whereto they
are stirred, by the consideration of her everlasting fall, so as they never
fear her deceit or cruelty any more. And, this raises their affection to a
new Halleluiab, so, upon the more clear sense of the greatness of the
benefit, doubling the praise. The foolish knows it not, and the unwise man
understands not, that the wicked flourishes as the grass, but he shall be
destroyed for ever.

7 The second order of singers affirm the same matter, in the word, Amen, and
sing the same praise in Halleluiah.

8 In the third order, as the singers are more, and the note higher, so is the
matter of their song somewhat larger: as which, has not only relation to the
judgment of the Whore, as the former parts of the song, but also to the
subsequent story, both of the enemies overthrow, and graceful state of the
Bride thereupon: both which are here summarily celebrate, and largely after,
through the book exponed. The first, in this, that now the Lord reigns, for
they are destroyed who usurped the Kingdom. The other, in that the Bride is
prepared. The destruction of the usurpers, is henceforth in this and the next
Chapter: the Bride prepared, Chapters 21. and 22. Hereupon, all are of other,
mutually exhorttd to joy and gladness, as well as to the praising of God; for
that The Lamb his marriage is come, etc. Wherein, as there is huge matter of
Gods praise, so of exceeding joy to themselves in their own good from him.
This marriage, contracted of old, was come in a great degree, when the
Bridegroom came into the world, but they who were bidden, refused to come, and
amongst those, who were brought in to the wedding, one wanted a wedding
garment, and Matthew. 22.
thereupon, is cast out into utter darkness, even the lake of fire and
Brimestone. But now, at this point here celebrated, the marriage shall come in
a nobler degree, when God, by a voice from the Throne, shall turn their hearts
who refused, now to come in: that, as their casting of was the riches of the
Gentiles, so their receiving, may be Romans 11.
much more the life of the world from death, by so strange and wonderful a
change as shall make, in a manner, a new heaven and a new earth, in which, they
shall have greatly Isa. 65. 15. 16, Cant 8.
to rejoice and be glad. When both sisters, as well the little sister, which
had no breasts, as the other, are spoken Eze. 37. John 10. 16.
for and received. That the Shepherd may be one, and the sheepfold one. When
in that day, there shall be one Lord over all the earth and his name one. This
is that number Zach. 14. 9. Isai 54. 5.
innumerable, Chapter 7. of al Tongs, Nations and Languages, with Palms in their
hands and clothed in longwhite roabes, etc. This is that Jerusalem from heaven
wherein the heathen nor any unclean thing shall enter no more: which, now shall
be perfectly adorned with such fullness of graceful and quiet state, al being
performed, whatsoever the Lord by his servants the Prophets had promised, that
she has as a Bride perfectly busked, but to attend the last and full act of
the marriage, to enter into the marriage chamber, and eternally enjoy her
spouse. This goodly state in grace, upon full overthrow of all troubles,
described most goodly, Chap. 21. and 22, is the finishing of the mystery of
God, Chap. 10. When a Bride is perfectly ^usked and trimmed, wanting none of
her ornaments, then nothing remains, but the solemn acts of the marriage, to
enjoy her Lord. So, the reason of the speech, is plain from common use.

9 This her preparation, that we may understand it not to be of herself, (for
the Lord will answer her before she Isai 65.
ask) is showed to be in her attire. Whereof is noted, whence she has it,
and what it is. She has it by free gift of the Bridegroom. For, what a Bride
we are, by nature, see Ezechiel 16. and not only is the garment given her,
but, which is to be marked, the putting on thereof is given her also: as, which
she can no more put on, by her self, then she can purchase it. What this
garment is, in showed, first, figuratively, and then in proper terms.
Figuratively, it is fine linen pure and shining. This linen has two
properties. It is pure, because Jesus Christ given us, of the father to
justification, whom by the gift of faith we put on, is pure, spotless, and
undefiled: and makes us pure before God. This is justification of faith
properly. The second property is Shining; for as it is spotless and pure, so
has it a glorious luster, to show, that Christ is not only put on to
justification, but also Philip. 2. 15.
to glory, and that in two respects, One, in that he sanctifying us we shine
here as lights in the midst of a froward generation, showing forth the
virtues of him that has called us: so glorifying God, witnessing to the 1.
Pet. 2. 9.
world our justification, and even strengthening our own souls in the
certainety of our election: while we declare our faith perfect by our works,
even as our works, thereupon shine and are approved, because faith works
together with the work. For whatsoever is without faith is sin, and this is
that justification whereof James Chapter 2. to express both, the word is
plural, (...). The other respect of shining is, in that as we put on Christ to
justification and sanctification, so also to full glory at length with
himself, our corruptible bodies being made conform to his glorious body. The
Jews first, seeking to establish their own righteousness Romans 10.
which is by the Law, (so like Adam and Eua, making garments to themselves)
fell from the righteousness of Genesis 37.
God, but now God turns their hearts to prepare and trim themselves with the
Bridegroom his gifts (as was Rebeccha with the ornaments brought from her
husband, both given her; and put on her) counting all Genesis 24. Philip. 3.
things loss to be found in Christ; that is, not having their own
righteousness which is by the law, but the righteousness of God, which is by
faith in Jesus: which, and application thereof, are both the f^ee gift of God.
And the holy Ghost so coucheth the words, as no place is left to cauillation.
For he says not our Iustifications are the fine linen, but the fine linen
given us is our iustifications.

10 Thus was the song marvelous, for strange form and matter. Now follows
the strange event in the Apostle; wherein come to be observed, the occasion and
event it self. Albeit the whole matter, and manner of the song occasioneth
this event: yet most specially it follows, through the Angels singular care,
and manner of confirming John in the greatness and truth of these matters:
even therein implying, that they are so wonderful, as men would hardely
believe that such things could come to pass. He confirms John by
commandment, and by affirmation. The quality of the commandment gives of it
self, to presume assuredly Chap. 14. 13. Isai 8. and 30. Abak. 22. I^b. 19. 23.
both some great, and also a certainly determined case: as which he
commands him to write, both for regard of the matter, as also for sure
preservation, and lasting record thereof, as which most assuredly should fall
out. He commands to write one special point, which yet implies all, that
they are blessed who are called to the Supper of the Lambs marriage. Which
blessedness as it must be restrained to the effectual calling (many being
called who are not chosen) so here, the Angel will stir John and all
Christians in John his person, to the consideration of a singular blessedness
of this time, through the great efficacy of the voice from the Throne, and
obedience wrought thereby in them who first refused; and no doubt, of the
Orient, by and with them. A blessedness was commanded to be written, Chapter
14. but that was of suffering, wherein they were even blessed. Here the case
varieth. For now all shall suffer, who come not to the Lamb his Supper, and
shall be made a Supper to the fowls of Heaven, verse 17, Now the tears shall
be wiped from the eyes of Mourners, and the destroyers of Chap. 7. 17. and 21
4. Isai 25. 8. Chap. 11. 18. Psalm. 2. Chap. 13 10.
the earth shall be destroyed. The Heathen were angry, now the Lord is angry
in his course, which if it kindle, Blessed are all that come to him. Now they
who did slay with the sword, are slain by the sword: and the Captiuers are
captiued. For now, God takes his kingdom Chap. 11. 15.
by the evident overthrow of his enemies, and exaltation of his Church, having
his name written, even on his garment and thigh. So blessed in effect are they,
who come to the supper of the Lamb his marriage. The Angel, next confirms
John by affirmation, that these words of God are true. Thus wakening up John to
consider rare matter, whereof he so earnestly affirms, that the words are
true, and for assurance of their truth, that they are of God or God his words.

11 Now, besides the song in it self wonderful, this care of the Angel to
confirm John, and waken up his spirits by so singular a commandment, and so
peremptory an asseueration, so rauisheth the heart of the Apostle with
excessive joy of so good news, that he was Chap. 22. 8.
(for a notable document of humane infirmity in so great an Apostle) about to
have worshipped this Angel. Which attempt how unlawful it is in it self, and
how unpleasant to the Angel; First, his interdiction well shows in such
haste and concise form of speech, as commonly men use, upon care to prevent
some instant and detestable evil. When fear and solicitude ^uffer not to
speak at length, or a full sentence (...). Next, he strengthens his
interdiction with strong reasons, one taken from his own condition, to whom
this worship was offered, as which was not capable thereof, being but a
servant, and not only his (left some prerogative might be imagined in the
Apostle, to stay that which of an other mighthaue bin offered) but even a
fellow servant of his brethren, who had the testimony of Jesus: his greatest
honor, and chief scope of al his service, being Christ and his knowledge, to
minister the same, without which he were nothing, and therefore, albeit of
different nature from John, and other Christians, yet in condition, and end of
calling but their fellow-seruant: they having the spirit of Prophecy as he
had. The other reason is from the person of him, who only is to be worshipped
and served, according to the law alleged by our Lord against Satan. Now it
might probably Math. 4. 10.
appear, that herein, yet some further thing were employed. For this Angel
being the type of these ministers, who shall be the shew^^ (...) pa^sators of
this huge mea^ure of powerful lig^ (...) (...), for so wonderful effects; and
John here ba^^^g the person of common Christians of that time: (...) may seem,
that the rare and excellent graces of the Ministers, who shall then be
furnished with a golden (...), would so far Chap. 21. 15.
miscarrie weak Christians, in admi^^tion of their gifts and working, as to
attribute (...) unto them, if their own fidelity and holiness (...) not let
it. And as this gives us to expect yet goodly things; so herein is a close
warning of humility in the one, and circumspectnesse in the other, to give all
glory to God. But hereof I dare determine nothing, fearing still to be curious
in so divine an Argument, wherein I have choosed rather to hold up coniecturall
suggestions, then appear irreverently to handle such mysteries.

12 Thus we have heard the song of Saints, first upon the Whore^ destruction,
and next more mightily, and of more intended higher, upon preception of full
victory over the other enemies, and the Church her graceful state thereupon:
which so ravished the Apostle, as he had almost miscarried. Now, are the other
victories showed, and goodly state of the Bride thereupon. And first, through
the rest of this Chapter, is the foil of the Beas^bearer up of the Whore, and
no question, but now highly chafed with her fall.

13 In the victory over the beast, are the description of the parties, and the
event of the battle, The party victorious is magnifickly described; first in
his person, army, weapons of war, and his working by them: and next in his
Herald. His person, by great properties, and many agreeable to his many and
great names. First, his coming forth declares him a heavenly personage, for
he is from thence. Of great majesty, coming forth in abundance of light: as
to whose outmarching, the heavens are cast wide open. A greater degree of light
then hitherto has been mentioned, so as the sign of the son of man is clearly
seen in heaven. Oh that thou would Math. 24. 30. Isai 64. 1.
break the heavens, and come down. His administration at this time in
Antichrist his full overthrow, shall be in exceeding great euidency of light
and power.

14 He sits on a white horse for fidelity and truth: and namely for these
points of his administration, wherein his fidelity and truth are now specially
to be showed: in judging and fighting; for all which respects, he rides, and
on a white horse: according to the state of a Judge, and triumphing glory of a
victorious VVarrious. He is also a faithful and true witness, Chapter 1. And
a faithful High Priest, Hebr. 3. But here he is to show his fidelity and
truth, in judging and fighting. Now the time of his redeemed is come, and the
time of the dead that they be Isai 63. 4. Chap. 11. 18.
judged, and such destroyed who destroy the earth. In all which he both
judges, and fights righteously, for he is pure when he judges, and just
when he speaks. This Psalm. 51. 4.
indgement is not that last and general, but here the special, of these
enemies of his Church is meaned: whom he is now to overthrow, so as they shall
never be any more able to trouble Sion, but their ruin shall hold on, till at
last they be for ever adjudged to endless torment. He rode on a white horse
from the first outgoing of the Gospel to conquer, Chapter (...). and to
deiect the Dragon from heaven, Chapter 12. when he and his Army fought to
that effect: but this is the last and noblest act of his riding for the Dragon
and his Vicars utter destruction.

15 Now to judge righteously, is requisite not only a righteous disposition,
but also a wise heart to discern: for often Judges who are in mind set to do
righteously, yet ignorantly give wrong judgment. But no such thing can befall
him, whose eyes are as a flame of fire. Pure, piercing, purging, and searching
hearts and reins, from Psalm 139.
whom nothing can be hid, for even the darkness is light before him. And as
for judging, so also, for fighting 2 Kin. 18. 20.
(as Rabsace though profane, yet pertinently says in that) Counsel and
strength are for the war. This Captain then who sees the thoughts of his
enemies, before they be hatched in their hearts, has no peril to be deluded
or circumuented with stratagems: or as often befalls otherwise, expert
warriors, through want of intelligence, to slip opportunities. If Elisha, 2
King. 6.
by a ray of the light of this Captains flaming eyes, was able to discover,
and so disappoint what the King of Aram consulted in his secret Cabinet; what
may this Lord do, who forms the heart?

16 With wisdom he has also great authority, as having on his head many
Crowns. Both, for that he is King of Kings, and also for his many victories,
specially in this his last war. Which how peculiarly is respected, his
Crowns are all on his head. For he stands not by crowned horns, as the
Beast, but all his authority and strength is in himself, and of himself, and
he in this his strength and power, now comes to take the Crown from the
head of the King of Ammon, to set it on David his head. The Beast now must
forgo his 2 Sa^. 12.
Triple Crown, Christ his proper honor wherewith he has blasphemously
attired his head.

17 Being thus able to see all, and of authority to conquer all: he has yet
a name written which none knows but himself. And this name is so much the
more maruailous, and has the more clear note of his Greatness, that being
written, as both a sure and permanent name, and also exposed to be read, yet
none knows it but himself. And what is he not able to do, who seeing, and
by matchless authority ouerruling all, yet is set above the reach of all? his
state, counsels and ways being known to himself only: as whereof no flesh
is capable. So insearchable are his ways, and his judgments past finding out
according, as in consideration of one special event of this his judging and
fighting at this time. Paul exclameth: and the sealed Book no creature was
able to look on. Romans 11. cap. 5


18 That none imagine these to be idle Titles, in name only, he is also a
practiced warrior, and now specially come forth to show, how mighty he is to
save. For this, his garment is dipped in blood, even the blood of his enemies; to
note a huge slaughter. He is now to tread the Wine Press of God his wrath. He
has long looked if any would help, but there was none to help, none to
uphold, Chap. 11. Isai 63.
therefore his own arm now shall help him, and his own wrath sustain him:
the day of vengeance is now in his heart, and the time of his redeemed is come.
And accordingly, as he who speaks justly, and is mighty to save, he is
called the word of God. Not only for that he is that word which was in the
beginning with God, and was God: but also, and here specially, because he is
that true one, who speaks and performs, as who, both speaks justly, and
is mighty to save. For this read garment and name agreeable to it, See Isai
63. and weigh the place.

19 Such is the Captain of the Lord his host. The inhabitants of the earth
following the Beast, Chapter 13. Wondered, and in wonder exclamed, Who is like
the beast? who is able to fight with him? Here I think he has his match and
more. But these earthly ones see not the Heavens, and so go on blindfolded to
their own destruction. His army is in his own Livery. He needs no army,
but his army has need of him. For he is their glory, their strength, their
armor, their victory, and all: In his strength they fight and over come. They
are all horsed, as, who for dignity are Judges and warriors, like their
Captain. They are also faithful and true, in, and by him. They are all kings
and priests clothed in pure and shining silk. This is a blessed Captain, who
conformeth all his followers in glory and dignity to himself. Alexander was
foolish to glory in his Argyraspides: here is a Captain of high note. In
opposition to the earthly ones, on the other party, they are called the host of
heaven, where there conversation Chap. 12. 12.
is, even while they are in the world, but not of the world.

20 The weapon of this great Captain, whereby he works and fights, is the
sword of his mouth. With Chap. 11. 2. Psalm 2. Chap. 14. 20.
it, he smites the Heathen, enemies of his Church, treaders down of the holy
City: crushing them in pieces, with an iron Mace. And he treads the
winepresse of God almighty. Here now, the treaders are trodden down. Thus,
with mouth and hand, he fights, and Osea. 6. 5.
with feet, downe-trampleth all. How so strange effects of bloodshed, and
ouerturning the whole state of the earth, are attributed to the sword of his
mouth, is clear Chapt. 14. 17. 18. where an Angel, armed with a sickle,
comes out of the Temple, and is stirred to cut down the grapes of the earth,
by one coming from the Altar, having power over fire. And Chapt. 15. where the
Chap. 16. 2 These 2.
Angels of the last wrath, receive their Vials from one of the four Beasts;
and come to execution out of the Temple; like as the voice commanding it, is
from the Temple. By the breath of this Lord his mouth Antichrist must be
consumed.

21 This his fighting, to the foil of all his foes, makes him yet a name. The
King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This he was at all times. And even from the
day Heb. 1. Phil. 2.
of his ascension was always seen of his own, crow^ed with glory and honor.
God having exalted him above all name that is named: so as all knees must bow,
and every tongue confess him to be the Lord. Yet he gets this name, at
this time, in a special manner, written on his garment and thigh. So as now,
it becomes manifest to the view of all: his power and strength kything
clearly in this victory, and wonderful sequels of it. This is that same,
which in the song was said, the Lord God almighty has reigned. And Chapt. 11.
The kingdoms of the world are our Lord his and his Christ's. This is his
sitting on a white cloud, Chap. 114. even the manifestation of his judgments,
Chapt. 15. 4. Rome in great derision, when they crucified him, set over his
head, in three Languages, This is the King of the Jews. And the Jews,
counting it scorn and high disgrace, John 19^
to have him called their King, entreated the alteration of the words, in that
he so called himself. But now, by the final and everlasting overthrow of the
Kingdom of Rome, and by conversion of the Jews, to mourn for him whom they
pierced, he shall gloriously manifest himself, and be acknowledged, not
only King of the Jews, but also King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This name,
he has written on his garment, as great Kings and high Captains have their
imperial garments, whereby they are discerned. On his thigh, not so much for
that ordinarily, the sword, weapon of the victory, is girded on the thigh: but,
for that in Scripture speech, a man his strength is placed commonly in his
losnes and Psalm. 45.
thighs, (now it is his own strength that helps him) and therefore, it was
a token of subjection and servitude, to put the hand under the thigh. Which
custom, Aben-Ezra witnesses to have continued still amongst the Indians Genesis
24. and 47.
and Ethiopians till his time. And therefore, his name is also written on his
thigh, because all the world now have to put their hands under it, and swear
him homage. This Captain, wrestling with Jacob, to make him know he was his
Lord, and that all his strength was Genesis 32.
of him, he did strike him with a note of infirmity in the thigh.

22 Thus was the description of the great Captain of the heavenly host, in
himself, his army, armor, and manner of fighting. Now, follows his herald
or trumpet. Who is remarkable for his standing place, and for the tenor of his
proclamation. He stands in the Sun. To note exceeding great light now, of
the Gospel and preaching thereof, wherein the preachers should clearly see,
and confidently proclaim Antichrist his ruin. For great measure of light, the
Apostolic Church, in the woman, Chapt. 12. was clothed with the Sun. We see
to the praise of God, and evidence of this Prophecy, light already grown in
great degree, as no doubt, but for this sight and great effect, it shall yet
grow more: so as the light of the Moon shall be Isa. 30. 26.
as the light of the Sun, and the light of the Sun seuenfold.

23 The tenor of the proclamation, in a figurative speech from Ezechiel,
shows so certain, and an exceeding great destruction of the Beast and his
aiders: as they, their states, great rooms, rents, and substance, should be a
prey: and that in such degree of havoc, as all, given to reiffe, or seeking
after prey, should be filled. I showed Chapt. 17. what it is to eat the flesh
of the Whore: but here, is such a strange ranuersing of the state of the
world, as no doubt, falls by that earthquake of the seventh Vial. And out
of all question, the total ruin of that state, must change the face of the
world, in so great endeavors of hell and heaven, for it, and against it,

24 Thus is the party victorious. Follows the adversary, and his foil. The
adversary, to any that sees not him, who judges and fights righteously,
will appear great. Even that wonderful Beast, Chapt. 13. bearing up the
Whore, Chapt. 17. and now, in great chafe at her fall, by his frogs,
gathering the Kings of the earth Chap. 16. 14.
Armageddon. The first party was from heaven, and his host heavenly. Here, the
leader, is the Beast of the bottomless pit, which was opened for his
outcomming, as were the heavens for the others, and Chap. 9. 11.
his hosts are all earthly. For, albeit many of his horns have fallen away
from him ere now, and joined to the host of heaven: yet, he is even at this
point, through the diligence of his frogs, strengthened with many Kings.

25 So, are the parties. The event of the battle, in the Beast his foil, is
declared in few words: without any mention of a conflict; but, of a proud and
obstinate purpose to fight against the rider on the white horse. For they shall
be blind and obdured to the end: as is clear by the effects, in them, of the
Vials, Chapt. 16. And the word (...) he was intrapped or snared. Implies in
it, as an easy victory, for the part of him that rides the white horse; so a
sudden and unexpected foil, to the Beast and his followers. For he dreameth of
perpetuity, as also staying upon him the Whore. I sit being a Queen and am no
widow, and shall see no mourning, Chap. 18. 7.

26 Their judgment is distinct, according to the diverse quality of the
parties. The Head, Beast, and false Prophet, are cast in the lake of fire and
brimstone, and that a live: to show a most horrible, and recurelesse judgment,
by allusion to that of Sodom; and of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, who went down
alive in the pit. Even eternal destruction and torment. The followers, Nom. 16.
are slain by the sword of the Lord his mouth, to the loss of all their
glory, and worldly state, which is made a prey to others. Only, by this
difference, to show, how this great Captain, judges and fights righteously,
giving to each according to the degree of their sin. For, no doubt, but even
at this point, many shall follow the Beast, and fall from their estates by his
fall: whom yet, by destruction of their flesh, the Lord may reclaim from the
full degree of his punishment; in lightning them to see the truth. As, many
also shall drink with him of the cup of endless wrath.

27 That the Beast and false Prophet are here made two, is only to show, the
ruin of the Head and State with him. For, as the false Prophet, ruling over
the State, is the Beast; so being distinctly considered from the State, he is
the false Prophet. As the first and second Beast are Cha. 13 distinguished but
for explication. So this is put, to show in such sort the fall of the false
Prophet (the eight head and one of the seven, the beast with horns like the
lamb making the image of the Beast by cure of his deadly wound) as state and
all shall perish eternally. For, as this Beast has some note from all the
four in Daniel; so in the destruction of this, the spirit alludeth to that of
these. Who all, so fell, as yet, in the destruction of the last, which was
burnt with fire, the final overthrow was of the^ all; the state of the former,
in some sort remaining in the succeeding Beast: as this Beast here falling in
the first heads, yet still continued in the subsequent, till in this last head
(the Beast going to destruction) it utterly perished. In Babels fall, by
Persia, and Media; yet in them the Kingdom in a sort continued. Darius of the
Medes taking the Kingdom, Dan. 5. 31. And in their overthrow by Alexander, who
despising Macedon settled both in their places and to their fashions: as also in
his successors after his fall, the domination of the former beasts in some sort
abode. But the fourth Beast falling, al utterly perished. See and weigh Dan. 7.
11. 12. for there is the allusion* One thing here is worth the marking, that in
the false Prophets working, which makes his guiltiness, and is here
recorded, both to know the party, and his just punishment: his deceit, in
making men receive the Beast his character, and to worship him, is only
mentioned, and no word of his name or number: as neither are they ever spoken
of in his judgment, either denounced or spoken of. The reason see upon Chap.
14. Sect. 8. Now we must not imagine here, one certain place, or one point of
time, of all this the Beast his endeavor and foil: as neither in the next
Chapter, of the Dragons. For their, we see how Gog and Magog are, from the
four quarters of the earth, all Satan his instruments, of his last fury, and
in all places. As for the name attributed to the place of foil, Chapt. 16.
Armageddon, we showed the reason there. And it is, wheresoever the Lamb
fights and overcomes. Albeit out of doubt, their last endeavors shall be
strange, and their fall conioined with such wonderful broiles, and alterations
of the State of the world, as was not since men inhabited the earth. And then,
the fattest karkasse shall be the finest prey. Blessed are they who come to the
supper of the Lamb his marriage. For who come not, are made a supper. And who
will not feed on the Lamb, are justly made food to the fowels of heaven.

CHAP. XX.
We have heard the judgment of the Whore, and the Beast her aduancer: but for
a perfect victory, is requisite also the destruction of the Dragon, that great
and Master enemy: as, of whose Kingdom and authority, the Beast, who made all
the Whores credit, was only the suffragant. That is, in this Chapter, set
forth, in two degrees of his captivity: Chap. 13.
whereof, the last is absolute, to eternal destruction. Now, as captivity
implies ever a foregoing liberty, whereof it is the privation, so here, a
twofold liberty or loosing is to be taken up; according to the two degrees of
restraint. The first liberty, it was not needful, that here it should be
recorded, being largely declared in the 12. Chapter. From which liberty, his
restraint, albeit of that time (as by substituting the Beast of his authority,
by deceitful hypocrisy and efficacy of error, to work that, from performing
whereof, in open rage, he was then bound up, might well be presumed) yet has
been reserved to this place, to give us in one view, his whole story. Which,
consists in that rage, Chap. 12. From which, being here, in some
consideration, bound up for a time, he is again let loose; and his endeauours
thereupon, are here declared: so far from his intended success, as he is
taken the second time, and destroyed for ever.

2 In his first restraint, come to be considered, the surenesse, end, and
degree thereof. The surenesse, is cleared in the person apprehender, and manner
of fermance. The apprehender is God ^^s minister, an Angel: instructed with
authority, as, coming from heaven: with power to execute, as, having the key
of the bottomless pit, and a great chain. All spoken after the manner of men.
This Angel, falls not from heaven to earth, as that great star, Chapter 9.
but comes down, as he Chapters 10. and 18. And, accordingly, has the key of
the bottomless pit for a far different end from that: this coming, to
enclose the Prince of darkness, being himself the minister of light: whereas
that great star, falling from the ministry of light, to become the minister
of darkness, he opens the botomlesse pit, to let out darkness. The Dragon,
is here described, by these same names, and property, of seducing Nations,
which are given him in the 12. Chapter, in the first degree of this his first
foil, toward this first captivity: when by Michael his valor, he was cast
from heaven. Which the holy Ghost does, of purpose, to lead us know that this
first binding, is from that rage. So wisely and plainly, the spirit teaches
us to couple together the parts of this prophecy. Now Christ is he properly,
who treads down the head of that serpent: Genesis 3. Luke 11. 21. 1. Ihon 3 8.
Chap. 1. 18.
who, only, is that stronger then the strong one, coming in, binding him and
spoiling his house: as who, only has come to lose the works of Satan, and
only has the keys of hell and death. But, according as he gives gifts to
men, and works by his ministers of whatsoever calling, who, in his light and
strength, advance the Kingdom of light, and bring down that of darkness,
his ministers, thus instructed by him, and to this end, are also Psalm. 149. 8.
binders of the Dragon. Of whom this Angel is the general type.

3 The manner of fermance, to show the surenes thereof, is after the manner of
men, set forth, in enclosing, shutting, and sealing, as was the caves mouth on
Daniel, and the Sepulcher of Christ.

4 The end of his restraint is, That he seduce not the Nations, etc, Which
end, how it is, and how far to be understood, the degree of his restraint
now, and his endeavor, upon his next loosing will make clear.

5 Thus we have the surenesse, and end of the Dragons restraint. Now follows
the degree thereof: clearing the end, as I have said. The degree is, that this
his captivity is not absolute, but in a special consideration. This is showed
by the time thereof, state of men in that time, and what this state is. The
time is not, for ever, as in his next taking, but, for a thousand years: which
being expired, he was to be losed again. The denunciation of which sad event,
is mitigated with a consolation, that it should be but for a short space, even
that three days and a half, wherein the witnesses were killed and lay
unburied, Chapter 11. For thencefoorth, by degrees the Dragon is again
comprehended, till he be made fully fast in eternal chains.

6 The state of men, during this first restraint, shows it also not to be
absolute: in so far, as he shall be bound but to a few, being still loose
toward the most part. This is cleared, by declaration of the several
condition of both: and first, of these to whom he is bound. Wherein, are two:
their condition, in this his restraint: and, who they are, that have this
condition. Their condion, is expressed, first, in figurative speech, of Thrones
and Sitters, having judgment accordingly, given them: and next, in proper
terms, that they lived and reigned with Christ these thousand years. Who they
are, that are in this estate and condition, is showed in two sorts: First, The
souls of them who were beheaded for the word of God, etc. Secondly, They who
worshipped not the Beast, etc. The state and condition of the contrary sort,
is, that during these thousand years, they lay dead and lived not. Now, how
great this number is, and how small in comparison thereto, is the former, is
clear by the 13 Chapter, where all the earth follow the Beast, and receive his
Character, name, or number: except these 144000. sealed ones, Chap. 7. in mount
Sion with the Lamb, Chap. 14. And consequently, in what respect, and to whom,
the Dragon is said, during this space, to be bound.

7 The third point, showing yet further the strict consideration of Satan his
restraint, is the explication of this state and condition of both sorts of men:
what this life and reign of the one is: and, what is the death of the other.
To wit, that this life and reign, are not to be taken for this natural life,
or any wordly dominion: neither yet, for that everlasting and glorious state,
which the Saints, in Soul and body, after the last indgement, enjoy in heaven:
this being their state during the thonsand years, and called the first
resurrection. As, neither is the death of the other, to be understood of the
natural death of the body, by separation of the soul therefrom: or, of the
eternal death of both, in Gehenna: as, wherein the world lying dead a thousand
years, thereafter rises from it, to have part in the first resurrection, and
consequently of blessedness. But, this life and reign in respect of the
souls beheaded, is their honorable commemoration, and rising from under these
horrible slanders and calumnies, whereby, the honor of their sufferings was,
maliciously, by Satan eclipsed: even that same thing, which, by long white
robes, was signified, Chapter 6. In respect of these who Worshipped not the
Beast, etc. This life and reign, is the first resurrection: whereby men here,
by the word and spirit, are begotten to the life of God in Christ, and freed
from the bondage and death of Satan and sin: being Ephesians. 5. 14.
vindicare in the liberty of the sons of God, and so, made Kings and Priests
to God in Christ Jesus. And the death of the rest, who rise not this first
resurrection, is that death in sin, ignorance, idolatry and induration,
wherein all men lie, naturally, deprived of the life of God: like those 1. Tim.
5. 6.
widows, who being alive, yet were dead: and like Ephraim, who was dead in
Baal. From which death, who O^^. 13. 1.
so rises not, to be pertaker of the first resurrection, shall be accursed
forever, and subject to the power of the second death, as contrariwaies, who
have part in the last resurrect on, are blessed and holy, and shall live and
reign eternally not feeling the second death.

8 Now, this death of the Rest of men, albeit in particular considerations of
the singular persons, in that time who lay dead and raise not the first
resurrection, it was an entry to the second death: Yet the spirit, here,
shows that in the general consideration of the world, it should not always
lie in that death. But as these 144000. lived and reigned with Christ, these
thousand years, (while all the earth followed the Beast, and were dead in
Baal) and were partakers in the first resurrection, under sure hope of the
second, to glory: so after these thousand years were expired, not these only
but an infinite number of all peoples, Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, with
Palms in Chap. 7.
their hands, and long whit robes, made white in the blood of the Lamb, should
rise from their death wherein they lay, and sing a new song. This, is evidently
implied in these words, The rest of the dead lived not, till the thousand
years were expired, and this is called the first resurrection, which, is
spoken, in common, both of the former who lived during the thousand years, and
of the other, who, after the thousand years, arose and lived. So, as these
words, This is the first resurrection, are relative, als well to the life of
these who lived during the thousand years, as to them, who should live after
the expiring thereof: for, their life is one, albeit not of one time, as the
words, The rest of the dead lived not till, etc. euince clearly: and
accordingly, blessedness and immunity from the second death, is the first
pronounced in common, of both: and thereafter severally by parts, this their
common life and blessedness of the first resurrection is exponed. That the
first should live and reign with Christ a thousand years: and the other,
notwithstanding, of the Dragon again loused, and his strange endeauours
thereupon, yet should rise this first resurrection, and live, and reign with
Christ for ever and ever. The place has been, and is mistaken highly, even to
the breeding of dangerous heresies. But thus it is. The holy Ghost having set
forth the state of the Church, as she rises the first resurrection, and
lives the life of God, from the time of Satan his first restraint, and that
in two degrees of risers: first these, who during the years of his Captivity,
lived and reigned, when as by the Beast his prevailing it might have seemed,
that there had been none at all: Next, these, who after the thousand years,
notwithstanding his loosing and rage, yet rose from their death in superstition
and blindness; and having said of both in common, this is the first
resurrection. He then proclameth their blessedness accordingly, in this their
spiritual life, and reign here, and that distinctly according to the two
times. Of the first sort, that they shall be Priests of God, and reign with
Christ a thousand years. And of the second sort, that after the thousand
years were expired they should rise to the life of God, and reign for
evermore. Now, if this second member had been thus succinctly put, answering so
to the other, it had exempted al doubt. But because in stead of this summarie
reddition, the holy Ghost much more gracefully subioyneth the narration, how,
as during Satan his first restraint, a good number lived the life of God,
refusing the Beast his mark, and so were blessed in the assurance of victory
over the second death: so, after his lousing notwithstanding thereof, and all
his endeauours thereupon, the rest of the dead shall rise the first
resurrection, and the Church should still wax and increase in light and grace:
Satan in his highest endeauours against her, should be again made fast for
ever, and she enjoy an eternal peace. Then to have the full sense of the second
member, and a clear reddition, we must read from the beginning of the
seventh verse, to the end of the 5. of the 22. Chapter. Neither must we here
imagine, that the first are said so to live a thousand years, as though the
life of God had perished from them thereafter, or that this life and reign is
of one and the same persons, still living all this while, (which were a lourdly
gross apprehension) as neither must we think, that because the second are
said to reign for evermore, that thereby is first and properly meaned their
state in glory after the last resurrection. But thus the spirit will show, how
first and last God entertained a Church, and spiritual life therein. To the
first, are attributed a thousand years, in respect that the Dragon being so
long tied from disturbing their spiritual life and reign by open rage, is
again let louse. To the second, a reign for evermore, because the Dragon
fighting against it, is taken and captiued for ever, to show such a destruction
of opposers, as the Church her peace should never again be disturbed by any
new lousing of Satan from his second imprisonment: but she shall enjoy quiet
state here in plentiful dispensation of grace, till she be at length
translated to everlasting glory: according to that which of her in this respect
was said, Chapter 7. they shall hunger no more, etc. To take the thousand
years, verse 6. to begin at the expiring of the first thousand, verse 4. and
5. which second thousand years, the rest of the dead arising, shall live and
reign: and to take the first resurrection here so in relation to a second, as
by the first should be meaned the rising of Gentiles from under Antichristian
darkness: and the conversion of Jews to be in relation thereto, the second:
Albeit it be the indgement of one deeply seen in these mysteries, and
deserving well of the Church for his learned Commentaries on this Book; yet it
seems to me a groundles conjecture, which has made him to mistake also as I
think the end of this Chapter. For, besides that to take the thousand years,
verse 6. for a second thousand, after that verse 4. and 5. and yet to make the
thousand years spoken, verse 7. to be relative to the first, and not to these
immediately preceding, it makes an obscure, and implicate construction,
(which in our interpretation goes plain and soundly) what should induce to
think a second thousand years to be meaned verse 6. seeing no case is put at
the end thereof to fall out, why the spirit should so exactly have limited
them, as we see in the first the loosing again of the Dragon? The thousand
years, life and reign then in the 6. verse, is the same which was spoken,
verse 4. and there resumed very pertinently, to show, in subioyning the other
sort of risers and livers, God his whole dispensation, from the first binding
of the Dragon, toward his Church, first and last, and distinctly in both.

9 Now, from what point of time to begin, and at what point, consequently to
close the count of these thousand years, the end here mentioned, and degrees
of the Dragon his restraint, do clearly lead us. We must not think, that
Satan in an instant was either tied up from his rage, or again, in a precise
point of time let loose. But both fell out by degrees. From the first out going
of the Gospel, he began in some degree to be bound, as he complains of
Christ, that he had come to torment him before the time. And as Math. 8. 29.
the Gospel prevailed, he was still the more made fast. But seeing the end
here specified of his binding, and the condition of the Church here described
upon his restraint, Make evident, that this his Captivity is not absolute, but
in some special consideration: and the degrees here mentioned show, that then
his vptying is to be counted, when in that consideration he is perfectly made
fast, as taken, shut up, locked on and sealed; we have to take up that point of
time, when according to this end he was fully fastened. I showed before on the
12. Chapter, that the Dragon his proper rage is taken for open and cruel
persecuting of Christians: from which he was then fully tied up, when by
Constantine his conversion to the faith, open persecution ceased, and
Christianity was by laws established, the Church became glorious in the eyes
of all men; the souls of Martyrs got long white robes, and seats were set
up, and the Saints Chap. 6. 11.
did sit on them, etc, having judgment given them. For, both the commemoration
of Martyrs was honorable, and the estate of the Church flourishing in
peaceable and goodly condition, and glorious account. And albeit in the mean
time, Satan was working by his Lieutenant the Beast, whom upon this his
restraint from open rage, he sent forth, then in the first sensible degrees to
deceive by false semblance, and who from this point of time mightily prevailed
(though at first by slow and scarce perceptible degrees, as rising out of the
earth) in bringing Nations to make up the image of the Beast, which at the end
of these thousand years came to the top of Chap. 13.
impiety: yet they lived and reigned all the while, who Chap. 14. Sect 8.
received not his Character. The end then here mentioned of the Dragons
restraint, that he should not seduce, etc. must not be taken absolutely (for
he was never busier seducing, nor with greater success, then during these
thousand years) but seducing here must be understood, according as we see he
works upon his lousing again: when he falls to that same kind of
seduction, from which first he was bound up, that is, to seduce Nations to
compass the Tents of Saints, and the beloved City. Even to set them again
upon violent and furious persecution, by sword and fire, as he was a murderer
from the beginning, and as in that, men most bewray themselves to be the
children of their father the Devil. From this rage he was bound up, when by
the two wings of that great Eagle, the woman escaped to her Ioh. 8. 44.
place from the presence of the Dragon: he being chained from coming at her,
now extolled with wings. And the degrees here set down, of binding, enclosing,
shutting upon and sealing, show evidently that the count is to be taken up from
the full and perfect point of his Captivity. For from that time he had no
louse chain for open rage. In Julian he was not so much loused, as biting the
chain. Who besides his short abode, never durst fall directly to murdering of
Christians, the persecutions of Constantius and Valens were partial heates
under profession, even that blood that was mingled with hail and fire, Chapter
8.

10 Now, as we have the point of time of his perfect fermance, which is the
300. year of Christ, or thereby: so this leads us to the point of his
loosing, the 1300. year, or thereby, and the conueniency of story is clear;
for although as by degrees he was fastened, so by degres he was loosed again;
yet we shall find as at the first point, the full degree of his binding; so at
this time, him fully loosed. In the Pontificality of Gregory the seventh, he
had a long chain, which yet was further raxed in that of Urban the second, and
his Successors, kindlers of that tragical and superstitious war, for
recovery of Jerusalem. But, for the end here spoken of open cruelty against
Saints, he was fully loused in the Pontificality of Boniface the eighth and
his successors; from whose times have been bloody persecutions and cruel
rage. Then the woman began to return from the wilderness, the witnesses to
step out Chap. 11.
of the Temple, the little book eaten, to give hearts and eyes, to apply the
reed, and so to discern the Temple from the Court: then the first of these
three Angels, Chapter 14. began to break out through the midst of Heaven,
and the other two in course followed: so as then they were blessed who died in
the Lord, and then was the patience of Saints. The Beast his mouth then being
perceived, and so the semblance of the Lambs horns no more able to bear him
out, the Dragon behooued come again in room to maintain his own throne, and
to repress by rage what by hypocrisy could not be kept down. Then the two
witnesses lay slain in the streets of the great City, all Nations being
seduced to slay them, and rejoice over them. Then the Beast which Chap. 11.
was carst spotted like a Pard, becomes of the Dragons color; and the Whore
born up by him, is drunk Chap. 17.
with the blood of Saints: from that time what cruel murder of Christians was
under the odious names of Waldenses, Albingenses, Fraterculi, Beghardi, etc.
And since, what fires, what blood sheds, what monstrous complots for
extirpation of the truth have been practiced, is too well known.

11 In this rage, though for a time the Dragon deborded, yet praised be God,
by success of the Gospel, and fire from heaven, he is in making fast the
second time, in an everlasting chain. Therefore it is said, that he should be
loused but a short space. For they are feign to relent of their open murdering
and burning, and are now in God his justice getting measure for measure,

12 The time then of these thousand years, is from the first open and sensible
steps of the mystery of iniquity, working on to the quickening of the Beast
(which fell together with this binding up of the Dragon) to the top of that
impiety, when it came to the highest degree. And this is the only time in all
this prophecy, to Chap. 9. Sect. 5.
be taken definitely; because of Antichrist his whole working (which was in
way even from the Apostolic times, first by hid and insensible, and next by
open steps toward the height, from which height again as by degrees it
arose, so by degrees it must vanish) no precise or exact time could be set
down: but yet, to give us sufficient clearenesse, the holy Ghost puts the
time from the first beginning of open working, to the height of impiety: and
marketh the two points of this time, with most evident notes of the binding of
the Dragon, and his lousing again.

13 In Constantine his time, that too great and open steps were laid for
Antichrist to mount up to Satan his throne, is too well known. And to what a
height the mystery of iniquity had wrought on, in the Pontificality of Boniface
the eighth their own stories give clear testimony: recording of him that he
entered like a fox, reigned as a Lion, and died as a dog. When, by a
counterfeit Oracle he had got himself made Pope, he would upon no condition
acknowledge the Emperor, except he did take his title and dignity of him, as
to whom properly it belonged. He excommunicated the French King, because he
would not take his Crown holden of him, and impudently and impiously
discharged his Subjects of their allegiance. He blasphemouslie against the
honor of Christ his Cross, instituted the first Jubilee at Rome, and put
forth this decree, that the Bishop of Rome ought to be judged of none,
although he should carry innumerable souls with him to hell.

14 The perverse minds of the Romans here bewray themselves. For this time of
a thousand years, which only of all the times in this prophecy is to be
taken definitely, they will have to be indefinite; and all the rest to be taken
both definitelie and properly. And without either example of Scripture, or show
of allusion, casting it roundly by them, they will forsooth have these thousand
years here indefinitely put for all the time from Christ, to Antichrist his
reign: who shall reign (say they) three years and a half before the last
judgment. But, if during these thousand years, the special honor and chief
crown of them who live and reign in them, be their refusing to worship the
Beast (whom even Romans confess to be Antichrist) of necessity his Kingdom
must have been in vogue these thousand years. And this again shows
plainly, that these times of a 1260. days, 42. months, and a time, times,
and half a time, are not properly and definitely put for the just time of
Antichrist his reign, as the Romans would enforce, seeing these thousand
years he bears sway: further, if these times were definitely, and yet not
properly to be taken, as some of our learned interpreters esteem, I see no
reason why here the holy Ghost should have altered his ordinary style. See
Chapters 9. and 11. and 12.

15 Now considering all the course of this prophecy, expressing first the
state of the Church in the seven of Asia, next, comprising the whole future
events in seven Seals: the seventh whereof affords seven Trumpets; and the
seventh of these seven vials of the last wrath. Seeing also that in all this
Book, but seven diverse times are recorded. First, that of ten days, Chapter
2. 2. that of half an hour, Chapter 8. 3. that of five months, Chapter 9.
4. that of an hour, day, month and year of the sixth Trumpet, Chapter 9. 5.
that of 1260. days, 42. months, a time, times, and half a time, which are
but one, Chapter 11. and 12. and 13. 6. that of three days and a half,
Chapter 11; and now this of a 1000. years is the seventh, in huge proportion,
exceeding all the former. Considering also, that this time of a 1000. years,
is in the course of this Chapter, and within short space, six times recorded,
and thereafter no time mentioned but evermore. Whither in these considerations,
if this manner of leading implies any further mystery, I refer it to godly
and sober considerations: not daring louse the raines to curiosity in so divine
and hid matter; wherein yet I am persuaded, thongh my weakness cannot find it
out, that nothing is either in matter or manner of handling, which has not in
it a great depth of wisdom.

16 Thus was the dragons first restraint, in a certain degree of time and
measure. Follows the second, absolute and everlasting. And it is cleared by
the foregoing liberty, to which he is loused. From the first binding. So as
all this point is in these two, the dragons second liberty, and the event
thereof.

17 In this his second liberty, is the time when, and his endeavor being
loosed. The time is, at the expiring of the thousand years whereof we have
spoken. His endeavor being loosed, is to practice again, that from which, by
his first taking, he was withheld: that is, to seduce Nations. Which
seducing, must be understood to be of that same kind, as hereafter is
clearly showed, in that he brought them to compass the tents of Saints and
beloved City. For otherways, all the time of his restraint from this kind of
working, he by the Lieutenant of his power, seduced in another kind mightily.
The greatness of this his endeavor, to this end, is cleared: first, by these
whom he seduced: and next, by their action upon his instigation. In these who
are seduced, are these circumstances. 1 Their habitation. 2 Their quality. 3
Their number. Their habitation, is the four quarters of the earth. Whereby is
offered to our conception, both, Satan his earnest and diligent practice in
this his last puff; and that, all the enemies over the whole earth, of what
state and condition soever, whom, in this his last fury, he brings forth,
are here designed. Their quality, is expressed in the names given them, of Gog
and Magog. To show them, detestable, for cruel disposition to destroy: that by
a huge destruction, they shall be destroyed: and that they are the instruments
of Satan his last fury. Their number, is expressed in two notes. One, that they
ouerspred the plain of the earth: the other, that they were as the sand of the
Sea for multitude.

18 Such are they who are seduced. The end, whereto the Dragon leads them,
is, to compass the tents of Saints and the beloved City. Even the utter
destruction (in their intent) of God his true Church, here on earth, pitching
in Tents, as yet in their warfare, and absent from their eternal habitation:
but who notwithstanding, are the true Citizens of heaven, beloved Chap. 12.
of God.

19 Thus is the Dragons liberty, and his endeavor thereupon. The event hereof
is double. One, of them, who thus seduced by him, were set on so evil a work;
that fire came from heaven and devoured them. The other, of him who is their
leader; that he is now taken and committed to everlasting fire and torment.
This his judgment, is cleared by his fellowship therein: the Beast and false
Prophet.

20 This event is further cleared and declared sure, by setting down the last
degree of their destruction, in the last judgment, when all enemies being
brought under, death shall be swallowed up to victory. To show us, that this
second victory over Satan, and restraint of him from this his last rage, shall
not be, but only for a certain space, as was that first: or in a special
respect, as that was; but it shall be absolute and eternal. So as, from the
time Christ began this second time, sitting on a white cloud, Chap. 14. 14. to
make his judgments manifest, Cha. 15. 4. And, from the time he began to erect
this his great white Throne by the revived light of the Gospel: when the time
of the dead comes to be judged, Chap 11. The seventh Trumpet sounding to the
finishing of the mystery of God, in full accomplishment of all which the
Prophets foretold, for deliverance of the Church, and her goodly state in
grace: So as, the sign of the son of man shall be seen in heaven: the
victory over her enemies, shall still hold on, and the enemies still fall, as
did Haman before Mordecay, till by all the degrees of destruction, Ester 6. 13.
they at last, in the general judgment receive final sentence: when death
and the Devil, who has dominion thereof, shall be abolished. And, for this
purpose only, it is, that here, so lively an hypotyposis, of the last
judgment, is set down. In the person of the judge: the manner and order of
judging; and the execution: so far forth, as for the present purpose was
needful. The person of the Judge is described in his office, administration
thereof, and his dreadful majesty and power. In office, he is a Judge, a
royal and a great Judge, as having a Throne and a great Throne. He is also
faithful, true, upright, and glorious, and whose judgments are clear and
manifest; by his white Throne. As he rode before, Chap. 19. on a white horse,
and did sit Chapt. 14. on a white cloud. His administration is, in that he
sits. His dreadful majesty and power, is expressed, in a wonderful form
of ishing before his presence. Heaven and Earth depart, and so as their place
is not found. To show Isai. 41. 12.
a perfect departing: as that which in Scripture, is said of the wicked, that
he perishes so, as his place is not known.

21 The order of judgment, is in the persons judged, and manner of process.
The persons, are all the dead great and small: cleared, by enumeration of
these who are dead in the Sea, who by any other kind of mortality, or who were
in their graves. And herein, clearly is employed the power of the Judge. For no
question can be of the living, when all the dead are forced to give presence.
The manner of process is set down, after the form of well ordered humane
iudicatories. In that books were opened: even the records of men's actions:
Dan. 7. 10.
and another book, the book of life. The judgment of earth, is, of these
things which were in the books according to their works. The form of speech
is to be noted, in that it says not, of things written in the books and
according to their works. To show, that here, are not two rules of judging.
But, that so men are judged according to their works, as yet the judgment is
led and ordered by the books. For the ground and cause of the judgment, is
the book of life: according as in it men's names are written, or are passed by:
being either given to Christ of the Father, or left. Now, whom the Father
gives him, none is able to take out of his hand, but he John 10. 28 Ioh. 6.
39. 44. Romans 8. 29.
raises them up at the last day. And, whom he electeth, them he
predestinateth to be made conformable to the image of his son: whom he
predestinateth, he calls effectually: whom he calls, he justifies, and
sanctifies, here, by his spirit to bring forth fruits of righteousness, and
so, at length glorifieth. These fruits of faith, confirm us in the assurance
of our election, and that we are in Christ Jesus: that, which, further
strengthens our peace, as writing it in our own consciences: which are the
one sort of books: and whose testimony must accord with the other book of
life. Now, then in the judgment, so are works looked on, as collation always
must be of the books, to see if our names be written in the book of life, as
assurance of life and joyful peace are written in our consciences. Otherways,
in it self, all our righteousness is but as a menstruous clout. But yet, what
Israel will not obtain seeking to establish their own righteousness, which
is by the Law, the election will Romans 10. 3. and 7.
obtain.

22 Such are the person of the Judge, and the order and manner of process.
Now, the execution follows. Which, agreeably to the purpose of the holy
Ghost, for which, only mention of the last judgment is here made, is all in
wrath, against death, hell, and such as are not written in the book of life:
who are adjudged to everlasting fire, which is the second death. And, this is
to show, as I touched before, that this last victory, over the Dragon and his
instruments, shall be full and perfect: holding course, from the first degree
of their foil, therein, till death and the grave, which are the last enemies,
be subdued. And, this execution of enemies was sufficient to record in this
place, where, this matter is not 1. Cor. 15. Ose 13.
handled, as though, now at this point of time, and incident case, the last
judgment were to fall out. As many, hereupon, have imagined, that the
overthrow of Antichrist, and these huge Armies of opponents, should be
conioined with Christ his last coming. But, the spirit has no such meaning.
But, handling the victory of the Church over her enemies, to show that it
should be perfect, he lets us see that it shall hold on, till all enemies
being subdued to Christ his feet, at last, death be swallowed up of victory:
and that the Dragons foil should not be, now, as at the first binding, from
which after a space, he got loose again: But, it should be to final
destruction. And, in this sense, the Apostle in the second to the These. 2.
tells that Antichrist shall be abolished with the brightness of the Lord
his coming. Not, as though he shall reign till then: but that he shall be so
consumed here with the power of the word of truth, as, without recovering
strength, he shall be destroyed for ever: the full and perfect point whereof,
is in the Lord his last coming, and final sentence against him. Therefore
Cha. 17 the Beast is said to go to destruction. In the usual manner of
Scripture, when God will confirm his Saints against dangers, and in hope of
deliverance, for their full settling, he leads them to the consideration of
that final deliverance, whereto ever our hearts should bend themselves. and in
like manner, in denouncing destruction to the enemies (in the measure whereof,
as it falls out here, we never are satisfied) he leads us to their last and
final sentence. Thus the Lord calls the Prophet, and other Dan. 12.
faithful, in that promised deliverance from the tyranny of Antiochus
Epiphanes, to the consolation of the resurrection. Acts 24. 15. and 26. 8. Heb.
11. 35.
So, Christ, in his sermons, often. Paul for all Christianity, pleads the
resurrection. The Martyrs suffered constantly, under the Law, looking for a
better resurrection. The Scripture teaches us, that, that day shall come as a
thief, upon a peaceable and secure world, marrying and taking in marriage,
etc. Which undoubtedly, 1. These. 5. 2. Matthew. 24.
will be, when, upon destruction of all troublers, the Church enjoying quiet
state, shall fall in the sleep of security. For, if the last judgment and
coming of Christ to it, had so notable marks, as the foil of Antichrist,
taking of the Dragon, and so great tumults, wars, and commotions, with the
havoc of so huge Armies besiedging the Church, how could either that day
comes as a thiese on a peaceable world; or the Church, in such cruel invasion,
be at ease, and sleeping? This error, has made the subsequent matter to be of
most part mistaken: as if therein, the state of the triumphant Church in
heuens, were set forth, as it shall be after the last day.

23 A learned man lately commenting, and with high and just commendation, upon
this book, perceiving well, that the subsequent condition of the Church must
be understood of her state here in grace: and, so being, not seeing how this
place could be taken of the last judgment, turns it to an allegory of the
conversion of the Jews, by allusion to the last judgment: their conversion to
the faith (in respect of their present and long beegunne desperate estate, both
temporal and spiritual) being as it were a rising from the dead. According
as, by the Prophets, in regard of the full point thereof, it is called: and by
the Apostle a life from death. But, besides that where a plain sense in
propriety is convenient, far sought allegories are not meet, albeit for the
wonderfulnesse and inexpected falling out thereof, the Jews restitution be, of
the Prophets, called a rising from their graves: yet, that thus, the whole
description, so clearly in all the circumstances, of the last judgment, can
be drawn thereto, I see no reason: specially, where, agreeably to the manner
of the holy Ghost, the descripton of the general judgment may be taken
properly and conveniently for the purpose in hand: and no necessity, for this,
to interpret the subsequent Chapters, of any state of the Church, in time,
thereafter. Which doubt, will nothing trouble the judicious Reader, considering
the manner of the Prophetical descriptions, much different from common
historical narrations: in that they, by Hypotyposeis, represent to the view,
as present, those things they prophecy. Further, to say in a resurrection,
whereby men rise from ignorance and in duration, to the knowledge of God and
embracing of the faith, that they rise to eternal destruction, it is utterly
absurd. And, here we see that all the execution is of enemies in torment and
everlasting fire. The spirit even, hereby as it were, pointing to us his
purpose, of this narration in this place. And this argument, ^uinceth that
place, Daniel (...). to be of the last resurrection. For, none rise the first
resurrection, to everlasting shame: but all are blessed. As for the word, there
put, of Many, as if therein, an argument were implied, of some other
resurrection, then the general, wherein All rise, it helps nothing that
opinion: as being put but in common, and (...), repeated according, to the
subsequent parti^ition, of Many to glory, Many to shame. And if thereon ought
might be builded, with als good reason, here the general judgment must be
understood, where All the dead small and great do rise, etc. That the many and
goodly Prophesies of the restoring of Israel, have not as yet their full
accomplishment, till by faith they be grafted in again, whence they were cut
out, through unbelief, it were either great ignorance, or perhaps blasphemy to
deny: seeing the Apostle to that purpose, cites Prophesies, which, therefore,
but in that case, cannot be fulfilled. Romans 11.
Again, that it seems necessary, so great a point not to be ommitted in
this Revelation, I heartily yield: but that therefore, this place should, from
a proper and well consisting sense, be drawn thereto, I see no necessity.
For, that matter was, not obscurely, in the sixth Vial signified: and, more
plainly, in the Church her song, Chapter 19. and, if more be requisite, who
may not be satisfied (as such mysteries are here delivered) with that, which
in the next Chapter is said of the new Jerusalem; having, upon this full
overthrow of her focs, her ports cast open toward all the quarters of the
earth; and on them written the names of the twelve Tribes of Israel, to whom
then they are made patent, that all Israel may be saved?

24 A Throne, Daniel 7. is erected, and one sits, for judging and destroying
the Beasts there mentioned, enemies and troublers of the Church then. And
Daniel 12. the faithful for conception of a perfect deliverance, and full
overthrow of their adversaries, are called to the meditation of the last and
full degree thereof, in the general resurrection. To that, here is the
allusion: even as, in the description of the enemies here, the allusion was to
these. To show, not only the like and full overthrow, of the troubles now of
the Christian Church, holding on to final accomplishment in Christ his last
coming, as the other were abolished at his first: but also, that the first,
even in the promise of God his dispensation, were types, of the latter. The not
aduerting whereof, has made many to misconceiue the mind of the holy Ghost in
the Prophets. While some, in accommodation of the promises and denunciations,
so rest in the first state and time, as they look not how, therein, God looked
further: and others, so interpret them of the last state and time, as, against
the mind of the spirit, they apply them not, first and properly, to the state
then: Whereof, first, and for special consolation against the evils then, they
are meaned: albeit they had also typically a further signification: as the wise
and frequent allusion in this Prophecy, proves, and accommodation through
all the new Testament, no less clearly.

25 This great white throne (shadowed by that of Solomon) albeit then, in full
and final degree, it shall be erected, when our Lord returns in the clouds
of heaven: yet, in some degree, it is erected, here in the clear, and evident
prevailing light and power of the Gospel. So as, even here after a sort,
heaven and earth depart, that is, the whole state of the world is changed: as,
upon pouring out of the seventh Vial, was denounced: and, as for the like
event, though not in so full measure, was spoken of* at the opening of the
sixth scale. For, even here, we shall have new heavens and a new earth, that
is, a new state of things, by the enemies utter fall, and goodly, graceful,
and peaceable estate of the Church thereupon: when there shall be no more Sea:
as, by Isay is Prophesied often, and magnifikly in the subsequent Chapters
Isai. 42. 9. and 43. 18. and 65. 15. and 66. 22.
is declared. Thus the state under the Gospel, in collation to the former, is
called of the Apostle, a new world, and so the condition of the Christian
Church (upon destruction of Whore, Beast and Dragon, and strange alteration of
all the states in the earth) enjoying peace, shall be yet in respect of her
state before, a new world. The full and perfect degree whereof shall then be,
when upon the Lord his last coming, the heaven shall depart with a noise, and
the elements shall melt with heat: what time, we shall get new heavens and a
new earth, wherein 2 Pet. 3.
righteousness no more soiourneth as in Tents, but stably dwells for ever as
in a mountain.

26 So far then is this description of the last judgment to be properly
understood, as yet we must not imagine it to be here set down, either for
the point of time when it shall fall out, for that it shall have this
coincident case of the overthrow of Gog and Magog: but only for the cause
above explaned. Neither is there in all this Prophecy, or (as I think) any
where in scripture, any ground, whereon to gather determinately, the year or
age of that day: whereof to inquire after the Lord his own answer, it is in my
judgment excuselesse temerity: and to determine ought, is high presumption.
That some, otherways godly and learned men, excuse their scanning hereat, by
that, Christ, foreclosing al Creatures from the knowledge of the day and hour,
leaves so, place to search the year or age: besides that (in such clear
evidence of the ordinary frame of Scripture speech) this shift is both childish
and ridiculous in my opinion, it is also too bold and gross dallying with the
Lord his words.

27 Now yet for bringing minds to acquiesce in this our interpretation, the
Nations seduced, their notes, judgment and names are more to be cleared. The
allusion is partly to Sodom, wherein all young and old from al quarters
compassed Lot his house. And Sodom was a City Genesis 19.
of the plain, and they were devoured by fire from heaven. It is also to the
7. of Judges, where the Midianites like Grasshoppers in multitude, and whose
Camels were as the sand of the sea in number, pitched against Israel in the
plain: and were destroyed by three hundredth, but holding forth burning Lamps,
and blowing Trumpets: (for the yoke of their burden, and the staff of their
Isai 9 4.
shoulder, and the rod of their oppressor are now to be broken, as in the day
of Midian) an exceeding fit type of this foil, which must be by fire from
heaven: but such as then shines, when we learn to break the earthy pi^cher
that hides it, and to blow the Trumpet of God his word loudlie. This fire came
out of the mouths of the two witnesses: This is the breath of the Lord his
Isai 30. 2 These. 2. Ier. 23. 29. Chap. 14. 18 and 15. 7. Mal. 14. 1.
mouth. The word of God in the mouths of his servants, is fire, and the wicked
are stubble before it. But the allusion here chiefly, both in the names and
manner of judgment, is to Ezechiel 38. and 39. where diverse learned men think
one and the same matter to be handled, accommodating both that and this place
to the Turks, as whose destruction both there and here in their judgment is
meaned: and accordingly with Abenezra interpret the little horn, Dan. 11.
mistaking (as I think) these places, and here, yet going further aside, in
thinking there and here, one and the same matter properly to be delivered.
Whereto the names of Gog and Magog, give no more reason of proper
interpretation then could before the name of Babylon, and the whole frame and
leading of this Prophecy, by continual allusion to the old Testament might
have taught another sense to be sought for: and that here Gog and Magog are to
be taken Spiritually, as before Sodom and Egypt.

28 By Gog and Magog in Ezeehiel, the Kings of Syria cruel oppressors of the
Church of Israel are meaned: as by the little horn in Daniel, Antiochus
Epiphanes the worst of all. Whereof see Tremellius and Iunius upon these places,
Iunius upon this, and the learned Commentary of Hugh Broughton upon Daniel.
That the attempt of Gog and Magog, and their judgment, thereupon is said to be
in the latter years: it will not trouble the resolution Dan. 8.
of any, who sees the rage of the Goats four horns (of the Prophet plainly
interpreted, and of all men confessed to be that of Alexander his successors,
and namely, of the succressing little horn Antiochus Epiphanes) called the last
wrath. Both Ezechiel and Daniel, so speaking not absolutely, but respective of
the last cruel troublers of the Church of Israel, before the first coming of
Messiah, and accordingly of their destruction. Wherein, if much more appear to
be spoken, then in the measure of God his judgment against them can be seen
fulfilled: we have to consider, not only the Hyperbolike style of the Prophets
in such cases, but as I have already touched, that these Prophesies besides the
first and proper accommodation, had a further but a typical relation. And
truly, it were strange to imagine how the Turk his Kingdom standing, the
Israelites shall so recover their own land, as they dwelling therein securely,
and without fear, he should plot to invade Ezech. 38. 11.
them. That here the names of Gog and Magog should be meaned, or at least
restrained to the Turks, is very improbable: seeing the two witnesses slain
at this lousing of the dragon, lie dead in the street of the great City, Chap.
11.
and all Nations rejoice ou^r them: seeing the Whore is drunk with the blood
of Saints, and in her is found Chap. 17. and 18 Chap. 13.
all the blood shed on the earth: seeing it is the Beast that makes war with
the Saints, and overcomes them: and thereupon, whereas he was first like a
Pard, in course of time, when the dragon is loosed, becomes of his color.
Seeing also that out of the mouth of Chap. 17. Chap. 16.
the dragon, Beast, and false Prophet, came these frogs, instruments of this
seduction: and seeing they are described to be false Prophets, working
miracles, and authorized thereto by the Beast and false Prophet: thus evidently
designed to be the Popish Clergy, and by experience, chiefly the Jesuits.
Lastly, seeing here by Gog and Magog clearly are designed all the instruments
of the dragon his last fury, from the four quarters of the earth, the Turks
particularly cannot be meaned. Like as herein is an evident Argument, why here
Gog and Magog are not properly to be understood, as in Ezechiel, who brings
them specially from the North. It is true, that at this point of time, when the
dragon is loused, the Turk his greatness began without resistance to undo
all: God his justice, in them lousing the four Angels from Euphrates. But
these Angels so loused for punishment of false Christians, their idolatry,
witchcraft, murder, etc. more then direct enemies of the true Church, are not
to be esteemed one with the dragon here loused. Who, as at his first misgiuing
against the woman and her first seed, he stirred up the Beast of his authority
to deceive, first, like Balaam, and a fraudulent Pard: so here again, being
loused for maintaining the credit of his Vicar (whom the semblance of the
Lamb his horns, false miracles, occupying of the holy City and Court of the
Temple, and his fitting as God in the Temple of God, could no longer bear out:
the rod now being applied to measure, and his mouth found out whose it is) by
the Beast, he makes war with the Saint^ and overcomes them. Falling to
open and cruel murder: the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet, all jointly
bending their whole endeauours to seduce the Kings of the earth, enemies of all
sorts, to compass the tents of Saints, and beloved City. The City and Court
of the Temple, trod under foot, and occupied of the Beast, albeit called holy,
for that the Temple was within them, Chap. 11.
yet were cast out. Here the Tents of Saints, and beloved City are besieged.
The four Angels from Euphrates were instruments of God his wrath against the
world, and for the sins specified, Chapter 9. 20. 21. from which the sealed
ones were free. Here the endeavor of Gog and Magog is directly against the
Saints. Gog and Magog then are the instruments whatsomeuer of Satan his last
fury against the Church, whom for upholding of Antichrist, or at least, for
keeping down the full prevailing light o^ the Gospel, and graceful state of
the true Church, he stirs up, of what Nation soever, Turks or others.

29 The whole course of this Prophecy framed to the dispensation in the old
Testament, and condition of the Church then, opens clearly the reason of the
allusion. This is certain, that in the condition of the Church of Israel, as I
have said, we are not only to look upon things in propriety, but also to
consider them as stampes of things to come. Hereof it is, that as all the
deliverances promised from their enemies, and afflictions then had a further
respect (as the measure of their present deliverances, nothing answerable to
the high promises; easily brought the godly to consider, and wait for better)
so also were their troubles and troublers, types of other and more dangerous
enemies, and the destructions denounced against them (which in the first
properly taken, were not seen fulfilled in the degree threatened) raised the
hearts of the faithful to wait in the end for a more absolute victory and
constant peace. The first great affliction of Israel was in Egypt by Pharao,
that great dragon, as Chapter 12. Itouched. The next great affliction and
captiuy was by Babel, and these Beasts in Daniel. Now after the peoples
delivery from Babel, City and Temple being reedified: the last cruel
oppressing enemy, and stayer of true worship before Christ his coming in the
flesh, was Gog, and of Gog specially Antiochus Epiphanes: as Daniel, Ezechiel,
and books of Machabees show clearly. For the Romans were not long before
Christ, but drawn in as sequestres by the Jews own partialities (whereto
pride brought them after they had been helped by a little help) and albeit
the stronger, yet so far suffered and maintained the liberty Da^. 11. 34.
both of state and religion, as at Christ his birth Herod was a mighty King,
and the state and religion for freedom from any foreign oppression,
flourishing. Hence it is, that as for expressing the first troubles and
troubler of the Christian Church, and her delivery there from, allusion is to
Egypt, etc. And for expressing the next huge evil of Antichrist, the allusion
is to Babel, and that in a Beast carrying a note of all the four in Daniel: so
here to express the last enemies, who after her coming out of Babel and Sion
reedified, shall be instruments of Satan his last puffed, the holy Ghost
alludeth to Gog and Magog. For whose destruction, as a great white throne was
set up, that at the first coming of Christ; the saints Dan. 7.
might get the Kingdom: so here, to show that these last Ministers of Satan
his rage shall fall still to final destruction in the Lord his last coming, a
great white throne is erected. And as upon the full overthrow of Gog and Magog,
Ezech. 38. and 39. Thereafter the state of City and Temple are set down, most
goodly: so by allusion thereto, here upon the utter foil ofher enemies, the
new Jerusalem is magnifickly described. That of Ezechiel is of the state of the
Church of Christ under the Gospel, generally in relation to the Church before
Christ, and under the law. This here in the subsequent Chapters, is of the
Church specially, now victorious over these enemies, and graceful through the
conversion of the Jews and Eastern Kingdoms to the faith: enjoying plenty of
light and peace, in relation to the Christian, Church, before in her wrestlings
and sufferings by these enemies, now overthrown.

30 By the course of this Prophecy it would appear, that first the Whore
shall be destroyed, next, that the Kingdom in the head thereof the false
Prophet shall be done away, and that thereafter, Satan for his last endeavor
stirring up Nations against the Church, shall be in these his instruments, so
absolutely foiled, as the Church from thence shall enjoy quiet state. For
whither things shall thus fall out in course: or if thus, by part, the
overthrow of all the enemies be set down, to show a perfect victory, I dare
not determine. And if (as possibly, and very probably it may fall) after the
burning and sack of the City of Rome by Christian Princes; and next afte^ ^he
ruin of the Kingdom, and head thereof, the false Prophet: that the Dragon by
some residue of the Frogs, shall stir up nations, and perhaps, of them the
Turks; (that so God may destroy all them who have destroyed the Church) yet
we see clearly what shall be the event. For both the inward enemy and
traitor, the beast shall be destroyed: and all outward enemies, who by Satan
his instigation (now madly furious, that his time is so short) shall rise
against Sin, shall find it a cup of poison. The Turk hitherto has been God
his scourge against the world, and false Christianity: and therefore has
prevailed, But if he rise against the true Church, fire from heaven shall
devour him. Yet that here specially the Turks are meaned, I see no reason.
And as I can take up the drift of the Holy Ghost in this Prophecy, it would
rather appear, and my heart inclines so to think by the fall of the Beast,
and conversion of Jews thereupon to the faith, that the Turks and other
states of the East shall be brought to embrace the Gospel; albeit, perhaps,
first taught thereto by some noble foil. For no question but as the event of
the seventh Vial makes clear, the whole esta^e of the earth shall suffer
such alteration, as was not since men first inhabited the same.

31 Now for the different measure of judgment upon the Army, and upon their
Captain^ the Dragon: whose judgment is according to that of the Beast, and
false Prophet, besides the reasons above touched upon the end of the 19.
Chapter; we must further consider, that the Dragon is such an enemy as no
foil of him can secure us, till he be sealed up in everlasting torment. And
for the Beast and false Prophet, signifying a Kingdom, and order of succeeding
heads over it, and not designing any one particular person, as the head of
impiety: a perfect and unrecoverable destruction of them both, both in God his
justice, and for the Churches full security, was requisite.

To the Reader.
Here should have followed the like Commentary upon the two last Chapters
(...) upon the former, but for some special reasons, they are omitted. Use
that which here thou have with an upright heart, and give glory to God.

A TABLE CONTAIning the most notable things in this book.
A Rule for right Accommodation of Story to the seven seals of this book. 41
The wrong ground whereby men mar the Accommodation. 46 How far time must
be looked to in the Accommodation. 89 The Air. 170 Our Altar Christ. 37. 60.
81 The Ambition of the Roman Bishops. 65 Angels are about the Church for two
respects, to protect her and to learn wisdom by her. 29. 30 Angels are not to
be worshipped. 210. Angels put for the name of office not of nature. 59. The
Angel of the covenant. 50, 59 Antichrist his beginning. 70, Whence, and in what
manner he arriseth. 118, 119. 120, 175. The mischief coming by him compared
with the flood of Noah. 77. His name. 79. The number of his name. 124. What
sort of enemy he is. 137, 140. That he is the Pope. 113, 183 185. Acommon
deceiuer of alboth Jews and Gentiles. 80. How he has not power to slaie men,
and yet with him is found all the blood shed on the earth. 72. 84. How far he
did prevail. 139. How to judge of his followers. 136, 137, 141. The first and
second degrees of his fall. 157. The third degree of his fall. 158. The fourth,
160 The fifth, wherein is a wise and just retribution. 161. The sixth, 163. His
destruction irrecouerable and utter ruin. 78, 89, 165, 177, 218. His
unexpected foil. 218. His irrecouerable fall compared with the falls of the
Beasts in Daniel. 219. Armageddon. 165 Christ his Arrows kill all but
differently. 34 A divine Artifice of the spirit 160 The Attire of the Bride 208
B
BArbarous nations ouerturners of the Roman Empire, although Satan his
intention in spewing them out of his mouth was far other. 110 A great Battle
in heaven 103, 108 Why men are named Beasts. 123 That the first Beast is the
state of Rome, not under the persecuting Emperors (as the common opinion is)
but of the same time and condition with the second Beast, that is, under the
Popedom, it is proved by four clear notes of the first Beast, proper to the
Popedom: The first note 113. The second, the third, and the fourth note
cleerest of all, 114. How the same Antichrist (to wit, the Popedom) is set
fourth in both the Beasts, 118. 121. What reason the Beast and false Prophet be
distinguished, seeing they are but one. 121. 177. 178, ^18. What the wound in
the sixth head of the Beast was, and the curing of it. 116. 117. In what
respect but seven heads are attibuted to the Beast, albeit in number they be
eight, 118. 176. Who is the seventh head of the Beast, 122. 177. The Beast is
the eight head and one of the seven, to wit, the sixth. 116. 122. 176. Who the
Beast is, 123. 178. His seven heads. 175. How he had been, and then in John
his days was, and how he was to come: and what be the Kings, called his
Heads. 176. The horns of the Beast. 179. Why to this Beast is attributed not
only horns as to that in Daniel 7. but further also, heads. 179
The Beast in comparison set against Christ. 217 Beasts throne and elders. 20.
202 Christ his garment dipped in Blood. 214 Pope Boniface the eight. 231 The
Books opened in the last judgment. 235. 236 The Bride her preparation. 206.
Her attire. 207. 208
C
THe degrees of a true inward Calling to the ministry. 91 The length of the
Land of Canaan 144 The Captain of the Lord his Host. 214 His power to do all
things, 213 The Character of the Beast. 124. 136. 219 Christ in diverse respects
is both God sitting on the throne, and also the Lamb standing between the
throne and the Beast and Elders. 13. He is dispenser of all both mercy and
wrath. 60. His coming down from heaven. 85 He is Lord of Sea and Land. 87.
He comes in his Kingdom with power. 107. 110. His garments dipped in blood.
214. He is our Garment. 162 The Church her constant graceful state, in the
presence of God in her. 12. In her goodly state heerethrough 13. In God his
dispensation; terrible for her. 14. And gracious toward her, in three graces.
15. Her happiness by this state. 20 Without the true Church is neither
salvation nor any true knowledge. 24 The true Church preserved even under
Antichrist. 53. 71 Her case under him. 93. 137. And it is showed in three
distinct speeches. 138 The Church her enemies and sufferings after what manner
they be described in this Prophecy. 104 The primitive Church her habit and her
traveling in birth 105. Her flight to the wilderness. 190. Why she is called
a mountain. 166 The Church her estate in the last days. 261 That the last two
Chapters of the Revelation must be understood of the Church militant 264
The Roman Clergy. 70. 196 Their properties. 78
A Cloud a note of divine majesty. 86 A delightful Co^gruity in the order of
God his working. 164 Conscience: the twofold state thereof; the intolerable
torment thereof coming by Popish Doctrine 72. 73 Constantine the great 44. 109
Contention set forth by fire; the effects thereof 62 How it was among the
Churchmen 63
The Course of the Revelation. 32. 101. 142. 153. 232 And of the Trumpets. 61
The Artifice thereof noted. 84. 90. 100. 101
The Cry of souls of Martyrs 37 The Dragon his Crowns are upon his heads, but
the Beast his upon his horns 113 Christ has many Crowns 213 The Cup. 135.
136
D
THe Day of Judgment shall come on a secure world. 169 Death of two kinds. 64
Of a third ki^de. 67 Death first and second, 223, 224 To Dye in the Lord. 142
Desire of further k^owledge. 49 The threefold Dignity of God his Saints. 14
Dioclesianus a cruel persecuter. 43 What Disposition is requisite for the
perception of Divine Mysteries 173 A Door open in heaven 9. How we must enter
thereat; and the necessity and fruit of entering. 10 Our Door to God is Jesus
Christ. 259 The Dragon who, and of what time he is. 105 His binding and to whom
he is bound. 222. 228
E
THat great Eagle 109 The Earth in opposion to heaven for the earthly sort. 10
For the place of the visible Church 49 The Earth in an other third sense. 156
The love of the Earth; the effect thereof. 70 A great and strange Earthquake
170 The East, a pleasant discourse upon the coming of the Angel from the East.
50 The occasion of the falling away of the East from the truth: and their
con^ersion again 163 To Eat the word of God. 91 To Eat the flesh of the
Whore. 181 The E^^s of Christ as a flame of fire 212 Elders, Throne and
Beasts. 202 Roman Emperors bloody persecuters; and how some were forced to
honor the Saints. 48 The German Emperors. 175. 179 The Grecian Emperors 178
The Enemies of the Church in the old and new Testament. 104. 145 Example. 193
F
HOw to judge of our Fathers in time of Antichrist. 136, 141 Fire from the
Altar of a double effect. 60 Fire of Gods spirit, of love, and the fire of
contention; the different companions and effects of the two fires 62 The Fire
of Ambition. 63 Fire, Brimstone and Iacinthe 83 The Fire of Christ's feet 86 To
have power over Fire. 146 How the Fire is mingled with the Sea. 150 Christ his
eyes a flame of Fire. 212 The Flood cast out of the Dragon his mouth. 109
Flying through the midst of heaven. 68. 134. 187 Frogs coming out of the
mouths of the Dragon, Beast and false Prophet. 161. 162 Their properties. 164
Who they are. 165 Fulminatrix legio. 43

G
CHrist his Garment dipped in Blood. 214 His neme written on his Garment. 216 Our
Gate and only door to God is lesus Christ 259 (...). 254 God his seat in his
Church, his nature, and Trinity of that one shadowed by three Jewels. 12 His
patience 82
Gog and Magog. 233 That they are not particularly the Turks: who they are.
242. 243. 244. 245
Golden Vials. 27. 153 The three Graces of God toward his Church 15 Pope
Gregory the seventh. 229
H
THe mourning of Hadadrimon 167 Hail for cold preaching. 62 For judgment. 99
Heretics their disposition. 66 Haleluiah. 200 Harpes. 27. 148 Harvest. 145
Heaven in opposition to earth throughout this Prophecy is taken for the true
Church in opposition to the worldly sort. 10 Heaven put for the glory and
honor of the great men of the earth 40 Amultitude in Heaven 200 The Heavens
cast wide open. 211
Horns. 26 Why the Beast is said to have two horns like the Lambs, seeing to
the Lamb are attributed seven. 115 Ten horns of the Dragon and of the
Beast. 123. 179 The difference between the ten horns Daniel 7. and the
ten horns Revel. 13. and 17. 179 Why the horns of the Beast have crowns
and not the horns of the Dragon 113
Horses. 33 The Host of heaven. 215
I
ALlusion to the fall of Jericho to the fall of Babel. 100 Jesuits the origin,
their busy endeauours, their date, they are the last puff of Satan his mouth
and of the Vicar of his throne. 165 The conversion of the Jews 80. 164. 167
But most evidently. 168, 139 Whether they shall inhabit their own Landagaine.
168 How great a way the Popes fall shall make to their conversion. 169 Their
conversion and joy upon his fall. 201. 206
John disposed the Canon before his death 269 The Impenitency and Induration of
Papists. 160. 161 The ordinary degrees of true Illumination. 25 How we should
look on the condition of the Church of Israel in the old Testament. 245 What
is requisite to Judge righteously. 212 A description of the last Judgment.
234. 235 The manner of process in the last Judgment, how it shall be led by
that which is written in the books, and yet according to our works: set
forth not for it self or time thereof, but to show the continual,
recurelesse, and final destruction of the enemies, and goodly state of the
Church thereupon, holding still one to the last Judgment, and so, eternal.
236. 237 The year or age of that day cannot determinatly be gathered upon any
ground in Scripture. 241
Julian. 229
K
KIngs. 194 King of Kings and Lord of Lords. 215 The Keys which the Popes
have, to wit, of the bottomless pit. 70 Christ and his Ministers have these
same Keys in a far different sense. 221
L
THe Lamb of God. 27 In what respect the Lamb his slaughter is the reason of
his worthiness. 28 The Lamb his marriage. 206 Seven burning Lamps. 15 Legio
fulminatrix. 43 Lightnings, thundrings and voices. 14 True Light brings ever
true joy. 24 White Linen apparel. 153 Where our Church was before Luther. 140
Lions, Bulls and Cherubins in Solomon his Temple, types of the Ministers of the
word. 18 Two Lions of diverse qualities. 24
M
MAgeddon or Megiddon. 165. 166 Mahomet his time of rising: by what means he
spread his doctrine: the swift course of the victories of his successors. 82 A
Man. 42 The face of a Man. 17. 78 A Man-child. 106 The number of a Man. 126
The measure of a Man. 257 Of an Angel. 258
The Marriage of the Lamb. 206 The souls of the Martyrs cry. 77 The Merchants
and Merchandise of Rome. 195 God even in wrath remembers Mercy. 60 Ministers
of God his word are necessary for begetting in us the life of God. 16 The
properties requisite in them. 17 The light and feeling that ought to be in them
88 They are the light of the world 188 The degrees of a true inward calling of
a Minister. 91 The type of the Ministers who were first open contesters with
Antichrist in three ranks. 133. 134. 135 How they were persecuted. 141 True
Ministers have power over fire. 146
Miracles. 151 Christ is our Morning star. 267 Why the Church is called a
Mountain. 166 Mourning must go before joy. 23 The Mourning of Hadadrimmon in
the valley of Mageddon 167 The Mystery of God; the finishing thereof. 88 89 99.
155 What is requisite for the perception of Mysteries. 173 A Mystery where of
the Author in soberness confesses be dare not determine. 12. Another. 232.
Another. 258.
N
ANtichrist his Name. 79 Christ has a Name which none knows but himself.
213 His Name King of Kings. 215 His Name the Word of God. 214 To have the Name
written on the garment and one the thigh 216 A New World. 241 How Christ
renews the world. 252
The Night for humane sciences 68 Noah his flood semblable to the evil of
Antichrist. 77 Number of the Elders twenty four, the reason thereof. 13 The
Number of four 17. 49 In an other respect. 81 The Number of twelve. 120. 128
The Number of the name of the Beast. 124 The Number of the name of God. 125

O
What makes the Obduration of Papists 173 Odoacer King of the Heruls 17 Our
prayers are Odours. 27 How and in whom they are Odours. 59
The Order of the Revelation. 32. 142. 153. 232 The great artifice thereof. 48.
90. 94. 98. 100. 101

P
HOw to judge of Papists. 136. 137. 141 The cause why Papists be so obdured 147
Their unity. 180 Papisticall seducers may be justly punished by death, yea and
should be. 159 Their impenitency. 160. 161 Their desperate sorrow because of
the light of the Gospel. 161
Christ his feet are Pillars. 86 Pharao a type of the Dragon. 104 That the
Pope is Vicar of Satan his throne. 112 That he is the Beast that Antichrist.
113 It is also proved by three infallible tokens. 183 And by a plain and
forcible argument euinced. 185 The shifts of the Papists for exempting the
Pontificality from this blot. 183 Whence he arriseth. 175 His fall
irrecouerable. 78. 89. 165. 177 His presumption, obstinacy, and unexpected
foil. 218
Aplaine crossing of all Popery. 54 An encouragement to Prayer. 60 The false
Prophet all one with the Beast; and for what cause they be distinguished. 121.
177. 178 The Lord God of the holy Prophets. 254. 265
R
Rain twofold. 62 The Rainebowe about Christ his head. 86 All Religion. 19 The
first Resurrection. 224 Who they are that are said Chap. nineteenth, to rise
the first Resurrection. 224. 225
The Revelation worthy of our study. 11. 265 The dignity thereof showed in two
great points. 21 The course thereof. 32
Riches and authority without wisdom are but the weapons of a fool 30 The
Riches of Christ. 30 Riders on Horses. 33 Christ his Riding on a white horse.
212 White Robes in Scripture have a triple signification. 38 Rome her
presumption. 192. 218 The Renting of her in three. 171 By whom shall her fall
be. 152. 163. 182 The first and second degrees of her fall. 157 The third
degree of her fall 158 The fourth. 160 The fifth. 161 The sixth. 163 What her
fall shall be. 181 It is irrecouerable. 165. 177 And unexpected. 192 The
certainety and greatness thereof. 188. 191. 198 The equity thereof. 189. 198.
205
Yet in considering the equity, a diffeerence is to be put between the state
and every particular member of that state. 193
S
TO the Saints is given a kingdom even here. 107 Satan his twofold dealing
against the Church. 105. 106 What is his first attempt always. 106 How he is
said to be in heaven, to fight there, to be cast down out of heaven into the
earth. 107
The Scripture is only to be heard and no voice else in the Church of God. 25
In what respect it is a little Book. 86 It is kept secure by the Pope. Ibid.
It must be eaten. 91 In the Scripture all is revealed requisite for light or
manners. 266. 267. 268 To couplerightly the parts thereof. 268 The glassie Sea
a type of the Word. 15. 149 The Sea for the common worship. 49. 64 For that
which is below. 120
The Red Sea and pillar of fire, types of the Word and Spirit 150 For what
reason the Sea is said Chap. 15 to be mingled with fire. 150 There was no more
Sea. 120. 250 Seamen. 196 The Seal of God. 51 Seducing of two sorts. 228. 233
The twofold Seed of the Church. 130 Seven Lamps 15 Seven horns and seven eyes
of the Lamb. 26 Seven points of his praise. 30 Seven heads. 118. 175 Seven
Seals, Seven Trumpets, Seven Vials. 153 Seven, diverse times recorded in all
this book, and concerning this number Seven. 232 The Shining of the Bride her
attire. 208 Showers twofold. 62 Two great Signs in heaven 100 The Sign of the
Dragon. 102. 147 The Sign of the Son of Man. 147. 212 To Sit. 191 The
Slaughter of the Lamb the reason of his worthiness, and in what sense must
think so. 24 Sobriety. 88. 211 Example of Sobriety in the Author 12. 232. 258
Solitary places 188 The Holy Spirit his procession and name of Comforter
signified by the Rainebow diffunded about the Throne 12 In a diverse
consideration he both sits in the throne, and also is before the throne set
forth in Seven burning Lamps. 13
Stars, for great men of the earth. 40. For Pastors. 67 And in that case how
they are to be considered. 68
To stand in the Sun. 216
T
The Tents of Saints 233 Theodoricus the Ostrogoth, the seventh head of the
Beast. 122 Thrones. 161 Thrones, Beasts, and Elders. 202 Thrones set for
saints. 228 Christ his white Throne. 235. 240 Seven Thunders. 87 Why their
speeches were uttered and yet not written. 88
The Times recorded in the Revelation. 73 A refutation of Prophetical years
(as they call them. 74. 96
How to understand the Times of the Revelation. 76 The Time of ten days. 76
The Time of five months. 77 How the Trumpets begin and end in respect of
time. 80. 89. 90. The Time of forty two months, and of 1260 days, and of
Time, Times, and half a Time. 96. 231 The Time of three days and a half. 97
Which also is the space that the Dragon is let go loose after his first
binding. 222 The effects of that his loosing 203
The Time of a thousand years. 226 It is the only Time in all this prophecy
to be taken definitly. 230. The Thighi; to put the hand under the thigh: Christ
his name written on his thigh. 216 Tragical times of some Emperors. 43
Treasons of Papists: by whom they are atchiued: how good and worthy works they
do esteem them. 72 And what sets them so madlings a work. 165
The Tribes of Israel. 53 Why they are recorded but to be twelve seeing they
were thirteen. 127
Trumpets. 58 Twelve. 120. 128 Turks, their heads, terrible Army, the great
desolation they make.
V
GOlden Vials types of faithful and pure hearts 27 Golden Vials cups of wrath.
153 The reason why they come in place after the trumpets. 154 On whom they are
powered out. 156 Vintage. 146 Of the Visibility of the Church. 138. 139 The
Unity of the Church of Rome. 180 The Voice of Christ is bold as a Lion, and
powerful as thunder: How to know if the Ministers speak his voice. Pope Vrbane
the second, and his successors, kindlers of the holy war for recovery of
Jerusalem* 229
W
Love of the Wages ofvnrighteousnes 196 The War proclaimed in Paradise. 102.
105 Christianity is a Warfare: against whom it is: and how to fight it out. 108
And overcome. 180
Counsel and strength are for the War 213 The holy War. 229 Waters of two
sorts. 67 Many Waters. 162 The drying up of many Waters 162. 173 White color,
White horses. 33. 145. 212 White robes. 38 White linen apparel. 153 A White
throne. 240 Winds for influence of spiritual graces. 49 Deep Wisdom. 204
The Whore described. 174 Who she is. 182
How the restoring of Prophecy and dispelling of darkness is a Woe. 98. 160
Two great Wonders in Heaven 100 Wondering of two sorts. 174 The Word compared to
water, figured by the Lauer in the Tabernacle, and by the brazen Sea Temple:
and in this book Chap. 4. set forth under the type of a glassie Sea before
the throne. 15. 16 The Word contemned, of a blessing becomes the first of
plagues. 34 The Word is the weapon of Christ his victory. 86. 88. 215 Three
degrees of operation which the Word of God has in the hearts of his own 132
Our Worship to God must proceed of knowledge. 20 The Wound of the Beast in his
sixth head 117 How Works do follow the dead. 142
FINIS.
Faults escaped.
Page 8 Line. 1 Fault. Affliction that Correction. Affliction them that Page 8
Line. 29 Fault. sex. Correction. step. Page 27 Line. 12 Fault. three Harps
Correction. their Harps Page 31 Fault. last Correction. of ingratitude
Correction. of our ingratitude Page 42 Line. 2 Fault. often Correction. of Page
42 Fault. 32. Correction. vncouch Correction. uncouth Page 43 Line. 10 Fault.
Antonio Correction. Antonino Page 43 Line. 30 Fault. Antonius. Correction.
Antoni^us Page 44 Line. 26 Fault. while Correction. which Page 46 Fault. last
Correction. bewhiche Correction. bewitch Page 56 Line. 14 Fault. endure
Correction. indeare Page 60 Line. 29 Fault. God even Correction. God is even.
Page 91 Line. 16 Fault. beget them of the world great. Correction. beget them,
of the world, great trouble. Page 158 Line. 16 Fault. sailed. Correction.
failed Page 160 Line. 34 Fault. first Correction. fifth Page 188 Line. 33 Fault.
damoniak Correction. daemoniak Page 239 Line. 2 Fault. Daniel 2. Correction.
Daniel 12. Page 212 Line. 26 Fault. Chap. 4. Correction. Chap. 6. Page 219
Line. 20 Fault. there Correction. thereto


In page 104. in the marge^t above the antepenult line, add Micah 7. 15

In page 219 line 20. after these words, for thereto is the allusion, insert
these words, as also Dan 2. the Image whereby these same kingdoms were
typically showed, is then said to be destroyed when the stone falls on the
feet thereof.


