CORNV-COPIAE, Pasquils Night cap: OR, Antidot for the Headache.

NON INTRET CATO autsi intrauerit Spectet.

Martialis

LONDON, Printed for THOMAS THORP. 1612.

Proaemium.
UNTO the kindest men that ever wiu'd,
Whose titles from the Cuckoe are derived,
And thereof Cuckolds named:
To all the Francklins of the horn,
Whom scoffing Peasants use to scorn,
And greatly have defamed:
And unto all our friends in Cuckold-shire
Health, happy fortune, and their hearts desire.
Pasquil, a terror erst to foreign States,
To mighty Princes and great Potentates,
In every other nation,
Perceiving here the Horn defaced,
And honest Cuckolds sore disgraced,
With terms of detestation,
Lately in England is arrived from thence
In challenge of a Cuckolds excellence.
If any Cuckold-maker him deride,
(For none but Cuckold-makers have enui'd,
A Cuckolds commendation)
Or sleering knaves which on it look,
Condemn it for an idle book
As still it is their fashion,
Pasquil protests, allthough they scoff and flout
Hereafter he with them will have about.
And little does he care, though they forsake it,
For not for them did Pasquil undertake it,
To win their affectation:
For honest Cuckolds was it penned,
To them this Work does he commend,
And craves their acceptance.
Then grudge not (gentle Sirs, without offense)
Kindly to read a Cuckolds just defense.
And yet in reading here I humbly crave,
No foolish applications you would have,
Nor censure things at randon,
Nor private meanings would surmise,
Whereby fond quarrels might arise,
True friendship to abandon.
Nothing but mirth did Pasquil here pretend,
Judge not before you read: and there an end.
Pasquil Anglicanus

-- Iuuenesque Senesque
Et pueri nasum Rhinocerotis habent.
Sed absit a iocorum nostrorum simplicitate malignus interpres.

Cornucopiae. OR, Pasquils Nightcap.
FIE, what a vaine-conceited world is this?
Whose judgment, error blindly leads astray,
Accounting that as right which is amiss,
Laughing at folly, as a sport or play.
Great sins are termed but a great man's pleasure,
When lesser faults are plagued out of measure:
New titles salve old sores; and every sin
Some honest name is allwaies shrouded in.
A Broker now is thought an honest Trade,
Though some by selling of stolen goods do live,
Theeuing is now an occupation made,
Though men the name of Tailor do it give.
Bribes are accounted but a freindly fee,
Dissembling taken for pure honesty:
Pride is reputed handsome in apparel,
And he most valiant, that seems most to quarrel.
The goutie Machiuilian murderer,
Whose codpeece is near 20. winters old,
Now scorns the title of an usurer,
And must be fashioned in an other mold:
The greybeard must a Monie-man be cleped,
Because great store of money he has reaped:
Or Mony-maister he to name must have;
Though he unto his money be a slave,
A Tos-pot spend-thrift, and a swaggering Jack,
Which have no pleasure but to drink apace,
And take in liquor, till their bellies crack,
Looking as red as scarlet in the face,
Must be good fellows: and the foolish Boore
That spendes his money to maintain a whore,
Is termed a youthful and a gallant lad:
Though men of judgment think the gallant mad.
The Prodigal that wastes his fathers pence
In carding, dicing, riot, and excess,
Must have a title of an other sense,
A liberal man, and void of niggardnesse:
And he, Gulam euacuat vt Arcam impleat.
whose shape does like a Ghost appear
For want of victuals, food, and bellie-cheare,
The starued miser, fearful, pale and wan,
Is the good husband, and the thriuing man*
Lust is esteemed as a youthful sport,
Lascivious gesture, as the Courtly fashion:
And wanton minions, with the wanton sort
Thrust modest matrons forth of reputation.
Sin is no shame: O blush my muse to tell!
More shame befalls the good for living well;
Wives play the wantons, husbands were the horn,
And patience, (though a virtue) wears the scorn.
A simple gull, clad in a silken case.
Brought out of Satan's wardrobe for his back,
Which learnes new fashions, and forgets old grace,
Turning his pinnes, till all his stringes do crack:
Which for a spanish block his lands does sell,
or for to buy a standing Pickadell,
Which struttes, and stampes to move his golden spurs,
That with their gingling he may fear the curres.
If his sweet worship with his horse-taile lock,
(As he does trauerse neatly through the street)
Scrape favor with some female-wedded smock,
Which by her carriage seems for pastime meet
Straight he is bold to bourd her to the play,
And either she must yield, or say him nay,
And howsoever matters after frame,
Her husbands forehead still bears all the shame
For whether gossips when they sit and talk,
(As women envy one an others bliss)
Seeing the gallant sometimes thither walk,
May by conjecture shrewdly speak of this,
Or whether she herself may spread the sails
(As women's tongues be like to young lambs tails)
And tell her pleasure to an other friend:
And thus the world have knowledge in the end.
Or whether brave Iuuentus play the blab,
Which vauntes himself a gentleman at least;
And when he waxes weary of his drab,
Meeting his mates at Tavern, or at feast,
Reveal the fault: or howsoever it be
That time bringes forth the fruits of lechery,
I cannot judge; yet thus much I can say
The Cuckold carries all the shame away
As for the woman; she is a wanton less,
A good kind wench; or of the dealing Trade:
The cuckold-maker (though as fond as Ass
As ever in this world, dame Nature made)
Is termed a gallant gentleman, and brave,
Though he by right should other title have,
But for her husband, he which wears the horn,
He is plain cuckold, and must bear the scorn
Sometimes this prodigal the Chapman plays,
And to the Mistress sometimes ill allied:
When as, God knows, these are but subtle ways,
Devised, least their knavery should be spide,
Else with her husband and company does keep
To graft the horns upon his head more deep.
And thousand other shifts do they devise,
To horn the Cuckolds head, and hood his eyes.
And yet not only do they blind his sight,
Which not so much as dreams of any wile,
But often it happens by a cunning slight,
One crafty knave another does beguile:
And when the Hunter thinks to strike the Bucke,
His hopes are crossed by some disaster luck,
" For true it is, when Fortune comes by chance,
" There fortune helps the boldest to advance.
But certs it is a strange and uncouth thing,
To see a pilfring and a picke-purse knave:
Which well deserves to stretch an hempen string,
And climb the gallows for to seek his grave:
Diue to the bottom of a true man's purse,
Take out is coin, and not accounted worse;
And he, to whom the loss did erst befall,
Pass with a scoff, to mend the match withal.
These are the humors of these present days,
Where lust is taken for a lawful thing,
The Dolphin on the water skippes and plays,
When as Arion soundes the silver string:
A homely bit in secret some digest
Better then dainties, when their husbands feast;
Stolen bread is sweet: Panis furtiuus dulcit.
In April and the Spring
Needs must you give the Cuckoe leave to sing.
And (sooth to say) needs must that pleasant foul
Strain forth the plaine-song of her pretty note,
When crooked age, half parting with his soul,
Will on a wanton Minion seem to dote.
And he which has one foot within the grave,
Will needs bestride a gennet young and brave.
Well may the Cuckoe sing at such a wedding,
When age and youth together go a bedding.
Nath'lesse I will not justify this part,
And bolster up vain folly with my quill,
A frolic forehead has a wanton heart,
This wicked world in prone enough to ill:
But in my judgment, if it might so pass;
An old man fool, that weds a youthful Less,
Deserves a coxecombe, and to be withal,
The chief Commander in Sow-guelders Hall.
Well erst Lycurgus in his providence,
Wisely forbad all aged men to marry;
For (certs) he knew their insufficience,
Must by all reason make their wives miscarry:
When once the stock is dead, decai'd and rotten*
Small is the fruit which from that tree is gotten.
Young Plants afford increase in seemly order,
Shrubbes serve for nothing but to fill the border.
Would it not make a Cynnicke laugh the while,
And Agelastus for to sing and whistle, The father of Croesus.

(Which never in all his life was seen to smile,
But when an old Mare once did eat a thistle)
If they should see a whithered rotten scold,
A toothlesse beldame, sickely, lame and old,
When she can neither go nor stand upright,
Address herself in armor to the fight.
And is it not as foolish and as mad,
To see old Mumpsimus, that gouty Sire,
Pranke up himself like to a youthful lad,
And look as handsome as a Pippin Squire?
And when he scarce has breath to keep in life,
Desire to couple with a youthful wife?
The fool deserves to wear a moatley coat,
When he should think on death, begins to dote.
For little knows the VVoodcocke, what pertaines,
Unto the pleasures of the marriage bed,
When that an empty paunch for food complains,
Nature requires (I wis) it should be fed,
A young wild colt, when grass begins to fail,
Leaps forth his bounds, springs over hedge and pale
And never rests in quiet, till he know
Or find a field, where better grass does grow.
No marvel then; if that a lusty Less,
That looks as fresh, as does a flower in May,
When she is mated with a foolish Ass,
Which storms like VVinter on his wedding Day,
Sometimes seek change of pasture and Prouant,
Because her commons be at home so scant,
For in a dried red herring, and poor John's,
Remains more virtue then in old men's bones.
What comfort can a newly married wife
Have in the company of such a drone,
Which (like a Cricket) does consume his life,
And lies in bed as cold as any stone,
Moving no more, then does a dead man's coarse,
Coughing and spitting, like a rotten horse,
Pained with the Palsy, vexed with the Gout?
Better a woman were to live without.
Would it not grieve a dog to smell the meat,
And have it hanging still before his nose,
Yet cannot get a morsel for to eat,
Though hunger force him bark, and tell his woes?
Less were his torment never to espy it,
Then to behold the meat, and not come nie it,
Far better were it still a maid to tarry,
Then want such things, for which a maid does marry.
And fitter were it knock her on the head,
And rid her forth the sorrows of this life,
Then by a lingering pain to live as dead,
Void of the sports belong unto a wife:
And like to Tantalus still thirst for drink,
When as her lips do well nere touch the brinke.
This is the cause prouokes an honest maid
Become a Mistress in the dealing Trade.
For when she wants that which her neighbors have,
Which are not half so beautiful as she,
So propper, fine, welfauoured, and brave,
Neither so fit for sport and iollity;
Yet blessed by their fortune and good hap,
Sit playing with their children in their lap.
Well may she with much patience brook the matter,
But (sure) her teeth perforce must run of water.
And if she fall in longing for the Thing,
Which is the instrument of earthly pleasure,
And binds more firmly then the wedding ring,
Begetting little children out of measure;
Her health and life upon her longing stands.
And what good can she look for at his hands,
Whose feeble ioints are stiff for want of marrow
And has less courage then an old cock sparrow?
Scarce is an old man fit to bear a lance,
Or play the soldier in a warlike field;
For might he wantes his weapons to advance,
And to resist his foe with spear and shield,
But less of force he is a maid to wed,
And play the soldier in the marriagebed.
For he that lackes strength to endure the fight,
Is no fit man to skirmish in the night
Wedding (some say) it is a kind of war, Ovid.

Whose field between a pair of shetes is pight,
(Though otherwise sometimes befall a jar,
When huswiues fingers chance to be too light)
Then he which such a matter goes about,
Must needs be strong, courageous, and stout,
For sharper conflictes marriage does betide
Than ever soldier in the wars has tried.
The most victorious man that ever lived,
(Strong Hercules that famous warrior,
Which twelve admired labors once atchiu'd,
And never fought but proved a conqueror)
Though he with strength was overcome of no man,
Was not of force to wrestle with a woman,
But took the foil, was gave her leave to win,
And for his penance was enioyn'd to spin,
Yea he, Socrates.
which by the Oracle was said
To be the wisest person in his time,
After that he was married to a maid,
Which would not loose the pleasures of her prime,
For all his knowledge was esteemed a sot, Facile diuinabam post tantum tonitru
secquuturam pluuiam.

And beastly crowned with a chamber pot
Strength is but weak, and wisdom seems a fool,
When Cupid leads them into Venus school
If then the greatest courage be to slender,
And learned heads as strtish as a block,
When once they combat with the female gender,
And enter disputation with the smock:
How can an aged, silly, foolish Ass,
Think to encounter with a youthful Less,
Neither of might the battle to endure,
Nor well approved of his furniture?
Yet if (forsooth) there be no remedy,
But that the doting Gray-beard must be wed:
Let ancient Nestor for to please his eye,
Make choice of old Ninosa for his bed.
For still by nature they do best agree,
Which are alike in age and quality:
And sooner will the North Pole meet the South,
Then frozen Age be pleasant unto Youth.
One asked of Diogenes in jest,
What time of life a man were best to marry?
Well he replide: For youth I think it best, Iuueni nondum Seni nunquam.

Because it is too soon, that he may tarry,
And for an old man, since it is too late,
Let him content himself with single state.
A little wind blows blossoms from the tree;
And rotten apples eat unpleasantly.
Scarce I suppose, that any young Maid would
Consume her Summer by cold Winters fire;
Though by constraint, or for the Misers gold,
Some have adventured on an aged Site:
But either she before has had a fall,
And weds old Crust that he may father all:
Or else to have more scope and liberty,
Under a color for adultery.
But whatsoever the pretense do prove,
That young and old do jointly come together,
Well may the woman make a show of love,
And smooth her brow in token of fair weather,
And at the first seem loving on her part,
Yet sure I am she loves him not in heart.
For if that fortune bless her with good hap,
Doubtless his head shall wear a horne-wrought cap.
And (certs) a Cuckold is a dignity,
To good by much for such a doting Swain,
And to the worship of that Company,
It is a great discredit and a stain,
To have that gouty Peasant rear his Crest,
And think himself a Cuckold with the best:
In my conceit, his wife is much too blame,
To grace him with the credit of that name.
But here (me thinks) I hear an apish knave, Objection.

Demanding in his proud and scoffing fashion:
Are forked heads of late become so brave,
And horns aspired to such reputation,
That this word (Cuckold) which was erst a name
Always attended with reproach and shame,
Should on a sudden in our times step forth,
And prove a name of credit and great worth?
What glory can he challenge, or renown,
Whose wife is truly noted for a whore?
Keeping another children as his own,
And bears the badge of infamy before?
What credit to a Cuckold can befall,
Whose wife, as common as Westminster Hall,
Bestows on others what is his by right,
And of the Forked Order dubs him Knight?
Peace prating Cynicke, Confutation.
least thou prove do.
A snarling curre will bark at every season.
The grosser fool, the sooner shoots his bolt,
Although his words be void of wit and reason.
Little thou know (poor fool) thy great amiss,
In scandalizing such a name as this;
Which in they rashness thus do injury,
Thy self, thy friends, and famous Cuckoldry.
But whatsoever thou art, that seem to scorn,
Carping the welfare of another state,
And thus derid'st the credit of the horn:
(To great a glory for a scoffing mate)
Seek not too much a Cuckold to defame,
For fear thy self be subject to that name,
True is the saying, though it seem a jest,
The Bird is filthy that defiles her nest.
And how can thou repute thy self as free,
And quite exempted from the Cuckoes song,
Since thousands (far superior unto thee)
Grudge not her ditty should to them belong?
For any a man of woman borne,
Is subject by destiny to wear the horn:
And though as yet no horns attend upon thee,
Fortune hereafter may bestow them on thee. Actu vel potentia.

If thou be linked in the Gordian knot,
And bound in fetters of the marriage state:
Grieve not the horns should fall unto thy lot,
Or that the Cuckoe sings before thy gate:
For if thou marry, still make sure of this;
To bear with patience, what thy fortune is,
Neither repine a Cuckold for to be,
But bless thy fate, and thank thy destiny.
And never love thy wise a whit the worse,
For which (I wis) thou art beholding to her:
Nor seem for this to frown, brawle, swear, and curse.
Because she has a little been a doer;
But rather praise her for her kind devotion,
Since she has lift thee up to such promotion:
Be not dismayed, though saucy knaves do jest,
Thou art exalted to bear such a crest.
And let base sleering scoundrels talk their fill, Knight of the Forked Order
and not inferior to some new Knights.

And idle muddy brains out-braue their better,
The world does want no fools nor ever will:
Dolts scoff at learning, which scarce know a letter.
And lame blind Batard ever is as bold,
As brauer horses which for more are sold:
None is more pressed to blot a Cuckolds name,
Then he which is both void of wit and shame.
Now if these spurre-blind Peasants could but see
How much themselves they blemish and disgrace:
And how they shame their friends and progeny, Cave ne patrem serias.

Their kindred, their acquaintance, and their race,
They would not speak so rashly as they use,
Nor seem so much kind Cuckolds to abuse:
The greater is their folly to deprave,
That title which perchance themselves may have.
Better it were for old men say the best,
Or else say nothing, and to hold their tongue,
Then at a Cuckold either scoff or jest,
Which might as well to them before belong:
And let the married without fear and shame,
Seek to uphold and patronize that name,
Clearer he is not which the same denies;
For (cert's) blind men do swallow many flies.
And as for young men, which do chiefly scorn
The ancient badge of famous Cuckoldrie:
It is their duty to applaud the horn,
And to defend it by their chieualrie,
And at all times a Cuckolds part to take,
Both for their credits and their kindreds sake,
Though now their head-peece be not fully cast,
Each dog must have his day: No time is past.
Neither can they exempt themselves as free, Bachelors may be Cuckolds; when
one is fair promised and an other speedes.

Allthough in marriage they have had no doing
At Cuckolds-hauen many landed be
Even in the very time they go a woing:
And some have such good fortune in their play
They prove right Cuckolds on their wedding day,
For certain I have heard of such a lurch
The very hour before they went to Church.
What person is he of so special gift,
That can affirm he does a Virgin Marry?
Many a wench has had a secret life
Which of a Virgin still the name does carry,
In every corner maids there are great store;
Yet diverse of them have been tried before:
A Jade in smith-field sooner may you find,
That buy a courser, sound of limb and wind.
Wise is that child (the common Proverb says
Though scarce I do believe it as my Creed)
Which so much knowledge of his father has,
He can avouch, that this is he indeed.
For though the mother do protest and swear
Her husband did beget what she does bear,
Yet now-adaies men are so much beguild,
They often prove fathers to an others child.
This has the usual practice of this time
Made most apparent, and as clear as day,
For when young gentlemen be in their prime,
And give themselves to wantonness and play:
If that they chance a country-maid to prick,
And with a Timpanie the wench grow sick,
Then straight his seruingman or hackney-foole
Must be a cover to his masters stool.
And not alone are serving men so mad,
To father what an other has begot,
But better persons now and then are glad
To taste what others put into the pot,
For scarce a wife of any gallant carriage
Does now perform what she has vowed in marriage,
And so great virtue has attracting gold,
Many cannot be honest, though they would.
If some seem chaste, it does of this proceed,
They have the wit to do, and not be spied,
And know by deep dissembling and good heed,
With sober looks their wanton lusts to hide.
Some women must be wo'ed, they are so chaste,
And some there are which tempt poor men as fast
That to conclude, as Ariosto taught,
Many of them belewd, unchaste, and naught.
Phar'o, Herodotus.
the King of Egypt, being blind
For ten years space, Observe this ye watercasters and reserve the water of
chastity to cure your own blindness.
made trial of this matter,
When by the Oracle he was assing'd
To wash his eyes in such a woman's water,
Which kept her faith inuiolate and right,
And never had to do with any wight
But only with her husband: Then should he
Again recover sight, and clearly see
Many a woman's water Phar'o tried:
And many a chambor-pot to him was brought, Vrinalls were not then in use

Yet still his sight was unto his denied
Because the female urine helped naught:
Nor could his wife release the woeful King
By the distilling virtue of her spring,
Long lay King Phar'o in great grief and pain,
Despairing ever to have fight again.
And, but that one at last of honest life,
Which after many thousands thither came,
And was approved a true and faithful wife,
A modest matron, and a virtuous dame,
Restored his sight by virtue of the fountain,
Which bubbled purely from her bearing mountain;
He yet had lived in darkness, and been blind
For such Physicians still are hard to find.
Here may the reader 3. things chiefly gather,



The first many might challenge as their right;
The last had power to give the blind their sight;
And how could children know their fathers well,
When as their mothers truly could not tell.
Much could I wish that Phar'o were to try
The virtue of this medicine once again,
That we might see what faith and loialtie
In married wines does at this day remain
Sure many of them, which have done amiss,
Would say they had the stone, and could not piss:
And many which we judge could not be blamed,
Then to make water would be much ashamed.
Then should you see some women, which make show
Of pure behavior, and great honesty,
Which will not touch a man, for ought we know,
Nor once be seen in profane company:
Which walk in little ruffes, and set their face
So simpringly, as if they still said grace:
Then should you see them by their vrinall
To be found merely hypocritical.
Then should you see, how dainty and precise
Many fine minions would be at this martter
Affirming that it could not help his eyes,
To have them washed in a woman's water;
But that it was the superstitious trick
Of some profane, ungodly Catholic,
Because within the Primitive of yore,
They never read of such a thing before.
Then should you see some men, which do deride
And scoff at others wearing of the horn,
When their own wives did come for to be tried,
How they should be requited with like scorn,
Then many women, which seem coie and nice,
Would be dissemblers found by this device:
So that if Phar'o now releast would be,
It would be long, ere he should clearly see.
Nath'les I will not be too cynicall,
To condemn every woman for this fault,
Nor for a certain number blemish all.
Each beggar is not lame, though (...) hault.
Nor every woman of so small compunction,
To violate her faith and holy function
For many women (doubtless) may be found
Which keep their plighted promise whole and sound
And God forbid, that we should all condemn,
Though all do taste the tree of good and ill:
For in so great a number, some of them
Must needs be honest (though against their will)
Some are for fear as modest as they may,
And worldly shame which holds them from their play:
And some reserve their loyalty untainted,
Because with Gallants they are not acquainted.
And some for want of more convenient place,
And time, which for such pleasures are elected,
Preserve themselves from blemish and disgrace;
Chiefly, because they would not be suspected:
And some for other idle unknown cause,
Observe a while their vows and marriage laws:
But very few of them, which to the last
For love of honesty continues chaste.
Sometimes the golden prey does make the theife,
And women yield for further maintenance:
Sometimes short commons makes them seek releife:
And stubborn usage and stern countenance,
Perforce constrain a woman now and than
To seek for comfort of a kinder man;
And sometime want of hearts, when hands are married,
Is one great cause, that many have miscarried.
For it is not now as erst in elder days,
When marriage was contracted by affection,
For kindred now so much the matter swaies,
The parties have small choice in loves election;
But many times, ere one behold the other
An unadvised match the friends do smother:
And howsoever they two can agree,
Their friends have wooed, and they must married be.
When they are wed, behold the ill success.
They live like dogs and cats, in brawles and strife,
Before they loved not: Now they fancy less,
She hates her husband: he abhorres his wife:
The devils dance to see the just confusion,
Of enforst marriage. And to make conclusion,
He grows a careless unthrift, bare and poor,
She turns a shameless and detested Whore*
Thus many either for this last respect,
Or for the causes which I late recited,
May justly for their knavery be suspect,
And by the laws of honesty endited:
Where though that none do give in evidence,
Nor sit as Judge; but their own consciene:
Certain it is, the most would guilty stand,
To be condemned to dye, or burnt in the hand.
For either lust, revenge, or want of love,
And unkind husband, or desire of gain,
The tender hearts of women does so move,
(As old and new examples show most plain)
That few of them, if they have fit occasion,
Are able to withstand a weak invasion:
For they are frail, unconstant, apt to range,
Faire-fac'd, false-hearted, and by nature strange.
Chaste wives are as the grapes, which we may see
To hang upon the Vine; (the vintage past)
Or as the Apples, which are on a tree,
When blustering Autumn has her pride defaced,
For such a dearth of honesty is tried,
Since Patient Gresill, and True Constance di'd,
That if a wife be honest; if once crossed,
It is almost as strange, as the great frost,
Here could I cote a rabble of those wives,
That you would wonder but to hear them named,
Which whilome led such lewd dishonest lives,
That to remember them I am ashamed,
But that the multitude and mighty number,
Were good for nothing, but your ears to cu^ber:
Nor need we any proofs from grave be brought,
We have too many living which are naught.
Nor will I here their other vices scanne,
Which more then to a million do amount:
He that would know them, may in Mantuan
See a great number more then I can count:
As envy, scolding, swearing, lying, pride,
Dissembling, and a thousand faults beside,
Which I forbear: because beyond my tex
I would be loath those loving worms to vex.
For they are creatures, which God made, to nurse
And comfort man; to increase and multiply:
But first, for comfort they procured his curse,
And brought a woe to man's posterity:
Yet for the increase which was of them required,
They often bring forth more then are desired:
Filling their husbands barnes with others corn,
As if to bargain they were only borne.
For instance of this truth, I can proclaim
Diverse examples which are worth the hearing:
To show; that wives, before they will loose their game,
Will still be taking up, and fall to bearing:
But that I fear I should to much offend them,
And yet, although I know it will not mend them,
One I Will produce; because I do not love
T'affirme for truth, more then I well can prove.
Within the spacious bounds of fertile Kent,
(The Country, which for Long-tailes is commended)
Where the increase of Rabbets paies the rent,
And six days labor is in one day spended:
Whether the Cittzens (when days are fair)
Sail down for pleasures, and to take the air:
T'eate plums and cheries: and about the Spring,
To hear the Nightingale and Cuckoe sing,
There is a Town; I list not tell the name
(Nor is the naming worth a Graues-end Tossed)
Men of all Countries travail through the same,
And (if they money want) may kiss the post,
English, Italians, Turks, Moors, Spaniards, Germans,
Danes, Scots, French, Irish, Muscouits, and Normans,
And new Virgineans, and of every sort,
Some white, some black, some long-men, and some short.
Some honest men, some fools, some knaves, some wise
Pass through this Town, of all degrees at large,
Some thieues, some Tailors, which do still devise
New foolish fashions to put men to charge.
Some Citizens, some Cuckolds there ariues,
Some queans, some Maids, some bawds, and some good wives*
And through this Town they travel to the ferry,
To be conuai'd by Tilt-boate, or by VVherry.
It is the place as now I call to mind,
Where Mariners and their espoused Mates,
Frollicke at farewell, while they stay for wind,
Which should transport them over to the Straites,
It is the place whereas they kiss and part
With weeping eyes, and with a heavy heart,
Forward he goes his voyage to entend,
Back she returns to meet a secret friend.
Within that Town there whilom was an Inn,
Where man and horse at liuerie might stand,
There dwelt an Hostess with a double chin,
A buxone wench, as any in the land:
She now was old and tough, yet in her youth
She was a morsel for a Parsons tooth;
Tender and fair, and plump; and with the rest
Courteous, and kind of welcome every guest.
And therewithal well could she talk and chat,
And tell of faries, and do other things
Her friend to pleasure. But what matter's that;
Her husband knew not, where the shoe him wringes,
For though she was a wanton, she was wise,
And knew what times were fit to fall and rise;
And in her head this Proverb still did carry
Although thou be not chaste, yet be thou charie.
And (sure) Icon her thank and mickle praise
(Considering many of them do step a wrie)
That she could line her shoes with vnder-laies
So cunningly, that few the fault did spy:
For since at Lodam they all love to play,
And will play false, yet her commend I may,
That so can shift great Loaders from her hand,
No lookers on, nor gamesters understand.
What with our eyes we see not in this case
We grieve not with our heart, (as people say)
Nor does the Forester, which keeps a chase
(Unless he see men bear his game away
Or by the blood find where the Dear did fall)
Suppose he wants any game at all:
For how can Warreners their conyes miss
Unless they come, just when the hunting is?
But though that marriage makes most husbands blind,
Or else of one eye all of them depriues,
That what their left hand does they cannot find,
Nor see the secret dealings of their wives;
Yet had my subtle Host some small suspicion
My Hostess was too pliant of condition;
But they that Iunes and Ordinaries keep
Must often see and wink, and wake and sleep^
For, trauailers when they are in their Inn
Love to be merry, and to make good cheer:
How ere they swagger, it must be no sin,
The forehead of my Host must still be clear,
And though they chance my Hostess for to (...)
My Host must say, there is nothing done amiss:
For they will pay like Kings, for all they take
And I have dowe (Gods plenty) for my cake.
For what care I? or wherein am I worse
Though others tine their candles at my light?
Or though an other man does use my purse?
If still my candle burn both fair and bright,
And that my purse return home without tearing,
With store of money, nothing worse for wearing.
For this position I will ever hold
It Is better wedde a Baggage, then a Scold,
Thus was mine Host content to let his wife
Keep company, and welcome every guest,
No foolish jealousy did stir up strife,
Nor fond suspicion did their state molest:
For she was merry, and did love to play,
And with her mirth mine Host could well away:
For though his wife did hault: he knew as much,
That all his neighbors wives did need a crutch.
But to go forward. Now they both were old,
And past the pleasures of their youthful nature
One child they had, more dear to them then gold,
A pretty maid, just of her mothers stature:
Like her in face, in person, and in favor,
Like her in qualities, and in behavior;
In all things like her mother, but in one,
Her name was Kate; her mothers name was Ione.
Her father loved her well, because he see
His wives true image in his daughters face,
A forward Impe she was, and like to be
A proper woman, (if she want not grace)
For to speak truth, and without partiality,
She was endu'd with many a pretty quality,
For she could sing most sweetly, da^ce most finely
And on her virginalls she played divinely.
At upper end of table, by her mother,
Dinner and supper, lovely Kate did sit,
Whereby discoursing still with one or other
She grew to have a pretty ready wit,
And could both jest, and taunt, to make a laughter,
That all men said she was her mothers daughter,
And so she was; for you shall ever find,
" That crows breed crows. And cat will after kind.*
But time past on, and Kate was past a child,
And in the teenes about a year or two;
When nature, which can never be exiled,
Made her conceive, what she was borne to do.
For now vain lusts, and idle prouocations,
Stirred up her mind with loose imaginations,
And this conceit still in her fancy ran,
The chiefest pleasure was to know a man.
And now she thought (good Lord) what happy lives
Have women allwaies after they are wed?
How pleasantly and merry live those wives,
Which have a man to comfort them a bed?
What fools are maids, to hold that thing so dear,
Which lets their sports, and grieus the^ for to bear?
This I resolve, though yet I do not marry:
My maidenhead I will not longer carry.
Thus courteous Kate decreed: and even the best
(Often times) about her years are so inclined:
For their virginity does so molest,
And is so great a burden to their mind
That scarce a maid (so soon as she has skill)
But keeps her maidenhead against her will.
And very many of them I have seen
For grief thereof grow sickly, and look green.
But Kate had vowed that sickness to prevent,
And not to lead old grinning Apes in hell,
And therefore she betimes to Physic went
The causes of that malady to quell.
And tasting of some drugges within a corner,
Which first were ministered by the captain Horner,
She liked so well the Apoticaries stuff,
That she did think, she nere should have enough.
This Captain Horner sometimes loved Kate,
And she likewise good will to him did carry:
But private quarrels stirring up debate
Mine Hostess was unwilling she should marry:
And therefore he, for fear they should him mock,
Gave Kate her farewell with a private knock:
Of which kind blow she took so good a liking,
That al were welcome, which would sal to striking.
Behold a woman's unrestrained thirst,
Her greedy appetite, and great desire:
After that she has broke the hedge at first,
And tasted of the fruit which all require:
Her mind is so unbounded without measure,
That she in never satisfied with pleasure,
But still (like to the grave) for more does cry,
Or (like the horse-leach) which is ever dry.
In such a gaping case was wanton Kate,
After that she had tasted of the potions,
Which Doctor Captain Horner gave her late,
To bridle and repress her youthful motions:
For though she did desire to drink before,
Yet now her thirst increased ten times more.
For after we have found the sweet of sin,
We worse refrain, then when we did begin.
Thus Kate gave bridle to her liberty,
And (when occasion served) made not dainty,
For she had put her self in ieopardy
To try the battle at the least with twenty:
And she was grown so skillful in her play,
That very few went conquerors away:
But they that with so many have about,
Shall sometimes have the worst I make no doubt.
It Is bad in sickness to have diverse Doctors:
Their sundry medicines will but make thee worse:
In law'tis foolish to fee many Proctors,
For some will harm thy cause and hurt thy purse:
So it is no wisdom in a wanton maid,
To use her pleasures, as a common trade,
And make her pastimes like her occupation,
Which were invented for her recreation.
So long the pitcher home does water fetch,
That by some knock it broken does return:
So long the fly does at the candle cletch,
That in conclusion she her wings does burn:
So long a wench may Physic use to take
To cure the griping of her belly-ake,
That she may surfeit in such dangerous case,
As she will be the worse a twelue-months space.
Thus it befell to Kate, that was so frolic:
Her bucket now was broken at the well,
She now complained that she had got the collicke,
And maruailed much to see her belly swell:
Her mother gave her drinks, and with a charm
Did clap the pot-lid to her belly warm,
To kill the worms. But all her means are vain,
They are no worms that put her to such pain.
Sometimes about the stomach grief she feels,
And sometimes of her back she does complain,
Sometimes a quick thing in her with two heels,
She thinks does stir, which maks her fear again
She is with child: but yet she does not know,
For it may be her guts, that tumble so:
Or it may be with fatness and with wind,
That she grows big before, and broad behind.
But now she did begin to long for Cherries,
For Codlings, Pescodes, and for Apple-pies:
And now she feign would eat some Gooseberries,
And every thing which came before her eyes;
Or others told her of, or she could name,
She still desired for to taste the same:
So that the Mother seeing this effect,
Somewhat began her daughter to suspect.
And one day taking Katherine aside,
Into the Parlour or some private place,
She began to tell her that she had espide
Both by the change of color in her face,
And by her longing for so many things,
And by the griping, which her stomach wrings,
That somewhat in her body was amiss;
And therefore, Kate, come tell me what it is.
Tell me (quoth she) and do not hide thy fault,
And if thou have offended, let me know it,
It Is hard before a Cripple for to halt:
For I perceive, although thou will not show it*
That thou have been too busy with a man,
And art with child; deny it if thou can:
Tell me, for though we cannot help the same,
Yet by prevention we may hide thy shame.
Kate, which knew well her Mother was too wise,
To be dissembled with in such a case,
Thought it was bootlesse for to blind her eyes,
Which could discern her folly by her face,
And therefore on her knees she fell before her,
And for remission did with tears implore her,
And since denial could no comfort bring,
She plainly told her Mother every thing.
And first she told her: how that Captain Horner
Before he trauail'd to the Newfound Land,
By chance did meet her in a secret corner,
And pressed her for a soldier of his band:
And how that diverse other men of Arms,
Besieged her afterward with fresh alarm's;
But who had blown her up; and made her swell,
Mother (quoth she) in truth I cannot tell.
Now Benedicite, her Mother said,
And have thou been already such a Twigger,
I durst have sworn thou had been yet a Maid,
And would have been so till thou had bin bigger.
Art thou begot with child, and can not gather,
Out of so many, one, to be the father?
Nor any but the Captain can thou name,
Which long since went to sea? Now fie for shame.
With that she shook her head and bent her brows,
As if she had been angry; when behold;
Mine Host comes in, to whom mine Hostess shows
Their daughters sad mischance, (as has been told)
Which when he heard; setting his cap aside.
He was so angry that he could not chide:
At last he said: And has she played the whore?
Fie on her, Baggage, turn her out of door.
Mine Hostess, seeing him to grow so hot,
Stepped out, and spoke to him with speeches mild,
Desiring him, although there were a blot,
He would remember that she was their child:
And not to cast her off, for one fault past;
For neither is she first nor will be last,
Of good men's children (sure I think as she)
That in their youth offend in this degree.
But husband (quoth she) it is no time to brawle:
We all have faults, and need for to amend:
The deed is done, and words cannot recall
That which is past, nor bring it to an end:
Many that now seems honest in their lives,
Have done as much, before that they were wives.
It Is true (quoth he) But this is too too vilde,
She knows not who is father to her child,
If she could name the Sire, I did not care;
For by their marriage she might hide her shame.
Allthough he were a beggar, poor and bare,
Or if he were a cripple, blind and lame,
Or whosoever, if she knew the father,
And could produce him, I could bear the rather:
But neither knowing him, nor his abiding,
This is a wonder worthy of deriding.
Lord (quoth mine Hostess) what a coile you keep!
Was never other woman so beguild?
Some I have heard have been conceived a sleep,
And never knew the Father of their child.
And some have such good luck their faults to smother,
That they will lie with one, then wed an other.
And wonder not, because she has miscarried,
For she is as good a maid, as most are married.
We all have faults: and it is a woman's nature
To love a man: She has but done her kind,
For when that I was young, about her stature,
I was unto the sport as well inclined
As others were: for we have all been sinners,
And sometimes love it better then our dinners,
But God forgive us all. Both we and you,
When we are young, will do as others do.
Well (quoth mine Host) I tell thee once again:
These things are not the point, whereon I stand;
Let me but know the man, which took the pain
To sow his seed in her vnfallowed land,
And I am pleased; and will do all I can
To have her quickly married to that man.
Within her furrows have there plowed so many,
That for to reap the crop she knows not any?
And what of that? mine Hostess then replied:
Can it be helped now with words or wind?
Fitter it were for us to seek to hide
Her shame, before the world the same do find,
Then like a pair of fools to prate and chat
Unto no purpose, of I know not what:
One man she knows; but he is such a knave,
With my consent she never shall him have.
And who is he (replied mine Host at last,)
For whom your liking does no better stand?
It Is Captain Horner, which some 6. months past
(Quoth she) went this way to the Newfound land.
But he is so great an unthrift, that he would
Consume this house, if it were full of gold:
And he is a Papist, and I wish her quick
Laid under ground, then wed a Catholic.
Surely (quoth he) it is strange to see your mind,
That he (whom in times past you did commend
To be an honest thriftie man, and kind,
And who has ever been our special friend)
Should now so far be cast out of your favor:
That, though it fittest be that he should have her,
(All things considered) yet you are so turned,
Before she be his wife, you would wish her burned.
But howsoever of the man you deem,
Or what conceit is come into your mind,
I cannot tell; yet he to me does seem,
(For I will speak no worse then I do find)
To be a civil gentleman of carriage,
And like to do as well as she in marriage:
And (be report) he has a heavy purse,
I pray to God, our daughter do no worse.
But it is no matter; once he would have had her,
And then she must not look on Captain Horner:
Now she is puffed, and blown up in the bladder,
And now there is not doubt, but he does scorn her
And yet your anger is so furious still,
He shall not marry her with your good will,
I think a woman in a spright infernal;
If once she hate, her malice is eternal.
It had been better that a chimny-sweeper
Had married her, if they two had affected,
Though we had after been compelled to keep her,
Then with this shameful deed to be detected.
For by that means; though he were never so base,
She might have looked her neighbors in the face,
And now we both may keep her for our store,
And she shall ever be esteemed a whore.
Yet in my judgment, the best remedy
That I can find to cover her offense,
Is, that is have we send her privily
Unto our friends or kindred, far from hence,
Where for a season she shall make abode,
Until that she be eased of her lode;
And after that the child is put to nurse,
She may return, a maid no jot the worse.
There like a wife shall she herself attire,
And so shall blind the Country with a wile:
Here we will say, if any do enquire,
She Is gone to soiourne with our freindes a while:
And when the child is beggar, and can run,
We will maintain it as our cozens son:
And it is no news: for I have known a dozen
Which kept their bastards, and did call them cozen.
But if the matter chance to be descri'd,
And that it be diuulged in the Town,
Some honest place we will for her provide
At London, where she shall remain unknown;
And there (as Countrymen do use to jest)
She Will be a Maid, as good as is the best;
For it is a usual practice and a witty
To send up broken vessels to the City.
Old hats, old clokes, and other such old ware,
Bought at the second hand, and almost worn,
The Citizens dress up, and trick them fair
And sell them unto Countrymen in scorn:
Again, the Countrymen in lieu of this
Send up their wenches, that have done amiss,
Cracked maids, gross widows, and such broken Truls
Are good enough to marry Cittie-Guls.
For I have known some wenches, that have borne
Tow or 3. bastards (at the least) a piece,
So that they were derided, had in scorn,
And hooted at, as if they had been Geese;
And after all these mockes, and much a do
Have gone to London but a year or two,
And there within short time have proved good Maids,
And been well married unto men of Trades.
Therefore this course is good, if you think fit,
For first abroad she shall be safe delivered,
So that our neighbors shall not know of it,
And if her folly be at home discovered,
Then unto London may she quickly wend
To take such fortune there, as God well send;
Yet if that I might rule the roast, much rather
I wish, that Horner might the bastard father.
That Horner might! replied mine Hostess then,
I wonder why so much you talk of him:
In faith I could not love him of all men,
He looks so black, so rigorous and grim:
Besides, he has no Trade to live upon,
Nor lands to keep him, when the wars are done.
And there is an other thing, which I like worse,
All his wives spending must come from his purse.
Oh, it will grieve a woman to the heart,
For every farthing that she does bestow,
To make account, how she did it impart,
So that her husband must of all things know:
For we have many secret means to spend,
Which are not fit our husbands should intend:
For if that of them all they notice had,
The most of them (I fear) would run stark mad.
It is your Citizen, which keeps his wife,
Gorgeous and gallant, with all prodigality:
She lives at pleasure; leads a merry life;
Sits in her shop with all formality:
He has a mystery which seldom fails;
And she a great allowance by her vailes;
Her cob-web lawne, the altering of her wings,
Come from her vailes, with many other things.
And truly it is wonderful to hear
How some of them will brag of their great vailes:
Boasting they gather 40 pounds by year,
From the pill'd scrapings of a few sheep tails:
And some from shreds, and horns, and such like stuff:
Are able every week to buy a ruff:
That (sure) I think them in their hattes as good,
As Gentle-women in their veluet-hood.
Indeed the Gentle-woemen look more high,
And of the Citizens will take the wall;
Yet have they but their pension quarterly,
To keep themselves, and find their house withal:
If they want trifles, or would be more brave,
Out of housekeeping they must pinch and save:
They have their coaches, and great Vardingals;
But Tradesmens wives have often better vailes.
And certainly, if I may have my will,
A Citizen shall marry her, or none,
And therefore if you have no better skill,
Or care not whom she have: Let me alone;
I Will see, if I a husband can provide
The child to father, and her shame to hide:
And though I know not whose it is by right,
It should be fathered, ere it come to light.
Nor will I stand engaged to any friend,
To be a Masque to cover our disgrace:
Nor unto London after shall she wend,
To make her honester by shifting place:
For these are foolish shifts, and common means,
Practiced by none, but ordinary Queanes,
And though a while these tricks their faults may hide,
Yet at the length their shame will be descri'd.
No, this devise too much in use is grown,
And will not hold out water to the last:
For it is no question, but it will be known,
Then all our fat into the fire is cast,
And she undone: For no man, but a Dastard,
Will love a woman, which has borne a Bastard;
Nor shall you find a man, will wed a Whore,
If he can learn that she was so before.
And therefore, husband, take a fools advice,
And if you love our credit, and her good,
Provide a husband for her in a trice,
Before that her offense be understood:
You know she is our only child and heir;
And (though I say it) welfauored and fair;
And there are many young men that do watch,
And would be glad to light on such a match.
First there is Master Peter at the Bell,
A Linnin-draper and a wealthy man:
Then Master Thomas, that does stockings sell:
And George the Grocer, at the Drying Pan:
And Master Tymothie the Wollen-draper,
And Master Solomon, the Leather-scraper:
And Master Frank the Goldsmiths at the Rose:
And Master Phillip with the fiery Nose.
And Master Miles the Mercer at the Harrow:
And Master Nick the Silke-man at the Plow:
And Master Giles the Salter at the Sparrow:
And Master Dicke the Vintner at the Cow:
And Harry Haberdasher at the Horn:
And Oliver the Dier, at the Thorn:
And Bernard Barbor-surgeon, at the Fiddle:
And Moses Merchantailor at the Needle.
And Master Hercules the Iron-monger,
(Some say that he is worth 2000. pound)
And Master James, Of old Iron.
that sels fresh Cod and Congerl.
And Master Roger Scriuener at the Hand:
And Master Anthony th'Apothecary:
All which would willingly our daughter marry;
With diverse others that I know beside,
Which would be glad to have her for their Bride.
All these are Citizens, and well to live:
The worst of them is worth 300 pound;
And with our daughter we as much will give;
Then fear not, but a husband may be found:
For (sure) among so many we shall find,
(Doubtless) some one or other for our mind,
And yet to choose one man before the rest, Hercules.

The Iron-monger I do fancy best.
For he is wealthy (and I crave no more)
And with our daughters love is strong infected;
He has made diverse motions heretofore,
Though hitherto he has not been respected:
Still he pursues his suite, and is her lover.
And he will fitly serve her fault to cover:
Therefore the next time that he does come hither,
Let Us knit the knot, and tie them fast together.
I see (replied mine Host) it is no lie:
The young Cock after the old Cock learnes to crow:
Well may our daughter tread her shoes awry,
If like unto her Mother she does grow.
Yet since I hear that she has done no more,
Then (almost) all the kind has done before,
I am content to do what shall be fit:
Broche you the meat, and I will turn the spit,
Thus was the plot set down and all agreed,
That Master Hercules should be deceived,
And that it should be brought to pass with speed,
Before it could be known she was conceived.
Behold ye Citizens what is concluded,
Whereby your simpleness might be deluded!
Hereafter more advisedly beware,
To set up shop with suck like broken ware.
Now master Hercules, that little knew
What subtle stratagems were lately plotted:
Whither it was, that Cuckolds luck him drew:
(Which none can shun) or love had him besotted,
I cannot at this present well discuss,
But in conclusion it did happen thus;
After 2. days to Billinsgate he went,
And ouer-sea set forward into Kent.
The Tide that morning fell at four a clock,
Two hours at least, before the day did spring
Many good morrowes had the cheerful Cock
Chanted to Cuckolds, clapping with his wing:
Good morrow master Hercules he cried:
Be stirring early, or you loose your Tide:
Take Tide in time. The Tide for none will stay.
Good morrow Cuckolds: Neighbors al good day.
Thus sang the Cock* But he more vigilant
Then is the Cock, was watchful like a Cat;
Which having found the hole, and usual hant
Of some delicious Mouse, or nimble Rat,
Still pries and peepes, and never can be quiet,
Listening and watching when she may espy it;
And though she wink, no rest her eyes can find
The Mouse does run so much within her mind.
Even so lay master Hercules that night,
Telling the clock, and could not sleep a wink
The love of Kate did haunt him like a spright,
And still upon his journey he does think.
No sooner had the clock resounded three,
But from his bed he started suddenly;
And in his brave new suite leapt out of doors,
And ran to Billinsgate, and there took Ores.
Black gloomie clouds did ouerspread the sky,
And foggie vapors did obscure the air,
So that the Watermen could not descrie
(Almost) which way they should conduct their fare,
For such thick mistes upon the water fell
It was as dark as if it had been hell
But he, to whom fair Katerin did give light,
Would have adventured in a darker night.
For as that famous Hercules of old,
For his friends sake to Pluto's kingdom went:
Even so this other Hercules the bold
For his fair Kate did ferrie into Kent,
And without Moon or Star his way to guide,
Courageously saild forward in great pride,
Dreading no dangers of the darkesome night,
No Oules, Hobgoblins, Ghosts, nor water-spright
For love did make him bold and valiant,
Fearelesse of Neptune, and his Trident Mace:
No clouds, nor mistie darkness could him dant,
Nor storms, nor tempests, make him turn his face.
But though it was so dark, they could not see
Before their bote, above two yardes or three,
Yet forward with great courage did he flote,
And sung this dittie, sitting in the boat
Fortune my foe, why do thou frown this night?
Ye lowering heavens, why do ye look so dark?
Though neither Moon nor Stars do give us light;
Yet little Cupid does conduct our bark.
And he will bring me where my true-loue is,
That face to face we may confer and kiss:
For as the Moon amongst the Stars does shine,
So amongst all Maids does beauteous Katherine.
Thou little God, that with thy golden arrowe
Did wound my heart, and made my belly rumble,
Give me the courage of a young Cocke-sparrowe,
That precious Kate with valor I may tumble.
Oh that my words may be so eloquent,
That I may tickle her with complement!
Oh pierce her (pretty Cupid) with thy sting,
That I may prick her with another thing.
My lovely Kate, which sleep at thy ease,
And do not dream* that I to thee come sliding,
Would I were partner with the skipping fleas
Which in thy bed with thee have their abiding:
I would not bite thee in that grievous sort,
But hip and skip, and kiss, to make thee sport.
For as the pricklings of the rose bring pleasure;
So should my ticklinges be esteemed a treasure.
Ye bold Corriualls, which do love my Kate,
Leave of your wooing, and give me the way,
My valiant heart in love admits no mate,
Before I loose her, I will kill and slay.
For as the mighty Hercules ran mad,
And for a woman lost the wits he had:
So If I have her not, I greatly fear,
I shall run mad, or else go very near.
Thus did he sing: and further would have chanted,
But that a sudden fear his note did stay,
Stopping his voice, and so his spirits daunted,
That he (poor man) could neither sing nor say.
For just against the leauelesse forked tree,
Which every passenger desires to see,
Whereon the Arms of Cuckoldrie appears,
There was he ducked over head and ears.
The reason was; because an other bark
Coming from Court at Greenewich with a fare,
And not descrying the other in the dark,
Met them so strongly ere they were aware,
That master Hercules without a word
Was cast to fish for Salmons over board;
And both his Mariners close at his heels
Did follow him for Lampries, and for Ecles.
The other bote far better fortune had,
And with a little staggering kept her head,
But master Hercules, whose luck was bad,
Sunk to the bottom, like a lump of lead;
Yet there perceiving, ere he further went,
It would not be the ready way to Kent,
With hands and feet he dashed and he waued,
And like a rushing Porpoise him behaved.
Upward he heau'd his body from the ground,
And plunged as proudly as a water-dog:
Loath was he at that present to be drowned,
Though he could swim no more then can a log.
For life is sweet, and he would gladly save it,
Nor would it loose, so long as he can have it:
And therefore it is no marvel if he strive
With all his might to keep himself alive.
He strikes the water, and would gladly swim;
But there was one thing did his swimming let:
His head was heavy, and did trouble him,
And out of water that he could not get.
And therefore now he greatly began to fear,
That without doubt he should be drowned there,
And (sure) except some lucky chance betide,
And other father Katherine must provide
For Master Hercules was now grown faint,
And now his breath no longer could contain,
And now in heart he sighed, and made complaint,
That he should never see his love again:
Yet here behold! when he was most in doubt,
Despairing ever that he should get out,
Then was his succor nearest to his hand,
To save his life and bring him to the Land.
O valiant Hercules, thou Champion bold,
Courageous suitor unto lovely Kate,
Fear not (brave man) but quickly take fast hold;
Good fortune at thy elbow does awaite:
Put up thy hand and apprehend that Oar,
Which for thy succor houers thee before;
Dread not that death can desteny withstand,
At Cuckolds-Hauen thou shall quickly land.
A happy Oar did happen then to swim,
Unto the place where Hercules did diue,
Which was a means most fortunate to him
His preservation thereby to contriue:
For as he plunged in that pitteous plight,
His hands by chance upon the Oar did light:
Which he held fast and lifting up his head,
Help friends (he cride) or else I am but dead.
The other Boat, which was not far away,
Hearing him call, drew to him by the sound,
And finding him at last in that array,
Much like a Rant that had been almost drowned,
They lift him up, and on his feet him reared,
Which looked as though he had been lately feared,
Or rather like the picture of a Ghost,
Pale, speachlesse, staring, standing like a post.
His limbs for cold did quake; his teeth did clatter
And from the dropping Cisternes of his breech
Down both his trembling legs ran forth the water,
And he for fear was almost void of speech:
But coming to himself and there espying,
That his apparel stood in need of drying,
And that his ioints were stiff, and wanted fire,
To be conuaide to shore he did desire.
Angry he was in mind so to be wet,
And therefore thought at first with them to brawle;
He saw those were the men that had them met,
And in the water overthrown them all:
But when he did consider in the end,
That quarrels would not this mischance amend,
He wisely them entreated in good sort,
That to some Haven they would him transport.
Not far from thence there was a landing place,
A Port of great report throughout our Nation, Cuckolds-Hauen.

Which latter times have branded with disgrace,
With terms of slander, shame and detestation;
Though heretofore it was a place of rest,
Where married men were fortunate and blessed,
And where the Horne-aboundant did bestow,
Riches and honor both to high and low.
There whilome did a famous Temple stand,
To Lady Fortune sometimes dedicate,
Where all the horned persons of the Land,
Did once a year conuene to celebrate;
But chiefly Citizens; upon whose Crown,
Fortune her blessings most did tumble down:
And in whose ears (as all the world does know)
The Horn of great Abundance still does blow.
Within this Church an image was erected,
Which did the Lady Fortune represent,
Crowned with mighty Horns, to be respected,
For worth, for beauty, and for ornament:
All gilded and beset with precious stones,
Which far were fetch beyond the burning Zones:
So bright with these fair ston's the horns did flame,
That none but married men could see the same.
Within her lap whole bundles their did lie,
Of earthly blessings, and terrestrial joys;
Wealth, honor, pride, acquaintance, vanity,
VViues, weddings, night-caps, and a thousand toies;
All which in such abundance she did cast,
(But chiefly on the Citizens) so fast,
That with the weight, so ponderous and so great,
Many of them about the brows did sweat.
With one of her fair hands she marriage made,
And coupled two together, man and wife;
With the other hand a pair of horns she laid
Upon the husbands head for all his life:
Then all the blessings, which her placket filled,
She seemed to shake, and on his head distilled,
The reason was (observe it now and then)
That Cuckolds often are the wealthiest men.
A horned Altar stood before her face,
Old dotards here which mary youthful wives;
And all old women, void of wit and grace,
Deprived of shame, and weary of their lives:
Which wed young boys, had wont to sacrifice,
For fortunes favor at their enterprise:
On whom by right she always did bestow,
Helmets of horns, to bear off every blow.
And at this Shrine did offer of each sort:
All those, which having spent abroad their stock,
At home have nothing to renew the sport,
But by their wives lie senseless, like a block,
They and their wives did here both offerings make,
And each received horns for the others sake;
For try who will: The proverb still does threate,
Who strikes with sword, the scabbard shall him beat.
And here did offer many a saplesse Sot,
Whose frigid nature, wanting moisture due,
Made his wives tillage prove a barren plot,
Till fortunes hand with horns did him endue:
But after that his offering here was made,
The fruitless soil, which was for barren laid,
Without his husbandry or helping hand,
Often proved more fertile, then he would demand.
This place was famous, and of great report,
Until Wat Tyler (as some books have said)
With all the rabble of the Kentish sort,
Havoc and spoil through all the country made.
Then was this stately Temple overthrown;
The Image and the Altar cast quite down;
All things defaced, and topsie-turuy turned,
Fortune disgraced, and all her horns were burned.
Thus Fortunes Temple fell: for what can stand,
Against so wilful, and so wild a crew?
Where love, nor faith, nor fortune can command,
Nor care, nor fear of dangers that ensue:
But Fortune, angry this great spoil to see,
And sore incensed with this injury
With such revenge the rascal Rebels follows,
That most of the^ she made to climb the gallows.
The rest, which by remission of the King
Escaped the halter and the fatal Tree,
She likewise plagued with another thing
(Foul shame to them and their posterity)
For from their backe-partes near about their rump
Did spring a loathsome and deformed lump,
Covered with hair; which growing pe^dent down,
Showed like the tail of Munckie or Babowne.
Thus was that rash and rebel crew of Kent
Plagued with tails of wondrous admiration,
And so continued downe-ward by descent
From man to man, by many a generation,
And though they curtailed them, or did them pare,
It could not help: They grew again as fair.
And hereupon a longtime to their shame
They and their race of long-tailes had the name:
Long time those long-tailes did remain in Kent,
Ashamed of themselves; and monsters deemed,
And no devise could find for to prevent,
And rid their tails that so deformed seemed.
But still the more they labored to avoid them,
The longer still they grew, and more annoid them:
Until a man of Art by skill did find
The means to cure their malady behind.
Who sitting one day in his private cell,
Casting an eye upon his Kentish tail,
With incantations of a Magick-spell,
Able to make great Rhadamanthus quail,
He coniur'd up a spirit; and charge'd him tell
The first occasion, how this shame befell,
And by what means they might the same escape,
And bring their buttockes to their ancient^ shape.
The fiend replied I can thee plainly tell
This shame attendes you for your sires offense:
For when in former times they did rebel,
They Fortunes Image used with violence,
Defaced her famous Temple, and in scorn
Consumed with fire her gilded Crown of Horn;
Whereat displeased for them and for their seed
Fortune this punishment of Tails decreed.
If therefore from the ignominious stain
Of long-tail'd Kentishmen you would be free:
Endeavor fortunes favor to regaine,
That she may cure your great deformity;
And for her Image, which was erst dejected,
Let some fair Monument be there erected,
That your submission may with her prevail
To the consumption of each Kentish tail.
Hereat the spirit vanished out of sight,
And left the Inchanter musing: which with speed
Assembled all the long-tailes, that there might
By wisdom and aduisement be decreed,
What Image, portrature, or Monument
Were for this purpose most convenient
To pacify the Goddess, and redress
Their beastly back-partes, and uncomeliness.
At Canterbury met this congregation
From every Town and village within Kent:
Where after much ingenious consultation
It was at last concluded by consent,
That on the fertile banks of that fair flood
Where fortunes famous Image whilom stood,
An horned Pillar there they would exalt
TO appease the Goddess for their fathers falt.
And, that it might be done with more respect,
And fortunes greater honor; they decree,
That at the time, when this should take effect,
Great store of Kentishmen in their degree,
Knights, gentlemen and yeomen, of the best,
Of common people, should be ready dressed,
In all their brave accoutrements, to grace
The forked Pillar to the foresaid place.
The 18. of October was proclaimed Saint Lukes day.

To be the day of this great celebration.
Against which time, each longtaile before named,
Made much provision and great preparation,
And unto Canterbury took their way,
There to be ready at the appointed day,
To give attendance in most sumptuous manner
On fortunes Pillar with nil pomp and honor.
Now was the instant come to play this prize,
The day of good Saint Luke; which was of old
The time, when men were wont to sacrifice
At fortunes Temple, (as before was told)
Chosen the rather, that their Present might
Better respected be in Fortunes sight:
And that she might behold with what desire
They were conformed to pacify her ire.
And now the long-tailes in their best array,
Preventing the Sunrising by their have,
Assembled were, before the dawning day*
Had nights black curtains from the sky displost.
The thundering drums did rattle through the town,
To summon every gentleman and Clown:
All which no sooner heard that loud Alar'me,
But like to Bees together they did swarm.
When lo! a glorious Post you might behold,
Fairer then any stake in Grayes-Inne field,
Or the large pastures of Saint Georges hold,
Or Finsburie, or Islington can yield,
Which in a cart (as thieves to hanging ride)
Are thither brought by Archers in great pride,
Guarded with gunners, bilmen, and a rout
Of Bowmen bold, which at a cat do shoot.
Forgive me, Fortune, that I do compare
Those painted posts with thy renowned Pillar;
Those gaudie stakes, which for no purpose are,
But rouing marks for Longbows and for Tiller:
For even so much for beauty, worth and gloss*
As Cross in Cheap excels old Charing-Crosse;
So much and ten times more this peerless stake
Exceeds those Posts, which Archers use to make.
For not with in a Carmans durtie Cart
(As if it wear to Tiburne) was it laid;
Nor plaisterd over with the Painters Art,
Which with a shower of rain is seen to fade:
Nor on the top a Cat-Amount was framed,
Or some wild beast, which nere before was tamed,
Made at the charges of some Archers stout,
To have his name canonized in the clout.
Upon a chariot was this Pillar mounted,
(A chariot framed of the purest Horn,)
Whose workmanship here cannot be recounted,
It was so curious, fine, on four wheles borne:
Two Gotes first drew this chariot, then 2. Rams,
Two Vincornes then followed, tame as Lambs.
Lastly 2. sober Oxen with slow pace
Held up the chariots head with horned face.
The pillar was of wood, all gilded fair,
Beset (like precious stones) with studdes of horn:
Upon the top did stand a goodly pair,
Fairer then any Cukold erst has worn:
From whence two lively trees did seem to grow
Bearing all sorts of fruit: to make us know,
That howsoever fools their fortune scorn,
Profit and pleasure both spring from the Horn.
Now drums and trumpets fill the air with thunder;
When first the chariot began to move her wheels:
Now Canons and Caleeuers seemed to thunder,
Then shoutes and clamor followed at the heels:
The Clergy first before the Coach did sing;
The Waits did play and all the bells did ring,
Bag-pips played horn-pips, some did dance the Morris,
Some wind their horns, and some with cornets flourish
Before the Chariot all the married went,
According to their place and due degree:
Behind it all the Batchelours of Kent;
Marched in order very gallantly:
Beside all these so great a troop, and throng,
Did fill the passage as they went along,
That many were sore thrust and wanted breath,
And some were crowded hard, but not to death.
For as you see upon that solemn day,
When as the Pageants through Chepe-side are carried,
What multitudes of people thither sway,
Thrusting so hard, that many have miscarried.
If then you mark when as the fire-workes fly,
And Elephants and Unicorns pass by,
How mighty and tumultuous is that press,
Such were those throngings, and no jot the less.
But notwithstanding all this grievous thrust,
Forward they march in decent rank and fashion:
Some, least their tails should daggle in the dust,
Had men to bear them up with ostentation;
But they which wanted men their tails to guide,
Fast round about their middles had them ti'de.
Or else about their necks. For (without fail)
The least was longer then an Oxes tail.
Many of them (the better to express,
Their willing minds Dame Fortune to appease,
That she might sooner cut their long-tailes less,
And curtaile their great rumps to give them ease)
In comely sort their foreheads did adorn,
With goodly coronets of hardy-horne:
As Siluan Satyrs in old time were seen,
When as they danced Horn-pipes on the green:
It were too long to set down every thing,
Which chanced in that progress as they went,
How all the bells in Feuersham did ring,
In Sitting-borne, and other towns of Kent:
What intertainement and precession was
Ordained, when they through Rochester should pass.
And how each Officer in his best gown,
Stood ready to conduct them through the Town.
Nor is it for our purpose to decide,
The hearty welcome given at Graues-end;
How many Citizens came down that tide
With their sweet wives, the show there to attend:
And how at Dartford the tall Sea-marke rod
His stately top and wethercocke did nod;
To bid her welcome; since our end is most,
At Cuckolds Haven to erect the Post.
Where being new arrived: A mighty crew
Of wealthy Citizens did them confront,
Come from the City, that fair post to veiwe,
And all the goodly horns which were upon it.
Which howsoever they desirous be,
Abroad to range strange fashions for to see;
Yet sure for this to range they have small need,
They may abide at home, and better speed.
There had the Citizens large tables set,
Laden with store of victuals and good cheer,
To gratulate the Long-tailes, which they met,
And show the love which to the Horn they bear:
VVhereafter they had fed in bounteous manner,
And drunk a thousand healths to Fortuns honor,
Toward the Thames they drew the horned Post,
And there did plant it strongly on the Coast.
Just in the place where Fortunes Temple stood,
There stands the forked Pillar, stout and tall,
Whose leauelesse boughs are never seen to bud,
Though much stone-fruit do from the branches fall.
VVestward it threatens, and with arms all bare,
Gives warning to the City to beware:
Like to a flaming Beacon, which still shows,
The near approaching of some dangerous foes.
Thus was this famous Monument extolled,
And on the fruitful banks of Thames erected:
Which when the Goddess Fortune did behold,
Perceiving how devout they her respected:
Her anger vanished, and with gracious eye,
She took compassion on their malady,
And all their rumpes, so infamous before,
Unto their pristine beauty did restore.
Thus came their Buttockes to their ancient hue,
Their tails fell off, and on the ground did lie,
When lo! a wondrous matter did ensue,
A miracle, most strange to every eye:
For on a sudden all their tails up stood,
Took root within the ground, and 'gan to bud;
And into willow trees, which there are seen,
Were the^ tra^sform'd, most fragra^t, sweet, and green.
Which when the Kentish-men at first beheld,
Feeling their hanches lighter then they were,
With shootes and joyful cries so long they yel'd,
That many unto Dover did them hear.
And London Bridge with Caesar's Tower did shake.
By reason of the noise which they did make.
But Charing-crosse fell down (as Stow does say)
And broke his neck, as may be seen this day.
But that this strange and great deliverance,
From such huge long-tailes, as they had of late,
Might still be had in fresh remembrance:
That day to Fortune they did dedicate:
Enacting; that for ever once a year,
On S. Lukes day they should assemble there,
To feast and frollicke on these pleasant banks,
And give to Fortune her deserved thanks.
Long time this solemn custom was observed,
And Kentish-men with others met to feast,
But latter times are from old fashions sweru'd,
And grown repugnant to this good beheast:
For now ungrateful men these meetings scorn,
And thankelesse prove to Fortune and the horn:
For only now is kept a poor Goose Fair,
Where none but meaner people do repair.
But whilst it was observed; did befall
A certain matter worthy observation,
For some wild Colts (which Citizens we call)
And when they are abroad it is their fashion,
Being all flustred, in their merry mood
Pulled down the Post, and threw the horns in the flood
But mark a wondrous thing! The horns next Tide
To land above the Bridge were all descride.
The Kentish-men at their next Congregation
Seeing the Post to be purloin'd away,
T'erect another made a consultation,
As like unto the former as they may:
Which was no sooner up: but some again,
Which had small cause for want of horns to plain,
Stole them away: And thus from time to time,
They were abused with the foresaid crime.
Which thing when that these curtailed men espide:
With certain London Butchers they agreed,
That they sufficient horns should still provide,
For to repair the Post when it should need:
And for reward the neighboring fields should be
Theirs and their heirs to hold eternally:
Provided still, that horns did never want,
For then they made a forseit of their grant.
Thus is the Post repaired, and Fortunes Port,
Since Citizens first took their Horns away,
(Whether it be in earnest or in sport)
Is nicke named Cuckolds-Hauen to this day:
And at this place as you shall understand,
Was Master Hercules conuai'd to Land:
An ominous presage (without all doubt)
Of future luck, and what he went about.
The watermen, which tumbled in with him,
Were in the mean time gotten to the shore:
For they by happy fortune both could swim,
Being instructed in that Art before.
Their bote and every thing the others sought,
And unto land with Hercules them brought
Only his hat was mist, which was small harm
His Horn-wroght-cap would keep his nodle warm.
They were no sooner on the banks arrived,
But presently new troubles did begin.
The stubborn watermen of wit deprived
Fell at debate about their falling in,
And first with bitter terms of foul disgrace
Each one reuil'd an other to his face:
And afterward, to recompense their mockes.
They fell from words to blows and boistrous knocks.
Which when stout-hearted Hercules beheld,
(Being unwilling to be beaten dry)
He took his heels, and ran into the field
To shun the dangers of this mutiny;
Where by the glimmering of a candle bright,
Upon a little cottage he did light:
Whither he went, and entrance did desire
To dry his dropping garments by the fire.
Which when the master of the house did hear,
And looking forth did see that miser wight,
Which (like a drowned mouse) stood dropping there
He was much moved at that pittious plight;
And first into his cottage him admitted,
And after bid him welcome, as befitted,
And made a fire, enough to roast a bull,
And gave him Ale and Tossed his belly full.
The watermen, which lately were at iar,
(Seeing the lookers on to give them way,
And not once offer for to end their war)
Did wisely of themselucs conclude the fray,
And after that they found their buffets smarred
From blows they fell to words, and so departed,
Cursing each other with reproaches vile,
After they were asunder half a mile.
And now our mariners no sooner were
Freed from those dangers: and all tumultes past;
But that incontinent a sudden fear
A fresh invaded them, and much aghast.
For Hercules they mist, and sought about,
Yet by their seeking could not find him out,
Then did they call alowd, but all in vain,
Which makes them sear, he is fallen in again.
Near to the shore they searched with their bote,
But no whereby their groping could him find:
His hat they found which fairly there did flote,
With treble Sypers, and with velvet lined.
But missing him, they rowd again to land,
More happy tidinges there to understand
Whither arrived, The dawncing day did show
The little cottage situate below.
Unto that little house forthwith they ran,
And for halfe-drowned Hercules enquire;
When they beheld that lamentable man
In drouping manner drying his attire.
Sadly he looked, and sorrily did sit,
As if he scarce recovered had his wit,
But when he saw the watermen arrived,
His fainting spirits somewhat were reviu'd.
Glad were they to behold each other there,
And 'gan discourse of their fore-passed dangers:
But master Hercules, now void of fear,
Did chafe, and fret, and threat, and curse the strangers,
And, like a Lion raging for his prey,
Did swear revenge, if they came in his way.
For to a young man falls no greater loss,
Then in his wooing time to have a Cross.
The watermen, his wrath to pacify,
Gave him fair words, and 'gan for to relate
How valiantly they made their foes to fly,
And how they soundly knocked them on the pate.
But since (quoth they) all dangers now are past,
And we are safely here arrived at last,
Let Us drink down sorrow, and the day here spend,
And at next Ebb we will ferrie to Granesend.
With this was master Hercules content,
And there that day to tarry he decreed,
(For when we cannot choose, we must consent)
His clothes were wet, and he could not proceed.
For both his health, the time, and his good fortune
To woo in dry apparel did importune:
And homeward to return he was unwilling,
There to be mocked. Twere better spend a shilling.
There all that day, and almost all the the night,
(Too tedious unto Hercules) they stayed:
W'here how they spent the time, recount I might,
But that to trouble you I am afray'd.
Therefore of purpose (as I think most fit)
Those circumstances I will here omit;
Because (for brevity) I most intend
To have them quickly landed at Grauesend.
And now conceive them in their boat again,
Their garments dry, and they fair shipped for Kent:
And now so swift they furrow down the maine,
As if an arrow from a long-bow went:
And now imagine they have failed so fast,
That at Graues-end they are arrived at last.
And now because we will not be long a doing,
Imagine Hercules is close a woing.
Kate had her lesson: and at first was coy,
Yet was she coyly kind, and kindly nice:
Now lift him up with hope her to enjoy,
Now cast him down with doubts which did arise:
She said, his faith and long perseueration,
Had almost forced her to commiseration,
And that she loved: but where our selves we are not
We often wish, when do the thing we dare not.
I do confess I bear you some affection,
Although the same I yet durst never show:
For where the Parents will have all election;
The children must be bended to their bow,
And therefore since their will must be my law,
Let me entreat your meaning to withdraw:
How happy are those maids, whofe fearlesse voice
May of their husbands make their own free choice*
Both hope and fear in Hercules his face,
Were seen to combat: when he thus replied,
Let me enjoy thy favor and thy grace,
And I respect not all thy friends beside:
For though they be unwilling, and withstand
To give their full consent to my demand,
Yet if to be my wife thou will agree,
Without their liking I will marry thee.
Pity it were, your fervent love (said Kate)
Should want his merit and his due desert,
And I could wish, if it were not too late,
To give redress to your destressed heart;
But that my Parents have decreed it meeter,
To have me married unto Master Peter:
The wealthy Linnin-Draper at the Bell,
Though I protest I love you twice as well.
To Master Peter? (quoth he) whar am I,
That Shepeheards-holland should be thought my better
It is my parents will (did Kate reply)
And they intend me to that log to fetter,
But blessed were I, before our hands do meet,
If I were shrouded in my winding sheet,
For sure I am, although I do him marry,
True love unto him I shall never carry.
Hereat she staid and wept. He wiped her eyes,
And wept to see her weep; and thus replied:
My dearest love, before the Sun does rise
Early to morrow do thy self provide,
And secretly to London with me wend,
Where of these matters I will make an end,
For I will wed thee first, and which is sweeter,
I Will bed thee after in despite of Peter.
And let thy froward Parents fret their fill,
Which seek to marry thee against thy mind:
If thou will grant me promise of good will,
And take the course which I have now assigned,
Though all thy friends displeasure seem to take,
And both thy parents do thee quite forsake:
Their frowns or favors I do little stand on,
For I till death will never thee abandon.
Kate, which knew well, when as the Sun did shine
It was the fittest season to make hay,
Did now think meet her Fortress to resign:
Considering dangers issue from delay:
And therefore setting circumstance aside,
Because his love so faithful she had tried,
She was content next morning before day,
Sans fathers leave to steal with him away.
Thus was this match confirmed with many a kiss,
And they on all things fully were concluded:
When lo! mine Hostess (seeming Kate to miss)
Into the room forthwith her self intruded:
And called her forth, for much it seemed to move her
To see her talking secret with her Lover,
And therefore chiding Kate(as much offended:)
Away they went, and so the woing ended.
And now mine Host, mine Hostess, and her daughter,
About these matters did in counsel sit,
Which when mine Host did hear (surprised with laughter)
He much did praise their quick and ready wit;
Which had so soon, and in such subtle wise,
Contrived so fine and strange an enterprise:
And by a stratageme so rare and witty,
Had caught a simple Cuckoe of the City.
But (briefly) there, without more consultation,
It was enacted, by a full consent
Before the cock did chant his salutation,
Or lamps left burning in the firmament:
That Kate next morning should herself provide
To meet her lover at the waters side:
Sad meeting unto him, which must by lot
Father a child, the which he never got.
Time, which does swiftly turn all things about,
Brought on the time for meeting destinate,
When Hercules came softly stealing out,
And at his heels went creeping lovely Kate,
Not daring almost breath (as he supposed)
For fear that her escape should be disclosed:
How happy art thou Hercules to sinde,
A wench so truly constant, and so kind?
A boat was ready into which they enter*
Fair shipped for London, without wind or tide:
And like to Jupiter with his aduenter,
(When as Europa on his back did ride)
So up the Thames in triumph did he ferry,
Proud of his purchase, frollicke, blithe, and merry:
And landing at the Tower, with liberal purse
Married they were for better, and for worse.
Thus is the Woodcocke fallen into the gin,
And in Lobs-pound entangled by a wile:
Behold the fortune of a Citizen,
That makes no conscience others to beguile!
In woing time here likewise understand,
At Cuckolds-Hauen to be cast on land,
How ominous it is, and hard to fly.
The horned chance of forked destiny.
But this is for thy comfort (man of Trade)
Thou neither art the first, nor shall be last,
Which have a voyage in this manner made,
And been on quicke-sands by misfortune cast:
For it is uncertain to the most that wed,
Whether they have a woman's Maidenhead:
And it is as hard a matter to be known,
Whether they keep more children the^ their own.
Therefore ye rural and champ estriall men,
Which live in villages and Country Towns,
Do not deride and mock the Citizen,
As if there were no Cuckolds among Clownes;
As though your maids were Malkins; and your wives
Would carue no Codfish, wanting of your knives,
For it is reported (greater is the pity)
The Country partly imitates the City.
I do confess, the City may of due
Plead of the Horns the more abundant share,
Chiefly by reason of the gallant crew,
Which there reside, and of their dainty fare,
Besides, Plays, Pageants, and the tilting day,
May give occasion for to run astray.
Again, their beauties, and their brave attire
Are greater motives to provoke desire.
Nath'les I would not have a rusticke Swain
Condemn all Citizens to be cornuted,
As the Country were deuoid of stain,
And that the City were alone polluted;
For many Citizens did never set
Their wives in shoppes more Customers to get:
Though diverse wealthy farmers have been known
To keep their Landlordes children as their own.
The thriftie Citizen with lives by Trade
Has in a room or two his wife confined,
So that the want of place has often made
Some women honest, much against their mind.
She never walks abrade, but either he
Or his apprentice watch her narrowly;
So that by any means I cannot see
How every Tradesman should a Cuckold be.
Whereas the Country forests, woods, and feilds,
Groves, thickets, haiecockes, grass, and standing corn,
To such intentes more fit occasion yeildes
And greater liberty to graft the Horn.
And therefore howsoere the Cittie-Dame
For pride and beauty may deserve the name,
Yet Country Marian with her lively brown
Is often as willing to be tumbled down.
Therefore allthough much crazed broken wares
Are vented unto Citizens by chance;
Yet sure the Country people have their shares,
And hand in hand with Citizens may dance:
And this to be no fiction nor a lie
Their Teachers in white shetes can testify:
So that I must conclude. Both Town and City
Have store of Cuckolds, worthy, rich and witty.
But now does Hercules enioie his Bride,
And to his house with glory does her bring
God give you joy, his freindes and neighbors cride,
And send you comfort of your wedding ring.
Thus for a week in pleasures and delights
They feast on days, and frollicke in the nights,
When lo! a sudden storm did ouerspread
The mirth and reuells of their marriage bed.
The Iouiall time of pastime and content,
Which married persons do in kissing spend,
Was scarce begun, when all their merriment
By means of forked fortune mad an end.
And now their Hony-Moone, that late was clear,
Did pale, obscure, and tenebrous appear;
And thrusting forth her horns, did plain bewray,
That some are Cuckolds on their wedding day.
The reason of this sudden discontent,
Which nipt so soon their pleasures in the spring,
Was by occasion of an accident,
A lucklesse chance, and unexpected thing,
That unto master Hercules befell,
Which made him think his head began to swell:
A sudden Cross, which did so much him pain,
That now he wished to be vnwed again.
They were not long conioyn'd in wedlocks band,
But that from them a Messinger was sent
Unto mine Host, to let him understand
The wedding news, and how all matters went:
Which when he heard; with words he Kate reuil'd,
Calling her graceless, disobedient child;
And since she married, (all her friends unwilling)
He swore from the^ she never should have shilling.
This was foam cause, why Hercules might grieve,
And of his hasty marriage soon repent;
(The want of portion, with should him relieve,
The lack of Parents favor and consent)
The want of wealth for which some only marry
Might give him cause with Katherine to vary:
But want of these, nor all these did molest him:
It was too much of one thing which oppressed him.
Too much and more then he was glad to find,
Too much and more then he so soon expected,
Did so with jealous thoughts disturb his mind,
That now his Bride by him was much suspected.
For as one night he chanced to put over
His twining arm about his naked Lover,
'As married men are wont to do in bed)
With sudden fear he was astonished.
For as he there her body did embrace,
Touching each tender and delicious limme,
Her breasts, her neck, her chin, her nose, her face,
So round, straight, pretty, beautiful, and trim:
And finding those so pleasant to his touch,
Downward he felt if lower parts were such,
But on her belly when his hand was laid,
A quick conceit his further searching staid.
A quick conceit, or thing conceived quick,
Under his hand he deemed for to feel,
And now he thought that it did stir and kick,
As if it were a creature with a heel.
But in the end he certainly concluded,
That in this hasty march he was deluded,
And that this stirring motion needs must be
A living child, and two-legd Timpanie.
And do I live? (thought he) or am I dead?
Or do I sleep? or do I dream awake?
Or do I feel? or are my senses fled?
Or does this stir? or do I but mistake?
No sure, I live, and waking have perceived,
That I do feel, my wife is quick conceived;
That I do truly feel, and plainly find
These stirring motions cannot come from wind.
And am I gul'd? and made a laughing stock,
To have my children gotten to my hand?
And had you none (sweet wife) but me to mock?
Or do you think I cannot understand?
Must I be baud unto your base desire,
And cloak your whordome like an Apple-squire?
No, Kate you shall perceive that I have eyes,
And can descerne your wiles and policies.
Herewith his sleeping wife he did awake,
And gravely to examine her begun
What thing is this which does this stirring make,
And up and down thy belly seems to run?
Art thou with child? and could thou find no other
To be thy stake, and make a younger brother?
Or do thou think I am so soon beguild,
That I will patronize an others child?
Kate, with had long before these things debated,
Now of an answer was not to provide,
Nor at his speeches did she seem amated,
Neither to be conceived she denide.
For I confess (quoth she) I feel some thing
Within my belly for to leap and spring,
Which if it be an infant, as I gather,
Here I will take mine oath, you are the father.
Shameless and wicked woman, void of grace,
Do thou not blush (said he) these words to give?
Can it be true, that in so little space
A child should be begotten, move, and live?
Cert's if you prove so soon, and child so quickly,
We shall have store of children it is likely;
But it is so plain, that I will pawn my life,
You were with child, before you were my wife.
And therefore early do your self provide,
And back again unto your friends repair:
For I will be no Goldsmiths, for to hide,
And guild the outside of your copper ware,
Nor will I be a merchant of retaile,
To set your broken merchandise to sale
No, mistress Kate; your counning is too shallowe,
I am not yet so blind such flies to swallowe.
Kate was not daunted at his bosterous threats,
Nor of his mighty menaces a fraid:
Neither for pardon at his hands entreats;
But boldly unto Hercules she said:
Have I (said she) unfortunate, unblessed,
Against my Parents liking and behest,
Only for love (unwisely) chosen thee,
Rejecting many better of degree?
And are you now so jealous without ground?
Or else grown weary of your wedding state?
Do you not know, when marriage once has bound,
That afterward repentance is too late?
Have I cast off my friends at your petition?
And would you now divorce me for suspicion?
Making your self a byword unto men,
And laughing stock to every Citizen.
Well Mynion (answered he) I tell you plain,
I Will not be bob'd with such a slight excuse:
You know, without a cause I do not plain,
Nor will I pocket up this vilde abuse.
For though till death the laws of wedlock bind,
Yet in this case I am not of your mind.
For if conditions be dissolved by you,
The forfeit of the bond, I Will stand unto.
If I (said she) have broke my plighted vow,
Or since the marriage gone one step awry,
Then use the rigor which Law does allow,
And of the forfeite take the penalty:
But from my promise since I have not sweru'd,
But have my faith inuiolate observed*
I crave no favor: Therefore do your worst,
It is your child, and you shall see it nursed.
And though my wrathful Parents for your sake,
Out of their love and favor have me thrown,
Yet both of them I will acquainted make,
And presently send for them to the Town:
And though my foolish choice much has them grieved
Whereby I might despair to be relieved;
Yet since my honest name is at the stake,
I hope that now they will not me forsake.
Thus for that night the conference had end,
And careless Kate fell quickly fast a sleep:
But Master Hercules the night did spend,
In troublous thoughts, which did him waking keep:
Sometimes he thought to put her quite away;
Sometimes supposed it fitter she should stay;
Sometimes to make it known he deemed best;
Sometimes much better that it were suppressed.
For if he cast her off, or make it known,
Though to her share great scandal might betide,
Yet he perceived the scorn would be his own,
And that the world his folly would deride:
Or if he kept her, and the fault conceal,
(To shun reproaches in the commonweal)
Yet inwardly some grief would still be cleaving,
Because that he must take another leaving,
And thus perplexed in his doubtful mind,
Consulting with himself he lay all night,
Until the Rosy morning had assigned,
The clouds of darkness to avoid the light:
When from his bed arising presently,
He went unto a neighbor dwelling by,
His trusty friend, a Midwife by vocation,
Of great experience, and good estimation.
Full twenty years she had a widdowe been
Like to a Turtle mourning for her make,
Yet fat and plump she was for to be seen,
As if but little care she used to take:
Many a match and married copulation
Had been affected by her instigation.
True talkatiue she was, like all the rest,
And could tell bawdie tales, and break a jest.
Some little skill she had in Surgerie,
And could redress, and cure diseases hidden,
Which do proceed from lust and surquedrie,
By tasting of those fruits with are forbidden,
By which occasion she was well acquainted
With diverse Citizens that had been tainted,
And for this secret cause, or for some others
Was Hercules well known to this old mother.
Unto this ghostly Counsailor he came,
And all his grieuance let her understand:
Desiring her, that to prevent the shame,
Which did attend his credit hard at hand,
She would advise him in her policy,
What he should do in this perplexity:
And so the story of his woe he told
From point to point, as I did erst unfold.
Which when old mother Maribones did hear,
Like to a sage and sober Ape she smiled,
And thus replied I wis, my neighbors dear
It is hard measure to be thus beguiled,
And (lure) it cannot choose but vex your mind
Such quick conception in your wife to find:
Nor truly (neighbor) can I much you blame,
If you be moved and angry for the same.
But let me tell you; It Is no time to grieve,
Or raise tumultuous brawles about this thing
Iarring debate cannot your wrong relieve,
Nor any help unto your headache bring.
Rather with patience, and with quiet carriage,
Support the Crosses of your hasty marriage.
For since the Priest the wedding knot has tide,
For better and for worse she is your Bride.
Keep her you must with quietness or strife,
And therefore make your choice of which you will
If she be true or false, she is your wife,
So is she likewise, be she good or ill.
If she be fat and rich, or lean and poor;
If Saint or Devil, honest or a whore;
After the weddings sportfull celebration
It is too late to make a recantation.
To put her quite away for this her claim
In law and conscience you can have no reason:
For since the fault was done before your time,
Cause of divorce does now come out of season,
Since therefore by no means you can forsake her,
But that with all her faults you needs must take her,
It Is rather for your credit to conceal it,
Then to your shame and infamy reveal it.
And yet I would not have you so content,
Wholly to cloak and swallow this abuse;
Make show of anger, wrath and discontent,
Neither allow of any blind excuse:
Threaten divorce, and if that bear no sway,
Privately send her to her friends away.
And bodly let them know, that back again
You never mean your wife to entertain.
Which when her Parents see, that still make show
Of great displeasure at their daughters choice,
And neither will with portion her endowe
Nor with kind look, nor confortable voice.
When they behold their daughter in that case,
Turned out of doors unto her foul disgrace,
Though heretofore they have been proud and stout,
Then shall you see them glad to seek you out.
Then shall you see them humbly to you sue,
With fair entreaties, and much obsecration,
That her offense you would with pity vewe,
And on their years take some commiseration,
And not to make them, and their only daughter,
The scornful subject of reproach and laughter.
Then will they promise much and give you more,
If you will keep her still and salve this sore.
And now, allthough at first you were unwilling
Ever again to take their daughter Kate;
Yet when you see your chestes and chambers filling,
With store of money, household stuff and plate.
Then may you seem by little to relent,
And (in your love) her folly to lament,
And that you please (upon her good behavior)
At their requests to take her into favor
Thus shall you purchase both her Parents love,
Obtain great riches, and conceal your shame:
And this your kindness will your wife so move,
(If she have any grace to weigh the same)
That she will prove so honest, kind, and chaste,
And she will satisfy for all is past.
And all your friends which see her virtuous life,
Will bless your fortune in so good a wife.
And though she be big-bellied with a child,
That you are certain cannot be your own:
Let it not grieve you to be thus beguild,
(Considering that the matter is not known)
Neither refuse to patronize the same,
And Christen it according to your name,
For many wealthy Citizens have done it,
And either did not know, or could not shun it.
For better is your case then many others,
Whose jealous minds are still oppressed with fear,
Ever suspecting when their wives grow mothers,
They are not fathers to the babes they bear,
And still ambiguous, that their wives dissemble,
If their young infantes do them not resemble
Whereas you need not fear to be beguild,
For you are certain it is not your child.
And though it be not yours, nor you can tell
What Cuckoe laid this egg within your nest,
Imagine it is yours, and all is well.
For in imagination all does rest.
Many a man is by his wife beguild,
And yet imagines he begot the child.
For whither children be your own or no,
Imagination only makes them so.
Your wife has done amiss, and so have many
(For who offendes not, either soon or latter)
The most have wanton motions: Neither can I
Excuse my self, unless my self I flatter,
But when that I was young, I was inclined,
As other merry wenches are by kind,
For this is all the difference can be spide
She is least faulty, that can faules best hide.
Then since she is but like your neighbors wives;
(Only her luck is worse to have it known)
Since you are tied together for your lives,
And cannot be diuorst, as I have shown,
And since you cannot her disgrace report,
But it will breed your scorn: let me exhort,
That you conceal her fault; and let her friends
With bags of money make you some amends.
Thus did that polliticke old woman prate,
And Hercules went home well satisfied,
Mean while you must conceive, that crafty Kate
Was neither idle, nor ill occupied.
For she (post have) a messinger had sent
To let her Parents know how all things went,
And to desire them (since she stood in need)
They would repair to London with all speed.
And for to keep without her husbands reach,
Locked in a chamber all that day she sat,
Because she had no mind to hear him preach,
Nor of those matters to expostulate.
But when her Parents were come to the Town,
Out of her chamber she came sadly down,
Her head close bound, her countenance dejected,
And on her knees their blessing she expected.
But they, (as though she had not been their child
Or they disdeigned to know her) looked aside.
With bitter words they sharply her reuil'd,
And outwardly made show to brawle and chide.
But Kate with tears of sorrow and contrition
Upon her knees for pardon made petition;
Desiring them, (since her offense was past)
They would forgive her, and forget at last.
Married I am (quoth she) and, would to God,
That I could truly say I were not married:
But till repentance whip us with her rod,
With headstrong youthful wills we are so carried
We cannot turn: until too late we find
Our selves nto your selves are most unkind:
And yet how blessed and happy were my state
Now to repent, if it were not to late.
But I am tied to such a crabbed Clown,
That all this City scarce has such a fellow;
For he does nothing else but lowre and frown,
And has his hose allreadie died in yellow:
Because I breed, he twits me with a crime,
And says I am with child before my time:
And though I left you all (by his persuasion)
He means to cast me off by this occasion.
Herewith a dropping shower of trickling tears,
(As most of them have weeping at command)
Did stop her speech. And Hercules appears,
Which in the next room all this while did stand;
With whom mine Hostess in great rage and choler
(Seeming much moved to see her daughters dolor
In hasty manner did begin to chide,
That so unkindly he had used his Bride.
And has our daughter against our intent
Made choice (said she) of such a froward mate?
Has she without our liking and consent
(Preferring your good will before our hate)
Left all her friends, and gone with you away,
And in this sort do you her love repay?
Now (doubtless) she has made a goodly match
Fishing so fair, at length a Frog to catch.
What she has caught in fishing (he replied)
May by her belly quickly be perceived,
But for my part, it cannot be denied,
But with a Frog, or worse, I am deceived,
Yet howsoere a Frog fall to my share,
Because in fishing I did not beware,
Since that the Frog too soon does multiply,
I Will neither keep the Frog, nor yet her fry.
The simple truth is this I do not mean
To style an others bastard by my name.
He which did till the furrows, let him gleane,
And reap the crop, that grows upon the same:
Your daughter is with child: and I do find
That by no means it can be of my kind.
Therefore I am resolved, (let come what may)
Within my house she shall no longer stay.
Sir (said mine Hostess) if that she were clear,
I would think scorn to pin her on your sleeue,
But since she is with child (as you do fear)
And ye are married (though without our leave)
Whether that you be willing, or else loath
You shall maintain and patronize them both:
For I am sure you wed not to the half,
Yours is the Cow, and you shall keep the calfe,
She is with child, you say, and what of that?
It Is none of yours, you think: how can you prove it?
I say, if that she be with child, it 's flat,
That you must father, keep, protect, and love it.
But it is not yet a month, since you were married,
And therefore you suppose she has miscarried:
But give me leave to say, you are deceived
For diverse in less time have been conceived.
You are too young as yet, and much to seek,
What to these woemens matters does belong
You think, unless she go full forty week,
That she has played you false and done you wrong;
Alas (goodmen) how cunning you will be
In your wives childing and delivery?
Before you scarce know how to get a child,
You will keep reconing lest you be beguiled.
To see the child begotten is your part:
It is your wives to bring them forth in season,
It shows a jealous and suspicious heart,
How long or short they reckon, for to reason*
Never was man with child. And therefore no man
Can tell those things so truly as a woman:
And therefore to your proof I make denial,
Since by report you speak, and not by trial.
Some fool, or gross Physician brought to light
This fond opinion first of forty weeks:
But I will show by arguments aright,
That this opinion is not worth two leekes:
For though in ancient times it might be true,
Yet in the years and ages that ensue
It still should hold, is no found inference,
As I will show by good experience.
In former Ages, when the world began,
And that dame Nature was in her full strength,
The time of life appointed unto man,
Nine hundred and odd years was then in length,
Then wives had time to breed (as writers tell)
And took more leisure for to do things well,
Their children were far greater, large, and stronger,
Which was the cause that they accounted longer.
For then a child but newly come to light,
Lying in cloutes upon his Nurses knee,
Was every way as great in outward sight,
As now at 20. years a man can be:
And therefore such great children must by reason
Unto their birth require a longer season
Then do out little, silly, Pigmie brats,
Which, in respect of them, are but like Rats.
An other instance likewise does me move,
Which much avails for this truths discerning,
When our forefathers first began to love,
And generations art was but in learning,
Men were not half so skillfull in the Trade,
As now by long experience they are made:
And therefore shorter time will serve (I hold)
To bring forth children now, then did of old.
Again, dame Nature is more fertile grown,
Then erst she wonted for to be of yore,
Twice in a year you see some meadows mowne,
And trees to bring forth fruit, (not seen before)
Twice in a year some Ewes do multiply,
And more then twice some creatures fructify,
And diverse wives, whose faith wants no excuse,
Three or 4. children at one birth produce.
In ancient time full 40. weeks did need,
Because their babes were of a larger size:
But now, dame Nature making better speed,
A great deal shorter time does well suffize.
For many women, after they are wed,
In less them 20. weeks are brought a bed;
And some in ten, and some in more, some less,
According to their kind, and fruitfullnesse.
And which his yet more strange then all the rest,
But not so strange as true; I know a wife,
That was esteemed as honest as the best,
And true unto her husband all her life,
Which, ere a month was fully past and done
After the wedding, had a goodly son:
And yet I know her husband will be sworn,
The child was his, allthough so quickly borne.
And therefore, if you mean to live in quiet,
It is your best to make no further trouble
The child is yours: It boots not to deny it,
And you the father, though she carry double,
Well (answered Hercules) I do not mean
To keep a bastard, and another Queen:
Good words (said she) and then the harm is small;
You must and shall, and there is an end of all.
When as mine Host did hear them grow so hot,
Which all this while stood silent without speech,
With milder words, (as they had laid the plot)
That they would hear him speak, he did beseech:
I cannot tell (quoth he) to what intent
You hold this strong and needless argument:
For many idle words may breed confusion,
But never bring these matters to conclusion.
The case is thus. Our daughter you have married
Without our leave, our liking and consent;
And therefore, if she chance to have miscarried,
It is your just deserved punishment.
If we had been the makers of this match,
You might have said we did you conicatch:
But since it was your work, against our mind,
You must be pleased to take such as you find.
I speak not this, because that I do think
My daughter has played false, and done you wrong,
But for to let you know, that you must drink
As you have bru'd, be it small or strong:
Besides, the fault (if that she have offended)
Against your person cannot be intended:
Because the damage, trespass, and transgression
Was done, before that you were in possession.
Likewise the Laws of Holy Church do bind,
And fast combine you during all your life,
So that no fault, which at the first you find,
Is cause sufficient to divorce your wife,
For by the Priest you underwent this curse,
To have and hold for better and for worse
Then sure by law you never can forsake her,
With all her faults (perforce) you needs must take her.
And never grudge to take her for your Mate,
For she deserves your love: I can you tell,
She might have had your betters in estate,
And left them all, because she loved you well:
And for her honesty I now dare swear,
She is as honest, as her mother here:
It is but some conceit which fear has bred,
That thus with jealousy does fill your head.
Here: Take her, love her, and God give you joy:
And you shall have 300. pound in hand;
And, after we are dead, you shall enjoy,
Our house, our goods, our money, and our land:
And if you think that Kate has you beguild,
And therefore do repine to keep the child,
Send it to us; And we will entertain it,
And at our proper charges will maintain it.
When these good motions Hercules did hear,
Allthough at first he seemed discontent
Yet at the last all things concluded were,
And he well pleased with their arbitrament:
And thus you see how Kate herself behaved,
Whereby her name and credit might be saved:
How Hercules is wiu'd, and well befriended,
And all parts pleased: and thus my Tale his ended.
But from this story, which I late have told,
Some few short observations let us gather
First, how the Citizen for love of gold,
An others child was willing for to father:
Whereby we may discern the servile mind
Of many Citizens in this same kind,
That for desire of profit will not shrink
At such small faults, and greater for to wink.
Yea, some of them are so in love with money,
Or else so covetous to have Horns budding,
That to allure great Bears unto their honey,
And hungry dogs unto a dirtie pudding;
They will not stick to make their wives a Stale
To draw on Customers for better sale;
And unto some it is the surest prop,
To have a handsome woman keep their shop.
And this is one great reason, I suppose,
That in great Towns so many Cuckolds swarm
For when a Woman, beauteous as a Rose,
Sits in her shop, the passengers to charm,
Like to a Ship in tempests does she flir
In danger ever minute to be split,
And though she does escape both rocks and sand,
Yet is not safe, until she come to land.
For after all these stormy gustes are past,
And winds are hushed, and seas are calm and still,
On subtle Sirens she may fall at last,
Whose smiles are wiles; whose kindest looks do kill
Besides, on cruel Pirates she may light,
And be encountered in the dark of night:
And though a while she fight, yet ten to one
Some ca^non shootes her through, and then she is gone
Even so a Citizen, that sets his wife
A public lodestone to attract men's eyes,
Does unto danger leave her honest life,
Amongst both Sirens, storms, and Pyracies
And therefore, if that some be Cuckolds named,
Only themselves I think are to be blamed:
For notwithstanding all their shops pretense,
They are the Bawdes unto their wives offense.
Yea some of them, (as though this were too little)
To hood the forked corners of their head)
Allthough they know their wives are frail and brittle,
And apt into temptations to be led,
Yet unto Tauernes, spectacles and Plays;
And to the Court upon the solemn days,
They will conuoy them very fair and quaint,
As though a woman were an earthly Saint.
And yet mistake not, for I will not say,
But many of them are both chaste and pure:
Yet those are means to make them run a stray,
For golden booties soon do thieves allure:
And yet they need no wind to blow the fire: Cornus. A cornel Tree or a Tree
whereof Butchers make pricks.

For they are hot even of their own desire,
And some of them (though kept with key and lock)
Will graft a horne-thorne tree upon your stock.
A well-conceited fiction I have read,
Among the Stories which old Poets framed,
Of one that had within his careful head
An hundred eyes: and he was Argus named.
And yet for all his eyes which never closed,
But evermore to watching were disposed,
One silly woman he could hardly keep,
For whiles he slept but once, she played bo-peepe.
Oh what deceitful tricks have women kind.
When they intend their lust to satisfy?
How boundless and unsatiate is their mind,
When they are bent to lawless luxury?
How brittle, fickle, wavering, false and frail,
Like to a wether-cocke, still turning tail?
So that to write their faults, who does intend,
May well begin, but nere shall make an end.
But why should I complain of letchery? Objection.

Or press bad wives with such an exclamation?
Since they uphold the state of Cuckoldrie,
And are the pillars of that ordination.
If that the fruit be good, no cause I see,
Why we should fault, or discommend the tree:
Or by our malice seek the man's disgrace,
Which by his cunning graft it in that place.
The end is all (the proverb old does say)
And does approve, or disallow each thing:
Nor do the causes wander much astray,
Which to a good conclusion matters bring.
If that a woman somewhat tread awry,
And follow sports of lust and venery,
Why should we blame her, since she does pretend
Her husbands good, and credit in the end.
What reason have I then (may some suppose)
To rail at women in this bitter manner?
If wives were true, and free from secret blows,
How should their husbands purchase such an honor?
If that a Cuckold be so brave a name,
They rather merit praise, then any blame.
And thus will Momus snarling brood complain,
What late I praised, I now dispraise again.
Well could I wish the world were at that stay,
And every woman of so honest carriage,
That horns, which now bear such a mighty sway,
Might be exiled the bonds of lawful marriage.
But since this fortune has befalne so many,
I say not that I cannot exempt any.
Better it were the title should be graced,
Then honest Cuckolds utterly defaced.
And though when fruit is good, we cannot blame
Or fault the person which did graft the tree,
Yet in the ground which other men do claim,
We cannot plant, nor graft, nor sow as free.
Each has his parcel; that which is enclosed,
Must at the owners pleasure be disposed.
If ground be scarce, the common fields be cheap,
Yet let men sow whereas they mean to reap.
The end is all; and so may Cuckolds sing,
For many men are Cuckolds in the end,
Yet little good proceeds from that thing
To her, which does her husband thus offend.
For where she was esteemed chaste before,
Now she is taken for a paltry whore:
Nor was her end to win him reputation,
But for to quench the flames of fornication.
If that a tyrant merits any praise,
Which does adiudge a Martyr to be slain,
Then does a wanton wife, which spends her days
In making horns to breed her husbands bane
Deserve great thanks: For both alike we see,
To be the causes of their destiny.
But though bad manners better orders breed,
Still they are naught, and shame shall be their meed.
None I suppose is of so vild a life,
But will affirm it by his own confession:
To have close dealing with another wife,
It is a shameless and a great transgression;
Yet though from thence arise a Cuckolds name,
No blemish can redound unto the same.
For often we see, even from a dunghill grows,
Sweet flowers, which neither sent nor odor lose.
Many a man of credit, As Iakes-farmers, Scauingers, and Curriers.
and good place,
Has earnd great riches by a stinking Trade:
And neither does his living him deface,
Nor of a baser reckoning is he made.
Why then should men thus scorn a Cuckolds life,
For that his name comes by a stinking wife?
Who does dislike good meat, is void of wit,
Although a greazie Scullion turn the spit.
Many a wicked father has been known,
To have a son of good and honest life:
And many a famous Cuckold of renown,
Has erst been married to a wanton wife.
And yet the woman's lewdness is no shame
Unto the credit of a Cuckolds name.
For (certs) a Cuckold in his generation
Is held a name of worth and estimation.
And of all men that live upon the ground,
None can more fitly be a Martyr named:
For with such scoffs and mockes his days abound,
As would in truth make any man ashamed,
But that with patience he is possessed,
Which makes him happy and his state more blessed:
For Patience such a noble virtue is,
As will in fine promote him unto bliss.
This is the cause so many learned Clerks,
So many ancient Authors, and grave men,
Did in their several volumes and their works;
Much in the praise of worthy Cuckolds pen.
For where this patience is so much commended,
A Cockolds honor needs must be intended.
And well we may expound them in that sense,
Since that a Cuckold is all Patience.
And rather truly might those learned wits,
Applaud a Cuckold under that pretense:
Because this virtue, which that state befits,
Might bear among them some pre-eminence.
And since it might seem foolish to dilate, The policy of old Writers in
praising Cuckolds.

In open words the glory of their state;
Better they thought to set before her eyes*
The patient Cuckolds praises in this wise.
Tully the Orator so much admired,
The Paragon of sweet-tun'd Eloquence,
In such a robe of glory has attired
A Cuckolds virtue and his patience:
That he not only has preferred him clear
Before all men that are, Haec qui facial, non ego summia viris eum comparo,
verum etiam simillimum Dijs iudico.
or ever were;
But also has (without respect of ods)
Reputed him as equal to the gods.
Ilist not here allege what all have said,
In commendation of the patient crew,
The usual examples, which are made,
Do prove my sayings and assertions true.
That sure I wonder, and I much admire them,
(Unless the horns with patience do inspire them)
How they so meekly suffer and abide,
The wrongs and injuries which them betide.
But (doubtless) they are men of gallant parts, Posse and Nolle Nobile.

And scorn to take revenge for every toy:
It fits not valorous and noble hearts
To pick a quarrel with each scuruy boy:
They live contented still what ere befall,
And for their crosses neither fight nor brall,
What Fortune sends, they willingly receive,
As you by this example may perceive.
An honest good plaine-dealing man of life,
Which got his living daily by his labor,
Finding a knave in sporting with his wife,
And playing frolickly upon his Tabor,
Did not, A wise and honest Cuckold.
as some would use to swear and swagger,
And at the first sight stab him with his dagger;
But in good words he wished they would amend,
And let him go, because he was his friend.
Here is a glass for all men to behold
How great the patience of a Cuckold is,
Worthy in leaves of brass to be inrold,
That after-ages might remember this.
Never was person of so mild a heart,
That if he found his wife at such a part,
Would with such quiet brook so great a scorn,
Except he had an interest in the horn.
I know some hot-spurd-youths, Note this my young gallants.
which are not wed,
Will swear this Cuckold was a very lout:
For if that they had found the knave a bed,
Zound's, by the ears they would have pulled him out.
They would have beat the villain like a stock,
That never after he should love the smock:
And in such manner they would use the Boore,
Scarce he should go alive out of their door.
Thus will my youthful striplings, Omnes facile cum valemus, Recta consilia
aegrotis demus.
in their vain,
Brag of their valor, ere they go to field.
But vanting Soldiers oftentimes are slain,
Or in the battle forced for to yield.
An empty vessel gives a mighty sound,
When least or nothing can therein be found.
Many can tell the way to tame a shrow,
But they which have the woman do not know.
Often have I heard a gallant say as much,
And stamp, and swear, that he would flea him quick:
Yet has his fortune afterward been such,
Though he have come even in the very nicke,
And taken one in bourding with his wife,
He durst not draw his dagger for his life,
But was content to feign himself asleep,
Mean while his head was armed like a sheep.
What are they better if they take the knave,
And beat him soundly, or bereave his life?
Can they avoid the title they must have?
Or purchase any credit to their wife?
It Is but a means to breed their further scorn,
Because so grievously they take the horn.
Better it is to see, and not espy it,
Then by their folly more for to desery it.
But if the Cuckold-maker be so bold,
To turn again, and bravely play the man,
And knock the Cuckold while his cudgel hold,
In what a taking is the Cuckold than?
Surely by this needs must he gain profoundly,
That both is Cuckolded and beaten soundly,
Much wiser might he seem to hold his peace,
Then with shrewd knocks his sorrows to increase.
If my advice may serve in any sted,
Rather I give thee counsel not to see,
When thou beholdst a knave within thy bed,
Then for to make a brawle, or mutiny:
For he that takes the horn in such a grudge,
A very simple fellow men him judge.
When he that is not half so foole-precise,
Is often esteemed to be very wise.
And well may he be taken for a Clown,
Which, when he cannot remedy the thing,
Does in his fury trouble all the Town,
And makes the Country of his folly ring.
But though the vulgar sort a Cuckold deem him, He is a Cuckold, not worthy to
be a Cuckold.

Yet worthy of that name I not esteem him.
For to the horn this virtue does belong,
That patient heads must undergo each wrong.
And now upon a sudden to my sight
Presents himself a greater fool then this;
Which is not only pleased to bring to light,
And make a wonder of his wives amiss.
But for to prove himself a very Daw,
Needs must he be divorced by the Law. A Cuckold with a witness, and a
Cuckold by authority.

The first; By witness is a Cuckold cleped,
This; By authority the horns has reaped.
Graue-headed fathers of the horned crew,
And all ye patient friends of Cuckoldshire,
Let me entreat a little boon of you:
(It Is for your good and credit I require)
Banish these peasants, these two lowering Ianglers,
Expel them from your company for wranglers:
Raze out their names and titles from your book,
Which their good fortune with such fury brook.
Never let them be ranged in your band,
Which grieve to have their Head-peece made of horn,
It cannot with your reputation stand,
Your colors by faint cowards should be borne.
Pluck off their horns, and on their coxcombs place
A pair of Asses ears to their disgrace.
Well does their folly this old saying fit,
A male-contented Cuckold has no wit.
For let me but expostulate this case;
Although to you I know it is but vain,
Which are of wisdom, and with time and place
Can order all your actions to your gain.
What better is the wood-cocke, made a wonder,
When with a knave he sees his wife lie under?
Or what amendment does he reap from hence,
To put her quite away for this offense?
I must confess (perforce) this is the way
To let the world have notice of his name:
Yet him I hold a fool which does display
Those things which may redound unto his shame.
And greater is his madness I suppose,
Which when he has good fortune, scarcely knows
But most his folly, if I dare so say,
Which bolts the door when Steed is stolen away.
Better it is in quiet take the cup,
(Since what is wouen cannot be vn-spun)
And patiently to drink thy sorrows up,
Than call in question what thy wife has done.
If of the horns perchance thou art ashamed,
Ten times as much by this thou art defamed:
And where to few before the fault was known,
Now all about the country it is blown.
Thou may remove the occasion of this matter,
And by a lawful course divorce thy wife:
Yet with the vulgar sort, which cannot flatter,
Thou shall be thought a Cuckold all thy life.
And though with equity you be untied,
The most will censure hardly on thy side:
For whether part soever be in fault,
Still is the husband deemed for to halt.
But to conclude, when all is come about,
And that from thee thy wife is quite divorced,
What have thou earned but a mock or flout?
For still to wear the horns thou must be forced.
Yet here proceeds great cause to make thee sorry,
The name of Cuckold gives to thee no glory:
And though the title make another blessed,
Shame and disgrace it paints upon thy crest.
The purest Wheat, cast in a cankred ground,
Dies ere it sprout, and never veelds increase:
Good wholesome meat, when body is unsound,
Does cloy the stomach, and the man disease:
So, if the Horns be grafted in his head,
Which is with fury and impatience led,
Nothing but scoffs and mocks they do importune,
Though otherwise the Scutchions of good fortune.
This is the scope and meaning of the place,
That ancient Poets of Actaeon feign,
Which took the horns with grief and such disgrace,
That of his dogged passions he was slain.
For this the story plainly shows in part,
His dogs did tear him in the shape of Heart:
And this to all mad Cuckolds be the end, All wives which have doting husbands
say Amen.

Which grudge at that they never can amend.
Here can I not with silence over pass,
Without great prejudice unto the Horn,
To tell how patient once a Painter was,
(As kind a Cuckold as was ever borne)
And since it is a matter of some worth,
Meet to be drawn in golden colors forth,
After my simple skill it shall be painted,
Though with the Pencill I am not acquainted.
This cunning Painter was but newly wed,
Living in pleasure with his wanton wife;
When Fortune aiming for to horn his head,
(As Fortune still disturbes the quiet life)
Gave him occasions by an envious chance,
That he by sea must travail into France,
The night before his journey he did take,
Thus to his wife in bed the Painter spoke.
Sweet wife (quoth he) thou know I love thee deerly,
And much I grieve to leave thee thus alone,
I sear my absence it will touch thee nearly,
And my departure cause thee sigh and moan:
But be content (my dear) I will not stay
Above a month at most from thee away,
It Is but a little while (my pretty Sweet)
Shortly I hope again we two shall meet.
Yet in remembrance, till I come again,
And that in heart with thee at home I am,
Let me entreat thee (if it be no pain)
That on thy belly I may paint a Lamb:
Not that thy truth or honesty I fear,
For thou art too too honest I dare swear;
But that it be a sign before thy eyes,
Both when thou go to bed, and do arise.
And that when still thou look upon this geere,
And on the little Lamb do cast a glance,
Thou may remember who did paint him there,
And send a sigh unto the coast of France,
And think thy husband will no longer stay,
Then his affairs be past, if winds obey;
And with these words he kissed her, and so staid,
When she again this ready answer made.
Husband (quoth she) and then the woman wept,
And sighed and sob'd, as though she had been sickly:
Dear husband, your great kindness I accept,
And sore lament, we thus must part so quickly.
Yet never think that I should you forget,
Though your affairs a tweluemonth should you Iet:
But if to paint a Lamb will breed your ease,
Paint on my belly even while you please.
The good plaine-dealing man was glad of this,
He took his Pencill, and to work he went,
And on her belly did he paint (ywis)
A pretty little Lamb incontinent.
But since the wind for no man's cause does stay,
He is imbarkt for France, and gone away:
Pity it were to tell the grief and moan
His wife made for him, being left alone.
Behold how cross sometimes our fortune plays,
The Painter his affairs did hap so ill,
That now are almost past thrice thirty days,
And yet he is constrained to tarry still:
So that before his business was ended,
Three quarters of a year were quite expended:
And since in France so long the Painter tarries,
Mark how his wife her self in England carries.
A month she took his absence passing sad;
But when he came not at the appointed day,
She entertaines another lusty lad,
For to maintain the sport, and hold her play:
Which in all points did please her lust so right,
That he was welcome to her every night;
Nor much she cared, but in outward show,
Whether the Painter came again or no.
The lusty youth, which was with her acquainted,
And kept possession of her husbands place,
By chance espied upon her belly painted
The little Lamb, whereat he laughed apace:
But sure he thought it wanted some perfection,
Because of horns there was a plain defection;
And therefore when the woman was asleep,
He painted two great horns upon the sheep.
Now is the Painters business quite past,
And he from France by sea is safely come;
His wife about his neck her arms does cast,
And kiss him often, and bid him welcome home:
Ah my sweet husband (then she kindly wept)
What sad misfortune has so long thee kept? A good kind wife.

Again she kissed him, and again she cried,
If longer you had stayed, I should have died.
Her loving husband taking all for truth,
(Seeing his wife to weep for very joy)
Kissed her most kindly, like a wanton youth,
And seem'de as blithe and lusty as a boy:
He took her straight, and set her on his knee;
Ah my sweet wife, how does my Love? (quoth he)
How fares my Turtle? I have done thee wrong,
In staying from thy company so long.
But such (sweetheart) was my disaster chance,
And such occasions did my coming let,
That I no sooner could return from France,
(No harm, thought she, if you had tarried yet)
But since (quoth he) at last I am come back,
Drink welcome to me in a pint of Sack:
She drank to him, he pledged her; to be short,
They supt, and went to bed in honest sort.
And now the Painter 'gan for to remember,
That on the night, before he went from home,
A little Lamb he painted on the limber
Vp-bearing outside of her tender womb:
Therefore, that he assuredly might know
Whether his wife had faithful been or no,
To view the Lamb he'gan her kindly pray,
Which he did paint before he went away.
Husband (quoth she) that you may plainly see
I have preserved my faith as vndefil'd,
Behold the Lamb, and after judge of me,
If in your absence I have you beguiled.
Therewith she showed her belly, whereon fair
The painted Lamb appeared with horns a pair:
Whereat he started as he were afraid,
Yet his own picture was there truly made.
The woman marvelled for to behold
The Lamb described with such a goodly head:
The man was angry, yet his peace did hold,
And stood amazed, as though he had been dead:
But she (as women are by nature sly,
Apt to excuse their folly with a lie)
After that she some little pause had made,
Demurely to her husband thus she said.
Well may you wonder how this comes to pass, Et quanquam videas oculis
praesentibus, audet excusare ^^esas.

And think (sweet husband) I have been unkind,
Yet if you ponder how it changed was,
And how the Lamb transformed thus we find,
I do not doubt but you will judge me true
In deed, in word, in thought, in all to you,
For by the Sun that shines before my face,
I know not when the horns came in this place.
And yet the night before you did depart,
And left me like a widow here at home,
A little Lamb, according to your art,
You painted (you remember) on my womb:
If at that present time it was a Lamb,
Although no greater but to suck his damme, Note her argument.

Yet since a twelve month you have tarried hence,
Now it must be a sheep by consequence.
When as her husband heard this sine excuse,
So witty, pleasant, and so ready told,
Though he was much aggrieued at the abuse,
And well perceived the sheep was of his fold,
(Knowing the horns which fell unto his share
Were marriage-fortune and good neighbors fare)
He took with patience what did him molest,
And smiling kindly, put it up in jest.
Lo here (kind Cuckolds) present to your view
A worthy mirror of true patience,
A rare example, meet for all the crew,
With whom the horns shall have pre-eminence.
This is the way to win your reputation,
And make your wives to leave their fornication:
These are the means a woman's feet to stay,
Which is disposed to range, or go astray.
Bootlesse it is to break a woman's will,
Or seek to curb her pleasures by thy rage;
For if she once be given unto ill,
Brawles, strife, nor anger can her lust ass^age.
If Rivers have their course, they gently fall,
Stop but their passage, then they throw down all:
So if a woman be restrained by force, Iram atque animos a crimine sumunt.

She grows more headstrong, and by nature worse.
Take for example what one Cuckold did;
Which when he heard his wife was prone to sin,
Shut not the doors unkindly, but straight bid
More should be made to let her lovers in,
That every person, when the doors were many,
Might come and go away, unseen of any:
But when his wise did see his disposition,
She left her wanton life and lewd condition.
Many, before they marry, seem to boast
How they will dominire when they are wed,
For they will tie their wives unto a post,
Before she graft the horn upon their head:
And they with watch and ward will so prevent her,
That no corriuall shall have time to enter,
And maugre fortune, and in sp;ght of chance,
After the Horne-pipe they will never dance.
But let them know, no policies prevail,
No art, no craft, no force, their fate to shun;
Strong brazen walls; Argus his eyes do fail
To keep a woman, when she list misdone:
And if she once do by his looks epsy
No faith her husband does in her rely,
Or else is jealous, and does her mistrust,
Much more she is incensed unto lust.
In vain thou stand'st within a woman's way,
When she is once past honesty and grace:
For though thou watch and ward her night and day,
And have her present still before thy face,
By some device or other which may fall,
Occasion she will find to pay for all:
And (or fit place she to her pleasures lack)
She will not stick to horn thee at thy back.
Prevent an evil (does the Proverb say)
But when an evil comes by destiny,
And cannot be avoided any way,
What profit falls by perverse jealousy?
Nothing but this; that standing still on thorns,
Suspicion bids thee to beware the horns:
And (sure) a horned head less grief does find,
Then does a jealous and a horned mind.
I cannot well commend that simple Swain,
Which for his hatred to the Cuckoes song,
(Because the Cuckoe in a merry vain
Sometimes did sing his Apple trees among)
Cut down the trees, that she might sit no more
So near his house, as she had done before.
But whether near or far the Cuckoe fly,
No Cuckold can avoid his destiny.
I marvel much, and cannot know the reason,
Why every foolish Peasant and rude knave,
When as they hear the Cuckoe in the season,
Which in these quarters does her presence crave,
Send out her notes so pleasant and so shrill,
That all true Cuckolds they with gladness fill,
Why they should mock, deride, abuse, and flout her,
And to the death with stones and cudgels clout her.
In my conceit, of all the fowls that fly,
Most pleasant are her notes, surpassing all,
Chaunting so sweet the fame of Cuckoldrie,
That unto men they seem Angelical,
And so replete with sugared melody,
As drives kind Cuckolds to an ecstasy:
Ah, sweetly, sweetly, does the Cuckoe sing
The Cuckolds praises in the pleasant Spring.
Familiar is her song, smooth, easy, plain,
Not harsh, nor hardly wrested from her throat:
No bird there is known sooner by her strain,
In such regard is grown the Cuckoes note:
Yet is her voice so pleasant to the ear,
It glads the meanest creature it does hear;
For never I beheld so sour a face,
But for to hear her song did laugh apace.
Fond wantonizing Ovid give us place,
Comparisons in all things are not meet;
It Is not your Nightingale that can disgrace
The Cuckoes tunes, so musical, so sweet.
Her warbling notes scarce equal half the skill
That is compact within a Cuckoes bill.
Pack hence (poor Woodcock) teach your bird to sing,
The lovely Cuckoe is of Birds the King.
Greatly I marvel thou would be so blind,
Being a man of wisdom, to prefer
That piping bird, A faeminins genere.
sprung from a pewling kind,
Before the Cuckolds merry Trumpeter;
Since she complains of murder, rape, and wrong.
The Cuckolds glory is the Cuckoes song:
And when she chantes it in her pleasant mood, Nulla potest Cuculo aequinalere
meo.

She makes the sweetest noise in all the Wood.
And yet (in truth) I cannot much thee blame,
If ignorance did lead thee thus awrie:
Thou would have writ divinely in her fame,
If thou had known a Cuckolds dignity:
And highly had thou graced thy wanton vain
In praising her, that sings thy praise again.
This, this had been a subject for thy pen,
To all thrice welcome that are married men.
But since I think thou bore no good affection
To honest Cuckolds, nor the Cuckoes song.
Thy books of Love do make a plain detection*
Thy mind was much inclined unto wrong,
And thou a lewd professed Cuckold-maker,
And therefore would not be with her partaker.
For still Experience evidently shows,
That Cuckold-makers are the Cuckoes soes.
Famous Sir Geffrie Chaucer, you were wise,
And worthily esteemed an English Poet,
And like a Scholar you could poetise:
Yet once you played the fool* I let you know it.
For in that great assembly which you make,
Wherein together birds did counsel take,
You greatly wronged this birds magnificence
In giving her so small pre-eminence
Reason it was, she should before the rest
Have taken place, and order, in her station;
Both for her voice, which is in great request,
And also for the Cuckolds reputation.
But you no Cuckold were it may be deemed,
Or Cuckolds then were not so much esteemed:
Or (sure) Sir Geffrie, you were beetle-blind
In tearming basely such a bird unkind.
But as for Skeleton with his Laurel Crown,
Whose ruffling times are empty quite of marrow:
Or fond Catullus, which set grossly down
The commendation of a silly Sparrow:
Because their lines are void of estimation,
I pass them over without confutation.
Much would the Cuckoe think herself impared,
If she with Philip Sparrow were compared.
Let chirping Philip learn to catch a fly.
And pick up crumbs from off his Mistress finger:
And let the Nightingales sweet harmony
Win her the name and title of a singer:
These are not all the praises we can bring
To praise the Cuckoe which attends the spring.
For well I may allege in her defense
She is a bird of wondrous patience.
Too much it were to reckon all the wrong,
And every injury does her betide:
No sooner she begins her lovely song,
Which Knaves and Minions cannot well abide,
But one or other Woodcocke that does hear her,
With threats and cursings is at hand to teate her,
That sure I think she could not live a day,
If she did want the wit to fly away.
One fool derides and mockes her to her face,
(As if her words did not concern his honor)
Another, being angry, chafes apace,
And with a murren bids a shame light on her:
The^ comes a third will neither curse nor mock her,
But seeks with stones and cudgels for to knock her.
Thus lives the Cuckoe, which offends no man,
Scorned, persecuted, both of man and woman.
Mean while the harmless creature (pretty Foul)
Flies up and down content from tree to tree;
Gently with patience she abides control,
For never was she angry I could see:
But still with meekness and great modesty
Well she disgests their inciuilitie;
And not a word she gives them indiscreetly,
But only Cuckoe, which she sings most sweetly.
As in her language if you mark her well,
Thus to the busy fools the bird did speak:
Cuckolds (quoth she) whose conscience is your hell,
And think on me your malice for to wreake;
You that do take the Horn in such disgrace,
Grieuing to have it grafted on your face,
Content your selves, your fortunes are not dainty,
The Cuckoe says, That Cuckolds there are plenty.
Then frolic, Sirs, this fragrant time of year,
Pale jealousy was never void of woe,
Sorrow is more encreast by needless fear,
Heart fretting care to health was ever foe:
Your States, the Cuckoe tells you, are no worse
Than many thousands, which nor brawle nor curse:
Many do bear great books, know scarce a letter,
Many are learned which are nere the better.
Many are Cuckolds, Three degrees of Cuckolds. One and none. One and one. None,
and one.
which suppose they are not,
Some are No Cuckolds, which think they are none:
Wise be the Cuckolds which both be and care not;
Fond is the man which is not, will be one:
But one or not one, still I am your friend,
You either are, or may be in the end.
I sing your praises to expel your sorrow,
And thus the Cuckoe bids you all Good morrow.
Ah sweet and pleasant bird, how I admire
The unregarded virtue of thy kind!
How near thy meet behauior does aspire
Unto the patience of the Cuckolds mind!
Certes it is a glorious thing to see
The Cuckoe thus with Cuckolds to agree,
And well deserves some worthy Poets pen,
That birds can learn the qualities of men.
Anger the Raven, he will fly about,
As though his meaning were to seize upon thee;
The Goose will gaggle, and the Cock cry out,
And every other bird call shame upon thee:
Annoy the Lark, and he will hang the wing,
Trouble the Nightingale, she leaves to sing;
Only the Cuckoe, Inter aues etenim nulla tibi similis.
which surmounts them all,
She still chaunts Cuckoe, whatsoere befall.
No hurt she means to any living thing,
And therefore deemes no creature will her harm:
For when her little eggs she forth does bring,
Within another neast she lays them warm,
Supposing that kind bird will love them dear,
As Cuckolds do, which no deceit do fear,
Suffering their wives to keep good company,
Thinking that men will use them honestly.
Neither do I esteem her as a Sinner,
(Although Pythagoras reprove the fault,
Which never eat an egg unto his dinner,
But only fed upon a root and salt)
Because she flies into another nest,
And suckes the eggs which there she likes best,
Nor does she more deserve and merit blame,
Than honest men, which daily eat the same.
Rather I deem her worthy commendation,
(If to the Cuckoe her desert we give)
Since she deuoures and suckes their procreation,
That eat the corn whereby mankind should live.
Herein she shows her self a friend to man,
Seeking his good by all the means she can,
Both in applauding them which wear the horn,
And sucking up their brood which eat the corn.
Kind gentlewomen, ye which take delight,
A prattling Parrat in your Cage to have,
Because she prates good morrow and good night,
Or bids a saucy fellow Walk a knave.
And ye which keep a Puppie or a Daw,
To make you laugh by playing with a straw,
Let not these toys be thought a woman's treasure,
But keep the lovely Cuckoe for your pleasure.
Your Jack daw cannot with her silver bell.
Match this sweet bird, the mistress of the Spring;
And trust me truly, she does far excel
Your Puppie and your Parrat in each thing.
The Parrat prates as she is taught by rote,
This bird by nature has a merry note,
And all her songs, in lieu of favors shown,
Shall tell your husbands glory, or your own.
Thrice famous David Lindsey of the North,
Thou had great conference with a Popingay,
Which erst did tell thee many things of worth,
As they in print are extant at this day:
Yet greater matters might thy pen have painted,
If with the Cuckoe thou had been acquainted:
For deeper mysteries does she bewray,
Than ever was revealed by Popingay.
No bird, nor any creature has the grace,
(Though they in other qualities excel)
Which can so truly to a man's own face
In good plain terms his proper title tell.
No sooner she a married man espies,
But in her language Cuckoe straight she cries:
Which her a Prophet makes me to suppose,
Since secret faults so openly she shows.
If she far off a company descrie,
Or by the noise their coming understand,
Cuckoe she doubles most melodiously,
As if she said, More Cuckolds are at hand:
And (though she never see them) she can tell
Both what the persons are, and where they dwell;
Cuckolds they are, if you their names require,
And where they dwell? forsooth in Cuckoldshire.
This is the cause, I think, that Jealousy
Repines to hear the Cuckoe sing so fair:
For he, consumed with foolish phrenesie,
With raging madness, grief, and fretting care,
Kickes like a scabbed Jade, when he does hear
That name repeated which he needs must bear,
And with impatience brooks her gracious call,
Which tells him truly what will after fall.
Another sort there are, which cannot well
Abide to hear the Cuckoe for their lives,
But do detest her as a Fiend of Hell:
And these are women, Minions, unchaste wives,
Which are ashamed for to have displaid,
How their kind husbands they have Cuckolds made:
Or they are Bastards, which scarce love to hear
Their mothers faults, and who their fathers were.
But for the yeomen of the horned Crowd,
Me thinks their joy and comfort is not small,
To hear the Cuckoe carroll out so loud.
The wondrous glory does their states befall,
And so harmoniously their praises sing,
That Woods and Forests with their Echoes ring:
Doubtless a Cuckold is a gallant name,
When birds chant Hymns in honor of the same.
And such in ancient times has been the praise,
And estimation of this worthy State,
(Though much it be disgraced in these days,
And sore abused of each scoffing Mate)
That Kings and Emperors have thought no scorn
For arms to bear the beasts which wear the horn,
And crowns and scepters, thrones and great dominions,
Are not more rich than horns in somes opinions.
Let famous Greece be witness of this thing,
Where horned heads were wont to bear such sway,
That seldom any came to be their King,
But still he proved a Cuckold, as some say.
This Menelaus well could verify,
Whose horns procured Troyes endless misery:
The horns were not the cause.
Yet not from them arose that mortal strife,
But that he could not have again his wife.
He could have been content with all his heart
To have been Cuckold, and have blessed his fortune,
If they his wise had suffered to depart,
Whom he to have again did much importune:
But when he saw fair means could not obtain her,
It was concluded, he by force should gain her;
To make it known, that she was his by right,
And show himself a Cuckold of great might.
And not alone was he a Cuckold deemed;
But Agamemnon, which was eke his brother,
And in the wars as chief commander seemed,
Had happy fortune to be made another.
Nor could Ulysses quite himself exile
From out this company by any wile: Samius says, that all her Woers lay with
her, and thereupon Pall was begotten.

For though Penelope was loath to marry,
So long without a friend she could not tarry.
Survey the Histories of elder days;
Peruse the chronicles of every Nation;
And thou shall find that men of greatest praise,
Wealth, riches, honor, fame, and estimation,
Most valiant, hardy, learned, grave, and wise,
Grieved not to be addressed in Cuckolds guise.
And thus has Fortune often thought it best
To make kind-hearted Cuckolds perfect blessed.
None ever lived and have had better chance,
Or been inhanced unto higher state:
None of more valor, might or cheuisance,
Or in the wars have been more fortunate,
Or greater glory and renown have won,
Then has the Cuckold, and the Cuckolds son;
As from these two great Monarchs we may gather
Great Alexander, and his worthy Father.
I will not here insist my lines to cumber,
Let it suffice, that I have named two.
He which assaies by name to take the number
Of ancient Cuckolds, shall have much to do.
If he can tell the sands upon the shore,
Then he may count the Cuckolds all of yore.
This is enough to free the name from scorn:
Kings have not been ashamed to wear a horn.
But what should I dilate of earthly Kings,
Of worldly Monarchs, and of mortal men?
Since Jove's own wife, (as Ovid sweetly sings,
And other pleasant Poets erst did pen.)
Juno the glorious Empress of the skies,
Queen of the air, where winds do tiranise,
Was through her husbands usual ribaldrie
Made Lady regent unto Cuckoldrie.
Nor had she only such propitious luck,
(Though she in Heaven chief Cuckqueane was reputed)
Vulcan her son was headed like a Buck,
And by the lusty God of War cornuted.
And Jove himself, (though some the truth do shroud,
Faining Ixion did embrace a cloud)
Was in this common lot a great partaker,
And both a Cuckold, and a Cuckold-maker.
If then no other matter did commend
Or paint the glory of a Cuckold forth;
This were enough (me thinks) that I have pend,
To grace his title and approve his worth.
That Jove, his wife and sister, and their son,
Were subject to that chance which none can shun.
And yet a Cuckolds dignity is such,
That in his praise I cannot speak too much.
Greatly I muse, and no occasion find,
Why men should mock a Cuckold with the horn;
And scoffing Peasants (as they come behind)
Should with two fingers point at him in scorn;
Since he has oftentimes as good a face,
As he that seeks his blemish and disgrace.
And in his forhead (though you mark him near)
Seldom or never do the horns appear.
If one but stumbles as he goes along,
Or chance to strike his foot against a stone:
It Is with the vulgar sort a common song;
Some Cuckold there was buried long agon,
Whose horns vpstarting strongly in this place
Well near had cast the fellow on his face.
Surely I wonder where these horns should be,
Which each one talks of, yet could never see.
But let us grant, what addle heads suppose;
That horns are grafted on a Cuckolds brow:
Small hurt thereby unto a Cuckold grows,
Nor is he therefore like an Ox or Cow,
Or to be thought a monster unto nature,
Or a misshapen and deformed creature;
But in all points a comely handsome man,
And not unlike unto the great God, Pan.
Pan was a mighty Syluan God of yore,
And (by translation) Pan does all contain:
Yet on his head a pair of horns he wore;
Which shows that horns to all alike remain.
Why then should horns a Cuckold so disgrace,
Since that a God has borne them on his face?
Certes I bless his fortune with my heart,
Which is alike the Gods in any part.
The silver Moon, fair Cynthia of the night,
The great'st and swiftest Planet in the sky,
Which did in marriage never take delight,
But as a maid kept her virginity,
(And therefore cannot well be Cuckold deemed)
Of such great value has the horns esteemed,
That still she wears them, not accounted strange,
Three or four days before and after change.
In great account our Elders heretofore
Did hold the horn, when as they went to fight,
The sound whereof their strength increased more,
And with fresh courage did supply their might.
And when in hunting they pursued their game,
They took great pleasure for to use the same:
It cheares the dogs, it makes them come and go,
It Is much in hunting, well a Horn to blow.
And such a necessary Instrument
It is for hunting either Hare or Conie,
That not a Huntsman wants this implement,
Nor would be void of it for any money.
And so much credit now attends it daily,
That every common Crier, Petie Baily,
Swine-heards and brave Sow-golders in a pride
Do bear a horn low dangling by their side.
Matters of chief importance are in have,
And for more speed dispatched by the horn:
Great light a Lantern, made of horn, does cast,
Which with a candle in dark night is borne.
When little children first are brought to school,
A Horn bo^ke is a necessary tool:
Nor can a Shoemaker well lack this ginne,
A shooing-horne exceeds the Squirrels skin.
What should I tell the virtues of the horn;
Which are incredible to muddie brains?
Gross ignorance will laugh the truth to scorn,
Because beyond his compass it contains:
But let him know, some horns have such refection,
They can expel each poison and infection,
And that the shauings of a Horners stall,
Good to preserve are Artichokes withal.
But of all Horns that ever I have heard,
None is more famous than the Horn of Plenty,
Which had so great abundance still prepared,
Take while men would, yet it was never empty:
Which (not unfitly) we may well compare
Unto the horns befall a Cuckolds share:
For these are chests, that hold great store of treasure,
Though these men live at ease, and spend at pleasure.
Such profit and commodities arise,
And so great gain redoundeth from the horn,
Unto the Cuckold, which will blind his eyes,
And can with patience well endure the scorn,
That many have a better living made,
Than by the traffic of their honest Trade:
And some have found such gettings by these means,
That they have forced their wives to play the queans.
Many that seem substantial men in Town,
Reap through the horn an hundred pound by year,
And many which are scarcely worth a crown,
Thus keep themselves with pride and lordly cheer:
And many which in prison have been laid,
In taking of the horn their debts have paid,
That sure I think, though other horns be dainty,
A Cuckolds horn it is the Horn of Plenty.
And yet not only does the horn befriend,
And yield the Cuckold that which is his due,
But wondrous profit often does it send
Unto his wife, although she be untrue.
By this she earnes great store of golden crowns,
To buie her velvet kirtles, silken gowns;
This makes her brave; this makes her fine and nice;
A Cuckolds horn, it is a horn of price.
Nay more then this: which some will think a wonder;
The Cuckolds horn maintains the Cuckold maker.
For need the law will never be kept under.
The Vine must fall, if that the Elm forsake her:
Some women in another field suppose, Fertilior seges est alienis semper in
aruis.

That deeper grass and better pasture grows.
Wantons are wilful; and before they lack
Their pleasures, they will make their purse-stringes crack.
Scarce will you think a swaggering Caualier,
Which has his garters bravely frindg'd with gold,
Swimmes iu his silks, and surfets with good cheer,
And lives as pleasantly as can be told,
Only by Cuckold-making thus should live,
And get no more but what kind wenches give;
Yet many gallants I have heard report
Are now maintained after such a sort.
What should I further amplify this matter?
Since every honest man, which wears the horn,
Can tell for truth I neither mock nor flatter,
Though fools may deem I write these things in scorn.
But what they say I have in no regard;
Nor do I pass the censure of a knave,
Unto the touch stone of a Cuckolds wit
The truth for trial ever I commit.
For (cert's) I know they are a generation
Of wise discreet sage honest, sober men;
Their name it is a name of estimation,
Deserving worthily a golden pen.
But for the horn, which fortune them has sent
(Since it would prove so fine an ornament)
Well could I wish, that to their greater grace,
Each Cuckold had two horns upon his face;
And yet (grave Patrons) let me here entreat
You would not seem my meaning to mistake.
For I protest, my love to you is great,
Devoted to you all for one man's sake;
And therefore think not that I use this speech
Your names, estate, or credit to impeach,
Or by this wish desire your heads to harm:
For horns will keep your heads in winter warm
But thus the world might know what men you are;
Which be the sons of Fortune and of Fame;
And thus the better sort might have a care
To give your state what does belong the same;
Thus might the name, to which you have aspired,
Be both applauded, honored, and admired:
And men would wonder at the strange event,
To see kind Cuckolds wear this Implement.
Thus every gentle heart and patient mind,
Which have the horns and willingly do wear them,
Might be perceived from the Kestrell kind
Of froward jealous fools which grudge to bear the^;
Thus honest Cuckolds might sequestered be
From scoffing Peasants of a base degree;
Thus might your glory be the more increased,
And you well hooded, and your wives well pleased.
For (sooth to say needs must it please your wives.
To see fair horns upon your forhead grow,
Sure that the whole demeanor of their lives,
That they desire the same, does clearly show
And if they did not wish you such a head,
They would not so defile their marriage bed.
But usual practice makes plain declaration,
They both desire and seek this transformation.
If then such profit hereby might arise,
Both to your glory and your wives content:
Seem not so great a blessing to despise,
Nor scorn the wishes of my good intent.
For it is not such a blemish and disgrace
To have fair horns to grow upon your face,
Neither a wonder to behold this change,
Though gasing fools at first might think it strange.
For many famous men of older days,
(As writers do record, and stories mention)
To their great honor and eternal praise,
Without reproach, scoffs, mockes, or reprehension,
Have had the forepart of their comely head
With two fair horns full seemly furnished.
This may you well perceive by horned Pan,
Which was a mighty God in shape of man.
I will not here upon examples stand,
To cloye your minds with wonders, tales, and lies:
Only for proof of what I took in hand
These few (to pass the rest) shall now suffice
Cippus, the valiant Roman, who took scorn
To be a King, (though chosen by the horn)
Did by his horns become so much renowned,
That they on posts were painted, and he crowned.
When lusty Jove was once a wanton lover,
And wooed Europa, King Agenors daughter,
That he in secret might his love discover,
(Although he knew some fools would make a laughter
To see the same) yet on his head he bare
Of fair bright shining horns a comely pair: Cornua parua quidem.

And therefore Ouids book (of leasings full)
Does feign that Puraque magis perlucida gemma.
Jove was turned to a Bull.
On strange and foraine proofs what should I stay?
Or tell of antique matters long agone?
The time would fail me, if I should assay,
To number all the persons one by one,
Which to their glory and their hearts content
Have on their forheads worn this implement:
Our present time for truth can testify,
It is no Monster, wonder, nor a lie.
For in the North is situate a Town,
Bounding upon the River, named Air,
Which for the Trade of Clothing is well known,
And for strong napple Ale has great repair,
Whereas an honest man did lately dwell,
(A patient Cuckold, as Report does tell)
Which had a horn fast growing by his eye,
To show that horns belong to Cuckoldrie.
Lo here (cornuted Seigniors) here you see
It is no wonder for to wear a horn,
No shame or blemish unto your degree,
No stain, disgrace, reproach, contempt, or scorn;
But famous, full of glory and renown,
As ancient Writers have set truly down.
It Is but conceit, that horns will look so grimly,
Do but believe, and they will fit you trimly.
And, in my judgment, if you had them growing,
That each one might discern them with his eye,
Fools would not use their mocks and apish mowing,
Nor knaves so much deride your gravity.
For they perceiving how the horns would grace
The superficies of your honest face,
Point with their fingers, as if that their taunting
Did show, that something from your heds were wanting.
Whereas if horns were present to their sight,
What should they with their fingers need to show it?
Since by this means a purblind fellow might
Perceive your worth, and by the horns might know it.
And then would scoffing Peasants cease to prate,
Because that others plainly see your state;
Then saucy fellows, which their neighbors flout,
Would cease to mock, their own horns peeping out.
Thus should your name be had in wondrous fear,
And not a man, from greatest to the least,
Should dare to mock a Cuckold for his ear,
Nor once against the horns to break a jest:
Nor seem another fortune to deride,
For fear the same good luck might him betide:
And thus I hope your heads have understood
What fruit would blossom, if your horns did bud.
But let us put the case; as some suppose,
That sleering fools for this might more deride you:
Naught by their misdemeanour do you lose,
Neither (ywis) does greater shame betide you.
Hereby your merit is the more augmented,
If you with patience hold your selves contented;
The^ scorn that childish scoffs should make you sorry,
The more you suffer, more will be your glory.
Never cast down your heads, nor be ashamed,
Though graceless wits unkindly you entreat;
Your blessed fortune cannot be defamed,
Nor prating slanderous tongues your praise defeat:
For though your worth and credit in the sight
Of scoffing persons be accounted light,
Yet in the judgment of the wiser sort,
A Cuckold is a name of good report.
And in defense of all the Patient train
Here I, Pasquils challenge.
as Challenger, do ready stand,
Justly to prove, uphold, and to maintain
Against the proudest Champion in this land,
That no Promotion, Calling, or Degree
Can be free from the state of Cuckoldrie;
And that the Hornepipe is as sweet a fit
As ever Fiddler played upon his A kind of Instrument.
Kit.
What Country in this Universe is known,
Which can affirm from Cuckolds it is free?
What Kingdom, Province, Borough, City, Town,
In all the world exempted do we see?
Which has not more or less (as Fortune pleased)
The number of kind Cuckolds still increased,
Or could not yield at one time or another
A horned Father or a horned Mother.
Greatly this title through the world is carried,
And so increases, as we hear by fame,
That if it might it would be to the married,
As Homo is to men a common name.
And this we see apparent at this day,
For as a stranger travails by the way,
If any married persons dog does stir,
Straight one or other calls him Cuckolds curre.
Truly I do not much mislike these words,
Because he is, or else may be hereafter,
Although I would not have them with their boords
Miscall the Cuckolds dog, to make a laughter:
Nor would I wish a Cuckold go to law
For such an idle jest, not worth a straw;
Neither for this disgrace to brawle or curse,
His state is better, and his dog no worse.
Much is his state the better, as we may
Perceive by that which is already said,
And if with patience he can bear away
The Apish mockes, which sometimes will be made:
Besides his glory (which before I quoted)
A valiant-minded man he shall be noted.
Fortior est qui se, quam qui fortissima vincit moenia.
Stronger he is that holds his fury down,
Than he which winnes a Fort, or walled Town.
Great is a Cuckolds honor and his fame,
And wondrous is the glory of his fate,
Which makes some persons so desire the name,
And with such greediness the horn await,
That for because none other will aread
To make them Cuckolds, and to arm their head,
They are content, when time and place importune,
To be the caruers of their own good fortune.
Thus Cephalus in Athens vnperceiu'd,
Like to a merchant clad, his wife did try:
And thus another man his wife deceived,
Which did belong to Loves kind Family.
Thus on their own heads some have graft the horn,
For very love they have to Cuckolds borne.
Which makes me think, because of others wish,
That Cuckoes eggs are sure a dainty dish.
Of all the men that ever I have known,
A Cuckold does for kindness bear the bell,
Which for his proper vsekeepes not his own,
But gives in common to his friends as well:
And so to courtesy he is allied,
What ere you ask shall hardly be denied:
That if his wife would any way befriend you,
He will not stick his very wife to lend you.
But to his wife, the world does not contain
A kinder man, replete with all civility:
Do what she will, he murmures not in vain,
But gives her scope with all facility:
Nor (though she graft the horn) does he complain,
Since he can do as much for her again.
If I by nature had been borne a woman,
A Cuckold I would have, or marry no man.
In vain it is, and needless for to spend
My worthless praises on a Cuckolds name:
Words I should sooner want, them to commend,
Than make a Period fully to their fame;
Or yield them all the honor which is due,
And does of right 'long to the horned crew;
Only a glimpse I give unto their glory,
Not able t'reach the height of such a story.
For how should I a Cuckolds praise enchaine
Within the compass of my shallow quill,
Which all the spacious world does scarce contain,
Such store of Cuckolds every corner fill:
And such a wondrous troop the Hornpipe treads,
One cannot pass another for their heads,
That shortly we shall have (as Skeleton jests)
A greater sort of horned men than beasts.
If all the Cuckolds in the world were pressed,
And ranged for the field in battaile-ray,
So great an Army there would be addressed,
As never was the like seen to this day:
For such a number would encamped lie,
That Xerxes Host, which drank huge Rivers dry,
Nor all the Armies which have been prepared,
Might with this band of Cuckolds be compared.
Cast up the number of the birds that fly,
Reckon the sands which are upon the shore,
Or tell the golden stars which paue the sky,
Then may thou count the Cuckolds all of yore:
For millions of men that have been married,
Have unto Cornwell without boat been carried;
And such a crowd are of that reputation,
They never can be put in numeration.
But though a Cuckold were a word of shame,
And slander and disgrace did still attend it,
(As all men know, it is a famous name, And many married persons should defend
it)
Yet let no Cuckold take it to the heart,
Since both his friends and neighbors bear a part:
It is great comfort to a Cuckolds chance,
That, many thousands do the Hornepipe dance.
Then to conclude (my friends of Cuckoldshire)
Grieve not to bear the horn upon your crest;
Let not the son be prouder than his Sire,
Your name is famous, and your fortune blessed,
Your life is void of sorrow and of care,
Your greatest crosses are but neighbors fare;
Spit in the face of Envy and of Scorn,
There is no credit like the Cuckolds Horn.
LEt none suppose I wear the Horn,
Because the famous Horn I praise,
Or that I am a Cuckold sworn,
Because his worth I seek to raise:
No, no (poor fools) in truth you are deceived,
Into that Order I was nere received.
All are not rich that talk of gold,
Nor Merchants, which the Burse do walk,
Nor all Divines, which Pulpits hold,
Nor strong, which do of Sampson talk:
Nor do my words so sure my state proclaim
To be a Cuckold, though I praise the name.
And yet by Vulcans head I swear,
Let sleering Apes their pleasure say,
If I the richest Cuckold were
That is in England at this day,
I know not how the horns might well content me,
But of his Living I should scarce repent me.
Non liber indicium est animi, sed honesta voluntas
Plurima mulcendis auribus apta refert.
Accius esset atrox: Conuiua Terentius esset:
Essent pugnaces, qui ferae bella canunt:
Creed mihi, Distat Casus a carmine nostro,
Vita verecunda est, Musa iocosa mea est.
Ovid. Quamobrem licet irrideat, si quis vult;
Plus apud me tamen vera ratio valebit,
quam vulgi opinio.
Cicero. FINIS.

