THE Ordinance and Edict, upon the fact of the execution of both the
Religions, Statuted by the Bailiefes, Schepens, of both the Benches, and both
the Wardens of the City of Ghaunt, by aduisement of my Lord the Prince of
Orange, and sight of the three Members of the same City of Ghaunt.

Published the 27. day of December. 1578.

Translated out of Dutch.

Jmprinted at London, by Thomas Dawson, dwelling at the three Cranes in the
Vinetree 1579.

blazon or coat of arms

THE Ordinance and Edict upon the fact of the execution of both the Religions,
Statuted by the Bailifs Schepens of both the Benches, and both the Wardens of
the City of Ghaunt, by aduisement of my Lord, the Prince of Orange, and sight
of the three Members of the same City, The 27. of December 1578.
WHereas from my Lord the Archeduke Matthias, Governor general of these low
Countries, likewise, my Lord the Prince of Orange his Liefetenant General, The
Council of the states, and the General States, at diverse times have proposed
and have been advised by diverse means for to void all the diffidence and
mistrustings, which are daily perceived and found to grow and augment among
the people, especially because of the diversity of Religion, and therefore
showed unto them of all the Provinces certain ordinances of peaceable Religion,
which (thorough subtle abusing) could not be concluded and resolved in this
City of Ghaunt, as the quietness of this City did well require: So it is, that
by the mouth of the Excellency of my aforesaid Lord the Prince of Orange, the
good intention of his highness, by my Lords of the Counsel of state General,
being well understood, is for to set the common Burgeses and inhabitants of
the said city of Ghaunt in good and sure peace, unity, and quietness, and them
therein to maintain: Also for to avoid and cut off all discordes, quarelles
and variances between the said Burgesses, during the which no City or
Province is able to take a fast and sure standing.

My Lords, Bailifes and Schepens of both the Benches, and both the Wardens of
the aforesaid city of Ghaunt, by aduiseme^t, deliberation, and communication
kept with the aforesaid Lord the Prince of Orange, also by sight, consent, and
true resolution and conclusion of communication of the three members of the
same City, being therevppon orderly assembled, have statuted and ordained
these points and articles following.

First, that within this city of Ghaunt shall be admitted the liber and free
exercise of both the Religions, as well of the Reformed as of the Catholic
Romish, and that following the same, they of the reformed Religion to and for
the exercise and using of their said Religion, shall keep, and shall by these
presents to them be granted the Churches and Temples, whereas the aforesaid
religion presently is exercised, to wit, the Churches of S. John's, S.
Saluators, and our Ladies church, and likewise the Temples of the Dominicans,
Carmelits, Fulling house, and Weauers Chapel, where shall continue the
liberty and freedom of their said Religion.

And likewise, on the other part to give full contentement to them of the
Catholic Romish religion, shall be granted and admitted the churches hereafter
specified, to wit, S. Michaels. S. Pharahilden, Saint James, S. Katherines
chapel upon the sand, for the exercising of the same religion, after the old
custom: well understood, by day, and with reasonable ringing of Belles,
without any processions to go without the church: neither also to go and carry
their sacraments openly and pompeously about the streets. And if need be,
there shall be assigned unto them of the Catholic Romish Religion one of the
other Churches or Temples, whereas presently is no Religion exercised.

And as concerning the Chapels not before mentioned, standing in diverse
distinct places of the City, they shall (for diverse considerations) be kept
locked and shut up, without any service or exercising of the reformed
Religion, or of the Romish Religion therein to be done, except it were by
ordinance of the Magistrates.

As concerning the closed Cloisters, as well of men as women, they may keep
them selves all together assembled in their respective Cloisters or Couents,
and there continue, maintaining their religion and order with closed doors,
and without ringing at nights, and nothing else. But they of the unclosed, or
open Cloisters, as well of the Friars upon the Walls, as the black Nonnes,
Baginnes, and all other, shall or may not exercise the Romish Religion in the
same their open Cloisters and Couents, but they shall thereunto use the Parish
churches unto the Catholics here before resigned and appointed as other
pastors. Well understanding nevertheless, that al those that will depart out of
the said Cloisters, and leave their habits and orders, or give themselves to
another state, that then shall be given to them reasonable and compent
maintenance to the discretion and ordinance of the Magistrates, after that they
shall find and have knowledge of the matter: without that herein shall be
comprehended any of the begging orders, as well men as women, which do remain
without the City, for the lesser charges and subleuation of the poor
commonaltie.

Item, there is agreed, that they of the reformed Religion, for the mainteining
of their public schools, shall have and keep the Cloisters of the Augustines,
Templehouse and Friars. As likewise on the otherside, they of the Catholic and
Romish Religion, if they likewise desire any Schools, shall have and enjoy
for the mainteining of their schools, the Cloister of the gray Sisters by S.
James church, likewise the Cloister of the gray sisters by the Dominicanes and
Merhem.

Item, for to assure sufficiently all the said statutes, as well for them of the
one as for the other Religion, the one is straightly bound to the other for
doing any hurt, let, trouble, hinderance, slander or harm, neither to the
services and execution of them, as well by the Catholics Romish, as by the
reformed Religion in any wise.

Moreover, it is likewise defended, for the diversity of the religion, for any
man to hurt, hinder, trouble, or molest by words or works, in body or goods:
neither to sell, set forth, or cause to be sold and set forth any envious or
spiteful pictures, songs, balades, proses or books, neither wear any marks
or tokens, wherewith they might provoke one another to anger, differences, or
questions.

Item, every man shall keep him self from the places whereas his religion is
not exercised, except he keep himself there quietly and honestly, keeping
him self from scandal, and rule him self according to the order of the church
or temples where he goes in.

Item, that as well the Ministers and Consistorians as they of the Catholic
Romish religion, shall be bound for to keep and behave them selves in all
modesty, quietness, faithfulness and obedience, in all politic matters,
without meddling themselves in any wise, in any matters of Jurisdiction, or
any matters concerning the authority of the Magistrates, directly or
indirectly.

Defending the aforesaid Preachers, Ministers, and Consistorians, and likewise
the^ of the Catholic Romish religion, openly or secretly to speak, preach,
or otherways use any words or talkings tending to co^motion, strife, discord,
or sedition.

But that every one of them keep him self modestly and manerly, saying,
preaching nor teaching any thing, but that which is good and convenient to the
instruction of the commonaltie, and mainteining of the peaceable union, concord
and tranquillity of the City and Country, which they and every one of them
severally do so promise, and shall affirm by oath so to do, and likewise to
maintain and observe: upon pain to them which shall transgress therein, to
forfet and be defended of their preachings, and further to be corrected and
punished to the example of others.

Item, that no man shall or may work, nor open his shops upon these holy days
following, to wit, All the Sundays, two Christmasse days, New years day, the
second Easter day, the second Whitsunday, our Lady dayin midde August, S.
Mathias day in Febru. S. John's day in Midsommer, S. Peter and Paul in June,
Saint James day in Iuli, S. Bartholomew day in August, S. Andrews day in
Nouemb. And as concerning the selling of flesh in the Butchers hall, the old
custom and common use of this City shall be observed.

And those of both the said Religions are bound to show to the Magistrates
and Superiority of the City, all dew obedidience and reverence: them also to
assist as well in apprehending and punishing of all manner of seditious persons,
and other offenders (being thereunto required:) and especially of the
offenders and transgressors of this ordinance, as perturbatours of the common
quietness and peace, and otherways.

Item, no man of whatsoever religion he be, shall advance him self to attempt
any thing or practice directly or indirectly against the common quietness,
welfare, and peace of the city, but contrariwise shall every one with their
body and goods, help to keep and observe in such state the said city, as by
this ordinance, and Edict is written as well against them, as also against
strangers, or others which would enter, invade, overthrow, or do hinder in any
wise thereto.

And if it did come to pass, (which God forbid) that any do enterprise or
attempt any such like matters to the hinderance of the same city, so shall
every man (having the knowledge thereof) be bound to give it to understand to
the Magistrates, upon pain to be punished as forsworn, or other ways,
according to the fact: And to the contrary, they that shall give knoweledge
thereof orderly, though they were culpable of the matter, shall not be
punished or corrected.

For to assure all this above written, shall be ordained by the Schepens of
both the benches, and both the Wardens of this City eight notable, honest and
quiet men, vz. four of the own, and four of the other Religion, the which
shall be authorized for to cause this ordinance to be observed and kept:
Likewise, to hear all the differences, questions, complaints on both sides,
and to take order and moderate them, or if need be, to report the same to the
Bailiefes, Schepens, or Council of the City.

For the true and sure observation of all which points, and full assurance
thereof to all men, shall the Bailiefes, Schepens and Council, and the aforesaid
eight deputed Gentlemen appointed as Commissioners for the sure fortification
thereof, Likewise the Colonelles, Captains, and all other officers having
commission, and do now serve, or hereafter shall be constituted into service,
take and receive in their true sauegard, protection, defense and custody,
as well the one as the other Religion: Promising well and expreslie upon faith and
oath, them to defend against all them of whatsoever religion or condition they
be, that would resist, attempt or claim the one another right, or hinder
them, or offer them injury in body or goods, by any means whatsoever.

Promising further upon like faith and oath, that the transgressors of this
Ordinance, or of any point thereof, shall straghtlie be caused to be punished
and corrected as commotioners and perturbatours of the commom quietness and
prosperity of the City, or Country, or otherwise according to the matter,
shall be punished without favor, to the example of others.

For the observation of al which ordinances, shall also assist the said eight
commissioners, all they of the City, the common Wardens and sworn of the
occupations, of the Weauers. Likewise the Preachers, Ministers, and assistants
of the said reformed Religion, which respectiuelie every one in his degree,
shall be bound to that intent, and to the effectual observation and performing of
this ordinance, and every point thereof, shall be sworn by their oaths in the
hands of the denominated Magistrates: as likewise shall be sworn all Spiritual
persons, Capittels, Colleges and Couents of the Catholic Romish religion,
with all the other Schepens of both the benches, and both the Wardens, as it
shall be most convenient for the observation thereof: All being to the end of
good peace and quietness of this City, and also for the assurance of the one
Religion against the other. And consequently, to a true defense and rooting out
of all doubtfulnes, mistrustings, fear and and diffidence, being the spoil
and ruin of all Cities.

Thus ordained by form of Edict statuted by the Bailifes, Scepens of both
benches, and both the Wardens of the City of Ghaunt, The xxvii. of December,
1578.

Subsigned Hembyze.

Published at the Thuyne of the Town or Schepenhouse of the Keure, these being
present, Master Charles of Pottelsberghe, Bailife, Mons. Anthony Blomme, and
Peter Heylinck, Schepens of the Keure, Mons. Lieuin Tayaert, and Bauduwin
Mattheus, Schepens of Ghedeele of this City of Ghaunt, The xxvii. day of
December 1578. I being present

HEMBYZE.


