Injunctions Given by the Queen's Majesty. Anno Domini. 1.5.5.9. The first year
of the reign of our sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.

R.I.

OMNIA DESVPER



Injunctions given by the Queen's Majesty, as well to the Clergy as to the
laity of this Realm.
THe Queens most Royal Majesty, by thaduise of her most honorable
counsel, intendyng thaduauncement of the true honor of almyghtye God, the
suppression of supersticion, through all her highness Realm and dominions,
and to plant true religion, to thertirpation of al hypocrisy, enormities, and
abuses (as to her duty apperteineth) does minister unto her loving subjects
these Godly injunctions hereafter following. All which Injunctions, her
highness wylleth and commands her loving subjects obediently to receive,
and truly to observe and keep, every man in their offices, degrees and states,
as they will avoid her highness displeasure, and the pains of the same
hereafter expressed.

THe first is, that all Deanes, Archedeacons, Persons, Vicars, Usurped and
forrayne authority.
and all other ecclesiastical persons, shall faith fully keep and observe, and
as far as in them may lie, shall cause to be observed and kept of other all
and singular laws and statutes made for the restoring to the crown the
ancient jurisdiction over the state ecclesiastical, and abolyshyng of all
forrayne power repugnaunt to the same. And furthermore all ecclesiastical
persons, having cure of soul, shall to thuttermost of their wit, knowledge,
and learning, purely, sincerely, and without any color or dissimulation,
declare, manifest and open four times every year at the least in their Sermons
and other collations, that al usurped and foreign power having no
establyshement nor ground by the law of God, is for most just causes taken
away and abolyshed. And that therefore no manner of obedience or subjection
within her highness Realms and dominions is due unto any such forrayne power.
And that the Queen's power within her Realms and dominions, is the highest
power under God, to whom all men within the same Realms and dominions, by Gods
laws owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above al other powers and
potentates in earth.

Besides this, to the intent that all superstition and hypocrysye, Images.
crepte into diverse men's hearts, may vanyshe away, they shall not set
forth or extol the dignity of any Images, Relics, or miracles, but
declaryng the abuse of the same, they shall teach that all goodness, health
and grace ought to be both asked and looked for only of God, as of the very
aucthour and geuer of the same, and of none other.

A sermon every month.
Item that they the persons above rehearsed shall preach in their Churches, and
every other cure they have, one Sermon every month of the year at the least,
wherein they shall purelye and sincerely declare the word of God: and in the
same exhort their hearers to the works of faith, Works of faith.
as mercy and charity, specially prescrybed and commanded in scripture, and
that works devised by man's fantasies besides scripture: works of man's device.
As wandryng of Pylgrimages, setting up of Candels, praying upon bedes, or
such like superstition, have not only no promise of reward in scripture for
doing of them: but contrarywyse great threatenings and maledictions of God,
for that they be things tendyng to Idolatry and superstition, which of al
other offenses, God almighty does most detest and abhor, for that the same
diminishe most his honor and glory.

Quarter sermon or Homyly.
Item that they the persons above rehearsed shall preach in their own persons
once in every quarter of the year at the least one Sermon being licenced
specially thereunto, as is specified hereafter: or else shall read some Homelye
prescribed to be used by the Queen's authority every Sundaye at the least,
unless some other preacher sufficiently lycensed as hereafter chance to come
to the paryshe for the same purpose of preaching.

The pater noster, Creed and ten commandments.
Item that every holy day through the year, when they have no Sermon, they shall
immediately after the Gospel, openly and plainly resyte to their paryshioners
in the Pulpitte, the Pater noster, the Creed, and the ten commandments in
English, to the intent the people may learn the same by heart, exhortyng all
parents and householders, to teach their children and servants the same, as
they are bound by the law of God and conscience to do.

The Bible and paraphrases,
Also that they shall provide within three months next after this visitacion
at the charges of the paryshe, one book of the whole Bible of the largest
volume in English. And within one xii. months next after the said
visitacion, the Paraphrases of Erasmus also in English, upon the Gospels, and
the same set up in some convenient place within the said Church that they
have cure of, where as their paryshioners may most commodiously resort unto the
same, and read the same, out of the time of common service. The charges of the
Paraphrases shall be by the person or proprietarie and paryshioners borne by
equal portions. And they shall discorage no man from the readyng of any part
of the Bible, either in Latin or in English, but shall rather exhort every
person to read the same, with great humility and reverence, as the very
lively word of God, and the special food of man's soul, which all Chrystian
persons are bound to embrace, believe, and follow, if they look to be saved:
Whereby they may the better know their duties to God, to their Sovereign
Lady the Queen, and their neighbor, ever gentely and charitably exhortyng
them, and in her Majesty's name strayghtly chargynge and commaundyng them, that
in the reading thereof, no man to reason or contend, but quietly to hear the
reader.

Haunting of alehouses hy Ecclesiastical persons.
Also the said Ecclesiastical persons shall in no wise at any unlawful
time, nor for any other cause, then for their honest necessities, haunt or
resort to any Tauernes or Alehouses. And after their meats, they shall not give
them selves to drynkyng or riot, spendyng their time idelly by day or by
night, at dyse, cards, or tables playing, or any other unlawful game:

But at al times as they shall have leisure, they shall hear or read somewhat
of holy scripture, or shall occupye them selves with some other honest study
or exercise, and that they always do the things which apperteyne to
honesty, and endeavor to profit the common wealth, having always in mind
that they ought to excel all other in purity of life, and should be examples
to the people to live well and Christianly.

preachers not lycensed.
Also that they shall admit no man to preach within any their cures, but
such as shall appear unto them to be sufficientlye lycensed thereunto by the
Queen's Majesty, or the Archebyshoppe of Caunterburye, or the Archebishoppe of
York, in either their provinces, or the Bishop of the Diocese, or by the
Queen's Majesty's visitours: and such as shall be so lycensed, they shall
gladlye receive to declare the word of God, at convenient times, without any
resystaunce or contradiction. And that no other be suffered to preach out of
his own cure or paryshe, than such as shall be licensed, as is above expressed.

Letters of the word
Also if they do or shall know any man within their paryshe, or else where, that
is a letter of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerelye preached,
or of thexecution of these the Queen's Majesty's Injunctions, Favvtors of the
usurped power.
or a fawter of any usurped and forrayne power, now by the laws of this
Realm justly rejected and taken away, they shall detect and present the same
to the Queen's Majesty, or to her counsel, or to the Ordinarye, or to the
Justice of peace next adioynyng.

A regester
Also that the Person, Vycar, or Curate and paryshyoners of every paryshe
within this Realm: shall in their Churches and Chapels keep one book or
Regester, wherein they shall write the day and year of every wedding,
Chrystenynge, and Buryall, made within the Paryshe, for their time, and so
every manne succeadynge them likewise, and also therein shall write every
persons name that shall be so wedded, chrystened, and buried. And for the safe
keeping of the same book, the Paryshe shall be bound to provide of their common
charges one suer coffer with two locks and keys, whereof the one to remain
with the Person, Vicar, or Curate, and the other with the Wardens of every
paryshe Church or chapel, wherein the said book shall be laid up, which
book they shall every Sunday take forth, and in the presens of the said
Wardens or one of them, write and record in the same all the weddynges,
chrystenynges, and buryals, made the whole weke before. And that done to lay up
the book in the said coffer, as before. And for every time that the same shall be
omitted, the party that shall be in the fault thereof, shall forfeite to the said
Church.iii. s.iii. d. to be employed, the one half to the poor men's box of
that Paryshe, the other half toward the repair of the Church.

Distributio^ of the xl. part.
Furthermore, because the goods of the Church, are called the goods of the
poor, and at these days, nothing is less seen then the poor to be
sustained with the same: All persons, Vicars, Pentionaries, Prebendaries, and
other benefyced men within this Deanrye not being resydent upon their
benefyces, which may dispende yearly twenty pound or above, either within
this Deanery, or else where, shall distribute heareafter among their poor
parishioners or other inhabitauntes there, in the presence of the churchwardens
or some other honest men of the paryshe, the forty part of the fruits and
revenues of their said benefice, lest they be worthily noted of ingratitude,
which reserving so many parts to them selves can not vouchsafe to impart the
forty portion thereof emonge the poor people of that parish, that is so
fruitful and profitable unto them.

Exhibition for scollers.
And to the intent that learned men may hereafter spring the more for thexecution
of the premises, every person, vycar, clerk, or benefyced man within this
Deanery, having yearly to dispende in benefyces and other promocions of the
Church an hundredth pounds, shall give.iii.li.vi. s.viii. d. in exhibicion to
one scoler in any of the universities, and for as many.C.li. more, as he may
dispende, to so many scolers more shall give like exhibicion in the university
of Oxford or Cambridge, or some gramer schole, which after they have profyted
in good learning, may be parteners of their patrones, cure and charge, as well
in preachinge as otherwise in execution of their offices, or may when neade
shall be otherwise profit the common weal, with their counsel and wisdom.

The fyft part for reparacio^.
Also that all proprietaries, persons, vycars, and clearkes having churches,
cappeles or mansions within this deanery, shall bestow yearly heareafter upon
the same mansions or chaunselles of their churches, being in decay, the fifth
part of that their benefices, till they be fullye repaired, and shall always
keep and maintain in good estate.

Reading of the Injunctions
Also that the said persons, vycars, and clearkes shall once every quarter of
the year read these Injunctions given unto them, openly and deliberatly
before al their parishioners, at one time or at two several times in one day,
to thentent that both they may be the better admonyshed of their duty, and
their said parishioners the more moved to follow the same for their part.

payment of Tithes
Also forasmuch as by laws established, every man is bound to pay his
tithes, no man shall by color of duty omitted by their curates, deteyne their
tithes, and so requite one wrong with another, or be his own judge: but shall
truly pay the same, as he has been accustomed to their persons, vycars, and
curates, without any restraynte or diminucion. And such lack and default as
they can justly find in their persons and curates, to call for reformacion
thereof, at their ordinaries and other superiors, who upon complaint and due
proof thereof, shall reform the same accordyngly.

The new Testament and paraphrasis.
Also that every person, vycar, curate, and Stipendary priest, being under
the degree of a master of art, shall provide and have of his own within three
months after this visitacion, the new Testament both in Latin and in Englysh
with Paraphrases upon the same, conferryng the one with the other. And the Bishops
and other Ordinaries by them selves or their officers in their Sinodes and
visitations, shall examine the said Ecclesiastical persons, how they have
profyted in the study of holy scripture.

Comfortable sentences for the sick.
Also that the vice of damnable despair, may be clearly taken away, and that
fyrme belief and steadfast hope may be surely conceived of all their
paryshioners being in a danger, they shall learn and have always in a
redynesse, such comfortable places and sentences of scripture, as do set
forth the mercy, benefytes and goodness of almyghtie God, toward all
penitent and beleauynge persons, that they may at all times when necessity
shall require, promptlye comfort their flock with the lively word of God,
which is the only stay of man's conscience.

procession to be left.
Also to avoid all contencion and strife which heretofore has risen among the
Queen's Majesty's subjects in sundry places of her Realms and dominions, by
reason of fond curtesy, and chalengynge of places in procession: and also that
they may the more quietly hear that which is said or song to their
edyfyinge, they shall not from henceforth in any paryshe Church, at any time
use any procession about the Church or Church yard, or other place, but
immediately before the time of Communion of the Sacrament, the Priests with
other of the Quyre, shall kneel in the mids of the Church, and sing or say
plainly and distinctly the Letany which is set forth in English with all the
Suffrages following, The Letany.
to the intent the people may hear and answer, and none other procession or
Letany to be had or used, but the said Letany in English, adding nothing
thereto but as it is now appointed. And in Cathedral or Collegiat Churches,
the same shall be done in such places and in such sort, as our commissioners in
our visitacion shall appoint. And in the time of the Letany, of the common
prayer, of the Sermon, Let hearing of divine service.
and when the priest reads the scripture to the parishioners, no manner of
persons without a just and urgent cause shall use any walkyng in the
Church, ne shall depart out of the Church, and all ryngynge and knollynge of
belles shall be utterly forborne for that time, except one bell in convenient
time to be ronge or knolled before the Sermon. But yet for the reteynyng of the
perambulation of the Circuites of parishes, they shall once in the year at the
time acustomed, with the curate and the substanciall men of the paryshe, walk
about their paryshes as they were accustomed, and at their return to the
Church, make their common prayers.

perambulation of parishes.
Provided that the curate in their said common perambulations used heretofore
in the days of Rogations, at certain convenient places shall admonyshe the
people to give thanks to God in the beholding of Gods benefits for the
increase and abundance of his fruits upon the face of the earth, with the
saying the.C iii. Psalm: Benedic anima mea, etc. or such like, at which time
also the same minister shall inculke these or such Sentences. Cursed be he
which translateth the bonds and dolles of his neighbor, or such other order
of prayers as shall be hereafter appointed.

Spending all the holy day.
Item all the Queen's faithful and loving subjects, shall from henceforth
celebrate and keep their holly day, according to Gods holy will and pleasure:
that is in hearing the word of god read and taught: in private and public
prayers: in knowledgyng their offenses to God, and amendment of the same, in
reconcylynge their selves charitably to their neighbors, where displeasure
has been, in oftentimes receauynge the Communion of the very body and blood of
Christ, in visitinge of the poor and sick, in vsinge all soberness and
Godly conversation: yet notwithstanding all persons, vycares and Curates,
shall teach and declare unto their parishioners, that they may with a safe and
quiet conscience after their common prayer in the time of harvest, labor
upon the holly and festival days, and save that thing which God has sent.
And if for any Scrupulositie or grudge of conscience, men should
supersticiously abstain from workyng upon those days: that then they should
grievously offend and displease God.

Open co^tenders to be reconciled openly.
Also forasmuch as varyaunce and contencion is a thing that most displeases
God, and is most contrary to the blessed Communion of the body and blood of
our Savior Christ, Curates shall in no wise admit to the receauinge thereof
any of their cure or flock, which be openly known to live in sin notorious
without repentance, or who has maliouslye and openly contended with his
neighbor, unless the same do first charitably and openly reconcyle him
self again, remittynge all rancoure and mallyce, whatsoever controversy has
been between them, and nevertheless their just tytles and ryghtes, they may
charitably prosecute before such as have authority to hear the same.

Contemners of laudable ceremonies.
Also that they shall instruct and teach in their cures, that no man ought
obstinately and maliciouslye break and violate the lawedable Ceremonies of the
Church commanded by public authority to be observed.

The abolishment of things supersticious.
Also that they shall take away, utterly extinct and destroy all shrynes,
coueryng of shrynes, al tables, candelstickes, tryndalles, and rolls of wax,
pictures, paintinges, and all other monumentes of feigned miracles, pilgrimages,
ydolatry and supersticion, so that there remain no memory of the same in
walls, glasses, wyndow or else where within their churches and houses,
preseruyng nevertheless or repayryng both the walls and glass wyndowes. And
they shall exhort all their paryshioners to do the like with in their several
houses.

The pulpit.
And that the churchwardens at the common charge of the parishioners in every
Church shall provide a comely and honest Pulpit to be set in a convenient place
within the same, and to be there semely kept, for the preachinge of Gods word.

The chest for the poor.
Also they shall provide and have within three months after this visitacion, a
strong cheste with a hole in the upper part thereof, to be provided at the
cost and charge of the paryshe, having three keys, whereof one shall remain
in the custody of the person, vycar, or curate, and the other two in the
custody of the churchwardens, or any other two honest men, to be appointed by
the paryshe from year to year, which cheste you shall set and fasten in a
most convenient place, to the intent the parishyoners should put into it
their oblacions and alms for their poor neighbors. And the person, vycar,
and curate, shall diligently from time to time, and specially when men make
their Testamentes, call upon, exhort and move their neybours to confer and
give, as they may well spare, to the said cheste, declarynge unto them,
whereas heretofore they have been diligent to bestow much substance otherwise
than God commanded, upon pardons, pilgrimages, trentalles, deckynge of Images,
offering of Candelles, geuynge to Friars, and upon other like blind
deuocions: they ought at this time to be much more ready to help the poor and
nedy, knowing that to relieve the poor is a true worshipping of God, required
earnestly upon pain of euerlaynge dampnation, and that also whatsoever is
given for their comfort, is given to Christ him self, and so is accepted of
him, that he will mercifully reward the same with everlasting life. The which
alms and devotion of the people, the kepers of the keys, The distribution of
the alms.
shall at times convenient take out of the cheste, and distribute the same in
the presence of the whole parysh or six of them, to be truly and faithfully
delivered to their most nedye neighbors, and if they be provided for, then to
the reparacion of high ways next adioynynge, or to the poor people of such
parishes nere, as shall be thought best to the said kepers of the keys. And also
the money which ryseth of fraternities, guildes, and other stocks of the
Church (except by the Queen's Majesty's authority it be otherwise appointed)
shall be put into the said chest, and converted to the said use, and also the
rentes of lands, the profit of cattaile, and money given or bequethed to
obittes and diriges, or to the finding of torches. lights, tapers and lamps,
shall be converted to the said use, sauinge that it shall be lawful for them to
bestow part of the said profits upon the reparacion of the said Church, if
great need require, and where as the paryshe is very poor, and not able
otherwise to repair the same.

Symony.
Also to avoid the detestable sin of Simonye, because buyinge and selling
of benefyces is execrable before God, therefore all such persons as buy any
benefices, or come to them by fraud or deceit, shall be deprived of such
benefices, and be made unable at any time after, to receive any other
Spiritual promocion. And such as do sell them, or by any color do bestow
them for their own gain and profit, shall lose their right and title of
patronage, and presentment for that time, and the gift thereof for that
vacation, shall appertain to the Queen's Majesty.

Homelies to be read
Also because through lack of preachers in many places of the Queen's Realms
and dominions, the people continue in ignorance and blyndnes, all Persons,
Vicars, and Curates, shall read in their Churches every Sunday, one of the
Homelies which are and shall be set forth for the same purpose, by the Queen's
authority, in such sort as they shall be appointed to do in the preface of the
same.

Contempt of ministers.
Also whereas many indiscrete persons do at this day, uncharitably contemn and
abuse priests and ministers of the Church, because some of them (having small
learning) have of long time favored fond fantasies, rather than Gods
truth: yet forasmuch as their office and function is appointed of Godde: the
Queen's Majesty wylleth and charge all her loving subjects, that from
henceforth they shall use them charitablye and reverently, for their office
and ministracion sake, and especially such as labor in the setting forth of
Gods holy word.

was by act of Parliament in time of our dear brother king Edward the syxt,
made lawefull, whereupon a great number of the clergy of this Realm were then
married, and so yet continue. yet because there has grown offense, and some
slander to the Church, by lack of discrete and sober behauyoure in many
ministers of the Church, both in choosing of their wives, and in indiscreet
living with them, the remedy whereof is necessary to be sought. It is thought
therefore very necessary, that no manner of Priest or Deacon, shall hereafter
take to his wife any manner of woman without the aduyce and allowaunce first had
upon good examination by the Bishop of the same Diocese, and two Justices of
peace of the same shyre, dwelling next to the place where the same woman has
made her most abode, before her marryge, nor without the good will of the
parents of the said woman, if she have any living, or two of the next of her
kynsefolkes, or for lack of knowledge of such, of her master or mastres where
she serves. And before he shall be contracted in any place, he shall make a good
and certain proof thereof to the minister, or to the congregation assembled for
that purpose, which shall be upon some holy day where diverse may be present. And
if any shall do otherwise: that then they shall not be permitted to minister
either the word, or the Sacraments of the Church, nor shall be capable of any
Ecclesiastical benefyce. And for the manner of marriages of any Bishops, the
same shall be allowed and approved by the Metropolitan of the province, and also
by such commissioners as the Queen's Majesty shall thereunto appoint. And if
any master or Deane, or any head of any college, shall purpose to mary, the
same shall not be allowed, but by such to whom the visitation of the same does
properly belong, who shall in any wise provide that the same tend not to the
hynderaunce of their house.

Of apparel of ministers.
Item her Majesty being desirous to have the Prelacye and Clergy of this
Realm to be had as well in outward reverence, as otherwise regarded for the
woorthynesse of their ministeries, and thinking it necessary to have them
known to the people, in all places and assembles, both in the Church and
without, and thereby to receive the honor and estimacion due to the special
messengers and mynysters of almyghtye Godde: wylleth and commands that all
Archebyshoppes and Bysshoppes, and all other that be called or admytted to
preaching or mynysterye of the Sacraments, or that be admytted into any
vocation Ecclesiastical, or into any society of learning in either of the
universities, or else where, shall use and wear such semely habites,
garments, and such square cappes, and were most commonly and orderlye
received in the latter year of the raygne of King Edward the syxt, not
thereby meaning to attrybute any holiness or special worthiness to the
said garments. But as saint Paul writes: Omnia decenter and secundum
ordinem fiant. 1 Cor. 14. Cap.

Heresies.
Item that no man shall wylfully and obstinately defend or maintain any
heresies, errors or false doctrine, contrary to the faith of Christ and his
holy scripture.

Charms.
Item that no persons shall use charms, sorcery, enchauntmentes, witchcraftes,
southsayinge, or any like deuelishe deuyse, nor shall resort at any time to the
same for counsel or help.

Absence from common prayer.
Item that no person shall, neglecting their own paryshe Church, resort to
any other church in time of common prayer or preaching, except it be by the
occasion of some extraordinary sermon, in some paryshe of the same town.

Inholders and alehouses.
Item that no Inneholders or ale house kepers shall use to sell meat or drink
in the time of common prayer, preaching, reading of the Homelies or
Scriptures.

Images in houses.
Item that no persons keep in their houses any abused images, table,
pictures, payntinges and other monumentes of feigned miracles, pylgrymages,
Idolatry, or supersticion.

Disturbers of sermons or service
Item that no man shall wyllyngly let or dysturbe the preacher in time of his
Sermon, or let or discourage any curate or minister to singe or say the divine
service now set forth, nor mock or rest at the ministers of such service.

Rash talkers of scripture.
Item that no man shall talk or reason of the holy scriptures, rashely or
contentiouslye, nor maintain any false doctrine or error, but shall commune of
the same when occasion is given, reverently, humbly, and in the fear of God,
for his comfort and better understanding.

Attendaunt to the service
Item that no man, woman, or child, shall be otherwise occupied in the time of
the Service, then in quiet attendaunce to hear, mark and understand that is
read, preached, and ministered.

The gramer of king Henry theight
Item that every scolemaster and teacher, shall teach the Gramer set forth by
king Henry the eight of noble memory, and continued in the time of king Edward
the syxt and none other.

Allovvaunce of scolemasters.
Item that no man shall take upon him to teach, but such as shall be allowed by
thordinary, and found meet, as well for his learning and dexterity in
teachinge, as for sober and honest conversation, and also for right
understanding of Gods true religion.

Duty of scolemasters.
Item that all teachers of children shall stir and move them to the love and
due reverence of gods true religion, now truly set forth by publyke
authority.

sentences of scripture for scollers
Item that they shall accustom their Scollers reverently to learn such
sentences of scriptures, as shall be most expedient to enduce them to all
Godliness.

unlearned priests.
Item forasmuch as in these latter days many have been made priests, being
children, and otherwise utterly unlearned, so that they could read to say
mattens and mass: The Ordinaryes shall not admit any such to any cure or
spiritual function.

The Cathechisme
Item, every Parson, Vycar, and Curate shall upon every holy day, and every
second Sunday in the year, hear and instruct all the youth of the paryshe,
for half an hour at the least, before Evening prayer, in the ten
commandments, the Articles of the belief, and in the Lords prayer, and
diligently examine them, and teach the Cathechisme, set forth in the book of
public prayer.

The book of the afflictions for religion
Item that the Ordinaries do exhibit unto our visitours their books, or a
true copy of the same, containing the causes why any person was imprisoned,
famyshed, or put to death, for religion.

Overseers for service on the holy days.
Item that in every paryshe, three or four discrete men which tender Gods
glory, and his true Religion, shall be appointed by the Ordynaries, diligently to
see that all the paryshyoners duly resort to their Church, upon all Sundays
and holy days, and there to continue the whole time of the Godly service. And
all such as shall be found stacke or negligent in resorting to the Church,
having no great nor urgent cause of absence, they shall strayghtly call upon
them, and after due monicion, if they amend not, they shall denounce them to
the Ordinary.

Inue^tories of Church goods.
Item that the Churchwardens of every paryshe shall deliver unto our visitours
the inuentories of vestmentes, copes, and other ornaments, plate, books, and
specially of Grayles, Couchers, Legendes, Processionalles, Hymnalles,
Manuelles, Portuesses, and such like apperteynyng to their Church.

Service on vvednesdayes and frydayes.
Item that weekly upon Wednesdayes and Frydayes, not being holy days, the
curate at the accustomed hours of service, shall resort to Church, and cause
warnyng to be given to the people, by knollyng of the bell, and say the Letany
and prayers.

Continuance of synginge in the church.
Item because diverse Collegiate, and also some paryshe Churches heretofore,
there has been lyuynges appointed for the mayntenaunce of men and children,
to use singing in the Church, by means whereof the lawdable science of
music has been had in estimation, and preserved in knowledge: The Queen's
Majesty neither meaning in any wise the decay of any thing that might
conveniently tend to the use and continuance of the said science, neither to
have the same in any part so abused in the Church, that thereby the common
prayer should be the worse understand of the hearers: Wylleth and
commands, that first no alteration be made of such assignementes of living,
as heretofore has been appointed to the use of singing or musycke in the
Church, but that the same so remain. And that there be a modeste and
destyncte song so used, in all parts of the common prayers in the Church,
that the same may be as plainly understood, as if it were read without
synging. And yet nevertheless for the comforting of such as delight in music,
it may be permytted that in the beginning, or in thend of common prayers,
either at morning or evening, there may be song an hymn, or such like
song, to the praise of almighty God, in the best sort of melodye, and music
that may be conveniently devised, having respect that the sentence of the
hymn may be understood and perceived.

Against slau^derus and infamus words.
Item because in all alteracions, and specially in rytes and Ceremonies, there
happens dyscorde emonges the people, and thereupon slanderous words and
raylynges, whereby charity the knot of all christian society is loosed. The
Queen's Majesty being most desirous of al other earthly things, that her
people should live in charity, both toward God and man, and therein abound
in good works: wylleth and straightly commands al manner her subjects, to
forbear al vain and contencious disputacions in matters of Religion, and not
to use in despite or rebuke of any person, these conuitious words, papist, or
papisticall heretic, scismaticke, or sacramentary, or any such like words
of reproach. But if any manner of person, shall deserve the accusation of any
such, that first he be charitablye admonysshed thereof. And if that shall
not amend him, then to denounce the offenders to the Ordinary, or to some
higher power having authority to correct the same.

Against heriticall and sedicious books
Item because there is a great abuse in the printers of books: which for
covetousness chiefly, regard not what they print, so they may have gain,
whereby arryseth great disorder by publication of unfruitful, vain, and
infamous books and papers: The Queen's majesty straightly charge and
commands, that no manner of person shall print any manner of book or paper of
what sort, nature, or in what language soever it be, except the same be first
licensed by her majesty by express words in writing, or by.vi. of her privy
counsel: or be perused and licensed by the archbyshops of Cantorbury and york,
the bishop of London, the Chauncelours of both universities, the bishop being
Ordinary, and the Archdeacon also of the place where any such shall be printed,
or by two of them, whereof the ordinary of the place to be always one. And that
the names of such as shall allow the same, to be added in the end of every such
work, for a testimonye of the alowaunce thereof. And because many pampheletes,
plays and balettes, be often times printed, wherein regard would be had that
nothing therein should be either heretical, sedicious, or unseemly for
Christian ears: Her majesty likewise commands, that no manner of person
shall enterprise to print any such, except the same be to him licensed by such
her majesty's commissioners, or.iii. of them, as be appointed appointed in the
city of London to hear and determine diverse causes ecclesiastical, tending
to the execution of certain statutes, made the last parliament for uniformity
of order in religion. And if any shall sell or utter any manner of books or
papers, being not licensed as is abouesaid: that the same party shall be
punyshed by order of the said commissioners, as to the quality of the fault
shall be thought meet. And touching all other books of matters of religion, or
policy or governance, that has been prynted either on thisside the Seas, or
on the other side, because the diversity of them is great and that there needs
good consideration to be had of the particularities thereof: her Majesty
refers the prohibition or permission thereof to thorder which her said
commissioners within the city of London shall take, and notify.

According to the which her Majesty strayghtly commands all manner her
subjects, and specially the Wardens and company of Stacioners to be obedient.

Provided that these orders do not extend to any profane aucthours, and
works in any language, that has been heretofore commonly received or allowed
in any the universities or Scoles: but the same may be prynted and used as by
good order they were accustomed.

Reverence at prayers.
Item, although almyghtie God is at all times to be honored with all manner of
reverence that may be devised: yet of all other times, in time of common
prayer, the same is most to be regarded. Therefore, it is to be necessarely
received, that in time of the Letany, and of all other Collectes and common
supplications to almighty God, all manner of people shall devoutly and humbly
knele upon their knees, Honor to the name of Jesus.
and give ear thereunto. And that whenever the name of Jesus shall be in any
Lesson, Sermon, or otherwise in the Church pronounced: That due reverence be
made of all persons young and old, with lowlynesse of cursye, and vncoueryng of
heads of the men kind, as thereunto does necessarely belong, and heretofore
has been accustomed.

Curats to read dystinctly.
Item that all ministers and readers of public prayers, Chapiters and
Homylies, shall be charged to read leysurely, plainly, and distinctly, and also
such as are but mean readers, shall peruse over before once or twyse the
Chapiters and Homylies, to the intent they may read to the better understanding
of the people, and the more encoragement to godliness.

An admonition to simple men, deceived by malicious.
THe Queen's majesty being informed that in certain places of this Realm,
sundry of her native subjects being called to Ecclesiastical ministerye in
the Church, be by sinister persuasion and perverse construction induced to
find some scruple in the form of an oath, which by an Act of the last
Parliament is prescribed to be required of diverse persons, for the recognitio^
of their allegiaunce to her Majesty, which certainly neither was ever meant,
ne by any equity of words or good sense can be thereof gathered: Would that
all her loving subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be
meant or intended by the same oath, to have any other duty, allegiaunce, or
bond required by the same oath, then was acknowleged to be due to the most
noble kings of famous memory king Henry theyght, her Majesty's father, or king
Edward the.vi. her Majesty's brother.

And further her Majesty forbyddeth all manner her subjects to give ear or
credit to such perverse and malicious persons, which most sinisterly and
maliciously labor to notify to her loving subjects, how by the words of the
said oath, it may be collected yt the kings or queen's of this Realm,
possessours of the crown, may challenge authority and power of ministry of
divine offices in the Church, wherein her said subjects be much abused by
such evil disposed persons. For certainly her Majesty neither does, ne ever
will challenge any other authority, than that was challenged and lately used by
the said noble kings of famous memory king Henry the.viii. and king Edward
the.vi. which is and was of ancient time due to the Imperial crown of this
Realm. That is, under god to have the soueraintie and rule over all manner
persons borne within these her Realms, dominions, and countries, of what
estate either Ecclesiastical or temporal soever they be, so as no other
foreign power shall or ought to have any superiority over them. And if any
person that has conceived any other sense of the form of the said oath, shall
accept the same oath with this interpretation, sense, or meaning, her Majesty
is well pleased to accept every such in that behalf, as her good and obedient
subjects, and shall acquit them of al manner penalties contained in the said
act, against such as shall peremptoryly or obstinatly refuse to take the same
oath.

For the tables in the Church.
WHereas her Majesty understands that in many and sundry parts of the
Realm, the Alters of the Churches be removed, and tables placed for
ministration of the holy Sacrament, according to the form of the law therefore
provided, and in some other places the Alters be not yet removed, upon opinion
conceived of some other order therein to be taken by her Majesty's visitours. In
thorder whereof, saving for an uniformity, there seems no matter of great
moment, so that the Sacrament be duly and reverently ministered. Yet for
observation of one uniformity through the whole Realm, and for the better
imitacion of the law in that behalf, it is ordered that no alter be taken
down, but by ouersyght of the Curate of the Church, and the Churchwardens, or
one of them at the least, wherein no riotous or disordred manner to be used:
and that the holy table in every Church be decently made, and set in the
place where the Alter stood, and there commonly covered as thereto belongs,
and as shall be appointed by the visitours, and so to stand, saving when the
Communion of the Sacrament is to be distributed, at which time the same shall be
so placed in good sort within the Chauncell, as whereby the minister may be
more conveniently heard of the communicantes, in his prayer and ministration,
and the communicantes also more conuenientlye and in more number communicate
with the said minister, and after the Communion done, from time to time the
same holy table to be placed where it stood before.

The sacramental bread.
Item where also it was in the time of king Edward the.vi. used to have the
sacramental bread of common fine bread: It is ordered for the more reverence
to be given to these holy mysteries, being the Sacraments of the body and
blood of our savior Jesus Christ, that the fame sacramental bread be made and
fourmed plain without any figure thereupon, of the same finenesse and fashion
round, though somewhat bigger in compass and thickenesse, as the usual bread
and wafer heretofore named syngyng cakes, which served for the use of the
private mass.

The form of byddyng the prayers to be used generally in this uniform sort.
YE shall pray for Christ's holy Catholyke Church, that is, for the whole
congregation of Christen people, dispersed throughout the whole world, and
specially for the Church of England and Irelande. And herein I require you
most specially to pray for the Queen's most excellent Majesty, our sovereign
lady Elizabeth Queen of England, France and Ireland, defendour of the faith,
and supreme governor of this Realm, as well in causes Ecclesiastical as
Temporal.

You shall also pray for the ministers of gods holy word and Sacraments, as well
Archbyshops and Bishops, as other pastors and curates.

You shall also pray for the Queen's most honorable counsel, and for all the
nobility of this Realm, that all and every of these in their calling, may
serve truly and paynfully, to the glory of God and edifying of his people,
remembryng thaccompt that they must make.

Also you shall pray for the whole commons of this Realm, that they may live in
true faith and fear of God, in humble obedience and brotherly charity one to
another.

Finally, let us praise God for all those which are departed out of this life
in the faith of christ and pray unto God, that we may have grace so to direct
our lives after their good example, that after this life, we with them may be
made partakers of the glorious resurrection, in the life everlasting.

And this done, show the holy days and fasting days.
ALl which and singular Injunctions, the Queen's Majesty ministers unto her
clergy, and to all other her loving subjects, straightly charging and
commanding them to observe and keep the same, upon pain of deprivation,
sequestration of fruits and benefices, suspention, excommunication and such
other cohertion, as to Ordinaries or other having Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, whom her Majesty has appointed, or shall appoint for the due
execution of the same, shall be seen convenient. Chargyng and commaundyng them to
see these Injunctions observed and kept of all persons being under their
jurisdiction, as they will answer to her Majesty for the contrary. And her
hyghnes pleasure is, that every Justice of peace being required, shall assiste
the Ordinaries and every of them, for the due execution of the said
Injunctions.

Imprinted at London in Powles Church yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Articles to be enquired in the visitacion, in the first year of the reign of
our most dread sovereign Lady, Elizabeth by the grace of God, of England
France, and Ireland Queen, defender of the faith. etc. Anno 1559.

R.I.

OMNIA DESVPER



ARTICLES.
Residenci
First, whether any person, Vicar, or Curate be reside^t continually upon his
benefice, doing his duty in preaching, readyng, and duelye mynystrynge the
holy Sacraments.

False miracles.
Item, whether in their Churches and chapels, all images, shrynes, all tables,
Candelstickes, trindelles, or rolls of wax, pictures, payntynges, and all
other monumentes of feigned and false miracles, pilgrimages, ydolatry, and
superstition be removed, abolyshed, and destroyed.

Lords prayer.
Item, whether they do not every holy day when they have no Sermon, immediately
after the gospel, openly, plainly, and distinctly, resite to their
paryshioners in the pulpitte, the Lords prayer, the belief, and the ten
commandments in English.

To bring up youth
Item, whether they do charge fathers, and mothers, masters, and governors of
youth, to bring them up in some virtuous study and occupation.

Curates.
Item, whether such beneficed men as be lawfully absent from their benefices,
do leave their cures to a rude and unlearned parson, and not to an honest well
learned and expert Curate which can and will teach you wholesome doctrine.

Readyng the scriptures.
Item, whether they do discourage any person from readyng of any part of the
Bible, either in Latin or English, and do not rather comfort and exhort
every person to read the same at convenient times, as the very lyuelye word of
God, and the special fode of man's soul.

Tauernes and games.
Item, whether parsons, vicars, curates, and other ministers, be common
haunters and resorters to tauernes or alehouses, geuyng them selves to
drynking, ryotyng, and playing at unlawful games, and do not occupy them
selves in the readyng or hearing of some part of holy Scripture, or in some
other godly exercise.

prechers.
Item, whether they have admitted any man to preach in their cures, not being
lawfully licensed thereunto, or have been licensed accordyngly.

Superstition.
Item, whether they use to declare to their paryshioners any thing to the
extollyng or setting forth of vain and superstitious religion, pilgrimages,
relics, or images, or lyghtyng of candelles, kyssyng, knelyng, deckyng of the
same images.

regester.
Item, whether they have one book or Register kept, wherein they write the
day of every weddyng, chrystenyng, and burying.

Obedien^
Item, whether they have exhorted the people to obedience to the Queen's
Majesty, and ministers, and to charity and love one to another.

The sacrament.
Item, whether they have admonyshed their parishioners, that they ought not to
presume to receive the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ before they
can perfectly the lords prayer, tharticles of the faith, and the.x.
commandments in English.

Hospitality.
Item, whether they be resident upon their benefices, and keep hospitality or
no. And if they be absent and keep no hospitality, whether they do relieve
their parishioners, and what they give them.

reparations.
Item, whether proprietaries, parsons, vycars, and clerks, having Churches,
chapels, or mansions, do keep their chauncels, rectories, vycarages, and all
other houses apperteynyng to them, in due reparations.

prayer in English.
Item, whether they do counsel or move their parishioners rather to pray in
a tongue not known, then in English, or put their trust in any certain
number of prayers, as in saying over a number of Beads, Beads.
or other like.

Diffamed persons.
Item, whether they have received any persons to the communion, being openly
known to be out of charity with their neighbors, or dyffamed with any
notorious crime, and not reformed.

poor men's box
Item, whether they have provided and have a strong chest for the poor men's
box, and set and fastened the same in a place of the Church most convenient.

Testame^tes.
Item, whether they have diligently called upon, exhorted and moved their
parishioners, and especially when they make their testamentes, to give to the
said poor men's box, and to bestow that upon the poor, poor men's box
which they were wont to bestow upon pilgrimages, pardons, trentalles, and
upon other like blind deuocions.

Sick. Buryall.
Item, whether they have denied to visit the sick, or burye the dead, being
brought to the Church.

symony.
Item, whether they have bought their benefices, or come to them by fraud,
guyle, deceit or symonye.

Adultrers
Item, whether they have given open monition to their parishioners, to detect
and present to their Ordinary, all adulterers and fornicatours, and such men as
have two wives living within their paryshes.

Church goods.
Item, whether they have monished their parishioners openly, that they should
not sell, give nor otherwise alienate any of their Church goods.

Many benefices.
Item, whether they or any of them do keep mo benefices and other
ecclesiastical promotions, then they ought to do, not having sufficient
licenses and dispensations thereunto, and how many they be, and their names.

Communion.
Item, whether they minister the holy Communion any otherwise, then only after
such form and manner as it is set forth by the common authority of the
Queen's Majesty, and the parliament.

Letters of the word or preaching.
Item, whether you know any person within your paryshe, or else where, that is a
letter of the word of God to be read in English, or sincerely preached in
place and times convenient.

goers out of the Church.
Item, whether in the time of the Letanye, or any other common prayer, in the
time of the Sermon or Homyly, and when the priest reads the scriptures to the
parishners, any person have departed out of the Church, without just and
necessary cause, or disturb the minister otherwise.

Church money.
Item, whether the money coming and rysyng of any cattle or other moveable
stocks of the church, and money given and bequeathed to the fyndyng of torches,
lyghtes, tapers, or lamps not paid out of any lands, have not been employed
to the poor men's cheste.

Kepers of the church money
Item, who has the said stocks and money in their hands, and what be their
names.

Conte^pte of priests.
Item, whether any indiscrete persons do uncharitably contemn and abuse
priests and ministers of the Church.

The kings Gra^mer.
Item, whether there be any other Grammar taught in any scoole within this
diocese, then that which is set forth by the authority of king Henry theyght.

The time of service
Item, whether the service of the Church be done at due and convenient hours.

Talkers in the church
Item, whether any have used to common, iangle, and talk in the Church in the
time of the prayer, readyng of the Homyly, preaching, readyng, or declaryng of
the Scripture.

Heresies.
Item, whether any have wylfully mainteyned and defended any heresies, errors
or false opinions contrary to the faith of Christ and holy Scripture.

Dronkardes.
Item, whether any be common dronkardes, swearers, or blasphemers of the name
of GOD.

Adulterers.
Item, whether any have committed adulterye, fornication, or incest, or be
common baudes or receivers of such evil persons, or vehemently suspected of any
of the premises.

Bravvlers
Item, whether any be brawlers, sclaunderers, chyders, scoldes, and sowers of
discord between one person and another.

Sorcerers.
Item, whether you know any that do use charms, sorcery, enchauntmentes,
inuocations circles, witchcraftes, southsayinge, or any like crafts or
imaginacions invented by the devil, and specially in the time of women's
travail.

pulpittes.
Item, whether the Churches, Pulpittes, and other necessaries apperteyninge to
the same, be sufficiently repaired, and if they be not, in whose default the
same is.

Resorters to other Churches.
Item, whether you know any that in contempt of their own paryshe Church, do
resort to any other Church.

Inholders
Item, whether any Inholders or ale house kepers, do use commonly to sell meat
and drink in the time of common prayer, preachinge, readyng of the Homelies or
Scripture.

Divorce.
Item, whether you know any to be married within the degrees prohibited by the
laws of God, or that be separated or dyuorsed without the degrees prohibited
by the law of God, and whether any such have married again.

privy contractes.
Item, whether you know any to have made privy contractes of matrymonye, not
calling two or mo witnesses thereunto, nor having thereto the consent of their
parents.

Banes.
Item, whether they have married solempnely, the banes not first lawefully asked.

Executors.
Item, whether you know any executours or administratours of dead men's goods,
which do not duly bestow such of the said goods as were given and
bequethed, or appointed to be distributed among the poor people, repayring
of high ways, fyndyng of poor scolers, or marying of poor maidens, or such
other like charitable deeds.

Images.
Item whether you know any that keep in their houses, undefaced any Images,
tables, pictures, paintynges, or other monumentes of feigned and false miracles,
pilgrimages, Idolatry, or supersticion, and do adore them, and specially such
as have been set up in Churches, chapelles, or oratories.

Books.
Item, what books of Gods Scripture you have delivered to be burnt, or
otherwise destroyed, and to whom ye have delivered the same.

Bribes.
Item, what brybes the accusers, promoters, persecutors, ecclesiastical
judges, and other the commissioners appointed within the several diocese of
this Realm, have received by them selves, or other, of those persons which
were in trouble, apprehended or imprisoned for Religion.

Loss of goods.
Item, what goods, moveable lands, fees, offices or promocions has been
wrongfully taken away, in the time of Queen Mary's reign from any person,
which favored the Religion now set forth.

How many burnt.
Item how many persons for religion have dyed by fire, famine, or otherwise,
or have been imprisoned for the same.

Certificat of the dead.
Item, that you make a true presentment of the number of all the persons, which
died within your parishes, sithen the feast of Saint John the Baptist, which
was in the year of our lord God, a thousand, five hundred, fifty and eight
unto the same feast last past. Making therein a plain distynct declaracion,
how many men, women, and men children the same were. And the names of the men.

Secret masses.
Item, whether ye know any man in your paryshe, secretly, or in unlawful
conuenticles say or hear mass, or any other service prohibited by the law.

False rumors.
Item, whether you know any person in your paryshe, to be a slaunderer of
his neighbors, or a four of dyscorde, between party and party, man and
wife, parents, and their children, Unlawful books
or that has invented, bruted, or set forth any rumors, false and
sedicious tales, sclaunders, or makers, bryngers, buyers, sellers, kepers or
conueyers of any unlawful books, which might stir or provoke sedicion, or
maintain supersticious service within this Realm, or any aydours,
counsaylours, procurers, or mayntayners thereunto.

patron Tithes. Vacacion
Item, whether the Church of your paryshe be now vacant or no, who is the
Patron thereof, how long it has been vacant, who does receive the tithes,
oblations, and other commodities duringe the time of the vacation, and by what
authority, and in what estate the said Church is at this time, and how
long the person or vycar has had that benefice.

Minstrels
Item, whether any mynstrelles, or any other persons do use to sing or say any
songs or ditties that be vile or unclean, and especially in derision of any
godly order, now set forth and establyshed.

Letany in English.
Item, whether the Letanye in English, with the Epistle and Gospel which was
by the Queen's highness Proclamation wylled to be readde to the people, were
put in use in your Churches, and if not, who were the letters thereof.

Distinct readinge.
Item, whether the Curates and ministers do leasurely, plainly, and
distinctly, read the public prayers, Chapters and Homelies, as they ought to
do.

GOD SAVE THE QVENE.
Imprinted at LonDON IN POVVLES CHVRCH yard by Richard Judge and John Cawood,
Printers to the Queen's Majesty.

Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


