PAVLS DESIRE OF Dissolution, AND DEATHS ADVANTAGE.

A SERMON PREACHED at the Funeral of that right virtuous and religious
Gentlewoman Mrs Rebekka Crisp, together with the Testimony then given unto her.

By T. G. B. of D.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for William Bladen, and are to be sold at
his shop at the sign of the Bible, near the great North door of Paul's. 1620.

TO MY LOVING UNCLE Mr NICOLAS CRISP, AND TO MY KIND COSENS Mrs Rebekka Stroud,
Mrs Anne Skeleton, Mrs Ester Whitaker his Daughters, with the rest of that
Family; happy imitation of the holy deceased both in Life, and in Death.
MY right dear, and deservedly beloved Allies; finding among my loose papers
the notes of that Sermon that I made at the enterrement of that blessed Saint,
lately wife to the one, and mother to the rest of you, collected and
transscribed not long after at the request of some of you for your own private
use and benefit: I thought it would not be amiss to make it more public; (the
rather for that diverse seemed to desire it) and to add unto it the testimony
then truly and upon good ground given unto her: partly for the propagating and
perpetuating of the memory of so worthy a servant of God, and partly also and
more principally for the enciting and egging on of others, of that Sex
especially, to the imitation of her. (...) Aristo^. ethic. l. 10. c. 1. Exempla
maxim mouent. Cic. de orat. lib. 3. Validiora sunt exempla quam verba, and
plen^us opere d^cetur quam vcce. Leo sermon. de ieiun.
Good Examples (as the Heathen man observes) are of great force; and are
therefore (not without cause) so frequently propounded 1. Cor. 11. 1. Ephesians. 5.
1, 2. Phil. 3. 17. Hebr. 12. 1, 2. and 13. 7. Iam. 5. 10.
in Gods word. Longum est iter per praecepta: breue and ^fficax per exempla.
Sen. epist. 6.
They prevail often more then precepts. Precepts show us what we should do:
Examples go further, and show us how we may do it; and Hoc plus valent
exempla, quod fieri posse docent quod factum est. Sermo quidam vinus and
efficax exemplum operis est, facile persuadens quod intendimus, deum factibile
probat esse quod s^ademus. Bern. de resurr. ser. 2. Ex aliorum factis fieri
poss^ credunt, quod forte, da^ putant non fieri posse, pigrescunt. Aug. epist.
134. Adiuvari se exemplie exoptat humana infirmitas, quo facilius ipsa etiam
nunc faciat, quae ali^^ fecisse ante cognoscat. Saluian. ad eccles. cath. l. 3.
that the things enjoined us may be done of us, because they have been done by
others (...) Iam. 5. 17. Lege Bern. sermon. de Martino.
like our selves before us: and so they take away that objection of
impossibility, as if that were required of us, that could not be done, or that
none before us ever did. Again, as Examples in general are useful; so
Examples of this Sex are in some respect of the twain the more needful. That
Popish conceit sticks still in the minds of many; that knowledge and
booke-learning is for great Clarks only; mean men, and women much more then,
have no need of it, neither indeed can attain unto it. Yet God tells us
that they must Ierem. 31. 34.
all know him from the highest to the lowest, John 17. 3.
whom he shows mercy unto in the remission of their sins. And surely, if to
know God in Christ be life eternal; then Si cognitio Dei vita aeterna, tum
ignorantia Dei mors aeterna. Bern. in Cant.
to be ignorant of him, cannot be, or bring but eternal destruction. Besides
that Galat. 3. 28. (...). Basil. Sell. hom. 2.
Christianity makes no distinction of Sex. 1. Tim 2. 15. (...) Clem Alex.
Paed^g l. 1. c. 4.
The same common salvation is propounded to both Sexes: (...) Basil.
the same means of attayning it are likewise common to either. Act. 4. 12. 1.
Cor. 11. 11.
No salvation to man or woman but by Christ: Mark. 16. 16. John 3. 16.
no interest in Christ but by Faith, 1. Tim. 2 15. John 11. 27. 2. Tim. 1. 5.
exacted therefore of either: and Romans 10. 14, 17. (...). Clem. Alex. strom. l.
5. (...). Marc. de lege spir. 102. Indiget fides cog^iti^ne, sicut and cognitio
indiget fide: neque enim esse potest sides sine cognitione, neque est cognitio
aliquid sine fide. Theodor. de cur. Graec. aff. l. 1.
no Faith without knowledge, the maine groundwork of Faith. Now as there is a
necessity of knowledge, faith, fear of God, and other spiritual graces in
either, so there is no impossibility of attaining them, and some good measure
of them, unto either. Examples of the weaker Sex apparently proving this, are
in that regard the more effectual; for that, as they shame men, if they come
short of such, so they give women encouragement to contend, and good hope to
attain unto, what they see others of their Sex have before them by like
contending attained. But domestical examples are of all other the most
powerful. And therefore whatsoever effect this shall have with others, it
ought in special manner to prevail with you, who had so special interest in
her, whose memory is so sacred with all those that here knew her, and who were
continual eyewitnesses of those her gracious parts and godly courses, which
most others had in part only by hearsay. And doubtless that is the greatest
honor we can do to our religious Ancestors deceased, if we endeavor so to
resemble them in good^^s and godliness, that by our religious courses and
carriage we may be known to have come of them, and they may seem to surviue in
us. The manner of her end, so sweet, so cheerful, so comfortable, should the
rather encite you hereunto, that, if you desire to find that comfort then that
she did, and to give that comfort to others, that you had then in her, you take
that course that you saw she did, lay a sure foundation in life for comfort in
death, and be continually building upon it when it is once surely laid. Now
that this weak work may a little at least further you therein, he vouchsafe to
grant, whose power appears in our weakness, and who by weak means is able
to effect weighty matters: To his blessing, I commend both you and it, and so
rest

Your loving Cosen Tho: Gataker.

THE TESTIMONY Given to Mrs REBEKKA CRISP at her Burial.
THE Bodies of Gods Sants as well as their Souls are 1 Cor. 6. 19.
members of Christ's body, and 1 Cor. 6. 19.
Temples of Gods Spirit: and are therefore in decent and honest manner to be
laid up in the womb of our common Mother the Earth. The performance of this
last office to our right dear and deservedly respected Christian Sister, Mrs
Rebekka Crisp, has occasioned this Assembly. Concerning whose religious course
of life and conversation, together with the Conclusion thereof suitable and
correspondent to the same, much might be said, and much be spoken, yea so much,
that it might to strangers seem either mere formalitie or plain flattery,
yet by those that thoroughly knew her, would not only be acknowledge for truth,
but to come far short of that that (...) But neither (...) my wont, (...) I,
(...) long in this kind: (...) rather, for that many take therein too much
liberty, and this exercise being intended Magis viuorum solatiae, quam
mortuorum subsidiae. Aug. de cura pro mort. ger.
more for the instruction of the living then for the commendation of the dead.

That which I shall speak of her, to the glory of Gods grace in her, and the
provoking of others to the imitation of her, shall be in few words, and
referred to two heads, her Piety, and her Patience.

For the former: it had pleased God to grace her with a measure more then
ordinary of spiritual grace, and of such graces as are not so ordinarily
incident to that (...) of (...), and soundnes of judgement^. Which (...)
accordingly applied and employed, (part^y by constant frequenting of the
public Ministry, while God gave leave and liberty, and p^^tly: (...) both
then and during the times of (...) meditation and private conference with such
as reforted unto her, Romans 12. 2.
and might that way further her, * to the searching out of the good and holy
and acceptable will of God. In this hind she was a great Questionist* and (as
those religious Roman Paula, Marcella, and Eustochium. Legatur Paulae epitaph:
and Hierenymi Epistola ad easdem.
Ladies were sometime to (...)) a whe^stone to my self, and I doubt not but
the like also to others, Sic Hieron. ad Marcellam; Maguis pro^^cas
quaestionibus, and torpe^s acio ingenium, dum interr^gas, doces.
by her studious inquiry occasioning the mo^e diligent search, and the more
exact discovery of many particulars: In regards whereof I may well, and do
freely and sincerely confess, that, so often as I resorted unto her, I did tam
proficere quam prodesse, as well benefit by her, as benefit her.

Neither were these her Questions, as with many, Later unculis I^ditur; In
supervacuis sub^ilit as teritur. s^hol^, noes vitae discitur. Sen. epist. 106.
Qu^scire magis i^vat quam prodest* Ibid. In quibus ^ihil ali^d quam acumen
exercetur. Ib. 109. Quibus quisquis se tradidit, quaestiunculas quide^ r^fras
nectit; cater^^^ ad vitam nihil profici^^ Ibid. 111. Quibus doce^^^ magis
disputare quam viuere. Ib. 9. 5.
tending to idle speculation; mere curiosities, or vain niceties, like a game
at Chesse; rather quirks of wit, fit for disputation in schools, then rules of
use for direction of life; but of such points as bent and aimed at the practice
of piety, the trial of faith, and sound sanctification: That wherein she
principally desired and endeavored to profit; and so profited, that I may truly
say of her, that she had not (...). 2. Tim. 3. 5.
an outward show and semblance of godliness, or a verbal discourse of it,
(the common fault of too many professors among us) but the very power and
efficacy of it in extraordinary manner and measure both imprinted in her
heart, and expressed in her life: She had learned, Sen. epist.
dicta in facta vertere, to turn words into works; and as Luk 2. 19.
to treasure up with Mary what she heard and learned in her heart, so to work
it into the affection, and to bring it forth into action, to affect it with her
heart, and to effect it in her life.

This, among other things, her sincere piety, appeared in her singular
Patience. And it is Patience indeed, that puts Piety to the proof. God had
trained her up a long time in the school of affliction; and she was therein a
good proficient: her afflictions being unto her, as Genesis 17. 7.
the waters to Noah's Arc, a means to carry up her thoughts and desires higher
to heauen-ward. It pleased God to bruise her with pains and weakness, and even
to (...) Esai. 53. 10. (...) Psalm. 90. 3.
grind to po^^der her vigor with continuance of affliction. Which yet she ever
sustained with great willingness ofminde, Psalm. 90. 3.
having often in her mouth that worthy speech of David, 2. Sam. 15. 26.
Behold, here I am, let him do with me what he will; and ^rudir^ cupiens
flagell^, non erut^ do Job^ Bern. in Cant. 33.
desiring ever, as she protested often in the midst of her pains, not so much
the remouall of the cross, which she esteemed but light, as patience to bear
it, and grace to make use of it: complaining of nothing so much in her
afflictions, as that by means of them she was disabled to the performance of
such duties as she desired with her Family, and restrained in the intention
of her spiritual meditation; if in any thing impatient, impatient of ^ought
that hindered that way.

Neither was this her patience such as proceeded either from some senselesnes
and stupiditie, or from some kind of immanitie and inhumanitie, Qualu
Stoicoru^ illa (...). Asfecti^ humana (vel inhumana potius) canine
aequanimitatis stupore formata Tertuli depatient. Indolentia ista no^ sine
magna mercede cantingit, immenitaris in, stuporis in corp. re. Grantor apud
Oic. Tuscul l. 3. Et vere Archytas in ethic. apud Stab. to^. 2. c. ^^s Ita enim
^mendandus est locus ille, qui no^ sine mendo in vulgat ishabetur: nec
corrigunt sed corrumpunt mente^ autoris, qui pro substi^u^^t: sicut and ijde^^
frustra sunt, du^ ^lausulam novissimam sine causa solicitant.
as in some; (for she was a woman made of meekenes and lowlines, of mind, as
of a tender constitution her self naturally, and therefore soon sensible of
pain and grief, so full of bowels of mercy and tender compassion toward
others, and free from all austeritie and harshnes of spira) but Non et vera
pa^ientia, vbi non est vera sapientla, (vbi non est vera pietas.) Cyprian. de
patient.
from an apprehension of Gods hand in those things that befell her and a
concoience of submitting her will to his pleasure whose wholly she acknowledged
herself to be, and was content therefore wholly to be disposed of by him.

But because Pers^uerantia sola virtutu^ coronatur. Bern. de temp. 114. Sola
est cui aeternitas redditur. Idem de consider. l. 5. Non inch^antibus sed
perseuerantibus praemium propunitur. Isidor. de sum. bon. l. 2. c 7. Siquidem,
Non perseuerare cultus est mutilus. Bern. in Cant.
perseverance, as Bernard says, is all in all; and is that that carries away
the crown or the garland from all: Superest vt laudabile principium condignum
consequatur finem, and cauda hostix capiti coniungatur. Bern. ep. 24. and 165.
Caput animalis cum cauda in sacrificijs offerendu^. Lev. 3. 9. quia sine
perseuerantia nihil placet. Rad. Ardens in 1a. 40a.
As the rest of her life had bin, so her latter end was not unlike; full of
piety and patience, of alacrity and cheerefulnes, wholly taken up with holy and
heavenly meditation, and longing exceedingly for the time of her dissolution.
God showed in her to all that were about her, that it is not in vain sincerely
to serve him; and that a constant course of a religious life will minister
abundance of sweet comfort in death.

About the beginning of her last sickness, she sent for me to her, whom (though
the meanest of many that resorted unto her) in regard of some bond of alliance
she desired to be, and made account she might be boldest withal; and before
some few of her familiar friends, made a worthy and pithy confession and
profession of her Faith, too long to relate; laid open the grounds and notes of
her assurance fetched forth of Gods word, of Gods love unto her, and of her
own unto God; requesting either to be better informed, if in ought she were
mistaken, or to have further confirmed by pregnant proofs out of Gods book,
what she rightly apprehended. And this was the work that by her good will she
then desired to be continually taken up with; forgetting her pains and weakness
when she was about it, and neglecting her natural rest to attend it. So that
she might well say to God with David, Psalm. 119 97.
Oh how love I thy law? it is my continual meditation. And with Job, Job. 23.
12.
I have preferred the words of thy mouth, not only before my most desired
food, but before my most needful and natural rest. Yea so eager was she upon
these things, that I was enforced often to persuade her to forbear, considering
her great weakness, and to intermit the intention of her meditation, by giving
some way to rest and repose. And here I cannot pass by one speech used by her
vpou such an occasion, which the rather I relate, to provoke others by her
example not to neglect the means of mercy and grace that God vouchsafes them
now, while they may follow them. After long discourse to and fro, perceiving,
as I thought, her eyes to wax heavy, and her spirits fainty, and well knowing
what need she had of some refreshing, I advised her to compose her self unto
rest, which her long want of it required, and her eyes seemed to incline unto,
that it was best to take it while she might, lest she should after, want it
when she would. Her answer was that this was her best rest, and that which she
found best refreshing and sweetest repose in; and that, said she, which you say
of the one, may I much better say of the other: if to give way to rest I
forbear those means of comfort that God by your presence now affords me, I
may hereafter want them when I would, and shall need them.

Some conflicts she had the day before her departure; but such, through Gods
goodness, as lasted not long, and ended in that comfort, that continued with her
to her end: which was so quiet and peaceable. that her departure was scarce
sensible to those that were nearest about her.

I will add but a word, and that I speak unfeignedly: I know Gods hand is not
straightened, neither is his grace scanted: yet, considering mine own observation
and experience, but small, I confess; as I have not hitherto in all points met
with her match, so I wish rather than hope to light often on her like.

But let us leave her with the Lord in happiness, in heaven: and apply our
selves unto that, that more principally concerns us, attending to such
instructions as shall (by Gods assistance) be delivered, not altogether
vnagreable to the present occasion, out of that portion of Scripture, which I
have chosen to entreat of, concerning

PAVLES DESIRE OF DISSOLVTION, AND DEATHS ADVANTAGE the ground of that his
DESIRE.

PHILIPP. cap. 1. verse. 23. Desiring to be dissolved, and to be with Christ;
which is by much more the better.
THE Apostle Paul was in a great strait, when he wrote this Epistle; in doubt,
it seems, whether he should rather desire life or death: affected as a loving
and loyal wife, says one, Zanchius in Philip.
whose husband in a far country advanced to great honor, writes to her to
come to him, but to leave her children behind her, as dear to her as her
self; and in that regard distracted, on the one side desirous to enjoy her
husband, and on the other side loath to leave her children behind her,
especially yet unable to help themselves; and in that regard content yet to
defer her own honor and joy in her husband, till she see them better able to
shift for themselves: Or, as a beggar-woman, says Bernard. in Cant.
Bernard, who coming to a rich man's door with a child on her hand, is offered
to come in and warm her and dine well, so she leave her child, because it is
unquiet, without; whose bowels earning with natural affection toward the fruit
of her womb, make her willing rather to accept of a small pittance without
doors with her child, then to dine largely and liberally without it, within.
In like manner fared it with the blessed Apostle at this present. He desired to
be with Christ his husband, his head in happiness, in heaven. But the
Philippians his little ones, whom he had newly 1. Cor 4 15. Galat 4. 10.
bred, and not thoroughly yet 1. Th^ss. 2. 7.
nursed up, they hung on his hands, and had need still of his help: whom
being loath therefore to leave, Indalgenau^ est hounestis affectibus: and
interdu^, etiemsi premunt caussae, spiritus in honore^ suorum vel cum tormento
retinendus est; cum bono viro viuendum sit, non quamdiu iuvat, sed quamdiu
oportet. Delicatus est, qui mori perseuerat, qui (...) amicos tanti putat, vt
diutius in vita commoretur. Etia^ qui vult mori, qui cepit, vbi suoru^ vlilitas
exigit, intermittat, and suis se co^modet. Ingentis animi est aliena causa ad
vitam reuerti. Sen. ep. 104. Vitam tibi ipsi si negas, multis negas. Sen. Theb.
he was content for their gain to defer his own good, and to continue yet
some longer time in this mortal and miserable life, for the helping of them
forward on the way to eternal life Vise Clem. Alex. strom. l. 3. and Am bros.
ep. 12. qui and idem de Acholio epist. 49. de Martino Seuerus epist. 3. and
Bern. de temp. 105.
.

And this his distraction and doubtfulnes of resolution he propounds in the
former verse. 22.
verse, and in the former part of this verse: whereunto are annexed such
motives as endeavored to draw his desires either way; his own felicity on the
one side, which made him rather desire death verse. 23.
; their necessity on the other side, that moved him rather to accept of then
to affect life, to endure it than to desire it verse. 24.
. So that the hastening of his own eternal good on the one side, and the
furthering of their spiritual gain on the other side; wrought between them a
great distraction in him. Yet so, that the things themselves, Life and Death,
simply considered; if he should respect, and as he respected his own good and
gain in either, his desire was rather to dissolution and departure by decease,
that he might be with Christ verse. 23.
. Whereof a reason is also rendered, because that simply considered, or in
respect of himself, was without all question or comparison, (...).
the far greater good of the twain.

Now the maine point that hence we observe then is this, that Doctrine.
a Christian man may lawfully and justly desire death.

Which point so conceived, Branches 2.
divides it self into two branches, both of them arising necessarily from the
words of my text.

The one concerning the lawfulnes or warrantablenesse.

The other concerning the equity or reasonableness of this desire.

For the former, Branch 1.
that a Christian man may lawfully desire death in some kind and in some case,
(as did 1. King. 19 4.
Elias, and Simeon Luke 2. 29.
upon sight of our Savior) is apparent, in that the Apostle not only
professes it here of himself, but writing by the Spirit of God, approves it
also, as in himself here, so in others as well as himself elsewhere 2. Cor
5. 8.
.

And it may be further confirmed unto us, Reason 1.
if we shall consider;

First, that death and departure hence by death, it is propounded as a blessing
Apoc. 14. 13.
, promised as a blesing 1. King. 14. 12, 13.
, and bestowed as a blessing Esai. 57. 1.
; and therefore may as a blessing also lawfully be desired. Reason 2.


Secondly, that our deaths-day is our doomes-day Luk 16. 22, 23. Hebr. 9. 27.
: that our going to Christ Eccles. 12. 7. 2 Cor. 5. 8.
, as that his coming to us Joh. 14. 3. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10. and 2. 1, 8.
. Now a Christian may love, and long after the one 2. Tim. 4. 8. Hebr. 9. 28.
, and therefore may lawfully desire also the other.

In a word, Reason 3.
we pray or ought to pray daily Matthew. 6. 20.
, that Christ's kingdom may be fully erected in us; that Gods will may be
prefectly fulfilled of us: which can not be either of them wholly effected, but
by dissolution and decease.

But here may a question or two be moved.

First, Questions 2.
for what cause we may desire death: Secondly, Question 1.
with what caution.

For the former, I answer; we may desire death: First, to be freed from
mortality and the miseries of this life 1. King. 19. 4.
; that we may rest from our labors Apoc. 14. 13.
; that mortality may be swallowed up of life 2. Cor. 5. 4.
; which can not be in ordinary course but by death.

Secondly, to be freed from spiritual evils Romans 7. 24.
, that will not leave us but by death Eccles 7. 22. Romans 67.
.

And lastly, Question 2.
in regard of those benefits, that death further brings with it; that we may
come home to God 2 Cor. ^. 8.
, and be for ever with Christ 1 Thessalonians 4. 7.
.

To the latter question, I answer, that first this desire it must be without
impatience: (that was Jonas his fault Jona 4. 3.
:) we may not desire death as weary of Gods work, Ridiculum est ad mortem
currere taedio vitae. Epicur. apud Sen. epist. 24. Vir. fortis ac sapiens non
fugere debet e vita, sed exire. Et ante oi^a ille quoque visetur affectus qui
multos occupauit, libido moriendi. Se^. ibid.
of doing or enduring what he calls us unto.

Secondly, it must be with submitting of our wills to Gods will Matthew. 26. 39.
; content to wait Gods leisure, and to abide Gods pleasure for death or for
life 2 Samuel 15. 26.
.

And thus, Confirmandus est anumus. vel ad mortis, vel ad vitae patientiam,
Se^. ep. 24.
for these causes, with these cautions; death may lawfully be desired.

Now for the latter Branch, that every Christian man has good cause and great
cause to desire death; (besides that the Apostle as he desires it, Branch 2.
so he has good ground for his desire in that kind 2. Cor. 5. 8. and in this
place.
;) it may further more clearly appear unto us, if we shall consider
ademptione^ malorum, and aleptione^ bonorum.
the evils that death freeth us from, together with the benefits that it
brings us unto.

Mors nullius mali est materia, multorum finis. Sen de ben. l. 7. c. 1. Malorum
omnium remedium est. Ide^ quaest. not. l. 6. c. 32.
The evils that Death freeth us from are either corporal or spiritual. Reason
1.


The corporal evils may be referred to 4 heads: First, Evils
those injuries and wrongs that Gods children sustain at the hands of worldly
men that here oppugn and oppress them. Corporal 1.
For all that will live, godlily, while they live here, must look to suffer
persecution 2. Tim. 3. 12. nunqua^ deerit persecutio Christiano, sicut nec
Christo, Si ergo pro Christo pressuram nondum pateris, vide ne pie viuere in
Christo no^du^ ceperis. Aug. in Psalm. 55. Fidenter dico, quia minus pie viuis,
si minus persecutionem pertuleris. Greg. ep. 27. l. 6.
; and the way to Gods kingdom is through many tribulations Act. 14 23.
: the world hates them, because though they be in it, yet are they not of it
Joh. 15. 19.
: and this hatred will last so long as the world lasts Luk 21. 12, 16, 17.
; so long as the one is in it, Troa. 29. 17.
and the other of it: neither will it cease to discover it self in mischievous
attempts Joh. 16. 2. Psalm. 37. 12. 14.
, so often as ability and opportunity shall meet. In regard whereof, Christian
men, says our Apostle, had they hope only in this life, were of all men the
most miserable 1. Cor. 15. 19.
. Christian men therefore as they have no cause to love life; so they have no
need to fear death: yea as they have little cause to love this life,
considering the wrongs that here daily they endure; so they have great cause to
desire death, that puts an end to them all; that sets them and the wicked
so far asunder, that they can not one come any more at the other Luke 16. 26.
, to vex or molest or annoy one the other. In respect whereof it is well said
by some of the Ancients, that Gods children are never better delivered, then
when delivered by death: for that then they are delivered not out of one, but
out of all troubles at once Aug. in Psalm. 34. 17, 19.
; and so delivered as they need no further deliverance any more Bern. in Psalm.
91. 15, 16.
.

Secondly, Corporal 2.
those temporal corrections and chastisements, that the corruptions of Gods
children by way (...) Arist.
of cure here require. For here God is oftentimes constrained to smite them
with the wounds of an enemy, in sharp and severe manner, ethic. l. 2. c. 3.
because their iniquities are many and their transgressions great and grievous
Jerem. 30. 14.
; to judge them in this world, that they may not be condemned in the next 1.
Cor. 11. 32.
. But after this life, as there shall be no need of natural food or physic
for the body; so there shall be no need of such spiritual physic for the
soul. As we shall be rid of corruption, so we shall need no more correction.
As there shall be no use of preaching or sacraments, so there shall be no need
of such sharp courses, as God is now feign to take with us: for all grief and
pain shall be then done away Esai. 35. 10.
; and all tears wiped away from our eyes Esai. 25. 8. Apoc. 21. 4. Mors omnium
doloru^ and solutio est, and finis; vltra quam mala nostra non exeant. Sen. ad
Marc. c. 19. (...). Aeschyl.
: we shall never fear then to taste of Gods anger again Esal. 54. 9.
Corporal 3.
; nor ever know what his displeasure means any more.

Thirdly, all laborious and painful employments: they rest then from their
labors Apoc. 14. 13.
; which though the works themselves are not evil; yet the pain and toil
accompanying them is of the punishment of sin Genesis 3. 19.
, and so evil in it self. Martha shall not need then to complain of Marie
Luke 10. 40, 41.
: nor the Prophet need by preaching to waste his lights and his life Esai. 49.
4.
. As all misery, so all mercy and works of mercy shall then cease Ipsa
cessabunt misericordiae opera, vbi nulla erit indigentiae miseria.
. As there shall be then no hunger nor thirst, nor other necessities of nature
Apoc. 7. 16. and 21. 4.
: so we shall not need there either to feed the hungry, as we did here
Man.25. 35, 36.
, or to have a fellow-feeling of their hunger; Aug. de 10. chord. (...). Sophal.
that which makes us many times as miserable, as those themselves are to whom
we show mercy Heb. 10. 33, 34. and 13. 3. mis^ ricordia nonnall is q^od miserum
cor faciat. Aug. contr. aduers. l. g.l 1. c. 20. and Isidor. orig. l 10.
.

Fourthly, all infirmities and bodily pains and diseases. Death is the best
Physician (...). Sophocl. (...), Aeschyl. Vltimus and optimus medicus morborum
etiam immedicabilium mo^s.
, the best physic for them (...). Euripid. Mors omnibus finis, multis
remedium, nonnullis votum. Sen. ad Marc. c. 20.
: it cures us not of one but of all, and of all at once; not for once only,
but for ever (...) Euripid.
.

And what speak I of diseases, or of other diseases? Death cures us even of
death.

Old age; says one, is a disease evil enough of it self Ipsa senectus morbus
est. Terent.
: yea our life it self is a disease Ipsa vita morbus est. Aug de te^p. 74.
, and a deadly disease, a disease unto death Psalm. 89. 48.
: and there is no means to cure us of this disease but by death. We (...)
freed from death by death; as by death Christ destroyed death Hebr. 2. 14.
; while mortality is swallowed up of life 2. Cor. 5. 4.
, and immortality, the only true health Ipsa immortalitas vera sanitas est.
Aug. ibid.
, is achieved by death.

The spiritual evils that death freeth us from, are also of 4. sorts.

The first of Satan's temptations. The Christian soul, while it is in this
world, is in fight ever with Satan Ephesians. 6. 11, 12.
, who is continually laboring to work our evil 1. Petr. 5. 8.
, and to work us unto evil 1. Chron. 21. 1.
: and if he can not draw us out of Gods way, by beating and buffeting us to vex
and annoy us 2. Cor. 1 2. 7.
, and so to make Gods way as tedious and troublesome, as he can possibly, unto
us Apoc. 12. 4, 13, 15, 17.
. And this course he continues with us to our lives end, raging many times
most furiously when we draw nearest to our end, because he knows his time
then is but short Apoc. 12. 12.
. But by Evils. Spiritual 1.
death we prevail against him, and get full victory over him Apoc. 15. 2. and
20. 4. and 12. 11.
; when he is not only so cast out of us Ioh. 12. 31.
, that he can not sway in us, as before our conversion sometime he did Eph^s.
2. 2.
; but is so shaken off from us, that he can never once return again, as with
our Savior he did sometime Luke 4 13.
, to tempt us. For our souls are out of his reach, when they are taken up into
heaven Apoc. 12. 5.
, whither that wicked one has now no access Apoc. 12. 9, 10.
.

The second sort is of worldly prouocations and evil examples. Spiritual 2.
The children of God while they are in the world, can not but live among, and
converse with the wicked of the world 1. Cor. 5. 10.
: and living among them, and conuersing with them, they can not but hear their
blasphemous speeches Psalm. 31. 13. Ier. 20. 10. Esai. 36. 22. and 37. 23, 25.
, and see their lewd courses Psalm. 55. 9. and 119. 158.
, whereby they abuse and dishonor God: that which is a matter of no small
grief and vexation to Gods children Psalm. 119. 136, 158. 2. Pet. 2. 7, 8.
; yea so great that it makes them often a-weary of their lives Genes. 27. 46.
. As indeed how can it be but a grievous heart-sore to any faithful subject
and well-affected to his Sovereign, to be constrained to abide in such a
place, Psalm. 120. 5, 6.
and among such people, Ierem 9. 2, 3.
where his Lord and master is daily railed on and reviled in his hearing, and
those things done daily in his sight, that tend to the disgrace and dishonor of
him, whom he deservedly most respects? But we are freed from all these evils
also, when we go out of the world 1. Cor. 5. 10.
. For howsoever here the grain and chafe lie together in one field Math. 13.
25, 26, 30.
; yet there the chafe goes one way, and the good grain another way Math. 13.
12. Luke 3. 17.
, the tares are cast one way, and the good corn is carried another way Math.
13. 30.
, even into Gods garner, to a place where there shall be no matter of scandal
Math. 13. 41.
, to make them stumble and fall Romans 14. 21. 1. Cor. 8. 9.
or to vex and grieve Romans 14. 15.
them any more.

The third sort of spiritual evils is of sin and corruption; Spiritual 3.
then which nothing is more burdensome and combersome to a Christian soul Romans
7. 24.
, not so much for fear of wrath, 1. Cor. 8. 12.
as for desire to please God, and for grief that thereby he should show
himself unkind and unthankful to him, whom he has ever found so gracious
and good to himself. And if this be so heavy to a Christian soul, that he
should so displease and dishonor his heavenly father by his errors and
ouer-sights Romans 2. 23.
, whose honor ought to be deerer to him than all the worlds wealth, 2. Sam. 12.
14.
yea then his own soul it self Math. 5. 16. and 6. 10.
; how is death then to be desired of him, Exo. 32. 12, 32.
that freeth him from this burden; that gives an utter ease from it, an
eternal discharge of it? For he that is dead, is freed from sin Romans 6. 7.
. Death, it strippeth us of our old man, our old skin, all at once, not, as
sanctification does it here, by degrees: yea it places us in far better
estate, then our first parents were in before their fall Ad^m acceper at posse
quod vesset, (...) velle quod posset: nos accipimus and posse quod volumus and
velle quod poss^mus. ille posse non peccare; nos non posse peccare. Aug. de
corrept. and great. c. 11.
. For they were so free from sin, that yet they might have will to sin: we
shall be so freed by death from sin, that we shall never have either will or
mind again thereunto.

The fourth sort of evils spiritual is of divine desertion, whereby God in
this life, Spiritual 4.
though he never indeed leave his children Ioh. 16. 32. Hebr. 13. 5.
, yet sometime seems to forsake them Math. 26. 46. Psalm. 22. 1.
; though he ever remember and regard them Esai. 49. 14, 15.
, yet sometime seems to forget them Psalm. 13. 1.
: he does many times, for secret causes best known to himself, withdraw from
them the sight and sense of his gracious presence and assistance, and look
upon them with a frowning and a lowering countenance. Which thing how grievous
and heavy it is to Gods saints for the present, may appear by those mournful
plaints that they power out in such cases Psalm. 6. 1, 2, 3. 6. and 13. 1, 2.
and 27. 9, 13. and 30. 7. and 31. 16, 22. and 77. 1, 2, 7, 8, 9, 10.
: even so grievous, that (for the time) they seem to be in the very suburbs of
hell. Whereas by death they are freed from all such dreadful desertions; being
placed in such a state thereby, that as God shall never be again displeased
with them, so he shall never in displeasure again turn his face away from
them Esai. 54. 7, 8, 9.
.

And thus have we seen the evils of all sorts, that death is a means to free
us from.

Now in the next place, Reason 2.
consider we the Benefits that death brings us unto: which may likewise be
reduced to 4. heads.

The first is the full consummation of Grace, Benefit 1.
that is here but imperfect and in part 1. Cor. 13. 9, 11.
: as first fruits Rom 8. 23.
, but an handful Levit. 23. 10.
to the whole crop; as an earnestpenny Ephesians. 1. 14. 2. Cor. 1. 22. and 5. 5.
given in pledge of full payment. But if the first fruits be so precious 1.
Cor. 2. 9, 10, 11, 12. 1. Pet. 1. 7. 2 Petr. 1. 4.
, those small beginnings of Grace, that the true Christian, the wise merchant,
would not take the world in exchange for them Math. 13. 46.
; that he counts all the wealth of this world, but as trash, as dr^sse and
dongue in regard of them Philip. 3. 7, 8, 9, 10.
; oh what will the full crop be? if the earnest-penny be so precious, what will
the entire payment be? And if we then thirst and long after growth of Math. 5.
6.
grace, how should we desire death that brings with it a full consummation of
1. Cor. 13. 10. Viuere volunt vt perfecti s^nt. mori v^lint, and perfecti
(...). Aug. ^n Mat. sig. 17.
grace, that brings grace to it full growth?

The second Benefit is a perfection of glory Psalm. 84 11.
; such an excellency as shall make us not only gracious Benefit 2.
in our selves, Romans 2. 7, 10. and 5. 2.
but most glorious also in the eyes of all that behold us: 2. Tim. 2. 10.
that which the Apostle calls 2. Cor. 4. 17. (...)
an exceeding excessive eternal weight of glory: (...). Themist. apud St^^. c.
119.
and says further,that all the afflictions of this life, are not worthy once
to be named with that glory, that in the next life shall be manifested, not
unto us only, but even in us Romans 8. 18. (...) in nobis, Beza. neque enim
erimus ^tiosi spectatores, sed participes gloriae. Bern. de diverse. 1.
.

When the sun of righteousness shall shine full upon us Malac. 4. 2.
, and shining full upon us, shall make us like unto himself Coloss. 3. 4.
; so that we shall also shine as the sun in the kingdom of heaven Math. 13.
43.
. This we are not able to conceive what it is. 1. Ioh. 3. 2.
We can guess somewhat at the former, 2. Cor. 3. 18.
because we have the first fruits of it here: 2 Thessalonians. 1. 10.
but this we are not able to give almost any guess at. But the Apostle Peter,
in Christ's transfiguration, seeing a glimpse of it ( oh it is good being here,
says he) would feign have stayed there still Math. 17. 4.
. And the Apostle Paul that had seen it, bonum est nobis esse hic.
could not utter what he had seen 2. Cor. 12. 4.
, but longed exceedingly after it, as one never well till he were there 2. Cor.
5. 2.
. And undoubtedly, enlarge we our minds all that may be, we shall say, when we
shall come to see and enjoy it, as the Queen of the South, when she came and
saw Salomons royalty 1. King. 10. 6, 7.
, the one half, nay the hundredth part of that we shall find there, was never
either reported unto us, or conceived of us here.

The third Benefit, Benefit 3.
is the inseparable company of Christ. They shall follow the Lamb there,
whithersoeuer he goes Apoc. 14. 4.
. In this world is Christ said to be with us Psalm. 91. 15.
: after this life are we Math. 28. 19.
said to he with him Job. 14. 3. and 12. 26. and 17. 24.
.

Here he is said to be with us, while we soiourne from him 2. Cor. 5. 6.
: there are we said to go to him, and to be at his home with him 2. Cor. 5. 8.
. And if it be matter of much joy to have Christ with us here, what will it be
to abide for ever with him there 1 Thessalonians. 4. 17.
? If Christ's presence by his spirit Ioh. 14. 16, 17, 18.
be so comfortable here, that it is able to cheer us up in all our greatest
afflictions Romans 5. 3. and 14 17.
: what shall his glorious presence be eternally there?

Conceive we it by some comparisons. Psalm. 23. 4.
It were a great grace, Philip. 4 4.
and such as would minister much comfort to a Courtier lying sick at home of
the gowt, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16.
to have the Prince not only to send to him, 2. Cor 1. 3, 4, 5.
but in person also to visit him: Esse Christum cum Paulomagna securitas: Esse
Paulum cum Christo summa felicitas. Bern. in Psalm. Qui hab.
but much more comfort and joy would it be to him, to be able, being recovered,
to repair to the Court, and there enjoy his Princes presence, with such favors
and pleasures, as that place may afford. How much more then, in this case, is
it a great grace and a comfort, that God vouchsafes to visit us here by his
spirit Ioh. 14. 23.
, sometime more familiarly and feelingly, but ever so effectually, Apoc. 3. 20
as thereby to support us even in our heauiest afflictions? but yet how much
more exceedingly shall our joy and comfort be increased, when being freed from
all infirmities, we shall be taken home to him, that we may live in joy and
bliss for ever with him? As that Courtier having assurance given him of
recovery by such a time, would exceedingly rejoice to think of the joy of that
day, and count every day a week, if not a year, to it, wherein he should
being recoured return again to the Court, and be welcomed thither in solemn
manner by all his friends there, the Prince himself principally: so well may
the faithful soul not a little joy to forethinke with it self, what a joyful
hour that shall be unto it, wherein by death parted from the body, it shall be
solemnly presented before the face of Christ, and entering into the heavenly
palace, shall be welcomed thither by the whole court of heaven, by all the
blessed spirits that there abide Hebr. 12. 22, 23, 24.
.

Again; this life is the time of our contract with Christ Hosh. 2. 19,
20.desponsabo te mihi.
after this life comes our mariage-day Apoc. 19. 7. and 21. 2.
. Now as a virgin espoused to one that is travailed to the East Indies, if she
do indeed faithfully and unfeignedly affect him, though she joy to read a
letter, or to see some token from him, yet it is nothing in that kind that can
give her contentment Nil mihi rescribas: attamen ipse veni. Penelope Vlyssi.
Ovid. ep. 1.
, but she longs for his presence, desires to hear of his return, and
joyeth to think on that day, when meeting again they shall be so matched, as
they shall never more again be so severed. So here, though the Christian soul
contracted to Christ, during the time of this contract, in his absence from her
Luke 19. 12.
, receive many favors and loue-tokens from him Ephesians. 4. 7, 8.
, as are all the blessings she enjoys here, be they spiritual or temporal
1. Cor. 3. 21, 22, 23.
; yet they can not all of them give full contentment unto her, 1. Cor. 12. 4,
8, 9, 10, 11.
but help rather to inflame her affection toward him, and make her, Romans 8.
32.
if she sincerely love him, as she professes and pretends to do, the more
earnestly and ardently to long for that day, wherein she shall come inseparably
to be lincked unto him, and everlastingly to enjoy his personal presence,
which above all things she most desires.

The fourth and last, Benefit 4.
but not the least Benefit that death brings us unto, is immediate communion
with God: when God shall be all in all and unto all 1 Cor. 15. 28.
: when we shall draw our delights from the fountain of all Jam. 1. 17.
, from the wellhead Psalm. 36. 8, 9.
: when God shall conueigh and minister unto us immediately by himself, Apoc. 7.
17.
whatsoever he now communicates unto us by means Apoc. 21, 22, 23.
. This (though it be the greatest benefit of all, Esai.58.13.Psalm. 122. 1. and
63. 3, 4, 5.
yet we can say the least of all of it. Only thus much: If the means whereby
God now imparteth his mercies unto us, be so sweet to Gods saints, (the
ministry of his word, his holy mysteries, and religious offices) that they
earnestly thirst after them when they want them Psalm. 42. 1, 2, and 63. 1, 2.
and 119. 20.
, delight exceedingly in them when they have them, seem to be even ravished
and enamoured with them Psalm. 84 per totu^. and 119. 97.
, prefer 1 Petr. 2. 2, 3.
the sweetness of them before the sweetest sweets Psalm. 19. 10. and 119. 103.
Job. 23. 12.
, yea seem to doat so upon them, that they have never enough of them Psalm.
27. 4. and 63. 5, 6. and 119. 62, 57, 147, 148, 164.
if the dim beams, I say, of Gods face and favor shining through these thick
clouds and veiles be so comfortable to them, that they esteem all worldly
joys and delights, as nothing in regard of themb: oh what shall God himself
be, when we shall see him fully face to face Esai. 33. 14, 15, 16, 27. 1. Cor.
13. 12. 1. Ioh. 3. 2. Quis oculis glorietur, qui suspicentur diem? quibus Sol
per caligine^ splendet? licet contentus interim sat effugisse tenebras, adhuc
non fruitur bon^ lucis. Tunc animus noster habebit quod gratuletur sibi, cum
emissus his tenebris, in quibus volutatur, non tenui visu clara perspexerit,
sed totum diem admiserit, and redditus caelo (Deo) suo fuerit. Sen. ep. 79.
Quid tibi videbitur divina lux, cum illam suo loco videris? Tunc in tenebris
vixisse dices, cum totam lucem totus aspexeris, quem nunc, per angustissimas
oculorum vias, obscure intueris, and tamen (...) tam procul. ep. 102.
, when we shall find all together in him, draw all immediately from him, and
enjoy whatsoever our heart can desire or mind imagine, yea far more than
either of them can possibly now reach to Ephesians. 3. 20.
, in him.

And thus we have seen the benefit of death, both in regard of the evils from
which it freeth us; Conclusion.
as also in regard of those good things that thereby accrue unto us: whence we
may well conclude, that as Gods children may lawfully desire it, so they have
just cause and great cause earnestly to long after it.

Now the Use then of this point is first to overthrow the opinion of those that
think it not lawful in any case to wish or desire death, 2 King. 22. 20.
yea in regard of freedom from outward evils; Esai. 57. 1, 2.
sithence it is promised, Apoc. 14. 13.
as we have showed, Use 1.
by God as a blessing, and as a blessing in that very kind 1 King. 14. 12, 13.
.

Yea but, may some say, if we may desire it, we may do it: we may then hasten
our own end.

It follows not. A man may desire many things to be done, Tuscul. lib. 1.
which yet he himself may not do. A man may desire the ministry 1 Timothy 3. 1.
: yet he may not Qu^ntots mperator terrae huius in peregrinis l^^is aut honoris
specie aut muneris alicuius causa iubet degere? nunquid hinc inconsulto
Imperator^ discedunt? and qua^to amplius est (...) parere quam h^manis? Ambros.
de bon. mort. c. 2.
make himself a minister Habr. 5. 4, 5.
. He may desire to have some malefactors taken away by the sword of justice:
yet, being a private person, he may not do it himself. So a man may desire
death, and seek it at Gods hands; but not procure it or hasten it by any
means of his own Vetat ille dominans in nobis Deus iniussu hinc not suo
demigrare, Ci^.
.

Secondly, it serves to shame and condemn such as are so loath to dye, that
they can not endure to hear of death and dissolution: Use 2.
so far from desiring that which they have so great cause to desire, that they
can not brook or abide any mention or motion of it, can worst of any thing
away with it: in so much that some forbear the doing of some things, some
matters of conueniencie, yea some necessary duties, as making of their Wills,
out of a frivolous and superstitious conceit, that they shall dye shortly, if
they do them.

Yea many though they can not live, yet are unwilling to dye (...). Epictet.
apud Stob. cap. 120. Inter mortis m^ tum and vitae tormenta miseri fluctuant:
and viuere nolunt, and mori nesciunt. Sen. ep. 4. Patinon vultis, exire
timetis; qui^ faciam vobis? Cyprian, de mortal.
. Though they live in that misery, that they can have no joy of their lives,
that their life is rather a lingering death than a life Herodicum (...). Plato
apud Plut. de sera vind. Quid huius viuere est? diu mori. Sen.
, yet would they rather continue still in such miserable plight, epist. 101.
then be content to have an end put to their intolerable torments, much more
bitter than many deaths, by an easy dissolution, by a speedy dispatch. No
pain, no torment, no pangs of death, can prevail so with them, as to make
them willing to undergo what they can not avoid (...). Homer. Odyss. (...)
Eurip. Iphigen. Debilem facito manu, Debil^m pede, coxa: Tuber adstruegibberum;
Lubricos quatedentes. Vita du^^ superest, been est. Mecaenas: Qued miserrimum
erat, ft incidisset, optatur; and tanquam vita petitur, supplicij mora.
Invenitur qui malit inter supplicia tabescere, and perire membratim, and toties
per stillicidia amittere animam quam semel exhalare? Invenitur, qui velit
trahere animam tot tormenta tracturam? Vsque adeo ne mori miserum est? Est
tanti, habere anima^, vt agam. Sen. epist. 101. Interdu^ obnixe petimus, quod
oblatnm re usar. mus. Mulia videri volumus velle, sed nolumus. Saepe aliud
volumus, aliud optamus. and verum ne Dijs quid^m dicimus. Sen. epist. 95.?
, or content to go to God.

Now for Heathen, or such as have no hope but here Psalm. 17. 14. 1 Thessalonians. 4.
13.
, to be thus affected, were not greatly to be wondered at. But for Christians,
that profess themselves to be but pilgrims and strangers here Psalm. 39. 12. 1.
Pet. 2. 11.
, this world a strange country to them, and heaven their own country Phil. 3.
20.
, their home, their fathers house; for them to be so unwilling to leave this
world, to depart hence, to return to their own home, as if their fathers
house were not an heaven but an hell, it is a foul shame, it is no small
blemish to their Christian profession.

Yea it shows such persons to be possessed still with a great measure of
hypocrisy. For what is it but hypocrisy, when our prayers and our practice
concur not, when the one is directly contrary unto the other, when we are most
unwilling to that, that daily we would seem to desire Or how do not our
prayers and our practice the one directly cross the other, when we pray daily
to have, not our will, but Gods will to be done Matthew. 6. 10.
; and yet when it comes to the point, Meminisse debem^ voluntatem not no^
nostra^, sed Dei facere debere, secundu^ quod nos Deus iussit quotidie orare.
Cyprtan. de mortal.
that God calls us to come to him, we hang back, and are unwilling to do what
he wills us Quam preposterum est, quamque peruersum, vt cum Dei voluntate^
fieri postulemus, quando evocat nos and aecersit de hoc mundo, non statim
voluntatis eius imperio pareamus? Hoc nitimur and reluctamur, and pervicaciu^
more seruorum ad conspectu^ Domini, cu^ tristitia and maerore perducimur, no^
obsequio voluntatis; and volumus ab eo praemijs caele stib^ honorari, ad que^
venim^ inviti. Ide^ ib.
, would rather writh Gods will to ours, than conform our will to his, would
rather have our own will done against Gods will to our own evil, then the
will of our loving father wrought on us for our good? How do not our tongues
and our hearts apparently and exceedingly jarre, when we pray daily to God,
that his kingdom may come Matthew. 6 10.
, and yet we wish and desire rather to stay here still, where Satan's throne
Apoc. 2. 13.
and kingdom 2. Cor. 4. 4. Joh. 12. 31. and 16. 11.
is; and where we our selves are in some degree still of thraldom Romans 7. 14,
23, 24.
, then to be translated hence unto that eternal kingdom Quid rogamus and
petimus vt adveniat regnum coelorum, si captiuit as nos terrena delectat^ quid
precibus frequenter iteratis rogamus and poscimus, vt acceleret dies regni, so
maiora desideria, and vota potiora sunt seruire isthic diabolo, quam regnare
cum Christo? Cyprian. de mortal.
; where we shall be absolutely free from all spiritual servitude, and shall
reign in glory for ever with Christ Jesus our head?

And surely strange it is to see here, as Mornay of Life and Death.
one well observes, how contrariwise we are in this kind affected to our own
courses otherwise. For the labourer hastes to repose himself Job. 7. 1, 2.
; the mariner roweth with all might to gain his port, and is glad at the heart
when he is once come within kenning of it; the trauailer is never quiet till he
be at his ways end. And yet we tied in this world to a perpetual task,
tossed as on the sea, with continual tempest, toyled and tired out with a
tedious and combersome passage, can not see the end of our pains but with
grief, view our port but with tears, think on our home but with horror and
dread: Seem weary of our work, of our waves, and our way; and yet when death
comes to rid us of them, to set us at an end of them, and to put us into our
port, ad Polyb. cap. 28. Iusto mors salut is portus. Ambros. de bon. mori.
(...). Plut. de tranquil. (...). Sotades. In hoc tam procelloso and in oe^s
tempest ates exposito marl narigantibus, nullus portus nisi mortis est. Sen.
we shun it as a rock, and cannot endure the sight of it Nemo sine querela
moritur: quis non recusans, quis non gemens exit? Morney ibid. Sen. de benef.
lib. 5. c. 17. Quis non, vbi mors prope accesserit, tergiversatur, tremit,
plorat? Ide^ epist. 78.
: do as little children, that go crying out of some malady all day, and at
night when the medicine comes that should heal and help them of their
pain, or the Barber-Surgion that should pluck out the akingtooth, have no
grief more now, but are well enough without it; fear the means of ease more
than the disease,: the medicine more than the malady it self so we fear what
we should wish for, and wis what we should fear; yea fear most and abhor
what we have most cause to desire (...). Plato apolog.
.

Oh but life is sweet, will some say: and man is a creature that loves life
(...) Aesop. fabul.
.

Do we love life? let us love true life, love eternal life, love that life
that is life indeed 2. Tim. 6. 19. (...). vel vt (...).
. For this life is no life, but a death rather than life (...), Eurip. (...).
Plato Gorg.
. It is no true life that yields to death, that tends to death, that ends
in death Genesis 5. 27.
: that is true life, that is eternal: that is true life, Psalm. 88. 48.
that cannot be dissolved by death Hebr. 7. 16. (...)
. If we desire such life then, let us desire death: for there is no way to such
life but by death 2 Cor. 5. 1, 4. Quod interim morimur, ad immorialitate^ morte
transgredimur: nec potest vita aeterna succedere, nisi hi^c contigerit excire:
(...) est exitus, sed tra^situs, and temporali itinere decurso ad aterna
tra^sgressus. Cytrian. de mortal.


As a Christian man therefore has no cause to fear or abhor death Quid ni
non timeat, qui mori sperat? Sen. ep. 102.
, because it can neither bereave him of spiritual Math. 22. 32.
, nor debar him of eternal life Apoc. 20. 6.
: (he dies not, though he dye Ioh. 8. 51, 52. and 11. 25, 26.
: his death is no death:) so he has great cause to love and desire death,
because it brings him to perfection of spiritual life 1 Cor. 13. 10.
, it places him in possession of eternal life Math. 25. 46.
. As he has no cause to dread death, because it cannot sever him from Christ
Romans 8. 38, 39.
: so he has good cause to desire death, because it brings him home unto
Christ 2. Cor. 5. 8.
. And it is no death, but life, to be joined unto him; as it is no life, but
death, to be severed from him Non est mors sed vita, quae morientem Christo
sociat: non est vita, sed mors, quae viuente^ Christo separat. Ambr. 1. Tim. 5.
6.


(...). Arist. ethic. l. 3. c. 6. (...). Epicur. ad Menaec. apud Laert.
in themselves: it alters clean the nature of things: it makes the world
irksome to Paul Galat. 6. 14.
, which all men naturally desire and delight in: it makes death and
dissolution desirable and delightsome unto him, which all men naturally
abhor; insomuch that though they be weary of life, yet they are unwilling to
dye; though they have no pleasure of their life, yet loath are they to leave
life, and to dye once, that they may live ever. It is clean contrary with
Paul. His life is not dear to him Act. 20. 24.
: and death is desired of him 2. Cor. 5. 10.
: yea so much desired, that he can hardly, but for others, induce himself to
live longer Philip. 1. 22, 23, 24 Quod viuit, liberalitas est. Se^. ep.
: it is as hard a matter to make him patient of life, as it is to make other
men patient of death Patienter viuit; delectabilitur moritur. Aug. in 1. Ioa^.
tract. 9.
: it is a mastery with them to make them willing to dye; it is a masterie with
him to make himself willing to live. And surely a great matter it must needs
be, that makes a man dye cheerfully, not as one weary of life 2. Cor. 5. 4.
, but as desirous of death Net spe mortis patienter dolet, nec taedio doloris
libenter moritur. hunc fert, illam expectat. Sen. epist. 98. Tam turpe putat
mortem fugere, quam ad mortem confugere. Ibid.
; as desirous of death, as other men are of life, because in death and by death
he looks for life Prove. 14. 32. Use 4.
.

Fourthly, this should incite us to the love and desire of that, which we have
so good, so great cause to desire Sapientis est totum in morte^ prominere, hoc
velle, hoc meditari, hac sempercupidine ferri. Plato apud Sen. ad Marc. cap.
23. Oi (...). Plato Phaed.
; For what should we desire rather than to be at rest, at an end of all our
troubles and travels; to be freed from the burden and bondage of sin, from
Satan's assaults, from the present wicked world; to be rid of infirmity; to be
stripped of our mortality; to be made perfectly gracious, and unspeakably
glorious; to be in joy inconceivable, and in happiness eternal; to be present
with Christ, and for ever with God? This was the end of Christ's descending,
that we might ascend Descendit altissimus, and suo nobis descensu sis ^uem ac
sa!ubrem dedicauit ascensum. Bern. de temp. 66.
: of his descending to us, that we might ascend unto him: he to misery, we to
glory; he to be crucified, we to be crowned; he to be crucified for us, we to
be crowned with him. And if he were content to do the one, how much more we the
other? If he counted it meat and drink to do that for our good Ioh. 4. 34. Luk
12. 50. and 22. 15.
, how much more should we desire to do this for our own good? And indeed his
descending cannot be beneficial unto us, unless we ascend unto him Ascendit
qui descendit. descendit, vt sanaret te: asce^dit, vt leuaret te. Aug. de
diners. 12.
. That was the end of his descending: and that is the end of his ascending. As
he descended, so he ascended that we might ascend Ephesians. 4. 9, 10.
: he went into heaven before us, to prepare a place for us Ioh. 14. 3.
, and to draw us up to him Ioh. 12. 32.
, that we might reign for ever with him Apoc. 20. 6.
. And shall we then be unwilling to follow him to our eternal glory, to our
endless good? Certainly with an evil will would we accompany him to the
cross, if we be so unwilling to come after him to the crown. Oh let us rouse
up therefore our dull and drowsy spirits; let us sharpen and whet on our
affections and desires hereunto, that we may be willing to dye, that we may
even desire death. For, He lives but evil, that cannot dye well Male viuit,
quisquis nescit been mori. Sen. de tranquil. c. 11.
. And, It is one point of well-dying, to be willing to dye Been mori est
libenter mori. Sen. epist. 61.
. And no man dies more willingly, than he that desires death.

Now that we may (with this blessed servant and Apostle of Christ) love death
and desire death, let us so live as we may not fear death. For how can a man
desire what he fears 1. Ioh. 4. 18.
? Would thou therefore have death to be not terrible and horrible, but
desirable and delectable; not lamentable, but comfortable; not dreadful, but
cheerful and delightful unto thee? (For it is not, neither can it so be unto
all, but unto some only Ad refrigerium iusti vocantur, ad supplicium rapiuntur
iniusti. datur mors tutela fidentibus, perfidis poena. Cyprian. de mortal.
; to those alone that are qualified so, Means 1.
as our Apostle here was.)

Then first suffer not thy soul to be glewed to this world. For it is the love
of this life that makes death bitter Vna est catena quae nos alligatos tenet,
amor vitae. Sen. ep. 26.
. Therefore are so few content to be dissolved, beeause they are so wedded to
the world Sic veteres inquilinos indulgentia loci and consuetudo; etiam inter
iniurias detinet, Ide^ ep. 70.
; whereas to a mind that loatheth and misliketh the world, nothing is so
welcome as death, that takes him out of the world.

Yea take heed that the good blessings that God here vouchsafes thee, cleave
not too close to thee. For even they are often unto us, as Absalom to David 2.
Sam. 15. 6.
, a means privily to filch our affections from God, and to make us more
unwilling to go hence unto God. Let us remember that these things, though good
things, are but as rings and louetokens that God wooeth us here withal. And as
it were but an harlotry love in us, to affect the present more than the party
that sends it Meretricius amor plus annulum quam sponsum diligere. Aug. medit.
; so an absurd and a preposterous thing, that Gods louetokens sent to us,
should lessen our love to him, and make us less desirous of the fruition of
him. Which that therefore they may not do, we must take heed that our hearts
be not set too much on them Psalm. 62. 10.
; that we use them so that we do not abuse them 1. Cor. 7. 30, 31.
; that we be not so desirous still to retain them, that they make us more
unwilling, parting with them, to depart to him that sent them, when he shall
call us to come to him. Let us so possess them, that they hang loose about us:
then when death comes to strip us of them, they will go off with ease, as we
slip off our garments, when we lay us down to sleep. Otherwise if they cleave
to us, we shall not part but with pain; as the shirt that sticks fast to the
vlcerous body, and pulls skin and flesh away withal: as the tooth, that
stands fast in the head, comes not out but with much difficulty, teareth
the gum, or brings a piece of the jaw away with it; when the tooth that is
loose, comes out with ease.

Secondly, Means 2.
hate sin, and death will be delightful unto thee. It is the love of their
corruptions, that makes men loath to leave them Job. 20. 12, 13.
, and loath to appear there, (...). Clem. ^l. strom. l. 5.
where they must be called to account for them. The love of sin makes men
fear death: and the hatred of sin would make men love and desire death. For
he that hates sin in himself Romans 7. 16, 17.
, cannot but desire to have the body of sin wholly abolished in his soul
Romans 6. 6.
: which, because it will last with him as long as he lives Eccles 7. 22.
, and will not be utterly abandoned till death; 1. Joh. 1. 8.
therefore the more he hates it, 1. Knig. 8. 46.
the less he loves life; the more he abhors it, the more he desires
death. As the more impatient of sickness, so the more impatient of sin, the
more desirous of death Romans 7. 24.
.

Thirdly, Means 3.
lay a good foundation for life eternal 1. Tim. 6. 19.
. Labor to keep a good conscience, and the comfort of a good conscience 2.
Cor. 1. 12. and 5. 8, 9.
, and death shall not be dreadful but cheerful unto thee. For the godly has
hope even in death Prou. 14. 32.
. The worldly man has his hope, as his happiness, in this life Psalm. 17. 14.
alone. And therefore so long as life lasts, some sorry hope he may have Dum
spirat sperat. Eccles. 9. 4. Aegroto dum ai^a est, spes esse dicitur. Cic ad
Attic. lib. 9. ep. 12.
But when he dies, his hope dies with him Prou. 11.7. and 10.18. (...)
Theocr. idyll. (...) Eurip. Troad.
. And therefore justly fears he death, that puts a final end, as to his
happiness, so to his hopes. Whereas the godly man retains his hopes, even
when life decays Prove. 14. 32. Du^ expirat, sperat.
therefore justly rifest then with him, because he approaches then nearest to
the accomplishment of them. And therefore little reason has he to fear or
abhor death, much cause to affect it, and cheerfully to expect it? For he that
is in the state of grace and life, cannot be put beside it, or deprived of it
by death Ioh 5. 24.
. And he may well cheerfully expect, Romans 8. 37, 38.
and even with triumph entertain death 1. Cor. 15. 55, 57. 2. Tim. 4. 7.
, that is to receive and enjoy a crown of eternal life after death 2. Tim. 4.
8. Apoc. 2. 10.
. That therefore we may be confident in these our desires, in coveting to
remove hence, that we may go unto God; let us study so to carry our selves,
that both staying here, and removing hence, we may be acceptable unto him 2.
Cor. 3. 8, 9.
.

Labor then for this: Means 4.
yea labor not only for it; but labor further, in the fourth place, to get
assurance of it to thine own soul 2. Petr. 1. 10.
. Labor (I say) to get assurance of Gods favor in thy life, and thou shall
not need to fear death 1. Ioh. 3. 14, 19, 20, 21.
. A man will never be afraid to go to God, if he know that in Christ he is
reconciled unto God 2. Cor. 5.5.
. He will never be afraid to lay down this cotage of clay, if he be assured
that he has an eternal housing, not made with hands, reserved for him in the
heavens 2. Cor. 5. 1, 2.
. The want of the former, of the thing it self, makes the unfaithful fear
death; and not without cause; because they have laid no foundation for life
after death; and therefore when they dye, they dye irrecouerably, they dye
eternally, they pass not from death to life, but from death to death Apoc. 20.
14, 15. and 20. 6.
, or from death to such a life, as is worse than any death, a dying life and a
living death Mors sine morte: mors semper viuit: semper occidit, nanquam
peroccidit. Greg. mor. l. 9. c. 38. and Beru. de consider. lib. 5.
. The want of the latter, to wit, of the assurance of it, makes even many
faithful fear death; (though that without just cause;) because, though they
have laid a sure foundation for life, and therefore cannot miscary, but must
needs do well in death; yet they want the comfort of it, because they do not
apprehend it, because they are not assured of it Miser est beatitatcm qui
nescit suam.
: which makes them therefore with fear to expect death, as a sergeant that
came to arrest them, and to carry them away to hell; which, if they could
consider of things aright, they had cause rather with great joy to welcome, as
Gods messenger, Means 5.
sent to conueigh them hence to heaven.

Fifthly, learn to dye whiles thou live; learn to dye before death 1. Cor.
15. 31. Morte^, dum adbnc viueres, imitatus, Ambr d: bon. mort. Egrogia res est
mortem condiscere. Sen. epist. 26.
. Forecast thine end Deuteronomy. 32 19. Nulla res magis proderit, quam cogitatio
mortalitatis. Sen. de^ra. l. 3. c 42. Nullius rei melitatio tam necessaria est.
L^em ep. 70.
think often on it Meditare mortem. Qui hoc d^cit, medi^ari libertale^ iubet.
Ide^. ep. 26.
; fit thy self for it; that though it come never so soon, never so suddenly,
it may not surprise thee unawares, it may not find thee unfitted. He can not
dye with alacrity, he can not in holy manner desire death, that has not
fitted himself for death, that has not before hand seriously thought on his
end, and addressed himself thereunto Morte^ nemo hilaris excipit, nisi qui se
ad ill^m di^ compusuerat. Sen. epist. 10.
. Therefore men fear it, because they are not prepared for it: therefore they
dread it, because it comes ere they expected it I^^^pectata plus aggrauant.
no vitas adijcst calamitatibus pondus. noc quisquam mor: aliu^ non magis, qu^d
etiam miratus est, doluit. Ideo nihil nobis im; r^uisum esse debet. In (...) p
emittendus est animus. Sen. ep. 91.
. As thou art wont therefore ere sleep come upon thee, to compose thy self
unto rest, by stripping thy self, lying down in or on thy bed, drawing the
curtains about thee, closing thine eyes, acting sleep as it were, before thou
sleep: So endeavor daily, before death seize on thee, to compose and address
thy self unto death Compo^e te ad diem illu^. (...) ep. 26.
, by the serious meditation of thine unavoidable end, as most certainly not
far of Dehemus animo pr^meditari, qu d aliquand^ sut^ri sum^^^, and quod,
velimus nelimus, abesse longius non potest. Hiero^. cpitaph Nepo^.
, so uncertain how near, by laboring to work out of thy mind such secular,
carnal, or satanicall conceits, as may bring thee out of love with it, and by
striving to bring thy self acquainted with it, yea to work thine heart to a
love and a liking of it, that when it comes, thou may entertain it,
neither as a foe, nor as a mere stranger, but as a wonted guest, as an ancient
acquaintance, as a familiar friend Effice morte^ tibi cogitatione familiarem, vt
possis, vbi fors tulerit, illi (laetus and alacer) obuiam exire. Se^. ep.
It is a matter, as of much consequence, for the furtherance of a cheerful
departure, so of great difficulty, not so soon achieved, not so easily
learned, Magna res est, and diu discenda, cum adventat hora illa inevitabilis,
aequ^ animo exire. Sen. epist. 30.
as many men imagine: yea it is that, that we may well all our life long be a
learning; Viuere totae vita discendum est; and quod magis fortasse miraberis,
tota vita discendu^ est mori. Sen. de brev. vitae. cap. 7.
since it is, or ought to be the maine aim of every man's whole life, to
prepare and fit him for death Primus Pythagoras dixit Philosophiam esse
meditatione^ mortis, quotidie de carcere corporis nitentem edu^er^ animae
libertatem. Hi^ron. c^nt. Ruffi^. Philosophia^ esse. Socrates apud Clem. strom.
l. 5. Plato apud Plut. de plac. philos. Oi (...). Plato Phaedon. Platonis
sententia est, omnem sapientum vitam meditationem esse mortis. Hieron. epit.
Nep^t. Plato Philosophiam meditationem mortis esse dixit: Idem epit. Marcel.
Philosophum nihil op^rtet sic agere, quam vt animum semper studeat consortio
corporis separare, and ideo e^istimandum, philosophiam esse mortis affectum,
(conatum Hieron.) consuetudinemque moriendi. Apul. de philos.
.

Sixthly and lastly, when thou look toward death, look withal ever further
than it. When thou meditatest on death, meditate withal on those benefits that
shall accrue unto thee by death. Oh could we see them, as Paul did, when he was
rapt into the third heaven 2. Cor. 12. 4.
: we would never be well, until we were there. Nay, could we see but some
glimpse, as those three Disciples did Matthew. 17. 3.
, of that glory; we would never lin longing till we were entered or entering into
it. But this since we cannot hope for, till we come there; let us labor with
Moses the mean while, with the spiritual eye of the soul, with the eye of
faith and meditation, to see him that cannot be seen Hebr. 11. 27.
; yea to see that, that cannot be seen Hebr. 11. 26.
; to see that with the spiritual eye, that cannot be seen with the natural
eye: with our Apostle, to look not on the things that are seen, but on the
things that are not seen 2. Cor. 4. 18.
: not consider death as it shows it self to the eye of flesh and blood, and
as it is in it own nature, as an enemy to man, as a punishment of sin Genesis
2. 17. Romans 5 12. and 6. 23.
; but as it is manifested to the eye of faith out of Gods word, as it is now
altered and changed through Gods mercy in Christ, as a great benefit, as a
blessing, as the messenger of God Lex est, (...) poena perire. Sen. epigr. 7.
Vltimum diem, no^ quasi poenam, s^d naturae legem aspicis. Idem ad Helv. Mors
naturae finis est, non poena. Cic. pr^ Milon. and Sen. suasor. 7. imo nec
finis, nec poena bonis.
; as Gods messenger, I say, for the good, yea for the endless good of all
those that belong unto God. Open the eye of thy soul to look not upon it, but
beyond it. Muse often upon the happiness that shall ensue upon it, and cannot be
attained but by it. That will make thee desire death, though not for it self,
yet for it (...). Plato in Phaedon.
; yea it will make thee even in love with death, if thou be in love with it;
since thou can not but by death attain unto it.

Fifthly, this helps to confute certain erroneous conceits.

First, the popish opinion of Purgatory. For what cause or reason should
Christian men have to desire death, if they were to go to such a place after
death? to pass not from pain to ease and rest, but from pain to pain, from
lesser pains to greater pains; Use 5.
to greater torments after death, then ever they did or could endure in this
life Constat enim poenas Purgatorij esse atr^ cissimas, and eti illes nullas
poenas huius vitae comparandas. Bellarm. de purg l. 2. c. 14.
: not to go unto Christ, bnt to go further from Christ; not to converse with
him immediately after death, but to be deprived of those means, whereby they
had spiritual society with him, and did comfortably enjoy him by his spirit
here upon earth. A mere dotage of man's idle brain, having no shadow of ground
or warrant out of Gods word, teaching the Saints of God to expect after death
woe and pain and hell, where the Spirit promises nothing but life 2. Tim. 4. 8.
, rest Luke 16. 25.
, joy Math. 25. 23.
, and heaven Luk 16. 22. and 23. 43. 2. Cor. 12. 2, 4.
.

Secondly, Apoc. 2. 10.
it confuteth likewise another unsound assertion, Ioh. 5. 24. and 11. 25.
to wit, of those that deny unto the souls of the Saints deceassed entrance
into heaven, Apoc. 14. 13.
and access unto the presence of Christ, Esai. 35. 10.
until the last day. This erroneous conceit was of old broached by Irenaeus In
lib. 5. aduers.
, and was of late again reviued by Pope John 22 Guil. Ockam in oper. 93.
dierum. and Adrian. in 4. did.
. But was then opposed by the most of his Cardinals, Valent. cap. vl^. Sed and
Tertull. ide^ habet adv. Marc. l. 4. and in lib. de anim^ prope finem.
and confuted by the Divines of the University of Paris, and the Pope himself
(as some write) constrained by Philip the Fair, then King of France, publicly
to recant it Erasm. in prefat. ad Iren. Gillius Annal. Franc. tom. 2. and
Gag^in. l. 8.
; as also Benedict 12. his next successor, solemnly condemned it In Extra.
Bened. Deus. Vise Al^^ns. de Castr^ cont. haeres. l. 3. Beatitud^.
.

And it is a point indeed directly contrary to the promise of Christ, 7. and
Io.. Gerson in sermon de Pasch.
and to the Desires of the Saints.

To the promise of Christ made to the Theife on the Cross; This day shall thou
be with me in Paradise Luke 23. 43.
: which Paradise this our Apostle expounds to be the third Heaven 2. Cor. 12.
2, 4.
, the present place of Christ's residence and abode Act. 5. 21.
.

To the Desires of Gods Saints; this our Apopostle, and others, as well here,
as elsewhere, who desire to remove hence, that they may go thither to Christ
2. Cor. 5. 6, 8.
. But in vain should they desire for that end to remove hence, if when hence
they departed, they should not go to christ, but wait without, I wot not where,
secluded from all access to him, and from the sight of him. So that of
necessity either we must shut Christ himself out of heaven, or else we must
admit the souls of the Saints, who by direction of the Spirit of God (which
cannot mis-informe them, either delude or deceive them,) desire therefore to be
dissolved, that they may go immediately to be and abide with him where he is.

Lastly, it teaches us not to mourn excessiuely for the deceassed 1 Thessalonians.
4. 13.
. For how can we desire to go after them, if we mourn for them, as if some
evil had befallen them? or what cause have we to bewail them, that are
therefore happier than us, because they are gone thither before us Premissi,
non amissi: praecesserunt, no^ decesseru^t. Aug. epist. 6. and 120. and de
diverse. 43. abijt, non obijt. Ambr. de Theodos. Quem putas perisse, pramissus
est. Quid autem dementius, quam cum idem tibi iter emetiendu^ sit, flere cum
qui antecessie? Se^ ep. 99. dimisimus illos, imo co^secuturi praemisimus. Idem
ad Marc. c. 19. Cogitemus cito n^s eb perventuros, quo illum per venisse
moeremus. quem patamus perisse, praemissus est. Idem. ep. ^ 3. Non est lugendus
qui antecedit, sed desiderandus. id quique desiderium patientia tempera^dum.
cur enim imm^derate feras abisse, que^ mox subsequeris? Tertul^^ de patient.
No^ sunt lugendi fratres nostri accersione dominiea deseculo liberati, cum
sciamus eos non amitii sed praemitti, recedentes praecedere: vt proficis^e^tes
and nauiga^tes desiderari (...) deberi non plangi. Cyprian. de mortal.
, whither we must once follow them, and can never be fully happy here, until
we be there with them? Rather; are they gone before us, that were near and
dear unto us? Let their departure from us, that were so much affected of us,
be a means to draw our affections more to the place whither they are gone
before us; and to those courses, whereby we may be partakers with them, as in
the grace of God here, so in glory hereafter.

FINIS.
Praeclare Antiphanes apud Stobaeum tom. 2. cap. 124. (...).
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
Quae Lipsius sic vertit.

Lugere amicos mortuos minime decet.
Non mortui etenim sunt: sed illam ipsam viam,
Quam mox necessum inire nobis ^mnibus,
Illi praiuerunt: and ecc^ postmodu^m
Transgressi in vnum idemque diversorium
Coniuncti agemus quicquid eui relliquum est.


