An Apology or defense for the Christians of France which are of the
Eua^gelicall or reformed religion, for the satisfiing of such as will not live
in peace and concord with them. Whereby the pureness of the same Religion in the
chief points that are in variance, is evidently showed, not only by the holy
scriptures, and by reason: But also by the Popes own Canons. Written to the
king of Navarre and translated out of french into English by Sir Iherom Bows
Knight.

AT LONDON Printed by John Day dwelling over Aldersgate. And are to be sold at
his Shop under the gate. 1579.

Cum Priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.



To the right high and noble Prince, Henrye the second, king of Navarre, Prince
of Bearn, Duke of Vandome and Albret, Earl of Foyze, Arminack, Agenois,
Bigorie, Marle. etc,
SIR, it is not without cause, nor without exaumple, that I dare take upon me
to dedycate unto your highness, this little Apologye, which contains a defense
of the reformed Religion, and of the Professors of the same. For in as much as
your Majesty has even from your youth, vndertake^ the defense thereof with the
hasard of your life and gooddes for the same: I could not more fitly prefer
the justification of so holy a cause to any, than to your Highness, who have
always maintained the same: not only in words, but also by deeds, and that
with most noble and Princely courage, following the renowned footsteps of the
late Queen of Navarre, your mother, whose godlynes, courtesy, and other
heroical virtues, are consecrated for ever to most honorable eternity. And I
have been led to take upon me this defense and to dedicate it to your
Majesty, by the example of many good and godly men in the Primitive church,
who in their times wrote diverse Apologies, in defense of the Christians against
the misreportes and illusions of the heathen, and did put them up to the Romayn
Emperors that were in those days: who (notwithstanding that they were heathen
Princes, and ignorant of the true Religion) were moved by them to succor the
Christians, and to surcease the persecutions that were made against them.

Quadratus and Aristydes wrote Apologies in their times, in defense of the
Christians against the heathen, and dedicated them to the Emperor Adrian, who
having read them, and perceiving thereby that the Christians worshipped the
great God which governs all the world: and that in the exercising of their
Religion, they did not any thing that was prejudicial to the laws of the
Romain Empire, but rather prayed for the prosperity of him and of his Empire:
sent a Proclamation to Fundanus the gouerner of Asia, wherein he forbad the
persecuting of the^ any more, as in respect of Religion, and commanded that
the slaunderers of them should be sore punished.

And moreover he caused diverse fair churches to be builded in many places,
without any Images, pictures, or portratures, greatly allowing the doctrine of
the Christians, for that it forbids the painting and portraying of God, the
worshipping of Images, or the having of them in their churches.

Likewise Iustine the Philosopher wrote in his time two Apologies that are come
to light, in defense of the Christians against the false accusations of the
heathen: whereof he dedicateth the one to the Senate of Rome, and the other to
the Emperor Antonine the godly: who being moved thereat, made a general law,
whereby he restrained the heathen from their false blaming of the Christians,
for the earthquakes and other public calamities, willing them to impute them
to their own sins, for he said that the Christians worshipped the great God
more deuoutely, than the heathen themselves worshipped the multitude of their
Gods.

And he prohibited all men, as well Magistrates as private persons, to persecute
the Christians any more, or to slander them with accusations or false crimes:
commanding them to observe the foresaid proclamation of his father and
Predecessor the Emperor Adrian, in all points.

Also Melito the Bishop of Sardis, wrote an Apology in defense of the
Christians against the Heathen, which he dedicated to the Emperor Mark Antony
the Philosopher, who was moved thereby to favor the Christians, and to cause the
persecutions to cease, which had bin made in the Provinces of the Empire
without his knowledge and commandment, by the Governors and other Magistrates
which abused the mildnes and clemency of their Prince, as a number do in these
days. Yea and this good Emperor finding by experience, that the Christians
were the good and well-beloved servants of the true God, (for he wan a great
battle against the Marcomannes and Quades, by the only prayers of a Legion of
Christian Soldiars that were in his army) not only forbad the persecuting of
the Christians by open Proclamation, but also gave leave to become Christians
to as many as would: willing and commanding that all such as accused any man
alonly in respect of Christian Religion, should be grievously punished as
cosoners and slanderers, and that no Christian should be compelled to change
his Religion.

Many others besides these (as Tertulian and Appollinaris) have pleaded and
mayntayned the same cause, by setting forth Apologies, which have greatly
auayled, yea even with the Heathen Emperors of their times: who (to say the
truth) as heathenish as they were, have treden out the way to the Princes of
our days, which bear the titles of Christians and Catholics, to show them
what vprightnes and modesty they ought to use in the case of Religion.

Forasmuch therefore, as our reformed religion is blamed and outragiously
defaced nowadayes, by such as neither do nor will understand it: I, after the
example of so many good persons, have set my hand to the pen, to show by this
short defense, that the same is not only grounded upon Gods pure word, and
consequently agreeing with the Christen Religion of the primative Church, but
also that it is warranted by the very Canons of the Popes themselves, and of
the Church of Rome, And I am sure that your majesty (being naturally inclined
to the peace of France) will not only take more pleasure to hear the sound
of these Canons, than the sound of those which have so often times terribly
thundered, to the destruction of this desolate kingdom of France, but also be
moved to maintain the same Religion constantly more and more, and to be a
mean to the French king our soueraign Lord, for the relief and quietness of
such as profess the same. For if the heathen Emperors (whom I have named
before) have vouchsafed to relieve and favor the Christians in their times,
without having any further knowledge of the Christian Religion, than that it
contained not any thing contrary to the Civil Laws: how much more ought we to
hope for the like at the hands of our most Christian king, by your
intercession, specially seeing that our Religion (thanks be to God) contains
not any doctrine which may not well beseem good Christians, and which tends
not to the advancing of kings, and of their estates, as his majesty may easily
discern, if it may please him to hear our reasons, or but only to look upon
this little Apology.

And surely Sir, we assure ourselves that you will always continue to be a
mean to his Majesty every day better than other, for the maintenance and
quyetnes of us and our Religion, because you were brought up in it in your
young time, and have made a good profession of it. Besides this, the famous
examples of your noble ancestors which have been ever renowned for their
godlynes, do direct you to the following of their footesteps. For the
Histories do auow unto us, that your Ancestors of the renowned house of
Burbon, (for I will not speak of those of late time, whose remembrance being
yet fresh in men's minds, and will continue honorable for ever among them that
come after us) have always been had in honor for their great zeal toward the
Christian Religion, and for their fervent love to the mayntenance of the crown
of France, and of the quyetnes of their country, which are two principal
points wherein godlynes shines forth.

For first of all, the great and dangerous voyages which your Ancestors have
made with men of war into the East countries, and into Affrike, against the
Turks and Sarasyns, for the great desire they had to advance the Christian
Religion, (as the two voyages of king Lewis the saint: The two voyages of Jews
Duke of Burbon: and the voyages of many other princes of their race) do yeald
sufficient record of their Religious and godly disposition. And although that
in those days (by reason of the great ignorance of languages, and of good
learning, and consequently of the pure doctrine) Religion was not so well
understood, nor so purely taught as it is nowadayes through the grace of god:
yet it is not to be douted but that if they had had a purer and cleerer
understanding thereof, they would have been so much the more earnest and zealous
in it.

And as touching love and dutifulnes toward their country (which is the
second point wherein godlynes consists) your said au^cestors have given so
good trial thereof, by their contynuall employing of themselves valyantly in
the defense and enlarging of the Crown of France, as well against foreign
enemies, as against the disturbers of the public peace, that the house of
Burbone has always justly had this honorable report, to have been always a
flourishing branch of the blood Royal, and a sure pillar of the liberty and
safety of the Realm: As for example, Jacques of Burbon Earl of March, and
Constable of France, gave good proof of his love toward the welfare of his
country, and toward the Crown of France, in hazarding himself in many
battles against the English men, then almost invincible enemies of this
Realm, specially at the battle of Poytiers in the time of king John, and also
in doing his endeavor with great good will to conclude the peace at Britany,
and to drive the Companions and Outlawes out of France, which took their
pleasure in spoiling the country, and in maintayning of trouble in the Realm.

Also Lewis of Burbon the first Earl of Va^dome, (for that Earldome fell unto
him by his mother) made war against the Englishmen in the time of king
Charles the sixth, not only in France, but also even in England, and he was a
courteous Prince, and very profitable to his Country, as well in matters of war
as of peace.

His son (named Lewis also) being then Lord great master of France, was in
many battles, where he fought valiantly, specially at the battle of
Agincourt, notwithstanding that he was taken prisoner by ye Englishmen, with
many other great Princes and Lords of France. Likewise he was one of those
that took most pains to make the peace at Arras, in the time of king Charles
the seventh, for the suppressing of the Civil wars, which had endured so long
time, welnere to the utter destruction of the Realm.

John of Burbon Earl of Vandome and son of the said Lewis, was also a
virtuous Prince, and a valyant warryor, and adventured himself in many a
battle, specially at the siege of Fronsack in ye Marches of Burdeloys, where
he was made knight for his valiant deserts: and he was one of the Princes
which took part with Lewis the Dolphin, and with the Dukes of Burbon and
Alaunson, in setting themselves against the wicked and tirannicall dealings of
certain timeseruers and flatterers of king Charles the seventh, Fraunces of
Burbon his son, a good and stout prince went in the viage to Naples with king
Charles the eighth, and behaved himself nobly in matters both of peace and
war, to the honor and profit of the Crown of France, and of his whole
country. But I should not soon make an end, if I minded to reckon up all the
excellent princes of your majesty's most renowned house of Burbon: and much les
should I do it if I meant to take upon me to rehearse their heroycall deeds and
virtues, which would require many great volumes. But I think it enough for me
to have named some few of them, that might serve for examples to princes and to
all other men, to speed themselves valiantly in the defense and mayntaynance of
the peace of their country. Which examples will (in my opinion) be the better
liked of your majesty, because they come not only of your own house, (which
has always been most fruitful in noble and virtuous princes:) but also of
the Linial disce^t of your progenytors. For ye late king of Nauare your father,
was the son of Charles of Burbon the first duke of Vandome: who was son of
the foresaid Fraunces Earl of Vandome: who was son to the forenamed John,
who was son to the foresaid Lewis Lord great master of France: who was the
son of the other Lewis, the first Earl of Vandome: who was the son of John
Earl of March: who was the son of Jacques Earl of March and constable of
France: who was ye son of Lewis first duke of Burbon surnamed the great
duke: who was the son of Robert of France Earl of Cleremount and
Beawuoysin: who was the Son of good king Lewis the saint.

And so your Majesty is the eleventh in order, descending in the right line
from S. Lewis your great Ancestor, whose virtues I hope that God will make to
grow more and more in your Royal person, making you to be a follower of his
steps in that he was a good defender of the Christian Religion, a lover of
upright justice, a native example of good manners, a severe correcter of
partial and corrupt Judges, an untreatable punisher of blasphemers, Atheistes,
and usurers, and a zealous furtherer of all good reformation.

But now to come back again to my matter: I hope that such of the Romain
Religion as shall read this my writing, shall have no cause to find fault
with me, or to say that I deal to roughly with them. For having once simply
and without any bitterness, set down my reason upon every point, and having
alleged the very text of the holy Scripture to confirm our doctrine, and to
disprooue theirs: I give them yet this advantage further, that I come into the
listes against them with their own weapons, which they take to be most for
their own defense, and most hurtful to us, that is to wit, the Canons, made or
authorized by the very Popes themselves. Wherein I think I have done so much
by the grace of God, that either they must condemn the Pope and his Canons, or
else confess that our Religion is void of all error.

True it is that many learned men of our time, have sufficiently already set
forth the pureness of our Religion by the holy Scripture, yea and that much
better than I could skill to do: Insomuch that in that respect, many may
think that I do but make repetitions. Howbeit forasmuch as I have taken in
hand (as you would say) to level or bend the Canons in defense of ourselves,
against such persons as beat us with them, and unduly do attribute as much or
more authority to them, than to the holy Scripture it self: I have considered
that it were no reason for me to commit the same fault, which they do. And
therefore my intent is, to allege the very text of the scripture upon every
point, for the true and sure grounding of our doctrine, and not to bestow the
Canons otherwise, than in beating down the contrary doctrine.

I know well that the time is now so miserable and sorrowful in France, that
most men take all good things in ill part, and that even those which best know
the way how to heal our sores, are so ill minded, that they will not use it.
And (in good hour be it spoken) we may well say as Liuie said speaking of the
time of the Civil wars in Rome, Tit. liu. lib. 1. in praefacione.
(which began under Silla and Marius, and continued under Pompey and Caesar, and
so held on in quarrelling and parttaking still under their successors: (a time
in all points like to this sorrowful time of ours) that this Realm of France
is brought to so extreme corruption, as it may no longer endure, either her
own vices, or the remedy of them.

And in good sooth, every man may well perceive the vices of dissension,
rancor, civil war, and corruption both of manners and doctrine, which are
sowed at this day, and already to deep rooted in our French nation. And
likewise all men of any understanding, do well see that the very remedy to rid
away these mischiefs, were to admit some good reformation, as well in doctrine
as in discipline, and in outward behavior.

But France is in the same taking that a poor sick man is, when the extremity
of his fit is upon him: who can neither suffer his disease patiently, nor
willingly receive the medicine that should do him good. For all of us do well
enough perceive our disease, and we know well it is great and dangerous, and we
would feign be healed of it, but the most part of us do find that the
medicine of reformation is to irksome, wherein surely men do greatly
ouershoote themselves, for there is not so much pain nor displeasure in
leading of a sober and modest life, as there is in leading of a lose life.
Besides yt, ye sober, well staid, and well reformed life in good ma^ners and
doctrine, is accompanied with great quietness of conscience: and (as says
Cicero) does commonly lead ye body to a healthful and honorable old age. But
although we had no other cause to desire reformation, than for the ceasing of
our intolerable troubles: were not that cause enough, since it is not to be
douted but that they will never be thoroughly brought a sleep, until the cause
of them (that is to wit, the error, corruption, and loosenes that is among us)
be first quenched and done away, by a sound reformation as well inwardly as
outwardly? For naturally all causes bring forth effects like themselves.

And again it is certain, that God being righteous, is wont to continue in
striking with his revenging rods, upon such as harden themselves in their
sins, and stand kicking against the spur. If we considered the monstrous
wasting and spoiling of things which Civil wars are wont to breed, (whereof
we have seen but too many by experience) the hear of our heads would stand up
at it.

Cornelius Tacitus (rehearsing the mischiefs that befell to the Empire of
Rome, by the Civil wars that were in the time of the Emperors Galba,
Vitellus, and Otho) says that in those fiery broils, the goodliest Provinces
of the Empire staggered, inclyning to a change of state, and to an overthrow of
the Monarchical government, where-through they had felt so many oppressions,
by means of the quarrels and parttakinges of great men, who shot at no other
mark, but to destroy one another. Insomuch that in those times, there was
every where great murdering of men, burning of towns, defiling of holy
things, excessive cruelty, even in the City of Rome it self, deflouring of
the noblest Ladies, and banishing of the honestest and honorablest men. The
vertuousest folks went soonest to wrecke. Notable valiancy, and great riches,
dignity and authority, executed, or left unexecuted for fear, were taken for
crimes. The servant was wrought either by terror or by treachery, to be against
his master, and the bondsman was set at liberty against his Lord. Such as had no
enemies were overthrown by the subtle packing of their friends. Truth was
oppressed, partly through the ignorance of the Gouerner, partly through the
crafty iugling of flatterers, and partly through the spyting of such as held
the helm.

It was not lawful for a man to think what he listed, nor to speak what he
knew. The wickedness of the flatterers who had won the ears of the Prince,
and the great rewards which they obtained for their flattering, (as
Consulships, governments of Provinces, preferments to Priesthods, spoilings of
Countries, and excheting of men's goods,) were hated and abhorred alike of all
people. The small Countries, which sometimes were entangled in those Civil
broils, were full of cruel deeds. The seas were covered with folk that had
been banished and driven out of their own houses: the rocks of the sea were
pestered about with the carkases of folk murdered: and the good Cities were
quite and clean soked from all their substance.

These are the fruits in effect, which the great and pollitick wise man
Tacitus affirms to come and grow ordinarily of parttakings and Civil
discords. Whereof we have felt so good store by the space of seventeen years
already, or there abouts, that we ought now long ere this to have desired and
sought the remedy that might have cured our so strange misfortunes and
barbarous calamities. Yea and even they which are the most sworn enemies of
the reformed Religion, ought to become assured by the proof of time past, that
for all that ever they can do or devise, they shall never so deface the truth,
and virtue, but that they shall stand still spite of all the corruptinges and
darckninges of this world, and of the maintayners of them.

And in very deed, God (who governs the doings of all men in the world by
his providence) has reserved still in this miserable world, a great number of
good and honest me^ and of such as love virtue. And like as in the foresaid
time of the Civil wars among the Romans, Tacitus says that that age was
not so barrayn of honest men, but that it brought forth some good examples: so
also may we say that even in this age of ours, how much soever it be infected
and corrupted, yet has God of his gracious goodness reserved many still, which
to follow the pure Religion and virtue, have constantly endured poverty, loss
of their goods, the cruel murdering of their children, kinsfolk, and
friends, banishment out of their Country, absence from their houses, and an
infinite number of other adversities and inconveniences. Which thing gives us
assurance that our Lord god will always maintain a certain number of good men
here below, which shall embrace virtue by maintayning good laws and
discipline, and follow the light of the truth which abides invincible for
ever, and shall scatter the mistes and clouds that set themselves against it.

Esd. 3. cap. 3. 4.
The worthy judgment of that great monarch Darius king of the Medes and
Persians, will never slip out of the remembrance of men. For this king having
upon a time made a royal feast to all the Governors, Captains, and other
Officers of his Dominion, (which was so great that it extended over a hundredth
and seven and twenty Provinces,) was contented to hear a disputation between
three young Gentlemen of Jury, that were attendant upon his own person. Of whom
the one maintained that nothing is stronger than wine, because that commonly it
overcomes as well the great as the small. Another said that nothing was
stronger than a king, because that with one only word of his mouth, he can make
men to be slain, Cities to be razed, and Fortresses to be beaten down when he
lists. And the third named Zorobabell, (a gentleman of the blood royal
descended of the line of David) vpheld that truth is strongest of all things,
because it contynueth in force everlastingly, and shall reign for ever and
ever.

Darius having heard this disputation, and knowing well how it is most
certain, that truth is the thing of greatest strength, and of longest
contynuance in all the world, gave the prize to zorabable as to him that had
been of best opinion, and gave him great gifts and privileges, as well for
himself as for all his wholl nation, commanding that from thence forth
Zorobabell should be called the kings Cosen. Which judgment of this great
king, ought to be well considered of all persons, and specially of kings and
Princes, that they may give themselves earnestly to the seeking out of the
truth in all things, as well in case of Religion as in Civil and worldly
affairs, and esteem it more strong and invincible tha^ any force of man.

For certainly, there is neither king nor Emperor, fire nor sword, pain nor
torments, that ever could quench the truth, or overcome it. But forasmuch as in
these days, many men are doutfull in the case of Religion, where they should
seek the truth, I will not here forget the rule which the great Emperor of
Rome Constantine did set down at the cosicell of Nice in Bithinia, Trip. hist.
li 2. cap. 5.
for the decyding of the points of doctrine, which were to be handeled and
treated of there. For having assembled the Council together, to determine upon
the doctrine that Arrius had sowed at that time: When he had made the Bishops
to take their places every one in his degree, (which were to the number of 318.
besides the Elders and Deacons that accompanied the^, who were above 500.) he
sat him down among them in a low chair, and made this Oration to them well
beseeming his Majesty and godlynes.

My Lords and fathers (quoth he) forasmuch as God has vouchsafed to put down
the cruel Princes by my hand, and to give peace to the world under my reign,
it is meet that you also in this holy assembly, should do your indeuoures to
set a stable unity and concord in the Church. For it were to evil an example
if after the ouercomming of our enemies, the public peace should now be
disturbed by the controversies and disagreementes of the Shepherds of the
Church, a thing that would minister occasion and matter to the ungodly to mock
our Religion, and to laugh it to scorn. Now then, since we be to treat here of
divine matters, we must tak ye doctrine of the holy Ghost for our rule, and
resort to the books of the Evangelists, Apostles, and Prophets, which teach
us what opinion we ought to be of concerning Gods holy law.

Therefore setting aside all stoutnes of contention, let us seek the resolution
of our questions in the word that is inspired by God.

After this short and notable speech made by that great Emperor, the Council
was held, and the doctrine of Arrius was thoroughly debated by the only word of
God, and in the end justly condemned by those holy Fathers, as utterly contrary
to a number of express places of the holy Scriptures, which auow unto us the
Godhead and euerlastingnes of the son of God, which thing Arrius did wickedly
deny.

But I must tell you by the way, that in this speech of Constantines, we have
three duties to mark, which do well beseem a great Prince. The one is to be
inclyned to public peace and tranquillity, and to procure the maintenance
thereof by all lawful means. Another is to love the truth above al things,
chiefly in cases of Religion. And the third is, to seek the same truth in the
Scripture inspired by God.

Now I beseech God of his gracious goodness, to make your Majesty's virtue and
godliness to shine forth daily more and more, in those holy duties, and to
cause your Royal highness to grow greater and greater in all his heavenly
gifts, and in all honor and felicity.

Dated the 15. day of February, ye year of our savior Christ. 1578.
The author of this Apology his Song.
THe Pope of Rome a thousand Canons bendes:
Against the Church which does Gods word embrace
And stoutly forth his own Decrees he sendes,
The soueraign Lords commandments to deface,
Or rather quite and clean away to chase.
Presuming proudly for to bear chief sway:
In man's salvation every kind of way.
He thinks, ere long, that noble fort to win,
And tryumphing aforehand, in despite
Of heavenly truth, he sets him down within
Gods Temple, boasting even in open sight
Himself as God, and strives with all his might.
To maintain still his Lordly soueraintie:
As Well above as underneath the Sky.
But thou O Christ, our King omnipotent,
Reach out thine arm: and with thy skillful hand:
Lay hold upon the Canons that are bent
Against thee by the Romish Tirants band.
And turn them back at him that has them sent.
To beat his Rampires and his Bulwarks down:
In force whereof he wears his tryple Crown.
The time is come to thine immortal praise,
That this same Kaytiffe being battered sore
With these same Canons of his own, decays:
And sinking under truth to rise no more,
Lies beaten down with shame for evermore.
From day to day forgoing still his strength:
Until his State be wanzd away at length.
FINIS.
THE AVTHOR TO his Book.
YE braying Canones which so grounded be
Upon the word of him that reigns on high:
With thundering noyze let fly your bullets free.
That men may hear them roaring to the sky.
But as for you ye Canons whom we see
From mouth of brass to spit out fiery flame
Of Vulcanes smoky Forge, hold you your peace:
You bring our Realm to ruin and to shame:
The others force fond ignorance to cease.
FINIS.
AN APOLOGY FOR the Protestants.
IT is well known that in these days, there are in France two sorts of
catholics, which are of the Romish Religion, For there are of them that be
tractable, and desirers, and lovers of the peace, and quietness of this Realm,
and such as will not condemn the reformed religion, nor those that make
profession thereof, without hearing and understanding them, as the others do:
but can well find in their hearts, to live in friendship, and fellowship with
them, and not trouble them in the exercise of their Religion, but tarry the time
until God (through his grace) have enlightened them, and made them to know the
errors and abuses which may be in the one and in the other: and make us
Frenchmen (which are now a days to wilfully bent) apt, and willing to yealde
unto reason. And there are other some so wilful, and so far run into hatred,
and enmity, against the reformed Religion, and the professors of the same:
that they prefer their own unreasonable humors, before the peace, and common
quiet of their country. Yea, and even before the preservation of the state of
the Prince.

These be they to whom I speak in my Apology. And also to all that are
desirous to know, in what point, and for what cause, the Protestants do stand
in controversy for Religion against the Romish Catholics.

(...) ^nne (...) be co^^^^^ed w^^^^^t bei^^ ^eard speak.
First, therefore, I desire them all to presuppose, that to judge of a matter
before they understand it, and to condemn a man without hearing his answer,
is a thing that ill becomes, not only all Christians, but also any other
reasonable person. For, by the law of nature (as witnesses the Civil law) we
ought to hear their reasons, and defenses, whose cause we have to judge of,
and therein to do as we would be done unto, as Nature wills, and commands
us. And therefore, these ouerangry Catholics, which condemn, hate, and
persecute, the professors of the reformed religion, without understanding it,
or without hearing them, do well bewray thereby, that their panges and passions
are very strange, for that they have such force, as to cause them to forget the
law of Nature, the knowledge whereof God has imprinted in the hearts of all
men, even from their creation. Truly, it is a lamentable and beastly thing,
that a man should so yealde himself to the humor of hatred, rancor, envy,
desire of revenge, and such like frenzes, as that he should rob himself of his
natural wit, and cause himself to forget the right use of reason, nun
as you may well see by the doings of those heady persons. I know right well
that they have been accustomed to cloak these passions, by saying that the
Pope, the Counsel of Trent, and the Sorbonistes, have long ago, condemned the
reformed Religion, as erroneous and heretical, and that therefore, it is to be
holden for a resolution, that it is naught, and to be condemned without farther
inquiry of the matter, and without any other form or process of Law.

But hereunto it has ever been answered, as we do still, that those which have
thus condemned our Religion, have always been both Judges, and parties. And yt
the professors of the reformed Religion, have not been heard in their lawful
defenses: So that those which will needs make a president of such
condemnations, given against the parties unheard, be suspected and vncompetent
Judges, and do still fall back again into the former fault of conde^ning men
unheard, (a thing contrary to the law of nature) and show themselves to be
parciall and fond Judges, in yt they will needs give sentence of ye thing which
they understand no more, (...)
than a blind man can judge of colors, and therefore are worthily noted, in way
of scorn by that common proverb.

Molin. de mon. Fran. art. 154. 155. 156.
That good king of France, Jews the twelfe, surnamed the father of his people,
will never be forgotten, who being importunatly called upon by the Bishops, and
Cardinals of his time, to cause a bloody execution to be done upon the people
of Cabriers, and Meryndoll, in Province, (who had neither masses, nor Images in
their churches: and were as a remnant of the ancient breed of the Albigions,
and of the pore men of Lion, which had been all condemned for heretics) did
make this worthy, and wise answer. I am a king (quoth he) over my people, to
minister justice unto them, which I cannot do, without hearing such as are
accused. I will therefore hear them before I condemn them, though they were
Turks, or Devils.

Hereupon it was told the King, that the religion which those of Cabryers, and
Meryndol, did profess, had bin often, before that time, condemned for
heretical, and wicked: specially in the Council of Laterane, Anno. 1179. e.
sicut e. excomunicamus. Ex. de haeret. Aut. Gazaros. C. de haret.
Under Pope Alexander the third, in the time of king Philip Augustus, and by
the Emperor Frederick the second, and Pope Honorius the third, about ye year,
1217 and by Pope Gregory the ninth, who entered into the Papacy Anno 1227.

But, notwithstanding, all these shows, and prouocations, this good king would
not be led from his determination: Saying, that he would not stretch his
conscience so far, as to make a president of the judgments, and decrees of
those Popes, King, and Emperor, but would hear the answers of the parties
accused, before he condemned them.

And thereupon, he gave audience to the Comissioners of Cabryers, and Meryndol.
And when he had heard the^, he sent thither Adam Fume his Master of requests,
and Ihon Paruyz his Co^fessor, to inform him of their life, and doctrine. Who
made report to his majesty, that it was true, that those of Cabryers, and
Meryndol, had neither masses, nor Images in their churches, but that otherwise,
they were all well instructed (yea, even the very little ones) in the articles
of the faith, and in the commandments of God, and that they utterly
abstayned from al blasphemous oaths, and whoredom, keeping holy the Sabbath
day, and greatly reuerensing the supper of our Lord, baptism, and marriage.
Which when the king thus understood, he did not only, not condemn them of
heresy (as he was intysed to have done,) but also, quite otherwise, did
pronounce with his own voice (and bound it with an oath) that he did believe,
that those of Meryndoll, and Cabryers, were better, and more honest people,
than himself, or any of his other subjects.

And what, will you infer, of this? will you say now that this good king was a
Protestant, or that he mislyked the Romayn Religion? I think there is no man so
shameless, that dares say so: For his life, and acts do show, that he was very
well minded toward the church of Rome: In maintenance whereof, he held great
wars in Italy against the Venecians, and other Princes, that usurped upon ye
patrimonies of the Church.

But he was a good king, and did acknowledge, that God had put the Scepter in
his hand, to minister justice to all his people, and not to condemn the
accused, without hearing their answer: nor to judge of a matter of importance,
by the consciences of others: but meekly to give hearing to al matters brought
before him, and not to condemn those things for evil, which may show
themselves to be good. I therefore, conclude thus, that those which in these
days, do so presumptuouslye condemn the reformed Religion, without knowing any
deserved cause, or without hearing such as profess the same, under color of
the condemnatio^s done already by the Popes, by ye council of Trent, and by
the Sorbonistes, do show thereby the great forgetfulness of their duty of
judging uprightly: And yt they carry to slack a hand on the bridle of their
conscience, in suffering it to depend upon the fantastical judgment of
others.

Lactantius Fyrmian, speaking to Constantine the great, (who was the first
christian Emperor) did greatly co^playn, and bewail, that the Paganes and
Idolaters of his time, did condemn the Christian Religion, and had it in
disdayn, without knowing what christian Religion was, and without reading their
books to understand it. Diu. Inst. lib. 5. cap 1. The pagans condemned the
christians without hearing the^ speak.


These be the very words of Lacta^tius. I doubt not (most mighty Emperor
Constantine) but that if this my work (whereby I show that the Creator of all
things, is the Governor of the whole world) do fall into the hands of these
unlearned Religious folk, they (by reason of their great superstition, which
makes them too too impatient) will assault me with injuries, and spitefully
fling the book to the ground, before they have read so much as the beginning
of it, imagining that they should defile themselves with such a crime, as could
never be wyped out again, if they should either read it, or hear it red
patiently. Nevertheless, I beseech them in duty of humanity, not to condemn my
wrytinges (if it may be) before they do perfectly understand them. For if it
be allowed by order of law, that Churchrobbers, Traitors, and Poysoners, shall
speak for themselves, and argue in their own defense, and that it is not
lawful to condemn any of them without examination of his cause: It is not
against reason, that I should entreat those, into whose hands this book
shall happen, to read it, or hear it read throughout, and to defer their
judgments, until they have read it to the end.

But I know well the wilfulness of that kind of people to be such, as I shall
not obtain this suite of them. For, they be afraid, least the force, and
strength of the truth should overcome them, and make them yeald unto us, and to
agree with us. That is the cause of their roaring, and storming, least they
should hear us, and of their shutting of their eyes least they should see the
light which we bring unto them, wherein they show the little assurance that they
have in their own fond reasons. For, they dare neither understand, nor enter
into disputation, because they know they shall soon be vanquished. By reason
whereof, it comes to Pass, that through their shunning of all manner of
scanning, and sifting of things by disputation,

They drive discretion quite away,
And force and fury bear the sway:
As says Ennius. And because they are bente to condemn, and utterly to oppres
such as they well know to be innocent: they be unwilling that their innocence
should appear: because they deem it a greater iniquity to condemn the
innocencye that is apparent, the^ the innocency that comes not to trial. Or
rather, (as I said before) they are afeard, that they should have no power to
condemn us, if they should hear us.

This was the inuectiue which Lactantius wrote against the heathen in his time,
who condemned the Christians without hearing them. Which reason, I will use
against the impatient catholics, desiring them, not to show them selves like
unto those heathen men, in being so obstinate, as to shut their ears from
hearing, and understanding the doctrine which they so condemn, and persecute,
without knowing what it contains. But if those angry Catholics, which oppose
themselves as adversaries against our reformed Religion, and so boldly condemn
it, would temper their choler, and passions, with such moderation, as to give
place to reason, and to set natural discretion in due place and pre-eminence:
Truly, I durst make the^ judges of this cause, and I am well assured that they
would judge far otherwise, than they have done hitherto, or do yet.

And in deed, if the love of truth have any place in their hearts (as I believe
it has) I beseech them, even before God and for the truths sake, to vouchsafe
to examine this present defense with settled judgment: and to consider of it
without affection. For, I protest unto them, that I will use such modesty in
my words, as none shall justly have cause to accuse me of rigor.

First, therefore, I presuppose, that betwixt the Romish Catholics, and the
Protestants, there is disagreeme^t of doctrine in many points, yea, even in
the most principal, as I will show hereafter.

But yet nevertheless both the one and the other do acknowledge generally, the
unity of the person of Jesus Christ in two natures not confounded: The holy
Trinitye, of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, and the holy Scripture
of the old and new Testament, and therefore they both may in this respect, be
called Christians howbeit the one more aptly then the other, as shall appear
by that which I will say hereafter. Now, that we may the better treat of the
points which are in question, and that all men may the more plainly judge
thereof, we will distinctly examine the reasons which are to be considered in
this discourse, and are commonly alleged on both sides, for the mayntayning of
the doctrine of either party: and so by comparing the contrary reasons and
alegations together, the truth will the more apparently show it self because
light is the^ most apparent and bright, when it is set nigh to his contrary.

Of three Maxims, grounds or rules, whereby a man may judge of the points of
religion which are in question. The first Chapter.
FOrasmuch as the whot Catholics accuse the Religion of the protestants, to
be wicked, new, and heretical, and therefore cannot brook the society of such
as profess the same: we hope to show them evidently, that it is not so, when
we come to the scanning of every point particularly that is in question. And
for proof and demonstration of our sayings, we will take for our ground,
three Maxims, or general rules, which are very certain and true, whereby
every man shall easily be able to judge whether ye same religion, is to be
reckned, wicked new, and heretical or no.

The three Maxims are these, The first is that that doctrine of Religion
whereby God is most honored, is the The second is, that that Doctrine The third
is, that the Romish Catholics cannot well accuse that doctrine, of heresy,
which is approved by their own Canones.

Which three rules or maxims, be so clear and evident of them selves, that
(in mine opinion) the day, or the Sun is not clearer. For, seeing that Religion
is no other thing, than the duty which we owe unto God. It does follow, that
that doctrine which teaches us to yield unto him all duty and honor, and to
rob him of no part thereof, is a good, and true doctrine, and that there can be
no better.

Likewise it is certain, that the doctrine which is builded upon the only word
of God, ought not to be called new, but that we may rather say, that it is as
old as the world it self. In so much, that they which do call it new, may
not nor cannot so call it, in respect of it self, but only in respect of
their own ignorance, for to the ignorant, every thing that they understand not,
is new. Neither is it to be douted, but that it is most true, because that God
(who is the author thereof) is the truth it self, and the fountayn of light,
and wisdom.

In like manner, I think that al me^ will easily grant, that even the
earnestest Catholics of Rome, can not dispense so much with them selves, as
to accuse that Religion of heresy, which is approved by their own Canones,
because the Canones be authorysed by the Popes themselves. For, the decrees of
Gracian (from whence I intend to draw the most parts of the Canons which
shall be alleged) were ratifyed and authorized by Pope The decrees of Gratian
authorized by the pope
Euginie the third, who commanded that they should be red in the Vniuersytyes,
Annal. sur l. an. 1168.
and used in judgment as they have been ever since. So that to reject and
condemn the Canons, were as much in effect, as to deny the Pope, and all the
Roman Religion.

But full well I know, that hereafter when I shall allege the Canons, those
passionate Catholics will rise up, and say that there be other canons
contrary to these, and truly I will not deny but that the books of the Canon
law, are full of co^traryeties. Yet dare I boldly say, and assuredly auow that
those Canons which I will allege in this book, are of the best and most
ancient of all the Canon law, The old canons are better the^ the new.
and which have proceeded from the best springs and fountaynes, and from such
authors, as were most principal in skill and holiness, as may easily be judged
by those that will compare them with their books.

Having thus set down these three Maxims (the truth whereof is easelie to be
perceived, by every man of common capacity, (yea even of the grossest sort) I
am now to apply them orderlye to every particular point. And first of all we
will treat of Prayer.

OF PRAYER. The second Chapter.
THe doctrine of the professors of the Gospel touching prayer, is very
plain. Their opinion is in effect, that we ought to offer our prayers unto God
our maker, who is able enough to give us whatsoever we ask, and gracious in
harckening gentlye to our requests: Who also has manifested his great
goodness, in giving his everlasting Son, to the end that by him, our manhood
might have access to his Godhead.

And therefore they say, that in praying to God our creator, we must always
use the credit and intercession of his Son our mediator, who may boldly go
to the Father because he is God as he is, in the selfsame Godhead and being:
and disdayneth not also to apply himself to men, and to be an intercessor for
them, because he is man as they be.

Nether is this manner of praying unto God altogether disalowed of the Romain
Catholics: but they will needs add thereunto, that we must have also other
Mediators and Intercessors to God the Father, and to Jesus Christ himself: That
is to wit, the hesaints and the shesaintes, which are many in number, and in
their times have done many a fair miracle. For (say they) if a man would be a
suitor to a king, in any cause, or to his eldest son, he would not at the
first dash preace to their presence, but go to some of their servants, or
Lords of their Court. And so it seems a thing very reasonable and meet,
that when a man is minded to pray to god for any thing, he go first to some of
the Celestial court, to purchase acces to god, and to Jesus Christ his Son by
their means: and that to do otherwise, were a kind of dispising of the
saints who have the charge from God, to pray continually for the Millitante
Church, and every particular person of the same.

Truly, it is not to be denied, but that these reasons have some color and
show of truth, if we shall judge of God as of man. We must not judge of God as
of man.
But hereunto the Protestants reply, that we may not judge of God, as of a
king, or as of another mortal man, for there is great difference. God is
altogether good, and inclyned to do good: But men, (be they kings or other)
are naturally evil, and disposed to do evil, both against God and their
neighbors. God understands our Prayers as soon as they be conceived in our
hearts, and before our mouths do utter them: But to cause a king to
understand our suites, we must put them in writing, or tell them by word of
mouth: and therefore we have need of Advocates to lay forth our cases, and of
Masters of requests to prefer our petitions to the Prince or to his
council, and of the favor of great Lords and councillors, to get us audience
and dispatch. All which things have no place with God. So that to compare the
manner of praying unto God, with the preferring of suits unto Princes, is a
token that we slenderly consider the greatness of God. And here we have to note
a proper saying of S. Ambrose, Amb. in epist. ad To. c. 1.
which he utters in these express words.

Those which in steed of resorting unto God, repair unto creatures, are wont
to color their contempt of God, with this miserable excuse. That by the menes
of those to who^ they have recourse they may attain to the presence of God, as
men attain to the presence of a king, by means of his officers. But I pray
you, is there any man so mad, or so careless of his own life, that he dares
yeald the honor to any of the kings servants or officers, which belongs to
the king himself, specially seeing we find that such as dare but speak of
the like matters, are by the law, gilty of high treso^? No. And yet these that
yield to the Creature, the honor that is due to the name of god, and which
letting god alone do worship their fellow servant, think not themselves blame
worthy at all: as who should say, they could reserve any greater honor unto
God.

Now the reason why men make their suites to Princes, by the mean and favor of
Noble men, Captains, and Officers, is, because the king is borne a man, and
knows not in whom to repose his trust and confidence for the ordering of his
public affairs. But as for GOD, from whom nothing is hidden (for he knows
every man's deserts) unto him we have no need of an Advocate, but of a devout
heart. For wheresoever such a heart speaks unto him, he will answer him.

By which sayings this good doctor S. Ambrose, by good and apparent reasons
confou^deth the doctrine of ye Romish Catholics touching the intercession of
Saints: So as, to use any other mediator to Godward, than our Lord Jesus
Christ, is a distrusting of his favor, and of the goodwill he bears us, as
though he were like unto some rough and discourteous prince, yt would take
displeasure if a man preaced to his presence, not being presented by some
officer of his court. For (say the Protestants) are not we certain and well
assured of the clemency and goodness of our Savior that does inuit us to come
directly unto him? Is not he our good Shepherd, our Redeemer, our
attonementmaker, our reconciler and our brother? Wherefore has he taken upon
him our flesh? borne our iniquities? fulfilled the law whereby we were
condemned? shed his most precious blood? and suffered death and passion upon
the cross? Is it not for us that he has done all these things to purchase
our salvation and reconciliation with God his Father? For neither for himself,
nor to increase his own glory, needed he to humble and imbase himself so much.
And therefore it is not to be douted, but that he does discharge his office of
Mediatorship, much better than all the saints can do: specially, seeing that
he is the only means that they be saints, and without him they could not so be.

Now, as it is not to be douted, but he has great good will to do the office
of a Mediator for us: so must we believe, that he will not consent that any
other should take upon him to do it, but is and will be the only obtayner of
our salvation, and of the heavenly blessings which God shall give us.

These be the reasons which the Protestants do allege for the maintenance of
their doctrine touching prayer. Whereby it does plainly appear, that their
doctrine is the best, according to our first maxim, because that the honor
which belongs to Jesus Christ our Lord, is thereby better, and more soundly
and wholly without diminishing rendered unto him, then by the doctrine of the
Romish catholics, who would have so great a number of Mediators, as they seem
to leave to Jesus Christ nothing else but only the name of mediator, and do
attribute to the saints, both the name and the effect.

Secondlye, this doctrine of the Protestants, is perfectly grounded upon the
word of God, as all men may know, by considering as well the precepts, as the
examples which are in the bible, concerning prayer. For, first of all, the holy
Scripture teaches us, to put all our trust in the goodness of God, and to pray
only unto him, assuring us that he will give care unto our prayers, Math. 7.18
saying: If you being evil, can skill to give good things to your children,
how much rather will your Father which is in heaven, give good things to those
that ask of him? And again, it exhorts us to use the credit of Jesus Christ
our Mediator to God the Father, saying: If any man have sinned we have an
advocate with God the Father, even Jesus Christ the righteous. 1. John. 2.1.
And to the end we should not doubt of the power and good will of our Mediator
toward us, it does assure us of two things: The one, that he sits in his
Majesty and might on ye right hand of the throne of his Father: And the other
that he does pray and make intercession for us. Romans 8.32.
He is says S. Paul upon the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us.

And for yt we should not abuse our selves in seking many mediators unto god:
ye holy scripture does also teach us, that as we have but one God to whom we
ought to pray: No more have we but only one Mediator saiing, For there is but
one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man, the man Jesus Christ. 1. Tim.
2.5.


And because we should not doubt that God is our Father, and that we may use
him as a Father: we are taught that those which believe in the Mediator, are
made the children of god, by the same faith and belief, saying: to all those
that have receued him, Ioh. 1.12.
he has given privilege to become the Children of God, that is to say: To
those which believe in his name. So as Jesus Christ himself teaching us how we
should pray to God, Math. 6.9.
has willed us to call him our Father.

Moreover, in the Psalms of David, and in the other books of the Bible, there
are infinite numbers of examples, which prove that all holy me^ have always
made their prayers unto God, and never unto dead me^, nor called upon them to
be their means and Intercessors unto God.

Whereupon it follows apparently, that the doctrine of the Protestants
touching prayer, is the most ancient and true, according to our second Maxim.

Finally, the said Romish Catholics ought not to charge the Religion of the
Protestants with heresy, by the which they say, there ought to be no praying
to the Saints which are out of this world: for there is no man of so simple
judgment, but he will confess it to be mere madness, to pray to them which
cannot hear him, as questionles those which be dead cannot understand the
prayers which we make unto the^ in this world, Saints can not hear the
prayers that are made to them.
because (as witnesses the Canon) they know nothing of the things which are
done in this world, except (says the same Canon) that those which die, do
carry them news of the things which they have seen and understood before
their death. These are the very words of the Canon. c. fatendum 13. 4, 2.
We must needs confess (according to the truth) that those which are dead do
know nothing of that which is done here upon earth: but they may well be
aduertysed of them by such as die and go unto them, and yet not of all
things, but only of such things as are lawful for those that be hear to
bear in memory, and expedient for the others to know.

Thus by this Canon, it is most evident that we ought not to pray unto Saints,
seeing they be dead and ca^ neither hear nor see nor know any thing that we
do here upon earth, but by messe^gers. And who so should say, that this
doctrine is heretical, must say also that the Canones and Popes be heretics,
which (as I take it) the Romish Catholics will be loath to confess. This Canon
is also confirmed by ye holy scripture, which bears witness to us that there
is none but god only, that knows the secrets of men's hearts, and so
consequently that it is he only that can understand our prayers, which come
rather from the heart than from the mouth.

The protestants say furthermore, that there are so great numbers of Saints
regestred in the Letany, of whose Canonysing men do doubt, (for as says a
good ancient Doctor, the bodies of diverse are honored on earth, whose souls
are buried in hell) that in reason we ought to refuse the number of
intercessors, and content our selves only with Jesus christ, which is the true
and pure doctrine that we ought to hold, and the Catholics cannot justly
accuse it of herisy, according to our third maxim.

And hereupon I add this more, that as the protestants do hold opinion that
we ought not to attribute the title nor the office of mediator to any other
tha^ to Jesus christ: no more ought we to do in his other titles and offices,
as of his priesthood, his mediatorship, his spiritual reigning, and his chief
shepheardship. For these be the titles of honor which belong unto Jesus Christ,
and are not to be communicated to others, how great or excellent personages so
ever they be. And truly herein all the world must needs confess, that the
protestants do show the^ selves to be best Christians, in that they attribute
only to our Lord Jesus Christ the titles of honor that are his, and will not
communicate them to any other creators, what so ever they be, for if they
would dispense with their consciences in this behalf, they know right well they
might soon be at a point with the Romish Catholics, and shun many miseries
and persecutions which they now endure. For there wants no more, but that
they would allow the Saints to be partners of the title of mediator, and the
maspriestes to be parteners of the title of Sacrificers, the doers of good
works of Supererogation to be parteners of the title of a propitiator, And
the Pope himself, to be partaker of the title of Spyrytuall King and
sovereign Sheaheard: And then by and by there would be a peace concluded
determined and established, betwixt the protestants and the romysh Cacholicks.
But the protestants will by no means, nor for any cause, diminish any part of
the titles of honor which belong unto the son of God, nor attribute them to
any other creatures. Whereby it appears evidently, that men do them great
wrong, in defaming their doctrine to the King, as though his permitting of them
to exercise the same, were a mean to disposses him of the title of most
Chrystian king.

For in as much as the name of christian comes of Christ, out of doubt they be
worthiest of that name, which yield Christ his due honor and glory.

Of faith and good works. The third chapter.
THe doctrine of the Romish Catholics concerning faith and good works,
differs greatly from that of the Protestants. For the Catholics hold
opinion, that only faith without good works does not justify a man: but that
it is needful ye faith be aided by good works. Contrariwise the Protestants
hold, that only faith does justify a man without good works.

That is to say, ye faith is the only instrument whereby Jesus Christ (who is
the true and efficient cause of our justification) applies his righteousness
unto us, and makes us to be accounted just before God his Father, through his
own merit, without the help of our good works. Nevertheless they confess
that good works are acceptable unto God: but yet they affirm that good works
are not of such power, as to justify us before the face of god, or to make us
capeable, either in part or in all, of everlasting life And they say also that
they be not all good works, which the catholics do take for good works.

For as touching the first point, you must consider that the doctrine of the
protestants does tend, to attribute the honor of our salvation all wholly unto
our Lord Jesus Christ, as unto him, who is the true and only cause thereof.
For although we have need of faith, whereby to receive the benefit of Christ,
who imputes and applies his own righteousness to all such as believe in him:
yet nevertheless, he does remain the only and altogether true cause of our
salvation, forasmuch as it is he himself, which does also give us faith.

So as he does not only give us ye drink of immortallity, that is to say, his
own righteousness which he allows us, but also the cup to receive it in: yea,
and he gives us both of the^ freely and for nothing, but only of his own
liberalitye and grace, with out asking or receiving of us, any recompense for
the same.

And truly if we would go about to recompense so great and excellent a
benefit, as is everlasting life, through our good works: it were as much as if
a man would purchase a great and rich inheritance, with a small sum of bace
money, such as in reason should rather be cried down, than allowed. For our
good works of themselves, be so vnpure and imperfect, mingled with Ipocrisy
and other ill affections, that they are not worthy to be presented before the
face of God, who does not esteem such untoward payments, in recompense of
eternal life. Notwithstanding, when they be done through faith, he does
accept them, in favor and for good will to his son our Lord Jesus Christ,
upon whose only deserts our faith rests, because in that respect, they
proceeded from the good tree, which is Jesus Christ, who works all our good
works in us.

So as the works of faith be good and acceptable unto god, for that they
proceed from Christ, as from the efficient cause which works them in us; but
they are full of uncleanness, and worthy to be rejected, in respect that they
proceed from us, who serve but as instruments (howbeit yet unclean
instruments) to do them. And therefore are they always defiled and spotted in
some sort: for Jesus Christ who works them in us, does make the^ good and
pleasing to God his Father: but yet they do gather somewhat of the filthy and
natural infection of us, who are the vessels wherein they be made.

Nevertheless, God is so good and gracious, that he not only admits them as
done by Jesus Christ his son, but also for his sake, does wipe away the spots
and uncleanness which are in them, and crowns them with many blessings: as
with prosperity of children, temporal welfare, help of friends in adversity,
moderation in prosperity, discretion, happy succes in affairs, and with many
other his benefits, wherein he does more and more show his great bounty and
gracious goodness by heaping upon us his blessings, as it were in recompense of
ye good works which he himself has wrought in us, and in making us to reap the
fruit of his own labor, and to receive the reward which he himself has
deserved.

But touching the great and inco^prehensible benefit of the gift of eternal
life, and of knitting us unto him self in everlasting happiness, he does not
give it us in any other respect, or consideration, tha^ only for the love of
his well-beloved son Jesus Christ. That was the cause why he would have him to
come down into this base world, and to take our nature upon him, and to fulfill
the law for us, and to bear our iniquities and greefes, and (at a word) to be
our Mediator, our redeemer, our high priest, our Shepherd, and our spiritual
king.

All which titles he has taken upon him, to save us and to be the only cause
of our everlasting felicity, and to knit and incorporate us unto himself, and
to make us partners for ever of his heavenly glory.

Yet may we not hereupon conclude, that we should not do good works, as
though they stood us in no stead to salvation: for they be fruits of faith:
and whosoever has the true faith, does incontinently show it by the good
fruits and effects which it brings forth in him.

And he that does no good works, cannot say that he has true faith. Besides
that, we also are sufficiently led to do good works, by the great number of
other benefits and blessings wherewith God crowns the^, as we have said
before. This is the su^me of the doctrine which the Protestants do hold
concerning faith and good works.

Whereby they yield wholly unto God, and to our Savior Jesus Christ, the
honor which belongs to him, as to the true and only cause of our salvation,
and of all the good things which we have and receive, as well Spiritual as
Temporal whatsoever they be.

We are saved only by God without any help of our selves.
It follows then acording to our first Maxim, that this doctrine is better
tha^ the doctrine of the Romish catholics, who affirm that by their good
works, they deserve Paradise, and all the other good things which God gives
them: and that these good works do partly proceed of themselves, and of their
own free will, and partlye of Gods grace: as if God alone could not save
them, if they helped not the matter by their own good works, which they hold
to be part of the cause of their salvation: which doctrine all men may easily
perceive to be repugnant to the nature of God. For seeing that he is altogether
and perfectlye merciful: it must needs follow, that those that be saved, be
saved wholly (and not in part) by his only mercy: which should not be perfect,
if ye effect thereof were not perfect and entyre. Notwithstanding, the
Catholics hold opinion still, that their good works are part of the cause
of their salvation, and that they be not saved by the only mercy of God.

Yea there are monks which take themselves to have such abundance of good
works in store, that they not only have ynow wherewith to merit their own
salvation, but also a great mass of overplus (which they call works of
supererogation Works superaboundant or of supererogation.
) to purchase the salvation of other men, but chiefly of such as do them good,
and give them liberally of their temporal goods: which doctrine (in very
truth) all such as love ye name of God ought to reject. For it is an utter
defacing of the benefit of our lord Jesus Christ, and an attributing of the
honor of our salvation, to the unclean works of sinners, whereas in deed, we
ought to attribute the same to the death and passion of the son of god who is
without sin.

Also it is to be discerned by Gods word, which of the two doctrines is the
truest and most ancient. For the Scripture does playnelye teach us, that we
be justified by faith, without the works of ye law, and so consequently by
faith only, when it says, To 3.20.23.
Wherefore no flesh shall be justified before him by the works of the law. And
it says in an other place, for you are saved by grace through faith, and not
of your selves: it is the gift of God: Not for works, Ephesians. 1.8.9.
least any man should boast of himself. And in an other place it is said:
Tit. 3.4.5.
He has saved us, not by the works of righteousness which we our selves have
done, but of his own mercy. And Saint Paul says in an other place: I esteem
all things as doong, so I may gain Christ, Phil. 3.8.9
and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness which is of the law,
but the righteousness which comes by belief in Christ.

Now, as there is no comparison betwixt the deserts of Jesus Christ our
savior, and the desert of men's good works, no more than is betwixt the
brightness of ye Sun, and a little spark of fire: so must we needs confess,
that our consciences do find without all comparison, far greater and
excellenter quietness in the righteousness of faith, tha^ in the righteousness
of good works. And in that respect does S, Paul say: To. 5.1.2.
Being then justified by faith, we have peace with God, through our Lord Jesus
Christ, By whom we have also access through faith, to this grace wherein we
stand, and rejoice under the hope of the glory of God.

But yet this faith which does iustifye us, may not be void of good works, for
then it were like the faith of devils: who believe that God has commanded the
contents of the ten commandments, but do quite contrary. For such a
faith will not justify us as S. James Iam. 1.12.
does teach us. And whereas the Catholics hold opinion, that we are justified
by the grace of Christ and our good works both together: Romans 11.6.
S. Paul does answer them thus: If it be of grace, then is it no more of
works, for then grace were no more grace. And if it be of works: It is no
more of grace, for the^ were works no more works.

And whereas the Monks bear men in hand, that by their good works of
Supererogation, they deserve Paradise for themselves and for their benefactors:
Jesus Christ does answer them himself, and utterly cast down their pride and
ouerweening, in that he says, Luke 17.10. Psalm. 143
when you have done all the things that are commanded you, say unto your
selves, we are unprofitable servants, we have done no more than we ought to
do. Neither may we say, that Jesus Christ does commau^d us to say so, to make
show of humility: for he who is ye truth it self, does not co^mau^d us to lie
for any intent, good or evil. And therefore it follows, that seeing he
commands us to say, that though we have done all the commandments (which
never any man did but only Jesus Christ:) yet were we but unprofitable
servants and god were nothing in our debt for it, because we have done
nothing but that whereunto our duty binds us: I say it follows that the
same is certain and true.

David also does witness that no man living can be justified before God. And
therefore it may be rightly said to these jolly doers of works of super
erogation, as Christ said to the Pharisees.

It is you that justify your selves before men, Luke 16.15.
but God knows your hearts. For that which is highly esteemed among men, is
abominable before God.

I know right well, there are many textes in the holy Scripture to prove, that
who so will enter into everlasting life, must keep the commandments of god,
and that those which have kept the commandments, shall possess the kingdom
of heaven: and yt those which have not kept them shall go into everlasting
damnation. But it is not to be inferred upon these textes, that a man may be
instified by his good works, for no man at any time does perform Gods
commandments to the full: But even the best of all do break them every day
many times. For what man is so arrogant as to challenge to himself such
sincerity of life, that he loves, and has always loved God with all his
heart: and his neighbor as himself, or has not wished somewhat that was an
other man's?

To be short, there needs no great disputation upon this point: for our
conscience does here accuse us, and of it self condemn us.

Now then, if no man can fulfill the commandments, It follows that no man
can have everlasting life by his own works, but must seek some other
justification than by works, if he will be justified before the face of God.
And in seeking an other justification, he comes to the righteousness of faith,
which is by imputation, through the free bestowed benefit of Christ. For, like
as if a poor detter that were unable to pay, were kept in prison for a det of
ten thousand crowns, and his creditor should tell him, that if he paid the
debt, he would set him at liberty, or else he should rot in prison: he had no
redier remedy, than to get such a surety, as would be so favorable and friendly
to him, as to pay the det for him, without trusting to his own substance, which
is utterly unable to discharge such a debt. In like sort, man, knowing on the
one side, that without performing the Law throughout, he is in danger of
damnation: and on the other side, that he is not able to perform it, has no
other shifte, but to repair to Jesus Christ, to take hold of his
righteousness by faith, to the end that the same may be imputed unto him, and
that by this means, his sins may be wyped out, and himself made capable of
eternal life.

And as it may truly be said, that that detter has well paid his debt, when
his surety has paid it for him: even so may a Christian say, that he has kept
and fulfilled the commandments of God, when he does assure himself through
faith, that Christ has fulfilled them for him. Thus should be understood
those textes of Scripture, which inioyne us to observe the commandments, to
have thereby everlasting life. And after that sort we should make them to agree
with the textes before alleged, which say that we cannot be justified but by
faith only. By which saying, every man of sound judgment may easily know, that
the doctrine of the Protestants is builded upon the pure word of God: and
consequently, that (according to our second Maxim) it is the most true and
ancient, and not to be called new, but of such as do not understand it.
Neither may the Catholics call this doctrine heretical, according to our
third Maxim, because it is ratified, even by their own Canons. c. Aduocaeuit
etc. vbi saua. 24. q. 1.
For thus says one of the Canons. Ciprian did call unto him the Bishop
Satyrus, and did think that there was not any true grace, saving that which
comes by faith. etc.

And an other Canon says thus: Look where is no faith, there can be no
righteousness, for the righteous lives by faith. etc.

There is another taken out of S. Augustine, which speaks yet more plainly,
saying thus: c. Vt euiden ter. 1. q. c.
The Lord purposing to declare plainly, that men's sins are forgeuen by the
holy Spirit, which he has given to the faithful, and not by their own
merits, says thus in a certain place: Receive the holy Ghost. And immediately
he adds, whose sins ye remit, their sins shall be forgeuen. As if he should
say it is ye holy Ghost that forgeueth sin, and not you,

Which Canon does show plainly, that the merits of good works, do no whit
justify us: and so consequently, that it is faith only without works which is yt
isntrumental cause of our justification, and the very efficient cause thereof
is Jesus Christ, working by ye holy ghost. And if the Romish catholics
themselves did well understand what they meant when they say and co^fes yt they
be saved by the grace of our redeemer: they would never depend any more upon
their good works and merits. c. Gratia. 1. q. 1.
For, (as says an other Cannon) Grace is not grace, if it be not freely given
and received.

Basil. lib. 1, de humilitate.
And hereunto accords the saying of Saint Basile: A man (says he) does then
glory whollye and throughlye in God, when he does not vaunt of his own
righteousness, but acknowledges himself destitute of the true
righteousness, and that he is justified thorough his only faith in Christ.
After the same manner speaks Saint Ambrose, Ambrose. in Psalm. 32. and ad To.
c. 3.14.
saying: David calls them right happy, whom God has determined to justify
by faith only, without any pains taking, or without their keeping of the law.

And in an other place, in expounding these words of the Apostle, freely
justified by his grace, he says thus: They be justified freely, because that
having not done any thing, nor requited like for like, they be justified by
faith only, which is the gift of God.

I could to this purpose allege many other canons and ancient doctors, but
these may suffice. For my purpose is not to build the doctrine of our reformed
Religion, neither upon Doctors, nor upon Canons: but only to rehearce and
allege some of them, to show unto the Romish catholics, that in condemning
the same so boldly of heresy, by the same means they unadvisedly condemn
their own canons and doctors. And because they do so greatly brag, that they
hold the faith of the Romish Church: I mean to prove that they do not so, The
ancient church taught no other doctrine than that of the Apostles. c. Rogamus.
24. q. 1.
even by their own Canons. Harken now, what a Canon says, in an Epistle
written by Pope Marcell to the bishop of Antioch. We beseech you dear beloved
brethren (says he) that you neither teach nor allow any other doctrine, than
that which you have received of S. Peter, and of the other Apostles and
Fathers. For he is the head of the whole Church, to whom the Lord said: Thou
art Peter, and upon this stone will I build my church, the seat whereof was
first established in your Country, and afterward removed to Rome by the
commandment of the Lord. etc.

Hereby it appears, that the faith of the Romish Church ought to be grounded
upon the pure and only doctrine of the Apostles our true Fathers: And that as
many as intend to follow that faith, must neither teach nor believe any other
doctrine. The Catholics then of these days, which still embrace so many
doctrines inverted by the Popes of our times, and by other superstitious men
long time after the Apostles and after Pope Marcell, (as Purgatory, and the
Mas, and an infinite number of other traditions) do no whit follow the faith
of the Romish thurch: which thing is most certain and true if ye have an eye
to the church of Rome that was in old time. For as for the church which is now
a days, wherein the Popes have patched up so many decretals and canons, and
brought in such an infinite number of new doctrines, not only differing, but
quite contrary to the word of God: I will not deny, but that the Romish
Catholics of these days, do follow the faith of that Church.

Of the things which the Romish Catholics do reckon and esteem to be good
works and are not. The fourth chapter.
I Have could you here before, that the Romish Catholics and the
Protestants, do disagree about the defining of good works. For the
protestants account those only to be good works, whch concern the obaying of
Gods commandments. But the Catholics do not only reckon those to be good
works, which concern the obaying of the commandments of God, but also those
that concern the obaying of the traditions and commandments of me^. Of which
traditions (say they,) some have been instituted by Jesus Christ and his
Apostles.

And because there is no mention made of them in the holy scriptures, they have
recourse to a distinction invented by the Sophisters, saying yt there are two
sorts of the word of God, the one written, and the other unwritten. The
sophisters make a double word of God, the one written and the other not
written.


And under this kind of the unwritten word of god, they would comprehe^d the
most part of their traditions. But this distinction is very easily answered:
Namely, that those traditions which they call the unwritten word of God, (as
holy water, Lent, the worshipping of the cross, the hallowing of altars, and
such other like) be repugnant to the written word of God: And that if there be
any unwritten word of God, the same cannot be repugnant to that which is
written, as these traditions be.

Also, it is to be found by the wrytings of Historiographers and other
Authors, who they were that first did set forth such traditions: and therefore
they are not to be fathered upon the unwritten word of God.

Thirdly, it is not to be denied, but that the written word of God is perfect,
and sufficient to salvation: And therefore that no article of faith ought to be
fathered upon ye vnwritte^ word, but only (at ye most) some such points as
concern the order and government of the Church. But yet under pretense of the
same distinction, the Papists think that to say and hear Mas, to sing and
say Suffrages for the dead, to give legacies and Offerings unto Priests, to
go on Pilgrimage to Saints, to offer Candles unto them, and to fall flat
before the Images of them, to abstain at certain times in the year from
eating of flesh, to live solitarily within a Cloister, and to wear their
Garments after some strange fashion, and other such like things, be good
works, and meritorious to gain Paradise. And the reason why they do reckon
all these things to be good works: is partlye because they do pretend that god
has commanded them by his unwritten word, (as before is said:) And partly,
for that (say they) it is a work of perfection, when one does not only all
that which God commands, but also more than he does command. For, by this
means they do so abou^d in good works that many of them do more than are
needful to salvation, and may therefore spare some part of them to other good
Christians, which do to few, in recompense of their temporal gooddes which
they receive of them. But hereunto the protestants do answer, that it is
sufficient for a man to do the commandments of God without charging himself
farther, since there yet was never man, that could perform them thoroughly, much
less do more. Notwithstanding, the Protestants grant it to be true, that
commonly men do more than they are commanded: but their so doing is but
sin, and in the mean while they leave the commandments of God undone. And
therefore, this doing of more than God commaundes, is not so great a virtue, as
the Romain Catholics esteem it to be.

For, seeing it is not to be denied, but that the commau^dements of God are
perfect, as the Author of them is perfect: so it must needs follow, that they
comprehend al good works, and so consequently that all such works, as are
repugnaunt to the word of god and his commandments, are not good.

Again, it is good reason, that we should esteem all things to be good,
which God commands, and account those things for ill, which he
forbids, without going any farther. For it is he that has set the difference
betwixt good and ill, and betwixt vice and virtue, and which has imprinted the
knowledge thereof in man's understanding, even from his creation. By reason
whereof, whereas we deem it good, to honor one God, to love our neighbor, and
not to do otherwise then we would be done unto: these and such like do proceed
and depend upon the ordinances of God, The destinction of good works depends
upon Gods ordinance.
which has set that order, and distinction in the things of the world.

So as by conseque^t, virtue is good, and vice is ill, because that God has so
ordained, and stablished that order in the nature of men. And therefore we
cannot call those good works which appear not to be good works by his word and
ordinance: neither may man's judgment so much presume of it self, as to term
that a good thing, which he is not sure to be so, by the ordinance of God.
For, to be desirous that God should allow those things for good, which our
fancy dremeth to be good, without having any warrant thereof by the ordinance
of God: were an imbasing of the Creator beneath the Creature.

By the doctrine of the Pope, the richmen may better gain Paradise then the
pore sort.
Moreover the protestants do say, that if a man might win heaven by these
pretended good works (as the Romish Catholics hold opinion:) it would then
be much more easy for the rich men to attain to it, than for for the poor.
For the rich have better wherewith to cause Masses to be said, and to be
liberal in giving to priests, and to maintain long journeys on pilgrimage,
and to buy good fish that they may the better forbear flesh in the lent time,
and to do such other like works.

So as by this reckning the gates of heaven should be open to the rich, and
shut against the poor: by reason whereof, the wealthy men should be happy
both in this world and in the world to come: and on the contrary part, the
poor should be unhappy, but that were against reason. For clean
contrariwise, it is certain that heaven is open rather to the poor than to
the rich, and that it is a hard thing for a rich man to enter into heaven.

And therefore the invention of these pretended good works (whereof do follow
so many and great absurdities) is in no wise to be allowed: But we must hold
our selves to the only ordinancee of God, to whom we ought to yield such honor,
as to believe that only those be good works, which he allows for good by his
commandments, and that those are not good works, which he allows not. For
in so doing we shall follow the best doctrine, which yeldeth God his honor due
unto him.

As concerning the other sort, It is easy to be proved by one only argument
which cannot be gaynsayd, that those works which are not agreeable to the
commandments of god, and to his word, are sin: and then muchlesse are they
good works. For all works that are done without faith are sin, says saint
Paul because it is impossible to please God without faith. Romans 14.15 Hebru
1^.6 Romans 10.17.
Now it is certain that faith must be grounded upon the word of God. Whereupon
it follows plainly that those works which have not their foundation in the
word of God, are sin, and so by consequence are nothing worth.

And therefore it stands the Romayne Catholics in hand, to show that their
pretended good works are allowed by the word of God, if they intend to prove
the^ to be good works in deed: Which thing they cannot do. Nay rather clean
contrariwise, a man may well prove that the scripture condemns them As
touching the mas, purgatory, and praying for the dead, we will speak of them
else where, and show that the doctrine of the Romish Catholics in those
points, is contrary to the word of God.

As for pilgrimages, seeing the end of them is to pray unto Saints, it
follows that they also are condemned by the word of God, which teaches us
to call only upon God, by the means of Christ our Mediator, as we have showed
before. Likewise, to knele down before Images of saints, and to make offeringes
unto them, is condemned by the second commandment, which forbids all kind
of Images, or to do unto the^ any kind of honor or service.

As touching monastical vows, Vows of poverty.
which consist in pureness, chastity, and obedience. It is also very easy to be
proved, that they be such works as are disalowed by the word of God, at the
least, in such sort as the cloysterers do use them. For, as for pouertye the
most part of them have but the visor thereof: for every body knows, that the
fairest, and richest possessions belong unto their Monasteries. And the proverb
which says, (he is as fat as a Monk,) does well show, that poverty has no
harbor among them. But admit that some of them (as the begging friars, called
also Limiters) make profession of wilful poverty in good earnest, and that they
live altogether by begging, yet is not that vow of theirs allowed of God For,
first of all, Deuteronomy. 15.4.
God forbids men to beg, and therefore in begging, they break his
commandment. I know they will hereunto reply, that they be forced to make
necessity a virtue to live by, because that otherwise, they should starve for
hunger, and so be murderers of themselves, wherein they should break the
commmaundement of God, which forbids to murder.

But ye answer hereunto is, yt their vow of poverty has brought them to both
those two extremities, that is, either to beg, or to suffer themselves to die
for hunger. And because in both these cases, there is a working against the
commandment of God, it follows, that that vow is nothing worth, forasmuch
as it leads them to the offending of God.

And, to speak of their vow of chastity, The vow of chastity.
which consists in not being married: the same is also repugnant to the word
of God. For, God has delivered us this general rule, from the creation of the
world, that it is not good for a man to be alone. Genesis 2.18. Mat. 19.11.
I will make him a help fellow to be with him, (says God.) And Jesus Christ
his son has taught us, that few folk can live unmarried, because all men
have not the gift of chastity, but only those to whom it is given of God.

And therefore Saint Paul commands all those which have not the special
gift of this chastity, 1. Cor. 7.
to take wives. The Monks then, and all the Romayn clergy (of whom, amongst a
thousand, there is not one that has this gift of chastity) do openly
transgres Gods commandment, through this vow of chastity, whereby they have
infected the whole world with all manner of whoredom, and villainy. But hereof we
will speak more heareafter, in entreating of Marriage.

And touching the vow of obedyence The vow of obedience.
it were very good, if they mente it of obedience to the co^mandments of God.
But they do not so understand it, (for to observe that vow, ye neded not to
separate them selves from other Christians, nor to shut up themselves in
Cloystars.) But they refer this vow of obedience, to they precepts contained in
their own orders. The most part of which precepts, consist in these points
following. That is to say, In wearing of strange fashioned Garments, much
differing from the common sort: In abstayning from certain kinds of meats: In
occupying themselves in contemplations: And in chaunting of mattinnes, and
euensong. All which things have no foundation in the word of God.

For, as touching the Monkishe weed, we find not, that Jesus Christ or his
Apostles, were apparrayled after any other fashion, than other me^. It is
therefore plain, that the diversity of the fashions of Monks garments was the
device and invention of those who were the first founders of their orders, and
therefore is not allowed of God. Math. 15.9.
For, Jesus Christ does teach us, that it is a vayn serving of God, by
observing the commandments of men.

Coloss. 2.20.
S. Paul also, does openly condemn all those traditions, which be of man's
own growing, and namely, those that concern abstine^ce from certain meats,
notwithstanding that they have some outward show of wisdom, devotion,
humility, and straitnes of life: For thus he says, If then you be dead with
Christ, as in respect of the trainments of this world, why do they burden you
with such obseruatio^s as though you lived to the world, saying unto you: Eat
not, taste not, nor touch not All which things being ordained by the
commandments and doctrine of men do go away with the use of them,
notwithstanding that they have a kind of outward pretense of wisdom and of
willing devotion, and a certain humility of mind for that they punish the
body, and have no regard to the cockering thereof.

As concerning the contemplations of the religious sort: they are condemned by
the fourth of the ten commandementes, which enioyneth every man to labor and to
get his living with the swet of his brows. And if the Monks reply, that by
their contemplative life, Moonkish contemplation.
they gain the knowledge of holy scripture: S. Paul answers them, 1. Cor.
13.2.
that it is to no purpose, to have the understanding of all secrets and all
knowledge, unless it be matched with charity.

And as for charity they can have no piece thereof by doing nothing else but
study, without making their neighbors partakers of the gifts that god has
bestowed upon them. And if they reply yet again and say, that there are many
moonkes which give themselves to preaching and teaching of the people: I
answer thereunto, first that not one among a hundred of the^ does so: and
secondly that such of them as preach, do against the profession of moonkes:
Moonks are forbidden to preach.
for by the Canons, a moonk ought to be always shut up in his cloister, and
not in any wise meddle with preaching or teaching. These are the very words of
the Canon. C. Monachus. C. Iuxta. 16. q. 1.
The office of a Monk is to weep and not to teach: for he ought to look for
the coming of the Lord with fear, mourning for himfelfe and for all the
world. And in an other place it is said thus: According to the tenor of the
good counsel of Calcedon, we give co^ma^dement as well to the Moonkes of S.
Benets order, as to other religious persons, to keep themselves within their
cloisters, that they stray not abroad in Cities, Castles, and Towns: and we
charge them to forbear preaching to the people in any wise, saving only to
such as are willing to take their habit upon them for the remedying of their
souls health.

Seeing then that it is against the profession of Moonkes to preach, it
follows, that they cannot justify their contemplations to be good, under
pretense that some of them do deal with preaching, for as much as in so
doing, they do against their general profession. And, as for their
watchinges, Mattines, Euensong, and such other Services, whereto they bind
themselves by their vow of obeoience: we will speak of them hereafter. It is
enough for me at this present, to have showed in few words, that the works
whereunto the Monks do bind themselves, as well by their vow of obedience, as
by their other vows, cannot be called good works, because they be to far of
from the word of God.

It is also to be proved by the Canons, yt these pretended good works, be
neither good, nor merytorious. And first, as touching their garments, the
Canons do curse and ban all such as repoze any holiness in them. The habit of
Moonkes has no holiness in it.
So that by the sayings of those Canons, we ought to abhor all kind of
Moonkes: For all of them account themselves to deserve somewhat at Gods hands,
by their wearing of yt kind of apparel, and of those shirtes of hear next
their skin: and that they should do ill, if they should wear such garments
as other men do. These words here following be the very words of the Canon,
which is a chapter of the counsel Grangrene. If any man think him self to be
the better furthered to chastity, by his wearing of the Moonkes cowle, or take
himself to be the more righteous for it, and there upon hold scorn of such as
modestlye wear hoods and other attyres after the common fashion, Cursed be
they.

And touching their vow of abstinence from meats, the ancient Canons speak
thereof in such sort, as generally they allow of sobriety, without prescribing
of any abstine^ce, more from flesh then from fish, These be the express
words of the Cannon.

For there is nothing so delectable, as meats well dressed and digested, Nor any
thing better for our health, or for the sharpning of our wits, or for the
preserving of our bodies from sickness, than sober and moderate feeding: for as
suffizance nurrisheth us, so does it also maintain us, in good plight and
pleasures:

By this Canon it appears, that moderate diet is so commended, as that we
must have a regard to our health, and not appayre it either by to much pyning
of our selves, or the eating of meats that are contrary to our health. And in
good sooth, the same Canons do likewise witness with us that, to abstain from
iniquity, is the true manner of keeping and observing the Lent, and that
therein consists the perfection of fasting. These be the very words of the
Canon.

It is a great and general fast to abstain from iniquity and unlawful
pleasures of the world, C. Ieiunium de Consec. did. 5.
and that is the most perfect kind of fasting in this world. For we observe
the Lenton fast, when we live honestly, keeping our selves from iniquity and
unlawful delights. And truly (as says an other Canon) men's prayers and
fastinges are nothing worth, C. nihil prodest de panit, did. 3.
if the ill life be not amended.

Upon this point of abstynence from meats this history which Eusebius
recites is worthy to be noted. In the time of the Emperor Mark Antonius,
there was a great persecution of the Christians in Vienna nigh unto Lions. Among
others two noble personages named Alcibiades and Attalus were put in prison.
Alcibiades did punish himself greatly in prison through his to great
abstinence, eating nothing but bread and salt, and drynking nothing but water,
forbearing to eat either flesh, or any kind of meat. Where upon it was
revealed unto Attalus that Alcibiades did evil in forbearing to use the
creatures of God, and ministered occasion of offense to the other christians.
Which thing when Attalus, had told to Alcibiades, Alcibiades began to eat of
all kinds of meats without any kind of scrupulosity, and gave thanks to God,
being persuaded so to do (says Eusebius) by ye same spirit which had revealed
it unto Attalus. It is also a very notable thing, which we read in the history
Tripartite, Lib. 9. cap. 38. The diversity that was in old time, in the length
of Lent and in the keeping thereof.
concerning ye great diuersitye which was used in old time, in abstayning from
meats, and in keeping of lent.

For in ancient time, the Romayne Church did make their lent of three weeks
and no more. And all Greece Slauonia, and Alexandria made it of six weeks.
And neither the one nor the other did make their lent of fortye days, as it
ought to have been in following the signifacatio^ of the word. Moreover some of
them did abstain from all things that had life: Other some did eat only
fysh: And some others (which were not of the grossest diet) did feed only on
flying souls and fish, and did eat neither beef, Mutton, nor other such gros
flesh.

There were some other so scrupulous, as they would eat neither eggs nor
whitemeate. And others, which were not scrupulous at all, did eat of all
kinds of meats, saving that upon the fasting days, they would not eat til
late toward night. All which diversities (says the historye) were in those
days practiced in sundry churches, without finding any fault, or chalinging
one an other for so doing. Whereby it appears, that the christians which lived
in those days, were of much greater modestye, than those which have lived in
our days, in whom we have seen all kind of cruelty, in burning and
persecuting of such as have not followed the traditions and superstitions that
are observed in the Romish Church.

As touching Pilgrimages, Pilgrimages
They also are reproved in their Cano^ law. For every body knows, that
amongst the Romayne Catholics, the pilgrimage to Jerusalem to visit the holy
Sepulcher, is highlye esteemed, as most holy, denoute, paynefull, and
meritorious, And yet for all this, a certain Canon says, C. Gloria. 12. q. 2.
It is nothing worth to have been at Jerusalem, but to have lived well there.
These be the very words of the Canon taken out of S. Ierom. It is not a thing
worthy praise (says he) to have been at Jerusalem, but to have lived well at
Jerusalem.

And as touching contemplation (whereby the Moonkes would color and
maintain their idle life, The Moonkes of old time did labor for their living.
C. Nunqua^ de consec. did. 5.
) their own Canons do openly condemn them, saying, that Moonkes ought to
exercise themselves in tilling the land, in dressing of gardens, in graffing of
fruit trees, in making of nets to catch fish, in copying of books, and
finally in following the example of the Be, which never cease to be doing of
somewhat.

And the same Canons do also witness, that in the monasteries of Egypt they
never received any Moonk, but upon condition that he should labor: Not so much
for his own necessitye, that he might have whereof to live, as to keep their
minds from wandering about evil Imaginations. In so much that we read that in
old time, there was in Egypt a good Abbot named Serapion, Hist. trip. lib. 8.
cap. 1.
which had under his charge ten thousand moonks, (which is (...) so little
allowed and lyked of poverty, as that they be very full of husba^dly ordinances,
for the well governing of the goods and riches belonging to the Monasteries:
Insomuch that there is a Canon, which condemns a certain kind of people for
heretics, which termed themselves Apostolical, (as followers of the
examples of the Apostles) in making profession to have nothing private of their
own. And therefore, by this Canon, a man might say that all beggars are
heretics.

And who does not see the infinite number of abuses, which are crept into the
order of Monks in protes of time, against the ordinances of the Canones. For,
C. Si cupit. and C. Placuit. 16. q. 1.
(says the Canon) if thou desire to be a Monk, that is to say a solitary
person, as thou do name thy self: What do thou in the City, which is no
place for solitary people, but for such as should haunt company?

And another Canon following, says thus: Let the Monk be contented with his
Cloister. For like as a fish does die as soon as he is out of the water, even
so does a Monk when he is out of his Cloister. Therefore, let him be solitary,
and hold his peace, for he is dead to the world but alive unto God.

But yet for all this, do we not see how the Monks are planted in the best,
and greatest Cities, and in the fairest places of them, and in exceeding
Princely and stately houses, whereas in ancient time, they were contented to
dwell in wild fields, and Forrestes, and in little Cabonets, builded in the
corner of some Rock? Shall not a man meet them now, at all hours, in every
street, in markets, and pleading places, in Innes, in fields, in towns, and
in Castles, in stead of being within their Cloisters?

Furthermore, the Monks in old time, of what sort so ever they were, did eat
no flesh No Monk ought to eat flesh.
at all, but followed the ordinance of the Canon, which says thus: It is not
lawefull for any Monks, either to eat, or to taste of flesh: Not for that we
esteem the creature of God to be ill, C. Carnem de consecra. did. 5.
but for that we judge it meet and necessary, that Monks, should abstain
from flesh, excepting only those which be sick. Now then, if it happen that
any Monks breaking the ordinance of this ancient rule and custom, dare
presume to eat flesh, let him be shut up and kept as a close prisoner, by the
space of six months to do his penance.

See now, how the Monks were brideled by their own Canons, but the most part
of them have since that time, broaken their bittes. For, now there are none,
but the Monks of the charterhouse, the Celestines, and these new come
Capusmes, and Smoke Monks, which will observe that canon: and yet their
observing of it, is (for the most part,) but in outward show, and Ipocrisie.

Truly, if there were no more but this to be found fault with, in the order of
monkery, the matter were not great. For, christian liberty gives every man
leave, to use all kind of meats, which God has created for man's use, so
that he take it moderatly, with thanks giving. But the cause, that led me to
speak of this point among the rest, is to show, that the Monks of these
days, do not observe their ancient Canons.

And by the Canons also, C. Sanctim. 20. q. 1 Of Nuns.
in ancient time, it was unlawful for any Nun to take the veil, and to
profess her self a Nun, unless she were above forty years of age. But in these
days, they be forced to take it upon them, being but thirteen, or fourteen
years old, whereof, the world sees what good huswifery insueth. And as
touching the pouling of their heads when they cause the^ to take the black
veil: it is not so small a fault, as many esteem it to be. For, by the word
of God, 1. Cor. 11.6
women are commanded to preserve their heir in token of subjection. And
according hereunto, it is forbidden by a Canon taken out of the Council of
Gangra, that any woman should poule her head under pretense of Religion. These
are the words of the Canon. C. Quecunque. did. 30.
If any woman cause her head to be pouled in respect of Religion, cursed be she
as a breaker of the Law of subjection, because long hear is given unto women
to cover them withal, and to put them in mind of their subjection.

And whereas in these days, it is thought so strange a thing amongst the
Romish Catholics, that a monk or a Nun should marry, That Monks and Nunes may
marry.
(because it seems that in their so doing, they break the vow of virginity
which they have made unto God:) they declare herein, that they have not well
read their own Canones, by ye which, such marriages are allowed: Namely, by one
Canon taken out of S. Augustine, as a witness of the Council, C. Quidem did.
27.
which says thus. Some say, that those which marry after the taking of the vow
be adulterers. But I say unto you, that those do sin right grievously, which
do separate such married folks.

Yet notwithstanding, we have seen many Laws here in France, which have
disanulled the maryages of priests, Monks, and Nuns, and constrained them to
return to their Cloisters, a thing quite contrary to this Canon.

The self same doctor S. Augustine does also show, De doctrina Christiana.
lib. 4. Virginity is not to be preferred before honest marriage,
that they have done greatly amiss, which have so highly commended virginity,
as to prefer it before marriage, saying that virginity did fill the heavens,
and marriage the earth, which was the cause of the sounding of so many Nunries.
For, he excuses S. Ciprian, and S. Ambr. of their so great praising, and
exalting of virginity, saying thus: Whereas Ciprian the martyr has written of
the behavior which ought to be in virgins, he did it not to intise the^ to
make vows of virginity: but Ambrose the Bishop, (through his great
eloquence) sought to inflame their desiers thereunto. Truly, both the one, and
the other have sore rebuked those women, which go about to grace, or rather to
disgrace themselves with painting of their faces: The abhominablenes of such as
paynt their faces.
against which sort, Ciprian (amongst other things) says thus: If an excellent
painter, had well, and lively counterfayted a man's face and body, and
afterward, another unskillful paynter would needs take upon him to ouerpainte
the same again, undoubtedly, the former paynter should have great cause to
find himself grieved, and iniuryed. And think thou (daughter) to escape
the punishment of God, who has fashioned thee, when thy damnable rashness
dares presume to control Gods paynting, by thy paynting? For, be it that thou
art not unchaste, and whorish to the worldward, yet, notwithstanding, thou
through the whorish intisements of thy paynting art wors than the very strumpet
and adulteres, forasmuch, as thou have corrupted, and marred Gods workmanship
in thy self. Whereas thou do it to beutefie and to trim thy self, it is
nothing else, but a corrupting of Gods workmanship, and a defacing of the truth.

Harken here to the voice of the Apostle who warns thee thus. Purge your old
leaven, that you may be made new dough, without leaven: For, Christ our Easter
Lamb is offered up for us: Let us therefore make good chere, not with old
leaven, nor with the leaven of naughtines, and malice: But with unleavened
bred, that is to say, with the bread of sincerity, and truth. For, what
continuance in sincerity and truth is there, when the thing that was pure, is
defiled, and when the truth is changed into untruth, by false culler, and
painting with slabersauces. Thy Lord does say unto thee, Thou can not make
one of thy hears, either black or white. And yet thou, to ouermaster the word
of thy Lord, will thou needs seek to clime above him, by thy treacherous
contempt, and ouerbold dealing? Thou paintest thy hear, and by evil ha^sel of
the thing that shall happen unto thee, do frizel thy head with fire.

Ambrose also, does speak thus against these counterfaite paintings: From
thence (says he,) spring intisements to vice, namely, that women do paint
their faces with color made for the nonce: In so much, that by the coloring of
their countenances, with the filth of their painting, for fear to displease
men, they purchase to themselves the stayning of their chastity. What a folly
is it to change a natural face, for a painted face? For, in fearing the
judgment of their husbands, they lose their own judgment, because that such
as will needs change the shape and fashion which God has given them by
creation, do condemn themselves: and in seeking to be well lyked of others,
do first of all mislike of themselves. What better judge of thy foulnes (thou
woman) can there be, than thy self, that art so loath to be seen in thy own
natural likeness?

If thou be fair, why do thou hide thy self? If thou be foul, why
do thou belly thy self, in desiring to seem fair, and by thine own fault,
make thy self worthy of blame, as well in thine own conscience, as in the
opinion of others?

The same Ambrose, speaking of virgins, does set down unto them, (under
example of a perfect virgin) of what behauior our virgins ought to be, What the
ma^ners and behavior of virgins or maidens ought to be.
saying: There was a virgin, which was a virgin not only in body, but also in
mind: who by no outward show, did at any time corrupt the sincerity of her
affection. She was humble of heart, sober in speech, wise in understanding, of
few words, given to reading, not putting her trust in the uncertainty of
riches, but in the prayers of the poor, earnest in her work, shamefast in her
talk, seeking God and not man to be the judge of her heart, not doing wrong to
any, wishing well to every body, honoring all her elders, not envying her
equals, void of boasting, following reason, and loving virtue.

Has this virgin at any time offended her Parents in word or deed? when has
she been seen to be at any jar with her neighbors? when despised she the
poor? when mocked she the lame? or when shrunk she away from the nedy? Her
only care has been to haunte the company of such men, as are accompanied with
mercy and honest shamefastnes. There has not passed her one suspicious look,
nor dallying word, nor any unshamefast iesture. Her pace has not been
uncomely, nor her voice loud, or over shrill. But, to be short, her outward
behavior has always been the representer and Image of the goodness of her
mind: for, a good house ought to be known by his entry, and make show at the
first, that there is no darcknesse in it, but that the Lamp which is within,
does shead forth his light to the outer parts.

What shall I say of her moderate feeding, and of the great abou^dance of her
duetifull doings? In the one, she passes Nature, and by the other, she
oppresses it. She lets no time slip, without doing some good. And her
sobriety is such, that she doubleth her fasting days, and when she has
desire to eat, she makes her meal of the first meat that she meets with,
which she takes alonly to keep her self alive, and not to pamper her self
for pleasure. By these words the meaning of Ambrose, is not to encourage
maidens to vow virginity, but to show of what behavior they ought to be,
which have already vowed it.

Hitherto I have rehearsed the very words of S. Augustine, who does allege the
forewritten sentences of S. Ciprian, and S. Ambrose to show that they esteem
not so much the vow of virginity, as the good behauior which ought to be in
both those, which be vowed, and in the others also. And it is to be noted, that
in the saying of S. Ambrose, above written (which speaks of the manners,
duties, and behauiors of the virgins which have vowed virginity) there is no
mention made of any of the hipocritical, and superstitious Ceremonies, which in
these days, are observed by the Nu^s. He descrybeth them at large, and (as it
were by peecemeale,) what they ought to be, and in what sort they ought to
busy themselves, and wherein they ought to spend their time: and yet in all
this, there is not one word spoken of their Popeholines. But contrariwise,
whereas he says, that the vowed virgins, (which now a days be called
professed) ought to be diligent in working, to beware of disagreeing with their
friends and Neighbors, not to withdraw themselves from the nedy, to frequent
only such men as are merciful, and shamefast, and to be of countenance and
behavior sober, and not nice or wanton.

It appears thereby evidently, that in those days, they were not shut up in
Monasteries, but kept their vow of virginity, in living in houses of their
own, or else with their kinsefolk, exercising themselves in all good works, of
godliness and virtue. And now that we have spoaken sufficiently of Nuns, let
us return again to the Monks.

A prohibition of the inuenting of new orders of Religion.
It is to be noted, that in the year 1273. in the time of Pope Gregory the
tenth, there was a Counsel holden at Lion, whereby was confirmed the
prohibition made in the Council of Lateran under Pope Innocent the third in
the year 1215, which forbad ye devising of any more new orders of mo^ks, or
habites of new religion, (whereof there had sprung up a marvelous sort since
that time,) and all new religions which had been invented after the said
Council of Laterane, were disanulled and forbidden. What shall we then say of
the smokymonkes, the Jesuits, and the Capussins, which are grown since that
time.

To conclude, neither the Monks of old time, nor those which have been devised
alate, nor their vows, nor their works, have any ground in the word of God,
neither do they behave themselves according to their own Canons.

Of the commandments of God. The v. chapter.
THe difference betwixt the Romish Catholics and yt protestants touching the
commandments of god, The Pope has defaced and wyped out the second of the
ten commandments.
is not small. For the protestants accuse them (or else the Pope) to have wiped
out the second commandment, which forbids Images: and to have cut the last
commandment into twain, to make up still the number of ten.

And truly it is a great treachery, and a presumption utterly intolerable, to
have been so bold, as to raze a whole commandment out of the law of the
living God. For if ye mark well the commandments which the priests pronounce
in the saying of their common Mass: ye shall find that Immediately after the
first commandment, (which is, Thou shall honor but the one God, and love him
perfectly) they have put the third commandment, which is, Thou shall not take
the name of the Lord thy God in vain, and have wiped out, and ouerskipped the
second commandment, which does forbid to have Images or to honor them.

Which thing has been done of purpose by the Pope and his Adherentes, that
they might the more easily fill the temples of the Christians unawares, with
Idols and Saints of both kinds, to draw unto themselves offeringes and
obuensions, and other like things, as may be seen by the sequel thereof. So as
in this point, the doctrine of the Romish catholics is contrary to Gods word
and commandment: for God says, Thou shall make to thy self no graven Image,
nor the likeness of any thing, nether shall thou do any honor unto them.

Contrariwise the Romish catholics uphold, that it is lawful to have Images in
Churches, (as they have) and to knele before them, and to offer up candles and
ince^se to them, and to put of their Cappes unto them. Is not this I pray you,
a direct encountering of Gods ordinance, and a tra^plinge of it under foot,
and a robbing of the creator of his due honor, to bestow the same upon stones
and stocks? A fo^d distinction beetweene worshipping and serving
For if they say that they worship none but only God, and that ye things
which they do to the Saints, and to their Images, is but a serving of the^,
according to their own distinction of worshipping and serving: The answer
herunto is both ready and very easy, namely, Venerabiles de consec. did. 3.
that first their own canons, which allow the honoring and seruinge of Images,
do use the self same term of worshipping, saying that Christians ought to
honor and worship Images.

And as for their distinction of worshipping and serving, it can in no wise
serve to excuse the^. First because it does not follow by force of that
distinction, that it is lawful for them, under that pretense, to wipe out one
of the commandments of God.

Secondlye because this distinction of worshipping and serving is fond and
foolish, chieflye in the Application, which they make thereof. For they say
that they honor God with the honor that belongs to worshipping, and that they
honor the Saints with the honor that belongs to serving. Now who is so very a
fool, that he does not perceive, how by this means they humble themselves
more in their honoring of Saints, than in their honoring of god. For he does
more imbase himself which serves, than he which worshippeth or honoreth. For
as we commonly see, great lords can find in their hearts to honor mean
personages, to whom notwithstanding they will not vouchsafe to submit
themselves to do them any service.

De ciuitate Dei. lib. 5. cap. 15. lib. 6. c. 1. lib 7. c. 32. lib. 10. cap. 1.
and 4.
But yet moreover, this distinction is false: As S. Augustine proves, who says
that worshipping is always taken in the Scriptures for service: So as by that
reckning, worshipping and serving are all one thing. And in very deed, both in
the Scripture and also in the books of the ancient doctors, those two words
are names of one self same thing, and signify both one thing without
difference. And as for the honoring of Images, Au. de doctr christ. lib. 3 cap.
7.
the same doctor, who never hard of the distinction of worshipping and serving,
does utterly condemn it, saying that those be greater Idolaters which worship
the Images that are made by the hands of men, Than those which do worship the
Son, the heaven, the sea, and the other creatures which are made by the hand
of God.

Again the Protestants say also, that the Romish Catholics have corrupted
the third commandment. How the Papists deface the 3. commandment.
For by the same, god does forbid men to take his name in vain. But yet does
he not forbid to swear by his name, when the oath is not in vain, (as when
a man is brought to affirm a truth before the Magistrate) But does command
that in such case, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
a man should swear by his name. And truly, when in such an earnest matter men
affirm the truth: it is an honoring of God, who is the truth it self, to
take him to witness, and it is a dishonoring of God and a despising of him, if
they swear by any of the creatures. Yet notwithstanding, the Romish
Catholics permit men to swear in judgments upon the relics of S.
Anthony, and by the heesayntes and sheesayntes and other creatures which thing
their own canons do condemn. C. considera. c. Tu malu^. c. Siquis. 22. q. 1.
Consider (says a Canon) that our Savior has not forbidden us to swear by
God, but forbids us to swear by the heavens, by the earth, by Jerusalem, or
by thy head. An other Canon says thus. Thou do not amiss in using an oath
well: for although, that of it self it be not good to swear: yet
nevertheless, it is necessary, when a man is to be persuaded in a truth There
is an other canon which punishes those that re^d god in pieces, by their
strange oaths (which now a days are but to much used) saying thus: If any man
swear, by the hears or by the head of God, or do use any such like blasphemy:
If he be of the clergy, let him be deposed: and if he be a lay man, let him
be accursed.

The Protestants say farther that the catholics have so corrupted the fourth
commandment, The Papists have corrupted the fourth commanodeme^t
as that (by all likelihood) their meaning was to have made it quite away, as
they did the Second. For God says in his Law, six days shall thou labor,
and do all that thou have to do, but the seseuenth day is the sabbath of the
Lord thy God. etc.

And the Romish Catholics do contrariwise say, that in some weeks we ought
not to labor past three or four days, or five at the most, for the rest (say
they) of the six ought to be imployd idly, in keeping them holy and
feastfull to the saints.

I pray you tell me, is not this a manifest impugning of the sacred and
inviolable commandment of God our creator? Is it not a setting of the^ selves
directly against his holy will? I know well it may be said, that in the time of
the old law of Moses, they did make more resting days than the seventh, which
was called the Sabbath day: As the feast of the Tabernacles, of Trumpettes, of
unleavened bread, of Easter, and such others like. But the answer hereunto
is, yt such feasts were commanded by the express word of God. And be not
those feasts which are celebrated in the Romish Church. Otherwise in all the
said feasts of the old law, the people did not loyter from their work. yea,
and even in the Christian primative Church men might work in tillage upon the
Sunday, Men may work upon the Su^daies
as it appears by a law made by the Emperor Constantine, Which says thus.
L. Omnes. 3 C. de Ferijs.
Let all Judges, Citizens and handicraftes men, forbear their work upon the
honorable day of Sunday: But let it be free and lawful for the husbandmen to
labor in tilling the Earth, (for often times it happens, that on the other
days, the weather serves them not so well to sow their corn and to dres
their vines) least by ouerhipping so small space of time, they might lose the
commoditye given them by the heavenly providence. Given the second day of
March in the year of the second consulship of Crispe Constantine

But there is a Canon taken out of S. Gregory, which proceeds yet further and
says moreover, that those which teach to abstain from work upon the Saturday
and Sunday, be teachers of Antichrist. These are the very words of the Canon.
C. peruenit. de consec. did. 3.
It is come to my knowledge, that certain people of peruersse disposition,
have sowed among you some points of doctrine contrary to the holy faith,
commanding men to abstain from working upon the Sunday: whom what else may we
call than preachers of Antichrist, who at his coming will cause men to rest
from all labor, both upon the Saturday and Sunday too.

This Cano^ does plainly condemn the doctrine of the Papists, which hold
opinion that men ought to do no manner of work upon the Sundays nor on the
holidayes throughout the whole year. The protestants do, (in deed) confess,
that the Sunday ought to be employed rather in the service of God, than in any
other kind of travel. And that it is good to observe yt order, to the intent
that by resting on yt day, folk may be the better able to go through with
their work upon all the other days of the week: But to bind men's consciences
to that order, were no better than to make them Jews.

And although the Romish Catholics find fault with men for laboring upon
the Sundaies and the other feastedayes: yet do they suffer usurers and
merchants to use their traffic, and to make bonds, bargains, contractes,
paymentes, and receipts of money upon their holidaies So as it is commonly
seen, that the times which are chosen for the making of Obligations and such
other bonds and bargaynes, be the Sundays, and the other feastdaies: And that
the times appointed for payme^ts of money, are generally upon the feastdayes.

And yet if now a days, any poor protestant should labor six days of the
week in the fields, or in his shop to obey God and to maintain his poor
family: by and by they will cry out that he is an heretic, and worthy to be
burnt or banished. And why so? Is it heresy to obey God? Now when when men use
such speeches, is it not all one, as if they called virtue, vice: and white,
black? Therefore let them hardily know, that their spewing out of such
speeches, is against God himself, who will one day well cause them to feel
his terrible judgment, and make them know that he is ielous of his honor, and
a revenger of the despite done to his commandments. The ninth commandment
also is corrupted by the Catholic sophisters, The Papists corrupt the ninth
commandment
for God does utterly and simply forbid to lie: And they are of opinion, that
it is lawful to lie for a good intent: And not only to tell a lie by
reporting some untruth, but also to break both promise, and oath to: Which is
contrary to natural reason whereby the law of all nations has been brought
in, which wills that both the public and private promise should be
religiously observed and kept for the maintenance of human societye.

And it is also contrary to the word of God, which not only reproves liing,
but also threateneth the liar with damnation, and commands us to keep our
promise, even though it be to our own disadvantage. Also it is contrary to
the canon law, which says that all kind of lies are sin, and that we ought
to keep our oath and promise, Promise and faith ought to be kept inviolable to
all men.
even with our enemies against whom we make war. C. primum. 22. q. 2. C.
Noli. 13. q. 1.
For as the Canon says expressly: Men ought not to seek peace to the end to
make war, but to the end to gain peace. And I would to God yt the Romish
Catholics had well observed these Canons. For then had not we frenchmen fallen
into the calamities, and ruin which we now be fallen into.

The other commandments likewise, have been greatly corrupted by these
Sophisters, The seventh Commandment corrupted by the Papists.
which name the^ selves catholics: As namely the seventh commandment,
(which forbids Adultery) has been corrupted by the goodly counsel of
Tollette, and by Isodorus which says thus: A christian may not have two
wives, C. Christ. did. 34. c. meretrices. 32. q. 4.
nor more than two: but one only. But if he have not a wife, he may have a
Concubine: which doctrine the Pope and his vpholders have Canonised and
confirmed: thereby the better and more easily to maintain their shameful
Lechery, notwithstanding that the seventh commandment, and also the ancient
Canons prohibit all dwelling or matching together of man and woman, saving
only in marriage.

Wherefore, (for a conclusion upon this point,) it appears openly that the
Protestauntes retain Gods Commandments in their pureness and soundnes,
without taking aught from them: whereby it is evident to be seen, that their
doctrine is the best, the auncientest, and the fardest from error according to
our foresaid maxims

Of the Sacrament of Baptism. The vi. chapter.
ALthough the Romish Catholics hold opinion that there are seven
sacraments: yet not withstanding to avoid tediousnes, we will speak here but
of two: That is to say of baptism, and of the Lords Supper.

As touching Baptism, the Catholics and the Protestauntes do well agree in
the principal points: which is, that it ought to be done in ye name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy ghost, with the sign of water.

But they do differ very much in the other points and ceremonies: for the
Catholics believe that if a child dye before he be baptized, he cannot be
saved: and that in case of necessity, women may Baptize. And they would have
Baptism ministered with coniured water, such as had been kept all the year in a
vessel, (which they call a font) within the Church: affirming that the evil
sprites be coniured to go out of the bodies of the little Infants which are
baptized: And yt they must be held all naked over the font in the time of the
christning, and that both salt and spittle should be put into the mouths of
ye babes: Al which things the Protestaunts do utterly disallow because as
touching the infa^ts which die unchristened, if they belong to Gods election,
(which goes both before their natiuitye and also before their conception) they
be with him and are partakers of his salvation, although they die unbaptized.

For Gods election cannot be disapoynted. Besides this it is not their fault if
they be not baptized, but the negligence of their Parents, or by chance of
soden death.

And as concerning women, their sect and nature does exclude them from public
charges, which only belong unto men. And therefore are they altogether unmeet,
either to preach in Churches, or to Minister the Sacraments. And touching the
children of Infidels, it is not reasonable to receive them into the church to
be members of christ, until they acknowledge him to be their head, and make
cnofession of their faith, and consequently be of convenient years, because
that being borne of unbelieving Parents, they have no warraunt or witness, that
they belong to the covenant of God. Neither do the protestants allow the
forementioned ceremonies: And their reason is, for that they believe that god is
the only cause whereof and whereby we receive the benefit of generation, and
the remission of original sin in baptim, without the aid of hallowed water,
or of any of the other Ceremonies. Nay, which more is, they take it to be a
defiling of the holy baptism, to add thereunto any other ceremonies then the
institution of God, and that it ought to be ministered purely and simply,
according to his ordinance. For we ought to do this honor unto God, namely
to believe that whatsoever he has ordained is perfect, and yt thereto there
ought nothing to be added, nor aught taken away. And therefore it does appear,
that in this point of Baptism, the Doctrine of the protestants does much
better yield God his due honor then does the doctrine of the Catholics.

For the Protestants mind not to restrain the election of God to those only
which are Baptized, but do extend it to the children of the faithful,
forasmuch as it is a thing very reasonable to be believed, that if the fathers
and moothers be of the household of God, their children are so likewise. But
the Romish Catholics do hold on the contrary, yt the children which die
before they be baptized, be not of the household of God, although their Fathers
and moothers were.

Again, whereas the Catholics enable women to baptize (which they call
christening Women ought not to baptize children.
) in doing whereof they commit unto them one of the chief charges in gods
house, to wit, the ministering of the sacrament whereby we be graffed into the
body of Christ's church, and made the members of his body and meyny of his
householde:) The Protestants will not grant to admit women into any of the
public charges in Gods household, specially seeing that even by the civil
laws, (which in that point agree with the law of nature) women be disabled to
take upon them the executing of any public office, even in the houses or
dominions of earthly princes. Moreover whereas ye catholics, (as much as in
them lies) not only receive such into the church by baptism, as are
faythles and have no knowledge of Christ, neither they nor their Parents, but
also bestow baptism upon bells after such a manner as they the^ selves have
invented for it: The Protestants cannot find in their hearts to defile Gods
house so much, as to receive infidels into it, or to avowe those to be the
members of Christ, who have no faith in them, neither themselves, nor their
Parents, for as much as it were to unseemly a thing to avow such a one for a
member of a body, as acknowledges not the head there of.

Finally, the Protestants yield this honor unto holy Baptism instituted by
God, that they will in no wise add any thing to it besides gods ordinance, nor
defile it with spittle, oil, salt, coniured water, and such other Ceremonies,
As the Romish Catholics do. Besides this, the word of God does teach us,
Math. 19.23. and Exo. 20.6. and 1. Cor. 7.14.
yt Christ received little Children which were not Baptized, and that he
pronounced of them, that the kingdom of heaven does belong unto them, and that
God does promise his blessings unto all the faithful, and to their children,
yea even unto the thousandth generation. So as those infantes shall nevertheless
be saved (though they dye unchristened) seeing they be comprysed in the
covenant of God.

Math. 18.9. Hebru. 9.4.
The same word does also teach us, that Christ gave commission of baptising and
preaching, not to the holy virgin his mother, nor to any other of the women
that resorted to his Sermons: but to his Disciples, and Apostles. And therefore
women ought not to take upon them to baptize, seeing that (as says the
Apostle) None ought to usurp any charge or degree of honor, Act. 8.37.48.50.
Gal. 3.27.
without lawful calling thereunto. And the same word does declare further unto
us, that those, which do not believe in Christ, nor come of believing parents,
ought not to receive Baptism, forasmuch, as baptism is no other thing, but the
zeal of faith.

And lastly, the same word of God does teach us, that in the time of the
Apostles, The manner of baptising in the time of the Apostles.
Baptism was always ministered with common water, That is to say, without any
charm or particular blessing. Mat. 3.6 and John. 3.22
For the Apostles and disciples of Christ, did baptize men on the banckes of
Rivers, or in the first water that they found fit for the purpose. Also it does
teach us, that God is the God of the faithful and of their Children: Genesis 17.7
Deuteronomy. 5.10
So as little Infantes begotten and brought forth of believing or faithful
Parents, do belong to God and to his covenant, even from their moothers
womb: And so by consequence, their bodies, (as is aforesaid) cannat be
possessed with ill spirits. And therefore it is needles to drive them out by
coniurations, as the priests of the Catholics do. Likewise the Protestants
say also, that to hold the tender babes all naked over the font, (specially in
winter) is often time a cause of their death, and that those which do practice
that Ceremony, be often guilty of murder, which is forbidden by the
commandments of God. Likewise they disalow ye salt the oil, the spittle,
and the other ceremonies, as well for that they cannot but be hurtful to the
little children, as also because they be filthy and fo^de ceremonis, and have
no ground in the word of God. Salvation depends not upon baptim.
Also it appears by the canons, that the salvation of men does does not
depend wholly upon Baptism, but principallye upon faith. These be the very
words of the Canon.

C. Baptism etc. cathecum. de consec. did. 4.
S. Ciprian, (to prove that the torment of death may stand in stead of
Baptism,) has grounded his argument upon these words of Christ spoken to the
unbaptized thief, This day shall thou be with me in Paradise. In the
examining whereof more narrowly, I find that not only the suffering of death
for the name of Christ, but also the hearty believing in him, and the confessing
of him, may supply the want of baptism when the party is so distressed by some
extremity of time, as he cannot have the sacrament of batisme ministered unto
him. And there follows an other Canon, which says that if a learner of the
Catechism, (that is to say) such a one as is but newly entered into the
doctrine of the faith, and is not yet baptized) do suffer marterdome for the
name of Christ, he fails not to be saved, although he want Baptism.

And the reason hereof (as says the same canons) is, because that in this case,
such as have not received the sacrament of Baptism, have not wanted it through
pride or disdain, but through inforcement of necessity.

In likewise it is forbidden by the Canons, that women, C. Mulier de cons.
did. 4.
(how wise so ever they be,) shall either preach or baptize. It is true, that
hereunto they do ioyn this one exception, (which is) if it be not in case of
necessity. But if it be granted, (according to the truth) that the Infants
which dye unbaptized, be not therefore excluded from salvation: It follows
well, that no necessity can be great enough, to dispe^se with women for
intermedling themselves with the administration of the Sacraments.

And truly in old time, C. duo tempora. de co^sec. did. 4.
(as the canons do witness) Baptism was not ministered ordinarily, but only at
two times in the year, namely at Easter, and at Whittesontyde: which well
bewrays that they used no such haste, as that women should be feign to
meddle with the matter. C. Baptizados. de consec. did. 4.
Likewise it does also appear by the Canons, that Baptism was not ministered
to the infidels, but only to such as had faith, and did make confession thereof
when they were of age to do it. And as touching the forementioned Ceremonies in
deed there are some Canons, (how be it of the worst stamp) which do allow the^.
But the best and most ancient canons, do utterly dissallow the^ For by the
ancient Canons, men are permitted to baptize in Rivers, in ye Sea, in
fountaynes, and in every other place commodious for that purpose.

C. celebritatem de conse. did. 3
These be the words of a Canon taken out of ye decrees of Pope Victor: Let the
Gentiles that are come to the faith, be baptized in all seasons and all places
fit for them, be it in River, sea, or Spring, as being made clean by
confession of the Christian faith.

And by an other Canon it is well showed, that we ought rather to rest upon
the Baptism of the covenant of faith, than upon the Baptism of water. C.
verus etc Non dubito de consecra. did. 4.
For it says thus: The true baptism does not consist so much in the washing
of the body, as in the belief of the heart, as the apostolic doctrine does
teach us, saying: They make clean their hearts through faith. And in an other
Canon going before, it is said that a catholic not Baptized, A man may be a
catholic when he is unbaptized.
(for it presupposes that one may be a catholic without being baptized)
which has an ardent zeal of divine charity, is to be preferred before a
wicked man that is baptized. As for example, (says the Canon) Cornelius the
Centener who was filled with the holy ghost before he was baptized, is to be
preferred before Simon Magus, who was possessed with an unclean Spirit after
he had been Baptized.

But if Cornelius having received the holy ghost, had not been willing to be
baptized, he had been grievously guiltye of the despising of so excellent a
sacrament.

By which canon it is easy to judge that we ought altogether to depend upon
that which the sacrament does signify unto us, and upon the graces which god
does thereby give unto us and not to set our minds upon a sort of
superstitious and vayn ceremonies as the Romish catholics do in these days.
For they may easily perceive by the things aforesaid, that the doctrine of the
reformed religion touching the sacrament of baptism, is better, more ancient,
and further from heresy, than theirs is, according to our three maxims here
before set down to prove the points which are in question. Let us now speak of
the supper of the Lord.

Of the Sacrament of the holy supper. The vii. chapter.
THe difference betwixt the Romish Catholics and the Protestants concerning
the Supper of the Lord, does consist in three points. The one, in the naming
thereof: for, the Catholics call that the keeping of Easter, which the
Protestants do name the Supper of the Lord. But this diversity of speaking
imports not much, for both of them are still a celebrating of the mystery of
our redemtion. True it is, that the Catholics use the manner of speaking of
the old Testament: according to the phrase whereof, the feast of Easter (that
is to say the passover) was celebrated by the eating of a Lamb, which did
represent Christ, in remembrance of the deliverance of the people of Israel,
whom God had brought out of the thraldom of Egypt. But the Protestants use
the manner of speaking of the new Testament, whereby the holy institution which
our Lord Jesus Christ ordained to celebrate the remembrance of his death and
passion, and to make us partakers of his body and blood, is called the supper
of the Lord. But we must not strive about words, so it be known that to keep
the Easter, and to celebrate the Lords Supper, are at this day one self same
thing.

The second difference (which is much greater) consists in the substance of
the Sacrament. For, the Catholics (at leastwise the schoolmen) uphold, that
as soon as the priest has spoaken the words of consecration over one hoaste,
or over many, they change their nature presently, and are transubstantiated
into the very body and blood of Jesus Christ, in the selfsame greatness and
bigness that it was upon the cross: so as the bread of the host is the^ no
longer bread, although the color, and the taste of bread remayn still therein.
Their proof of this doctrine is, that when our Lord Jesus Christ did institute
his supper, as he gave the bread to his disciples, he said unto them: This is
my body. And in giving them the cup, he said unto them: This is my blood. They
prove it also by a Canon, C. Ego. de constable. pise. 2
which begins thus. I Beringarius, etc. which Canon says in express
words, that after the consecration, the bread and wine become not only
sacraments, but also the very body, and the very blo ud of Christ. And that the
priest does sensibly handle the same very body, and break it. And that the
faithful in eating the Sacrament with their mouths, do crash, and crush
between their teeth, the very natural body of our Savior.

And upon this doctrine they conclude, that we ought to worship the bread of
the supper, which they term the holy host. Because (say they) it is the very
body of our Lord Jesus Christ. But the Protestants allow not this
Transubstantiation of the bread into flesh, nor of the wine into blood, nor
consequently, the worshipping of the^, as though Jesus Christ were personally
enclosed within the compass of the boast. For they say, that every Sacrament
is called a Sacrament, because it is a sign of a holy thing. In so much that
the outward sign is to be conceived by the eye: and the thing signified (which
is inward and spiritual) is to be conceived by the mind: And that therefore in
the holy supper, the bread and the wine are the signs which we see with our
eyes and receue with our mouths, but the body and the blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ be the things signified, the which we comprehend and receue by the
mind, as true spiritual food ordained to feed the soul and not the body.

Now, to receive and eat this spiritual meat, and to cause it so to digest
in our souls, which are spirits, as it may give them such nourishment as may
make them live everlastingly like as the food it self and our souls that
receive it are spiritual things: so must the eating thereof be spiritual
also. And to make this spiritual eating to become effectual: we must not
imagine that our souls are removed from hence, and conveyed up to heaven, nor
that God leaves his place in heaven, to come down to us hear below: for the
mind of man does well execute his works, though the thing that it works
upon, be far distant from it. As for example: we see how it does truly and
effectually understand the things that are far from it by distance of place,
by means of the ability or power of reasoning, which serves it as an
Instrument to join it to the thing that it works upon, how far of so ever
it be by distance of place. And even as reason serves the mind as an
Instrument to couple it to the thing that it ameth at in understanding: even so
likewise does faith serve the mind for an Instrument to receive and take hold
of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, in the spiritual meat and
drink: notwithstanding that he be in heaven, on the right hand of his father,
from whence he will not come until the last day.

This manner of eating then, which is done spiritually by the means of faith,
is no less real, than if it were done carnally by the mouth of the fleshly
body, because the spiritual actions of the mind be no less real and true,
than the corporal and fleshly actions of the body, which are perceived by the
eyes.

The third difference touching the supper, does consist in the manner of
receiving it. For the Catholicques (I always mean ye scholedeuines) do hold
opinion, that the lay people (that is to say those which are no priests)
ought not to communicate, but only with the sacrament of bread, And that the
priests (as being more worthy) ought to communicate both with bread and wine.
And yet least the lay people should be difcontented with this partage, they say
that the body of Christ is not without blood, but that the blood does always
accompany the body, and that so by consoquence, the lay people in receiving the
sacrament of the body, receive also the sacrament of the blood. They hold
opinion also, that the priest ought to receive this holy sacrament every day:
And that it is sufficient for the lay people to receive it once a year, and
that it is not sufferable that they should touch the sacrament with their
bare hands. But the Protestants do in no wise allow such parting of it, nor
yet their fond shift of consequency, but hold opinion that the holy sacrament
(as well of the blood as of the body of Christ) ought to be distributed unto all
the faithful, without any distinction of lay people or priests, because that
otherwise the supper of the Lord should not be celebrated whole, but by
halfedeales: And therefore yt it is good and necessary to receive it as often as
they may, that men may be the oftener put in mind of the excellent misterye of
our redemption, and be made partakers of the heavenly food which gives
everlasting life to our souls. Likewise they say that in as much as Christ
said, Take ye (which is referred to the hand) and Eat ye (which is referred to
ye mouth): the faithful ought to receive the Sacrament into their own hands,
and the custom of the Primitive Church was to receive the sacrament with their
own hands, Eccle. hist. lib. 6. cap. 33
as witnesses Eusebius.

Thus you see in effect what the doctrine, as well of the protestants as of the
catholics is, concerning these three points of the supper of our Lord,
which are in controversy amongst them. Absurdities that follow
Transubstatiation.
And now may a man easily judge by comparing the one doctrine with the other,
which of the^ does best yield god his due honor. For if the bread were changed
or transubstantiated (as the Catholics term it) into the very body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ: it should follow by their doctrine, that he
should come every day down from heaven, to be handled and eaten of a Million of
Priests, and to be bruised and crushed betwixt their teeth: yea, and that he
might also be eaten of mise, and gnawen with worms, which are things to much
against reason, and too too intolerable to be heard. For it were a thing very
unbeseeming the majesty of the son of God, to be so commonly conueid through
the hands, Mouths, and Bellies of so many Priests, full often foul and
filthy both in body and soul: And that his precious body should be subject to
be eaten of mice, and gnawn with worms. And therefore the Protestants do best
yeald Christ his due honor, for that they uphold that his body is gone up into
heaven, and there sits at the right hand of his father, and that from thence
he neither does nor will remove, until the last day when he shall come to judge
both the quick and the dead. And therefore that our worshipping of him must be in
heaven, and we must lift up our hearts on high, and not worship him in the
priests hands or in the pix. Likewise, they much more honor the supper of the
Lord, than do the Catholics, because they do so often celebrate the same,
and that not by half deals, but wholly, utterly abhorring the broosing and
crushing of the flesh and bones of our Savior betwixt their teeth, as a
doctrine more meet for the barbarous people of America and the Canibals, than
for Christians. Neither will they (say they,) believe the contrary of that
which natural sense does teach us, that is to say, that the things which we
see with our eyes, and taste with our mouths to be bread and wine, should be
flesh and blood. No nor that neither which is contrary to the order of Nature,
namely, that accidents should have an abiding without a substance fit and
convenient for them to be in: or that a natural body of a man, may be enclosed
in so small room as the bigness or roundnes of an host, for these things are
contrary to nature. And if the Catholics reply that God is almighty, and able
to do these things: the Protestants do answer, that doutlesse he is of power
to do whatsoever he lists, In so much that because God will neither sin
nor lie: we say he can neither lie nor sin. But our Lord meant so little that
his body after his glorification should receive unnatural qualities: that
clean contrariwise he would have his Apostles to judge by the sense of their
sight and feeling, that his body was a true and perfect natural body, and not
an imagined body. And although the effects of the Sacrament be things divine,
and supernatural: yet are they not contrary to nature, as those are which
depend upon the doctrine of Transubstantiation. Neither can it be proved by the
word of God, that the Sacraments or any other of the ordinances of God,
contain any thing contrary to nature.

This doctrine of the Protestants touching this Sacrament, is also evidently
grounded upon the word of God. For first of all, we do say and believe
according to the articles of our faith, that Jesus Christ is ascended into
heaven, from whence he shall come, not ten thousand times a dry, but only once
at the last day, when he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. Which
thing S. Peter declares very openly, when (in speaking of the last coming of
our Lord) he says thus: Act. 3.21
Whom the heavens shall contein until the full setting of all things in
perfect state, which God has foretold by the mouths of all his holy
Prophets, that have been since the beginning of the world.

And Jesus Christ himself also did well give us to understand, that we should
not believe that his body after his ascension should every day return hither on
the earth, nor remain shut up in boxes, when he said to his disciples, which
found themselves grieved at the shedding of a little ointme^t upon his body:
Mat. 26.11
You shall not have me always with you. And yet notwithstanding we must
believe, that by the efficacy of his grace, he will always be with us, as he
declared to his Apostles, in sending them throughout the world to preach the
doctrine of his grace, saying unto them: Behold, I am always with you, Mat. 28
even unto the end of the world. And we must furthermore consider that the body
of Christ was made in all points like unto the bodies of other men (except
sin) as the scriptures do witness: Hebr. 4.17.
In so much that it has ever had, and still has at this present, a certain
measure of greatness and thicknes, as the bodies of other men have. Whereupon it
follows of consequence, that his body neither is, nor ever has been, in any
mo places than one at one time.

And therefore when he celebrated his holy supper with his Disciples, the day
before he suffered his death and passion, his body which sat at the table, was
not in ye bread which he gave the^: for the nature of a true body does not
permit it to be in any more places than one at one time. And if they reply that
a glorified body may be in many places at one instaunt: the answer thereunto
is, that the body of Christ was not the^ glorified but mortal, at the time
when he celebrated his holy supper, and was put to death the day after, Math.
17.2.
and that the words of the holy supper cannot as now be true in any other
sort, than they were when he spoke them and instituted the Sacrament. And
therefore this replication is impertinent, and besides that it is untrue: Luke
24.39
for the body of Christ, has not through his glorification, lost the qualities
of a perfect body, which is to be felt, to have flesh and bones, and to be
contained within the compass of certain bowndes. And therefore when he
celebrated the holy supper, his body was not in the bread which he gave to his
Disciples, and much les was the bread transubstantiated into his body. Whereof
it follows, that these words of Jesus Christ, This is my body, This is my
blood, ought to be understood sacrame^tally, as if he had said, This is the
sacrament of my body and of my blood: because that (as is aforesaid) ye nature
of a very true body in deed, permits us not to understand, that every
morsel of the bread which he gave to his disciples was his own natural body.
Also ye words which S. Luke and S. Paul use in speaking of the Sacrament of his
blood, Luke 22.20 1. Cor. 11.25.
do well declare that it is so to be understood.

For they say not that Christ said This is my blood: but rather this cup is the
new covenant in my blood. Nevertheless we must think it all one with the
other speech, where it is said this is my blood, or else should S. Luke and S.
Paul be contrary to S. Matthew and S. Mark, which were ungodly to believe So
that if it be granted (as truth is) that to say this is my blood, is as much as
to say this cup is the covenant in my blood: It follows plainly that this
manner of speaking, ought to be understood of the sacrament of his blood, or
of the sacrament of the new covenant of his blood, which is all one, and
comes all to one sense.

For the bread and the wine of the supper, are the sacraments of the body and
blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the new covenant which he makes
with us: because yt in receiving this sacrament with our mouths, our souls do
also participate and receive spiritually and really, the thing signified, which
is the body and blood of Christ, in which participation consists the
covenant which he makes with us.

And in very deed, Io. 6.51.53
Jesus Christ him self in speaking to his disciples of the eating of his flesh
and of the drinking of his blood: (yea and of the supper it self as the
Catholics expound it,) perceiving them to be offended thereat, told them
that it ought to be understood of a spiritual feeding, and not of a crusshing
of his flesh and his bones betwixt their teeth, nor of a ca^niballike kind of
drinking of man's blood, as the catholic scholemen of these days do
understand it. Neither ought it to seem a more strange interpretation of
these words this is my body, to say, this is the sacrament of my body, tha^ to
make the same interpretation of a great sort of other figurative speeches
contained in ye scripture.

As for example, where Christ says I am the vine, John. 15.1. John. 10.9. 1.
Cor. 10.4 Exo. 12.43. Genesis 17. 13. 1. Cor. 12.12 Ephe. 1.23.
and my Father is the husbandman, I am the gate. And again it is said the
rock was Christ, The Lamb is the passover, The circumcision is the
covenant, The sacrifice is the clensing of the law: and Christ is the church.
For out of question, all these textes are to be interpreted figuratively. Thus
may you see that the doctrine of the Protestauntes touching the holy sacrament
of the supper, is grounded upon the pure word of God.

But now as touching the canons. The Catholics think, they make altogether
for them, and for the upholding and maintayning of their transubstantiation, as
in deed there be of them which do, and chiefly the canon before alleged,
which is an abiuratio^ that pope Nicolas caused to be made at Rome, by one
Beringarius c. Ego Beringarius de consec. did. 2.
a deacon of the church of S. Mawrice of Angiers: by which abiuratio^ they
enforced this poor man of Angiers to say and protest, that he renounced the
doctrine that he had holden aforetime whereby he had maintained that the bread
and wine of the sacrament remained bread and wine still after the consecration,
and that the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ could not be handled with
the hands of men nor, eaten with their teeth: Declaring that contrariwise, he
there allowed the doctrine of the Romish church and of pope Nicholas, that is
to wit, that after the consecration, the bread and the wine do change and
transubstantiate themselves into the very body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and that the priest in putting the sacrament into the mouths of the
faithful, does sensibly handle Christ's very body it self, and that the
faithful do crowze and crashe it betwixt their teeth. But against this goodly
abiuration racked by pope Nicholas and a hundred and fourtene bishops out of
this pore Deacon whom they held amongst them in their claws, there are many
other canons to be opposed, which are of a better stamp. Thus says one of
them which is taken out of S. Augustine, where he interprets these words of
the Lord, c. Prima quidem de consec. did. J.
The words which I have spoken unto you are spirit and life: meaning of the
eating of his flesh and of his blood. These words (says he) are spirit and
life to those that understand them spiritually: But to those that understand
them carnally, they are neither spirit nor life. You shall not eat this body
that you see, neither shall you drink the blood which they shall shed that
shall crucifye me: the thing that I commend unto you, is a sacrament: If you
understand it spiritually, it will quicken you the fleshly understanding
thereof avails nothing at all. Afterward he concludes thus: The Lord shall
be still above until the end of the world, but yet in the mean while his
truth shall remayn here amongst us. For it must needs be that the body wherein
he is risen again, is in a place certain, but his truth is spread every where
throughout the world. And to show that the flesh of our lord is not crushed so
betwixt the teeth as Beringarius says in his abiuration: here is an other
canon taken also out of S. Augustine, which says thus. c. Vt quid paras
deute^. de consec. did. 2.
To what purpose do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly? believe and thou
have eaten: for to believe in the Lord, is to eat the bread, and to drink the
wine, who so believes in him, eats him. And an other Canon following says
thus. That which is seen and perceived with the eyes, is the bread and the
cup: c. Qui man ducant. de consec. did. 2.
but as in respect of says (which seeks to be taught) the bread is Christ's
body and the cup is his blood. And because the receiving of the sacrament is
spiritual: It follows, that at that supper the wicked receive but the signs
only, and not the things signified, which are the spiritual meat of Christ's
body and blood.

And the same is auowed by an other Canon which says: c. Qui discordat. ibidem.
He that agrees not with Christ, eats not his flesh, nor drinks his blood,
though he receive the sacrament to his utter undoing and damnation. By these
Canons it appears plainly that transubstantiation is reproved and condemned,
and so by cosequence the local worshipping of the body of christ in the
sacrament of the bread and wine. But before I pass out of this matter. I will
allege one text of S. Augustines, Au. de doctr Christ. lib. 2 cap. 10.16.
which is so clear and fit to confute this transubstantiation, as is
possible. For first of all, (that men may learn to know what manner of
speeches in the scriptures are to be taken figuratively and what are to be
taken according to the letter) he sets down this rule which is a very
notable one. If there be any thing (says he) so spoken in Gods word as that it
can not properly agree with the comelines of good manners, A rule whereby to know
figurative speeches from plain speches.
nor with the truth of faith: you must take the same to be figuratively
spoken. Afterward to make this rule plain by examples, he says these very
words. If then the manner of speaking be a precept, so as it forbids any
crime and misbehauiour, or commands the thing that is good, and behoue full:
such manner of speaking is not figurative. But if it seem to command an evil
fact, or to forbid the thing that is good and behouefull: then is it spoken
figuratively. Unless you eat the flesh of the son of man (says our Lord)
and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you. By this manner of speaking
he seems to command a cruelty and an evil fact, in eating of his flesh
and drinking of his blood, therefore it is a figure whereby we be commanded to
become partakers of the passion of our Lord, and to imprint gentlye and
profitably in our memories, that his flesh was ma^gled and crucified for us.
The Scripture says likewise. If thine enemy hunger feed him, if he be a
thirst give him drink, no doubt but in this case he commands a good deed.
But whereas it follows, for in so doing thou shall heap coals of fire upon
his head: forasmuch as thou may think that he commands a malicious deed:
doubt not but that this manner of speech is figurative, and that those words
may be taken two manner of ways, the one to do hurt, the other to do good.
Thou ought therefore rather to construe them according to charity than
otherwise: and by those burninge coals, to understand the burning sighs of
repentance, whereby the pride of the party is healed, in that he repents
himself to have been an enemy to such a one as releeueth his misery and
necessity. Also it is written, who so loves his soul shall lose it. Now, It is
not to be thought that he forbids so requisite a thing as the saving of a
man's own soul, but that this speech ought to be taken figuratively. He
shall lose his soul, that is to say, he must suppress and forsake the froward
and untoward dealing, whereunto his mind is now given: by means whereof he is so
greatly wedded to these temporal things, that he has no regard of the
everlasting things. Again it is also written, Show mercy and receive not the
sinner. The latter part of this sentence seems to forbid a good deed, for
it says, receive not the sinner. Understand therefore that this is spoken by a
figure, taking the sinner for the sin, to the end that thou admit not any
sin.

Thus have you heard the very words of S. Augustine, which do very well
declare unto us (as well by the rule as by the first example which he sets
down) that the eating of ye flesh and blood of christ in his supper, ought to
be understood spiritually and sacramentally, and not after the manner of the
cannibals (which is utterly void of all humanity and good manners) as those
transubstantiatiers would make us believe.

And whereas the catholics uphold, The supper ought to be received in both
the kinds.
that this sacrament ought not to be distributed unto the lay people but by
halfes (which they do term under one kind) the same is expressly condemned by
their own canons, as hie treason toward God. For you shall here what a canon
says, which is taken out of the decrees of Pope Gelasius.

It is done us to understand, c. Comperimus. ibidem
that some having received the holy sacrament of the body, do abstain from the
cup of the holy blood, which thing they ought not to do: for in as much as it is
evident, that in so doing they entangle themselves (in I wot not what a kind of
superstition) they ought to receive the sacrament whole together, or else to
abstain from it altogether. For the dividing a sunder of one self same
mystery, can not be done without great treachery. And furthermore where as the
most part of the lay catholics, do content themselves with the receiving of
the sacrament only once a year, (which is at Easter) they are condemned by
the canons, which declare that those are not to be taken for catholics, which
receive not three times in a year. These be the very words of a cannon taken
out of the council of Agatha. c. Seculares ibidem.
The lay people which receive not the Lords supper, at Christmas, at Easter,
and at whitsontide, let them not be taken ne reputed for Catholics. Thus may
all men perceive and judge, with what manner of passion these catholics are
carried away, which do so boldly condemn the Protestants as heretics for
their doctrine concerning this point of the supper of the Lord, and so do
spitefully name them Sacramentaries, as though they denied this sacrament. For
in so doing, they do also unawares condemn their own ca^nons, which otherwise
they esteem so greatly, that many of them do attribute more authority unto
those Cannons, than to the holy scripture: saying that they be the
determinations of the holy mother church, whereunto they ought to stick because
the scripture is to obscure, and may be taken both ways. But indede it is
nothing so: for the scripture has but one sense, which is easy to be found out
of a man that is willing to learn by conferring one text with another. But the
cannons are in many cases quite contrary one to another. I know full well that
too shift off these contrarieties, the schole men say that we must always hold
us to those that were last made. But I answer them that that is as much to say,
as we must always hold us to the worst. For every man of sound judgment may
always easily perceive, that the ancient cannons are better than those of
latter time.

And further, to abate the authority of their canons by their canons themselves
I say, that the cannons do will us to search the understanding of the obscure
textes of the scripture, in the scripture it self, And those which seek it
elsewhere, are the very scholemasters of error. These are the very words of a
cannon. What is more ungodly, c. Quid autem. 24. q. 3
than to hold an ungodly doctrine, and not to believe those that are most wise
and learned? But all such do fall into this kind of ignorance, as make not
their recourse to the words of the Prophets, to the writing of the Apostles,
and to the authority of the Evangelists, to learn the knowledge of the truth
in any obscure point, but will needs trust to their own wit And therefore they
become scholemaisters of error, because they list not to be disciples of the
truth.

Which cannon in very deed, does deeply in few words condemn the
scholedeuines that make more account of the authority of ye Cannons and doctors
of the church, than of the very text of the scripture, which they account to be
to obscure. And true it is, that some textes of the scripture, are in some
places very dark: howbeit there is no text so obscure, but it may be made
plain by other textes of the same scripture, Specially if they resort (not to
the cannons and decretalls, but) to the Hebrew text for the the old testament,
Aug de doc. Christ. c. 11.
and to the Greek text for the new testament, as S. Augustine does teach us,
who says in this wise. C. vt veteru^ did. 9.
Such as understand the latin tongue, must for the better understanding of the
whole Scriptures, have the knowledge of two other languages more: that is to
wit, of the Hebrew, and of the Greek, to the end they may have recourse to the
very fountain of the original coppies, when the diuersitye of the Latin
rranslations does breed any doubt. And hereto accords a Canon which says
thus: Like as the truth of the things that are contained in the old Testament,
ought to be examined by the Hebrew books: Even so the truth which is written in
the new Testament, ought to be made plain and clear by the Greek books.

I beseech you what can be braied aagaynst this Canon, by the whole herd of
these Asses, which are so bold as to say, that the Hebrew and Greek tongues be
the Languages of Heritickes, and therefore do utterly reject and condemn
them. Do they not by the same means, condemn the canons and ancient doctors?
And if they condemn them: Are they to be holden for good Catholics?

Well: let us come now to speak of the Mass.

Of the Mass. The viii. Chapter.
THe difference betwixt the Mass and the Supper of our Lord is great. For, the
Catholic schoolmen which understand what the mass is, (for all of them
understand it not) do say, that it is a Sacrifice, whereby the Priest offers
up the body and the blood of our Lord Jesus Christ unto God, for the soul
health, both of the quick and of the dead: Which Sacrifice is accompanied with
diverse other parcels as accessaries: that is to say, with diverse prayers, and
diverse texts taken out of the gospels and epistles of the new Testament, and
with diverse verses taken out of the Psalms of David, and other books of the
old Testament, and interlarded throughout with many and diverse Ceremonies. And
this goodly omnigatheru^ has been patched together at many and Sundry times,
by diverse Popes. And that is the cause why the Catholics do put the mass
among the commandments of their holy mother Church. For this commandment,
Thou shall hear mass upon the Sondayes, and upon other feastfull days
enjoined, is the first commandment of the Church of Room. But asfor the
supper of our Lord, It is no sacrifice, but an holy bancket, which is prepared
to put us in mind of thonelye and sovereign sacrifice, whereby our Lord Jesus
Christ himself was once for all sacrificed for our redemption, and to make us
pertakers of his body and blood, by the spiritual and effectual eating
thereof: So that there is noe more lykenes between the celebrating of the
Lords supper and the celebrating of the mass, than is betwixt giving and
taking, which are things far differyng, For, in the supper, the faithful
receive the body and blood of Christ: but in the Mass, the Priest gives, or
offers up Christ wholly unto God the Father, as an host of sacrifice.

Now it must needs be granted, that in this point of the Mass, the
catholics and the Protestants do utterly disagree, And that the same
disagreement is the principal cause, why the Catholics do so extreemely bate
the doctrine of the said Protestants. For they esteem the mass to be one of
the principal points of the Christian religion, and therefore think it very
strange, that the Protestants should be so bold as to reject it, sith it has
dured so long time, and is composed of so many good things, drawn out of holy
Scripture, the which the Protestants seem to reject, in reiectyng the texts
that are taken out of it.

In deed these reasons give some likelihood whereby to judge so, without
hearing the other party. But if the Catholics will use a little patience,
and here the replies of the Protestants: they shall not find them so void of
reason as they think. For first they say, that the only sacrifice, whereby
Christ himself was sacrificed once for all, is more than sufficient for the
salvation of the whole world. Yea and though he had shed but one only drop of
his precious blood upon ye cross: It had been sufficient to have satisfied the
Justice of God his father, and to wash away the sins of all men, which
should be borne into the world in an hundred thousand years, if the world should
last so long, for that inasmuch as he was the son of god, the dignity of his
priesthood and the infinite greatness of his Sacrifice, are of sufficiency and
worthiness enough and more than enough, to do away the innumerable sins of
all men hitherto borne, or hereafter to be borne. And therefore it is great
outrage (say the Protestants) to our Savior, to crucify him new again (as
they do in the mass) to obtain remission of sins, and life everlasting, for
the quick and the dead for it is all one, as to say, that his only once
sacrificing of himself, is not sufficient to take away our sins, and to
obtain us life everlasting, because that if they held it for sufficient and
perfect, (as in truth it is) it should follow, that it were in vain to do it
any more.

And is it not a great blasphemy, to say that the oblation and sacrifice of the
death and passion of our Lord Jesus Christ is not sufficient for the salvation
of the whole world? Truly it is not to be douted, for although it be nether
auailable nor appliable to any other, than to such as believe in him: yet
notwithstanding his sacrifice is more tha^ sufficient to save all the world.
And furthermore whereas the Catholics (at the least wise the simple common
people) imagine that the Protestants in rejecting the mass, do reject the
holy Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, they deceive
themselves greatly: for contrariwise, the Protestants hold the same sacrament
in his true perfection, as we have showed in the Chapter going before.

Neither do they reject the textes that are stuffed into the Mass, and be
taken out of the holy Scripture: But they like much better to read and learn
them in the bible it self, than in the Massebooke. Neither do they reject the
good prayers which are mingled in the Mass: but they say it is much better to
pray to God with a contynual prayer, for Princes and Magistrates, for the
Shepherds of the church, for the necessities of all the people, for the
remission of sins, for those which are sick and afflicted, for the
conservation of the faithful, for the inlightening of the ignorant, and for
the advancement of the kingdom of Jesus Christ, as they themselves do: than
to say an Oremus or particular prayer for every of these things as the Priest
does in his mass, which says now one Oremus for himself, and by and by
another for the Pope, and (...) a third for his benefactors, and for those that
are departed, and often times for brute beasts, as is done in the Mass of S.
Anthony.

For besides that the most part of the prayers in the mass be not allowable by
the word of God: It is certain that men pray more heartily, more advisedly, and
with greater zeal when the prayer is continued to the end without interruption,
than when it is said by iumps with often interruption.

Besides this, the people which do harken to the Priests Oremus, cannot set
their minds well upon the prayer which he is saying, because they understand
it not, nor often times the Priest himself.

To be short therefore, by this doctrine of the Protestants, God is better
honored, than by the doctrine of the Catholics. For the Protestants in not
admitting any other sacrifice than that which our Lord Jesus Christ himself
did make of his own body upon the cross, which sacrifice they esteem to be
very sufficient and perfect for our salvation, do thereby yeald the honor and
the effect of our felicity, unto our Lord Jesus Christ only: whereas the
Catholics do attribute part of his honor to the Priest, and part to the
sacrifice of the Mas.

Likewise the Protestants do much better honor God, in learning the texts of
Scripture in the Bible it self, which is the very original Record of his
will: than those which will needs learn them in the Massebook, where they be
confusedly packed and unaptly applied. The only sacrifice of Christ is our
salvation.
And now to show that the doctrine of the Protestants (which admit the only
Sacrifice of Christ, and reject the Sacrifice of the Mass) is evidently
grounded upon the holy Scripture, there needs no other witness than the
Apostle to the Hebrews, For, first he does testify unto us, that there is none
other Sacrifice for the remission of men's sins, but Jesus Christ only, and
that he himself by his own blood, has obtained for us an everlasting
redemtion: For thus he says: Christ being become the high Priest of the good
things that are to come, Heb. 9.11.12
by a greater and more perfect Tabernacle not made with hands. That is to say,
not of this building, nor by the blood of Goats and Calves, but by his own
blood, is entered in once into the holy place, and has found eternal
redemtion. And to the end we should not think that Christ is no more a Priest,
but that although he was once a Priest, yet as now he has resigned that office
unto others: The Apostle testifyeth that he is a Priest still, and ever shall
be, saying thus of him: Heb. 6.4.5.6.
Thou art a high Priest for ever, after the order of Melchizedech. And because
we should not think that there should be any other priest tha^ he: the Apostle
teaches us yt there may be none other, in that he says that no man may take
the honor of high priest unto himself, except he be called of God, as Christ
was called to that office by his Father. These be his very words: No man may
take that honor upon him, but he shall enjoy it, which is called of God, as was
Aaron. Neither has Christ presumed of himself to be made high Priest, but he
has bestowed that dignity upon him, which fayde unto him: Thou art my son,
this day have I begotten thee.

Now as we are taught by this text, that neither there is, nor ought to be any
mo then one Sacrifice for the forgeuenes of sins, that is to wit, Jesus Christ,
which is and shall be the high priest for ever: So are we taught also by other
texts, that there is but one only Sacrifice once offered for all sins, and to
obtayn everlasting life, which is, the death and passion of Jesus Christ our
Savior. And that we need none other Sacrifice for the remission of our sins
but only that. This is the very text of the Apostle, which is so plain and
clear as nothing can be more. By the which will we are made holy, Hebr. 10.10
14.18.
even by the offering of the body of Christ once for all. For by that one
offering has he made them perfect for ever, which are to be sanctified: and
where remission of sins is, there needs no more Sacrifice for sin.

Which words of the Apostle are a very definitive sentence pronounced against
the Mass. For if there be no more offering for sin, what shall become of the
mass, seeing it is no other thing in substance (as the very words of the
consecration do declare) but a Sacrifice and an offering for the forgeuenes of
the sins of the quick and the dead? And in very deed the Catholic
Schooleme^ not being able by any means to rid themselves of these textes which
are so plain and clear, do say for their refuge, that the Mas is not a very
Sacrifice in deed, but a remembrance of the only and true Sacrifice of our Lord
Jesus Christ.

But the answer to this shift of descant is very easy. For seeing they do
maintain that the very body of Christ is in the mas, and that the bread of the
singingcake is changed into his very body, and the wine into his very blood:
And that they break his body in pieces, and offer up both the body and the
blood in Sacrifice unto God: It follows of necessity, that their opinion is,
that it is a very Sacrifice and not a remembrance only.

On the other side, the protestants do say that the remembrance of the true
Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, ought to be done by celebrating his holy supper
after the same manner that he has appointed it. For he has ordained that his
Supper should be celebrated by many at once, because it is a sacramental
communion of the body and blood of our Savior, by the which we are made one
body, and as it were one loaf in Jesus Christ, and become partakers of one
selfsame bread of everlasting life.

These are the words of S. Paul upon the same matter: 1. Cor. 10.16.17.
Is not the cup of blessing which we bless, a partaking of the blood of
Christ? And is not the bread which we break a partaking of the body of Christ?
For we that are many are one loaf and one body, because we be al partakers of
one bread. By which text it appears evidently that the remembrance of the
Sacrifice of our Savior ought to be used in celebrating the holy Supper by
many together, accordingly as when he did institute and celebrate it with his
Disciples, they were many together. And so consequently it follows, that the
Mas neither is, nor can be a true remembrance of the sacrifice of Christ,
seeing that none takes part of it but the priest him self. Now let us come to
the Canones.

The Canons which we have alleged in the former Chapter, when we spoke of the
Lords Supper, do sufficiently confute this Transubsta^tiation (which is the
very principal part and foundation of the Mass:) And therefore we will speak
no more of that point. Absurdities rising of Transubsta^tiation.
But I will speak of certain difficulties, into the which the
Transubstantiation has led the schole divines, as it happens commonly
(according to the saying of the Logicians) that in admitting one absurdity,
there follow many more. The schole doctors having once granted that the bread
and wine in the Mass, are Transubstantiated into the very body and blood of
our Lord Jesus Christ, are greatly troubled how to resolve diverse other
questions, C. Cum Marthae quesiuisti. extr. de celebr. Miss.
which have grown upon the same matter. Pope Innocent the third recites one
of them, which he says was greatly debated amongst ye said Scholedoctors,
(howbeit in such sort, as they knew not how to determine it) That is to wit,
whether the water which the priest puts into the chalice with the wine, be
transubsta^tiated into blood or not, for they imagine, that water must needs be
put into the chalice where the wine is, because it is written that out of the
side of our Lord Jesus Christ, there did issue both blood and water.

Notwithstanding, their opinion is, that there ought to be more wine than
water. C. Perniciosus. extr. eo
For Pope Honorius the third, did sharply check a certain Bishop, who in
singing mass did put more water in his chalice then wine: whereupon grew a
great disputation amongst the Scholediuines, as Pope Innocent, reports. For
some of the^ held opinion, that the water was not Transubstantiated into wine,
but remained natural water still, because (say they) there was water in the
blood which issued out of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he was upon
the Cross. And therefore, seeing that the wine in the Chalice at the mass
time, is Transubstantiated into the very blood: it must needs be, that the
water remains water still, to the end that there be an answerable
resemblance, as well of the water as of the blood. Others said, that although it
were granted that water, must needs remain still in the Chalice with the
blood, yet notwithstanding it must always be believed, that the water which
the priest puts into the Challice, is turned into the self same water which
issued out of the side of our Lord Jesus Christ. Which opinion seems to have
most show of wit, and most proportionble resemblance agreeing to the matter,
though at the first sight it might seem an absurd thing, to say that water
is turned into other water. For look by what reason the wine is
tra^substantiated into the very blood, by the same reason is the water changed
into the water.

The third opinion is taken out of Galene, and other Physicians, which say that
man's body is compounded of four humors. That is, of blood, of flewme, of
melancholy, and of choler: and therefore (say they that are of that opinion) it
is very like, that when the Evangelist said, that with the blood there issued
water out of the side of Jesus Christ, he meant that there issued out fleame,
which is a watery humor: Whereupon they do conclude, that in the Mass water was
changed into fleame. C. in quada^ extr. de celeb. Miss.
But this opinion was condemned by the said Pope Innocent, in a letter which he
sent to the Bishop of Ferrara.

The fourth opinion is of such as uphold that the water also is changed into
blood, as well as ye wine. Which opinion the said Pope Innocent grants to
have in it, not most truth, but most likelyhode of truth: Because (says he)
water is often times in the Scripture taken for the multitude of the people: so
as the union which is made betwixt the water and the wine by the
transubstantiating of the same water into wine, does signify unto us the true
knitting together of Christ with his people, by such a bond as cannot be
broken. Truly, a reason drawn out of a quintisens of the subtilties of
Scotus, otherwise called Duns. Mark here the goodly questions, or rather the
fond and heathenish dotages, wherein the Schoolmen and the Popes have wrapped
themselves, by the mean of their Transubstantiation.

Likewise also they find themselves greatly cumbred in answering these other
questions: that is to wit, if a mouse or a rat do happen to eat the Sacrament
of the host, whether she eat the very body or the accidents only. Again,
whether the Accidents can be without a subject, and whether Accidents can be
eaten or no. Also, whether the Accident without the subject may have the taste
of the wine, and give nourishment to the body: and such other vain questions,
whereof they can give none but very absurd resolutions, because the
presupposing of transubstantiation, is nothing but absurdity.

Besides this the Canons say not that our Lord Jesus Christ did ordain the
Mas, but they affirm that it was S. James, and S. Basil. The invention of the
Mass fathered upon S. James, and S. Basil.
for these be the words of the Canon: James the brother of our Lord according
to the flesh (who had the first charge of the Church of Jerusalem) and Basil
the Bishop of Cesarea (whose knowledge in the Scripture has been renowned
throughout the world) have brought unto us the celebrating of the Mass. C.
Iacobus de consec. did. 1.
But yet neither S. James, nor the other Apostles, nor the Evangelists, have
at any time spoken of the mass in their wrytings: so as there is no likelihood
of truth in the report of this Canon, that S. James should be the inuenter of
the Mass. Neither were it to any great purpose to say that only James of all
the other Apostles, was the first fou^der and setter up thereof. For, had it
been a good thing, the rest of the Apostles would have allowed it as well as
he: and not being good, he would have allowed it no more than the residue did.
Besides this, S. James has no more spoken of it in his Epistle, than the other
Apostles have spoaken of it in theirs. Neither is it to be believed that any of
them would add aught to the ordinances of Christ their Master.

C^nocte. de Cons. did. 1
And as for S. Basil, the Canon has unfitly joined him with S. James, to have
helped him to make the mas. For he was 350. years after S. James. Moreover,
there are other Canones, which do father the inuenting of every part of the
Mass upon other fou^ders. C. Ecclesi. did. 2 C. Sacra. de cons. did. 2 C.
vasa. eo. did. 1. C. Apost. eo C. Pacem igitur eo. did. 2. Io. Stella venetus
de vitis Pontific.
As for example, the using of unleavened bread, and the putting of water into
the Challice with the wine, they father upon pope Alexander the first. The
Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus Sabbath, and the invention of the Corporace, they
attribute to pope Sixtus the first. The invention of Gloria in excelsis, to
pope Telesphorus the first. The invention to use chalices of gold and silver
(which were wont to be of wood and glass,) To pope Vrbane the first. The
singing of the great Creed at the Sondaies mass, to Pope Mark. The saying of
Confiteor in the beginning of the Mass, To Pope Damasus the first. The
standing up of the people when the priest sings or says the Gospel, To
Pope Anastasius the first. The kissing of the paxe, to Pope Innocent ye first
The invention of anthems. taken out of the psalms of David, and the Introites,
and Graduels, to Pope Celestine the first. The invention of the nine
Kirieleysons, of the Alleluya, and of the offertorye, to pope Gregory the
first. The Oremus against ye Turks Pagans, and Infidels (which in that time did
make great wars upon the Christianes) to Pope Calixte the third. The long
prayers which are in the secret words of the consecration, to Pope Leo the
first, and to diverse other Authors. So as S Basil is not found to have done
any thing toward the building of the Mass, as may appear by the
Historiographers which have written the lives of the Popes, and by the Canones
which speak of their particular inventions.

Now these Popes that have invented and added every one something to the Mass,
were not al at one time. For betwixt the first and the last that are here
spoaken of, there was more than a thousand years: which shows plainly
enough, that the Mass is but an invention of men, and therefore deserves not
to be of such estimation as the Romish Catholics do reken it. For it ought to
be sufficient for us, to dwell upon the holy ordinances and institutions of
God, and to let go the inventions of men, seeing that the Scripture forbids
either to add or to diminish aught from Gods word.

Inconveniences ensuing to such as hear Mass.
Yea and there are some Canones that seem to disalow the Mas. For among the
rest, there is one which commands every man to receive immediately after the
consecration: upon pain of excommunication, so as by that Canon it may be
said, that all such as be nowadayes at Mass, are excommunicated every one,
save only the Priest, because none receives but he only. These are the
express words of the same Canon: C. peract. de consec. did. 2.
After the consecration, let them all communicate, except they will be put out
of the church: for the Apostles have so ordained, and the holy Roman Church
does so observe the same.

There is also another Cano^ which forbids upon the same pain of
excommunication, that any man should hear the Mass of any Priest which
keeps a Concubine or any other woman. These are the words of the Canon. We
do command moreover that no man do hear the Mass of any Priest, C.
Praebet. did. 32.
whom he knows assuredly to keep a Concubine, or any other woman in his
house: for so has the holy Sinode ordained upon pain of excommunication.

By which Canon it appears, that a man shall in these days hardly hear a
Mass, without putting himself in danger of excommunication, by reason of the
notorious whoredom and bawdry which is amongst the most part of Priests. And
moreover, the Canons denounce those persons to be Idolaters, which hear the
Mass of any Priest or Deacon that is a Fornicator. C Si qui s^^ did. 81.
For thus says a Canon taken out of S. Gregory. If any Priest, Deacon, or
Subdeacon, be stained with the sin of fornication: we in the name of the
father almighty, and by the authority of S. Peter, do utterly forbid bim to
come into the Church, until he have done penance, and made amends. And if
they continue in their sin, let no man presume to hear their divine service:
for their blessings shall be turned into cursings, and their prayer into sin.
And this does the Lord himself witness, where he says by his Prophet, I will
curse your blessings. And as many as disobay this wholesome commandment, shall
fall into the sin of Idolatry.

Were this Canon well understood of the infinite number of pore ignorant souls
that hold of the Romish Religion, and do ordinarily hear the Masses and other
Church services of lecherous priests: I believe, they would rather forbear it
utterly, than defile themselves so wretchedly with Idolatry. And (as says
this Canon) receive the curse of God in receiving the blessing of such a
priest. But ignorance accompanied with error, which has been long bred and
rooted in the Romain Church, do cause the poor people to be content to hear
the masses of these Fornicators. But if a married Priest should sing them a Mas,
they would stone him to death, and not allow his mass to be good.

Behold what power long forgrowen error has over poor ignorant people, and
how strangely the tirany thereof causes their wretched consciences to go
astray. For by the ancient Canons it is a cursed thing to shun the offering of
a married priest. or to believe that the same is to be despised because he is
married.

These be the very words of a Canon taken out of the council of Gangra. C. Si
quis. did. 28.
If any man make difference of a married Priest, in forbearing to come to his
offering, as though he might not do it because he is married: Cursed be he.

And there is yet another Canon which says that no Priest has power to
consecrate singingcakes, except he be a man of good life. Which thing should
make the Romish Catholics to think that they put them selves in great danger
of Idolatry, when they worship the singing cake, although it were admitted that
their doctrine of Transubstantiation were true, which thing the Protestants do
still deny. For questionles, by this Canon all be Idolaters which worship the
singing bread that is consecrated by priests of evil life, as the most part of
them be. These be the very words of the Canon: C. Sacerdotes. 1. q. 1
The priests which minister the body and blood of the Lord unto the people,
do wickedly, in believing that by the law of Christ, it is the words which
the priest speaks, and not his good life which make the consecration of the
Sacrament: And that to do the same, there needs but only the solemn
pronouncing of the prayer, without any merit of the priest: for it is written,
that the Priest which has any blemish in him, may not approach to the Lord to
offer any Sacrifice unto him.

So then by this Canon it may be well said, that in these days there are very
few Priests which have power to consecrate.

Moreover, in these days they observe no part of the Ceremonies appointed by
the Canons, in the saying of their Mass. For they ought to sing the Mass in
single linen cloth, and not in silks of colors. These are the express words
of the Canon. By the opinion of us all, C. Consulto de consecra. did. 1.
we ordain that no man presume to celebrate the Sacrifice of the Altar in cloth
of silk, nor in any other cloth of color, but in linen cloth only,
consecrated by the Bishop, That is to say, made and wouen of flax which grows
upon the earth, Even in such like sort, as the body of our Lord Jesus Christ
was buried and wrapped in a simple white sheet made of flax.

There must be two at the least to help a priest to say Mass
Neither ought they to sing or say Mass without two assistantes, least they
should offend in the congruity of Grammar in having but one, when they said
Dominus vobiscum, and Orate pro me fratres, speaking in the plural number. But
yet this notwithstanding, the most part of Masses are said nowadayes but with
one Clarke to accompany the priest, yea and often times the Priest is
constrained to answer himself, as it is said by a common proverb of a priest
named Martin. These be the very words of the Cano^: C. Hoc. quoque. de consec.
did. 1.
It is also ordained that no priest shall presume to say mass, except he have
two assistants, so as he himself may be the third. For when he says in the
plural number, the Lord be with you, and these words of the Memento, Brethren
pray for me, it is very convenient that other folks should answer of
themselves to his salutation. So as if all these Canons be well considered,
every man may well perceive, that the Romish Catholics have no great reason to
make so great account of their Mas, or to think the Protestants to be in
error, in that they will neither come at it nor allow of it.

Of Marriage. The ix. Chapter.
AS co^cering marriage, ye doctrine of the Protestauntes differs not much
from the doctrine of the romish catholics. In deed the Catholics do term
it a sacrament, and the protestants say it is a holy institution of God, but
not a sacrament: because that in every sacrament, there must be an outward
sign to be discerned with the eye, and an inward thing signified, which is
invisible, as I have said of Baptism heretofore, showing that in that
sacrament, the water is the outward sign, and the washing of the soul is the
inward and invisible thing signified: And in ye supper of our lord, the bread
and the wine are the outward signs, and the body and the blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ be the things signified, which our souls do receive inwardly and
spiritually.

But it cannot be said, that in marriage there is an outward visible sign and
an inward and invisible thing signified: And therefore it is not a Sacrament.
Again the Protestants affirm that marriage is honorable amongst all sorts of
people, be they lay men or men of the church, noble or unnoble, rich or poor,
because God has instituted it. and has permitted the use thereof to all
persons of what quality soever they be, and to celebrate the same at all
seasons: And that to make gloses and limitations or restrayntes of ye which God
has set at liberty, is to go about to be wiser than God, which in deed is
stark foolishness, beastly presumption, and heddy trayterousnesse. The
Papists make fornication lawful, and marriage unlawful.
Contrariwise the romish Catholics hold opinion, that it is not lawful for
men of the church to be married at all, nor to celebrate any marriage in Lent,
in Aduent, and in the four ember weeks. And the reason whereupon they have
founded this doctrine, is that they have imagined it to be a stayning and
defiling of the Churchmen, (which do handle sacred things) to be married: In
so much as there has been some of the^, which have termed second marriages by
the name of honest fornication. C. Hac ratione. 11. q. 3 C. Non oportet. and
seq. 33. q. 4
And yet for all their forbidding of Priests to be married, they have allowed
the^ to keep concubines, as we have said before, in the fourth chap. By means
whereof they have given them leave to transgress Gods commandment which
says, thou shall not commit adultery, by taking from them the liberty of
Marriage, which god does allow to all persons. But if it should be asked them,
wherefore priests (whom they esteem holy and sacred persons) should not use
marriage, which they call a sacrament: what would they answer? For sacraments
are meetest things for sacred persons. And if marriage be a sacrament, (as
they hold opinion it is:) can it defile those which participate the same?
Truly it is as absurd a thing to say that a Sacrament can defile, as to say
that whiteness can make black. Thus does it follow that God is better
honored, and his ordinances are more sincerely observed by the doctrine of the
Protestants, than by che doctrine of the catholics. The doctrine of the
Protestants is clerly founded upon ye holy scripture, whereby Marriage is
commanded to all such as have not the gift of stayednes, as before is said in
the fourth chapter. For when God ordained marriage first of all at the creation
of world, he gave this general rule: It is not good for man to be alone. Genesis
2.18. 1. Cor. 7.2.
Also S. Paul giving an other general rule thereof, says thus: For the
avoiding of whoredom, let every man have his wife, and every woman her
husband. And in an other place he says, that to forbid marriage is a deuilish
doctrine. 1. Tim. 4.3.
And how the^ can the followers thereof a vow, that their doings in that behalf
are acceptable unto God? Therefore it is easy to judge, whether of the parties
are best grounded upon the word of God, namely whether it be the Protestants,
(who hold opinion that the celebration of Marriage is lawful to al people, and
at al seaso^s:) or the Romish Catholics, which maintain that it is not
lawful for Priests, Monks, and Nuns: nor ought to be celebrated in the
lent, aduent, or the four ember weeks.

There be Canons also, That the Marriage of Priests is lawful.
which do flatly condemn the doctrine of the romish Catholics in this
point, and which affirm that marriage ought not to be forbidden to men of ye
church, which thing was also maintained by a good Bishop named Paphnutius,
(although himself was never married) in the first general counsel holde^ at
Nice in the country of Bithinia, In ye reign of ye Emperor Constantine ye
great: which opinion of his was followed by consent of al ye counsel. These are
ye words of the Cano^: C. Nicena. did. 31.
The counsel of Nice intending to correct the lives of the Ecclesiastical
persons, made certain laws called Canons: in consulting whereupon, it seemed to
incline to the bringing in of a law, to forbid Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons to lie with their wives which they had taken in marriage before
their entering into holy orders. Then Paphnutius standing up, spoke against
it, saying that marryage is an honorable thing, and that it is chastity for a
man to use the company of his own wife. And so he persuaded the Counsel, not
to make any such law: alleging this reason both right grave and of great
importance, namely that it might be an occasion of fornication to the
ecclesiastical persons themselves, or to their wives. Such matter did
Paphnutius allege, notwithstanding that he himself was never married: and
his advice was allowed by all the counsel, in so much that there was no law
made then concerning that article, but the matter was left at liberty for every
man to do as he listed. Lo here a very notable and au^cie^t canon, which has
euersince been observed and kept in the eastern churches, which would never
suffer themselves to be bound to the vow of single life. And if the western
church of Rome had done the like: Priests had never filled the world with so
much whoredom and wickedness as they have done. And unto this Canon of the
counsel of Nice, is agreeable the fifteth chap. of the Apostolic canons,
(which are allowed, for good and Catholic in the Decrees of Grecian) where it
is said thus: If any Bishop, priest, C. Quonia^ did. 31. C. Placuit. did. 26.
deacon or Subdeacon, or any other man of the order of Priesthood, do abstain
from marriage, or from eating flesh, or from drinking of wine, not to make his
mind more apt to the exercises of godliness, but as in way of misliking them,
forgetting that God has made both male and female, and that all his creatures
be good things, and so thereby blaming and slaundering that, which god has
created, let him be corrected, or deposed and put out of the Church.

By which Canon is condemned not only the prohibition of marriage unto
priests, but also the forbidding of men to eat flesh upon certain days,
whereunto does well accord, that which S. Athanasius did write to one
Dracontius a Moonke, who refused to be a bishop, because he imagined that the
Monks life had more holiness in it, by reason that the Moonkes did observe more
scrupulously the prohybition of marriage, and the eating of certain meats.
Athanasius in his epistle to Dracontius.
Well then (says he) let not such things be alleged to thee by such as
counsel thee to shun the charge of a Bishop. For I have known Bishops which
have been great fasters, And Monks which have been great eaters! And Bishops
which have dronk no wine, and Monks great drinkers of wine: Bishops which have
been workers of miracles, and Monks which have wrought none. Again diverse
Bishops have abstained from marriage, and many monks have been married and had
children: And contrariwise, there have been many Bishops married and been
fathers of children: and many Monks unmarried. And there have been clergy men
that have eaten and drunk, and Moonkes which have fasted: For both of them be
lawful, and none of them both is forbiden, but every man may lawfully chose
which he lists.

Whereby this good doctor does plainly declare, that in his time marriage was
not forbidden to men of the clergy, nor to any monks. And in like manner the
ancient Canons accurse al those, which in exalting virginity do condemn
marriage. These be the words of the Canon: C. quicu^que did. 31.
Whosoever keeps virginity or single life, as in derogation of marriage,
cursed be he, because his following of virginity, is not for that it is good
and holy. And in very deed, the true virginity is yt which consists in the
mind rather than in the body, as witnesses an other Canon, saying: It is much
better to have the soul a virgin, than the flesh: C. 2.32. q. 5
yet were it good to have them both so, if it may be. But if we cannot be
chaste to the worldward, let us yet at the lest be chaste toward God. For a
true virgin may well be misused, but she cannot be made a whore, because the
godly virgin is the church of God, and her chastity cannot be defiled by the
brothelhouse. For the chastity of the mind abolisheth the infamy of the place.

For the understanding of ye which Canon, we must have an eye to the time of
the primitive Church, when diverse among the heathen men did put their
bondslaues (whether they were wives or maidens) into brothel houses and common
stews, to raise gain of the shameful abuse of their bodies. And it fell out
oftentimes that their poor slaves were Christians, and yet full ill against
their wills, they were feign to suffer that shameful abuse in their bodies,
and to become as it were open brothels and harlots, to make gain to their
Masters. whereof they are excused by this Canon, as having only their bodies
abused by a forcible constrainte, and not their minds by consent of their
wills. Now therefore it may well be discerned by these Canones, whether this
doctrine of the Protestants concerning marriage, ought to be reputed erroneous
or not, and whether it be not more agreeable to Gods word, and the ancient
Cannons, than the doctrine of the Romish Catholics. And now let us proceed on.

Of princes and Magistrates. The x, chapter
THe Protestants hold opinion that all such as dwell within the lands,
Dominions, or Provinces of any Prince, be they natural subjects or free
Denizens, ought to yeald faithful obedience to him, and also to all Magistrates
under him, without any exception of persons, or of their goods. And that they
ought to acknowledge and to honor him as Gods Lieutenant upon earth, having the
sword in his hand, to minister justice to al men, and to be the defender and
maintayner of Gods commandments, and to cause his Subjects to obey them.
Also they hold opinion, that all folk ought to pray to God for the
preservation and prosperity of the Prince, and of all other Magistrates. And
they believe that to disobay ye prince, is a disobaying of God who has set him
up. And that me^ must obey him, not only for fear, but also for the duty of
conscience, which does bind us to obey God, and so consequently the Prince
whom God has commanded us to obey.

The clergy exempr themselves from the obedience of princes.
But the opinion of the Romish Catholics is, that such as are of the clergy be
exempted from this general rule, and that they be not the subjects of
temporal Princes, but of the pope: And that so by consequence, the prince
neither may, nor ought to leuy any tribute, beneuole^ce, loan, or subsedy of
the Clergy of his Countries, nor of their goods: e. Clericis. de immunit
ecclie. in 6.
Accordingly as Pope Boniface the eight in one of his decrees expressly
forbids all Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earls, Barons, Potentates, Captains,
Officers, Gouerners of Cities and Castles, and all other persons, of what
estate, degree, or condition so ever they be, to do the like upon pain of
present interditing and excommunication, whereof none other but only the Pope
himself can give absolution.

Also they hold opinion, that the Prince (whom they term secular) has no
authority in matters of Tenthes, nor in matters of Matrimony among the lay
people, nor in many other such like things.

Thirdly, The Pope chalengeth power to put down Princes.
they hold opinion that the Pope has power to put down kings and Princes, and
to deprive them of their Realms and Principalities, as Pope Gelasius vaunteth
himself in an epistle sent to the Emperor Anastasius: wherein he alleges the
example of Pope Zachary, who deposed king Chelderike of France from his
kingdom, C. alius. 15. q. 6.
not for any wicked doings (says he) but because he was unfit to be a king.
And did set up king Pipin the father of Charlemaine in his place. Also by
reason of this great authority, which the Popes took to themselves over
kings, they be puffed up with such pride, c. Solitae. extra. de Mayor. and
obed.
that they compare themselves to the Sun, and to Gold, and kings and Emperors
to the Moon, and to lead: tearming themselves the masters of them, as the same
Pope Gelasius did write to the said Emperor Anastasius. c. Duo. c. quis dubit
and did. 96.


Every man therefore may judge whether doctrine is the better, either that of
the romish Catholics, (which does so limmit and cut short the authority of
kings and Princes, to augment the greatness of the Popes and Prelates.) Or that
of the Protestants, which do not challenge, but disalow such limitations,
affirming that the Pope has no such jurisdiction over the Subjects of kings
and Princes. And seeing that Princes be the Lieutenantes of God here on earth,
holding their Scepters and Crown of him: No doubt but the honor which is done
to them, is done to God himself. And so consequently, God is better honored by
the doctrine of the Protestants, than by the doctrine of the Romish Catholics.

The doctrine of the Protestants is grounded evidently upon the word of God,
which commands all men (without exception of any person) to obey the Prince
under whose Dominion they dwell, not only for fear of his sword, but also for
conscience sake. These be the words of S. Paul, who speaks generally: Romans
13.1. 5. and Tit. 3.1.
Let every man be subject to the higher powers, for there is no power but of
God, and the authorities that be, are ordained of God, and therefore we ought
not to be subject for fear of displeasure only, but for conscience sake also.

And hereupon S. Chrysostom says that this rule is so general, that there is
neither Apostle, nor Evangelist, nor Bishop, nor other person, that is exempted
from the obedience of the Prince. And likewise S. Peter speaking to al
Christians, and to al Gods chosen flock, says thus: 1. Pet. 2.15
Submit your selves to all ordinance of man for the love of God, whether it
be to the king as to the chief, or to the governors as to those which be sent
and oppointed by the Prince to punish malefactors, and to praise the well doers.

And the reason why every one ought to yeald obedience to ye Prince, is,
because the charge and estate which Princes take upon them, is of God: For, the
Scripture does call Princes Gods, because they are the Lieuetenants of God.
Deuteronomy. 1.16. Psalm 82.1. 1. Pet. 2.17.
And therefore next after God, we ought to fear and honor the Prince, as says
S. Peter: Fear God and honor the king.

And as Solomon does also teach us, Prou. 24.21.
saying: My Son, fear the Lord and the king. And it is to be noted that in
these textes, the king is put next after god, as his Lieuetenant presenting God
himself. And we ought not only to honor and fear the prince: but also to
pray to God for him, and for all those which are in authority under him, yt
their government may be in peace and tranquillity, and that we may live under
their obedience in the serving of God with all godliness and goodness. These be
the very words of S. Paul: 1. Tim. 2.1.
I warn you therefore that before all other things, you make intercessions,
prayers, supplications, and thankesgeuinge, for all men, and specially for
kings, and for all such as are in authority under them, that we may lead a
quiet and a peaceable life in all godliness and honesty: For that is acceptable
before God our Savior.

And it is not for any man, not only to exempt himself from obaying the
prince, but also to deny to pay him tribute, Math. 17.27. and 22.21.
seeing that our lord Jesus Christ did pay it, and has commanded to pay it.
S. Paul does also witness the same thing, saying yt the duty of conscience
commands us to pay tribute to princes, because they be the ministers of God,
and serve thereunto. Therefore give unto every man (says he) that which is due
unto him. Romans 13.5.6.7.
Tribute to whom tribute belongs, custom to who^ custom pertains: duty
to whom duty belongs, and honor to whom honor is due. To be short, next
after God, we owe to the Prince all obedience, honor and fear: neither ought
we to think it strange, that God should have the chief pre-eminence,
seeing that the prince is but his minister and servant, and that the
Liefetenant ought not to go before him which puts him in office, nor the
servant before the master. And that was the cause why Daniell said so boldly
unto the king Darius, Dan. 6.2^
that he had made no fault in disobaying his commandment, which he could not
have obayed, without offending both God and his own conscience.

Also it was for the selfsame cause, that the obedience which the people of
Israel did yeald unto their king Ieroboham, (which caused Calves of gold to
be made, and commanded the people to honor them) is condemned by the word of
God. For in matters of Religion we ought to hold the general rule which S.
Peter teaches, saying: We must rather obey God than man. Act. 4 20.
The reason hereof is the same that is alleged by S. Paul: 1. Cor. 7.23.
namely That we be redeemed or bought with the precious blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is a thing of so great and excellent price, that we ought not to
turn away from the salvation which he has purchased us, for any thing in all
the world.

The Pope and his clergy ought to be in subjection to Princes.
We have heretofore alleged some of the decretall Epistles of the Popes
Gelasyus, Innocent the third, and Bomface the eight, by yt which they have done
their endeavor to thrust down emperors, kings, and other Princes far
underneath them: but the ancient Canons speak far otherwise, for by them,
even the Pope himself (whenever he commits any fault) ought to be
corrected and punished by the Emperor, as Pope Leo the fourth auoweth and
confesses in his epistle written to the Emperor Jews, c. Nos fi incompetenter
^. q. 7.
which epistle is made canonical. If we have done (says he) any thing which
we ought not, or have not performed the equity of the law toward your
subjects, we are ready to amend our fault, by the judgment of your self, or
of your commissioners: for if we which should correct the faults of other men,
do worsse then they: we be not the children of the truth, but (which thing I
speak with great grief) we be masters of error, more tha^ others. Wherefore, we
most humbly beseech your majesty's clemency, to vouchsafe to send hither some
commissioners of yours, such as fear God, to inform you of our behavior and
to make as diligent inquisition thereof, as if your imperial majesty were
here present in proper person: and to search out the truth by peecemeale, not
only of the things before mentioned, but also of all other matters which may
have been reported unto you: So as by that means al things may be determined
by lawful examinatian of the case, and nothing remain to be discussed and
decided hereafter. By which Canon it appears plainly, that the Emperor of
Rome has power and authority to inquire of ye misbehauiour and misdealings of
the pope, and that he may by lawful judgment, condemn and punish him when he
does amiss. We do also read in S. Gregory Greg. Epist. lib. 4. epist. 29. lib.
5. epist. 163. lib 6. epist. 194 lib. 7. epist. 114 120. 126. lib 8. epist. 2.
lib. 9. epist. 60.
(who is esteemed for one of the best Popes) that in his epistle which he wrote
to the kings of fran^ce of England, and of the westerngothes, he did always
call them his children. But when the wrate to the Emperor which raygned in his
time, whose name was Mawrice, he called him his Lord, and spoke very humbly
unto him, as unto him that was his soueraygne, declaring that he did, and would
obey the said Emperors most mylde commandments, (for those be his terms
that he uses. There are other Canons also, by the which all power of
Soueraintye is attributed unto princes, as well over the lay people, as over
the clergy, and over the goods both of the one and of the other. These be ye
very words of the Canon. c. Tributum 13. q. 8.
S. Peter in fishing found tribute in the mouth of a fish, because that the
church ought to pay tribute of such outward good as are seen to al me^. And the
case so stands, that for his tribute he was commanded to pay, not all the
whole fish which he had caught in fishing, but only the piece of silver which
he had found in the mouth of the fish which he had caught, because the church
it self or the pre-eminence of the place, ought not to be given to Emperors,
and Kings, nor to be put in subjection to their power. But surely (as I said
before) that which was found in the mouth of the fish, is commanded to be
given for the tribute of Peter and of the Lord, because we ought to pay
tribute unto princes, of the outward goods of the church, according to the
ancient custom, to the end they may maintain and defend us in good peace and
quietness.

By which canon it appears, that princes may as well raise tribute upon men of
the Church, as upon ye lay people, although they may not take authority in
divine matters, further than to cause obedience to be given to the
commandments of God, as it is said in an other Cannon in express words. c.
Imperatores did. 9. Princes cannot bind me^ to laws that are against Gods
commandments.
When Emperors make wicked laws to maintain falsehood against the truth, it
serves to try the true beleuers, who are crowned with martirdom for
perseuering in the truth. But when they make good laws and edictes to
maintain the truth against the falsehood, the persecutors are stricke^ in fear
by it, and such as understand the truth do amend themselves. Whosoever
therefore, does refuse to obey the edictes of the Emperoures and princes that
maintain the true doctrine, do procure themselves great punishment: but as
many as refuse to obey the edicts made against the will of God, win to
themselves great reward. Eor ever since the time of the prophets, all kings
are blamed, which have not prohibited, and rooted out from amongst Gods people,
all such things as have been set up against his commandments. And these
which have prohibited the^ and rooted them out, are highly praised above al
others. Nabuchodonosor being an Idolater, did make a treacherous proclamation,
that all men should worship his Image. But those which refused to obey the
ungodly law, dealt faithfully and holyly. With this Canon agrees an other
canon taken out of S. Augustine, who in expounding the text of S. Paul,
(where it is said) that he which resists the Prince resists the ordinance
of God, C. Qui resi^^et. 11. q. 3.
speaks in these terms. He that resists the higher power, does resist the
ordinance of God. Yea, but what if he command unlawful things? truly in that
case thou must not obey him. Consider the degrees even of men's laws. If the
ordinary judge command a thing, he ough to be obayed, but not if the governor
command the contrary. And in this case thou despisest not the inferior
maiestrate, but of the two thou chosest rather to obey the superior, where in,
the inferior maiestrate ought not too find himself grieved, for that his
superior is preferred before him. Moreover, If the governor command one
thing, and the Prince an other: or rather, if the Prince command one thing,
and God command the contrary, what will you say to that? God is the highest
power, O my sovereign Lord, I beseech you to pardon me, you may cause me to be
put in prison, but god has power to put me in hell fire. In this case thou
must arm thy self with the buckler of faith, whereby thou shall be able to
beat back all the fiery darts of the devil.

Now then, these Canons maynetaine the doctrine of the Protestants, which
affirm that next under God, we ought to yield all obedience to the Prince, yea
although he were an Infidel or a Runeagate as Julian the Apostata was, of whom
the cano^ speaks thus: C. Iulianus. 11. q. 3
Albeit that Julian the Emperor was an Apostota or backslider: yet had he
christen soldiers that served under him, whom whenever he commanded to march
forward in battle for the defense of the common weal, they obayed him. But
when he commanded them to march against the Christians, the^ they
acknowledged the Emperor of heaven.

And in good soothe, The Pope can give agene away benefyces.
so little is the Pope in abled by the ancient Canons, to bereave kings and
princes of their Realms and principalities, that he cannot so much as give
away a Bishopric in any Realm, without the consent of the pruste under whose
dominion the same is, as it appears by an Epistle of Pope Leo the fourth sent
to the Emperors, Lotharius and Jews, by the which he does entreat the^ to
consent to bestow the Bishopric of Rets upon one named Colon. These be the
very words of the Canon. Seeing the church of Rets, c. Reatina. etc. Lectis.
did. 65.
has been so long time without a Shepherd, it is requisite that it should be
aided by your majesty's authority, and maintained by the power of your
government. Wherefore after our most humble salutatio^ unto you, we beseech
your clemency to vouchsafe to grant the government of the said church unto
Colon your humble deacon, that by your majesty's license, we may (with Gods
help) consecrate him Bishop of the same. And if it stand not with your liking
that he should be Bishop of that church, then we beseech your highness that he
may have the Church of Tusculan which is now vacant, so that being by us
consecrated Bishop, he may give thanks to almighty God and to your jmperiall
majesty.

And it is not to be doubted, but ye both in the time of the same Pope Leo, and
before his time also, it was the ordinary custom, not to receive any Bishop,
without the consent of the prince, under whose dominion the bishopric was.
According whereunto it is said thus in an other canon speaking of ye same
matter in these terms Forasmuch as we know that the church of God cannot be
maintained without Shepheardes: we beseech your majesty (as we are bound to
do) to vouchsafe of your imperial wisdom, (according to the custom in all
ancient time observed) to give us license by your majesty's letters patentes
to provide one, and we will therein obey your will and (by Gods help)
consecrate him that shall be chosen

To be short, not only these foresaid canons, but also many others do witness
unto us, that another any Byshoprick, nor yet the Papacy it self, may be given
to any without consent of the Prince: so far off is the Pope from having
authority above ye Prince. And whosoever will read S. Gregory (especially in
the Epistle which he wrote to Mawrice the Emperor) shall find that he does
often times give the Emperor thanks for providing such and such a church of a
good and meet shepherd, Epist. lib. 4. epist. 29. and lib. 6. epist. 170.
and how he declares in diverse places, yt he is and will, be obedient to the
laws and commandments of the Emperor, as we have towched here before.

Of the authority of the Pope and of the succession, and discipline in the
order of the clergy. The xi. Chapter.
THe Romish Catholics hold opinion, that the Pope is the supreme head, chief
Shepherd, and universal governor of all the churches of Chistendome: as vicar
general of our Lord Jesus Christ. And this doctrine they build upon a
likelihood of great conueniency, that Jesus Christ which is in heaven, should
have a liuetenant here below upon earth, to pardon the sins of the repentant,
and to provide Curats and Shepheardes for the particular churches when they
happen to be vacant, and to make laws and Canons to rule all christendom in
matters of religion and ecclesiastical policy. They say also, that this
authority over all the churches of the world was given to S. Peter the first
pope of Rome, and so consequently to to his successors, for because our Lord
Jesus Christ said unto him. Mat. 16.18
Thou art Peeter, and upon this rock will I build my church, and the gates of
hell shall have no power against it: And I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, and whom soever thou bindest upon earth, he shall be bound
in heaven, and whomsoever thou losest upon earth shabbe losed in heaven.

But contrariwise the Protestants affirm, Christ has no need of any
Lieuetenant or vicar General on earth.
that Jesus Christ alone is the supreme head, chief shepherd, and universal
governor of the universal Church which is disparsed throughout the world, and
that when he went up into heaven, he did not appoint any vickar or liuetennant
to keep his place, another in deed was it needful. For he that is abse^t
himself has need of a liuetenant: but as for him, he is never absent from his
church, but is and always will be with it by his spirit and divine power,
unto the end of the world: So as to say that Christ has need of a
liuete^naunt upon earth, as though he could not execute his office upon earth
for all his being in heaven, is as much as to bereue him of his Godhead, which
of it own nature has no less power and ability on earth and in hell, then
in heaven where his manhood is resident. Whereof it inseweth (according to our
first maxim) that the doctrine of the Protestants in this point, is better
the^ the doctrine of the Romish Catholic, because the honor that belongs to
Jesus Christ, is better yielded unto him by that, then by the other. Likewise ye
doctrine of the protestants is much better grounded upon the word of God, then
the doctrine of the Romish Catholics.

For S. Paul does teach us, that Christ is the head of the church, not a head
separated or set away from it, but surely knit and joined fast unto it, with
all manner of fastninges and knittinges that a well united and well co^pacted
body should have. These be his words: Ephe. 4.15.
To thend that by following the truth with charity, we should in all points
atteyne to full growth in him which is our head, that is to say in Christ, unto
whom the whole body being thoroughly knitted and fastened together, by all
manner of fastninges that may furnish it out, does take bodilye increase of the
power that works within it, according to the capacitye of every member, to
the full perfecting up of it self in love. By which words every man may easily
judge, that S. Paul meant to portray out unto us the great and singular
co^iunctio^ of the head, (which is Christ) unto his church, in that he says,
that he is knit, and fastened to the same, by all manner of fastenings
requisite to the full furnishing out of a body.

And in an other place he says likewise, that Christ is the head of the
church, working all things fully in all the members of his body, which is the
church. Whereupon it follows very well, that we ought to have no other head
in the church, to execute and perform the office of Christ, forasmuch as the
said performance is reseruid to Christ him self.

These be the very words of S. paul: Ephe. 1.22.
And he has put all things under his feet, and set him above all things to
be the head of the church, which is his body, and the full furnishing out of
him, who furnishes out all things fully in all men. Also in an other text of
S. Paul, it is well declared, that yt church needs not a liuetenant to hold
the place of Jesus Christ her head.

For he says yt like as the husband, is the head of his wife: so is Christ also
ye head of his church. And were it meet yt a wife should have a another man in
her husbands stead? would not men say that the wife which would needs have
another man to supply her husbands room, were a whore? yes, and eue^ in like
wise the chaste and honestminded church ought to content herself with her head
which is Christ, who is well enough able to govern the same, without a
liuetenant, specially seeing it should be but ill governed by such liuetennants
as the most part of the Popes have been.

Ephesians. 5.23.
This is the very text of S. Paul: For the husband is the head of the wife,
even as Christ is the head of the Church, who is also the preserver of her
body. Therefore, as the church is subject unto Christ, so likewise let women be
subject to their husbands. Moreover when S. Paul makes reckening of the
diverse offices which are in the Church, he says that for the gathering
together and building up of the same, Christ has ordained Apostles, Prophets,
Evangelists, Shepherds, and Teachers: and not that he has appointed a Pope or
an universal Shepherd to have supremacy over the universal Church, which is
dispersed throughout all the world. And yet it is very certain that S. Paul
would not have forgotten to have spoaken of him, yea and to have reckned him in
the first place, if Jesus Christ had ordained that there should have been a
pope in his church, to have been his lieutena^t. These be the very words of S.
Paul Therefore he has appointed some to be Appostles, some to be Prophets,
Ephesians. 4.11.
some to be Evangelists, some to be Shepherds, and some to be Teachers, to
gather together the Saints through their working in the ministry, and to
build up the body of Christ. And so it appears by this text, that there
needs no pope for the building up of ye church nor for ye work of the
ministry, but that ye offices before named by S. Paul are sufficient for yt
purpose.

And as touching the text of Saint Matthew before alleged, whereon the Romish
Cotholickes do build their doctrine concerning the Pope, saying that Jesus
Christ has builded his Church upon S. Peeter the first Pope, and given him all
power over the universal Church. The Protestances answer, that the Petra
that is to say the rock which is spoken of there, is the faith whereby S.
Peter had most stoutly confessed that Jesus was that Christ, the son of the
living God. For S. Paul does teach us, Ephe. 2.20.
that Jesus Christ is the head corner stone whereon we ought to build. And S.
Peter himself does witness, 1. pet. 2.5.
that the true beleuers, (which have their faith builded upon this corner stone
christ) are as living stones, conched and cemented together upon it, to fynish
up the building of the lords church. And as for ye authority which Jesus Christ
gave unto Peter, as it is said in the same text: They said also that he gave
the like to all the rest of his Apostles, as S. John witnesses.

Ioh. 20.23.
So as it cannot be inferred upon this text, that S. Peter was ordained to be
the only Soueraygn governor of the Christian Church, any more then the rest of
the Apostles. And in an other place S. Paul does well declare that S. Peter had
no more authority then the other Apostles: for he puts himself in the same
degree of apostleship that Peter was. And when he reckneth up the chiefest
Apostles, he reckneth first S. James, then Saint Peter, and in the third place
S. John, wherein he had greatly ouershot him self (which cannot be said
without blaming the holy ghost) if the saying of the Romish Catholics be
true, who affirm that S. Peter was the Prince of the Apostles and had
soueraygne authority over them, and over the whole universal church. These be
the uery words of S. Paul: Gal. 2.8.9.
For he which has wrought by peter, in the office of Apostleship among the
circumcised, has like wise wrought by me among the Gentiles, and James,
Cephas, and John, who are esteemed to be the pillars, have known the grace
which was given me. Neither does S. Peeter in his Epistles, name himself Pope
or prince of Apostles, or head of the church, or Christ's vickar, but simply, an
Apostle as the others. And when his companions did give him charge to go preach
in Samaria, he was so far of from prete^ding to have any princely authority
over them: that he obayd them without gayneseing, as it is written in the Acts
of the Apostles. Act. 8.14.
And therefore it appears playnelye by all these sayings, that the doctrine
of the protestants is better grounded upon the word of God, then the doctrine
of the Romish Catholics, and consequently that it is the most ancient and
true, according to our second Maxim.

Let us now come to the Canons. Truly when I read these Canons, which I will
rehearse hereafter: I marvel that pope Engenie the third (who authorized the
decres of Gratian and commanded that they should be openly red in the
universities) procured not the utter defacing and dissanulling of all the
ancient Canons there gathered together, seeing they be so derectly contrary to
the doctrine and authority of the popes. The name Pope signified in old time a
Father, and now a Prince.
But it was the providence and will of God, that it should so be. Now then you
must first of all understand, that the ancient doctors of the church do often
use this name of pope, which signifies, a father, and in ancient time, was
indifferently used to all Bishops as well mean as great. But in the end, the
Boshop of Rome appropriated the same to himself alone, and from that time
forth, this name of pope has ever been taken, (as it is still in these days)
not for a father but for a supreme head and universal Bishop of all the
Christian churches of the world: which title of universal is reproved by all
the ancient Canons, and so consequently the estate which the pope of Rome does
take upon him at this present, is condemned: For it is well known that he
names himself the universal Shepherd or Bishop, and that he chalengeth
authority over all churches and councels. Now harken to the very words of a
Cano^ which puts him to his neckverse. Let no Patriarch at any time use the
name of universal. c. Nullus. c. ecce. did. 99.
For the Patriarch, which names himself universal, takes the name of
Patriarch away from all others. But Godforbid that any of the faithful should
chalendge honor to himself, to the derogation of his brethren, be it never so
little. Wherefore we beseech you of your charity, let none of you from
henceforth in his letters, give the title of universal, to any man any more
least ye take away the title due unto your selves by attributing the same
unduly unto orhers. The next Canon following does sing the same song, which
ought to be of so much ye more force among the Romish Catholics for that it is
taken out of an Epistle of S. Gregory sent to the patriark of Allexandria: Thus
therefore does he say in express words. Behold even in the very preface of
your letters which you wrote unto me, you go about to cast the proud name of
universal pope upon me, even upon me (I say) who have forbidden other men to
use it. Wherefore I beseech your holiness, even of your curtesy, to do so no
more, for you take from your self to give to an other, without cause why. I
seek not to advance my self in tytles but in manners: neither think I that I
ought to purchase honor to my self, with the loss of the honor of my
brothers, for my honor is to honor the universal church, and to behave my
self uprightly toward my brethren. And I think my self then most honored,
when every of them has his due honor yielded unto him. But if your holiness
name me the universal pope: then in attributing the whole unto me, there is
nothing left to others: which God forbid wherefore let us drive away these
terms far from us, which inflame us with vanity, and hurt charity. The
reason of these Canons is very evident: namely, for that it is impossible for
one man to govern the universal church, and to be Bishop of the whole world,
seeing that even they which are best able, do find themselves greatly combred
in the governing of one only Byshoprick well. Besides this the title of
universal Bishop, is to stately and proud to be matched with the true
Shepheardes of gods church, which ought to walk in humility, void of al pride
and ambition. The same thing is verified by a cano^ in these expres words
Whosoever desires supremacy upon earth, shall find confusion in heaven. C.
Vlt. did. 40. Supremacy above others is to be eschued.
And he that speaks of primacie, shall not be nu^bred amongst the servants
of God. Let every body therefore study, not how he may seem greater the^
others, but by what means he may most imbase himself. For he is not the most
righteous, which amongst men is most honored: but he is most honorable, which
is most righteous Hereunto agrees well the Canon which says that all churches
are equal in authority, and that the church of Rome has no superiority over
other churches, This Canon is taken out of S. Ierom, and says thus. We ought
not to think that there is any ods between the church of rome and the churches
of any other place of the world. c. Legimus. did. 93.
In France, England, Affrik, Persia, the East, and the Indies, and all the
Barbarous nations do honor Christ, and observe one rule of truth. If regard be
to be had of authority: the world is greater then the City of Rome.
Wheresoever there is a Bishop, All Bishops are of equal authority.
be it at Rome be it at Eugubiu^, be it at Constantinople, be it at Rhegium be
it at Allexa^dria, be it at Thebes, or be it at Garmace: it is all of one
worthiness and of one selfsame degree of priesthood. The greatness of Riches, or
the meanness of poverty, sets not a Bishop in higher or lower degree. To be
short, all of them be the successors of the Apostles.

Now then it appears plainly by these Canons, that the pope (who in all his
bulls does name himself the Bishop of Rome) is no greater than another mean
Bishop, and that neither he, nor the Church of Rome, can claim to themselves
any authority over other Bishops and Churches, otherwise than by tyranny and
usurpation.

And truly, besides the forealleaged Canons taken out of S. Gregory, Greg.
epist. lib. 4. ep. 76. and 78.
who so will read his epistle, shall find that he utterly detested this title
of universal Shepherd or Bishop from his heart, as a wicked title not meet
for any but for Antichrist or for his forerunner. In one of his Epistles he
complains greatly to the Emperor Maurice, that John Bishop of Constantinople
did trouble the Church of God, by seeking to usurp the title of universal
Bishop. For (to the intent ye may understand the very root and original
beginning of this discourse) you must consider that in those days, and long
time before, Constantinople was called new Rome, and the other in Italy was
called old Rome. And because the Emperor of Rome did most commonly keep his
residence at new Rome, and old Rome was at that time greatly vexed with the
barbarous Goths, and Lumbards which warred upon Italy and destroyed it:
without doubt the new Rome was then a more flourishing City, and in higher
estimation than old Rome, or any other City in all the wholl Empire. Whereupon
the said Bishop John being of an ambitious disposition, and minding to advance
himself by the dignity of the City whereof he was bishop, began to preach
and persuade the people and diverse of the bishops, that like as the Emperor
extended his dominion over all the provinces and countries of the Empire: even
so the Bishop of Rome (that is to say of new Rome) which was then in more
estimation than old Rome, ought to extend his power and autooritie over all the
provinces and countries of Christendom.

And truly this Bishop John did so much by his continual travel, that he
caused him self to be proclaimed universal Bishop in a certain Sinode or
Counsel, wheragainst S. Gregory (who was then bishop of old Rome) did set
himself very manfullye. And therefore writing again to the same Emperor
Maurice, he says amongst other things there written, that the name of
universal Bishop is a title of pride and pomp, which troubles the church, the
laws, and the sinodes, and the commandments of Christ: And that S. Peter
never was, ne never called himself universal Apostle. And that it was the
Emperors duty, (if he meant that God should long preserve his empire) to cut of
that sore and to bridle the disease by his authority, if it could not
otherwise be healed. Afterward he adds these words worthy to be noted. If any
man (says he) do attribute unto himself the name of universal Bishop in the
church, S. Gregory whom the Catholics take for an Archpope, condemns the
authority of Popes.
what will al honest men judge of him? For the estat of the universal Church
must needs fall (which God forbid) if he fall which is called the universal
Bishop. Therefore let this blasphemous name be banished from the hearts of all
Christians, whereby the honor of all Priests is taken away, and wrongfully
usurped by one alone.

And in the Epistle following, S. Gregory makes his moan to the Empress
Constance, that the said Emperor Maurice her husband went about to persuade him
to leave of his setting of himself against it, which I cannot do (says he)
for I defend the cause of the Gospel, and the Canons, and the truth of equity
and humility. And it is to grievous and intolerable a thing that the said
John our fellow brother and bishop, should seek to have the name of bishop to
himself alone. But what other thing does he give us to understand by this his
pride, but that the time of Antichrist draws near? For he follows the
steps of the wicked feend, who despising ye joy which he had in common amongst
the legions of other Angels, did seek to set himself in ye highest room, to
reign as sovereign all alone,

And in an other Epistle, the same S. Gregory, answering to ye which the said
Emperor Maurice had written unto him, which was that he ought not to be so
precisely wedded to his own will for the term of universal Bishop, for such
strife about terms hinder the union and peace of the church: did disprove his
reasons with very good grace, Ep. lib. 6. ep. 194.
saying thus: But I beseech your majesty of your goodness, to consider that of
words fondly spoken some do no harm at all, and other some do great harm.
As for example, when Antichrist shall come and call himself God, that speech
is very fond: nevertheless as it is fond, so is it also very pernicious. If you
look no further tha^ to the words, there are but two sillables: but if you
way the meaning of the words, it is the full importance of all iniquity. And
I dare boldlye say unto you, that whosoever calls himself, or causes
himself to be called the universal priest, the same party through his
vaingloryousnes, is the foreronner of Antichrist, because that by his pride, he
exalts himself above all others. I beseech you therefore of your good zeal
to Godward, to command that no cause of offense be given by taking up such a
fond title. See how S. Gregorye declares and denowceth him to be the
foreronner of Antichrist, which does name himself universal Bishop, forasmuch
as he takes upon him the aucthoritye of all other Bishops, as well near all
the Popes of Rome have done, which have been since his time. And yet to
confirm this his sentence better, I will add the warning which he gave by his
letters to the Bishops of Greece, to be well ware that they gave not the title
of universal Bishop, to Siriacke Bishop of Constantinople next successor of
the said John after his decease: Epist. lib. 7. epist. 69.
good brethren (quoth he) ye shall understand, that the late John, (who not
long since was prelate,) Passing the bonds of modesty, and of the measure of
his calling, did wrongfully in a Synod usurp the proud and pestilent title of
Oycumenicall (that is to say universal) Bishop against God and the Church, and
to the despite and derogatio^ of the whole order of Preesthode. Whereupon we
wrote twice unto him, that he should not omit any thing, which might concern
the peace of the Church, exhorting him to leave that proud name, and to submit
his heart to the humilitye, which our Lord and master has taught us. Whereof
forasmuch as he held scorn, we have used the like admonitions unto our brother
Siriacke, his successor. But since we see that Antichrist the enemy of
mankind, begins to show himself openly by his foreronners in this latter
time: and that the priests themselves, (which ought to resist him by their
holy and humblelyfe,) be the parties that serve him for his foreronners, by
intitling themselves with his proud name of universal: I beseech ye, yea and
charge ye, that none of you at any time, receive, admit, write, allow written,
or subscribe unto that title: But that as becomes the servants of the
almighty God,) every of you keep himself pure and clear from this venomous
infection, without yelding of him self, to the deceitful craftines of the
enemy: for surely that title tends to no other end, but to the hurt, and
division of the Church, and to the slander of you all, as I have said before:
because that if he only (as he imagines) is the universal Bishop, it
follows that you be no Bishops. There are yet diverse other like sayings, in
the writings of S. Gregory, which I could here allege, but these which I have
here before set down, may suffice (in mine opinion) to declare and show unto
the Romish Catholics by the authority of that god doctor (whom they themselves
take to have been one of the greatest and worthiest of all the Popes, in
respect whereof they have surnamed him the great S. Gregory) that the name and
office of ye Pope (which is nothing else but an universal and supreme Bishop
or shepherd over all other Bishops and Priests,) is condemned as the name and
office of Antichrist or of his forerunner, and as a title and estate full of
pride, injury, division, and contempt of Gods commaundeme^ts, and of the holy
decrees and counsels which have been hold before that time.

That S. paul and S. Peter were equal in degree.
But now that we have made S. Gregory to fight sufficiently against ye popes
that were his successors, let us return to our Canons, to show that S. Peter
was never pope, (that is to say prince or sovereign over the Apostles:) I will
only allege one Canon, which says that S. Paul and S. Peter were equal, yea
even at the same time that they were both at Rome, and that the one was no way
greater than the other: whereof it follows, that S. Peter was no more pope
than was S. Paul. Now S. Paul was never pope, nor ever reputed so to be, by
the very maintayners of the popedom themselves. For these be the very words of
the Canon, taken out of S. Ambrose. c. Beat. 2. q. 7.
S. Peter and S. Paul have pre-eminence above all other Apostles, by special
prerogative. But yet is it uncertain whether of them two were preferred before
the other. For I think that they were both equal in deserts, and likewise in
their deaths and passions: and also that they lived in like devotion of faith
and finally, came Both together to the glory of martyrdom.

And I believe that it happened not with out some cause, that they both suffered
martyrdom in one day, in one place, and under one persecuter, for they
suffered in one day, that they might go together in company to Christ: and in
one place, to the end that Rome should not want either of them both, and under
one persecuter, that both of them might be partakers of one cruelty. The day
therefore was ordained for their desert, the place for their glory, and the
persecuter for their virtue. And they both suffered martyrdom at Rome the
soueraign Lady and head of all nations, to the end that where the head of
superstition was, there should rest the head of holiness: and where the princes
of the Gentiles dwelt, there should remayn the Princes of the Church.

By which Canon it may easily be judged, S. Peter was never head of the Church.
that S. Peter was in nothing to be preferred before S. Paul, and that both
were equal in all respects, which shows plainly that S. Peter was never head
of the Church, neither in respect of nature, nor in respect of ministration.
For if he had been, the^ should as much have been said of S. Paul, according to
the Canon. And so by consequence, we should say that ye Church had then two
heads like a monster, a thing that were to absurd and strange. I know well that
such as imagine the government of the Church to be like the government of a
kingdom, The Lordly government of the church disproued by the ancient
Canons.
do think it meet that there should be one supreme head and gouerner, and
that the same should have Cardinals as great Princes of his court, and
Archbishops somewhat in lower degree than the Cardinals, and Bishops as
inferiors to the Archbishops, and so consequently Abbots, Priors, Channons, and
Curats, each in degree under other. And in good sooth, this order of holy
government has a fair outward show, but there is one thing that marreth all,
which is, that it has no foundation in the word of God, which does not teach
that there is any inequality amongst the Shepherds, but that they ought to
govern their Churches with one common consent by Gods word, making assemblies
or meetings, (which are commonly called Sinodes or Councels) for the same
purpose, if need require. And moreover that they ought to submit themselves to
the Civil Magistrate. And the very Canons themselves do agree herewith,
(specially one Canon which is taken out of S. Iherom,) seeing, that in the time
of the primitive Church there was no difference betwixt a priest or an elder,
and a bishop: and that the Church was then governed by the common council of
the elders.

Let us hear the very words of the Canon. c. Olim. did. 95.
In old time an Elder and a Bishop were all one thing, till scismes and
parttakings crept into Religion by the devils inspiration, and that folk began
to say, I hold of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of Cephas. Until this time the
Churches were governed by common advice of the Elders. But after that every man
began to brag of his own disciples whom he had baptized, and not of Christ,
then it was ordained that in every Church one of the Elders should have
authority over the rest, to take away the seed of scizme. Wherefore like as
the Priests know that by the custom of the Church, they be put in subjection
to the party that is set in authority over them: So let the bishops know also
that whereas they themselves are of more authority than the Priest, it is not
by the ordynance of God, but by custom, and that they ought to govern the
Church by common advise.

Which Canon in very truth is very notable, specially for that it does
evidently show, that all the degrees and dignities (which are infinite at this
day in the Church of Rome) are not grounded upon the express ordinance of God,
but only upon the positive law of custom, for look what the Canon speaks of
Bishops, is much more by all reason to be spoken of Cardinals, Patriarchs,
Archbishops and other dignities, seeing that the office of a Bishop (whereof the
holy Scripture makes mention) was instituted long time before the dignities of
the Cardinals and the others. And hereupon it follows, that men should not
make so great reckning of any of these great and pompous dignities, which are
founded but only upon custom, which ought not to be of any (or at least wise
of very little) authority in the Church of God, as shall be declared more at
large in the last chapter of this book.

The Pope had no prerogative above the general counsels in old time.
As touching the residue, if it be alleged that the Bishop of Rome had in old
time, and still ought to have chief authority and pre-eminence, at the least
wise in the assemblies of councils and Sinodes: the answer is, that he has
nothing to do with the matter: for the Ecclesiastical histories and the acts
of the ancient councels, Hist. trip. lib. 2. cap. 1.
(as that of Nice, holden in the time of Constantine the Emperor) do witness
unto us, that the Bishop of Rome was so far of from ouerruling ye councils,
that he took his place in sitting but as fourth in degree, (which is a good
way offe from the first and cheef place) as he did at the general council of
Nice.

But forasmuch as in this point of the Popes Supremacy, The forged donation
fathered up on Constantine.
the Romish Catholics (and chiefly the Canonists) do maintain the authority
of the Pope, by means of a donation and of certain prerogatives which they
affirm to have been granted unto the Pope by the Emperor Constantine the
great. I will here a little examine the truth of the matter. I say therefore that
this donation and grant of prerogatives, c. Constantius. did. 96
inregistred by Gratian in his decrees, is a thing invented of pleasure and
altogether false, and that it neither is like nor possible, that the Emperor
Constantine did at any time make such a pretended gift or grant of
prerogatives, as may easily be perceived by the histories of his time.

And for proof of this matter, ye must first understand, that in their said
surmised donation, they make the Emperor Constantine to say within four days
after he was baptized, that he would have all the Bishops and Priests of the
Romayn Empire, to acknowledge and hold the Bishop of Rome for their head, in
like sort as the judges of a Realm do hold their king: and that he should
have greater authority than the Emperor himself: Giving unto Siluester the
universal Pope and to his successors, his Imperial Palace of Lateran which
is at Rome, and the City of Rome it self, with all the Provinces, Places, and
Cities of Italy, and all the west part of the Empire, together with the
Imperial Crown of pure gold, enriched with precious stones, his Scepter, his
mantell of Purple, and his other Imperial Robes, and the Imperial dignity of
commanding the men of war, with all other things concerning the glory and
majesty of the Empire. Giving also to others of the Romain Clergy, the
dignity, prehemine^ce and authority of Senators, Lords of the Empire, and
Consuls: willing them to ride on horseback with white footeclothes, apparrayled
like Senators, to the end that the Clergy should be furnished with the like
titles of honor in all points, as the Lords and men of war of the Imperial
Court were.

Also they make the same Emperor to acknowledge himself to be Pope Siluestars
Footeman or Lackay in holding his stirrup and his bridle when he mounted on
horseback. And moreover to declare that he would remove his Imperial seat to
the City of Bizance, which he was the^ purposed to build and to name it after
his own name (that is to say) Constantinople, to give place to the Pope,
because it was unmeet that where the seat of the Priestly kingdom, and of the
supreme head of christen Religion was set by the Emperor of heaven: there also
should be set the seat of the Emperor of the earth. And therefore that he
willed and commanded that the same donation should stand in force, and be
inuiolablye observed until the end of the world, beseeching and adiuring all
the Emperors, Lords of estate, Princes, Senators, and People that should come
after him, even before the dreadful judgment seat of God, never to break
the same upon pain of everlasting damnation. And to have both S. Peter and S.
Paul their enemies, both in this world and in the world to come, and to be
burned and consumed in the deep pit of hell, amongst the devils and the
ungodly folk. And the date of this pretensed donation is this. Given at Rome,
the third of the Kalends of April, in the year of the fourth Consulship of
Constantine Augustus. And also in the fourth Consulship ot Gallicanus.

This in few words is the whole su^me of the pretended donation made by the
Emperor to the Pope and to the Clergy of Rome. Whereupon the doctors of the
Civil Law take maruailous pains in discussing whether it be available or
not, and whether Constantine might so greatly diminish the Empire, seeing that
(say they) the title of Augustus is given unto him, to the intent he should
increase, and not diminish the Empire: And whether he could give greater
authority to the Pope, than he himself had, seeing that by the rules of the
law, no man can grant to another more right than he has in himself: And
whether he could force or constrain his successors to observe this donation,
considering that by the Civil Law, like against like has no power.

These doctors (say I) have taken great pains to resolve this question and
diverse such like upon that matter: but all in vain, The disproofe of the
donation by the very donation it self.
for it ought first to be proved that there was such a gift made, before they
disputed whether it be lawful and available or not. But we may easily gather
by the histories, that it is but a surmised and a forged grant, and that there
was never any such: But the holy order of the Clergy has always taken it to
be a holy kind of fraud, to enter upon the goods of the lay people by such
means.

Therefore to resolve the said dout by the history, you must understand, that
this donation is reported to have been granted in the time of Constantines
fourth Consulship after his baptism, Pomponius laetus. in Constantine and
Licinius. Eusebius. lib. 9 cap. vlt. trip hist. lib. 1. cap. 8. 9. Orosius. lib. 7
cap. 28.
as if they had been both at one time, when as those times were far asunder.
For his fourth Consulship was in the year of our Lord three hundred and
eighteen, and his baptism was more than twenty years after: and therefore the
diversity of the times does discover the falsenes of the donation.

Besides this, it could not be done in any of both those times, for before the
time of his baptism Pope Siluester was already dead, as the histories do well
prove, which do witness, that for the great desire which Constantine had to
be baptized in the River of Iordaine, in Jury, he deferred his Christning (by
reason of the great affairs wherewith he was continually kept occupied) until
the latter end of his life, at which time perceiving himself to be very ill
at ease and out of all hope of being able to travail into Jury to be baptized
in the River of Iordaine, he caused himself to be christened in Nicomedia.

And therefore this pretended grant, could not be made by constantine after his
Baptism (as the donation it self does bear men in hand) to pope Siluester
who was dead before that time. Neither could it be done in the time of
constantines fourth consulship: For at that time (and more than ten years after)
he had a fellow in the Empire named Licinius who held the East part of the
Empire, and Constantine himself held the west parts, according to the custom
of the Romain Empire then received, which was to have two Emperors at once (as
were Dioclesian and Maximian, and also Galerius Maximinus, and Constantius
Chorus) the one commanding in the East parts, and the other in the West.
Eusebius. lib. eccl. hist. 8. cap. 16. and Pom. lpaetus in vitis horum Imperatorum.
And thereof (as some think) did grow the custom of paynting the Imperial
Eagle with two heads. Now then in as much as Licinius remaining at that time in
the East countries as in his own part of government, was a Heathen man and a
deadly enemy to Constantine who was a Christian: It follows in reason, that
if Constantine should have given up the Empire of the West to the Pope, he
could not have made his account to have removed his Imperial seat by and by
into the East, (for he had reckned without his host) but it would have
behooued him first to have put down Licinius, ere he could assure himself of
the Empire of the East, as in deed he did afterward by force of arms: But that
was more than ten years after his fourth Consulshippe. But who would think
Constantine to have been such a fool, as to spoil himself of the West Empire
to give it to the Pope, and to content himself with the East Empire, which he
had not, nor could assure himself to have, considering how uncertain the
issue of waar is.

Moreover about the same time of Constantines fourth Consulship, there was
Civil wars in Rome betwixt Constantine himself and Maxentius, who had set up
himself as an usurper in the City of Rome, through the aid of the Pretorian
Soldiars. By reason whereof, considering that Maxentius was a great enemy to
the Christians, and had on his side an infinite number of the greatest men
within the City: It does well appear that that time was utterly unmeet for
Constantine to advance Pope Siluester and the Roman Clergy so greatly as
this pretended donation would make us believe.

And truly in the very same years of this fourth Consulship, the Senate of
Rome did canonise and inrowle among the number of the Gods, the Emperor
Dioclesian who dyed at that time and had resigned up the Empire, about a ten
years before.

Now then seeing that the Senate was at that time in so great authority as to
canonise Dioclesian (the greatest enemy and persecuter of the Christians that
ever was) in despite of Constantine being then Emperor. Consul, and a
Christian? I leave it to your discretions, to consider how they would have
suffered the thing which this pretended donation speaks of, namely, that
Siluester should have been set up as sovereign Lord over the Senators
themselves, and over all the West Empire: and that the rest of the Clergy
should have been made fellow like and equal with the Senators, Consuls, and
States of the Empire. Surely they would no more have suffered it, than the
Presidents and Councellars of our Parliament would nowadaies abide to have a
minister of the Gospel set over the^ to control them. Or the ouerseear of a
Consistory to be made fellow with them.

And yet furthermore the history does witness unto us that this Constantine the
great, did leave unto his son Constantine for his part the Realms (...) such
ordinances do burden men's consciences, and they that obey them, do seem
rather to play the Jews, than to use the liberty of Christians. These be the
very words of a Canon taken out of S. Augustine: c. Olim. did 12.
Undoubtedly I am of opinion that the traditions of the Church ought to be cut
of, as soon as opportunity may fitly serve thereunto. For although it appear
not that they are contrary to the faith: yet notwithstanding the slavish
burden of them does oppress Religion, which God of his mercy has appointed to
be free with the celebration of few Sacraments, and those very clear: In so
much that the state of the Jews is more tolerable tha^ the observation of so
many traditions. For though they know not the time of their liberty, yet do
they not submit themselves to any Sacraments at the presumptious and
fantastical appointment of man.

Which Cnnon does well declare how much they be wedded to their own affection,
which in these days do kindle coals in all places, and condemn all those of
heresy, which do leave the traditions of men, to betake themselves to the
word of God. For with what countenance dare they call it heresy, not to
believe in the inventions of Popes, seeing that even their own Canons do will
us to forsake the traditions of men? If this be heresy then ought they to
burn their Canon Law.

Moreover, it is very easy to be proved by their own Canons, that all the
decrees and ordinances of the Popes, are either superfluous or wicked. For if
they agree and accord with yt word of god, they are superfluous, because it
ought to suffice us to observe ye ordinances of god, which have no need to be
ratified and authorized new again by men. And if they be contrary or repugnant
to the ordinances of God, then ought they to be rejected as wicked, as the
ancient Canones themselves do witness. These be the very words of an ancient
Canon attributed to Pope Vrbane: c. Sunt quidam.
Ye must understand that the Pope of Rome may well make new ordinances in such
things as the Evangelists and Prophets have not spoaken of, c. contra. 25. q.
1.
But in the matters that are openly resolved by the Lord himself, or by his
Apostles, or by the ancient Fathers that followed next unto them, the Pope of
Rome cannot make any law at all, but ought rather to maintain that which is
already ordained, yea eue^ with spending of his blood and his life. For, if he
should take upon him (which God forbid) to destroy that which the Apostles and
Prophets have taught, in so doing he should show himself to do amiss, and
not to give sound judgment.

Upon this Cannon it is worthy to be noted, that the Popes authority exte^deth
not so far, as to deal with any thing which the Doctors, and ancient
fathers of ye Church have taught, as it is farther avouched and proved by the
Cannon following, attributed to Pope Zosimus which says thus: As touching the
statutes of the fathers, the authority of the Seat may neither ordain any
thing contrary to them, nor change any thing in them: for antiquity ought to
be inuiolably rooted among us, as being honorable by the decrees of the
fathers, By which Cannons of Pope Urban and Pope Zosimus, it does plainly
appear, that the ancient Cannons, (such as those be which we have alleged
in this book to confute the errors of the Romish church) ought to be of greater
authority, than the decrees, and ordinances of the latter Popes of our days,
and of their councels, which have no power to disanul or altar any thing in ye
statutes, and doctrine of the ancient fathers. And as touching the authority,
which the Pope attributes unto him self, The Popes auchority in damning of
men's souls c. Si papa. did. 4 0.
concerning power to dampne souls, and to send them into hell by great
troops, without being lawful for any man to say unto him, why do thou so:
and to excommunicate, outlawe, and accurse whom he lists: a man may beat
down all these horns of his with this unanswerable argument taken out of his
own Canons, that such as are true members of Christ and of his Church, cannot
be condemned nor put out of the Church by any kind of excomunication,
enterditing or accursing, and that if any faithful Christian happen to be
wrongfully excommunicated or accurssed by ye Pope, or by any other priest: yet
notwithstanding he is never the more out of the Church, but remains always
a member of the same.

These be the very words of a canon touching that point: c. Cum aliquis. 2. 4.
q. 4
When any man departs from the truth, from the fear of God, from the faith,
and from Charity, truly, truly the^ goes he out of the compass of the
Church. But contrariwise, if any man be excommunicated and thrust out of the
Church, by unjust Judgment, it is certain that if he were not gone out
before, (that is to say, if he have not done any thing that deserved it) he is
not hurt by such excommunication, for often times he which is driven out
remains still within, and he that seems to be within, is nevertheless
without.

This Cannon teaches us a very good, and holy doctrine: which is to hold and
retain the pure doctrine of the truth, the fear of God, faith and charity,
and then not to fear ye excommunications or thunderbolts of the Popes, or
Bishops (the which in these days they do rather use against such as will not
allow their errors, than against wicked livers and such as give occasion of
offense) because no man is able to put us out of Gods Church, if we cast not
out our selves through our vices. Now, if vices and errors be the things which
drive a man out of the Church of God, are there in these days any people in
the whole world which are more out of the Church than those which think to
drive out others?

There remain yet two points to treat of, touching this matter, A personal
succession in the order of clergy.
namelye, the personal succession amongst those of the Romain Clergy, (whereof
they do so greatly brag themselves against the Protestants) and their
discipline. As touching the first point, they say they have (as it were) a
lineall succession from age to age, of Bishops and Shepherds from the
Primitive Church, and therefore that they be the true Shepherds: and that by
the contrary reason, the Ministers of the gospel which have had no such
succession, be false Shepherds. But this matter of succession is very easy to
be answered. For if you look well into the histories of the Popes, and
confer them with the canons both of late years and of old time, you shall
find that the most part of the Popes and Bishops came in at the window, and
not at the door. And that they have been intruders and usurpers, and not
lawful successors.

And to begin at the beginning, the canons do teach us (as truth is) that
Bishoprics and Ecclesiastical offices ought to be bestowed by lawful
election, and that it is not lawful for Bishops and Shepherds to appoint in
their latter days who shall succeed them, but only to give their opinion to
their Churches, concerning such as they deem in their consciences to be most
meet to succeed them. Thus says a Canon taken out of the Counsel of
Antioch. e. Episcopo. c. vnde. 8. q. 1.
It is not lawful for a Bishop to choose or appoint who shall be his Successor,
though he be near his death: and whatsoever he does in that case, is nothing,
nor nothing worth.

That the Popes are intruders of the Papacy.
By which Canon it follows, that Pope Clement (whom they vouch to be the
Successor of S. Peter) was no lawful Pope. For there is another Canon which
says (if it be worthy to be believed) that S. Peter drawing nie the end of his
life, took S. Clement by the hand, and betook unto him the Church of Rome,
choosing him to be his successor. Also Pope Damasus (who was about the year of
our Lord 371. in the time of the Emperor Valentinia^) was made Bishop or Pope
of Rome by great hurliburlies, wherein there were a hundred and seven and
thirty men slain in the streets as Marcillinus does witness. Am. Marcellus.
lib. 27. Io. stella venetus. and Platina in vitis Pontificum.


Pope John the eightth being a woman (and therefore not capable of the Popedom)
was borne in England, and held the Papacy about two years and a half. Pope
Siluester the second was a great Negromanser, and came to be Pope by the help
of the devil, to whom he gave both body and soul (as it is written in his
history) and he reigned four years and certain Months. Pope Siluester the
third was made Pope by tumults and factions: For in those days (as says the
history) the popedom was grown to such a state, that it was given to him that
would give most for it, or which made most friends and favor. Pope Boniface the
eightth was made Pope by faction and bribery, having first by subtle practices
gotten the resignation of his predecessor Pope Celestine a man of a simple Wit,
whom he caused to be straightly shut up in prison, where he dyed for grief of
mind when he saw himself so deceived and il handeled. Whereupon it was said by
this Boniface, (a good witness of his calling) that he entered into the
Popedom like a fox, reigned like a Lion, and died like a dog: for he dyed mad.
Pope John the four and twentieth usurped the Papacy by force and violence, and
maintained himself in it by the same means, and was found to err in the
Christian faith in more than in forty Articles: so holy was his holiness.

To be short, the histories of the popes are full of the wicked dealings and
practices which the Popes did use to attain to that degree. Now therefore I
ask you whether these ought to be called lawful successors of S. Peter, and
whether those Bishops which were consecrated by them, were lawfully called or
not, or ought to be reputed the lawful successors of ye primitive church, and
whether the Curates and other Priests that were promoted to holy order and to
benefices by such Bishops, may be reckned as lawful successors of the
Shepherds and Elders of the Primitive Church. It is very ceataine that they
were not: c. Cum. in cunctis. c. Bona c. Quisquis Extr. de Electione.
For then were the Canons untrue, which say that in all provisions for persons
meet for Benefices, there ought to be a lawful election, wherein
consideration is to be had of the fitnes of the parties age which is to be
chosen, and of the gravity of his manners, and of his learning: and that as
many as have voices in the election, should be heard, upon pain of making the
election of no force, and that the party be denou^ced as unworthy and unmeet to
have a benefice, which is furthered or preferred thereunto by the favor or power
of the world. Neither are such devilish seruings, inforcementes, subtilties,
and favors to be called lawful vocations: but intrusions, inuations,
usurpations, and wicked and damnable practices. c. Eaquae. 1. q. 3. Ci. c. cum
essent extr. de Simo^ etc cum detestabile Extra.
The Canons also do confirm it to be Simonie, to give money or ought else to be
promoted to Orders, or to be provided of a Benefice or to obtayn a benefice in
recompense of any temporal service.

And that al aduowsions and prese^tations made by Popes or Bishops in way of
Simonye, be naught and of no valor or authority. Now I leave it to al people
of any discretion, to conclude how the Bishops and the priests of these days,
may be called the lawful successors of those of the primative Church. For
shall a man find any which gives no money for his orders or for the bulls of
his benefice? Are not the Bishoprics, Abbyes, Pryoryes, and other Benefices
given away now adays and of long time ago, in recompense of temporal
service, yea and sometime for such unworthy and vile services as deserve rather
punishment than recompense? And seeing that the Popes and Bishops themselves
clymbe up into their high degrees by Symonye, must it not needs be, yt the
collations which they make in bestowing the benefices of the patronages upon
other inferior priests, are Simonicall, and so consequently void according to
the foresaid Canons?

If the Romish Catholics deny this, they must also disauow their own Canons,
and deny the son to have light. And therefore the Romish Clergy are far
from the lawful and continual succession of the Shepherds and Priests of the
primative Church, wherein they imagine themselves to to remayn. For sure,
Brybery, Simonie, and such other like practices, are not the door whereby they
ought to enter into the succession of the ancient shepheardes and Elders, as
they do. But they ought to enter by lawful election made by calling upon the
name of God, after dew examination of the party that is to be promotid, and
that he be found meet for that charge: who being so chosen, must thenceforth
have the tokens of the ancient Shepheardes, which are, to preach Gods word
purely, to minister the Sacraments, to mayntayn good discipline, and to visit
and comfort the sick, as the Shepheardes of the Protestants do.

Affor the discipline of the Bishops and the rest of the Romish Clergy, The
discipline and ma^ners of the Clergy.
It is so corrupted and marde, that their life, doings, and behavior, are
directly contrary to the ancient Cannons. For first, neither the Bishoprics
nor any other benefices ought in any wise to be given to such as sue and make
means for them, but rather to such as shun the having of them. These are the
very words of a Cannon taken out of S. Gregory.

In your writings you say you have greatly sought quietness: c. In scripturis.
8. q. 1.
But yet by the same you declare, that you are come lawfully to the office of a
shepherd: for like as that office ought to be denied to such as do greedely
seek it, so ought it to be given to such as do shun it. And (as it is written)
let no man usurp authority, but tarry the Lords calling, as Aaron did.

But who is he that sees not that benefices are at this day given to such as
hunt for them, and to such as run best: so as it is said in common proverbs,
What manner of persons ought to have benefices.
that horses run for benefices, and Asses catch them. Let us now see what kind
of folk they be, to whom (by the ancient Cannons) Bishoprics and other
benefices ought to be given. These be the words of a Cannon taken out of S.
Iherom. Albeit then that the Lord had given his commandment and election for
the setting up of a Prince: c. Licet ergo 8. q. 1.
yet nevertheless the congregation is called together about it. The presence of
the people therefore is requisite at the choosing of a priest that every body may
know and be assured that such a one is chosen to the degree of priesthood, as
is most excellent amongst the people, best learned, most holy, and most
notable in all virtue: that when the people have yealded him this record, there
may remain no scruple or occasion to revoke the election.

And another Canon says thus: c. Si Episcopus. did. 23.
He whom men would make a Bishop, ought first to be examined, whether he be of
nature, wise and discreet, mild of behavior, chaste of conversation, sober,
vigilant, of good foresight in his own affairs, lowly, gentle to speak unto,
merciful, learned, well instructed in the law of the Lord, sharpwitted, and of
good understanding in the sense of the Scriptures, exercised in the doctrine of
the Church. And (above all things,) such a one as holds simply the Articles
and grounds of the faith.

And in another Canon are well described at large, yt behauiors whereunto the
Priests framed themselves in ancient time, according to the rule of the
ancient Fathers. c. His igitur did. 23.
Now then (says the Canon) such as are separated from the common conversation
of the world, are commanded by the laws of the Fathers of old time, to
abstain from pleasures of the world, to absent themselves from common plays
and gamings, and from the pomp of common feasts and banquets to be sober and
shamefast in their private behavior, to give them selves from usury and
dishonest gayn, to seek to deceive no man, to shun the love of money as the
root of all vices, to eschew worldly businesses and offices, to accept no
degree of honor through ambition, to receive no gifts or presents for the
bestowing of Gods benefits, to flee from all false practices and conspiracies,
to shun hatred, envy and backbyting, to keep their eyes from wandering, their
tongs from walking, their gesture from loosenes and wantonness, to yeald proof
of modesty and shamefastnes by the plainness of their gesture and apparraile,
to abhor all villainous words and works, utterly to refrain the company of
widows and maidens, to admit no women to dwell with them, except they be
very near of kin to them, to indeuer to maintain the chastity of their
bodies, or else to bind themselves in marriage, (howbeit but only once) to obey
their Elders, to forbear to vaunt themselves with bragging and boasting, and
finally to apply themselves continually to the reading of the Christen
doctrine, and to the exercise of Psalms, Hymns, and songs, for such ought
they to be which intend to give themselves to the serving of God: that by their
laboring to get knowledge to themselves, they may minister the doctrine of
grace to the people.

Truly here be many good conditions and virtues. And if the priests of these
days, which are so greatly in love with ye tenths of worldly goods, had but a
tenth part of these virtues, the world should not be so corrupted as it is. But
every body sees, that now a days men of quite contrary conditions are
advanced to the Benefices and Offices of the Church. For a father that has
many children, does not seek to prefer that son of his into the ministry
which is most gentle and virtuous, but him which is most untoward and unfit.
And thereof grow the extreme abuses, corruptions, and ignorance that is among
the Clergy.

And as in old time the teachers, Priests ought to be Preachers.
and Shepheardes were learned men: so did they employ themselves to teach
others, and they that did not so, were reputed not only unworthy of their
chardge and vocation, but also worthy to be abhorred of every man. Thus
speaks a Canon thereof.

c. Vlt. did. 43.
The sowing abroad of the heavenly seed is commanded us: Cursed be we if we
hold our peace. Which thing, seeing that the vessel of election does fear and
cry out at: how much more ought we little ones to be afeard? Wherefore, as it is
a great fault in the Shepherds, to co^ceale the truth which they ought to
publishe abroad: so is it no small danger (God sheeld it) to such as despise
their doctrine which they ought to obey.

And an other Cannon taken out of the counsel of Tollero, does show that the
whole duty of Priests consists in studing the Scriptures, and in preaching
them to the people. c. Ignorantia. did. 38.
Ignorannce the mother of all errors (says the Canon) is to be eschewed in any
wise by priests, whose duty it is, to preach the word of God unto the
people. The priests are admonished by Paul the Apostle writing unto Timothy,
to read the holy Scriptures. Be diligent (says he) in reading, in exhorting,
and in teaching: and continue always in the same. Let Priests be cunning in
the holy Scriptures and Cannons, and let all then labor be in preaching and
teaching; and let them edify all men, as well by knowledge of faith, as by
redress of manners.

But where be now these Shepheardes, which give themselves to preaching,
shall you find one such amongst twentye of your Priests? There are none that
meddle with preaching, save a few monks, and their so doing is contrary to the
profession of monkery: For by the Canons (as we have showed before) it is not
lawful for monks to preach. And as for redress of ma^ners, and examples of
good works: where is it to be found? Not amongst the Curats and Priests of
this time, who (for the most part) are full of ignorance, which being (as the
Canon says) the mother of all errors, has laid her belly among them, and (by
their means,) has brought forth all the abuses, errors, and corruptions that
be in the world, so as men cannot abide any reformation or amendment.

Furthermore in old time, bishops and other Ecclesiastical persons, What the
talk and communication of Clegime^ ought to be.
had none other ordinary talk and communication, (no not even at their feasts
and banquets) but of points of the Scripture, according to a Canon made in the
third Council of Tolleto, which says thus: Because that most commonly there is
nothing but telling of idle tales at the table: c. Pro reuerentia. did. 44.
therefore (for the reverence of God and Priests) the holy and universal
council decrees that Priests shall use to read some part of the holy
Scriptures at their meals. For by that means the soul may well be edefied,
and unprofitable fables laid aside.

I do ask now, shall ye find this Canon well practiced and observed in these
days? No: but ye shall find the clean contrary, as every man does see and
know.

What Bishops ought to be.
The Bishops and Pastors of old time, took not the state of a Bishop to be a
degree of honor and dignity, but a chardge of great weight and painfulnes: but
they esteemed it to be an honorable thing in a Pastor, to be learned and of
good knowledge. Harken what the canons do speak thereof. c. Qui episcopatum. 8.
q. 1.
He that desirerh a Bishopric, desires a good work. By these words the
Apostle meant to teach us what a Bishopric is: namely, that it is a title of
work and not of worship. For it is a greek word, which signifies that he to
whom the charge of a Bishopric is committed, is as an ouerseer of all such as
are committed to his chardge, and that he ought to have a care of them.

And another Canon says thus: c. Vilissimus 1. q. 1.
That man is to be counted most vile, which is in highest degree of honor, if
he do not also excel all others in knowledge and holiness.

Nay contrariwise in these days every man sees that to be a Bishop, A
description of a Popish praelats priesthood.
is a title of honor and dignity, void of all other chardge than to make good
cheer, and to keep a Bishoply table, causing a kind of service to be said in
the Church by some chapline of his for fashion sake. But to be a man of
knowledge, of good life, and of plain meaning, is a vile and a disdainful
thing. The Bishops themselves laugh such people to scorn, and cannot abide to
have them about them.

Touching ecclesiastical goods (for the which our Clergy men contend in these
days with tooth and nail) let us see a little how the men of old time did use
them, The use of church goods.
and how they ought to be used by the ancient Canons. First of all according
to these Canons, they ought not to possess any lands, nor any other temporal
goods, but only the tithes and offerings. These are the very words of a Canon
taken out of S. Iherome: c. Clericus. 12. q. 1.
The Churchman ought to show himself to be such a one as possesses the Lord,
and is possessed of the Lord. He that possesses the Lord and says with the
Prophet, the Lord is my portion, can possess nothing but the Lord. And if he
possess any other thing, the Lord will not be his portion. As for example, if
he possess silver, gold, lands, or moueables, the Lord disdaineth to be his
portion amongst these things. Also if I be the portion of the Lord, and the
meeteline of his heritage, I have no part with the other tribes, but (as a
Leuite and Priest) I live of the tenths and serving at the altar: I am found by
the offerings of the altar: having my food and clothing, I content me therewith,
and naked I follow the naked cross.

Now I do ask of you how well this Canon is performed in these days? Have not
the clergy men all the best and goodliest possessions, rentes, and revenues
that are to be found, over and besides their tithes and offerings? If the case
concern the demanding of tithes, they can skill to say that they belong to
them, as to those that hold the place of the Levites, to whom (by the old law
of Moses) the tenthes ought to belong. But if it be put to them that they
ought not to posses any lands or temperall inheritance, as indeed the levites
did not, because it was forbidden them by the law: They will not then be
Levites any longer, nor say that they represented them. It is not amiss to
construe it to most advantage, that they may be gathering on all hands
thereby. As touching tithes and offerings, How the goods of the Church ought to
be used.
let us now see how the bishops and priests did use the tenthes in old times,
and how they ought to use them now, according to the canons. That is, that they
owght to divide the reuenew of the tenthes and offeringes, into four parts:
Whereof one fourth part was to be given to the Bishop, to maintain him and his
family, that he might keep hospitality for strangers: an other fourth part
was to go to the priests and clergy of his Church: an other fourth part was
to be bestowed upon the poor: and the last fourth part was to be employed in
the repairing of his churches. Harken to the expres words of a canon taken out
of S. Gelasius, which says thus. c. Quatuor, etc. Mos. est. 12. q. 2.
All the revenues and offerings of the Church, ought to be divided into four
parts, if the value thereof will bear it, (as is found to have been decreed
long ago,) Whereof one part belongs to the Bishop, an other to the Clerks,
the third to the poor, and the fourth is to be employed in building. And an
other Cano^ speaks thus. It is the custom of the Apostolic Seat, to
command the new made Byshopes to divide all the revenues of his Bishopric
into four parts: the one part for himself and his family, and to the keeping
of hospitality, an other for the clergy, the third part for the poor, and the
fourth for the repayring of Churches.

Thus you see how the tenths and offerings were bestowed in old time. But in
these days the distribution and employment of them is far otherwise, for the
Priests use the partition of the Lion, taking all to themselves, and leaving no
part to the poor. And yet have we seen even in our time, that these ancient
Canons have bin set in force again by the statutes of Orleance, in the reign
of the late king Charles the ninth, in the year 1561. for there is a branch of
that statute, which says that the fourth part of the tenths shall be
distributed to the poor of every Country where they are leuyed. But the
Clergiemen have so well handled the matter by setting themselves against it, and
by their appeals that the said branch could never yet be put in execution, nor
attain any effect at all, so charitable are they toward the poor. And yet by
the ancient Canons the tenths are named the tributes of the poor. Tithes are
the tribute of the poor.
And therefore those which do not pay their tithes well, be counted gilty of
the death of the poor, which die for want and necessity. How much more gilty
then are they which can so well exact the tenthes, and keep all to themselves,
and give naught to the poor? Let us harken (I pray you) how the canons do
thunder against such kind of people as do withhold the goods of the needy. c.
Decema. 16. q. 1.
The tenths (says the Canon) are the tributes of needy souls, so that if thou
payest well thy tithes thou shall not only receive abundance of fruits, but
also health of body and soul. He that pays them not, is an usurper of other
men's goods. And look how many poor folk do die for want of sustenance in
the place where he dwells, of so many murders shall he be gilty before the
seat of the eternal judge, for converting of the things to his own use,
which are appointed for the poor.

And surely the Church of old time could so ill away with such an abuse in the
Clergy, as is the withholding of the goods of the poor, that it would never
have suffered it. But contrariwise (by the ancient Canons) the Bishops and the
rest of the Clergy, should have been constrained to succor the poor and needy
with the gold and silver of the Church, and to employ it rather in this work of
charity, than in making of fair buildings and in repayring of Churches. These
are the words of a Canon taken out of S. Ambrose: c. Aurum. 12 q. 2.
The Church has gold, not to hoord it up, but to distribute it to the needy.
To what end should a man keep that, which serves him to no purpose. Do we not
know what a great quantity of gold and silver the Assiriens took out of the
temple of the Lord? were it not much better that the priests should bestow
it to the relief of the poor and needy, than that the wicked enemy should
spoil it and carry it away? will not the Lord say unto you, wherefore have ye
suffered so many needy folk to dye for hu^gar? For thou had gold wherewith
thou might have bought them meat: wherefore have thou suffered so many
Captives to be led into bondage, and to be killed by the enemy for lack of
being redeemed? It had been much better for thee to have saved the vessels of
life, then the vessels of metal. Thou shall not know what to answer unto
this, for what will thou say? That thou wast afraid least the Temple of God
should not have been well garnished? I say unto thee, that the Sacraments have
no need of gould. The things which are not to be boughte for gold, are never
the more acceptable for the golds sake. The redemption of Captives is the
ornament of holy things. And truly these are the precious vessels, which do
save men's souls from death.

That is the true treasor of the Lord, which covers that which his blood
has covered. And the next Cano^ following taken out of S. Iherom, c. Gloria.
12. q. 2.
says thus. The glory and reputation of a Bishop, is to pinch himself to
enrich the poor, and it is a shame for a Priest to seek riches to himself.
Many build up the walls, and in the mean while do pull down the pillors of the
Church. The marble glistereth, the Lamp shyneth, and the altar is garnished
with precious stones, but of all this while, there is no account made of the
seruau^ts of god. To receive the goods which ought to be distributed to the
poor, and to be desirous to keep them unspent, is a point of to great
forecast, or else of to great fearfulnes, but to convert any part of it to a
man's own use, is a fault which passes the cruelty of the greatest thieves
of the world.

Mark this definitive sentence, which this good doctor S. Ierom has pronunced
against such as withhold the goods of the poor, and bestow them to their own
use Oh good lord, how full of such thieves is this world at this day, which
are condemned by this sentence of S Ierom. At leastwise the most part of my
masters of ye Clergy, can not wash their hands of this crime of deteining and
usurping the goods of the poor, except they will deny the Canons heretofore
alleged, which are grounded upon al reason and equity, and have been holily
observed in the primative church. I doubt not but that many of the clergy will
think this little discourse of time which I have made touching their
discipline, They that conceal the truth mainteyne error.
very hard and grievous. But I beseech them to suffer their affections to give
place to the truth. Their own Canons shall serve me for a lawful defense and
excuse in this case. For by them we be taught, never to conceal the truth, but
bouldly to speak it upon pain to be accounted oppressors of the same, and
allowers of error. These are the words of a canon of Pope Innocents. The
error which men do not resist, c. Error. did 83.
seems to be allowed. And the truth which is not defended, is oppressed. If
a man neglect to resist the unruly, it is as good as a mayntayning and
bolstering of them: neither can the party be excused of suspicion of secret
society, which neglects to withstand the crime that is manifest.

There is also another canon which says thus: c. Facientie did. 83.
That party is gilty of the fact, which is careless to correct the thing that he
may amend. For it is written, that not only those are partakers of the misdeede
which commit it, but also they that consent thereunto. And he that condemns
such as go astray, shows himself to hate their misdoinges: and he leaves
no gap for himself to leap out at, which challenges those that start out of
the way.

By which canon we ought all of us to learn, not to wink at vices and
misdealings. And therefore my masters of ye clergy, may (if it please the^)
make themselves a wholesome medicine of the things which I have spoken
heretofore concerning their manners and discipline. And like as they spare not
to exclaim against the Protestants (howbeit wrongfully) that they are the
cause of the civil trobles in France, and so consequently of the corruptions
and disorders that are bred of them: So set them bethink themselves a little of
their own doeings, and they shall find by the Canons which I have alleged
heretofore, that in their own orders there are as many abuses and corruptions
as possibly can be. But now that I have spoaken sufficiently of the Pope, and
of the Romish Clergy, let us now enter into their Purgatory.

Of Purgatory. The xii. chapter.
THe Romain Catholics do hold opinion, that there is a certain place within
the earth which is not altogether so low as hell, whether the souls of the
good Christians which are dead, do go to purge them of their sins by
torments of fire and other rigorous pains: and that every deadly sin
should, by desert, have seven years of purgation, if the term of years were
not shortened by masses, suffrages, and pardons. And for this cause they do
hold opinion, that it is needful to cause a great number of masses and
suffrages to be said for them that be dead, and to the same end to give
legacies and foundacions of Obites to massepriests and chauntrypriests, and to
make good provision of pardons, specially in the time of the great Iubileis and
Croysseys, which they sell very good cheap.

And in very truth this doctrine of Purgatory has exceedingly enriched the
Clergy, Purgatory the inricher of the Clergy.
yea more than any other thing. For there dyed not so poor a wretch which gave
not some legacy to the priest, (yea often times even the best thing they had)
to have them sing masses for the case of their souls, and to shorten the time
of their abode in purgatory. And hereunto were al sick folk persuaded by their
Confessors, which would make great difficultye and nicenes to give them
absolution, except they would promise to give one thing or other to the church.

And the better to draw them hereunto, they made them believe that for every
mortal sin, their souls should remain (as is said) seven years in the
pains of purgatory, which would be an infinite time, if it were not shortened
by masses. For, say they, although that God do in this world, pardon the
sins of all such as confess them to the priest and make satisfaction, yet
does he remit but the sin only, and not the pain, so as we must needs go
to purgacory to suffer pains for all the sins which we have committed in all
our life time: Which pains are so great, as greater are not possible. For (say
they) there is as great difference betwixt the fire of purgatory and the fire
of this world, as is betwixt a burning coal and the breath of a man's mouth.
By reason whereof the poor world had so great fear and conceit of this hot
fire of purgatory, and of the infinite time which they should be fayn to
remain there, accounting seven years for every mortal sin which was
committed in a man's life time, that every man gave unto the Priests, as much
as they would crave, to the end that their time in purgatory might be shortened.
But contrary to this doctrine, the Protestants do hold opinion that we have
no other purgatory than the blood of our Lord Jesus Ghrist, which washes away
and cleanses all men's sins which believe in him. And they say that his
precious blood is more then sufficient to wipe out all our sins, without
having need to be purged by any fire. And that our savior does not cleanse us
by halfes, but thoroughly altogether, and we should do him wrong and injury, to
believe that we have need of any other kind of clensing, than of that which he
him self makes, in justifying us by bearing our iniquities, and by wyping
away our sins and blemishes: And that it is a mockery to say that God does
pardon our sins, and not the pain due for sin: as if you would say, he
forgeueth us the dets that we do owe him, but not the payment of the dettes:
for he will have that still.

And now (to say the truth) all men may easily judge that this doctrine is
better tha^ the doctrine of the Romish Catholics, according to our first
rule, because that by the same, Christ our Redeemer is most honored, forasmuch
as he is acknowledged to be the only and whole purger of our iniquities, and
our true and only Attonementmaker and Iustifyer.

And asfor the holy scripture, that does teach us that the faithful and chosen
of God do dye unto the Lord and that those which dye unto ye Lord are very
happy, and do go into the place of rest. These are the express words of S.
John. Happy are they which from this time forth do dye to the Lord: Apoc. 14.13.
for they do rest from their labors. And for those which dye not to the Lord,
forasmuch as they be none of his, nor members of the body of the true church
whereof christ is the head: it is certain that there is no salvation for them.
And therefore it is in vain to imagine a purgatory, either for the one, or for
the other. For as many as die to the lord, go presently to rest and not into
purgatory. And those which do not dye to the Lord, do go into everlasting pain
(not into purgatory) and there is no salvation for them. And as for the text
taken out of the book of the Machabees, which allows prayer for the dead, 2.
Machab. 12.43. and 15.39.
and so by consequence purgatory also: The Protestants say that it ought to be
houlden for a certain and undoubted rule, that we ought not to build any
article or faith upon the books called Apocripha, of which number this book
of the Machabyes is one: insomuch as the Author thereof that wrate it,
confesses that he may perchance have ouershot himself, and that he has
written in simple style, and that he was not of skill to write any better:
which is an unmeet kind of speech for the holy Ghost, who can not err nor
has any need to be excused for speaking in a base style: for when he lists
he speaks in a higher style than the excellentest Orators that over were in
the world.

And as touching the text where it is says: that the sin against the holy
Ghost is not pardoned, neither in this world, Mat. 12.32
nor in the would to come. (Whereupon the Romish Catholics do infer,
following the interpretation of S. Gregory) that then the other sins are
forgeuen in the other world, and so by consequence, that there must needs be a
purgatory: the protestants affirm that to be an ill conclusion. For in so
saying our Lord Jesus Christ mente nothing else, but that ye sin against the
holy Ghost shall never be forgiven. S. Oregory himself (as we will declare
hereafter) does not say that all other sins saving the sin against the holy
Ghost, shall be pardoned in the world to come: but only that the smalest sort
of sins which are called venial sins, shall be then forgeuen. Let us now
come to the Canons.

Prayer for the dead is disproued.
There are two pieces of Canons in the decrees of Grecian, which may easily
quench and confound purgatory. For by the one it is said that in this world one
of us may well be helped by the prayers of another: But when we depart from
hence to appear before the seat of Christ, every man must bear his own
burden, and then the prayers of Saints which are in paradise will nothing
avail us, and much less will the prayers of me^ of this world stand us in any
stead. These are the words of the Canon. c. Inpraesenti. 13. q. 2.
In this present world we know we may help one another with our prayers and
good advice: but when we come before the judgment seat of Christ, then
neither Job. nor Daniell, nor Noe, can pray for any, but every man shall then
bear his own burden.

The other Canon says that neither the bishops nor the Apostles can assoyle
the dead of their sins: Whereupon it follows yt men have bought the Popes
pardons in vain, for the redeeming of those which are said to have been in
Purgatory. These are the very words of the said Canon taken out of the decrees
of Pope Gelasius: c. 2. 24, q. 2.
We read that Christ has raised the dead to life: But we read not that ever
he released any of those which were dead in sin. And he who only had the
power to do it, has given this principal commandment to S. Peter, saying:
That which thou vnbindest upon earth, shall be unbound in heaven, and that
which thou bindest upon earth shall be bound in heaven. He says upon earth,
but he never said that he which is departed bound by sin, shall be released.

Which Canon does well show, that the power to unbind does not stretch so
far as to hell, nor so far as to the pretended Purgatory, but only to the
earth: and that the Popes of late years have gone about to extend the bounds
of their territories to far, in commanding the angels (as they do by their
bulls of pardons) to go fetch the souls of such out of purgatory, as the
Popes themselves listed to name, for they have no commandment that reaches
either higher or lower than the earth.

Whence prayer for the dead comes.
It is true that for ground of this doctrine of Purgatory, they allege that
the custom of praying for the dead has been allowed and received now of long
time, even from the time of the primitive Church. But it does not thereby
follow, but that an error is an error, although it be never so old. c. Cum
Marthae. vlt. ext de celebr. missa.
Moreover (as Pope Innocent the third does witness) many of the ancient Fathers
have believed, that the glory of those which are in Paradise, might still grow
greater until the day of judgment, and so by consequence they did imagine that
it was lawful to pray to god for the increase of their glorifying.

De Ciuit. Dei. lib. 2. c. 24.
S. Augustine also writes (how be it that he allows not the opinion) that
some ancient Fathers have imagined, that to pray for the damned sort, might
do them good, not to exempt them from eternal pain, but to moderate their
torments. And therefore although that this kind of praying for the dead were
sufferable, (as in deed it is not) seeing it has no foundation in the word of
God, yet cannot Purgatory be grounded thereupon, forasmuch as the praying of the
Fathers of old time, was either for those which were happy in Paradise, for
that their glory and blessedness might increase, or for those which were
damned, that their pain might be diminished, and not for any which they
believed to have bin lodged in Purgatory. For in those days they knew not yet
what was meante by Purgatory, nor where Purgatory stood. For it is but a late
invention of the new descriptions of hell.

The famosest doctor that ever spoke of Purgatory, is S. Gregory: Dialog. 4. c.
39.
who notwithstanding, speaks after such a fashion, that he seems to make no
great reckning of the matter, For he says that none but venial sins may be
purged by the fire of Purgatory, the deadly sins cannot: The small power of
Purgatory in clensing men's sins
So that by this reckning the pains and torments of this pretended Purgatory,
have no more power to purge, than has the simple holy water: whereunto they
do likewise attribute the virtue of clensing, and of washing away of men's
venial sins. These are the very words of S. Gregory.

Such as a man departs hence, such is he presented in the day of judgment.
But yet we must believe that before the judgment, there is a fire of purgation
for certain degrees of sins, because the truth says, that if any man have
blasphemed the holy Ghost, his sins shall not be forgeuen, neither in this
world nor in the world to come. By which words it is given us to understand,
that there are some sins which may be pardoned in this world, and some in the
world to come. For that which is denied in one sin, is granted in an other
by consequent interpretation. But yet (as I have said) you must understand this
to be spoken of the least sins, as the speaking many idle words, to much
laughter, to great carefulnes for a man's own family (which is a sin that can
hardly be shu^ned even of such as know best how to keep themselves from
sinning) or to err in points which are of no great importance, or to be
ignorant of the^. Al which sins make a man's burden the heuier eue^ after
death, if they be not pardoned in his life time.

Upon this text and upon the interpretation which S. Gregory has made of it,
(howbeit amiss, as I have said before in the text of the holy scripture which
says that ye sin against the holy Ghost is not pardoned in this world nor
in the world to come) the Romish Catholics, or rather the Scholemen and
sophisters have altogether builded and founded their purgatory. And they are
not contented yt only venial sins should there be purged, (as S. Gregory
would:) but they will needs have it to serve for the doing away of deadly
sins also, either by remaining there the full time of seven years for every
deadly sin, or else by redeeming or shortening that long season, by the
celebrating and founding of Masses and other suffrages. Which addition of the
Sophisters has maruelously enriched ye kitchins of ye clergy and monks, and
brought great abundance of water to their milles, which had never happened to
them, if purgatory had served but only to purge venial sins, according to
the aforesaid opinion of S. Gregory. for the good people of christendom had
rather to have purged themselves from those sins with holy water (which did
no harm to those that sprinkled themselves therewith) then by the fire of
purgatory which is affirmed to be extremely burning and scalding hot, or by the
founding of masses and Obits, which were far deerer then was the holy water.
So as purgatory had been brought to nothing, as a wast and barren soil, if
men had held themselves to the only sayings of S. Gregory. Thus may you see
how the poor world has been abused, by the inue^tors and practisors of such
holy deceytes.

Of the exception of prescription. The xiii. chapter.
Hitherto I think I have made it to appear plainly enough, that the Romish
Catholics are not so well grounds as they imagine, in ye points of religion
which they would maintain against the protestants, Now therefore let them
blame the reformed religion as much as them lists and report it to be new,
full of errors and heresies, and contrary to the word of God: and finally let
them deface it as much as shall please them. For when it comes to ye vpshot,
their hasty headines and their wilful fordeeming through the corruptnes of
their affections, shall never bring to pass, but that truth shall always be
truth, and darcknes be darcknes. Do what they can to the uttermost, yet will
the truth continue always to strong for them, in the judgment of the wisest
sort. I know well that those which think themselves to have the best brains,
and to be of greatest insight in all matters, are the persons that utter their
opinions so boldly in this controversy of Religion, saying that the reformed
Religion (which they term new) is a savage Religion, fond and full of follies
and errors: and they will needs be believed in the matter upon their bare
word, without proouing any part of that which they speak.

But as those kind of people are commonly ignorant and malicious, and moreover
possessed with ambition and beastlines: so does it appear that their mouths
are ever still open, even when their ouerarrogant ignorance is beaten down by
good reasons and allegations. And when they have done all that they can, for
their last refuge they are feign to run to the exception of prescription,
saying, that the Romish Religion has been received and observed in France
ever since the first setting up of ye kingdom, even since the great king
Clowis, who was the first Christian king, and that it is not like that God
would leave the world so long time (which is more than a thousand years) in
error and ignorance. Prescriptio^ can bear no sway in matters concerning God
and Religion.


But what if it be denied that their Religion (such as it is this present) was
observed in the time of Clowis, or of Charlemayn, or of many other kings of
France which have been since that time? How would they prove that which they
have said? And if the contrary be proved to them by wrytings of ancient
Bishops and Doctors of France, by the which it does appear that in this
Realm in old time they did hold the same Religion, or uery near the same,
which the Protestants do in these days, what will they answer then? And were
it not also very easy to prove by the Historiographers which have written the
lives of the Popes, and also by the decrees of the Popes themselves, that the
most part of their ceremonies and traditions (whereof at this day they make
more account than of Gods word) have bin invented and brought into the Church
by the Popes of later times, long since Charlemayn? And therefore they which
said that the Romish Religion (such as it is at this present) has been
observed in France ever since the beginning of the kingdom there, do greatly
mistake their marks, and cannot verify their saying, but the contrary is
easy to be proved.

But let us put the case (how be it without granting it) that the thing which
they say is true, and that this Romish Religion is of the uttermost antiquity
that can be. Must the truth of God therefore forgo his right, by the exception
of prescription? Noe truly. For if by the Civil law there be no prrscription
against a king, how much less then, may it be against the king of kings? And
put the case again (without granting it) that prescription ought to take place
against God: yet were it not reason (think you) to reckon the lapse of time
according to Gods measuring thereof? Now it is certain, that with God, a
thousand, yea and twelve hundred thousand years, are no more than an hour, or
a quarter of an hour, and therefore by the lapse of so little space of time,
prescription can take no advantage. But all men of sound judgment will always
grant that as time does not change the truth into untruth, nor untruth into
truth: So also of consequence we must not admit a Religion for true and good,
under color that it has endured long time, seeing that the exception of
prescription is not to be admitted in such caces.

For else if the Romish Catholics will needs stick to the Judgment of
prescription for the allowance of a Religion: then must they make good the
religion of Mahomet, which has already lasted above a thousand years, which
thing I am sure that none of them will do, how passionate soever they be
otherwise. And if it be demanded wherefore god has so long time suffered ye
error of Mahomet amongst the Turks, Persians, Arrabians, Sirians, and the
other Esterne and Southern people of Asia and Africa, among whom the Apostles
and disciples of Jesus Christ preached the Gospel and planted so many fair
Churches: there is no other answer to be made unto it. but that god has done
it by his secret judgment, whereof we are ignorant. Full well we know that he
has done it for good and a just cause, and to good purpose, because he does
nothing but that which is good and just. But it does not become us to search
any deeper for the particular causes which have moved him so to do, neither
ought we to be inquisitiue of his priuities and secret di^g^mentes. The same
also is to be answered, to such as say that it is not likely yt God would
suffer the people of Christendom to err, so long as since the mass has had
his full scope. For (to be short) seeing that God is the truth it self and yt
his word is true: it is much better to yield God his due honor by sticking only
to his word, then to refort to custom and prescription of time, to authorize
the traditions of me^. Math. 5.21.
Jesus Christ himself does teach us plainly enough, that we ought to reject
the traditions of men, although they be never so ancient, and grounded upon
prescription of time out of mind, and that we ought always to have recourse
back to the pure word of God, which shall last for ever, notwithstanding al
customs and prescriptio^s which are against it. For in reproving the
traditions of the Pharisees which had then been received and allowed of long
time, he exhorts his disciples to cast them of, and to return back again to
the pure word of God, and to the natural meaning thereof saying: you have
heard how it was said to the me^ of old time etc.

As for the ancient Canons, they are so clear and express in this case, as
is possible and therefore it shall suffice me to translate them here simply.
These be the very words of ye Cano^. c. Mala. c si consuetudinem. c. Frustra.
c. Consuetudo. c. si solus. did. 8. The perilous effects of evil custom.
An ill custom is no les to be rejected and shunned, then a pestilent
infection, because that if it be not the sooner plucked up the wicked do serve
their turn with it as it were by right of privilege: insomuch that the sundry
disorders and diverse vsurpatio^s which are not repressed out of hand begin anon
after to be received for laws, and are always observed as privileges.

By which Canon we may well note the pernicious effects of ill customs,
which cause us to receive vice in stead of virtue, and evil in stead of
good: whereof our miserable world has to many examples, as well in causes of
Religion as in matters of policy and law. For in these days men defend
nothing more earnestly, than the abuses and errors which are in all estates,
under pretense that they have taken root by long custom and contynuance of
time, which have suffered them to pass in force of laws and Privileges.

Another Canon taken out of saint Gregory says thus: Al custom must give
place to truth.
If a man happen to object custom against us, we must consider what the Lord
says: I am the way (says he) the truth and the life. He does not say I am
custom. And truly (as says S. Ciprian) all custom although it be never so
ancient, add received, ought to be set aside in respect of the truth, and all
custom which is contrary to the truth ought to be abolished.

There is yet another Canon which sings thus: In vain do they allege
custom, which are overcome by reason as though custom were of greater force
then the truth. Or as though in spiritual things we should not follow that
which has been revealed by the holy Ghost. Certainly it is a true thing, that
reason and truth are to be preferred before custom. But if custom be
confirmed by the truth, it ought to be consta^tly kept and retained.

There is yet another Cano^ which speaks fitly of this matter, taken out of
S. Ciprian, saying thus: The custom that is crept into any place, ought to be
no impediment but that the truth should be preferred and get the upper hand: for
custom without truth is nothing else but a giving of contynuaunce unto error.
Wherefore let us leave the error, and follow the truth: knowing that in Esdras,
truth gets the upper hand, according as it is written, Truth preuayleth and
gets the mastery, and lives for ever, and shall endure world without end.

To come to an end, I will add this one Canon and no more: For I should not
have done very soon, if I would rehearse all the Canones that are to purpose
touching this matter. And thus says this Canon: If only Christ ought to be
heard, then must we not depend upon the things which other men that have been
before our time, have thought meet to be done, but rather upon that which
Christ has done, who is before all. For we ought not to follow the custom of
men, but the truth of God, specially seeing that he says by the mouth of Esaias
the Prophet, In vayn do they honor me, by teaching the commandments and
doctrines of men.

And in very deed this Cannon should make the whole rabble of the Canonistes,
Decretistes Sarbonists, Sophistes, and others which handell the books of the
Romish divinity, to blush for shame, that they should strain them selves to
uphold the doctrines which have been appara^tly invented by men. For this one
Cannon does arregne them and condemn them, al in few words.

Now to come to an end of this treatise, An exhortation unto peace.
I pray the Romish Catholics to vouchsafe, to look advisedly into the poynes
hertofore by me discussed: and to examine and ponder them thoroughly and without
passion, if it be possible. For in so doing I am sure, that as many as have any
natural discression in them, shall find that the Religion of the Protestants,
is a far other thing then they have hitherto taken it to be, or than it has
bine borne them in hand to be. And when they shall perceive that the said
Religion (at the least) is neither wicked, nor heretical, nor new (as even the
most simple may easily discern by the points before treated of) it may be a
just occasion for them (if they be not strangely bereft of their right wits)
to incline to live henceforth in peace and concord, with the professors of the
said Religion.

And herewithall I beseech them to have earnest consideration of two things.
The one is, that without a good peace and concord betwixt the Catholics and
the Protestants, the state of the Realm of France will not only run wholly to
ruin, but also come to utter undoing and destruction. And he that sees not
this, is very gross and ignorant. For Civil wars (when they continue) do
never bring forth other effects, than the changes and destructions of commonweals, unless some good and virtuous men that are lovers of the common weal,
do fortune to prevent such unhappy and evil destinies, by procuring some good
and reasonable pacification, as the histories do yeald us infinite examples
thereof.

The other thing to be considered of is this. That every particular person
ought to bethink himself that he has a soul to save, and that he ought to
seek the way of his salvation. For to what purpose serves it to have gotten
honor, glory, riches, and other contentments of the world, to him that
follows the way of damnation to his own wretched soul? Now he that is
determined to seek the salvation of his soul, will he say that he is
contented to believe as his Curate does believe? Such resolution were to
foolish and beastly. Or will it suffice him to say that he will live as his
Predecessors have done, and follow custom? That were also a wrong way; and is
already condemned by the Canones heretofore alleged. Then ought we to
determine with our selves to follow the truth, and to embrace the true doctrine
of Christ Jesus but lord and Savior, or else we shall never attayn to
salvation. And when we be thus resolved, we must take heed that our passions
do not blind the eyes of our understanding, and cause us to take black for
white. For if we say still, we have been led and brought up in this Religion, my
father and grand fathers? (which were good men) have died in the same, I have
borne Arms and ventred my life to maintain it, it were not now for my honor to
follow the Religion against which I have fought, I am of the opinion that there
is no ill in the religion that I hold, I am now to old to learn any other,
and such other trifling excuses: we do greatly deceive our selves, for they are
nothing available before god, with whom we may not dally in this sort. For
such shifts of descant serve to no other and, but to trifle our minds, and to
lull them a sleep in ignorance and darckenes, that they may have no skill of
their salvation when they depart this world. What is then to be done that we
may come into the path of salvation? we must seek the truth. And where shall we
find it? eue^ there whether Christ did send us when he said search the
Scriptures.

The father of all mercy, who has created and made us for of his own glory
and honor sake, give us all such grace, that being enlightened by his holy
spirit, we may be well edified in the pure doctrine of Jesus Christ his son
our Savior, to the end that being true Christians in name and effect, we may
live in good unity peace, brotherly and christianly love together in his holy
service.

Amen.
Telos.

