D. HESKINS, D. SANDERS, AND M. Rastel, accounted (among their faction) three
pillars and Archpatriarches of the Popish Synagogue, (utter enemies to the
truth of Christ's Gospel, and all that syncerely profess the same)
overthrown, and detected of their several blasphemous heresies.

By D. Fulke, Master of Pembrooke Hall in Cambridge.

Done and directed to the Church of England, and all those which love the
truth.

AT LONDON, Printed by Henry Middleton for George Bishop. ANNO. 1579.

The contents of the several treatises contained in this Book.
1 The Parleament of Christ, auouching the inacted truth of his presence in
the sacrament, restored to his verity, and delivered from the impudent and
outrageous corruptions of Tho. Heskins.

2 That it is lawful to break superstitious Images, and utterly unlawful to
honor them, (with a confirmation of such true doctrine, as Master Jewel has
uttered in his reply concerning that matter) against a blasphemous treatise
made by Nicholas Sander.

3 The challenge and sound doctrine, contained in M. Jewels sermon, maintained
and delivered from the lewd and slanderous dealing of Rastel, with an answer
to his challenge.

A CATALOGVE of all such Popish Books either answered, or to be answered,
which have been written in the English tongue from beyond the seas, or secretly
dispersed here in England have come to our hands, since the beginning of the
Queens Majesty's reign.
1 HArding against the Apology of the English church, answered by M. Jewel,
Bishop of Sarum. 2 Harding against M. Jewels challenge, answered by M. Jewel. 3
Hardings reioynder to M. Jewel, answered by M. Edward Deering. 4 Coals
quarrels against M. Jewel, answered by M. Jewel. 5 Rastels return of
untruths answered by M. Jewel* 6 Rastell against M. Jewels challenge, answered
by William Fulke. 7 Dorman against M. Jewel answered by M. Nowel. 8 Dormans
disproofe of M. Nowels reproof, answered by M. Nowell. 9 The man of Chester
answered by M. Pilkington Bishop of Duresme. 10 Sanders on the sacrament in
part answered by M. Nowell. 11 Fecknams Scruples, answered by M. Horn B. of
Winchester. 12 Fecknams Apology, answered by W. Fulk. 13 Fecknams objections
against M. Goughes sermon, answered by master Gough and master Lawrence
Tomson. 14 Stapletons counterblast, answered by M. Bridges. 15 Marshall his
defense of the cross, answered by M. Caulfehill. 16 Fowlers Psalter, answered
by M. Sampson. 17 An infamous libell or letter ((...)) against the teachers of
Gods divine providence and predestination, answered by Robert Crowley. 18
Allens defense of Purgatory, answered by W. Fulk. 19 Heskins parleament
repealed by W. Fulk. 20 Ristons challenge, answered by W. Fulk, and Oliver
Carter. 21 Hosius of Gods express word translated into English, answered by
W. Fulk. 22 Sanders rock of ye church, undermined by W. Fulk. 23 Sanders
defense of images answered by W. Fulk. 24 Marshals reply to Caulfhil answered
by W. Fulk. 25 Shaclockes Pearl, answered by M. Hartwell. 26 The hatchet of
heresies, answered by M. Bartlet. 27 Master Euans answered by himself. 28 A
defense of the private Mass answered (by con^ecture) by M. Cooper Bishop of
Lincoln. 29 Certain assertions tending to maintain the church of Rome to be
the true and catholic church, confuted by John Knewstub.
These Popish treatises ensuing for the most part are in answering, and those
which are not (by God assistance as (...) will serve) shall receive their
several replies. If the Papists know any not here reckoned, let them be
brought to light, and they shall be examined.
1 Sanders, upon the Lords supper, partly unanswered. 2 Allens defense of
Priests authority to remi^ sins and of the churches meaning concerning
indulgences. 3 Stapletons fortress of the faith. 4 Stapletons return of
untruths. 5 Rastels replye. 6 Bristowes Motives and Demands collected out of
the same. 7 Vaux his Catechism. 8 Canisius his Catechism translated. 9
Frarins oration translated.
THE AUTHOR to the Reader.
ALTHOUGH there is nothing in these books which have been so long unanswered,
but either it is unworthy any answer, or else has been satisfied sufficiently
before in many treatises extant in the English tongue already: yet because the
adversaries should not altogether please themselves in their fantasy that they
be unanswerable, nor the simpler sort suspect that there is any thing in them
that we need to be afraid of, I thought good to take in hand this short manner
of confutation. In which I trust the diligent and indifferent reader will
confess, that I have omitted much matter whereof I might have taken advantage,
rather then that I have left any argument of importance unsatisfied.
Considering therefore what breuitte I have used as was necessary for me, being
but one against so many, I trust the reasonable Readers will look for no other
virtue of writing at my hands, but only the simple showing of the truth, and
the plain confutation of the false reasons of the adversary. Which that they
may the better see, and with more profit perceive, I exhort all such as have
the Popish Books here confuted, to confer their arguments with mine
answers. And for them that have not the books at hand, I have so set down the
titles of their Chapters, and the chief points of their treatises collected
by themselves, in their ow^^ tables, that the perusers may understand, I have
left no matter of any moment untouched. In rehearsing of their arguments, I
have rather added weight unto them, then taken any force from them, in my
repetitio^ or abridgement of them, so near as I could by any wit I have,
conceive their order, and resolve their Method. What I have performed in
answering, let the godly and learned Judge. In the mean time I desire God to
grant that this my labor may be to the glory of his name, and the profit of
his Church, by Jesus Christ our Lord.

THE FIRST BOOK OF HESKINS PARLEAMENT REpealed by W. Fulke.
THE first Chapter upon occasion that this adversary, this proclamer, and
challenger (he means the B. of Sarum of holy and learned memory) would have
the Scriptures read of all men (presupposing the same to be easy to be
understood) enters, as by preamble, to treat of the difficulty of the
Scriptures, and to prove that they ought not of all men to be read, without an
able interpreter or teacher. D. Heskins.


THIS Burgess for the city of Rome, D. Fulke.
having in purpose to make a speak in the Popish Parleament, for the matter of
the sacrament of the Mass: and douting least his tale should not be long
enough, if he uttered nothing but that might seem directly to appertain to
his cause, begins with a pretty preamble of eight Chapters long, of the
difficulty of the Scriptures, and the understanding of the same. And because
he has not advantage sufficient of any words or writing of the B. of Sarum
to enlarge his speech by confuting thereof: he feigneth unto him self, a
monster to fight withal, out of Luthers book, De seruo arbitrio, who teaches
(as he says) That the Scriptures of them selves be easy of all men to be
understood, and need none interpreter, for that we be all taught of God and
of his spirit, etc. Of which mind he imagines his adversary to be, In that
he would the scriptures to be common to all men. How false and slanderous this
his report is of Luther, may sufficiently appear by that one word,
Theodidacti, taught of God, by which it is most manifest, that Luther affirms
the scriptures to be easy to be understood, not of all men in general, but
only of all them that are taught of God, and of his spirit, by which they
were indighted. But now our Burgess will make plain by discussion, that the
scriptures be obscure, dark, and hard to be understood, and for that cause
not of all men indifferently to be read, and that by seven arguments. Although
it follows not, that the scriptures are not to be read, because they are
hard, but the contrary; yet let us weigh these seven arguments.

The first: There be many controversies of the blessed sacrament, therefore
there be difficulties in the scriptures. If controversies raised by froward
maintainers of falshoode, be a proof of difficulty, there shall nothing be
plain, not only in the scriptures of God, neither in any other writings or
sayings of men, no not in such matters as are subject to our senses, but we
shall be brought into an Academicall doubtfulnesse of all things. But what say
you M. Heskins? are not the scriptures plain for the real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament which you maintain? Is Hoc est corpus meum,
now a matter of diffic^ltie? Let all Papists that have wit beware of your
proceeding, you have even now by your first argument, cut asunder the sins and
strength of al your cause.

The second: The very disciples of Christ, besides the Jews, understood not
Christ's own words before they were written. Ioh. 6. Much less we the same
written. To pass over the ungodly difference you make, between Christ's
words proceeding out of his own mouth, and the same written by inspiration of
his own holy spirit, call you them the very disciples of Christ, which
offended with that speech departed from him, or them that abid the
interpretation of them, and tarried still with him? Such disciples as the
former were be you, and your sect, which when the scripture serves not your
purpose, accuse it of difficulty and uncertainty, as the old Heretics the
Valentinians did: as witnesses Irenaeus lib. 3. cap. 2. But Chrysostom I
suppose helps you much, Chrysostom. in. 6. Io^^.
where he says: Quid ergo? est durus? difficilis intellectu, and quem capere
non posset eorum imbecillitas plenus formidinis. What then? is this word hard?
difficult to be understood, and such as their weakness could not receive,
full of fearefulnes. Here is the name of the words of Chrysostom, but to what
purpose? when no doctor more often, or more earnestly exhorts all Lay men
that are Christians, to read the scriptures of God, affirming the^ also to be
easy to be understood for the most part, and not only without danger, but
also very profitable, even where they be hard to be understood. I will
rehearse one or two places of a great number.

In Luc. cap. 16. Idque, hortor and hortari non desinam etc. And this I exhort
you, and will not cease to exhort you, that you would not only in this place
(meaning in the Church) give heed to those things that are said, but also when
you shall be at home, you would every day give your selves to the reading of
the holy scriptures. And there follows a reason, Neque nunc fieri potest:
Neither can it now be, I say, it can not be, that any man should obtain
salvation, except he be continually conversant in spiritual reading. And not
long after, Etiamsi, non intelligas illic recondita etc. yea, although thou
understand not the mysteries that are therein hidden, yet of the very reading
of them, great holiness grows. Finally, In genesim Hom. 9. In diuinis autem
scripturis etc. but in the holy scriptures, and in those spiritual and
precious stories, neither is it lawful to suspect any danger, neither is there
any great labor, but unspeakable gain, only let us bring with cheerfulness
that which lies in us.

The third: If the scriptures be plain and easy for every man to understand,
it was no great benefit that Christ did open his Apostles wits, that they
might understand the scriptures, nor that he did interpret Moses and the
Prophets, to the disciples that went to Emaus, wherefore we conclude with S.
Peter, that as he witnessing the Epistles of S. Paul be hard: so be the rest
of the scriptures hard. O blundering Burgess! Who did ever affirm that the
scriptures were easy to be understand without the spirit of Christ? Or what
ass of Acarnania, would brave out such a reason? The Apostles could not
understand the scriptures sufficiently to teach all the world, without a
singular gift of interpretation, therefore no Christian man may learn by
reading the scriptures, how to know God to his eternal salvation, without
the same extraordinary gift. But by your leave master speaker, (for the
office you take upon you, I know not how you came unto it) you misreport S
Peter being a Lord of the higher house as you count him, for he says not that
the Epistles of S. Paul be hard, but that among those things which he wrote of
the second coming of Christ, some things are hard to be understood. Wherefore
neither his authority, nor your reason, will be sufficient to conclude your
cause.

The fourth. The Chamberlen could not understand the prophet Esaias without an
interpreter, therefore the scriptures are not plain and easy of all men to be
understood. A proper conclusion. There is some difficulty in some
scriptures, therefore they are all hard and can not be understood. We neither
affirm that all things in the scriptures are easy to be understood; nor
that they are easy to be understood of all men. But that the children of God
by his spirit, are instructed to understand so much in them as is profitable
for their salvation, and that nothing necessary for us to know, is so
obscurely set forth in one scripture, but it is as plainly set down in an
other. Neither do we reject interpreters, because we read the scriptures, but
as Chrysostom teaches, by reading the scripturs, we are made more apt to
understand the interpreters. In Euan. Joan. Hom. 10. The example of Philip sent
unto the Chamberlen does also declare, how God will bless the reading of the
scriptures, when he is sought in them.

The fifth. The Apostles them selves understood not Christ speaking of his
passion and resurrection. John. 16. After a while, etc. therefore if the lively
voice of Christ was dark, much more is the same now written in dead letters,
dark and hard to be understood. The Apostles by special dispensation, not
yet so well lightened, that they understood their master, not only at this time,
but at many other times also, bewrayed their natural ignorance, that the grace
of God in their illuminatio^ in due time afterward, might appear more
glorious. But does it therefore follow, that the sayings of Christ were hard,
or their understanding dark? A blind man can not see the Sun, is it
therefore a good conclusion, that the Sun is dark, and not easy to be
seen? Howbeit, it is well to be marked, that once again he puts
difference between the lively voice of Christ, and his word written in dead
letters, making opposition between The lively voice in the ear, and the
dead: letter in the eye. As though the understanding of the scripture,
consisted either in the ear or in the eye, when neither the eye has seen,
nor the ear has heard, neither have they ascended into the heart of man, such
things as God has prepared for them that love him. 1. Cor. 2. Es. 64. But God
has revealed them unto us by his spirit, which spirit searches out al things,
even the depthes or greatest secrets of God. Nevertheless, here is brought in
Hieronyme ad Paulinum. Habet nescio quid latentis energiae viua vox etc. The
lively voice has I know not what hidden virtue, and being uttered from the
mouth of the author, into the ear of the disciple, sounds more strongly.
Wherefore Aeschynes when he was banished at Rhodes, and that Oration of
Demosthenes was read, which he made against him, when all men did wonder at
it, and praise it sighing he said: What if ye had heard the beast himself
sounding out his own words? This writes Hieronyme to persuade Paulinus, not
only to satisfy him self with his writings, but also to travel that he might
so him, and hear him, whom he had known before only by his writing, and that
by the example not only of heathen Philosophers, but also of holy men of the
Church, as the next words following immediately do plainly testify: Haec non
dico quod sit in me aliquid tale etc. I say not these things, for that there is
in me any such matter, which either thou may, or art desierous to learn:
but because thy fervent heat, and desire of learning, ought to be commended
even without us. Thy wit is pregnant and commendable without a teacher 3. So
far is it off that Hieronyme meant to compare the word of Christ spoken, with
that which is written, whose force is as great by his spirit in the scriptures,
which this dog calls the dead letters, as it was in his voice when it was
uttered. But how impudently the name of Hieronyme is abused against his plain
judgment, whereby he not only allows lay men to read the scripturs, but also
confesses that they receive great fruit thereby, may appear by this one place
among many, written in Esaiam libro. 4. cap. 11. Frequenter euenit vt homines
soeculi. It comes to pass very often, that lay men being ignorant of the
mystical sense, are yet fed with the plain and simple reading of the
scriptures. 33. And in his epistle upon the same Co^mentarie, he affirms,
that Ignoratio scripturarum, ignoratio Christi est. Ignorance of scriptures, is
the ignorance of Christ. Shortness will not suffer me to point the places only,
to the confusion of the adversary: if any dout or would see more, let them
read the places at the full.

The sixth All men have not the gift of knowledge of prophecy, nor of
interpretation of tongues, therefore every man has not the understanding of
the scripturs, neither be they easy to be understood of every man. First I
pray you note, that he makes interpretation of the scriptures and the
interpretation of tongs al one, secondly, what force is in this reason, all men
have not extraordinary gifts of tongs, of healing, of knowledge, of prophecy,
of interpretation of tongues etc. Therefore the scriptures are so hard, as
they cannot be understood by the ordinary gift of prophecy, which is
promised to all the servant of God, young and old, men and women, upon whom
his holy spirit is powered. 10.2. Act. 2. I am ashamed to troble the readers
with any more words, in answer unto such a gross consequence.

The seventh, God has ordained first Apostles* secondly Prophets, thirdly
teachers, etc. Now if the scriptures be easy for every man's understanding,
then either these states be superfluous, or else every man is a teacher and
prophet, but this were a great absurdity, therefore the scriptures are hard
and full of difficulties. If a young Sophister had D. Heskins in the schools at
Cambridge, where sometime he has been a Sophister, he would with one common
ward, which is Nego consequentiam, avoid the pikes of all these seven
arguments. Alas poor man, is there no understanding of the scriptures, but
such as may make a man a teacher, and an extraordinary prophet? are there no
degrees of knowledge but either the highest perfection, or the depest
ignorance? Will this reason follow? Men may profit in knowledge by reading,
therefore teaching is superfluous: or this, teaching is necessary, therefore
reading is unprofitable. What shall I say to these reasons, but that they are
given over into a reprobate mind, which are so furiously bent to withstand the
truth, that they set not forth so much as any shadow of reason.

The second Chapter to prove that the scriptures be not easy, recites
certain hard and obscure places of the old Testamente. Hesk.


The purpose of this Chapter, as of the next also, Fulk.
is al together foolish and unreasonable, for who is so mad to deny, but that
there are diverse places both in the old and new Testament, which be obscure
and hard to be understood, not only of the ignorant, but even of the best
learned, yet does it not therefore follow, because something is hard,
therefore all is so: or because some places in the scripture are hard,
therefore there is no profit in reading of all the rest. But let us see these
places recited. First he names all the prophets, the books of Job, the book
of Psalms, the Preacher, and the song of Solomon, Al which books in his
judgment are so hard, as they cannot be understood without an interpreter.
Well, let us grant great difficulty to be in these books, as in diverse other,
is all time lost therefore that is spent in reading of them? The harder they be,
the more diligently they are to be red, yt they may be understood. The
difficulty to good scholars will not dull but when ^hei^ desire to learn* to
(...) to (...) to confer to se^^e (...) to find Co^cer^ing Genesis he
alleges out of Hieronyme, the tradition of the vnbel^uing Jews, that they
might not read it before they were 30 years old. But Hieronyme him self would
have young childrens tender tongs seasoned with sweet Psalms* and exercised in
study of the scriptures and Prophets, which you M. Heskins profess to be so
difficult. For he instructing Laeta (...) she should bring ^p her daughter,
says* Adhuc tenera lingua, Psalmis dulcibus imbuatur. let her tongue when it i^
yet but tender be seasoned with sweet Psalms, and when she grows to years
of discretion, Quaerant eam; etc. let them seek her in the journey of the
world, among the flocks and companies of her kinsfolks, but let them find
her no where else, but in the closet of the scriptures, asking counsel of the
Prophets and Apostles of her spiritual marriage. But more agreeing with the
title of this Chap. you allege the 49. Chap. of Gene. and one special place
of that Chapter, namely the blessing of Judah. What if this Chapter be hard,
and this place especially in the Chapter: is it therefore hard, which Moses
writes in the beginning of this book. In the beginning God created Heaven and
Earth. And shall all the profitable and necessary doctrine of this book be
unread for the difficulty of one Chapter?

In Exodus and Leuiticus, although many things require a ripe judgment, yet
are many things also very easy and plain, and the same scripture also
teaches us, that all figures were referred to the pattern showed in the
mount, which is Christ. Exodus 25. Acts 7. Heb. 8. But these sayings offends
M. Heskins, and seems to him to have almost no reason in them, where God
forbids them to suffer their cattle to gender with a contrary kind, or
sow their field with mingled seed, Leuit. 19.
or to wear a garment of linsiwoolsie. Which positive laws me thinks do
plainly teach, that God loves pureness, and abhors all unholy mixtures. As
likewise, those words Deuteronomy. 23 of sowing the vineyard with diverse seeds, and
plowing with an ox and an ass. The law Deuteronomy. 22. of leaving the old bird when
a man takes her young out of the nest, was a good rudiment to teach them to
abhor either covetousness, or cruelty, or both. Which law, when the heathen men
had by the light of nature, as appears in Phocylides, I marvel why it
seems so strange to M. Heskins, which would be taken both for a Christian
and a Divine. As for the moosling of the ox, that treads the corn, is yet
more plain, when the Apostle does gather a strong argument out of that place,
from the less to the more, that God which would have men to consider brute
beasts, with humanity, would not have the Ministers of his word neglected at
their hands. But o noble Divine. Does the high providence of God occupy it
self in making ordinances for birds nestes? Yea M. Doctor, and in teaching
birds to make their nestes, and in feeding their young birds that call on him,
although these ordinances concerning birds nestes, were not made for birds,
but for men. Or does the wisdom of God join such rewards of prosperity and
long life to such trifles? O M. Doctor, obedience before God, is better then
sacrifice, though it be in never so small matters.

But Solomon in his Ecclesiastes pleases not M. Heskins, where he says, that
Where much wisdom is, there is also much travel and disquietnesse etc:
hereupon the unlearned, he says, might take occasion to contemn wisdom, and
much more by that which follows. cap. 2. If it happen to the fool as to the
wiseman, what needs me to labor any more for wisdom. And hereupon he
swears, that he heard a man of worship gravity, wisdom, godly life,
competent learning, able to understand, and exercised in the scriptures,
earnestly say to him, that it was a naughty book. When Solomon does so
exceedingly not only in his other books, but also in that same book, and
place, set forth the commendation of wisdom, it was a very spiderlike juice
that your wise Gentleman (M. Doctor) gathered out of that book, and such as
no Be would suck out of so-sweete and wholesome flowers. As for The title
Inci^ament unto virtue, that you suppose to appear in the ballattes of
Solomon, yea rather how ungodly and wanton they seem to be, rather in the
outward face teaching and provoking wantonness, then godliness of life,
Declares how reverently you judge of the holy scripture And that offense you
dream off (belike not most chastely affected) is most easily avoided: for what
unlearned man endued with common sense, reading in so many other places of the
scriptures, all wantonness of life expressly forbidden, will not immediately
conceive, that this is some spiritual and mystical love, which is set forth
in these ballats, rather then lewd or wanton songs, provoking to wickedness?
But then follows the son of Syrach, With his unseemly words describing
the wickedness of an harlot Cap. 62. Which an honest man would be ashamed to
speak, and you ashamed to write, if they were not scripture. Like as one that
goes by the way, and is thirsty, so shall she open her mouth, and drink of
every next water that she may get. By every hedge shall she fit her down, and
open her quiner to every arrowe. Then what trifling, resting, and pastime you
have seen and heard upon the reading, and rehersall of this text, and what
unchaste words have fallen out upon the same. It appears you have been in
good company, where you have often heard such wholesome talk. But once again
you swear, that This text being spoken in the presence of a good virtuous
gentlewoma^, the book turned and the place read, she exclamed and said, that if
the scripture had such bawdie words, she would no more believe the scripture,
for it was naught, with mo such like words. To pass over the blasphemous
nicenes of this your Gentlewoman, and your judgment of their goodness and
virtue, with their honesty, that troubled her with this place: I pray you
master Heskins, was it the darkness of the place, that did so much offend her,
or else because she thought it to be too plain a description of such a
matter? You see therefore, or if you do not, all the world beside does, that
while you seek to bring the reading of scriptures into contempt and hatred,
you forget your self so much, that you bring examples of one contrary for
another. Although if I may speak of mine experience, as well as you, I do very
well remember, that I heard a sober and chaste matron, of her own accord,
not provoked thereto by any means, but the only hearing the same place read,
affirm, that it was a modest description of so vile manners as an harlot uses.

To conclude this Chapter, you bring in a long testimony of Origin. 10. lib.
Strom. Who to defend his wicked allegorizing upon the scriptures, goes about
to prove by some examples and sentences, that the litteral sense is not
profitable, but rather hurtful. As the incest of Judah, and the polygamie of
the Patriarks, the drunkenness of Noe, and such like, which are not commended
in histories, but reproved. The sacrifices of Leuiticus he imagines should
provoke men to idolatry, but without all color of reason. He adds the
judgment of God against Babylon and her children in the Psalm. 136. and the
justice that David does promise to execute against all the wicked of the land.
Psalm. 101. to encourage men to cruelty and contention, but all in vain: like
as his purpose (for which he alleges them,) was wicked, namely to overthrow
the true and natural sense of the scripture. But yet the same Origin is
directly against master Heskins, in that cause for which he is alleged, as
appears plainly in Leuitici cap. 16. Hom. 9. An tu putas qui vix diebus
fectis ad Ecclesiam venis, etc. Think thou which scarcely come to the
Church upon the holy days, and give no heed to hear the words of God, nor
take any pains to fulfill his commandments, that the Lords lot can come
upon thee? Yet we wish that after you have heard these things you would take
pains not only in the Church to hear the words of God, but also at home in
your houses to be exercised, and to meditate in the Law of the Lord day and
night. Go your ways now and boaste of Origens authority, that the scriptures
are not to be read of all men, when in a public Sermon he exhorts all the
people to the diligent reading of them, and sharply reproves them for their
negligence in this behalf.

Hesk.
The third Chapter to declare the new Testament not to be easy to be
understood* brings diverse obscure places of the same.

Fulk
As I said before, there was never man yet so foolish, to affirm the scriptures
to be so easy, that there was no obscure place in them, but that nothing
needful to salvation is so obscure in them, but that it may be easily
understood by conference of other places, where the fame is most plainly set
forth. But let us see his wise reasons, to prove the new Testament to be hard,
because some places therein be hard to be understood.

The Evangelists Matthewe and Luke seem to varrie in the Genealogy of
Christ, therefore all is not easy. What then? They both do manifestly agree
in that, which is material for our faith, that Christ was the seed of
Abraham, and the son of David. In the rest, what strange matter is it, if
one pedigree be brought from one principal ancester by several discents,
lineall, and collateral, natural, and legal, by the male and by the female*

For the second obscure place, Chrysostom is alleged, who Numbereth it among
the hid things, how Elizabeth being of the tribe of Levy, may be called the
cosen of Marie. A perilous doubt, in solution whereof, though a number be
ignorant, yet I doubt not but they may be saved. And yet by conference of the
stories of scripture it is easy to find, that men of the tribe of Judah might
marry of the Priests daughters, and the Priests did marry even of the Kings
daughters of Judah. By which marriages cousenage might easily be understood to
grow between the two tribes* notwithstanding the law of Number 36. Which did
forbid only those marriages, by which the inheritances might be confounded.

The third doubtful place is in Mark. 13. Where it is said, that Of that day
and hour knows no man, no not the Angels in heaven, nor the son him self,
but the father. And Chrysostom is again alleged, to show that this is a
doubtful place: and yet a simple Christian that knows the two diverse natures
in Christ, humane and divine, can easily solute it, and say, that although
Christ by his godhead knows all things, yet as he was man he knew not all
things.

The fourth proof is taken out of the example of Algasia and Hedibia, two
godly women, and studious of the scriptures; whereof the one found twelve, the
other eleven doubts in the new Testament, and sent to S. Hieronyme for
resolution of them. I marvel M. Heskins has so small discretion, to allege
these examples, which do quight overthrow his purpose. If not only men, but
women also, may read the scriptures, and profit so well in the study of them,
that they can find but eleven or twelve doubts in the whole new Testament,
for resolution whereof, they did (as became good scholars) send so far for
the judgment of their learned master. But M. Heskins, not content to show
that they douted, will also set down some of their douts, namely this one
moved by Algasia. Why John the Baptist should send his disciples to Christ to
ask this question: Art thou he that shall come, or do we look for an other?
seeing he both knew, and openly pointed at Christ with his finger before?
Although this good woman doubted of this matter, yet it is easy to answer,
that the^ he sought the instruction of his disciples, rather then the
confirmation of his own knowledge. An other was moved by Hedibia, How Christ
in John 20. forbad Marie to touch him, when Matthew 28. affirms, that the
women held his feet. It seems to M. Heskins that one of these must be
untrue, I dare say it seemed not so to Hedibia, although she could not
perfectly reconcile these places. But seeing that both these reports are true,
it is plain enough, that he suffered Marie Magdalene to hold his feet so
much, as was sufficient to confirm the certeintie of his resurrection, and
forbad her not, until she showed her self too much addicted to his bodily
presence.

Another doubt is, how Mark says the women came to the sepulcher when the
Sun was risen, and then says, Marie Magdalene came early in the morning when
it was yet dark. A woman sitting at her distaffe, would easily solue this
doubt, and say that it was dark when they set forth of their doors, but the
Sun was risen by that time they came to the Sepulcher.

Yet another doubt of Hedibia, whether Christ breathing on his Apostles gave
them the holy Ghost, when he promised to send him after his ascension. There
is no doubt but he did then in some small measure, but afterward sent him
with most plentiful virtue and power.

To conclude, what needed Austen to have written a great volume, De consensu
Euangelistarum, what needed the comentaries of Hieronyme and Ambrose upon the
Evangelists, or the Homilies of Chrysostom and Augustine, and the expositions
of so many learned men, etc. if the Scriptures be so plain and easy? O
foolish conclusion! as though the Scriptures may not planely set forth unto
us, all things necessary for us to learn, and yet the same things (with all
other things contained in them, be set forth more plainly and largely to the
instruction and increase of our faith, hope, comfort, obedience, etc. by
Comentaries, Homelies, expositions, yea admonitions, and exhortations.

Hesk.
The fourth Chapter contains certain hard places of the Epistles.

Fulke.
M. Heskins takes great pains in those Chapters, to prove that which no man
doubts of, that there be some hard and dark places in the Scriptures, and
yet it follows not, but that the Scriptures are a light unto our steps, and
a lantern unto our feet, and the word of the Lord gives wisdom unto the
simple. But let us follow him whether he leads us. In the Epistle to the
Romans be mo obscure, then plain places, yea, the matter of justification how
hard it is, the controversies thereupon risen may suffice to declare. Such is
M. Heskins divinity, that he counts al scripture obscure, that ca^ not
easily be wrested to maintein popery. Otherwise there is nothing more clear
then the doctrine of justification: though the Owls and Battes of our time,
either can not, or will not see it. But it is no easy matter to reconcile the
saying of S. Paul Romans 3. We conclude that a man is justified by faith, without
the works of the law, and that which James says: Iac. 2. what avails it my
brethren, if a man say he have faith, if he have no works, can faith save him?
And after he concludes: even so faith if it have no works it is dead in it
self. It is an easy matter to reconcile these places to him that can put a
difference between him that has faith in deed, and him that only says he
has it: between a true lively faith, and a false and dead faith: finally,
between the cause of justification that goes before, and the effects thereof
that follow after.

In the same Epistle Cap. 10. concerning the reiection of the Jews and calling
of the Gentiles, there are many places that trouble M. Heskins, as that out of
Esaias, for calling of the Gentiles. I am found of them that sought me not, etc.
But against Israel, etc. yet afterward he asks if God have forsaken his
people, and answers: God forbid, and such like. The matter is not so hard as
it seems to him, but who so does read the text attentively, may see the
difference between a particular reiectio^ of many, and an universal reiection
of all, a temporal reiection of most, and the final reiection of al. The
former is true, the latter is false.

The matter of predestination no man denies, but it is a great secreat, yet so
much as the spirit of God has revealed of it, for our comfort, is not so
hard, but it may be easily understood. And as for that contrariety which he
seems to find, between these two texts, Romans 9. It is neither in him that
wills, nor in him that runs, but in God that has mercy: and that other
Romans 7. To will is present with me, but I find no means to perform that
which is good, is so absurd, that I think it would not enter into the head of
any unlearned man, to make a doubt, whether the will which is in a regenerate
man by the grace of Gods election, was the cause of his election before the
world was made.

A like difficulty he finds between these places: God will have all men to
be saved and (...) to the knowledge of the truth* 1. Tim. 2. and that Romans 9.
Who can resist his will. And again: Many are called, few are chosen. If
master Heskins would understand like a man, and no^ like a child, the very
words following would teach him, that in the first sentence, by all men, are
meant all forces of men, as well Kings and Princes, as inferior subjects.

After this he repeateth another doubt of Algasia: What Paul meaned to wish
him self accursed from Christ, for the Jews, which doubt is increased by an
objection of Hieronyme, that he had said before: I am sure that neither death
nor life, etc. nor any other creature can separate us from the love of God. In
which saying he seems to affirm that he so fervently loved Christ, that
nothing could separate him from his love, in the other he seems for the love
he bare to the Jews, to wish that he were sepaerated from Christ, as though he
loved the Jews better then Christ. A short answer is best. Although his
desire was exceeding vehement, yet it was more for zeal of Gods honor, then
for love of the Jews. And although he loved Christ fervently* yet the boast he
makes of assurance, was not of that love wherewith he loved Christ, but of
that love wherewith Christ loved him. And yet there is another doubt moved by
Algasia upon the words of Paul Romans 5. For scarce will any man dye for a
righte^us man. But yet for a good man it may be that one dare dye. The
obscurity of which place, has moved two contrary heretics, to take their
heresies thereof. Marcion, who made two Gods, a just GOD of the Law, for whom
few dyed, and a good God of the Gospel, Christ, for whom innumerable Martyr
have suffered. Ar^ius contrariwise calls Christ the just God upon the Psalm
71. Lord give thy judgments to the King, and thy righteousness to the Kings
son. The good God he called father of heaven, of whom Christ said, none is
good but God. These doubts Master Heskins moves, but he answers none. The
place is not so dark, that either such doubt should be made of it, or such
far fetched expositions sought as the heretics made. For a man may be
righteous in some case, for which he is condemned to dye, which is not simply a
good man, and for such a one will hardly any man give his life, although
peradventure for a very good man, some would venture to dye: But Christ dyed
for us, being his enemies, justly condemned, and altogether naught or wicked,
which no man would ever do but he. The douts of Algasia are matched with the
four questions of Amandus, of which one was, of that place 1. Cor. 15. He must
reign till he have put all things under his feet. The last enemy that shall be
subdued is death. For he has put all things under his feet. But when he
says, all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which
did put all things under him. When all things are subdued under him, then shall
the son himself also be subject unto him that put all things under him, that
God may be all in all* The question is, how the son shall be subject to the
father when he is equal with him. And this doubt is answered by Hilarious lib.
11. de Trin. M. Heskins does often declare, that he had rather men should be
taught by him to doubt, then to be resolved in doubts, for he vouchsafes not
so much, as to recyte the answer of Hilarious, but only to cite the place.
But the answer is easy by the distinction of the two natures in Christ: for
he shall never be subject in his divinity, but in his humanity, wherein he is
now exalted, and reigns until all his enemies be put under his feet.

Yet another doubt upon Coll. 1. Where Paul writes: Now joy I in my
sufferings for you, and fulfill the rest of the afflictions of Christ in my
flesh for his body which is his Church. Here he seems to make the passion
of Christ insufficient. Not a-whit: for as Christ suffered once in his own
person, for their redemption, so he suffers daily in his members, for their
exercise of patience, and confirmation of faith.

Then the Epistle to the Hebrews has two sore sentences. Heb. 6. and 10. For
it is not possible that they which were once lightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of
the good word of God, and of the power of the world to come, if they fall
away, should be renewed again by repentance, seeing they crucify again to
them selves the Son of God and make a mock of him. And again. For if we
sin wilfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there
remains no more sacrifice for sins, but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and violent fire which shall devour the adversaries. The difficulty
of these places rests in one point, and in a manner in one word in each of
the sentences. For the Apostle excludes not from repentance every one that
falls and sins, but him only which sins so wilfully, that he falls
clean away from Christ. For then there is no repentance nor remission, because
he sins against the holy Ghost, as did Judas, Alexander the coppersmith,
Julian the Apostata, and such like.

The contention of Hieronyme and Augustine about Peter's dissimulation is the
last example of difficulty, Gal. 2.
which did not arise of any obscurity of the place, but of Hieronymes
immoderate and over great zeal to defend Peter, where the holy Ghost says
plainly, he was worthy to be reprehended. But for as much as these two great
doctors, could not agree about the exposition of this place, it does not so
much declare the hardness of the Scriptures, as it does discourage us, to
find the certain exposition of them at all times in the judgment of the
doctors: which both in this place and many other, are not only diverse, but
oftentimes contrary one to another. The conclusion of the Chapter is not all
amiss, wherein he dissuadeth not men from reading the scriptures, but from
rashness of judgment, and exhorts the readers of them to humility and
modesty, that so the spirit of GOD may rest upon them, which will lead them
into all truth.

Hesk.
The first Chapter declares the minds and judgments of the Fathers and
Doctors, upon the difficulty of the scriptures.

It is not enough for this bold Burgess, to trouble the house, Fulk.
in proving that which no man does gainesay, but he will also charge men with
impudency and arrogancy, which give him no occasion of this his long and
vain speech. But herein, he shows his wit more then his honesty. For,
because he can not disprove that which they say, he labors to prove that
which they do not deny. And now of the doctors, (substantially no doubt)
Origin must begin, who says: That these words of Paul: Brethren, you are
called into liberty. Gal 5. is an hard place, and that the holy Ghost must be
found in the scriptures, with much labor and sweat etc. We say likewise with
David, that the godly man's study must be in the law of the Lord day and
night. But that Origin would not for the difficulty of the scriptures,
dissuade any Lay man from reading of them, is manifest by this place in Genesis
Capit. 26. Hom. 12. Tenta ergo and tu o auditor habere proprium puteum, and
proprium fontem, vt and tu cum apprehenderis librum scripturarum, incipias
etiam ex proprio sensu proferre aliquem intellectum, and secundum ea, quae in
Ecclesia didicisti, tenta and tu bibere de font ingenij tui. Assay therefore
thou o hearer, to have a pit of thine own, a spring of thine own, that even
thou also, when thou take in hand the book of the scriptures, may begin
to bring forth some understanding of thine own wit, and according to those
things which thou have learned in the Church, assay thou also to drink of
the spring of thine own wit. Here Origin will not only have men to read the
scripture, but also incourageth them to seek out the interpretation by their
own study.

But Hieronyme (next to Origin) in his Epistle to Paulinus both notes diverse
obscure places in the scripture, and also counsels Paulinus to use the help
of interpreters. And who is it that mislyketh his council? especially if it be
to exhort one that meant to be a teacher in the Church as Paulinus was. Yet
nevertheless we showed before, that Hieronyme would have even infantes brought
up in the knowledge of the scriptures, and exhorts not only men, but women
also to the study of them, and commends husband men, and laborers; for
their knowledge of the scriptures.

And although he confess the questions of Algasia to be full of difficulties,
yet he both commends her study in the scriptures, and desire to be resolved
in her doubts.

Yet Basil teaches that all the scriptures are not to be published and made
common. Basil. lib. Sp. 5. cap. 27.
For there are points of learning, or of doctrine that are to be kept close,
and the obscurity which the scripture uses is a kind of silence so framing
those points of learning, that a man may hardly understand them.

The words of Basil are these (...). That is, (according to Erasmus
translation) exercising a mind unapt for the contemplation of this doctrine,
and that for the profit of them that exercise them selves in the scriptures.
Which last words, M. Heskins has fraudulently left out, and so he is clean
contrary to M. Heskins purpose. Although Basil speaks not expressly of
reading the Scriptures by the faithful, but of publishing the mysteries of
Christian religion that were received by tradition without Scripture. For in
his short definitions (...): to this question, whether it be expedient that
they which are new come to the faith, should be instructed in the holy
Scriptures? he answers (...), etc. This question may be dissolved by those
things that were said before. For it is both convenient and necessary, that
every man for his need should learn out of the divine Scriptures, both for
the certain persuasion of godliness, and also that he be not accustomed unto
man's traditions. lib. 7. E. 44.
But S. Ambrose also in few words says much to this matter, calling the
Scripture of God the great sea, having in it a deepenesse without bottom of
deep senses and understandings, into the which many floods do enter. But this
lets not S. Ambrose upon 118. Psalm. Sermon. 1. to exhort the lay people to
read the Scriptures. Et tu lege prophetam vt videat, lege vt apperiat os tutum.
And thou also read the Prophet, that thou may see, read that he may open
thine eyes. And again: Quod sisugias lectionem propheticam, si domi non legas,
in ecclesia audire nolis, etc. But if thou fly from the reading of the
Prophets, if thou read not at home: thou will not hear in the Church, but
while thou feinest to hear those things that are read, etc. And if in your
judgment he said much for you, when he co^pareth the scripture to the sea, I
think he says more against you, where he compares the Church to the sea.
Hexam. lib. 3. cap. 3. Vnde been mari plerumque comparatur ecclesia, quae primo
ingredientis populi agmine totis vestibulis vndas vomit: deinde in oratione
totius plebis tanquam vndis refluentibus stridet: tum responsorijs. Psalmorum,
cantus virorum, mulierum, virginum, paruuloru^, consonus vndarum fragor
resultat. Whereupon the Church is often times very well compared unto the sea,
which first by the coming in of the multitude, flows out waves from every
porch or entry: and then makes a noise with the prayer of the whole people,
as it were with the ebbing or flowing back of the waves: last of all, with
answerings of Psalms, singing of men, women, virgins, and little children, a
well tunable sound of the waves reboundeth. By this place it appears, that
all sorts of people were admitted to the reading of the scriptures, and that no
tongue was used in the Church, but such as was common to all the people.
Chrysostom succeeds Ambrose, who says: Hom. 44 in Matthew.
The scriptures are dark that they are found out with labor, but not shut
that they can not be found out at all, and that the priests ought to be the
keykeepers of the scriptures, not to shut them up, but to open them, etc. I
would oppose some testimony of Chrysostom to explane his meaning, not to be
to discourage men from reading the scriptures, but that M. Heskins does soon
after confess the same, of his own accord, in these words: I am not ignorant
(gentle reader) that Chrysostom does so, that is, that Chrysostom in a number
of places most earnestly exhorts men to the reading of the scriptures, and
does not fear them with the obscurity, and difficulty thereof. I ask no
more against M. Heskins, but his own confession of Chrysostomes judgment to be
against him, whereunto we must return anon, after a little consideration of
Gregory's judgment. Gregory shows, that the obscurity of the scriptures is
for great profit, for exercising the understanding, for avoiding of wearines,
idleness, contempt, and for great delight, when it is found out with labor.
Augustine has the like sentence, but this makes much for our cause, that the
obscurity of the scripture, where, it is dark: is very profitable for the
diligent reader. To conclude, if all the scripture were never so dark, yet
seeing it is necessary to be known of al men, it ought to be read and studied
of all, and the more and the oftener, where it is more hard to understand, yt
long and diligent search may find out, yt which sildome and slight reading
would pass over. As for the last testimony of Hieronyme ad Paulinum,
concerning the Canonical Epistles, That they are both short and long so that
there be not many which are not blind in them. Because we had the like before,
I will refer it to the former answers. The rest of the railing stuff,
charging us with cause of heresies, arrogance, and ignorance, in suffering and
allowing the people to read the scriptures, affirming them to be easy, when
they be hard etc. is more meet for M. Heskins to write, then us to answer.
But to return to the objection, that he makes of the judgment of Chrysostom
and Erasmus, whom he confesses to be against him, let us see his witty
answers. To Chrysostom he answers, That there were two causes why he would
have the scriptures read, one, that they might the better understand his
expositions in the Church, the other that they might read them to follow
them: to these purposes he grants it were tolerable they should be read,
but not to frame new doctrines out of them, nor to cont^mne the learned
teachers, etc. And who (I pray you) would have them read to other purpose? Not
Luther, not Jewel, nor any man whom you most spyte at. But see the force of
truth, and the malice of an enemy thereof. Heskins having reasoned in five
Chapters, against the reading of scriptures, now grants to it: but yet that
which is most convenient and of al, most necessary, he vouchsafes to call it
but tolerable. To Erasmus he replyeth, first, yt seeing he confesses in
diverse places the scriptures to be hard to understand, he maruelleth that he
would exhort ignorant men to the reading of them. But Erasmus would easily
turn back M. Heskins reason upon his own head. Seeing they are hard, they
are the more often and diligently to be read and studied. Secondly, he thinks
Alphonsus good enough to oppose against Erasmus, who affirms, That although
it were meet the people should read the scriptures in Chrysostomes time, yet
it is not meet now, because laws are changed as the times and manners of men
are. And it is no more meet that the people should now read the scriptures,
then that the Vigils should be kept as they were in Hieronymes time, or that
Infantes should receive the Communion as they did in Augustines t^me, or men
should abstain from blood and strangled as in the Apostles time, or discipline
and public penance should be used as in the old days. If the manners of men
be worse now, they have more need of the knowledge of God, whereby they might
be reformed, wherefore the similitudes are nothing like. And besides this, note
also the error of the Church in S. Augustines time confessed, and the want of
discipline in the Popish Church acknowledged.

The sixth Chapter, declaring how the people shall come to the understanding of
the scriptures. Hesk.


The understanding then of ye scriptures is necessary, Eulk.
seeing God as you confess, which ordeineth nothing in vain, has appointed a
mean, whereby the people should come to the understanding of the scriptures. So
by the way we have gained thus much: that ignorance is not the mother of
Christian devotion, as was most impudently affirmed by all the Bell weathers of
Papistrie, in the conference of Westminster, to the perpetual shame and
ignominy, both of them selves, and all the Popish Church. But now to the mean
appointed by God, which you say, Is, that the law should be in the mouth of
the Priest, and the people should learn it at his mouth. A very godly order in
deed, but yet such as neither promises, that the law shall be always in the
Priests heart, nor binds the people to learn it only at his mouth. And
therefore nothing in the world lets, but that the godly man should meditate
in the law of God day and night, Psalm. 1. and have it so familiar unto him,
that he should teach his children therein, talk of it at home, and abroad,
vprising, and downlying, and write on the posts of his doors, and upon his
gates, that he may learn to do it. Deuteronomy. 4. and 11. Wherefore all the places
that M. Heskins alleges, to show that the Priests should be learned, and
the people instructed by them, serve to prove nothing that is in controversy,
but is confessed of al men: except it be to condemn the Clergy of Papistrie,
which for the most part are ignorant, not only of Gods law, but of all
honest knowledge, and upon very necessity, open a gate unto the people, to
seek instruction them selves, where the ordinary passage is stopped, through
the ignorance of the Ministers.

The first place by him alleged, is Deu. 17. That if there rise a matter too
hard for the people in judgment between blood and blood, etc. they shall come
to the Priests, and stand to their judgment on pain of death, etc. Although
I might answer, that this ordinance appertains to judicial causes, of
which God gave his law also, yet if it be taken generally, so long as the
Priest determines according to the law, it is well enough. But this proves
not, that the people must have no understanding, beside the priests mouth. For
the decree is only of matters that are difficult, and such as cannot be
decided at home. No more do the words of Malachie, That the lips of the Priest
shall keep the law, and men shall require it at his mouth. And much less the
commandment in Aggee: Enquire the law of the Priests, And least of all that
Christ commands the Scribes and Pharisees to be heard sitting in the chair
of Moses. These places prove, that it is the Priests duty to be learned in
the law of God, but repel not the general law, whereby every man is commanded
also to study in the law of God, yea, though the Priests neither would nor
could teach him. For if the blind follow the blind, they both fall into the
ditch: which our savior Christ wills all men to take heed of. Hieronyme in
the place by you alleged (M. Heskins) gathers rightly of these places, ^n
Agge. 2.
that it is the Priests office to know and expound the scriptures: but I muse
how the greatest number of your Priests can brook those words of his: If he
be ignorant of the law, he proves him self to be no Priest of God. Much more
against your clergy, and your cause is that large sentence you set down out
of Hieronyme, the^ to hurt your adversaries, where he concludes out of 1. Tim.
3. and Tit. 1. that both by the new Testament and the old it is the priests
office to know and teach the law of God. As is also that which you add out of
1. Cor. 12. that God has appointed some Apostles, some Prophets, some pastors,
and teachers, as though these orders might not stand with the peoples reading
of the scriptures: when even in the Apostles time, the Thessalonians or
Berrhoeans were commended, for that they did not only hear the Apostles, but
also co^ferred their doctrine with the scriptures Acts. 17. Having rehearsed
your texts, you fall to collecting of three things out of the^. 1. That it is
the duty of a Priest to be learned in the law of God, and godly life also,
which every man confesses. 2. That there be doubts and hard matters in the
law. And that also shall be confessed. But withal out of the same place it is
proved, that there are many plain and easy points in the law, because the
decree was not for all the law, but only for hard cases of the law.
Thirdly, that the people must be taught them and learn of the priests, and
this also shall be granted to the uttermost, so that you will allow the people
to learn such things as are easy, not only of the priests, but also of their
own reading, study, and conference with the^ that are no priests. And this is
no inuerting of Gods order, M. Heskins, how much soever you envy the peoples
instruction. For it is gods commandment, as I showed before, that his people
should not only read the law themselves, but teach the same to others, yea
parents are commanded to teach the law of God to their children, and yet I
ween you will not say that all parents be priests. But the mark you shoot
at, is easy to see, the ignorance of the people is more for your worship and
gain then their knowledge. The examples you bring, of the people teaching
Aaron, of Chore, Dathan, and Abiram; rebelling against Moses and Aaron, and of
the Israelites in deposing Samuel and desiring a king, are of no force to
dissuade men from reading of the Scriptures, no though they have learned and
true teachers: much less, when they are under dumb dogs and heretics, as
all popish priests are: nor to abridge the authority of lawful magistrates,
in banishing and suppressing all usurped power and false teachers, nor to shake
off the yoke of Antichrist to submit themselves unto a king. There is too great
odds between the Pope and Samuel, between Moses and Aaron and the popish
clergy, that they which withstand the Pope and his Prelates, should be in
the case of Dathan and his accomplices, or of the people that refused the
regiment of Samuel. The saying of Augustine Ep. 118. Although it come in here
out of season, yet it makes nothing against us. (He says, It is most insolent
madness to dispute, whether that is to be done, which the Church throughout
all the world does observe:) Except M. Heskins can show, what is observed of
the Church throughout the world; which we do not observe, or deny to be
observed. For S. Augustine in that place speaks of Ceremonies.

Hesk.
The seventh Chapter declaring the same by examples of the Fathers and
authorities of the Doctors of the Church.

The title of this Chapter pretends to declare, how the people shall come to
the understanding of the scriptures, Fulk.
but the examples are most of the preachers and teachers, how they shall
atteine to knowledge sufficient to discharge their office. But the first
argument whereupon almost all the rest of the Chapter does run, is a
marvelous conclusion God commands the children of Israel, 32. Ask thy
father and he will show thee, thy Elders and they will tell thee. Ergo God did
not send all the people, only to the five books of Moses to learn, but willed
them to learn of their Elders: So now, all men may not be sent to the
scriptures to learn, but they must learn of their Fathers, what be the goodly
works of God contained in the Scriptures. Why M. Heskins, you forget not only
lodgike, but common reason? We would not have men to learn, only by reading
the scriptures, but much more by hearing their teachers, first their Pastors,
and then all other, whom God has endued with any gift of knowledge. And will
you conclude with shame, that because men were not sent, only to the five Books
of Moses, men may not now be sent at all to the scriptures? And are you so
blind that you cannot see, this text to overthrow the purpose of both your
sixth and seventh Chapters after this manner, by necessary conclusion? Men must
learn of their fathers, therefore not only of the Priests. The rest that
follows for certain pages, is so tedious a proof of that which is not at
all in controversy, that it yrketh me to abridge it, but for orders sake. The
Apostles learned of Christ in three years study, prayer is required to the
understanding of the scripture by Origens judgment. The Fathers of the Church
learned of their Elders, as Clemens, Mark, Linus, Cletus, of Peter: Titus,
Timotheus, Luke, and Dionise, of Paul: and so one of an other. Basil and
Gregory Nazianzen studied thirteen years in a monastery. Hieronyme learned
of ye Hebrews, and trusted not his own judgment, wherefore all rash readers
and arrogant teachers may be abashed, which take upon them, to teach before
they be learned, whereas no man, may be his own teacher in the scriptures. All
this, and much more shall be granted to M. Heskins without any strife at all.
But yt which he also grants, (though it be not very liberally) yet, it must
not be refused. That in S. Hieronymies time many did study the scriptures,
which if the people could now reverently and meekely use might be tolerated.
Well then, the allowance of antiquity is of our side, and the conditional
tolleration of M. Heskins: for I may not say of the Popish Church, knowing what
horrible persecution they practice against the^, which have but a book of the
scriptures in their mother tongue, found in their hand or house, although it
cannot be proved, that they read it. Wherefore, it is most absurd, that he
charge the proclamer, with slaundering their Church, to bring her in hatred
with the lay people, as though she had now forbidden them to read the
Scriptures, in their own tongue: whereas he knows no such prohibition,
given to the lay people universally. But the reason is most monsterous. For if
there had been any such prohibition, there should not have been so many lay
men, which have both read and written of the scriptures in their native
tongues, etc. As though learned lay men, could not have readd the scriptures
but in their mother tongue. But the church fearing the abuses of the scriptures
by the unlearned lay men, forbad them. But such lay men as understand the
scriptures in Hebrew and Greek, the Church will allow them to read the^ in
English. O wise and provident Church! Nay meruell not at this. For the learned
if they be rash fall into heresies: much more the unlearned. And the learned
also, yea and physicians themselves sometimes take surfeites, therefore it were
a sure way for the people never to eat meat. Noble men and wisemen sometime
have their houses burned, therefore it is much more dangerous for poor and
simple men to have fire in their houses.

The knowledge of Mysteries must not be made common to all men for the Jews
would not suffer Genesis, and Cantica to be read of young men before 30.
years of age. The heathen men also, as the Romans and Philosophers, kept
close their secrets: the one Sibyllaes books the other Moral philosophy, and
especially Metaphysike. If I had time I might make sport with this
Metaphysical argument, In Matthew. H. 44.
that Christian men must follow the practice of Infidels. But I must pass over
to the rest. Chrysostom in the Greek Church, as well as Hieronyme in the
Latin, would have the people to learn by hearing their teachers, and not only
by reading them selves, because the scriptures are dark, and are a storehouse
not common for all men, but out of which the stewardes must deliver to every
man his portion. Remember all this notwithstanding, that M. Heskins confessed
before, that Chrysostom does often earnestly exhort the lay and unlearned
people to the diligent reading of the scriptures.

Then follow similitudes of young children and unthrifts, the one if they
feed themselves, the meat runs about their mouth, bosom, and clothes, the
other spend their fathers goods in suites, and quarrels, and contention with
their brethren: So men without wit and grace abuse the scriptures to the hurt
of others, and no profit of themselves. Except all lay men want wit and
grace, these similitudes prove nothing. For many priests also want wit and
grace, who^ you admit to read the scriptures. After similitudes come examples.
Valdo an unlearned man caused Books of scripture to be translated, and so
began the sect of Valdenses, or Pauperes de Lugduno. Out of the same
founteine of ignorance sprang the heretics, called Begradi Turrelupini. Valdo
was a godly man, and seeing the ignorance and ungodliness of the Priests, did
very well to procure the translation of the scripture, and upon good grounds
departed from the Church of Rome unto the Church of Christ, what the other were
as stories are uncertain, so I leave them in doubt.

But Luther and Zwinglius are charged to affirm The scriptures to be easy,
and make it free for all men to read and expound them, and teach that not only
men, but also women may openly preach the word of God, and that as well a
child and a woman absolueth, as a Bishop. If these were not mere slanders,
he would have set down their own words, the circumstance of which no doubt,
would discharge them of such absurdities as he collecteth. For they would never
affirm every place of the scripture to be easy, nor women, but in case where
al men, (or the most) fail of knowledge to teach, as the prophetesses of the
old law did, nor women and children to absolve as well as a godly bishop by
the doctrine of the Gospel, but perhaps better then an ignorant Popish Prelate.

Likewise where he charge Luther To boast that he was ignorant in no part of
the scripture, and yet brings in his own words: wherein he confesses that
he knew not whether he had the right understanding of the Psalms, and says
also, that it was most impudent rashness for any man to profess that he
understood any one book of scripture in all parts: I say the conference of
these places does declare, that no man except he were blind, mad, or drunk
with malice, would believe the slander of boasting to be true in manner and
form as Master Heskins sets it down.

Having vomited his malice against Luther and Zwinglius, he inueyeth with mayn
sail of open railing against the people of our time, for the rashness and
disorder of some. As though there were no talk, but rash babbling of
predestination, free will, justification, yea God to be the author of sin, of
the number of ye sacraments, and especially the sacrament of the altar, and no
where, but in Tauernes, Innes, Alehouses, and Barbarshops, in streets,
highwayes, and fields, and in the mouths of women, boys, and girls. God be
thanked, this slander is false. Although there be great rashness in some, and
vnreligiousnesse in more: yet the true members of Christ, profit much by
reading of his word. We confess with Gregory Nazianzene, that it is not for
every man rashly to dispute of God, nor yet of divine matters, but with
humility and sobriety, which they shall learn no where so well, as in the
holy scriptures of God. The other cauil that follows, of lay men artificers,
preaching in open places, and ministering the sacraments deserves no answer,
for if they be admitted to the office, being worthy thereof, there is no
doubt, but they may as well now, as in all ages of the Church they have done,
neither are they to be taken for laymen, though they have been artificers. Yet
if they presume without calling and admission of the Church, they are no more
borne withal among us, then such as counterfeit themselves to be Priests
among the Papists. As English Joan did to clyme to the Papacy, and as of
late a lewd fellow in Italy feigned himself to be a Cardinal, as Stephanus
in his defense of Herodotus does witness. We condemn according to the
scriptures, not only all intrusion of men without calling, but all ambitious
and symoniacall practices, to procure the outward calling. So far off is it,
that we allow every man of his own fantasy, to intrude himself, as this
man does most vainly slander us.

Heskins.
The 8. Chap. exhorts men to hear, or to read the expositions of the
scriptures, and not to presume upon their own understanding.

Fulke.
If there were nothing in this Chapter, but answering to the title thereof: I
would willingly subscribe unto it. But after he has exhorted as he promises,
by the counsel of James, Solomon, and Hieronyme, that we should hear and
learn of them, whom God has appointed, pastors and teachers in his Church: he
dissuadeth men also, by the authority of Paul, and Ecclesiasticus, to appoint
unto them selves Elders, or masters, to be carried about with new and strange
doctrines: and decrees, That they only are lawful Elders, that have learned
of their fathers. For which cause Luther was no good Elder, allowing women to
teach openly, contrary to Paul, 1. Cor. 14. which is an impudent slander of
Luther, who by no means would have women to teach, except it were
extraordinarily, as the prophetesses of the old time did namely Debora, Holda,
and such like. Such stuff is in the other slanders, That contrition makes a
man more sinner, where Luther means of yt, which is without faith, and
therefore must needs be sin. That a righteous man in every good work sins
mortally, where he means that sin and imperfection is mixed, even with the
best works, not that good works are sin. That is also a detestable lie, that
Luther should teach, Every Christian man, to be a priest for the common or
public ministry, whereas he neither thought nor spoke otherwise, then the
scripture speaks, which has made us Kings and Priests. Apoc. 1. And no less
is ye slander of Zwinglius, That he taught, that original offense is no sin,
whereas the world knows, that Zwinglius taught the contrary, and the
Papists come nearer to that error, which define it to be no sin in the
regenerate: it is as false that he taught, That Christian men's children need
not to be baptized, As it is true, that if they dye without baptism, (without
any contempt of their part,) it is no cause of conde^natio^ unto them. The
saying of Christ, except a man be borne again of water and of the spirit, he
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, makes no more for the baptism of
infantes, then his saying also, except ye eat the flesh of ye son of man,
and drink his blood, ye have no life in you, makes to prove, that infants
must receive ye communion, for neither in the one speaks he of the sacrament
of baptism, nor in the other place, of the sacrament of his supper. But where
Luther does often protest yt he will not be taught by man, but by God, he does
as every Christian man ought to do, and yet excludes not the ministry of
men, but the authority, doctrines, traditions, and inventions of men, which by
Luciferian pride take upon them to teach that they have not learned of God.
But how shall we understand this saying of Master Heskins, speaking in
despite of Luther: This is another Paul. As though only Paul were called of
God without the ministry of man, when all the Apostles were so, or as though
it were a reproach to be so called as Paul was: if God do extraordinarily stir
up any man, as he did the Apostles and Eua^gelistes. After his deriding of
Paul, Zwinglius is condemned, by that which Master Heskins has said, for
writing a book De claritate verbi Dei, How wisely and justly, let the godly
Readers judge. Next follows general railing against Oecolampadius,
Bullingerus, Caluinus, Bucer, of whom his adversary (meaning I think the B.
of Sarum) learned his heresies: then he returns to unlearned artificers,
teaching in corners. All which he would have to be avoided: I suppose because
he has rayled upon them, and called them heretics, for other reason he
brings none. Except this be one, that Hieronyme thinks it not sufficient,
if a man say, he loves God, and yet breaks the unity of the Church. The
Church once named, by and by all is his. As though it were no controversy at
this day, whether the Synagogue of Rome be the Church of God or no. And as
though all Christendom, had been at all times, and in all places obedient to
the Church of Rome, before these few years. And therefore he is bold to
demand where it was taught in the Christian world, that Christ's natural
body is not in the sacrament, nor to be offered, nor received, nor honored?
Nay Master Heskins, where was this taught in the affirmative for five or six
hundredth years after Christ? As for your other questions of prayer for the
dead, and prayers to the dead, if you bring any reasons for the^ in this your
Omnegatheru^, they shall be answered otherwise the readers for me shall resort
to other treatises where they be handled of purpose. But seeing men must learn
the law of their mother, that is the Church, they must follow Hieronyme, which
never ceased from his youth, to seek knowledge of learned men, and traveled
to Alexandria to be instructed of Didym^s. So did Augustine to Millain to
learn of Ambrose. No wise man will mislike this counsel. But this one thing
especially is notable: That Damasus being bishop of Rome, did send to S.
Hieronyme to be answered in certain doubts, and disdained not to learn of him.
I had thought the Pope, had had all knowledge In scrinio pectoris, in the
closet of his breast, that he had the spirit of truth, to resolve all doubts,
so that he could not err, and that Hieronyme having him at Rome, needed not to
have sought knowledge at Alexandria. But Damasus, although even in that time, a
ioly stately Prelate, as appears by some of his Epistles, (if they be not
counterfeit) yet showed himself far from that Antichristian pride, which the
Popes of Rome, (I cannot say his successors,) did show afterward, and yet to
this day do hold.

But to omit Damasus Many learned of Saint Augustine, and of other learned
men also, which were learned them selves. They did well, and many, (God be
blessed) follow their example at this day, and yet too few, for it were to be
wished, that such modesty were in all men. The saying of Clemens, registered
also in the cannon law, although you allege it out of a counterfeit and
barbarous epistle, yet is it very godly, and worthy of the Apostles scholar:
That the scripture must not be drawn into strange and foreign senses,
according unto every man's fantasy, but the true sense must be taken out of
the very Scriptures themselves, agreeable to the judgment of them, that have
received is from the elders, That is the Apostles. For there were none other in
the time of Clemens, which went before but even they.

The rest of the Chapter contains a repetition of that he has handled in
these eight Chapters, with a promise that after this pretty preamble, he will
go immediately to his purposed matter, to be debated in this high Court of
prattlement. And yet I ween as you have had a preamble, so you shall have a
preface of other matter, for three or four Chapters more, or ever you come to
the principal matter. In deed great solemnity becomes a parleament.

Heskins.
The ninth Chapter declaring that our redemption was prenunci^^ed by promises
figures, and prophesies, and what the promises be, and to whom they were made.

Fulke.
In this Chapter, so long as he follows the scriptures, he has well and
truly satisfied the title: showing that Christ was promised principally to
Adam, Abraham, and David, denying that Solomon was promised to David, but
Christ. Where I hope he means, that Solomon was not promised as Messiah, but
as a figure of him. Finally, I agree with him in all things, for which he
brings authority of the word of God, only I cannot admit the exposition
that Iacobus de Valentia makes of the Dominion of Christ from sea to sea, that
is, from the mid land sea to both the Oceans, the South, and the North, which
enclose Affrike, and Europe from the floudes, Nilus and Tanais, unto the ends
of the world, that be toward the East, which comprehends all Asia. For since
the time of Iacobus de Valentia, we have knowledge of the fourth part of the
world, toward the West, called America, greater then any of the three other,
which his circumscriptio^, does exclude, out of the kingdom of Christ,
although I doubt not, but thither also the found of the Gospel has been
carried, and is now restored in some places, although brutish barbarousnesse
has of long time overwhelmed it.

Hesk.
The tenth Chapter touches the figures of Christ's incarnation, passion,
resurrection, and ascension.

Fulk.
In this Chapter as in the former, following the authority of the holy
scriptures, he shows that the conception of Sampson, was a figure of the
incarnation of Christ: Joseph, of his betraying: Isaac, of his suffering: the
priesthood of Aaron, and the sacrifices, of his priesthood and sacrifice:
Jonas, of his resurrection: and Elias, of his ascension. Wherein I see nothing
worthy of reprehension, except peradventure in some collation, there be more
subtle curiosity, then sound steadfastness.

The eleventh Chapter, declares by the Prophets of what line the Messiah
should come, with his co^ception, birth, passion, and death. Hesk.


In this Chapter also he does well discharge his promise, for the history of
the co^ception, and passion of Christ. Fulk.
If all the rest were like these Chapters, we should soon agree.

The twelfth briefly touches a prophecy or two of the resurrection, and
ascension of Christ. Hesk.


In this Chapter, as he promises, Fulke.
is touched a saying of David Psalm. 16. alleged by Peter, Act. 2 to prove the
resurrection: and an other, Psalm. 67. for the ascension, alleged by Paul.
Ephesians. 4. in these four Chapters, there is nothing in a manner, but that which
is confessed of both sides.

The thirteenth Chapter, how that Melchisedech was a figure of Christ both in
Priesthood and sacrifice. Hesk.


This Chapter promises more then it performs, Fulk.
for it shows in deed, and as the truth is, that Melchisedech was a figure
of christ, but it scarce touches his priesthod, and speaks not one word of
his sacrifice, as by a brief collection of the whole Chapter, and every part
thereof shall appear. First he there declares, that as the mystery of our
redemption was promised, figured, and prophesied in the old Testament, and
accomplished in the New: so was the memorial of yt redemption: which New
Testament being everlasting, has an everlasting Priest, and an everlasting
sacrifice. The everlasting priest he confesses to be our savior Christ. But
the everlasting sacrifice (he says) is the very body and blod of the same, our
savior Christ. Which as he according to the order of his priesthood, did
sacrifice in his last supper, under the forms of bread and wine: so did he
give authority and commandment, to the Apostles and ministers of his Church
to do the same, saying: Hoc facite in mea^ co^memorationem. This do ye in the
remembrance of me. Beside that these things of the everlasting sacrifice, be
uttered without all proof, or shadow thereof, mark one horrible blasphemy,
and an other detestable absurdity. For in as much as he affirms, the
everlasting sacrifice, to be Christ's body and blood offered in the supper, and
it is manifest by the scripture, that Christ never offered but one sacrifice,
and that but once: Heb. 9.25.10.14. it is evident, that he utterly excludes
the sacrifice of his body upon the Cross, as not being done, according to the
order of his everlasting priesthood. For a prodigious absurdity note this,
that he grants the everlasting priesthood to Christ, (Which as the Apostle
witnesses is without succession) Heb. 7.24. because it is everlasting in him:
and yet he makes the Apostles and ministers of the Church, partakers of that
Priesthod, to offer that sacrifice, which none could offer, but he himself,
which is an everlasting priest, after the order of Melchisedech, that is, both
a King and Priest.

He proceeds and affirms, that Of this new Priesthood and sacrifice, there
were figures, and prophesies, which must as well be performed, as the other were
of the instituter of them. The other figures and prophesies ended in Christ
touching the fact, but not touching the efficacy and virtue which is eternal.
The new Testament with the new priesthood, and the new sacrifice are begone,
and confirmed in the blood of Christ, but must continue always, whereof there
be figures in the law of nature, and in the law of Moses. In the law of
nature, albeit that Seth, Noe, and other did offer sacrifices unto God: yet
were they not figures of this sacrifice now used in Christ's Church, but rather
of Christ's sacrifice offered upon the cross after the manner of Aaron. Here
mark first, that he makes Christ to have two sacrifices, this sacrifice
which is now offered, (I can not tell after what manner,) and that which he
offered on the Cross, after the manner of Aaron.

Secondly, that he makes Christ a Priest after the manner of Aaron, which the
holy Ghost in express words denies Heb. 7.11.

But the first that figureth both the priesthood and sacrifice of the new law,
is Melchisedech. So that this priesthood is peculiar only to our savior
Christ, as both David, Psalm. no. and the Apostle to the Hebrews the 7. do
prove it: there is no doubt but Melchisedech was a figure of Christ: But what
sacrifice he offered, the scripture makes no mention, neither is M. Heskins
able to show. For first, he has rehearsed the history of him, which is
written in Genesis 14. And Melchisedech king of Salem brought forth bread and
wine: and he was a priest of the most high God, Therefore he blessed him,
saying: blessed is Abraham of God most high, possesser of heaven and earth: and
blessed be the most high God, which has delivered thine enemies into thine
hand. And Abraham gave him tithe of all. In which words, there is no mention
of any sacrifice. Afterward he compares him in all those points, in which the
Apostle to the Hebrews does Heb. 7. Which are these: that he was king of
righteousness, and king of peace, without father, without mother, without
kindred on earth. Having neither beginning of days, nor end of life, but is
likened to the son of God, and continues a Priest for ever: that he blessed
Abraham, and that Abraham paid tithes unto him. In all which applications,
there is not one word of any sacrifice. Neither in the apostle, nor in M.
Heskins: therefore as I said in the beginning, M. Heskins has not satisfied
the title of his Chapter. And verily, the Apostle in these two points, only
considers the Priesthood of Melchisedech, yt he blessed Abraham which had
the promises, and received tithes of him, in whose loins Levy the father of
Aarons Priesthood was tythed: who undoubtedly would not have omitted the
sacrifice of bread and wine, if there had been any, when he applied the
interpretation of his name, which was a great deal lesser matter. And surely
it seems, that Master Heskins could not handsomely frame an application
thereof, else would he not have admitted so plausible a matter, and so commonly
prated of among the Papists. He saw first in the text was no mention of
oblation, secondly if there had been oblation of bread and wine, it would not
well have figured that sacrifice, wherein they say, is neither bread nor wine.

Hesk.
The fourteenth Chapter declares, after the mind of Chrysostom that Job was a
figure of Christ, for the desire his servants had to eat his flesh.

Fulk.
Master Heskins does well to add, after the mind of Chrysostom, for it is
plain by the text, that the words of eating his flesh, are meant of hatred and
not of love. Either that Jobs servant showed their desire to be revenged of
their masters enemies, of who^ he speaks in ye two verses before, or else as
Saint Hieronyme thinks, that he had procured his servants hatred for his
intertainment of strangers, and other virtues mentioned in the next verse
following. Pro hospitalitatibus eius and virtute, quae and caeter^ sancti Deo
placuerunt odium seruorum contraxerat. So that this matter stands not upon
any certain figure of the scripture, but only upon Chrysostomes mind, unto
which, you hear the contrary mind of Hieronyme. But ^owe let us consider
what the authority of Chrysostom makes for him: his words are as he cyteth
them out of Hom. 45. in 6. Joan. Vt autem non solum per dilectionem etc. But
that we should be converted into that flesh, not only by love, but also in
deed: it is brought to pass by that meat which he has given us. For when he
would show his love toward us, he has mixed himself with us by his body, and
made himself one with us, that the body might be united to the head These last
words. For this is the manner of them that love especially, in M. Heskins
translation are left out, I know not for what causes, peradventure of
negligence. This did Job signify by his servants of whom he was loved
especially, which declaring their love, did say: Who would give us, that we
might be filled with his flesh. Which thing Christ did, that he might bind us
to him with g^^^ter love: and that he might show his desire that he had to us,
suffering him self not only to be seen of them that desire, but also to be
touched and eaten, and their teeth to be fastened in his flesh, and all to be
filled with the desire of him. Wherefore let us rise from that table as Lions
breathing fire, terrible to the devil, and let us know our head, and what
love he has showed unto us. Parents have oftentimes given their children to be
nourished of other: but I do feed with mine own flesh. I give my self unto
them, I favor all, I give an exceeding good hope to all of things to come. He
that gives him self so unto us in this life, much more in the life to come. I
would be your brother, and I took flesh and blood with you for your sakes. and
by what things I am joined to you, the same I have given to you again. In
this long speech of Chrysostom, what is there that makes for Master Heskins
bill, that he has promoted into the Parleament house? and not rather
altogether against it? For first, it can not be necessarily concluded out of
this place, that Chrysostom speaks of the Lords supper, but rather of that
table, meat, giving and eating of Christ's flesh, which is spoken of in the
sixth of Saint John, where no word is of the sacrament or supper, which at that
time was not instituted. Secondly, if we should never so much understand this
speech of the sacrament, yet must we grant it to be figurative, or else there
will follow infinite absurdities, beside such as M. Heskins affirms. Wherefore I
will reason thus: Christ by this saying of Chrysostom, is none otherwise eaten
then he is seen: but he is not seen corporally, but spiritually by faith,
therefore he is not eaten corporally but spiritually by faith. And likewise
thus: as Christ is touched and teeth fastened in his flesh, so is he given or
eaten, but he is not touched corporally or naturally, nor teeth fastened in his
flesh corporally but spiritually, therefore he is not given nor eaten in the
sacrament corporally, but spiritually.

The majors of these arguments are Chrysostoms words, the minors are ye
confessions of the Papists, which affirm Christ's body to be in the sacrament
inuisibly, and do correct the recantation of Berengarius, where he affirmed,
that the body of Christ is torn with the teeth: the conclusions I trust be
rightly inferred. But now let us see what handsome stuff M. Heskins gathers
out of this text of Chrysostom.

First that we are joined to Christ two ways, by love, and by the thing it
self. Which in other terms, is called spiritually and really. Mark this wise
division of spiritually and really, as though such things as are joined
spiritually, might not be joined really. But (M. Heskins) a spirit is not
contrary to a thing, except you will say it is nothing, but to a body, and
therefore spiritually and bodily are opposite, not spiritually and really. For
we are joined to Christ spiritually, and yet really, so that Christ dwells
in us by his spirit through faith, but not bodily, so in the sacrament, we
eat the body of Christ really, that is in deed and unfeignedly, but yet in a
spiritual kind of eating, and not carnally or corporally.

But M. Heskins proceeding, affirms that We are spiritually joined to Christ
by charity and faith, and therefore incorporated into his mystical body, but
really or substantially we are joined to him, when by eating his very
substantial flesh in the sacrament, THE SVBSTANCE OF OUR FLESH IS TVRNED INTO
THE SVBSTAVNCE OF HIS FLESH, and thereby so joined to him, as we are made one
flesh with him etc. Note here, good reader, for thy learning, that these words
printed by M. Heskins in another letter, that they might be seen as a special
paradoxe* teach thee a new kind of transubstantiation. For he is not content,
to have the bread turned into the body of Christ, without all type or figure,
really, substantially, corporally, etc. but as really, corporally, and
substantially, he affirms that the substance of our flesh, is turned into the
substance of ye flesh of Christ. O monstrous paradox, as ever any was heard,
since the beginning of the world!

After this he notes, that Christ's flesh is not digested in us, as other
meats are, which is needless to note, if our flesh be digested or turned
into his: adding this reason, that As it is a celestial meat, being now a
glorified body, so it draws us up to it, converting and turning us into it,
according to the nature of a celestial thing. How vain this reason is, by
which he would avoid the digestion, and prove his new transubstantiation and
conversion, appears by this, that the body of Christ in the Sacrament, was
as effectual, while he lived in his passible body on earth, in which he
instituted this sacrament, as it is now being a glorified body in heaven.
And whereas he charge, I know not what Stercoranites of our time, to
affirm that the flesh of Christ, passes through the body as other meats, I
think verily, he lies most impudently. For I never heard, or read of any
that so affirmed. Although, I would wish men to speak reverently of so high
mysteries, yet the importunity of the Papists with their matter of
transubstantiation enforces them not to affirm of them selves, but to report,
what they read in the fathers, concerning the bread, being the terrestrial
or outward part of the Sacrament, that it is digested and passes through, as
all other natural meats do, whereof Origin writes in Math. Chap. 15. Quod si
quicquid ingreditur in os in ventrem abit, and in sesession eijcitur: and ille
cibus qui sanctificatur per verbum Deiperque obsecrationem iuxta id quod habet
materiale, abit and in sesessu^ eijcitur. If what soever enters into the
mouth goes into the belly, and is cast forth into the draught: even that
meat also which is sanctified by the word of God and by prayer after that
which it has material, goes and is cast forth into the draught. This
douteth not Origin to speak of the material part of the Sacrament, by which
it is manifest, that he knew no transubstantiation. The chief thing that M.
Heskins urges us to mark, is that, Whereas the Sacraments would have only
a spiritual receiving, this holy father teaches that we are framed to Christ
not only spiritually by love, which may be without receiving of meat, but,
re ipsa, in deed by receiving of meat. But I pray you M. Heskins, where
says Chrisostom that our conjunction unto Christ is not only spiritual. In
deed he said, not only by love, but in deed, but he opposes not
spiritually and really as you do. And where you urge that this conjunction is
by meat, and this meat is his body, and therevppon conclude that it is a
corporal conjunction, and Christ is joined corporally: I answer, that if
Chrysostom may expound himself, this meat and this body is a spiritual
meat, therefore a spiritual conjunction, and Christ is eaten spiritually. De
prod. Iud. Nemo sit Judas in mensa: hoc sacrificium cibus spiritualis est. Nam
sicut corporalis cibus, etc. Let no man be Judas in this table: this sacrifice
is a spiritual meat. For as corporal meat when it finds a belly,
possessed with humors contrary to it, it hurts and offends more, and
helps nothing at all: even so this spiritual meat, if it find any man
polluted with wickedness, it destroys him the more, not of it own nature* but
through the fault of him that receives it. Thus far Chrysostom, for the meat
to be spiritual. Finally the last observation that Christ does give us in ye
sacrament, is the same flesh, by which he was joined unto us, therefore his
very substantial body and blood, avails him nothing: For we contend not,
of the substance of the thing, that is given, but of the manner of the giving,
the thing is the very body and blood of Christ, but not after a corporal or
natural manner, but after a spiritual and divine manner, or as the old
writers have said. Modo ineffabili, after an unspeakable manner, as so many
figurative speeches that are spoken thereof do declare, which to expound
literally or gra^matically, were little better then extreme madness.

The other place which you add out of Ho. 24. in 10.1. Cor. help them nothing
at all, that Christ has given us his flesh etc. That this body the wisemen did
reverence in the ma^ger. You might have added out of the same place: Quod est
in calice, id est quod a latere fluxit, that which is in the cup is the same
that flowed out of his side, and thereof we are partakers. But that all these
are figurative speeches it is manifest by this interrogation, that follows in
the same homily. Quid enim appello inquit communicationem? id ipsum corpus
sumus. Quid significat panis? corpus Christi. Quid autem fiunt qui accipiunt
corpus Christ's: non multa sed vnum corpus. For what do I call it (says he) a
participation? We are the self same body. What signifies the bread? The
body of Christ. And what are they made which receive the body of Christ? Not
many bodies but one body. And in ye same homily. Sed quare, Addit quem
frangimus? hoc in Eucharistia videre licet, in cruce autem minime sed omnino
contra. Os enim eius non conteretur. Sed quod in cruce passus no^ est, id in
oblatione patitur, and propter te frangi permittit. But why? does he add
(speaking of the bread) which we break, that you may see in the sacrament of
thanksgiving, but not on the cross, but altogether the contrary. For there
shall no bone of him be broken. But that which he suffered not on the cross,
he suffers in the oblation, (for so they called the ministering of the
communion, because it was a sacrifice of thanksgiving) and for thee suffers
himself to be broken. In these places Chrysostom affirms the Church to be
the same body, which the bread does signify, and which the faithful do
receive, and in the latter place, he shows manifest difference, between the
natural body of Christ that suffered on the cross, and the spiritual
receiving of him in the supper, in which his bones are broken, which (he
says) was not on the cross, which must needs be figurative. I pass over
the large allegory he continues in the same homily, affirming that we must
be Eagles to fly up into heaven, and feed of Chrstes body where it is, for
where the body is, thither the Eagles will be gathered.

The fifteenth Chapter declares by scriptures that the figure of the pascall
lamb, was a figure of the eating of Christ our pascall lamb. Hesk.


There is no doubt but the killing of the pascall lamb was a figure of the
killing of Christ, Fulke.
and of the eating of the lamb, was a sacrament of the eating of Christ our
pascal lamb, but not properly a figure of ye Lords supper. For Christ is eaten
not only in the sacrament, but also by faith, which the use of the sacrament
is to confirm, as he himself teaches Joan. 6. It is true also, that this
sacrament is succeeded in the place of that. But that the eating of the Lamb,
was a figure of our eating of the Sacrament, no scripture teaches. For first
your comparisons will not serve M. Heskins, The lamb was verily eaten,
therefore Christ is verily eaten, the lamb was substantially and really eaten,
therefore Christ was really and substantially eaten. For I may reason as well,
the lamb was a natural lamb; therefore Christ was a natural lamb: or as
you do of the age of the lamb: the lamb was but one year old, therefore Christ
was but one year old: or rather and more properly thus, if you will algates
have it a figure of the sacrament, the lamb was called the passover, and yet
it did but signify the passover, so the bread is called the body of Christ,
and yet it does but signify the body of Christ: or thus, the eating of the
lamb was a figure of the eating of Christ, so the eating of the bread is a
figure of the eating of Christ. As for the desire that Christ had to eat the
passover, proves not, that he called his supper so, but the old passover,
which he so desired to eat, because it was the last and should be fulfilled,
and then was in fulfilling, in the suffering an oblation of his body. The other
text alleged out of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 5. (Christ our passover is slain,
therefore let us feast, not in the old leaven, nor in the leaven of malice
and wickedness, but in the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth) is
manifestly wrested unto the eating of Christ in ye supper: whereof, the Apostle
speaks not, but of the whole course of our life, wherein we must hold the
feast in the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.

The rule borrowed out of Augustine in Psalm^^ts. 77. will do you little
pleasure: for grant that the thing figured in good things, is better then
the figure, and in evil things worse, what have you gained? Yes forsooth
very much: For then the passover figured must needs be better then the
passover the figure. If the passover which is now eaten, be but a piece of
bread, a bare sign, a figure, (as the sacramentaries affirm:) then the
pascall Lamb is a figure of a piece of bread, which is not better then it. Of
this argument no small account is made, for it is continued in six long
tedious chapters following. But how soon will all this smoke be blown away?
yea, even with one breath. For admit that the Pascall lamb was a sign of
the Lords Supper, which is not yet proved by Scripture: yet shall the thing
figured be better then the figure. For the supper of the Lord consists of
the body and blood of Christ, and not of a piece of bread, (a bare sign or
figure,) although bread and wine are elements which do lively represent that,
which Christ in his supper does feed us withal. And he does more then
beastly belie them, whom he calls Sacramentaries, to affirm that it is but
a piece of bread, a bare sign or figure. They affirm that it is bread, but
they affirm not, that it is nothing but a piece of bread: they say it is a
sign and a figure, but they say not, it is a bare sign, and nothing but a
figure: except baptism be a bare sign, and nothing but a figure, because it
is a sign and a figure. Therefore, when you come to your conclusion (M.
Heskins) you may well conclude, that the Sacrament is not a bare figure: but
you falsely cogge in, that by Christ's institution, it is consecrated to be
offered: for Christ was offered up but once, and that by him self only.
Likewise, (very unlike a divine,) you say, the Pascall Lamb was but a bare
figure, which is untrue: for it should not have been called the Passover,
except it had truly assured the worthy receivers of their spiritual
deliverance. But where you make it such an absurdity, that one figure should
be figure of another: there is no such inconvenience as you immagine, but that
one thing may be the sign of another thing, which shall be a figure of the
third thing. As in this very example, if you will call your wits together, I
am sure you will confess, that the Pascall Lamb was a figure, of the
deliverance of the Israelites, from the destruction of Egypt, and the same
deliverance of their bodies was a figure of the spiritual deliverance of our
souls. Because Dionysius (whom you call the Areopagite) says nothing to the
matter in controversy, I will pass him over until some other time.

Hesk.
The sixteenth Chapter teaches this matter by Tertullian, and Isychius.

Fulk.
This Chapter neither proves substantially that it promises, nor gains any
thing if it proved it. For, if ye Pascall Lamb were a figure of Christ's
supper, yet that proves not, as was showed before, that the body of Christ is
there eaten corporally, and after a corporal manner. Tertullian, a noble man in
Christ's Parleament Cont. Marcion lib. 4. writes thus. Professus igitur se
concupiscentia concupiscere edere pasca, vt su^^m (indignu^ enim vt quid
alienum concupiscat Deus) acceptum panem, and distributum discipulis corpus
suum illum fecit. Therefore, when he had professed that with desire he desired
to eat the Passover, as a thing of his own: (for it was an unworthy thing,
that God should desire that pertained to another) that bread which he took and
distributed to his disciples he made his body. This saying M. Heskins has
most vntollerably abused: first, by false translating, and then by leaving out
that which expounds the mind of Tertullian most clearly. For the true
understanding of this place, we must note two things: first, that Marcion,
against whom he writes, affirmed that the God of the law, was not the God of
the Gospel: secondly, that Christ had not a true body, but a fantastical
body. Against both these errors, he reasons in this sentence. Against the
first, when he says, he desired to eat the Pascal lamb of the old law,
which was his own, namely of his own institution, (for it was absurd that
Christ being God, should desire that which was another Gods institution) as
the heretic said, the law and all ceremonies thereof were. And this is
directly contrary to M. Heskins purpose, who joining with the heretic,
denies that he did desire to eat the Pascall of the law, and that it was not
properly his own, and for this intent, to make it serve his turn, he
translateth falsely vt suum, as his own Passover, and alienum, any strange
thing. Against the second, Tertullian reasons in the same sentence, which
words, because M. Heskins could not abide, he has clean cut off. The words
are these, Acceptum panem, and distributum discipulis corpus suum illum fecit,
hoc est corpus meum dicendo, id est figura corporis mei. Figura autem non
fuisset, nisi veritatis esset corpus. Caeterum vacua res, quod est phantasma,
figuram capere non posset. Aut si propterea panem corpus sibi finxit, quia
corporis ca^ebas veritate, ergo panem dibuit tradere pro nobis. Faciebat ad
vanitatem Marcionis vt panis crucifigeretur. The bread which he took and
distributed to his disciples, he made his body, saying, this is my body, that
is to say, a figure of my body. And it could have been no figure, except his
body had been of truth. But a vain thing which is a fantasy, cannot
receive a figure. Or else, if therefore he made bread his body, because he
lacked the truth of a body, therefore he should have given bread for us. It
made well for the vanity of Marcion, that bread should have been crucified.
There can nothing be more evident, then that Tertullian by this place,
overthrows both the transubstantiation and also the carnal presence,
maintained by the Papists. This M. Heskins because he could not brook, he
brake off the sentence, and comes out of the matter also, to rail against
Cranmer of holy memory; first, doubting whether the book set forth in his
name were made by him, as though Cranmer was not well enough known to be as
well able to write a book as Heskins: then that he affirms, the Papists
unable to show one article of faith, so directly contrary to our senses, that
all our senses shall by daily experience affirm a thing to be, and yet our
faith shall teach us the contrary.

Master Heskins like a wily Pie, obiecteth the article of the resurrection,
where our senses teaches us, that men's bodies be dead, and faith teaches, yt
they shall rise again. But the subtle sophister does not see, I ween a
difference between it and is in M. Cranmers assertion, and is and shall be in
his balde objection. Faith teaches, that shall be, which our sense teaches now
not to be. But faith teaches not that to be white, which our sense teaches to
be black. But he has another wise instance. The senses taught, that the
wound which Christ had in his side, after his resurrection was very sore,
but faith taught the contrary, because his body was glorified. Seeing the
wound was made after his death, reason would judge, that it was insensible,
especially when he was risen again from death, by his divine power. And Thomas
was not so rude, that he would have thrust in his hand, if he thought it should
have hurt him, and when he did thrust in his hand, he perceived by his senses,
that it did not hurt. But it is pity to spend any time about so vain a
matter: soreness being not the thing, but a certain affection of the thing,
which cannot always be known by another man's senses, but by his only that
feels it, as in him that has the Palsy, if his leg were cut off, he
feels nothing, yet some such wise man as M. Heskins, would think it were
very sore. But he woulde-faine excuse the matter, why he cutteth off Tertulian
by the waste, promising in another place to do it, and wills you in the mean
time to consider, that Christ's body is given in the sacrament, and further
alleges out of Tertullian in another place, which is in his book De
resurrectione carnis: That the flesh does eat the body and blood of Christ,
that the soul may be fedd of God. Where he means none otherwise, then in
the former place, calling the sacrament a figure of Christ's body, and so an
end with Tertullian. Then comes Isychius disciple of Gregory Nazianzene,
who first dissuading men from using of the Jews ceremonies, affirms that
which M. Heskins denied, that Christ did eat the legal Passover in his last
supper. His words that are material are these: Christus primum celebrauit
figuratum Pasca. Post canam auem intelligibidem tradit. Christ did first
celebrate the figurative Passover, but after supper he delivered the
intelligible supper.

Then follow diverse places, to show that by intelligible, he means figured.
But being granted that the supper was figured, by the pascall Lamb, which is
the egg that he is so long in brooding, yet he is never the nearer, for the
carnal presence and corporal manner of eating, no not with that which
Isychius says: That he took the intelligible blood first in the mystical
supper, In Leuit. lib. 2 cap. 8.
and afterward gave the cup to his Apostles, and that he drank himself, and
giving to his Apostles to drink, then he powered the intelligible blood upon
the altar, that is to say, his body. Now the body of Christ is the Church and
all his people. He that sees not, that this Father does use figuratively
these words: blood, body, altar, power, drink, etc. is worthy to wear a
cocks comb, and a bell. Yet Master Heskins notes in the margent, Christ
drank his own blood, and gave it to his Apostles. Which if it be true in the
litterall sense, as he means, then it is as true, that he powered his own
blood upon his own body in the literal sense. For the same blood, which he
drank, and gave, he powered on his body. But he powered not his natural blood
upon his body, therefore he neither gave nor drank his natural blood in the
litterall sense. But you will say, his body signifies his Church and people,
for whom he powered forth his natural blood. Well, beside that you are enforced
to acknowledge a figurative speech, you are never the near. For although he
powered out his blood for them, yet he powered it not upon them. And your Author
says, he drank none other blood, but that he powered upon them. Here is also
alleged Chrysostomes name, for Christ's drinking of his blood, but his words
are referred to another place. Then follows a conclusion: If Christ drank his
own blood, he drank it spiritually, or corporally: spiritually he could not:
wherefore he drank it corporally. This is very round dealing M. Heskins. But if
he could drink his blood, I pray you why could he not drink it spiritually,
as well, and rather, then corporally? For if he drank his own blood, he also
did eat his own body, which if it sound not grossly in your ears, it is,
because you have a gross understanding.

In this Chapter two Lords of the Parleament being required of their
judgment, have given their voices both directly against his bill for the
carnal presence.

Hesk.
The seventeenth Chapter proceeds in the same matter, by S. Cyprian, and
Euthymius.

Master Heskins, in his Epistles, and prefaces, promises great sincerity,
Fulke.
and every where obiecteth impudency, and insinceritie against the proclaymer,
and his accomplices. But see what sincerity he uses, that matcheth Euthymius,
scarce worthy to be a burgess of the lower house, ^ith Cyprian one of the most
ancient Barons of the upper house. And yet afterward he him self places him
in the lower house, that is, among the writers within the compass of nine
hundredth years. Whereas the higher house consists of them that writ within
600. years after Christ, as the Bishop whom he terms the proclaymer, makes
his challenge. And certeinely Euthymius was never accounted for a Lord of the
parleament, before he was called thereto by Master Heskins writ, which of
what force it is to make a Baron, let the readers judge.

For he lived about the year of our Lord 1170. Notwithstanding we will examine
his voice as it comes in order. But we must first consider the voice of
Cyprian Bishop of Carthage. Which is this. The supper therefore being ordered
among the sacramental meats, De coena Domini.
there met together the new ordinances and the old. And when the lamb was
consumed or eat^n, which the old tradition did set forth, the master did set
before his disciples the inconsumptible meat^. Neither are the people now
bidden to feasts, painefully wrought with expenses and cunning: but the food
of immortality is given, differing from common meats, reteyning the kind of
appearance of corporal substance, but proving by invisible efficiencie, the
presence of Gods power or the divine virtue to be there. In this saying, First
there is never a word, to prove that the Pascall Lamb was a figure of the
Lords supper, which is the purpose of the Chapter, but only that the new
institution succeeded the old, which is manifest by the history of the
Gospel: Even as Baptism succeeded circumcision, and yet was not circumcision a
figure of Baptism, Secondly note, that he does not affirm, the real
presence of Christ's natural body, but the invisible working of his divine
power. And so his voice is flatly againg Master Heskins bill. Now let us
consider his fond collections. First that Christ gave inconsumptible meat,
the sacramentaries give consumptible meat? For they give but bread. This is a
false slander, a thousand times repeated, for they give not bread only, but
even the same inconsumptible meat, by the invisible working of his divine
power, which Cyprian affirms, that Christ gave his Disciples. But he urges,
That it was put before them, taken by hand, and laid in sight, which the
merit and grace of his passion could not be. See I pray you how this man
agrees with Cyprian: Cyprian says, it was by invisible working of Gods
favor, he says it was put before them, (for so he translateth apponit) taken
by hand, and laid in sight.

His second collection is, That it differs from common meats, reteining the
form of corporal substance, which can neither be the bread, which
differs not from common meats, nor the spiritual meat, which they call the
merit of his passion, because that reteineth not the form of corporal
substance.

A wise reason, disioyning and seuering things that should be taken together.
The water in baptism, differs from common water, and containing the form
of corporal substance, by invisible working, proves the presence of Gods
power to be there. So does the bread and wine in the Lords Supper. Which
although of them selves, they be no more holy then other creatures, yet when
they are consecrated for the use of the sacrament, they differ as much from
common meats, as the body and the soul do, as temporal life, and eternal
life: as heaven and earth do differ, so does the water consecrated for
baptism differ from common water.

His third collection, that it is called The food of immortality, which
cannot be bare material bread. A true collection, for the sacrament is not
bare material bread, but the body and blood of Christ, represented by material
bread, as a material lauer is the water of regeneration, but not bare
material water.

For confirmation is brought in Ignatius ex Ep. ad Ephe. Be ye taught of the
comforter obedience to the Bishop, and the priest with vnswaruing or stable
mind, breaking the bread which is the medicine of immortality, the
preservative of not dying, but of living by Jesus Christ. Although no learned
man, that is not more wilful then wise, will grant this Epistle to be written
by yt ancient father Ignatius, whose name it bears: yet does this saying,
co^tein nothing but very sound doctrine of the sacrament, which he calls
bread, that i^ broken to be ye medicine of immortality. M. Heskins urges as
before, yt it can non be bare bread, which has such effects. Which I grant
willingly, but I reply upon him, that it cannot be the natural body of Christ,
which he exhorts them to break. For Christ's body is not broken, but the
sacramental bread, to signify the breaking and participation of his body.

But he proceeds to another speech of Cyprian, which is in deed a more
apparent speech for his purpose, the words are these: Panis iste, quem
Dominus Discipulis porrigebat, non eff^gie, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia
verbi factus est caro. Et fiout in persona Christi humanitas videbatur, and
lateba^ diuinitas: ita sacramento visibili ineffabiliter se diuina infudie
essentia. This bread which our Lord did reach unto his disciples, being
changed not in shape, but in nature, by omnipotency of the word is made
flesh. And as in the person of CHRIST, the humanity was seen, the divinity
was hidden, even so the divine essence has powered it self unspeakably into
the visible sacrament. The Papists esteem this place to be an invincible
bulwark of their transubstantiation, but alas it is soon overthrown, when
the meaning of Cyprian is boulted out, not only by sentences going before and
after this saying, but also by the very words of this same sentence. For he
makes a manifest difference, between the visible sacrament and the divine
essence, which is invisible. Whereas the Papists by their transubstantiation,
have no visible sacrament, but only accidents of bread and wine, which they,
nor none other can call a visible sacrament. Moreover, the word divine essence,
answering to the word flesh, in the former sentence, plainly expounds what
he means thereby, namely the divine power which the flesh of Christ has, to
give life, and not the divine nature or substance, as M. Heskins translateth
it, and much less Christ, God and Man, as he expounds it. For if we take the
divine essence, for the divine substance of Christ's Godhead, it will be a
gross absurdity, and a blasphemous heresy, to make any infusion or pouring
of that into the visible sacrament, which fills all places. Wherefore of
necessity it signifies the property or efficacy, even as the word nature,
in the former clause does signify. For the former shape of the bread is not
changed, but the nature or property is altered, namely to feed the soul and
not the body only, as before it was made a sacrament, it served to do. But M.
Hesk. likes not this gloss, but will have nature to signify substance, and not
property, as it does very often: as when we say, the nature of herbs, of
stones, of beasts, we mean the properties. But whether he will or no, it must
be so taken, seeing it may be so taken, or else Cyprian should be contrary to
him self: who distinguishes the visible sacrament from the divine essence,
who calls that divine essence (a word more usual for substance) which is but
divine efficacy or property, who, if he had meant, that the bread had been
turned into the natural body of Christ, would neither have compared it with
the divinity of Christ hid under his humanity, nor have said, even so the
divine essens, infundeth it self in the sacrament, but even so the body of
Christ is hid under the forms of bread and wine. But that there should be no
doubt of his meaning, thus he writes in the same sermon, a little after: Haec
quoties agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide syncera panem sanctum
franginus and partimur. As often as we do these things, we do not sharpen our
teeth to byte, but with a sincere faith we break and divide this holy bread.
What can be more plain to express the meaning of this doctor, then that we
receive not the body of Christ with our mouth, but with our heart, not with
the instrument of our teeth, but with the instrument of our faith. In the same
Sermon, he writes Panis est esca, sanguis, vita, caro, substantia, corpus,
Ecclesia: Corpus, propter membrorum in vnum conuenientium: panis, propter
nutrimenti congruentiam: sanguis, propter vinificationis efficientiam: caro,
propter assumptae humanitatis proprietatem. The bread is food, blood, life,
flesh, substance, his body, the Church: his body, for the agreement of the
members in one: bread, for the aptnes of nourishment: blood, for the
efficiencie of quickening: flesh, for the property of his humanity that he
took on him. These places do sufficiently expound the meaning of Cyprian, how
the bread is changed into flesh, not after any change of substance, but of
quality and property, as in so many figurative terms is more the^ manifest.

Let us now come to Euthymius advanced by Master Heskins into the higher
house. And he in deed seems to affirm the purpose of this Chapter, that the
Paschall lamb was a figure of the sacrament, and yet not very plainly, but
rather it was a figure of the true Passover, which the sacrament does
represent, but that is no material point of our controversy, whether one
sacrament did figure an other, his words are: Christ in the same table
described the figurative and shadowing Passover, and set before them the true
and perfect Passover. Hereupon he infers that Christ was not truly and
perfectly given to the Jews in the Paschall Lamb as we teach, but only a
figure and sign of him, but in the sacrament he is given to us truly and
perfectly, that is by a true and real presence. But it is pity that he sees
not that his author compares the thing signified by our sacrament, with the
outward sign of the Jewish sacrament, as also the scripture does oftentimes,
against them that depended upon the outward ceremonies. Not that a false or
imperfect Christ was figured and received of the faithful by them, but to
show a difference between the shadow and the truth, the figure and the
thing figured, when ye Jews so sticked in the figure, that they considered not
the thing signified.

The other place which was alleged out of Euthymius, because he refers the
handling of it unto the second book, thither also will I refer the answer.
In the mean time, it is a childish insultation that he makes against the
proclamer, noting that he has found a plain place for Master Jewel, when
neither the place is so plain, nor the Author within the compass of his
challenge.

The eighteenth Chapter treats of the same matters by S. Hieronyme and
Chrysostom.

In this Chapter Hieronyme is first brought forth, In Matthew. 26. in these
words. After the figurative Passover was fulfilled, and he had eaten the
flesh of the Lamb with his Apostles, he takes bread which comfort the
heart of man, and passes to the true sacrament of the Passover, that as in
prefiguration of him, Melchisedech the Priest of the highest GOD had done,
offering bread and wine, he also might represent the truth of his body and
blood. Here Hieronyme does not affirm the Passover to be a figure of the
sacrament, but of Christ the true Passover. Calling the supper a true
sacrament of that true and prefigured Passover. Which words would be noted,
that he calls the bread a true sacrament, that is a lively sign of the
very Passover Christ, and a representation of the truth of his body and
blood. But here Master Heskins, fares as he were half mad, sending us to
the Vocabularies, Calepines, and Dictionaries, for the signification of this
word repre^ento, That among learned men it is not so streighted, as only to
signify, to show a thing by a figure or sign.

And thereupon we will not strive, but that it is often taken to show by a
figure or sign, he him self can not deny, and that it must be so taken here
in this place, appears by this reason. The comparison will not else stand
between Melchisedech and Christ (which all though it be not grounded on
scripture, Hierome often makes) except Christ offered bread and wine in a
figure or representation, as Melchisedech did in a prefiguration.

M. Heskins enforces the word Truth, that he should not mean a figure, for
then he would have said (as he imagines) that he also must represent his body
and blood, and not that he also might represent the truth of his body. But if
you mark the force of this word, quoque, also, you shall see, that
Melchisedech did prefigurate the truth of his body likewise. For it imports
an equality of both their doings, Melchisedech by bread and wine did
represent or prefigurate the truth of his body, and Christ also by bread and
wine did represent the truth of his body. For Christ could not do also, that
which an other had not done. Therefore very foolish are M. Heskins oppositions,
of typical passover, and true passover, and figure and truth, where the
argument is a consentaneis, and not a dissentaneis. The other frivolous
interpretation, that he makes of the bread comforting man's heart, being both
out of the mind of Hieronyme, and out of his purpose, I omit. At length he
comes to an other place of Hieronyme ad Heliodorum Ep. 1. Absit vt de ijs
quicquam sinistrum loquar, qui Apostolico gradui succedentes: Christi corpus
sacro ore conficiunt. God forbid that I should speak any evil of the^, which
succeeding the apostolic degree, do make the body of Christ with their holy
mouth. M. Heskins translateth it, which do consecrate, because in the word,
make, which Hieronyme uses, he should be enforced to acknowledge a figurative
speech. But let him turn over all his vocabularies, Calepines, and
dictionaries, unto which he sent us ere while, and he shall not find this
Verb conficio, signifying to consecrate, but to make, to dispatch, or to kill.
Likewise he leaves out these words which follow immediately, Per quos and nos
Christiani sumus, by whom we also are Christians. It is evident that
Hieronyme speaks hyperbolically of the dignity of priests, for as to speak
properly, we are not made Christians by them, no more is the body of Christ
made by them. But where he speaks properly, he uses proper terms, as
Contra Iouin. lib. 2. In typo sanguinis sui non obtulit aquam, sed vinum. In
the figure of his blood he offered not water, but wine. Here he calls the
sacrament, the type of his blood, and says it is wine. And in the same book,
he says of Christ, that although it be written of him, that he hungered and
thristed and went often to diner, yet excepto mysterio, quod in typum suae
passionis expressit, and probandi corporis veritate, nec gulae scribitur
seruisse, nec ventri. Excepting the mystery which he expressed in figure of
his passion, and in proving the truth of his body, it is not written that he
did serve his throat or belly. Meaning that it is not said expressedly what
he did eat and drink, but only a^ his last supper, and after his
resurrection to prove the truth of his body.

The other collection that he makes, that because priests do consecrate
with their mouth, therefore the faith of the receiver, makes not the presence
of Christ in the sacrament, beside that it is not Hieronymes word, yet it
proves nothing, because, as there be causes that work altogether alone, so
there be causes which be helping, and concur with other, of which sort is
the faith of the receiver, necessarily to conceive with the ministry of the
Minister, that Christ may be present. That Christian Priests should not be
contemned if they be good, it is easily granted, if they be naught, the
ministry is to be honored, but not the person.

Out of Chrysostom are alleged two long testimonies, the one out of his
homilies de prodit. Iudae. But by that also an other greater benefit was
showed, that that lamb was a sign of the lamb to come, and that blood showed
the coming of the Lords blood, and that sheep was an example of the
spiritual sheep. That lamb was a shadow, this lamb the truth. But after
the sun of righteousness shined, the shadow was put away by the light. And
therefore on the same table both the passeouers were celebrated, both that of
the figure and that of the truth. For as painters are wont to shadow the
table that is to be painted, with certain lineamentes, and so with variety of
colors to make it perfect. Even so Christ did in the table. He did both
describe the figure of the Passover, and showed the passover of truth: Where
will thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover? That was the Jewish
passover, but let the passover give place to the light, and the image be
overcome of the truth. If this place be well considered, it makes altogether
against the Bill of transubstantiation. For the similitude of the Painters
Table, having in it shadows and colors, applied unto the pascal lamb and the
sacrament, declares that they both together make a perfect image, to show and
represent the true lamb Christ which was offered for us, the old pascall,
being the shadowing, and the new sacrament which he calls also a passover,
being the variety of colors, by which the passover of truth is discribed and
plainly showed. Therefore M. Heskins collections are vain, and from the
authors meaning. For his purpose is not, to make ye pascall lamb a figure of ye
sacrament, but of christ, and both ye lamb and the sacrament, figures of
Christ: but yet the lamb a shadowing figure, like the first draught of a
painter, ye sacrament a clear demonstration like an image in colors. It is
therefore very babish, yt he grou^deth upon the word of the Passover showed in
the table, that the body of Christ was really present on ye table in ye
sacrament, whereas it is plain, that Chrysostom speaks of showing by signs,
as by colors an image is set forth in a painted table. As childish it is, that
he will oppress the proclamer to tell him why Hierome and Chrisostom call not
the Jewish pascal, light, truth, and verity, as they do our pascall, seeing
by it they received Christ^ as well as we in our sacrament. A sore matter.
The Iewishe pascall represented (if I may use that term under correction of
M. Heskins dictionarie) the true pascal Christ, as our sacrament does, who is
the light, truth, and verity: the sacrament they call not the pascall lamb,
light, nor truth, but by a figure, as they call it many other things. But
when they speak properly they use other terms, so does Chrysostom. Homi.
Ex. Psalm. 22. and 116. Sapientia dificauit sibi Domum, supposuit columnas
septem, parauit mensam suam, misit seruos suos conuocans omnes, and dicens,
venite and edite de panibus meis, and bibite vinum quod miscui vobis: and quia
istam mensam preparauit seruis and ancillis in conspectu eorum, vt quotidie in
similitudinem corporis and sanguinis Christi, panem and vinum secundum ordinem
Melchisedech nobis ostenderet in sacramento, ideo dicit, parasti in conspectu
meo mensam aduersus eos qui tribulant me. Wisdom has builded her an house,
she has set under seven pillars, she has prepared her table, she has
sent forth her servants calling all men to her and saying, come and eat of
my bread, and drink of the wine that I have powered forth for you: and
because she has prepared this table for her servants and maids in the sight
of them, that she might daily show us in the sacrament after the order of
Melchisedech, bread and wine in similitude of the body and blood of Christ,
therefore she says, thou have prepared a table in my sight against them that
trouble me. What Papists holding transubstantiation, would thus write, that
bread and wine is showed in the Sacrament in the similitude of the body and
blood of Christ?

The second testimony that M. Heskins alleges out of Chrysostom, is upon
the 1. Cor. 10. This table is the strength of our soul, the sinews of our
mind, the bond of our trust, our foundation, hope, healpe, light, our life,
if we depart hence defended with this sacrifice, with most great confidence,
we shall ascend into the holy entry, as covered with certain golden
garments. But what speak I of things to come? For while we be in this life;
this mystery makes earth to be heaven unto us. Ascend unto the gates of
heaven and mark diligently, or rather not of heaven but of heaven of heavens,
and the^ thou shall behold that we say. For that which is worthy of highest
honor, I will show thee in earth. For as in kings houses, not the walls, not
the golden roof, but the kings body sitting in the throne is most excellent:
so also in heaven the kings body, which now is set forth to be seen of thee
in earth. I show thee neither Angels, nor Archangels, nor the heavens, nor
the heavens of heavens, but the Lord himself of all these things. Thou
perceiuest how that which is greatest and chiefest of all things thou do not
only see it on earth, but also touch it: and not only touch it, but eat
also: and when thou haste received it returnest home, wherefore wipe thy soul
from all filthiness, prepare thy mind to the receiving of these mysteries.
For if the Kings child being decked with purple and diadem, were delivered
to thee to be carried, would thou not cast all down to the ground and
receive him? But now when thou receiuest not the child of a king being a
man, but the only begotten son of God, tell me I pray thee, do thou not
tremble and cast away the love of all seculer things?

This testimony so necessarily must be understood, of a figurative and
spiritual receiving of Christ by faith, that nothing in the world can be
more plain. For even as earth is made heaven unto us, so is Christ made
present. And even as we see, the Lord upon earth, so we handle and eat him,
and that is only with the eye, hand and mouth of faith.

But let us see M. Heskins collections. First he is enforced to confess that
the sentence begins with a figure, The table for the meat therevppon:
Secondely, having such honorable terms, it can not be a piece of bread,
but Christ himself. This shall be granted also. Thirdly, that Christ is
verily on the table, which he calls Altars. As verily as earth is made
heaven. Fourthly, that it is Christ which is worthy of highest honor verily
present in the Sacrament. As verily present as he is seen: but he is seen
only by faith, therefore present only to faith. But this objection he takes
upon him to answer: If we say the body of Christ can not be seen in the
sacrament. No more says he, can the substance of man be seen, but his
garments or outward forms and accidents. This is such a boyish sophisme as I
am ashamed to answer it. By which I may as well prove, that Christ's body
was never seen, and therefore not seen in the sacrament, contrary to that
which Chrysostom says. From this objection he falls into an other, yt if
christ in the Sacrament be worthy all honor, then of sacrifice also, and the
sacrifice being Christ, Christ shall be offered to him self. This he calls an
ignorant objection. But there is more knowledge in it, then he has wit to
answer. He alleges the words of Augustine. lib. 4. de Trin. cap. 14. Christ
abides one with him, to whom he offers: and makes him self one with them,
for whom he offers himself: and is one with them, that offer: and one, with
that which is offered. Here are diverse kinds of unity, and yet not Christ
offered unto him self, unless M. Heskins will be a Sabellian and a
Patripassian, to confound the persons of the Godhead, and say, that God the
father, yea, the whole Trinity is likewise transubstantiated in the Sacrament.
Though Christ be one with his father, yet did he not offer him self to him
self, but himself to his father. As for the other saying of Augustine that he
brings, it is altogether against him De ciuitate Dei. lib. 10. c. 20. He is
the Priest him self, he is the offerer, he is the oblation, whereof he would
have the daily sacrifice of the Church to be a sacrament; seeing that of her
body he is the head, and of his head, she is the body, as well she by him,
as he by her being accustomed to be offered. First Christ is the offerer and
the oblation, but not he to whom it is made. Secondly, that which he calls
the sacrifice of the Church, is a sacrament, that is a holy memorial of that
propitiatory sa^^^fice, which he offered. Thirdly, this sacrifice of the
Church, is of the Church her self offered by Christ, and of Christ offered
by the Church, which must needs be spiritual, as the conjunction of Christ
and his Church is spiritual, therefore it is not the natural body of Christ
offered by the priest, but his mystical body offered by the Church and by
himself, and so a sacrifice of thanksgiving and not of propitiation.

After these objections, he returns to his collections out of the authority
of Chrysostom. There need no such preparation nor trembling, if the Sacrament
were but a piece of bread. He has never done with this slander, as though any
Christian man did say, it was but a piece of bread, which Christ vouchsafed
to call his body. We say truly, it is bread: but we say not, it is but a
piece of bread.

Hesk.
The ninteenth Chapter continues the proof of the same matter by S. Augustine,
and S. Cyrill.

Fulk.
M. Heskins promises in his Epistle, and gloryeth often in his work, that he
does not allege the doctors words truncately, and by piece meal, as
heretics do. But you shall see how well he handles him self. He would have S.
Augustine speak for his bil, and alleges his words out of his work. contrae
literas Petiliani, quoting neither what book nor what Chapter of the same, by
which it seems that either he red not the place him self out of Augustine,
but received it of some gatherer, or else he would cloak his dishonest
dealing. He cites it thus: Aliud est Pascha quod adhuc Iudaei celebrant de
Oue: Aliud aute^ quod nos in corpore and sanguine domini celebranus. It is
another Passover that the Jews do yet celebrate with a sheep, another, that
we do celebrate in the body and blood of Christ. But Augustines words, not
truncately and by piece meal rehearsed nor altered are these: Contrae literas
Petiliani lib. 2. Cap. ^7. Sed sicut aliud est carnis circumcisio Iudeorum,
aliud autem quod octauo die baptizatorum nos celebratius: et aliud est Pascha
quod adhuc illi de Oue celebrant, aliud autem quod nos in corpore and sanguine
domini accipimus: sic alius fuit baptismus Ioannis, alius est baptismus
Christi, illis enim ventura ista praemanciabantur: istis completa illa
praedicantur. But even as the circumcision of the flesh of the Jews is one
thing, and that which we do celebrate the eight day of them that are baptized
is another thing: and the Passover which they do yet celebrate of a sheep is
one thing, and that which we receive in the body and blood of the Lord is
another thing. So the baptism of John was one, and the baptism of Christ is
another: for by those things these things were foreshewed to come: by these,
those things are preached to be accomplished.

First, the supper is not made here another Passover but another thing, that
is, an other sacrament. Secondly here is declared, how the sacraments of the
old law, differ from ours of the new Testament, not in substance, which is
all one in both, but that they were signs of things to come, ours are signs
of things accomplished. Which thing he teaches often, and in this Chapter
most plainly. Lex and Prophetae, etc. The law and the Prophets had
Sacraments, foreshewing the things to come: but the Sacraments of our time do
testify that to be come, which they did preach that it should come.

And in Joan. Tract. 28. he says, that the Sacraments of the old testament
and the new, in signis diuersa sunt, in re quae significatur paria. In visible
kinds, diverse, but aequall in spiritual virtue. By which, and a hundredth
such places, it is manifest to be overthrown, which M. Heskins would build,
that Christ spiritually received, is not our Pascall lamb, but that we receive
another substance of Christ, then the faithful did in the old Testament. The
second place he cites out of Augustine, I marvel he could not see it to be
as plain against him as the first. cont. Faust. Man. lib. 20. Cap. 18. The
Hebrews in the sacrifices of beasts, which they did offer to God many and
diverse ways, as for so great a matter it was meet, did celebrate a Prophecy
of the sacrifice to come, which Christ has offered. Wherefore now the
Christians do celebrate the memory of the same sacrifice being accomplished by
the holy oblation and by the participation of the body and blood of Christ.
In this sentence is manifestly declared, the same difference we spoke of before
of the Iewishe sacraments, and of our sacraments, the one being a Prophecy of
Christ's sacrifice to come, the other, a remembrance of the same being past,
and fulfilled.

And whereas M. Heskins urges the word oblation, to exclude ye spiritual
eating, he does very ridiculously, as though there might not be as well a
spiritual oblation, as a spiritual participation, especially when the author
showing what we do in oblation and participatio^, says, we so celebrate the
memory of Christ's sacrifice alredie fulfilled. Therefore, this oblation is
another from that: namely, a spiritual oblation and thanksgiving, for that
whose memory it celebrateth, as Augustine most plainly teaches in the same
book, Cap. 21. Sed quid agam and tantae caecitati istorum Hreticorum, quando
demonstrabo quam vim habeat quod in Psalmis canitur: Sacrificium laudis
glorificabit me and illie via est vbi ostendam salutare meum? Huius sacrificij
caro and sanguis ante aduentum Christi per victimas similitudin^m
promittebatur: in passione Christi per ipsum veritatem redd^batur: post
ascensum Christi per sacramentum memoriae celebratur. But what shall I do? or
when shall I show unto so great blindness of these heretics, what force that
has which is soung in the Psalms? The sacrifice of praise shall glorify me,
and there is the way where I will show my salvation. The flesh and blood of
this sacrifice before the coming of Christ, was promised by sacrifices of
similitudes: in the passion of Christ, by the very truth it self, it was
given up: after the ascension of Christ, it is celebrated by the sacrament of
remembrance. Judge by this place, whether Christ's body be really offered, or
whether it be a mathematical sacrifice, as it pleases M. Heskins in his merry
vain to call it. Augustine makes three kinds of oblation of the flesh and
blood of Christ: In promise by sacrifices of similitudes, in truth by Christ in
his passion, in the sacrament of remembrance after his death.

Now follows a long speech of Cyrill, directly against M. Heskins the
alledger of it: lib. 4. in Joan. 6. ca. 14. Nec putet etc. Neither let the Jew
of the dullness of his which think, that we have invented mysteries never
heard of before. For he shall see, if he will seek more diligently, that the
very self same thing has been done since the times of Moses. For what
delivered their Elders from death, and the destruction of Egypt, when death
reigned upon the first borne of Egypt. Is it not evident to all men, that
because they being taught by Gods institution, did eat the flesh of the Lamb,
and oynted the posts and upper door posts, with the blood of the Lamb,
therefore death departed from them: for destruction, that is death of this
flesh, raged against mankind for the transgression of the first man. For
because of sin, we have heard: Earth thou art, and into earth thou shall
return: but for as much as Christ by his flesh would overthrow that cruel
tyrant, therefore that was shadowed by a mystery among the ancient fathers,
and they being sanctified by the sheep flesh and blood (God so willing)
escaped destruction. Therefore o Jew, why art thou so troubled, seeing the
truth prefigured long before: Wherefore I say art thou troubled, if Christ
says: except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you
shall have no life in you, whereas it behooved thee, being instructed in the
laws of Moses, and well taught by the old shadows to believe, to be most
ready to understand these mysteries? The shadow, and the figure thou know,
therefore learn the very truth of the thing. My flesh, says he, is meat in
deed, and my blood is drink in deed. In these words beside that there is
nothing to prove the Pascall Lamb, to be a figure of the Lords Supper: it is
directly said, that the self same mystery of eating the flesh of Christ,
has been observed since the time of Moses: and that there is no cause, why the
Jew should be offended at the saying of Christ, if he would understand the
truth, whereof the Pascall lamb was the figure and shadow. Which truth was
no mystery newly invented, but practiced ever since Moses, for not by the
flesh and blood of the Lamb, but by the flesh and blood of Christ, the people
were delivered from death. The Lamb was then a sacrament: Christ was then,
and ever shall be the truth: but what need we more strive, when M. Heskins
confesses, That the faithful of the old Testament did eat the flesh, and
drink the blood of Christ spiritually, as the Apostle teaches. 1. Cor. 10.
They did all eat the same spiritual meat, etc. And Cyrill says, We have no
new mystery, but even the same that has been practiced since the time of
Moses.

The twentieth Chapter, joins Saint Gregory, and Damascen to confirm the
same matter. Heskins.


In the beginning of this Chapter, he does honestly confess, Fulk.
that Gregory was the last of the higher house: and Damascen the first and
chiefest of the lower house, he may make him Vantparlar if he will. But neither
of the^ have any thing material for his purpose, that he alleges them, nor
for the general purpose of his bill. For Gregory's words are altogether
alegoricall, and therefore cannot be taken in the Grammatical sense, Hom. 22.
Pasch: All which things do bring forth to us great edifying if they be
discussed by mystical, or alegoricall interpretation. For what the blood of the
lamb is you have learned, not now by hearing, but by drinking, which blood is
put upon both the posts, when it is drunk, not only with the mouth of the
body, but also with the mouth of the heart. For he that does so receive the
blood of his redeemer, that he will not as yet follow his passion, has put
the blood on a post. Hear what a great thing is there? But that he calls the
sacrament of the blood, ye blood of the redeemer, speaking alegorically, as he
calls it the blood of the Lamb, meaning the old Paschal, which does
signify the blood of Christ. Therefore if Master Heskins will urge the blood
of the redeemer drunk not only with the mouth of the body, but with ye mouth
of the heart: he may likewise urge the blood of ye lamb: if this be a
figurative speech, so is that. But Gregory proceeds. In the night (says he)
we eat the lamb, because we do now receive the Lords body in a sacrament,
when as yet we do not see one another conscience. Note here yt Gregory does
not say simply, we eat the Lords body, but we eat the Lords body in a
sacrament or mystery: comparing the night of the Jewish eating, with the
mystery of the Lords body. And in neither of both his sayings affirms the
lamb to be a figure of the supper, which is the purpose of the Chapter. As for
Damascen, his chief words are these, (For it were too long to rehearse all, he
being but a knight of the lower house.) If God the word by willing was made
man, etc. can he not make bread his own body, and wine with water his blood?
God said in the beginning: let the earth bring forth green herbs: and unto
this day, being helped, and strengthened by Gods commandment, the rain
coming, it brings forth fruits. God said, this is my body, and this is my
blood, and do ye this in remembrance of me: by his almighty commandment it is
brought to pass until he come. In this testimony, which M. Hesk. rehearses
more at large, saving yt he names ye old Passover yt Christ did celebrate at
his last supper, there is no mention of any figure yt it was of his supper.
Secondly, although the time, in which Damascen lived, was very corrupt, yet
there is nothing in these words, which may not well be referred to ye
spiritual presence of Christ's body, unto the faith of the worthy receiver. M.
Heskins makes a needless digression of ye commandment of consecration, which
shall be granted to him, if he will not frame a new signification of consecration,
which none of his Calepines, Vocabularies, nor Dictionaries do acknowledge.
For, to consecrate, is to halow, or to separat to an holy use, so we grant ye
bread and wine to be consecrated. But ye Papists call consecrating, to change
ye substances, or to transubsta^tiat. And so neither Chrysostom, nor any other
learned man, did ever use yt word. His words, as M. Heskins cites the^ Ho. de
pro. Iud. be these: And now the same Christ is present, which did furnish that
table, he also consecrateth this. For it is not man that makes the things set
forth to be the body and blood of Christ, by consecration of the Lords table,
but he that was crucified for us, even Christ Words are spoken by the mouth of
the priest, but they are consecrated by the power and grace of God. This is
says he, my body. By this word the things set forth are consecrated. And as
that voice that said, grow ye, and multiply ye, was but once spoken, but yet it
feels always effect, nature working with it unto generation: so that voice was
but once spoken, but through all the tables of the Church, unto this day, and
until the coming, it gives strength to the sacrifice. In these words
(because M. Heskins brings them in for consecration) note yt Chrysostom
affirms all consecration unto the worlds end to be wrought by the voice of
Christ, once spoken by him self. This is my body, whereas the Papists affirm
consecration to be by the virtue of these words spoken by a Priest. So yt there
is great diversity, between their judgments of consecration.

Hesk.
The one and twentieth Chapter concludes the matter of the figure of the
Pascall lamb, by Haymo, and Cab^sila.

There is no doubt, but in the lower house, M. Heskins may find many that
favor his bill, Fulk.
but seeing it is shut out of the higher house, I will not trouble my self,
nor the Reader much to examine the voices of the lower house. Which if they
should every one allow it, yet it cannot be an enacted truth, without the
consent of the higher house. Only this will I note, that Master Heskins
makes Haymo elder by 500. years, then such chronicles as I have read do
account him.

But this thing in this Chapter must not be omitted, that he says, that The
sacramentaries cannot bring one father, teaching the sacrament to be only a
figure. And joins issue with the proclaymer, that if he can bring any
scripture, any catholic counsel, or any one approved doctor, that by
express and plain words, does deny the real presence of Christ in the
sacrament, then he will give over and subscribe to him. Still he charge them,
whom he calls the sacramentaries, to make the sacrament only a figure or a
bare sign, which is false. But for evidence to inform the men, that shall go
upon this issue, I will allege, first S. Augustine, in plain and express
words, denying that which Master Heskins, and the Papists, call the real
presence of Christ's body in the sacrament. In Psalm. 98. Non hoc corpus quod
videtis manducaturi estis, and bibituri illum sanguinem, quo fusuri sunt qui me
crucifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commendani, spiritualiter intellectum
vin^ficabit vor. You shall not eat this body which you see, nor drink the
blood, which they shall shed, that shall crucify me: I have commended to
you a certain sacrament, which being spiritually understood shall quicken
you. What can be said more plainly. The second witness shall be Chrysostom
In Matthew. Homil. 11. Si enim vasa sanctificata ad priuatos vsus transfer
peccatum est, and periculum, sicut docet nos Balthazar, qui bibens in calicibus
sacratis, de regno depositus est, and de vita. Si ergo haec vasa sanctificata
ad priuatos vsus transfer sic periculosum est, in quibus non est verum Corpus
Christi, sed mysterium corporis Christi continetur: quanto magis vasa corporis
nostri quae sibi deus ad habitaculum preparauit, non debemus locum dare diabolo
agendi in eis quod vult? For if it be an offense to translate the sanctified
vessels into private uses, and a danger, as Balthazar does teach us, who
drinking in the hallowed cups, was put out both of his kingdom and his life:
therefore if it be so dangerous to transfer unto private uses, those
sanctified vessels in which not the very body of Christ, but the mystery of
the body of Christ is contained: how much more the vessels of our body, which
God has prepared to be a dwelling place for him self, ought we not to yield to
the diuil to do in them what he will.

The third shall be out of the Popes own Cannon law, which M. Heskins may
not refuse for good evidence, and it is gathered out of Augustine. De con.
did. 2. Cap. Hoc est. Sicut caelestis panis qui Christi caro est suo modo
vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentum corporis Christi, illius
videlicet quod visibile, quod palpabile, quod mortale in cruce positum est,
vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis, quae sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio
mors, crucifixio non rei veritate sed significante mysterio: sic sacramentum
fidei, quod baptismus intelligitur, fides est. As that heavenly bread which is
the flesh of Christ, after a certain manner of it, is called the body of
Christ, whereas in very deed it is but the sacrament of the body of Christ,
namely of that body which is visible, which is palpable, which when it was
mortal was fastened to the cross, and the same offering of the flesh of
Christ which is done by the Priests hands, is called the passion, death, and
crucifying of Christ, not in truth of the thing, but in a signifying mystery:
so the sacrament of faith which is understood to be baptism, is faith. Now
let this issue be tried according to this evidence, by any lawful and
indifrent men of the country, and I doubt not but they will find Master
Heskins charged by his bond, to yield and recant. But to conclude this
Chapter, Master Heskins will needs have two manner of presences, as well as
the sacramentaries, spiritual and corporal, the spiritual he grants to
the worthy receiver, and the corporal also: the corporal only is left to the
wicked. Whereupon I would desire the Christian reader to consider, what hard
hold the Papists keep for the corporal presence, which is no benefit to
the faithful, but according to their doctrine common to the wicked, and how
proudly they deride and contemn the spiritual presence, wherein yet
consists all the comfort of the godly, which they them selves can not deny.
Undoubtedly this quarrel for the corporal presence, has a corporal respect,
to abuse the superstitious minds of carnal men, to their carnal commodity,
and not to seek spiritual recreation of the inward man, which is thoroughly
satisfied with the spiritual presence by faith.

Hesk.
The two and twentieth Chapter begins the application of the show bread to
the sacrament, as of the figure to the verity, by S. Hierome and Damascen.

Fulke.
The figures of Manna, and the waters, he rejects into the third book, and
now will treat of the figure of the show bread. And this bread, he will
have to be a figure of the body of Christ in the sacrament. Wherein the matter
is not worth the strife, so we remember that the sacraments of the old law,
were not bare figures, but ye same in substance and virtue that ours are, as
we showed before out of Augustine, and that they were not bare figures of our
sacraments, but of the things whereof our sacraments are effectual signs.
Although ours more clear, as of things already exhibited, and theirs were of
things to come. And therefore the old writers, Origin, Ambrose, and
Oecumenius also affirm, that the Fathers in the sacraments had the shadow, we
the image, and both of us shall have the truth in one country. Orig. in Ps.
38. Amb. 4. Offi. Chap. 48. Oec. in 10. Heb. The like comparison we had before
of the shadow and image out of Chrysostom and Euthymius, that borrowed it of
him. But how frivolous the comparisons be, that M. Heskins makes between the
show bread and the sacrament, to prove the one to be a figure of the other:
because it was set on the table, never failed, was a bread of remembrance, was
our offering, might not be eaten of any defiled person: I will declare by as
many differences. The show bread was 12. cakes in number, so is not the
sacrament: had frankincenses set upon it and burned, so has not the sacrament:
was removed every Sabbath, so is not the sacrament: must of necessity remain
a whole week, so must not the sacrament: might not be eaten of any but only
the Priests, the sacrament must be eaten of al men: might not be eaten of the
Priests, until it was a seven nights old, so is not the sacrament. Where
note I pray you, the synceritie of M. Heskins, that rehearsing the text out of
24. of Leuit. leaves out the putting of incence upon the two rows, because
he could not apply it to his Mass cakes.

But to the place of Hieronyme, In cap. 1. ad Tit. If Lay men be commanded to
abstain from the company of their wives for prayer, what is to be thought of
a Bishop, which daily must offer undefiled sacrifices for his own and the
peoples sins? Let us read the book of Kings, and we shall find that
Abimelech the Priest, would not give David and his servants of the show
bread, before he asked whether the servants were clean from a woman, not from
a strange woman, but from their wives: and except he had heard that yesterday
and the day before they had abstained from the work of marriage, he had not
granted them the bread which before he had denied. There is as great
difference between the show bread and the body of Christ, as between the
shaddowe and the bodies, between the image and the truth, between the
exemplars of things to come, and the things them selves prefigured by the
exemplars. Therefore as meekness, patience, sobriety, moderation, abstinence
from lucre, hospitality also and benignity, ought to be chiefly in a Bishop,
and amongst all Lay men excelling: so also a peculiar chastity, and, as I may
say, Priestly continence, that he do not only keep him self from an
unclean work, but also the mind that shall make the body of Christ may be
free from casting of the eye, and wandering of thought. In these words
Hieronyme makes the show bread, a shadow and figure of the body of Christ,
but not of the sacrament thereof. Neither will Master Heskins collection of
the office of a bishop standing in consecration, offering, and receiving the
body of Christ help him. For here is no word of consecrating, but of making
the body of Christ, Men's Christi corpus confectura, the mind shall make the
body of Christ: which if it be not a figurative speech, Hieronyme speaks both
grossly and untruly, neither of offering the body of Christ, but offering
undefiled sacrifices, which are prayers. Finally if it were plain, that he
called the sacrament by the name of that which it signifies, yet he him self
is the best expounder of him self. Where he shows a double taking of the
body and blood of Christ, spiritual and corporal. In Ep lib. 1. cap.
Dupliciter vero sanguis Christi and caro intelligitur: vel spiritualis illa
atque diuina, d^ qua ipse dixit caro mea vere est cibus, and sanguis meus vere
est potus: Et nisi manducaueritis carnem meum, and sanguinem meum biberitis,
non habebitis vitam aeternam: Vel caro and sanguis quae crucifixa est, and qui
militis effusus est lanc^a. The blood and flesh of Christ is understood two
ways: either that spiritual and divine flesh, of which he said: My flesh is
meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed: And except ye eat my flesh
and drink my blood, you shall not have eternal life: or else that flesh that
was crucified, and that blood which was shead by the soldiers spear. This
place may suffice to expound whatsoever either Hieronyme or any other old
writer says of the consecration, offering, or receiving of the body and blood
in the sacrament: making a manifest difference between that flesh and blood,
which is eaten and drunk, and that which was crucified, which the Papists
teach to be all one.

But M. Heskins cannot omit this place, without a gird against married Priests,
of which number he him self was once one, saying, they have put away the
consecration to keep their women, but he did put away his wife, that he might
return to consecration: Howbeit to the matter. As it is very well known,
Hieronyme was too much addict to the praise of virginity, so in this Chapter,
he cannot simply condemn the marriage of Bishops, although he wish rather a
continence in them that can abstain: and openly says to professed virgins,
that either they must marie if they cannot contain, or else continue if they
will not marie. Ad Demetriadem.

Next to Hieronyme, which is of the higher house, he is feign to place
Damascene of the lower house. Who says that The show bread did figure this
bread, meaning the sacramental bread, and not as M. Heskins expounds it
the body of Christ in the sacrament. For transubstantiation is not so old as
Damascene, neither was it received in the Greek Church, neither is it at this
day, neither, do these words help him which he adds. Therefore with all
fear and pure conscience, and with a sure faith let us come to him and worship
him with all pureness of mind and body. Let us come to him with burning
desire, fashioning our hands in manner of a cross, let us receive this body
of him that was crucified. There can no necessary collection be made of this
place, that Damascene spoke of the popish real presence. And if it might, yet
it is but one doctors opinion of the lower house, whose authority we weigh
not. But why do not the Papists hold their hands a cross, when they
receive the sacrament? by like all their ceremonies be not so ancient as
Damascene.

The three and twenty Chapter proceeds in the proof of the same by S.
Augustine and Isychius. Hesk.


Out of Augustine he alleges Ep. 86. Ad Casulanum: Fulke.
reproving one Vibicus Dicit cessisse pani pecus. etc. He says that the
sheep has given place to bread, as though he knew not that then also the
show bread was wont to be set on the Lords table, and that now also he does
take part of the body of the immaculate lamb. He says that blood has
given place to the cup not considering that now also he receives blood in
the cup. Therefore how much better and more agreably should he say, that
the old things are passed, and new things are made in Christ, so that
Altar gave place to Altar, sword to sword, fire to fire, bread to bread,
sheep to sheep, blood to blood? For we see in all these, that the carnal
oldnesse gives place to the spiritual newness.

The understanding of this place depends upon the knowledge of the error of
Vibicus. And that was this. He thought that the outward ceremonies of the
old law, did signify the outward ceremonies of the new Testament, that is,
that carnal things did succeed carnal things. As the lamb did signify
the bread, the blood did signify the wine in the sacrament, and so bread gave
place to the lamb, the cup to the blood. But this Augustine denies. For
they had bread then, and they have bread now: they had the flesh of a lamb
then, and they have the flesh of a lamb now: they had blood then, and they
have blood now: they had carnal things then, and we have spiritual
things now. This place therefore is directly against M. Heskins bill of the
carnal presence, and has nothing to prove that the show bread was a
figure of the sacrament: but only affirms that they had bread, as we have
bread, for they had the show bread. But if there had been transubstantiation,
that is, no bread in the sacrament, he might easily have confuted Vibicus
saying, that bread gave place to the sheep. But he confesses that we have
bread, and affirms, that they had bread also. And where he says, that we
eat part of the body of the immaculate lamb, he declares sufficiently that
he spoke of no carnal presence, for then he would not have divided the
body of the lamb into parts, which the Papists say every one receives
whole. Finally, where he says that the carnal oldenesse gave place to the
spiritual newness, he does most clearly teach us, that the outward
ceremonies of the old Testament, were figures of the spiritual things
signified and given by our sacraments, and not of the outward elements of
our sacraments. By which it is manifest, that spiritual things and not
carnal things are the substance of our sacraments. Now to M. Heskins
collections. He says that the old sacrifices of the lamb were not figures of
the sacrament: denying now in one word, that he labored to prove before in 7.
Chapters: but of the bloody sacrifice of Christ offered upon the cross after
the manner of Aaron. Concerning ye sense of Augustines words, let the readers
weigh my collection and his, by Augustines place, and by the rest of the
Epistle that is of the same matter. But mark here once again, that he makes
the sacrifice of Christ's passion, a sacrifice after the manner of Aaron, and
consequently Christ a priest after the manner of Aaron, directly contrary to
the scriptures in express words Heb. 7. Secondly he urges that, which
Augustine says, we now receive blood in ye cup, by which he will exclude the
distinction of spiritual receiving. But all in vain, except he can conclude,
yt we receive partem de agni immaculati corpore, part of the undefiled lambs
body. For if the one be spiritual, so is the other. I am sure the natural
body of Christ is not divided into parts, but we do spiritually receive
nourishment al of one body. To be short, if that which Augustine adds of
spiritual newnes succeeding carnal oldnes, were not a sufficient
demonstration of a spiritual receiving, I would bring other places of
Augustine to show the same most plainly. But the thing being so apparent, I
will not mistrust the judgment of any indifferent reader so much, as to
trouble him with more testimonies, which shall better come in, where more show
is for M. Heskins bill.

But we must pass over to Isychius, whose words are set down at large in
Cap. 24. Leui. The very number of the loaves does call us to a contemplation
of the commandment. So does the setting forth of the^, and that he does not
command the^ to be made a burnt offering as those things which be of the frying
pan, of the girdiron, and of the furnace, but that they should be set on the
table one over against an other, and that it should be lawful only for the
priests to eat of the^, not for the Levites, so that they also must eat the^
in a holy place. And also that they are called holy of holies, (understand
what is said, for the Lord shall give thee understanding) remember the
mystical table of which it is commanded that none should begin except the
intelligible Aaron, that is Christ, (For he began it first) except also his
sons, which by him are made Christ's, and have put on him, which yet they are
commanded to eat in a holy place. And he is that holy of holies, that they
may have a principal and vndespised sanctification. These loaves of two
tenthes (for they are of God and man, of the same being, perfect in both) are
set six over against six. The mystical supper is set here, and it is set in
the world to come. Six loaves are one proposition or setting forth, as the
mystery it se^fe is perfect and makes them that enjoy it perfect. And in
six days this visible creature was made, and the sixth day man was made, for
whom Christ prepared his mystical table. But yet altogether are rightly
twelve loaves, because the Apostles that were twelve in number first supped at
the Lords table. Here is an allegorical interpretation of the show bread to
signify the Lords supper, but that proves it not a prefiguration of the
sacrament. For there is great difference between an allegory, and a figure of
a thing to come. But to the point of the bill, here is nothing for the carnal
presence, but somewhat against it.

First where he says that the Christians (whom allegorically he calls the
sons of the intelligible Aaron, induti sunt eo, have put on him, meaning they
are baptized, for as many as are baptized in him have put him on. But they
have put on him only spiritually, therefore they are commanded to eat him
only spiritually.

Secondly the twelve loaves, which signifies the body of Christ, signifies
the twelve Apostles also, which mystically were his body, by which you may
see, he speaks of no carnal presence, Thirdly he calls it a mystery and
a mystical supper, which will not stand with M. Heskins corporal collectio^s.
No more will yt which he adds That it is a clean table, first as making
clean, secondly as having no lies or infectio^, such as are in the mysteries
of the paga^s. Where it is to be laughed at, that he will prove a corporal
presence, because it cleanses sins: for then shall we have the same presence
in baptism, and the Papists in holy water, which they affirm to cleanse
sins also. But it is, a per se, that Isychius adds. Moreover, extolling his
glory, and aduauncing the dignity of this mystery into an height, he adds,
it is the holy of holies of the Lords sacrifices for a perpetual law.
Therefore prayer is holy, the reading of holy scripture is holy, and the
hearing of the interpretation thereof: to be short, all things that are done
and said in the Church of God, according to the law, are holy. But the holy
of holies of the Lords sacrifice, of all things that are offered and done to
his glory, is the table which Christ sets forth of his own sacrifice. Here
is a great commendation of that mystical Table, which Christ has set forth of
the sacrifice of his death, which no man doubts to be most holy in the
right use thereof, and in respect of him that feeds us with his body and
blood at that table. But what is all this to the corporal and carnal
presence? But M. Heskins would find a contradiction in the words of
Oecolampadius, in that he says the bread is sanctified, and yet it has no
holiness in it, whereas that holy man speaks plainly and distinctly, that
it is sanctified, and does sanctify, in the right use of it, and not in the
nature of it self.

The four and twentieth Chapter, applying the continual reservation of the
Show bread, to the reservation of the sacrament, proves the same reseruatio^
by the old fathers, and by the perpetual practis^ of the Church. Hesk.


That the sacrament (of some) was reserved in the elder days of the Church, it
is not so great a controversy, Fulk.
as whether it ought to be reserved by the institution of Christ. Neither is
the simple reservation, one of the proclaymers articles (as M. Heskins says,)
but whether it should be hanged up in a Canopie for an ydol as the Papists use
it. As for reservation, how slenderly it is proved by him, we shall see by
examination of his witnesses. For as touching his application thereof unto the
reservation of the show bread, because it is but his own judgment, I will
not vouchsafe to answer it, otherwise then to deny it, to be of any force to
prove his purpose. His first witness is Clemens Ep. 2. The sacraments of Gods
secrets are committed to three degrees: to the priest, the Deacon, and the
minister, which with fear and trembling ought to keep the leauings of the
pieces of the Lords body, that no rottennes be found in the holy place, lest
when the thing is done negligently, great injury be done to the portion of the
Lords body. By this place M. Heskins will needs prove reservation, and the
carnal presence, but neither of both will fall out of his side, although the
authority of the Epistle is not worth a straw, being a counterfeit decretall
ascribed to Clemens, neither in true latin, nor good sense.

And first for the carnal presence, note how he says, ye remnantes of the
pieces and portions of the Lords body, and so he does often in this Epistle,
meaning ye crommes of the sacramental bread, which was consecrated to be the
body of Christ. For Christ's natural body cannot be broken into leauings,
fragments, and portions, which be the terms he uses. Now touching the
reservation, he means no keeping but of these crommes, which he calls
leauings, fragments and portions, and no keeping of them, but from mouldinesse
or rottenness, that is, that they should be spent while they are good, and not
kept while they stink, as the Papists do, not the fragments, but their
whole Mass cakes sometimes. For touching the sacrament it self, he writes by
and by after: Tanta in altario holocausta offerantur, quanta populo sufficere
debens. Quod si remanserint, in Crastinum non reseruentur, sed cum timore and
tremore clericorum diligentia consumantur. Let so great sacrifices be offered
on the altar, as may suffice all the people. But if any be left, let them not
be kept until the next day, but with fear and trembling, let them be spent
by the diligence of the Clerks. This being most manifest against reservation,
Master Heskins is not ashamed to rack it to stand with reservation.

And first, he asks the adversary, whether he thinks that Saint Clement
was a fool, to deny that he said before? No verily, but I think him to be
no wise man, that either takes this Epistle to be written by Clement, the
first bishop of Rome, or so understands it, that he would make him contrary
to him self. And I think he that did forge this Epistle under Saint Clements
name, was not only a doltish fool, but also an impudent falsarie, to make
that ancient Clemens to write to the Apostle Saint James of such bables as
those be, and that follow in the Epistle: which, if they were of weight, yet
the Apostle was not to learn them of Clemens, but Clemens of him. But
concerning the keeping that he speaks of, he writes yet more plainlye: Non
eijcientes for as e sacrario velamina, not shaking abroad out of the holy place
or vestrie the covering of the Lords table, lest peradventure the dust of the
Lords body should fall a miss from the linen cloth being washed abroad,
and this should be sin to him that does it. Lo sir, before we had relics,
fragments, and portions, now we have the dust of the Lords body. What dust is
this, but small crommes? But he goes on, and that Saint James might the better
look to those matters, he says: Iterum atque iterum de fragmentis dominic^
corporis demandamus. Again, and again, we give charge, concerning the
fragments of the Lords body. And finally, he concludes in fine Latin and
cleanly terms: A principio Epistolae vsque ad hunc locum de sacramentis
delegaui been intuendis: vbi non murium stercora inter fragmenta dominicae
portionis appareant, neque putrida per negligentiam remaneant clericorum. From
the beginning of the Epistle unto this place I have given charge concerning the
sacraments to be well looked upon: where no Mise tordes may be seen among the
fragments of the Lorde^ portion, nor they remain rotten through the negligence
of the Clerks.

You see this man would have the sacrament spent, and takes thought that the
crommes, both small and great, be not cast away, nor kept until they be
rotten, nor suffered to be eaten of Mise, nor defiled with their doung, but he
is utterly against popish reservation. The next is Irenaeus, who in his
Epistle, in which he does sharply rebuke Victor bishop of Rome, for
excommunicating the Bishops of Asia about the celebration of Easter, says:
That they were never for that matter driven from the fellowship of the Church,
or coming from those parts, were not received: but rather all the elders or
Bishops that were before them, did always solemnly send the sacrament of
Eucharistie to all the bishops or elders of those Churches that did not so
observe it. M. Heskins imagines that the Bishops of Rome, did send the
sacrament into all parts of the world, to all bishops and elders of every
Church: which if he did, he had need of many messengers. But the matter is
plain enough. If any of those bishops or elders came to Rome, they were
lovingly received of Victors predecessors, and at the time of the Communion,
the bishop would send the sacrament to them by the deacons, as well as to any
of the citizens that were of his own Church. Here is no shadow of
reservation, but M. Heskins absurd imagination.

Tertullian follows Irenaeus, writing to his wife, lib. 2. An arbitrare o
vxor ita gesturam te, vt clam viro sint, qua facis? Non sciet ille quid secreto
ante omne cibum gustes? and si sciuerie non partem illum credit esse, qui
dicitur. Do thou think (o wife) so to handle thy self, that these things
that thou do shall be unknown to thy husband? shall not he know what before
all meats thou do secretly receive? and if he shall know it, he
believes it not to be that bread, that it is said to be. Thus M. Heskins has
set down the words both in Latin and English. But wheresoever he had the
former question* An ar^itrare o vxor ita gesturam te, vt clam viro sint quae
facto? He had it not of Tertullian, for he has no such words in that book,
but only, Non sciet maritus, etc. shall not thy husband know, etc. By which
it is plain that he never read this place in Tertullian himself, but only
borrowed it out of some other papist, that alleged it for this purpose, and
belike gathered the former question, not as Tertullians words, but out of his
meaning, which Master Heskins not understanding, very ridiculously, has set
down, as the words of Tertullian. These be the Popish doctors, that boast of
their great reading, when they read but patches out of other men's notes, and
collections. But to the matter. Although it may seem, this corruption to have
entered into the African Churches, yt the people carried home ye sacramental
bread, and did eat it daily before all other meats, yet this is nothing like
unto the Popish reservation in the pixe, to be adored. And Tertullian in his
Book De Corona militis, does rehearse this custom among those things, that
had no ground of scripture for them. The liks is to be said, to the place of
Cyprian, where a woman kept it in her chest, as for the miracle, whether it
reproved her unworthiness, or her reservation, it is not plain by the
author. The story of Satyrus out of Ambrose proves not directly reservation,
for it is like, the Christians being in danger of shipwreck, did minister the
communion in the ship, and not bring it with them from the shore consecrated.
And Satyrus being then but a nouice or Catechumein, and not baptized, desired
the sacrament of them, meaning to receive it before his death, if he saw
present danger of drowning, otherwise to tarry until he were admitted to it,
by order of the Church. But this proves nothing at all the Popish
reservation, although the fact of Satyrus was not without imperfection, as
greatly as it is commended of Ambrose: and much less the Carnal presence, For
Satyrus, did not so put his affiaunce in the sacrament, that he thought it to
be God, but that he desired it as an help of his faith, that he might not
depart this life without the communion of the body of Christ in the sacrament.

The place of Chrysostom, is nothing at all for reservation, where he says,
that in a tumult the soldiers rushing into the Churches, The most holy blood
of Christ was shed upon their clothes. For he must remember, it was on Easter
day, when all the people did communicate, and such as came were baptized. And
where he says, it was Ad vesperu^ diei, that they did enter, that is, in the
afternoon: he must wit, that Chrysostom after the manner of the scripture,
calls ye morning before day light Vespere Sabbati, and therefore his
collection is vain. But although it were in the afternoon, what inconvenience
is it if we say, they spent all the forenoone in prayer, and fasting, and
hearing the word of God, and ministering baptism, which then was ministered
twice a year, at Easter, and at Pentecost: and then in the afternoon toward
evening, went to the communion? Hierome reports of Exuperius, that he carried
the Lords body in a wicker basket, and his blood in a glass. What reservation
is here? M. Heskins says, he did bear it about with him, but Hieronyme says
not so, except you mean about the Church, when he ministered the communion.
But here Master Jewel has a double blow. O cunning Master of defense. For
here is not only reservation, bu^ also he calls it in plain words, the
body and blood of our Lord. Master Jewel shall not greatly feel these blows.
To the reservation I have said before, and to the plain calling of it body
and blood, I say, what other thing is it, then as Master Jewel himself will
call it? and worthily: yet no transubstantiation meant by him. But how will
Master Heskins ward these blows? Exuperius had no hallowed pixes, nor
chalices of Gold and silver, as the Papists must have? And Exuperius
ministered to the lay people in both kinds, as the Papists will not do? What
has M. Heskins gained by Exuperius? But then Eusebius shall help him, for in
his 6. book, and 36. Chapter, is declared, yt a certain priest, sent to
Serapion (being at the point of death) a little portion of the Eucharistie in
the night season: by which it appears, yt it was reserved. In deed Dionysius
bishop of Alexandria writes so unto Fabianus Bishop of Rome. But withal he
shows, that it was no public order of the universal Church, but his own
commandment unto his own Church, that he might not seem in any point to
resemble the Nouatians, which denied reconciliation to them that had fallen in
persecution: wherefore he says, that although the priest was sick, and could
not come: Tamen quia prceptum fuerat a me, vt lapsis in exitu nemo
reco^ciliationis solatia denegaret, and maxim ijs, quos prius id rogasse
constaret, parum etc. Yet because it had been commanded by me, that no man
should deny to them that had fallen, the comfort of reconciliation at their
departure, especially to those who were known to have desired it before, he
gave a little of the Eucharistie, etc. Which words M. Heskins has clean left
out of the text, whereby the particular commandment of Dionyse is expressed:
and yet it is not proved that the Priest had the sacrament reserved, but it
might well be, that he did then consecrate and send him part, as he should
have done, if he could have come to the sick man himself for his own
weakness. Last of all he rehearses the words of Cyril Ad Colosyrium: I hear
that they say, that the mystical blessing, if any remnants thereof remain unto
the next day following, is unprofitable to sanctification. But they are madd in
so saying, for Christ is not made an other, neither shall his holy body be
changed, but the virtue of blessing, and the lively grace do always remain
in him. M. Heskins translateth in illo, in it, as though ye virtue, and
quickening grace were included in the sacrament, which ye author says to
remain in Christ. But touching ye authority of this Cyrillus ad Colosyrium, I
must admonish the Reader, that these words are not to be found in all the
works of Cyrillus that are extant, but is only a patch cited by other men, ye
whole epistle is not to be found. So yt we can neither tell whether it were
written by the ancient Cyrillus of Alexandria, or by some late writer of yt
name, nor yet what was ye argument and scope of yt Epistle. Nevertheless, it
seems to some, yt he wrote against ye Anthropomorphits, which thought yt the
body of Christ was corrupted, if the remnants of the sacrament were corrupted:
but that Cyrillus denies, because Christ is eternal and incorruptible.

He says not that the remnantes of the sacrament are so, for that the Papists
confess to be otherwise, affirming that they cease to be the body and blood
of Christ, when the species or kinds of bread and wine are putrified or rotten.
But Cyril says, that virtue, and grace, do always remain in him, not in that
sacrament reserved, which does corrupt. Finally, he speaks but of
reseruatio^ for one day, to the use of eating, and not of adoration, therefore
he speaks nothing against the challenge, which was not simply of reservation,
but of reserving the sacrament to be worshipped. But whereas M. Heskins
mainteyneth reservation by dipping of stoales, and linen clothes in ye cup, he
must remember that Julius in his decretal epistles, forbids that dipping, as
diverse counsels also do, which in due place are alleged.

Finally, Origin does utterly condemn that abuse of reservation of the
sacrament, affirming that it is in ye same case, that the sacrifice of the
passover, and the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving were, of which it was
not lawful to reserve any part, until the next mo^ning, therefore he says in
Leuit. 7. Ho. 5. Nam and Dominus panem quem discipulis dabat, and dicebat eis,
accipite and manducate, non distulit, nec seruari iussit in erasti^um: For that
bread, which our Lord gave to his disciples, and said unto them, take ye, and
eat ye, he deferred not, neither commanded it to be reserved until the next
day. By which words it is manifest, that as he disallowed the reservation, so
was it not in use in the East Church in his time. And that M. Heskins may be
snarled in his own coarde, he must call to mind, what pains he took to
prove the Pascall Lamb, to be a figure of this sacrament, and how earnestly he
urges, that the truth must answer the figure, in all things justly, inso
much that he alleges this text, that not a jot, or apricke of the law shall
pass, until all be fulfilled. Now of the Pascal lamb, there was an express
commandment, yt no part of it should be reserved until ye next day: therefore
by his own figures, textes, and manner of reasoning, I conclude, that the
sacrament may not be reserved at all.

The five and twentieth Chapter proves the same by Counsels that have been
nearer to our time. Hesk.


For Counsels that have been nearer to our time, then six hundredth years
after Christ, Fulk.
we do not admit their authority. But M. Heskins promising Counsels,
begins with the institution of Justinian, That Monasteries of Virgins
should have liberty to choose a Priest which should bring unto them the holy
Communion. Hereupon he will build reservation, for they did not celebrate to
them (says he) but they brought it. As though he that brings ye word of God
to the^, does not preach before them, but brings a Sermon in his bosom. But
for as much as that decree speaks not only of a Priest but also of a Deacon,
I can be content to think, that he brought the sacrament with him and did not
consecrate there, but what makes this for reservation to the use of adoration,
which is the matter in question* Or else for an ordinary custom of
reservation, if the sacrament were brought from the next Church, (where and
when it was celebrated) to the Monastery, not to be hanged up in a cannopie,
but to be received presently? But it is a proper reason that M. Heskins uses:
for may be reserved for a short time, why not for a long time? For answer of
this, I will refer him to his own Popish decrees, that forbid such
reservation, for fear of putrefaction and rottenness. At last comes the
Counsels of Worms and Remes, in which times it is certain that great
corruptions prevailed in the church: then follows the Counsel of Laterane
commended for general held Anno. 1215. speaking of the diligent reservation of
the sacrament: with much ado about the authority of Counsels But all not
worth a rush. The general Counsel of Laterane falsified the text of scripture
tract to both in words and sense, alleging it thus in their second Canon or
Chapter against Ioachim Abbas: Pater quod dedit mihi maius est omnibus, that
which the father has given me is greater then all. Whereas the truth of the
text is, the father which has given them to me, is greter then all. A wise and
worshipful Counsel, that can not confute an error, but by falsifying of the
scripture. And this is the Counsel that first decreed transubstantiation.

Last of all comes the Counsel of Trent in our days, and that, not so vainly
alleges of The age of the Nicen Counsel to have acknowledged reservation, as
M. Heskins impudently affirms thereupon, that The Nicen Counsel did ag^^se
reservation. Next he iangleth of the authority of the Church, as though what
so ever the synagogue of Antichrist does affirm, were the difinition of the
Church of Christ. And in the end, he joins an other issue with the proclamer,
That if he can bring any plain scripture, catholic doctor, or counsel, that
by express words forbids reservation, he will subscribe. For scripture ye
institution, do ye this in remembrance of me, proves the sacrament to be an
action, and not a name of a thing that may be reserved, for every action is in
moving. Secondly, all Catholic doctors in a manner, and all Counsels
general and provincial, that speak of this sacrament, call it Eucharistia,
which is a giving of thanks, which name can not be rightly applied to the
bread and wine only, but to the whole use of them according to Christ's
institution. Thirdly, the express decree of Clemens his own Doctor is
against reservation, alleged in the Chapter next before. Fourthly, Origin in
Leuit. Chap. 7. Hom. 6. the place also cyted in the latter end of the 24.
Chapter.

Hesk.
The six and twentieth Chapter answers the chief objection of the aduer^aries.

Our chief argument (he says) against the reservation, Fulke.
and our very Achilles against all other rites used in the sacraments, is, that
in the institution thereof there is no mention made of reservation. But there
he belyeth us. For we say it is directly against the commandment of the
institution, take and eat, and do this in remembrance of me. I would ask this
question of him. Was it lawful for the Apostles to have reserved it when
Christ commanded it to be eaten? If he say no, let him show me why it is more
lawful now to reserve it then it was then: seeing we have the same
commandment continued, do this in remembrance of me, that is, take and eat
it?

Moreover, we say it is clean contrary to the end and form of the sacrament,
that it should be reserved and carried about to be worshipped. For it is
spiritual meat, whose end, use, and fruit is in eating, not in keeping and
carrying about, or worshipping. But now let us see Master Heskins profound
Divinity in solution of our argument. There be three manner of doings as
concerning the scripture. One is, to do so much as the scripture bids An
other, to do against that the scripture bids. The third, to do something
besides that the scripture bids. Concerning the first, he says, that As
Christ took bread and wine, made it his body and blood, commanded it to be
eaten and dronken in remembrance of him: so he that takes bread and wine, and
does consecrate it, eat it, and drink it in remembrance of his death etc.
does as much as the scripture bids him, and is blameless in this respect.
This is true, and all this do we in our Church, therefore are we blameless by
his own conclusion. But they that being commanded to eat, and minister to
be eaten, do not eat it, nor give it to be eaten, but keep it, and hang it
up, do manifestly break this commandment: and so do the Papiste^. For they
do against that the scripture bids. And whereas he alleges the sixth
Counsel of Constantinople, reproving the Armenians for ministering with wine
without water, it seems that both he and the Counsel forgot his first rule.
For they doing as much as they had either example or commandment, of Christ's
institution, by his own rule were in this respect blameless. But he adds,
that they in the Counsel alleged the Mass of Saint James and Basil, which is
utterly false, for they alleged but the manner of celebration of the mystical
sacrifice set forth by them, and no Popish Mass. Whether Saint James did set
forth any such form of celebration I will not here dispute, but I am sure
there were many things entitled to the Apostles, even while they lived, that
were but counterfeit, and so I think was this, for else it had been Canonical
scripture, and the Church would not, or should not have changed S. James his
Mass, for Gregory's Mass: nor Basil nor Chrysostom, should have needed to
have made any new liturgye, if they had been certain, that the old had had
the Apostles for their authors and inditers.

But M. Heskins triumphs upon the old usage of the Primitive Church, for
mixing water with their wine, which we in our celebration observe not, neither
is it any matter that we strive for, but against the necessity of water in the
wine. The^ he cauelleth against M. Jewel, For punishing a Minister of his
Dyocesse, that ministered the Communion with Ale, whereas he him self does
worse, like the high Priests, that made no conscience to condemn Christ, but
a great matter i^ was with them to put the price of his betraying in the
tresurie etc. Where note, that ministering with wine only, which was Christ's
institution, is called of him our tradition.

The third manner of doing he divides into two kinds. When the substance
being kept, some circumstance is altered, or some ceremony added for decency.
But reseruatio^ is no meare circumstance of time, place, or persons, nor yet an
indifferent ceremony, but contrary to the substance of the institution, and
the commandment of Christ. For the sacrament was ordained, only to be eaten
and dronken, whereunto reservation is contrary, so was it commanded to be
received, therefore ought not to be reserved, hanged up, worshipped, etc. And
as M. Heskins will join issue, so will I demurre in law with him and all his
fellows, that Popish reservation is contrary to the end of the institution
and commandment of Christ, and nothing like those matters of circumstance
wherewith he compares it, of morning, evening, fasting, after supper, number
of persons, or difference of sex, or any of those kinds. Therefore (he him
self says) The Protestants argument of negative is eluded, but never a wh^t
answered or avoided.

Hesk.
The seven and twentieth Chapter, answering other arguments and objections of the
proclamer.

In the beginning of this Chapter, whereas the Bishops challenge was, Fulke.
of hanging up the sacrament under a canopie, meaning reservation, and setting
it up for idolatrous worshipping, for which M. Heskins has no color in
antiquity, he would enforce him to understand his challeng of simple
reservation, or for other uses the^ adoration, as to be carried to the sick, or
such as could not be present etc. And first he pleads possession of nine
hundredth years, out of which he should not be put without reason, but as
good a lawyer as he is, he must know, that now a writ of right being brought
against him, prescription of possession will not serve him.

But he will give color to the plaintiff, and apply the reason used against
private mass by the proclamer, to see if it will serve against reservation.
That it is the commandment of Christ Do this, that is to say, practice this
that I have here done, and that in such form and sort as you have s^ene me
do it. This exposition he refuses as false, concerning the manner and form:
Affirming that the commandment extends no further, but to the receiving of
his body and blood, as the substance whereupon the memorial should be
grounded, without any charge given of the manner and the form. And for proof
of this exposition, he cites S. Hieronyme, Chrysostom, Euthymius, Thomas
Aquinas, and Hugo Cardinalis, all which in deed affirm, that we are
commanded to celebrate the remembrance of his passion, but none of them
exclude the manner and form of celebration from the commandment. How
^oudenly has M. Heskins forgotten the strong clubbe of his Logike, whereby he
did even now, beat down the proclaymers negative arguments, but now again
they are the best he can occupy him self. Hieronyme, Chrysostom, and the
rest speak not of the manner and form of celebration: therefore there is no
necessary form to be observed, as commanded by Christ. But as the proclamer
has no authority for his expsition, so M. Heskins will bring good reason
against it to prove it false. First he will grant that the primitive Church
for five or six h^ndreth years after Christ did minister the sacraments
purely and without the breach of Christ's commandment. He will grant for the
substance, but not yt they continued so long without abuse. The assumption of
this proposition is, that the Masses used in the primitive Church, varied from
Christ's institution. As for example, the Masses of S. James, Basil,
Chrysostom, Ambrose, differed each from other, and all from Christ's
institution in form and manner. It pleases him to call the old liturgies or
forms of ministration used in diverse Churches, masses: the diversity he
means is in forms of prayers, and circumstances, concerning which Christ
gave no commandment, and therefore, they are contrary to his institution.

The second reason is of the proclamers own practice, who in celebration of
this sacrament uses other time, other kind of bread, other garments, other
number of communicantes then Christ did. But none of these are the form or
matter of the sacrament, and so they touch not the substance. But eating and
drinking is of the substantial form of the sacrament, and the end of the
consecration of the creatures of bread and wine, to the use of that holy
mystery, against which, not eating is contradiction, and so reservation is a
plain contradiction of the commandment of Christ.

An other reason he has of admitting an unworthy person, as Christ did
Judas, which is for all that a matter of question: and yet nothing to the
purpose, if he were admitted. For Christ knew him by his divine nature,
before he chose him to be an Apostle, but in as much as Judas was an
hypocrite, before he was reveled to the judgment of man, he was not to be
refused. To be short, the substance of the sacrament is not only the heavenly
matter thereof, as M. Heskins dreameth, but also the earthly matter and the
form also. As for circumstances and accidents, that touch neither the form
nor matter, they are to be applied to edification, order, and decency.
Cyprian and the fathers in his time, and long time after, what reason did they
use to confute them that ministered with water, milk, clusters of grapes,
dipping of bread, and linen clothes in the wine, and such like? Did they not
beat the^ down with ye institution of Christ? For they could well enough
distinguishe the substance from the accidents, the matter and form from the
circumstances.

After this M. Heskins will open a sleight of the proclamer, who confesses
that women in the time of Tertullian and Cyprian did carry home the sacrament
to their houses, and received a portion thereof in the morning, before meat: but
he numbreth this custom among abuses, whereas neither Tertullian nor Cyprian
do directly reprove them: neither do they allow them, by any one word. But I
pray you M. Heskins, if it be no abuse, that women should carry the sacrament
home with them, keep it in their coffers, and eat it every morning next their
heart, why do not you of the Popish Church continue such an ancient custom?
Why have you abrogated it? and to dissuade them from it, tell tales in you
legends and promptuaries, of some that have carried it home, and found it
turned I cannot tell into what monsters? But peradventure the usage of the
Church in Iustines time, will prove it to be none abuse. For then the
sacrament was carried home to them that were absent. And here M. Heskins
alleging Iustines Apollogie, tells not in whether Apollogie, and sets
down a form of words, which are not in Iustine, Apoll. 2. where the matter
is spoken of, in such form as he cites the^: by which once again you may see,
that his great reading of ye doctors was out of other men's notes and
collections, and not of his own study. For it seems he knew not in which
Apology this matter is spoken of, alleging this saying thus, Cum aute^ is qui
praest gratias egerit, and totus populus approhauerit, (...) qui vicentur apud
nos diaconi, distribuu^t vnicuique, praesenti^a vt participent de pane, in quo
gratiae actae sunt, and de vino and aqua, and his, qui non sunt praesentes,
deferunt domu^. When he that is chief has given thanks, and all the people
has consented to it, these that with us be called deacons, do distribute of
the consecrated bread, and of the wine and water to every one that is present
to receive, and to those that be absente they carry it home. But Iustines own
words be these: (...).

When we have ended our prayer, there is offered bread and wine and water. And
the chief minister sends forth likewise prayers and thanksgiving with all his
might, and the people give their consent saying Amen. Then is made distribution
and participation of those things for which thanks is given, unto every one:
And to them that are not present there is sent by the deacons. By these worde^
it can not be proved necessarily, that the sacrament was sent to them that
were absent, but rather part of the bread and wine which was offered in great
plenty, the distribution whereof belonged to the Deacons: and immediately after
mention is made of the contribution of the richer sort. But admit that they
did send the sacrament to such as were sick, or otherwise to necessarily
let, that they could not be present in body, and yet were present in mind,
and joined in prayer with them, what makes this for the popish reservation to
be worshipped? Every one that was present there received, only the Priests
receives amongst the Papists, and hangs up the rest over the Altar. But it
is a fine reason of M. Heskins, they carried it, therefore they reserved it: if
they reserved it an hour, why might they not reserve it as long as they lift?
But they carried it yt it might be received presently, they hanged it not up to
be gazed upon.

S. Basil also witnesses, that holy men living in the wilderness did reserve
the sacrament in their alter. Omnes in Eremis (...) vitam agentes, vbi non est
Sacerdos, communionem domi servants, a se ipsis communicant. All that lead
solitary lives in the wilderness where there is no Priest, keeping the
com^union at home, de receive it of them selves.

M. Heskins falsifieth the words in translation and says: they received by
them selves, as though they received it alone. This fragment of Basils Epistle,
argues an abuse of the reservation, but it proves no hanging up of the
sacrament for adoration. That this was an abuse crept in of superstition, it is
manifest, for that it was afterward by a Godly council condemned and
forbidden. Council. Caesaraugustanum, Capit. 3. Eucharistiae gratiam si quis
probatur acceptam non consumpsisse in ecclesia, anathema sit in perpetuum. Ab
vniversis Episcopis dictum est, Anathema sit. If any person be proved after he
has taken the grace or gift of the Eucharistie not to have spent it in the
Church, let him be accursed for ever. All the bishops said, let him be
accursed. Moreover, to prove a thing to be lawful, by such an usage, as they
them selves confess to be unlawful, what abusing of the simple is it? S.
Hierome also in his apollogie against Iouinian, testifyeth that the people of
Rome in his time used to keep the sacrament in their houses, and receive it by
themselves. In this place I cannot tell whether I should suspect that which has
often been proved before, that M. Heskins cyteth his authorities out of
notebookes and collections, rather then out of his own readings, and so know
not what was Hieroms judgment of this custom of receiving at home, or else
that of fraud to abuse the reader he has concealed it. But ye matter of
truth is this. There was a custom at Rome, to receive every day, which
custom Hierome says he does neither allow, nor reprehende. But he appealeth
to the consciences of those men that had communicated at home, the same day
after they had companyed with their wives, wherefore they durst not go to the
Church. Quare non ingrediuntur ecclesias? an alius in publico, alius in domo
Christus est? quod in ecclesia non licet, nec domi licet. Why come they not
into the Churches? Is there one Christ in the public places, another in their
private house? that which is not lawful in the Church, is not lawful in the
house. But how can M. Heskins prove, that the people used to keep the
sacrament in their houses, whereof there is no word in Saint Hierome? but
rather it is to be thought, that the Priests did come to them, and minister it
in their private houses, which Hierome also disalloweth. And how can he
prove, that they did receive it by them selves? when Saint Hierome says,
communicant, they do communicate. The last discourse proving by authority of
Saint Augustine, that universal observations of the Church, where the
Scripture commands not the contrary, are to be holden for laws, is
merely vain, seeing he can never prove his reservation to be catholic or
universally allowed and practiced of the Church, and we have proved it, to be
contrary to the Scripture.

Hesk.
The eight and twentieth Chapter begins to speak of the Prophesies, and
first of the prophecy of the priesthood of Christ after the order of
Melchizedech.

The one half of this Chapter is consumed in citing of textes, Fulk.
to prove that Christ is a Priest after the order of Melchizedech: and at
length, he deuideth the Priests office into two parts, teaching, and
sacrificing. Then he affirms, that Christ was not a Priest after the order of
Aaron, but after the order of Melchizedech. Yet in the end of the Chapter like
a blasphemous dog, he says, that Christ executed his priesthood after the
order of Aaron upon the Cross. Where beside his blasphemy, note how he
agrees with him self. But Christ he says, it called a Priest after the
order of Melchizedech for the manner of his sacrifice, which makes the
difference between the order of Aaron, and the order of Melchizedech. For
Aaron offered in blood, the other in bread and wine. The Apostle to the
Hebrews, observing many differences, could not find this. But M. Heskins
answers that the cause why the Apostle did leave out this manner of
sacrifice, was, for that his principal purpose was, to show the excellency
of Christ and his priesthood, above Aaron, and his priesthood, which could not
be by showing that he sacrificed bread and wine, for the Jews sacrifices
were more glorious then bread and wine. By this wise reason, he gives us to
deem, that the Apostle of subtlety suppressed this comparison, because they
were weak, as though they knew not what the sacraments of the Church were.
But if Christ sacrificed his body and blood twice, he could not better have
showed his excellency above Aaron, then in declaring, that Christ did not
only offer him self in blood on the Cross, but also in bread and wine, after
the example of Melchizedech. For if offering of sacrifice were one of the
chief parts of a Priests office, and bread and wine had been the sacrifice
of Melchizedech, the Apostle neither would, nor could have dissembled the
comparison of his sacrifice with the sacrifice of Christ, which would
infinitely have advanced his priesthood above Aaron. For else the Hebrews,
whom M. Heskins imagines would have objected their sacrifices to be more
glorious then bread and wine, might more probably have replied, that the
Apostles compared Melchizedech with Christ in small matters, and omitted the
chiefest part of his office, which was this sacrifice: so that if he were
inferior in the chief, it was little to excel in the small matters.

But M. Heskins takes upon him to answer our objection that we make against
this sacrifice of bread and wine, which is this: as the Apostle to the Hebrews
speaks nothing of it, no more does Moses in Genesis. For it is said there,
that Melchizedech brought forth bread and wine, but never a word, that he
did sacrifice bread and wine. This objection he will answer, both by scripture
and by the eldest learned men of Christ's parleament. Concerning the parleament
men, as it is true, that many of them did think Melchizedech to be a figure of
Christ in bringing forth bread and wine: so when we come to consider their
voices, it shall appear, that they make little for transubstantiation, or the
carnal presence.

But now let us hear the scripture. The scripture to prove that Melchisedech
did sacrifice this bread and wine says: that he was a Priest of the most high
God, to whom is belongs, not to bring forth, but to offer bread and wine,
so that the very connection of the Scripture and dependants of the same,
enforces us to take this sense, and none other can be admitted. This is a
very peremptory sentence, plumped down of you M. Heskins, not as from your
doctors chair, but even as from Apolloes three footed stool. But if it may
please you to hear: is it not also scripture, that he was King of Salem? and
will not the very connection and dependence of the Scripture lead us to think,
that as an example of his royal liberality, he brought forth bread and wine,
to refresh the hungry and weary soldiers of Abraham, which being such a
multitude, could not easily be provided for by a private man?

And where Moses says, he was a priest of the highest God, he adds also an
example of his priestly holiness, that he blessed Abraham, and praised God,
and that Abraham gave him tithes of al. And lest you should exclame, as your
manner is, that this is a new exposition, Josephus in the first book and
tenth Chapter of his Iewishe antiquities, does so expound it: Hic
Melchisedechus milites Abrahami hospitaliter habuit, nihil eis ad victum deesse
passus etc. This Melchisedech gave very liberal intertainment to the
soldiers of Abraham, and suffered them to want nothing unto their living. But
if M. Heskins will object that Josephus was a Jew, then let him hear the
author of Scholastica historia a Christian and a Catholic, as M. Heskins will
confess, allowing of the same exposition Chap. 46. in these words. At vero
Melchizedech rex Salem obtulit ei panem and vinum: quod, (quasi exponen^
Josephus) ait: ministrauit exercitui Xenia, and multam abundantiam rerum
opportunarum simul exhibuit, et super epulas benedixit deum qui Abrahae
subdiderat inimicos. Erat enim sacerdos Dei altissimi. But Melchizedech King of
Salem offered unto him bread and wine, which Josephus, (as it were expounding
of it) says: he ministered to his army the duties of hospitality, and gave
him great plenty of things necessary, and beside the feast, or at the feast,
he blessed God which had subdued unto Abraham his enemies. For he was a priest
of the high^ so God. Thus far he (...) M. Heskins for his connection
perchance will urge the Conjunction enim, erat enim saterdos, etc. in the
vulgar Latin text, to make it to be referred to the former clause, but neither
the Hebrew, nor the Greek text has that Conjunction. To be short, if the
bringing forth of bread and wine, perteined to his priestly office, there is
nothing in the text to express his Kingly office: but Moses, as he calls
him, both a King, and a priest, so does he distinctly show, what he did as a
King, and what he did as a Priest. Yet Master Heskins goes on, and will
prove, That if Christ were a Priest after the order of Melchizedech he offered a
sacrifice after that order: but he never made any mo oblations then two, the
one on the cross, after the order of Aaron: the other in his last Supper after
the order of Melchisedech except we will say that Christ altogether neglected
the priesthood appointed to him of God. Mark here (Christian Reader) how many
horrible blasphemies, this impudent dog barketh out against our Savior
Christ, directly contrary to his express word. First he affirms, that
Christ made two offerings of himself, whereas the holy Ghost says. Heb. 9.
not that he should oftentimes offer himself, as the high priest, etc. For then
he should have suffered oftentimes since the beginning of the world. And Heb.
10. He offered but one sacrifice for sins, and is set down at the right hand
of God for ever, etc. For by one only oblation, he has made perfect for ever
them that are sanctified. And in the same Chapter: where there is forgiveness
of sins, there is no more sacrifice for sin. Whereupon it follows that if
Christ's sacrifice at his supper, took away sins, he offered no sacrifice
upon the cross.

Secondly, he affirms that Christ was a priest after ye order of Aaron,
which he denied before, and is in plain words denied by the holy Ghost Heb.
7. which place M. Heskins himself sets down in this Chapter: if perfection
had been by the Priesthood of the Levites (for under it the law was
established to ye people) what needed it further, that another priest should
arise after ye order of Melchisedech, etc not to be called after ye order of
Aaron.

Thirdly, he affirms, that the sacrifice of Christ upon the cross, was after
the order of Aaron. Whereupon it will follow, that it was not an eternal
redemption purchased by it, but transitory, as the priesthood of Aaron was.
Whereas the holy Ghost says, that by his own blood he entered once into the
holy place, and found eternal redemption, which could never be obtained by any
sacrifice after the order of Aaron.

Fourthly, he affirms, that Christ altogether neglected the priesthood
appointed to him of God, except he did offer sacrifice in his supper of bread
and wine.

By which, he denies, that the once offering up of himself, by his eternal
spirit on the cross, was any part of his priesthood appointed him by God,
then the which there can be no more devilish blasphemy. And yet the beast is
not ashamed to challenge and write, If not then ^ let the adversary show, when
and where Christ did sacrifice after the order of Mechizedech. Even then, and
there, thou enemy of the cross of Christ, when and where he was made obedient
to the death of the cross, and having learned obedience by the things he
suffered, he was consecrated, and made the author of eternal salvation unto
all them that obey him, and is called of God an high priest, after the order of
Melchizedech. Heb. 5. Having an everlasting priesthod, by which he is able
perfectly to save them, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for them. For such an high priest it became us to have, which
is holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and made higher then
the heavens, which needed not daily, as these high Priests, to offer up
sacrifice, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples: for that he did
once when he offered up himself. Heb. 7. But beside his detestable blasphemies,
see his ridiculous vanity. If the priesthood of Melchizedech stands in his
offering of bread and wine, then Christ also offered bread and wine, as he
said before, Christ offered in bread and wine: as Aaron did in blood. If bread
and wine be Christ's offering, or any part of it, then there is bread and wine
in the sacrament, and what is becomme of transubstantiation? If there was no
bread and wine in ye sacrifice of Christ, then where is Melchisedeches
priesthood, by his own divinity? Again, if he say, there be the shows, or
accidents of bread and wine, then Melchizedeches bread and wine, was a figure
of the accidents of bread and Wine, and then the figure was better, then ye
thing figured, contrary to his worshipful rule, given in the 15. Chapter. If
he say, yt Melchizedeches bread and wine, figured not the Accidents, but the
bread and wine before it be consecrated, then he breaks his rule once again:
for Melchizedeches bread, if it were not hallowed, was as good: if it were
hallowed, as it was, if it were offered, it was better then ye vnco^secrated
bread and wine. Finally, if he say, it figured, neither ye vnco^secrated bread
and wine, nor the accidents of the same consecrated, but the body and blood of
Christ under these accide^ts: beside that he makes it a figure of a figure or
sign, which he said could not be, he denies that Christ did that, wherein he
affirmed the priesthood of Melchizedech to stand: namely, that he offered bread
and wine. And so thou see M. Heskins hanged in his own halter.

The nine and twentieth Chapter proceeds to prove the same by S. Cyprian,
and Isychius. Hesk.


I confessed before, that diverse of the old fathers, were of opinion, that the
bread and wine, Fulk.
which Melchisedech brought forth, was sacrificed by him, and that it was a
figure of the sacrament, which they improperly called a sacrifice, meaning
nothing else, but that it was a holy sign, and a thanksgiving, offered to God
for the passion of Christ: as it is manifest by diverse places in their
writings. But they were far from those blasphemies, which M. Heskins has
uttered in ye Chapter before, as to make Christ's passion a sacrifice after the
order of Aaron, to make Christ offer two sacrifices, and the better sacrifice,
yt was after the order of Melchizedech, in the sacrament, etc.

But now let us consider the places of Cyprian, whether such poison may be
drawn out of them, as M. Heskins has sucked out of his own poisoned brain.
The words of the first place are these: The sacraments signified of old, since
the time that Melchisedech came forth, Sermon. de coena Dom.
and to the sons of Abraham that do his works, the high priest brings
forth bread and wine. This (says he) is my body. They had eaten and dronken
of the same bread, according to the visible form, but before those words,
that common meat, was profitable only to nourish the body. But after it was
said by the Lord, do this in remembrance, This is my flesh, and this is my
blood. As often as it is done with these words, and with this faith, that
substantial bread, and cup consecrated with a solemn blessing, profits
unto the life and health of the whole man, being both a medicine, (Et
Holocaustum) and a burnt offering, to heal infirmities, and purge iniquities.
There is also declared the difference between spiritual meat, and corporal
meat: namely, that it was one thing that was first set before them, and
another thing, which was given and distributed by their Master. First it is
granted, yt Cyprian thought the bread and wine brought forth by Melchizedech,
to be a figure of the sacrament, and that herein also he resembled the
priesthood of Christ, which we are neither afraid, nor abashed to deny,
because the Apostle (an older doctor then Cyprian, and such an one as in his
writings could not err) could find no such resemblance between Melchizedech
and Christ. Concerning the sacrifice of bread and wine, I will speak hereafter,
in answer to the other places of Cyprian. But now let us examine M. Heskins
two notes, for the real presence, as he calls it. The first is, that this
common meat being consecrated is profitable for the whole man, as a medicine
to heal infirmities, and a sacrifice to purge sins, but neither our faith in
Christ crucified, nor the merits of his passion are the sacrifice, but his
very body: therefore this meat is his very body.

The Mayor of this argument is ambiguous: and therefore it must be
distinguished: for this word sacrifice, is either taken properly, or
improperly, and figuratively: if it be taken figuratively for a sacrament, or a
memorial of a sacrifice, as Cyprian means, the proposition is true, but if
it be taken for a sacrifice in the proper sense, it is false. For Christ
offered but one sacrifice, and that but once, never to be repeated, which was
on the cross. Now, to prove that Cyprian used the word sacrifice, improperly
for this time, I will show no more, but his own word Holocaustum, which
signifies a whole burned sacrifice, for M. Heskins will grant, that the
sacrifice of Christ is improperly called a burned offering.

The second note that he gathers, is of the Property of this word, Aliud: in
the Neuter gender it signifies an other substance forsooth: as we may say,
Alius pater, alius filius, but not aliud pater, aliud filius. And then the rule
is extended to vnum, for Christ says, ego and pater vnum sumus, and hij tres
vnum sunt. This he would bear men in hand, to be the determination of learned
men, and so the bread before consecration was aliud, that is one substance, but
after consecration it is aliud, that is an other substance, and so the body of
Christ. This is an high point in a low house, but the young pettites in the
Grammar school, can teach him that aliud in the Neuter gender put absolutely,
must be resolved into alia res, an other thing, and so does Master Heskins
him self translate it. And Cyprian shows what other thing it is, after
consecration, when he says: here is declared the difference between the
spiritual meat and the corporal meat, namely that it was one thing when it
was first set before them, that is corporal meat, and an other thing which
was given by their master, namely spiritual meat. The same substance
remaining, it is spiritual meat that before was corporal meat: as in
baptism the same substance of water remaining, it is a spiritual lauer, that
before was a corporal lauer. This is the great divinity of aliud and aliud.
But I marvel that Master Heskins, which sees such high mysteries, in aliud,
can not see that Cyprian says, they did eat of the same bread before, after
the visible form, which they did afterward eat, being converted into
spiritual meat, so that it was the same bread before and after, although it
had now a new virtue given it by the words of Christ, to nourish the whole
man, which before nourished only the body.

The next place which he alleges out of Saint Cyprian is Lib. 2. Ep. 3. ad
Caecitium. Where he leaves out the beginning of the matter, because it
expounds all the rest of the place against him: but I will be so bold as to
add it for the better understanding of S. Cyprian, and the discharging him of
M. Heskins blasphemies. Item in sacerdote Melchisedech sacrificij dominici
sacramentum praefiguratum videmus, secundum quod scriptura diuina testatur and
dicit: and Melchisedech etc. Also in the Priest Melchisedech we see that the
sacrament of our Lords sacrifice was prefigured, according to that the
scripture testifies, and says. And Melchisedech king of Salem brought forth
bread and wine, and he was a Priest of the highest God, and blessed Abraham.
And that Melchisedech did bear the figure of Christ, the holy Ghost declares
in the Psalms, saying in the person of the father unto the son: Before the
day star I have begotten thee. The Lord has sworn, and it shall not repent
him, thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech; which order
verily is this coming of that sacrifice, and from thence descending, that
Melchisedech was a priest of the most high God, that he offered bread and wine,
that he blessed Abraham. For who is more the priest of the highest God then our
Lord Jesus Christ, which offered up a sacrifice to God his father* And offered
the self some thing that Melchisedech offered, that is, bread and wine, even
his body and blood. And concerning Abraham, that blessing going before,
perteined to our people. For if Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him
for righteousness: so likewise who so ever believes God lives also by faith,
is found righteous, and long ago showed to be blessed and justified in
faithful Abraham, a^ S. Paul the Apostle proves, saying: Abraham believed
God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness. Ye know therefore, that
they which are of faith, even they are the sons of Abraham. Wherefore the
scripture foreseeing that God justifies the Gentiles by faith, foreshewed to
Abraham, that all nations should be blessed in him. Therefore they that are of
faith, shall be blessed with faithful Abraham. Whereupon in the Gospel we
find that many are raised up of stones, that is, yt the sons of Abraham are
gathered of the Gentiles. And when the Lord praised Zacheus, he answered and
said, This day is salvation happened to this house, because this man is also
made the son of Abraham. Therefore that in Genesis the blessing about Abraham
might duly be celebrated by Melchisedech the priest, the image of the
sacrifice goes before, ordained in bread and wine. Which thing our Lord
perfecting and fulfilling, offered bread and the cup mixed with wine, and he
that was the fullness, fulfilled the truth of the image that was prefigured.
Thus much Cyprian. In cyting this place, note what falsehood M. Heskins uses:
first of all he leaves out the beginning, where Cyprian calls the supper,
the sacrament of the Lords sacrifice, by which it is plain what he means,
when he calls it afterward, an oblation or sacrifice. Secondly he falsifieth
his words, where Cyprian says, Fuit autem sacerdos, that is, and he was a
Priest, Master Heskins changes it into Fuit enim sacerdos, for he was a
Priest. Thirdly, where Cyprian compares Christ to Melchisedech in three
things distinctly, in that he was the Priest of the highest GOD, in that he
offered bread and wine, and in that he blessed Abraham, showing, that Christ
was the Priest of the highest GOD, when he offered his sacrifice to his
father, meaning in his passion* that he offered bread and wine as he did,
meaning in his supper: and last of all, that he blessed his people as
Melchisedech did Abraham. Master Heskins confounds the first with the
second, by putting out the interrogatiue point, that is after obtulit, and
joining the next sentence to it, and the last he omitteth, by cutting off the
dicourse that Cyprian makes thereof. As though Cyprian had spoken of no
resemblance of Melchisedech unto Christ, but in offering bread and wine, as he
before said most blasphemously, that the execution of that Priesthood lay
only therein.

But now let us look to his collectio^s out of this place. First that
Melchisedech was a figure of Christ. That shall easily* he granted. Secondly,
that Melchis^dech was a figure of Christ in three pointe^, and the^ the Author
does apply them all to Christ, namely a Priest of the highest GOD, in offering
sacrifice to his father, and that he offered the very same that Melchisedech
did, which was bread and wine. But these two Master Heskins* you would make all
one, when you expound the sacrifice that he offered to his father, to be the
bread and wine that he offered in the supper, and so there shall not be three
points. Besides that you are enforced to confess that Christ offered bread
and wine to his father, the very same that Melchisedech did offer, which I am
sure was no accidents, and so you do flatly overthrow your own dearling,
transubstantiation. Your next cauil is of obi^^lie and protulie whereas both
the text and Cyprian have protili^ he brough^ forth, although he seems to
think, that he brought it out eo offer. And therefore to the impudency that
you charge your adversaries withal, will sit still in your own brazen
forehead. For although he thinks that Melchisedech offered the bread and
wine, which he brought forth, yet he cyteth the scripture truly: And
Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and he was a priest of the highest
GOD: which you have most impudently falsified, as I showed before, saying, for
he was a Priest.

Your third gloss you bring to prove, that the sacrifice which Christ offered,
was but on the cross, but at the supper is, that the image of the sacrifice
went before, which the Lord perfected and fulfilled, offering bread and the cup
mixed with wine. An^ though that sacrifice may not be referred to his sacrifice
on the cross, because ye image thereof was ordained in bread and wine, and yet
he fulfilled the truth of the prefigured image; when he offered bread and
wine in the supper, as a sacrament of that sacrifice which he offered on the
cross, as Cyprian in the first sentence of this place, does call it. And for
most clear demonstration, that Cyprian by sacrifice means a sacrament,
sign, and memorial of the passion of Christ, and not a sacrifice properly,
consider his own words in the same Epistle. Et quia passionis eius mentione^
in sacrifioijs omnibus facinous, (pastio est enim domini sacrificium quod
offerimus) nihil aliud, quam quod ille fecit, facere debemus. And because we
make mention of his passion in all our sacrifices (for the sacrifice which we
offer is the Lords passion) we ought to do nothing, but that he did him
self. This one place will answer all that can be brought out of Cyprian, or
any old doctor for the sacrifice of the Lords supper. The sacrifice which we
offer, is the Lords passion (says Cyprian) what, was Christ crucified in
their sacrifices? or were their sacrifices nothing else but a sacrament of
thanks giving for the passion of Christ? You see by this place how
improperly they spoke, but yet so as of reasonable men they might well enough
be understood, and they them selves do often expound them selves. Wherefore
thou see (reader) what injury the papists do unto ye doctors, when they
feign such monsters to be begotten by them, while they interpret literally,
which the doctors did write figuratively.

But to ye testimony of Isychius, which is a curious allegory of sacrifices,
wherein no merueyle, In Leui. lib. 6. Cap. 23.
if he use the name of sacrifice figuratively or improperly, his words are
these. And what is this sacrifice? Two tenth deals of fine flower sprinkeled
with oil. For w^e must know to contemper the perfect manhood and the
perfect Godhood, that it, to come together into one in oil, that is, by that
comparison which he has toward us. For so the sacrifice is found a sweet
savor to our lord, when we understand of him things that be worthy. In
what things the sacrifice which is the oblation of the intelligible lamb,
is, and by whom it is done, how it is celebrated, that which follows
declares. For neither by unreasonable beasts does God receive sacrifice of
us, as the words that followe-doe plainly show ^or, he says, and the
drink offering of it, shall be of wine, the fourth part of an Hi^, bread and
Polentant (M. Heskins calls it) parched corn. Because peradventure it might
have been doubtful by whom the mystery of the sacrifice, (which is by
Christ's, that we spoke of before) is celebrated: behold thou have the oblation
of intelligible. Melchisedech which is performed in bread and wine, in which
the fourth part of an Him is offered in drink offeringes of wine, that by the
fourth part he might signify the tradition or delivery of the Gospel which
is in four books* by the drink offering, the Lords word, when he says,
This is my blood which shall be shed for you: for it seemed good to the
law giver without diminishing to signify the mystery of Christ.

And then again he says: The oblation of these present gifts which we have
showed to be the mystery of the only begotten son, has reconciled us to
God, and given us the meat of the new parched corn. Now to M. Heskins
collections, We must learn here, that Melchisedech did not only bring forth,
but also offer bread and wine. In deed we learn that Isychius thought so: And
that Christ the intelligible Melchisedech did sacrifice in bread and wine.
Yea, but this sacrifice was a mystery of that sacrifice, which has
reconciled us to God, for so says Isychius also, and that no man offered this
sacrifice but he himself, for that he says also. Read over the place if
you doubt of my collection. By which it is plain, it was not the sacrifice of
the mass that every hedge priest may offer. But that we should not say that
it was bare bread that he sacrificed, he shows what bread it was, saying,
by the drink offering he would signify that of which he said, this is my
blood. See this impudent falsarie: the writer says, he would signify
Dominician sermonem, the Lords word, and he says, that of which he said
etc. Where is then the bread that the mystery might be fully signified? Is
it not that which he calls the tradition of the Gospel which is in four
books? I dispute not how well he applies these things, but it is more then
manifest, that he speaks so figuratively, that no argument can be fastened of
his words, for the carnal presence. And whereas M. Heskins shrinketh in his
horns about the oblation of bread and wine, saying it was not bare bread, but
he shows what bread it was. Let him answer me plainly, if he dare for his
ears. Was it very bread and wine, which Christ did sacrifice or no? If he
say, it was very bread and wine, then he denies transubstantiation. If he say
it was not very bread and wine which Christ did sacrifice, then he denies ye
resemblance unto Melchisedechs sacrifice, and has Cyprian against him, who as
we heard before, says, Obtulit hoc idem, quod Melchisedech obtulerat, id est,
panem and vinum, suum scilicet corpus and sanguine^. He offered yt self same
thing yt Melchisedech had offered, that is to say, bread and wine, even his
body and blood. Note here that Melchisedech and Christ offering both the very
self same thing, they both offered bread and wine: and likewise they both
offered the body and blood of Christ. Whereby not only transubstantiation, but
also the carnal presence is utterly overthrown. And to press him harder by
his own weightes, even to death, If aliud signify an other substance, as he
taught us before, then hoc idem, signifies the same substance, and much
rather. Therefore when Cyprian says that Christ offered hoc idem quod
Melchisedech, it follows that Melchisedech offered the same substance which
he expounds bread and wine, his body and blood. And this two forked reason,
will hold down all the papists noses to the grindstone, that they shall not be
able to avoid it for their lives.

The thirtieth Chapter treats of the same matter by S. Hieronyme and
Theodoret. Hesk.


The place of Hieronyme which M. Heskins does so triumph upon, is upon the 110.
Psalm, Fulke.
but those commentaries, both by Erasmus and by Bruno Amerbachius, are utterly
denied to be Hieronymes doing. But seeing they be falsely entitled to him, we
are content to take this place, as though it were Hieronymes writing in deed.
The words upon the fourth verse are these. It is superfluous for us to go
about to make an exposition of this verse, seeing the holy Apostle to the
Hebrews has most fully treated thereof. For he says, this is Mechisedech
without father, without mother, without generation. And of all ecclesiastical
men it is said, that he is without father as concerning the flesh, and without
mother as concerning his godhead. This only therefore let us interpret: thou
art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech, let us only see wherefore
he said, after the order. After the order: that is, thou shall not be a priest
according to the sacrifices of the Jews: but thou shall be a priest after the
order of Melchisedech: For as Melchisedech king of Salem offered bread and
wine: so shall thou offer thy body and thy blood, true bread and true wine.
This Melchisedech has given us these mysteries which we have. He it is that
has said, he that shall eat my flesh and drink my blood. He has
delivered to us his sacrament according to the order of Melchisedech. What can
be said more plainly in exposition of this writer, then that he him self
says? that he has given us these mysteries, that he has delivered to us his
sacrament after the order of Melchisedech, by which he expresses, what his
meaning was by offering his body and blood, very bread and very wine, or
true bread and true wine, not in the proper sense of a sacrifice, but in a
mystery, in a sacrament. But now let us see how M. Heskins insulteth upon
us, for this counterfete Hieronyme. First that he takes upon him to expound,
that which was left vnexpounded by the Apostle to the Hebrews, namely that
Christ was a priest, which is altogether false, for the Apostle does not only
speak of his eternal priesthood, but also of his one oblation, by which he
purchased eternal redemption. And although this writer does refer his order to
the similitude of his sacrifice in bread and wine, yet both the prophet in the
psalm, and the Apostle to the Hebrews do sufficiently declare, that the
excellency of Melchisedechs order does consiste in this, that he was both a
King and a Priest, and so a lively figure of the real priesthood of our
savior Christ.

But whereas M. Heskins will control not only us, but even his own vulgar
interpretation of the bible, which says not, obtuli^ he offered, but protulit
he brought forth, by authority of this Hieronyme, who (he says) both knew
the old testament and understood the Hebrew tongue, he bewrays his own
weakness, and shows, how good a reader he has been of Hieroms works, when
he knows not what the true Hieronyme himself writes of this matter in his
Epistle to Enagrius, in which, setting down the very Hebrew text: (...) (...)
does thus expound it: Et Melchizedech rex Salem protulit panem and vinum. Erat
autem sacerdos Dei exelsi. And Melchisedech brought forth bread and wine, and
he was a priest of the high God. The same word protulit has Ambrose, de
mysterijs initiandis, and Augustine upon the title of the 33. Psalm, and
Cyprian as we heard in the last Chapter lib. 2. Epi 3. ad Caecilium. Besides
this Hierome in the same Epistle shows, that the best learned of the Hebrews
judgment, was, that Melchizedech victori Abraham obuiam processerit, and in
refectionem tam ipsius, quam pugnatorum ipsius, panes vinumque protulerit.
Melchizedech came forth to meet Abraham the conqueror, and for refection as
well of him, as of his warriors, brought forth bread and wine. And concerning
the order of Melchizedech, he says, that the Greek writers interpret it many
ways. As for example, that he alone was both a King and a Priest: and that he
was a Priest before circumcision: that he was not anointed with the oil of
the Priests, but with the oil of gladness: that he offered not sacrifices
of flesh and blood, and took not the blood of beasts and their bowels, and
what soever is in them more then meat: Sed pane and vino simplici puroque
sacrificio, Christi dedicauerit sacramentum, but with bread and wine being a
simple and pure sacrifice, he dedicated the sacrament of Christ. This the true
Hierome writ, and yet in the end, will determine nothing of his own
judgment.

But M. Heskins repeting again a parcel of Cyprians saying, uttered in the
Chapter before: Who is more properly the Priest of the high God, then our Lord
Jesus Christ, which offered a sacrifice to God his father? and offered the
self same thing that Melchizedech had offered, that is, bread and wine, even
his body and blood, compares it with this saying of Hierome: As Melchizedech
offered bread and wine so shall thou offer thy body and thy blood, the true
bread and the true wine.

And not content with this, he notes in the margent a plain place for M.
Iuel. How plain it is to confute M. Heskins, I have showed abundantly in the
last part^ of the Chapter next before this, whether I remit the reader, and
pass to Theodoret, who in his second dialogue writes thus. Godly Moses
writing the old genealogy has taught us, that Adam, when he was thus many
years old begat Se^h, and when he had lived so many years, he made an end of
his life. Even so also he says of Seth and Enos with other. As for the
beginning of the generation of Melchizedech, and the end of his life he
ouerpasseth it in silence. Wherefore, if the history be looked on, he has
neither beginning of days, nor end of life. So in deed the son of God
neither has beginning of his being, neither shall have ending. Therefore in
these most great and very divine things was Melchizedech a figure of Christ
our Lord. And in his priesthood, which agrees rather to man then to God, our
Lord Christ was an high Priest after the order of Melchizedech. For
Melchizedech was an high Priest of the Gentiles. And our Lord Christ offered a
holy and healthful sacrifice for all men. If I said never a word (as I need
not to say many) yet the indifferent reader would see, that here is no
comparison of Melchizedechs bread and wine with the sacrament of the Lords
supper. Yea, he would easily see, that he speaks of the sacrifice of his
death which our savior offered for all men, both Jews and Gentiles. And much
more plainly by that place which M. Heskins adds out of the first dialogue.
If therefore it appertains to Priests to offer gifts, and Christ concerning
his humanity is called a Priest, he offered none other sacrifice but his own
body. This speaks Theodoret expressly of the true sacrifice of his death,
and not of the fained sacrifice of his supper, nor yet of any sacrament or
figure of his only true sacrifice, which the old writers (as I showed before)
do often call a sacrifice, oblation, burnt offering, etc: But that M. Heskins
cannot gain by the doctors words, he will win by reason. First, if we
deny that Melchizedech was a figure of Christ his Priesthood, saying, he was
a figure only of his eternity, then we join with Eutyches, who granted the
divinity of Christ, and denied his humanity, unto which his priesthood
properly perteyned. But who told M. Heskins, that we deny Melchizedech to be
a figure of Christ's Priesthood? when we most constantly affirm, that he was a
figure of his eternal Priesthood, unless Master Heskins think the humanity
of Christ, having once conquered death, is not now everlasting. It is not our
exposition, that mainteineth the heresy of Eutyches, that the nature of
Christ's body is absorpt into the divinity, but it is your heresy of
vbiquitie and carnal presence (Master Heskins) that mayntaineth it most
manifestly in very deed, though in words you will say the contrary.

But Master Heskins follows his reason, and urges us, that it is the office
of a Priest to offer sacrifice, wherefore, if Christ resemble Melchizedech in
Priesthood, he must resemble him in sacrifice, and that is the sacrifice of
bread and wine, for other sacrifice we read none that Melchizedech offered.
I answer, as we read of none other, so we read not in the Scripture one
word of that sacrifice of bread and wine, as has been often declared at
large. And seeing the scripture expresses not what sacrifice Melchizedech
offered, we are content to be ignorant of it, satisfying our selves with so
much as the scripture affirms, that Christ offering him self once for all on
the Cross, was in the same called a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedech, as we have showed at large before out of Hebr. 5. and 7.9.10.

But it is a sport to see, how M Heskins skippeth to and fro, as it were one
whipped at a stake, when he would reconcile his transubstantiation, with this
counterfeit sacrifice of bread and wine. Christ sacrificed in bread and wine.
In bread and wine I say, a kind of food more excellent then the bread and
wine that did figure it, I mean with Theodoret and Hierome the true bread and
wine, that is the body and blood of Christ, that is to say, no bread nor wine.
But if you give him a lash on the other side, and say: if Christ sacrificed
not natural bread and wine, then he answered not your figure, he will leap to
the other side, and say with Cyprian, and Isychius, that Christ offered the
self same thing that Melchizedech did, and in one place he says, he occupied
bread and wine in his sacrifice: so did he a table and a cup, and other
things, but was any thing his sacrifice that he occupied therein, saving only
that which he offered? he will say no. Did he offer bread and wine? he dare
not answer directly, and so the poor man to uphold two lies, the one
contrary to the other, is miserably tormented.

Hesk.
The one and thirtieth Chapter concludes this matter of Melchizedech by S.
Augustine and Damascene.

Fulk.
S. Augustine is alleged upon the 33 Psalm, whose words are these: The
sacrifices of the Jews were before time, after the order of Aaron, in offerings
of beasts, and that in a mystery. The sacrifice of the body and blood of our
Lord, which the faithful, and they that have read the Gospel do know, was
not yet, which sacrifice is now diffused throughout all the world. Set before
your eyes therefore two sacrifices, both that after the order of Aaron, and
this after the order of Melchizedech. For it is written, the Lord has sworn,
and it shall not repent him. Thou art a Priest for ever, after the order of
Melchizedech. Of whom is it said, thou art a priest for ever after the order
of Melchizedech? of our Lord Jesus Christ. For who was Mel^hizedech? The King
of Salem And Salem was that City which afterward (as the learned have
declared) was called Jerusalem. Therefore, before the Jews reigned there,
this Melchizedech was Priest there, which is written of in Genesis, the Priest
of the high God. He it was that met Abraham when he delivered Loath from the
hand of his persecutors and ouerthrewe them of whom he was held, and
delivered his brother. And after the delivery of his brother, Melchizedech
met him (so great was Melchizedech of whom Abraham was blessed) he brought
forth bread and wine and blessed Abraham. And Abraham gave him rythes. See ye
what he brought forth, and whom he blessed? And it is said afterward: Thou
art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedech. David said this in the
spirit, long after Abraham. Now Melchizedech was in the time of Abraham. Of
whom says he in an^^her place* Thou ar^ a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchizedech, (...) of him whose sacrifice you know? Here says Master
Heskins, is sacrifice avouched, and the sacrifice of the body, and blood of our
Lord: who says nay? But this is not the sacrifice of the mass, but the
sacrifice of CHRIST'S death, whereof the holy sacrament is a memorial.

But Augustine says farther: The sacrifice of Aaron is taken away, and them
began the order of Melchizedech. Very well, but once again this sacrifice is
the sacrifice of Christ's death, the remembrance whereof is celebrated in the
Lords Supper: where let the Reader observe, that he does yet again deny the
sacrifice of Christ's passion, to be a sacrifice, after the order of
Melchizedech, contrary to the express word of God; and affirms that it was
after the order of Aaron, saying, that The sacrifice after the order of
Melchizedech, was only as the Supper.

Here note that he makes the sacrament more excellent then the sacrifice of
Christ's death, by so much, as the Priesthood, and sacrifice of Melchisedech,
is more excellent then the sacrifice, and priesthood of Aaron. But Augustine
has more yet, if it will help, upon the same Psalm. Con. 3. Before the
kingdom of his father, he changed his (...), and left him, and went his way:
because there was the sacrifice, according to the order of Aaron: And
afterward he himself by his body and blood, instituted a sacrifice, after the
order of Melchizedech. Therefore he changed his countenance in the
priesthood, and left the nation of the Jews, and came to the Gentiles. By
this we must needs understand, that Christ did institute a sacrifice of his
body and blood, after the order of Melchizedech. Yea verily. But how do we
understand, that this was in the sacrament? Therefore for any thing that is
here showed, it is no slander that the Pope has turned the holy sacrament
into a sacrifice, to obscure the glory of Christ, and his only sacrifice,
once offered on the cross. For although the Fathers did sometimes call the
sacrament, a sacrifice, yet they meant nothing but a memorial, or sacrifice of
thanksgiving, for that one sacrifice, offered once, on the cross for the
redemption of the whole world. Whereof none other shall be a better witness,
then Augustine himself, and in his exposition of this self same Psalm:
Saginantur ergo illo Angeli sed semel ipsum exinaninit, vt manducaret panem
angelorum home: formam serui accipiens in similitudinem hominum factus: and
habitu inuentus vt homo. The Angels therefore are fead with that bread (meaning
the divinity of Christ) But he emptied himself, that man might eat the
bread of Angels, taking the shape of a servant, being made like unto men, and
in his habit was found as a man. Humilianit se factus obediens, vsque ad
mortem, mortem autem crucis, vt iam de cruce commendar^tur nobis car^ and
sanguis Domini (...) sacrificium: quia mutauit vultum suum coram Abimelech, id
est, eoram regno patris. He humbled himself and was made obedient to the
death, even the death of the cross, that now the body and blood of our Lord
might be commended to us from the Cross, being the new sacrifice, because he
changed his countenance before Abimelech, that is, before the kingdom of his
Father. By this it is manifest, that Augustine referred the sacrifice after the
order of Melchisedech, unto the cross of Christ, whereof we are made partakers
in the holy mysteries of his blessed supper. So that as well, the body and
blood of our Lord, as the new sacrifice in those mysteries are commended to
us, to be participated from the cross, where they were truly and essentially
offered unto God by the eternal spirit of our savior Christ, whereby he
procured everlasting redemption.

The same Augustine in his Ep. 23. to Bonifacius. Nonne semel immolatus est
Christus in se ipso, and tamen in suet (...) non sober^ per omnes pasch
solennitates, sed omni die populi^ immolatur, nec vbique mentitur, qui
interrogatus eum respondarit immolari? Si enim sacramenta quandam similitudinem
^arum rerum quaru^ sacramenta su^t non habere^t, omnino sacramenta non essent.
Ex haec autem similitudine plerunque etiam ipsarum rerum nomina accipiunt.
Sicut ergo secundum quendam modum, sacramentum corporis Christi, corpus Christi
est, sacramentum sanguinis Christi, sanguis Christi est, ita sacramentum fidei
fides est. Was not Christ once only offered up by himself? And yet in a
sacrament* not only at every solemnity of Easter, but every day he is
offered for the people, neither does he lie, which being asked the question
answers that he is offered. For if sacraments had not a certain similitude
of those things, whereof they are sacraments, they should not be sacraments
at all. And of this similitude oftentimes they take the names even of the very
things themselves. Therefore, as after a certain manner the sacrament of ye
body of Christ, is the body of Christ, the sacrament of the blood of Christ is
the blood of Christ: so the sacrament of faith is faith. What can be uttered
more plainly, either against the Popish sacrifice, or against their carnal
presence? This one place may expound whatsoever in Augustine, or any other old
writer is spoken of the sacrifice of the Lords supper, and of the presence of
Christ's body and blood therein.

After Augustine M. Heskins cites Chrysostom in Mat. 26. to prove that the
sacrament is now of the same force that it was, when it was first ordained by
Christ at his last supper. These works are not of man's power, what things he
did then in that supper, he himself does now work, he himself does make
perfect. We hold the order of Ministers, but it is he himself, that does
sanctify and change these things. With my disciples (says he) do I keep
my Passover. For this is the same table, and none other. This is in nothing
lesser then that. For Christ makes not that table, and some other man this,
but he himself makes both.

Hieronyme follows a vain discourse, against, I wot not what Petrobrusians,
and Henricians, that denied the body of CHRIST to be consecrated, and given by
the priests, as it was by Christ him self: Whom peradventure Petrus
Cluniacensis, Master Heskins Author, does slander, when they said none
otherwise, then Chrysostom said before, and that which Master Heskins
himself affirms, That Christ and not man does consecrate: But by this place
also are confuted the Oecolampadians, and Caluinistes, if we will believe
Master Heskins: who first rauing against Cranmer, urges the word of
sanctification of the bread and wine, that Chrysostom uses, charging Cranmer
to have said, that the creatures of bread and wine cannot be sanctified. Which
no doubt, that holy Martyr spoke of the substance, and not of the use in the
sacrament. Then he snatcheth up Chrysostomes words, Transmutat, he does
transmute, and change them. This is easily answered. He changes the use, but
not the substance. But for more confirmation, Origin is called to witness Lib.
8. Cont. Celsum: We obeying the creator of all thing^s, after we have given
thanks for his benefits, which he has bestowed upon us, do eat the bread
which is offered which by prayer and supplication is made into a certain
holier body, which truly makes them more holy, which with a more sound mind
do use the same. Here by Origens plain words, the use does sanctify the
worthy receivers. And though you add to Ambrose his phrase De pane fit corpus
Christi, of the bread is made the body of Christ, yet the interpretation of
spiritual receiving, which both Origin and Ambrose do at large testify, (as
in due place has and shall be more declared) does take away your gross
imagination. And that you do not reject the spiritual receiving in the
sacrament, you do well: but you do fondely, when you oppose it against real
receiving, where you should say corporal or carnal, for Spiritus and Res be
not opposite, but Spiritus and Car^, or Corpus, are.

And here I would have the Readers to note, how Master Heskins confesses,
that The receiving of Christ really, (which is all that he strives for)
profits not, without the receiving of him spiritually. But it is certain by
the scripture, that the spiritual receiving profits without that, which he
calls the real receiving. For Christ does dwell in our hearts by faith. And
whereas he says No man can receive Christ spiritually, which believes not
that he receives him really: I demand of him, whether infants, and such as
dye without the participation of the sacrament may not receive Christ
spiritually, without receiving of him corporally? He must needs answer, yea,
or else by Christ's word they have no part of eternal life: and then his
assertion is false. If I should object the fathers of the old testament, who
did all eat Christ spiritually, before he had a natural body, perhaps he
would answer, that he speaks of men in these days. But seeing the Apostle 1.
Cor. 10. says, they received the same spiritual meat and drink that we do,
even Christ, it is manifest, that Christ both now and then is eaten spiritually
only, and not carnally.

To match with Augustine, for default of a Lord of the higher house, he
brings in Damascene a Burgess of the lower house, whose authority although
I do little esteem, yet will I set down his words, that you may see, how
little help he has out of them, but by racking and wresting. Melchisedech
with bread and wine did receive Abraham returning from the slaughter of the
strangers, Li. 4. de Orthod. fid.
which was a priest of the highest God. That table did prefigurate this
mystical table, as that priest bare the figure and image of Christ the true
priest. Thou art (says he) a priest after the order of Melchisedech.

First Damascene is plain, that Melchisedech did not offer bread and wine, but
he did entertain Abraham therewith at his table, and that Melchisedechs feast
was a figure of Christ's feast, but not of his sacrifice, which is the matter
in controversy. But you shall see how M. Heskins sets his words on the
tenter, to stretch them to a sacrifice. I would that the adversary did note,
that the table of Melchisedech, which al men of learning do know, is taken for
the sacrifice. Who shall be able to stand before M. Heskins, which has the
judgment of all men of learning on his side? Yea and yt which is more* S.
Paul takes it so: ye cannot be partakers of the table of God, and the table
of devils also, that is, of that which was offered to God, and of that which
was offered to devils. O learned exposition! But he must remember that S. Paul
reproves not the Corinthians for offering sacrifice to the idols, but for
sitting down at the feasts, in which that meat that had been offered was
eaten. So that a table is still a table, and for a feast, not for a sacrifice.
The conclusion of this chap, if he durst openly utter it, contains a most
detestable blasphemy: namely, that every hedge Priest, that says Mass, is a
Priest after the order of Melchisedech. As though Christ's Priesthood could not
be perpetual, except it were continued by succession of yt greasy order of
shauelings, whereas it is expressly said Heb. 7. that his Priesthood according to
the order of Melchisedech, rests only in his own person, because he lives
for ever, and that it can not pass by succession. Upon which place (to
conclude this matter) and the Papists own grant, I will reason thus. Christ's
Priesthood after the order of Melchisedech, rests in his own person, and
passes not by succession: The Popish Priesthood consisting in the sacrifice of
bread and wine, is continued in the world by succession: therefore the Popish
Priesthood consisting in the sacrifice of bread and wine, is not the
Priesthood of Christ after the order of Melchisedech.

Hesk.
The 32 Chapter to prove the sacrifice of our show bread, to be a continual
sacrifice, as the old show bread was, alleges the prophecy of Daniel, and
rejects the false expositions of the adversaries.

The show bread is here brought in for a mere show, for there is no matter at
all in it for his purpose, Fulke.
except it be this, yt he says The reservation of that bread was a figure of
the reservation of their blessed bread. Which if it be true, it is not lawful
for ye priest to eat his consecrated hosts, until they be a seven nights old.
For the show bread, was of necessity to stand on yt table, from Sabbath to
Sabbath. But of ye co^tinua^ce of their sacrifice, not only Malachie; but also
Daniel has prophesied, who in ye 9. and 12. of his prophecy, foresheweth ye
taking away of ye daily sacrifice, which (he says) ye holy Fathers do expound
to be done by Antichrist. As there be many prophesies in Daniel, very hard to
interpret, so there is none more clear, either in him or in any other prophet,
for ye time when it should be fulfilled, then this of taking away ye daily
sacrifice, and placing ye abhominatio^ of desolation, for as much as our savior
Christ him self Mat. 24. does refer it to ye destruction of Jerusalem and ye
temple. For then ye daily sacrifice, not of ye show bread, but of ye morning
and evening oblatio^, was utterly taken away in act, as it ceased in effect,
when our savior Christ by his true sacrifice had taken away all figurative
oblations. For as Hierom says very well, whatsoever was afterward sacrificed
by ye unbelieving Jews in the temple, was not the sacrifice of God, but the
worship of the devil. But notwtstanding this, M. Hesk. will needs have it meant
of ye daily sacrifice of ye Christians, and for yt purpose alleges ye
judgment of Petrus, ye Monk (I trow) of Clunie, yt there be four principal
sects in ye world, yt is of ye Jews, Sarazens, Pagans, and Christians, of
which ye Jews, Sarazens, and Pagans offer no sacrifice, but only ye
Christians. But he is fowly beguyled, for ye Sarazens or Mahumetans offer
sacrifice for the dead, after the manner of the Gentiles. And where this Peter
acknowledged no Pagans, but such as dwell farthest in the North, it seems he
has not heard of so many nations as in all quarters be discovered to be
Idolaters, especially those of Calechut, who beside the blood of a cock which
they sacrifice to the Idol of the devil, do offer unto it all meat that the
king eats. Wherefore the conclusion of P. Cluniacensis is a very vain and
foolish collectio^. And whereas M. Hes. makes so small account of ye sacrifice
of thanksgiving, praises, prayers, and obedience, that he calls them but
common things, he shows what religion is in his breast. But where Daniel
says, then daily sacrifice shall be taken away, he will prove that there must be
a daily sacrifice, and that of the Christians, by Hieronyms authority. Whose
words are cited thus by him: Hos mill ducentos nonaginta dies Porphyrius in
tempore Antiochi, and in desolatione templi dicis completos, quam and Josephus
and Machaborum (vt dixintus) liber, tribus tantuni annis fuisse commemorant. Ex
quo perspic^^^ est, tres istos and semis annos de Antichristi dici temporibus,
qui tribus and semis annis, hoc est mill ducentis nonaginta diebus sanctos
perseq^^turus est, and postea, ceciderit in monte inclyto and sancto. A tempore
igitur quod nos interpreta^i sunus judge sacrificiu^ quando Antichristus vrbem
obtinens Dei cultum interdixerit, vsque ad internecionem eius, tres and semis
anni id est, mill ducenti nonaginta dies complebuntur. These thousand two
hundredth and ninety days Prophyrius says, th^^ were fulfilled in the time of
Antiochus, and in the desolation of the temple, which both Iesophus and the
book of Machabees, (as we have said) do testify to be d^n in three years
only, whereby it is plain these three years and an half to be spoken of the
times of Antichrist, who by the space of three years and an half, that is a
thousand two hundredth and ninety days, shall persecute the holy and faithful
Christians, and after shall fall down in the famous and holy hill. From the
time therefore that we been interpreted the daily sacrifice, when Antichrist
shall forbid the service of God, unto his destruction there shall be fulfilled
three years and an half, that is to say, a thousand two hundredth and ninety
days. We have often seen before, what an impudent falsarie M. Hesk. is of the
Doctors, and here, I know not for what cause, except it were to trouble the
sense of Hieronymes words, both in ye Latin and in his English translation, he
has left out the Greek word yt Hieronyme uses in this sentence, A tempore
iginer (...), quod nos interpretati sumus judge sacrificium etc. Therefore from
the time of the perpetuity, which we have interpreted the perpetual
sacrifice, etc. At least wise he should have noted in the margent Graecum est,
non potest legi But to the matter, although Hierom, contrary to the exposition
of our savior Christ refer this taking away of the daily sacrifice, to the
time of Antichrist, yet does he interpret the same sacrifice, to be but the
worship and service of God, which Antichrist should forbid. But Nicholas Lyra
is a Doctor for M. Heskins tooth, for he expounds it of the sacrifice of the
altar. And M. Heskins will prove it by reason. For it can not be meant of a
spiritual sacrifice of praise, prayers, mortification, repentance, etc. For
these can not be put down, but shall be frequented, even under his flames and
sword, therefore it must needs be the daily sacrifice of the altar. And yet M.
Heskins thinks, that shall not be clean put down, but secretly be used of
godly disposed people, so that he were best to conclude, that there shall none
at al be put down. But may not the outward service of God be put down, as
Hieronyme says, But it must of necessity be the sacrament of the altar? O
easy necessity, that so lightly is avoided! Well, beside this rushie cheine
of M. Heskins necessity you shall hear matter of congruitie.

If the fathers of all ages knew that externe sacrifice did please God, should
not christians much more, which live in the clear light, acknowledge the same?
O profounde divine! He has forgotten that the true worshippers must now
worship: God in spirit and truth: Joan. 4. Yet more. If those sacrifices
were a sweet savor to God, for his sake whom they figured, how much more is
our sacrifice, offering Christ him self unto him? But sir, their sacrifices
were commanded, and Christ by his eternal spirit has offered himself once,
to end all such sacrifices. For no man is worthy to offer him to God, but
even himself. If they give not only sacrifice of laud and thanks, but also
external sacrifice of thanks, shall not Christians which have received
greater benefits then they, offer like, or rather greater thanks? Yes good M.
Doctor, but by such means as God has appointed, and not by setting up an
other Altar and sacrifice, to deface the cross and sacrifice of Christ.
Although nothing can be feyned more leaden, and blockishe then these reasons
be, yet the illuminate doctor cries out against his obccate and blind
enemies, that cannot see ye congruitie of these matters, as it were a light
shining through a millstone.

The three and thirtieth Chapter opens the Prophecy of Malachie. Hesk.


The Prophet Malachie toward the latter end of the first chapter of his
Prophecy, writes thus: Fulk.
I have no pleasure in you says the Lord of hoastes, neither will I accept an
offering at your hand. For from the rising of the sun, until the going down
of the same, my name is great among the Gentiles, and in every place incense
shall be offered unto my name, and a pure offering: For my name is great among
the heathen. This text (says M. Heskins) has greatly tormented the
protestants: for they wrest it into diverse senses, because it proves
inuincibly the sacrifice of the mass.

Therefore Oecolampadius expounds this sacrifice of the obedience of all
nations, to the faith: Bucer, of faith and the confession of the same:
Bullinger, of the land and praise of God: Vrbanus Rhegius, of mortification and
invocation of Gods name. Al which M. Heskins him self that first cries out
of their discord, confesses to agree in this, that they understand the
prophecy of the spiritual sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. But these
heretical expositions, he says, cannot stand. And why so* forsooth because
these spiritual sacrifices be not new, but were offered by the godly, even
since Abel, who (he says) was the first that offered sacrifice to God, and
that of the fruits of the earth: whereas it is not to be thought, that Adam
offered no sacrifice all that time before: and the text is plain, that Abell
offered the fruit of his cattle. But although the spiritual worship of God is
not new, yet it was new to the Jews, that the father should be worshipped
from the time of Christ, neither in the mount Garizim nor at Jerusalem, but of
all nations in spirit and truth, John. 4.
that is, without all external and figurative sacrifices. An other reason is
of the pureness of the new sacrifice, above the old. For the old sacrifices
were pure by participation, the new is pure by nature, and therefore nothing
else but the body of Christ. But by his favor the prophet in calling the
new sacrifice pure, does not charge the old with imperfection, if they had
been offered according to their institution, but reproves the priests, that
they had polluted the Lords sacrifices, with their covetousness and hypocrisy,
and in punishment of their pride (which thought God could not be served except
it were by them) threateneth that he will reject them and the people that were
partakers of their sins, and set up the spiritual pure worship of his name,
among the Gentiles in all parts of the world, which should better please God
(as ye Prophet says) then a bullock that has horns and hooffes. And as for
the pureness that M. Heskins requires in the new sacrifices, we have a
sufficient warrant of the holy Ghost Heb. 13. that by Jesus Christ we offer
the sacrifice of praise always to God, that is, the fruits of the lips which
confesses his name, doing good and not forgetting to distribute, for with
such sacrifices God is pleased. By which place you may see that the expositions
of the godly before rehearsed, are grounded upon the word of God, and not the
devise or imagination of man. It is meruell yt M. Heskins (as the rest of ye
papists do in this place) does not build much upon the word (...) which
properly does signify a sacrifice made of flower, and so a kind of bread: but
then he lacks wine, and the other word which the prophet uses (...) which
signifies an incense or perfume, both excludes that phantisie, and also
shows that the Prophet, according to the common custom of other Prophets,
speaks after the capacity of the people, in discribing the spiritual state
of Christ's Church by the external-figures and ceremonies of Moses law. And so
there is no place in ye scripture, makes less for the sacrifice of the mass,
then this text of the prophet Malachie.

The four and thirteth Chapter expounds the prophecy of Malachie by
Martialis and Ireneus. Hesk.


M. Heskins desirous to expound this prophecy by two very ancient barrons
of the high house of parleament, begins with one Martialis, Fulk.
whom to make him seem more reverend and ancient, he has adorned with
Parleament Robes, affirming that he was the disciple of Christ himself, and
after his Masters death kept company almost continually with the Apostle
Peter, and therefore wills every man to give audience to his speech. Now
whether ever there were any such disciple of Christ, and companion of the
Apostle, as the scripture makes nomention of him so I will affirm nothing.
But for as much as the Church never heard of any such writer, neither by
Eusebius, or by Hieronyme, nor by Gennadius, all which gathered the names of
all the writers yt had been in ye Church of Christ, that were known in their
times, and seeing that many hundredth years after, there is no mention of any
such writer, and writings in any approved author, I will plainly affirm,
that the author of such Epistles, is more worthy to stand on the pillerie for
an impudent counterfeiter, then to sit in the Parleament house among ye
Apostles of Christ and ye holy doctors of the Church. If there were nothing
else to confute him, but the title that he gives himself, it were sufficient
to prove him a shameless forger. Martialis Apostolus Christi, he terms
himself (in the Devils name) as though the scripture had not defined both of
the number and of the calling of the Apostles. If any man list to hear his
absurd speech, that he makes for the sacrifice of the mass, let him resort
to M. Heskins swynetrough, for I will not vouchsafe to defile my pen and
paper to carry away such draffe, of such pseude-apostles and counterfeit
doctors. Leaving therefore M. Heskins with his groyne serching in that swill, I
will chase him away from routing in the holy ancient garden of Irenaeus, of
whom M. Heskins confesses, that he is not to be suspected of truth, thereby
insinuating that his Martial, was not so honest, but that his credit might
come in question. But Irenaeus lib. 4. Chapter 32. writes thus: Sed and suis
discipulis dans consilium etc. But also giving counsel to his disciples, to
offer the first fruits unto God of his own creatures, not as to one having
need, but that they might be neither unfruitful nor unthankful: he took
that bread which is of the creature, and gave thanks, saying, this is my
body: and likewise the cup which is of the same creature that is with us, he
confesses to be his blood, and taught the new oblation of the new
Testament, which the Church receiving of the Apostles, offers to GOD in all
the world, to him which gives food unto us, the first fruits of his own
gifts in the new Testament, of which Malachias among the twelve Prophets
has foreshewed: I have no pleasure in you, (says the LORD Almighty) and I
will receive no sacrifice at your hands, etc.

Here M. Heskins I know not for what subtlety, had translated very absurdly
primitias munerum suorum, the first fruit of his sacrifices. But to the
matter. What can be more plain, then that Irenaeus speaks here of the
sacrifice of obedience and thanksgiving, celebrated in the sacrament of the
Lords supper?

For he shows the end of the institution to be, that they should neither be
unfruitful nor unthankful, which oblation the Church observes throughout
all ye world, according to the Prophecy of Malachie, in the celebration of the
Lords supper, although not only therein. M. Heskins cavil, of the newness
of the oblation, I have answered before, that it is new in the manner of the
offering, which is without such sacrifices and ceremonies as the law
prescribed. And whereas the incense and the pure oblation, that the Prophet
says, should be sacrificed to God, be both of one nature, Irenaeus does in
plain words expound the incenses for spiritual sacrifice, namely, the
sacrifice of prayers. Which exposition M. Heskins does so obstinately contemn
lib. 4. Chap. 33. Quoniam ergo nomen filij proprium patris est, and in Deo
omnipotente Iesum Christum offert ecclesia, been ait secundum vtraque and in
omni loco incensiu^ offertur nomini meo and sacrificium purum. Incensa autem
Ioannes in Apocalypsi orationes ait esse sanctorum. Therefore, for as much as
the name of the same pertains to the father, and in God almighty the Church
offers Jesus Christ: he says well according to both, and in every place,
an incense is offered to my name, and a pure sacrifice. Now S. John in the
revelation says, that the incense are the prayers of the Saints. The one
being a spiritual sacrifice, the other is also of the same nature: by which it
is evident, how the Church offers Jesus Christ in God almighty: namely,
when she renders most humble and hearty thanks to God, for her redemption
by Jesus Christ. To which intent, much more might be alleged out of Irenaeus,
but for prolixitie, and the same places shall afterward be cited for other
purposes.

The five and thirtieth Chapter proceeds to the exposition of the same
Prophet by S. Augustine and Eusebius. Hesk.


Out of S. Augustine is alleged a long saying lib. Aduersus Iudaeos, but not
so long in words, Fulke.
as short of his purpose. Dominus omnipotens dicit, etc. The Lord almighty
says, I have no pleasure in you, neither will I receive sacrifice of your
hands. Certainly, this you cannot deny o ye Jews that not only he does not
take sacrifice as your hands, for there is but one place appointed by the law
of the Lord, where he has commanded sacrifices to be offered by your hands,
beside which place, he has altogether forbidden them. Therefore seeing you
have lost this place according to your deserts, the sacrifice also, which was
lawful to be offered there only, in other place^ ye dare not offer. And it is
altogether fulfilled which the Prophet says: And sacrifice will I not receive
at your hands. For if the Temple and the Altar remained to you in the earthly
Jerusalem, you might say this were fulfilled in them, whose sacrifices, (being
wicked men abiding among you) the Lord does not accept: but that he accepts
the sacrifice of other that be of you and among you, which keep the
commandments of God. But this cannot be said, for as much as there is not one
of you all, which according to the law, which proceeded from mount Sinay, may
offer sacrifice with his hands. Neither is this so forespoken and fulfilled,
that the sentence of the Prophes will suffer you to a^nswere: because we offer
not flesh with our hands, with our heart and mouth we offer praise, according
to that in the Psalm: Sacrifice to God the sacrifice of praise. From this
place also he speaks against you which says: I have no pleasure in you, etc.
Moreover, that you should not think that seeing you offer not, and that he
takes no sacrifice at your hands, therefore no sacrifice is offered to God,
whereof truly he has no need, who needs not the goods of any of us, yet
because he is not without a sacrifice, which is not profitable for him, but for
us, be adioyneth and says: For from the rising of the Sun until the going
down of the same, my name is made honorable among all the Gentiles, and in
every place a sacrifice is offered to my name, even a pure sacrifice, because
my name is great among the Gentiles says the Lord Almighty. What answer
ye to these things? open your eyes at the length, and see from the sun
rising to the going down thereof, that not in one place, as it was appointed
among you, but in every place, the sacrifice of the Christians is offered, not
to every God, but to him that spoke these things before hand, even to the God of
Israel. Wherefore (in another place) he says, to his Church: and he that has
delivered thee, the same God of Israel shall be called the God of the whole
earth. Search ye the Scriptures, in which you think to have eternal life, and
truly you should have, if in them you could understand Christ and hold him.
But search them through and even they bear witness of this pure sacrifice,
which is offered to the God of Israel: not of your nation alone, of whose hands
he said he would receive none, but of all nations which say: come let us go up
into the hill of the Lord, neither in one place, as it was commanded in the
earthly. Jerusalem, b^t in every place, even in Jerusalem it self* neither
after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchizedech.

First we must see how M. Heskins note book deceived him: for where the words
of Augustine in the beginning of this sentence are these: Locus enim vn^to est
lege domini constitutus, etc. that is* there is but one place appointed by the
law of the Lord. M. Hesk. has falsified and set down locus enim vnus est
loco domini constitutus, which he translateth: For there is one place in ye
place of God appointed. But this is not the first corruption that we have
bewrayed by a great many. Now to the matter Master Heskins still harpeth upon
one string, that the sacrifice in this saying spoken of cannot be the sacrifice
of praise and thanksgiving, because that is not peculiar to the Christians,
but was offered of the Jews before Christ, and may be yet, if they be
converted. But I have more than once or twice declared, that here is no such
peculiaritie in the matter of the offering, but in the manner of the oblation.
And Augustine speaks not half a word, by which we might deem, that he
refuses the spiritual sacrifice of the Christians to be the pure sacrifice
prophesied in Malachie. If you urge that he says, it is offered after the
order of Melchisedech, and so has relation to the offering of bread and wine
in the Sacrament, although it be no necessary conclusion: yet Augustine him
self will tell us, that it is a spiritual sacrifice of laud and thanksgiving.
And M. Heskins him self directs us to the book saying: As notable a saying
as this has S. Augustine in an other place also, (and quoteth, lib. 1. Cont,
aduersariu^ legis and Prophetarum) who so lists to read, shall find that,
that shall not repent him of the reading.

What place M. Heskins means I know not, but in the same book I read and in
the 18. Chapter, that he calls the death of Christ (...) singular and only
was sacrifice. If that sacrifice be but one singular, and the only true
sacrifice, what manner of sacrifice is the sacrifice of the Mass, which
sets up a new altar to overthrow the cross of Christ? And that you may
know what sacrifice S. Augustine means, when he names the sacrifice of the
Church, or the sacrifice of bread and wine, or any such like phrase, he
speaks this in the twentieth Chapter of certain apocryphal writings, falsely
entitled to the Apostles Andrew and John.

Qua fillorum essent, receptae essent ab ecclesia, quae illorum temperibus per
Episcoporu^ succes^iones certissimas vsque ad nostra and deincap^ tempora
perseuera^, and immolat Deo in corpore Christi sacrificium ^^^dis: Which if
they had been theirs, they should have been received of the Church, which from
their times, by most certain successions of Bishope, continues unto our times
and after, and sacrifices to God in the body of Christ, the sacrifice of
lawde and praise. And let this suffice to discharge Augustine from M. Heskins
and the Papists blasphemous cauelling. Now must we come to Eusebius: which
lib. ^. Euang. Demonst. cap. 10. writes thus: The Mosaical sacrifices being
rejected he does by divine revelation declare our ordina^ies that was to (...),
saying: For from the rising of the (...) the going down of the s^^e my name is
glorified among the nations, and in every place (...) is offered to my name, and
a pure sacrifice. Wherefore our sacrifice to the most high God, is the
sacrifice of praise. We sacrifice to God a full, (...) and holy sacrifice. We
sacrifice after a new manner, according to the new testament a pure sacrifice,
etc. M. Heskins asks us, if we do not see that Eusebius expounds the
Prophet of the sacrifice of Christ's body? but we may well bid him shore up
his eyes, and see, if he do not in plain words expound him of the sacrifice of
praise? But because he calls this sacrifice horrorem adferens, bringing
horror, meaning, not a slavish, but a reverent fear, as is meant to be in all
matters of religion, which ought to be handled with fear, and reverence of
Gods Majesty, unto whom they apperteine: he will needs have it the body of
Christ, and first, he alleges a saying of Dionysius, whom he falsely calls
the disciple of Saint Paul, although he be a writer of good antiquity: Eccle.
Hier. part. 1. cap. 3. Neither is it almost lawful for any mystery of the
priestly office, to be done, except that his divine, and most noble sacrament
of thanksgiving do fulfill is. What he picketh out of this saying, as he
notes not, so I am not of his counsel to know, neither why (after his
accustomed boldness) he translateth, Sacramentum Eucharistiae, the sacrament
of Christ. From Dionyse he flitteth to the hyperbolicall amplifications of
Chrysostom, which Lib. 6. De Sacerdotio, calls the sacrament, That sacrifice
most full of horror and reverence, where the universal Lord of all things is
daily felt with hands. And de prod. Iud. Hom. 30. The holy and terrible
sacrifice, where Christ that was slain is set forth. He that will not
acknowledge these and such like, to be figurative speeches, must enter action
against Chrysostom for many heresies: or rather Chrysostom may enter action
against him of slander and defamation. In the same treatise De Sacerdotio Lib.
3. speaking of the same sacrifice, he says:

You may see the whole multitude of people died and made red with the
precious blood of Christ. But to show that all this is spiritual, he
demands, if you think your self to stand upon the earth, when you see
these things, and not rather that you are translated into heaven, and casting
away all cogitations of the flesh, with a naked soul, and pure mind you
behold those things that are in heaven. Therefore to conclude, neither
Augustine nor Eusebius have spoken any thing to the furtherance of Master
Heskins bill, of the carnal presence.

The six and thirtieth Chapter, ends the exposition of Malachie, by Saint
Hierome, and Damascen. Hesk.


S. Hierome upon ye Prophet Malachie writes thus: Fulke.
Ergo proprie nu^c ad sacerdotes Indeoru^ sermo sit domini, qui offeru^t,
caecu^ and clandu^ and languidu^ ad immolandu^ vt sciant carnalibus victimis
spirituales victimas successuras. Et necquaquam tantorum hircerumque sanguinem:
sed thymiana, hoc est, sanctorum orationes Domino offerendas: and non in vna
orbis prouincia Iudaea, nec in vna iudaea vrbe Jerusalem: sed in omni loco
offerri oblationem: nequaquam immundam, vt a populo Israel: sed mundum, vt in
ceremonijs Christianorum. Now therefore the word of the Lord is properly
spoken to the Priests of the Jews, which offer the blind and lamue, and
feeble, to be sacrificed, that they might know that spiritual sacrifices,
should succeed those carnal sacrifices. And not the blood of bulls and
goats, but an incense, that is to say, the prayers of the Saints should be
offered to the Lord: and that not in one province of the world Iewry, neither
in Jerusalem one city of Iewry, but in every place an oblation is offered: was
unclean, as of the people of Israel, but clean, as in the ceremonies of the
Christians. Do thou not marvel (Gentle Reader) that Master Heskins
alleges this place, which in every point is so directly contrary to his
purpose? He says that among the ceremonies of the Christians, none can be
properly called the clean sacrifice, but the sacrifice of the body and blood
of Christ. O shameless beggar, that craves no less then the whole
controversy to be given him! And that contrary to Hierome, whose name he
abuses, which expounds this place of spiritual sacrifices, and more
expressly of the prayers of the saints, which are not used in one, but in
all the ceremonies of the Christians. But to set some color upon ye matter, he
brings in an other saying of Hierome, which is written before this in
exposition of another place, perteining nothing to this prophecy of ye pure
sacrifice: but where by analogy or like reason, (as the prophet rebukes the
priests of the Jews) he does reprehend also the Bishops, Elders, and Deacons
of the Church for their negligence: Offertis inquit etc. You offer, says he,
upon mine altar bread polluted. We pollute the bread, that is to say the body
of Christ, when we come unworthily to the altar, and we being filthy do
drink clean blood, and say the Lords table is contemptible, etc. Here
forsooth, we understand that the body of Christ is, the sacrifice of the
Christians, yea, but according to the former sentence, so offered, that it is a
spiritual sacrifice.

But what else? Here we are taught that we do not take one thing: videlicet
bread, and do injury to another thing, that is the body and blood of Christ,
as the sacramentaries say, but receiving the very body and blood of Christ we
do injury to the same. But vouchsafe to hear the same teacher, speaking of the
same matter, and in the same place, in few words to satisfy the reasonable,
and to stop the mouths of quarrellers. Dum enim sacramenta violantur, ipse
cuius sunt sacramenta violatur. For while injury is done to the sacraments,
injury is done to him whose sacraments they are. He shows a reason against
them that demanded proudly, wherein they had polluted God, when they had but
polluted his sacraments? Leaving therefore Hierome at open war with M.
Heskins, I will pass to Damascen, who for lack of a Greek ancient Baron,
being an ancient burgess of the lower house, Master Heskins, is bold to
match with Hironyme, though far inferior to him in antiquity and credit,
whose words are these: Libr. 4.
This is that pure and unbloody sacrifice, which our Lord speaks by the
Prophet to be offered to him, from the rising of the sun, to the going down
of the same, namely the body and blood of Christ, unto the unconsumed, and
uncorrupted establishment of our body and soul, not going into secesse, (God
forbid, that any such imagination should be) but it is a purgation of al manner
filth, and a reparation of all manner of hurt, unto our sustentation, and
conservation. This place says Master Heskins is so plain, that a child may
perceive it: for it is sufficient for him, if he hear once body and blood
named. Howbeit, if either Damascens authority were of weight, or the
corruption of the time in which he lived unknown, there is nothing, in this
saying, which might not easily, and without any wresting, be referred to the
spiritual sacrifices, and to the spiritual manner of sacrificing the body and
blood of Christ, which we have learned out of the elder fathers.

The seven and thirtieth Chapter, makes a brieefe recapitulation of things
before written, with the application of them to Hesk.
the proclamation of the adversary, and so concludes the first book.

It were but vain labor, especially for me, that profess such brevity, Fulk.
to repeat the answers and declarations made before, that not one of these
Lords of the higher house, whom he names, favors his bill, of the carnal
presence, or the sacrifice of the mass in such sense, as he and his fellows
take it. But whereas he is so lofty once again, to join issue with the
proclaymer, and that as he has done always hitherto, upon the negative, I
will not refuse him. And yet by the way I must admonish the Reader, how
unreasonably he deals, that joins all his issues upon the negative, which
sometime is hard, sometime is impossible to be proved, whereas the Bishop,
whom he calls the proclaimer, joins issue with them upon the affirmative,
which if ever it was holden, is more probable to find proof in antiquity.
Whereas if I might have liberty to join upon the negative, I would bring in
five hundredth propositions, that are false, and yet never a one expressly
denied of the old writers, because there never happened any controversy
about such matters in their times. But to his issue. If he can bring any one
sufficient authority, that shall directly say, that the Church may not offer
the body of Christ, in such sort as it does, I will give him the victory.

First here he rejects the authority of the Apostle to the Hebrews, saying,
it is but wrested, which is as direct, as nothing in the world can be more
direct, that Christ offered himself, and that but once, and by that one
oblation has made perfect for ever, them that are sanctified. But he shall
hear Chrysostom upon the same scripture Hebr. 10. Aufer^ primum, vt sequens
statuat, etc. He takes away the former, that he might establish that which
follows. Behold again the abundance. This sacrifice says he, is but one,
but those sacrifices are many: for therefore they were not strong, because they
were many. But tell me what need is there of many, when one is sufficient?
Therefore whereas they were many, and always offered, he shows, that they
were never purged. For as a medicine when it is strong and effectual to give
health, and able to drive away, all sickness, being but once laid to, works
the whole at once. If therefore being but once laid to it has wrought the
whole, it shows the virtue thereof, in that it is not laid to any more: and
this is the effect of it, yt it is laid on no more but once. But if it be
always laid to, it is a manifest token, yt it prevailed nothing. For this is
the virtue of that medicine, yt it is but once laid on, and not oftentimes:
even so in this case. By what means were they always healed, by ye same
sacrifices? For if they had been delivered from al their sins, there should not
have been offered sacrifice throughout every day. For they were appointed, yt
they should be always offered for all the people, both at evening and in ye day.
Therefore, that was an accusation of sins, not a discharge: for there was made
an accusation of weakness, not a showing of strength. For because ye first
sacrifice was of no force, the second was likewise offered, and because that
also profited nothing, an other was offered also: wherefore this is but a
conviction of sins. For in yt they were offered, there is a conviction of
sins, but in that they were always offered, there is a conviction of
infirmity But contrariwise in Christ, the sacrifice was but once offered. For
what need was there of medicines, when there is no more wounds remaining? For
this cause, you will say, he commanded that it should always be offered, because
of infirmity, that there might be also a remembrance of sins: What then do
we^ Do we not offer every day? we offer truly, but for a remembrance which
we make of his death, and this is but one sacrifice, not many. How is it one
and not many? Because it was offered but once, and it was offered in the holy
of holies: but this sacrifice is an exemplar of that, we offer the same
always. For we do not now offer one lamb, to morrow an other, but the same
thing always. Therefore this sacrifice is but one. For else by this reason,
because it is offered in many places, are there many Christ's? No, but one Christ
is every where, both here being perfect and there being perfect, even one body.
For as he which is every where is one body, and not many bodies: so also it is
one sacrifice. And he is our high Priest, which offered the sacrifice which
purged us: the same do we also offer now, which then truly being offered, can
not be consumed. Howbeit, that which we do now, is done truly, in the
remembrance of that which was done then. For this do ye (says he) in
remembrance of me. We make not an other sacrifice as the high Priest, but
always the same, but rather we work the remembrance of the same. This place
of Chrysostom shows, both that the Church neither does, nor may offer the
body of Christ in such sort as the Papists say, that is really and carnally,
and for the sins of the quick and the dead: and also how the Church is
said to offer the sacrifice of Christ's body, namely, when she celebrateth the
remembrance thereof.

After this holy issue joined, M. Heskins rayleth upon Cranmer, which in his
first book has not one Doctor or Counsel to allege, but only a little false
descant upon a scripture or two, as the proclamer in his Sermon. What reading
Cranmer and Jewel, were able to show in the Doctors and Counsels, is so well
testified by their own learned works unto the world, that it can not by such
an obscure doctor as M. Hesk. is, be blemished or darkened.

But M. Heskins has such store of testimonies for the sacrifice of the Mass,
to prove that Christ is offered therein, yt beside those which he has already
cited, he will ad three or four to this recapitulation. First he names
Justinius Martyr, in his dialogue against ye Jews. Where he alleges his
words truncatly, leaving out the beginning* which declares that Iustine
makes all Christians Priests and offerers of the sacrifice of thanksgiving
in the celebration of the Lords supper. His words are these. (...) (...).
Even so we which by the name of Iesusas al (shall be one man in God the maker of
al things) having put off our filthy garments, that is, our sins, by the name
of his first begotten son, and being set on fire by the word of his calling,
are a right kind of high priests of God, as God himself does witness, That in all places among the Gentiles, acceptable and pure sacrifices are offered to him.
But God receives no sacrifice of any but of his Priests. Wherefore God before
hand does testify, that he does accept all them that offer by this name the
sacrifices, which Jesus Christ has delivered to be made, that is in the
Eucharistie or thanksgiving of the bread and the cup, which are done in
every place of the Christians. By these words it appears not, that Christ was
offered, but thanksgiving in ye sacrament, not of the priest alone, but by all
Christians. And yet more plainly in the words of his, that are in the same
Dialogue: (...).

And as concerning those sacrifices which are offered to him of us Gentiles in
every place, that is of the bread of thanksgiving, and the cup likewise of
thanksgiving, he foresheweth saying, that we do glorify his name, and that
you do profane it. In which saying what can we see, but the sacrifice of
thanksgiving in the bread and cup? And to prove that the Church has none
other sacrifice but of prayers and thanksgiving, he says within few lines
after the place cited by M. Heskins; (...). For I my self do affirm, that
prayers and thanksgiving made by worthy persons, are the only perfect and
acceptable sacrifices to God. For these are the only sacrifices that Christians
have received to make, to be put in mind by their dry and moist nourishment,
of the passion which God the son of God is recorded to have suffered for them.
This place does not only show, what the only sacrifice of Christians was in
his time, but also teaches, that in the sacrament is dry and moist
nourishment, that is, bread and drink, not bare accidents as the
transubstantiators affirm. How little Justinius makes for the sacrifice of the
Mass, these places do sufficiently declare.

The second place he cites, is out of Hierom in his book of Hebrew
questions. Quod autem ^it, etc. whereas he says, thou art a Priest for ^uer
after the order of Melchisedech: in the word (order) our mystery is signified,
not in offering unreasonable sacrifices by Aaron, but in offering bread and
wine, that is, the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. We have showed
sufficiently before, how the old writers used the word of sacrifice
licentiously, when there was no such heresy, as fined is sprung up, of the
sacrifice of ye Mass, for the memorial of the sacrifice of Christ's body and
blood, in which was offered the spiritual sacrifice of prayers and
thanksgiving: which reasonable men might well enough understand, though
heretics do now draw it to their meaning. As when Hierom calls this
offering of bread and wine a mystery, every indifferent reader may understand,
that he speaks not properly in calling it the body and blood of Christ, and
a sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ. But as to a sick man of the
ague, all drinks seem bitter, so to a popish heretic, all sayings of the
Doctors seem popish and heretical.

The third place he alleges, it is out of Ambrose his preparatiue prayer to
Mass, I will not vouchsafe to rehearse it, because it is a mere bastard and
counterfeit writing, out of which it is cyted, having as much of S. Ambrose in
it, as M. Heskins has wit and honesty in alleging it. If any man will
object, that then I must bring arguments to disprove it, or else I may likewise
deny any authentical writer: I answer, it were too long to do in this
shortness that I must use, and not necessary, when they are notorious and
well known already to every man of mean reading in the Doctors, and Erasmus
in his censure does plainly reject it.

The fourth is Isydorus li. 1. ca 18. de off. which although he be somewhat without
ye compass of 600. years after Christ, yet because he is an ancient writer,
and nere that time, I will consider his speech which is cited by M. Heskins in
these words, The sacrifice that is offered to God by the Christians, our Lord
and master Christ did first institute, when he commended to his Apostles his
body and blood, before he was betrayed, as it is redd in the Gospel: Jesus
took the bread and the cup and blessing them gave the same unto them. Here
beside the usual phrase of sacrifice (which we have often declared what it did
signify, and whence it came) is nothing to quarrel at. For Isydore meant no
doubt, the spiritual sacrifice of thanksgiving, which is offered in the
celebration of the Lords supper, and not the propitiatory sacrifice of the
popish mass, of which scarce the foundations were begone to be laid in his
time, of certain odd stones of improper speech, and licentious phrases of
sacrifices and oblations.

As for Haymo and Cabasila, I will never trouble my self to examine their
speeches, they are but late writers, and therefore of small credit in these
causes. And whereas M. Heskins glories that he has answered four members of
the proclamation in this book: the scriptures in the vulgar tongue, the
reservation of the sacrament, the offering of Christ to his father, and the
presence of his body and blood in the sacrament: let the judgment rest with
the indifferent readers, whether although he has some of the lower house to
favor his bills, and more might have, if he would ask their voices, yet I
have proved by this short answer, that of the higher house, he has not one
that has given a voice with the^, but many that have spoken directly against
them.

God be praised.
THE SECOND BOOK OF HESKINS PARLEAMENT repealed by W. Fulke.
Hesk.
The first Chapter declares the offices of the old law, and the benefits of
the new law, with an exhortation to submit our understanding to the knowledge
of faith, and therewith to the belief of the sacrament.

Fulk.
HOW vnsauerly he discourses upon the two offices of the law, it were too long
to examine in every point. Only this let the reader observe, that when he
has made the first office of the law, to give them knowledge of sin, and to
restrain them from it: The other office he says was, by lineamentes of
figures and shadows to lead the people to Christ: as S. Paul says, the
law was our scholemaister to Christ, etc. As though the law was not a
Schoolemaister to bring us to Christ by showing us our sins and
condemnation, but only by shadows and figures. After this he makes him
self a ioly hunter, That with great travel and some pleasure has passed
through the bushes and thickets of the law, and now being come into the fair
land of the Gospel, forgetting his former travels, with fresh delight will
follow on his game. So that he is now belike gone out of the parleament
house, where matters are gravely entreated of, and has betaken him self to
the wild forest, where he may disporte himself in his games with Robin
hoode, and his merry mates. And verily if he had not told us him self of his
lusty hunting, we might well have thought, he had not been at home, but
wandering in the woods so wild, when in his exhortation unto faith in the
sacrament, he will persuade us, that none can understand the scriptures,
except they have found faith in the verity of the Sacrament. Which happens
to all those that will not be with Christ in the breaking of the bread, as the
two disciples were that went to Emans, to whom Christ was a stranger, until
he came to the breaking of the bread. But least this vain allegory should
seem to be found out only in M. Heskins chase, he trauelleth to find it in
S. Augustine, and Theophylact, but al in vain. For first to give us a taste what
synceritie and truth he will use in the rest of this book, the very first
sentence he alleges out of any Doctor, is corruptly and untruly rehearsed.
For thus he makes Augustine to speak in his treatise De consensu
Euangelistarum, not naming in what book or Chapter, whereas that which he
writes of this matter, is Lib. 3. Cap. 25. Non enim incongruenter accipimus
hoc impedimentum in oculis eorum a Satana fuisse, ne agnosceretur Jesus, sed
tantum a Christo propter eorum fidem ambiguam facta est permissio vsque ad
sacramentum panis, vt vnitate corporis eius participata, remoueri intelligatur
impedimentum inimici, vt Christus possit agnosci. We do not take it
incongruently, that this impediment in their eyes was of Satan that Jesus
should not be known, but only it was permitted of Christ for their doubtful
faithes sake, until they came to the sacrament of bread, that the unity of
Christ's body being participated, it might be perceived, that the impediment of
the enemy was removed, that Christ might be known. In this place beside yt he
turns autem into enim, and leaves out factum after fuisse, he adds of his
own propter eorum fidem ambiguam, for their doubtful faiths sake. Which words
are not Augustins. Whereby it appears that he read not this place out of
Augustine himself, but followed some other man's collection as he does almost
every where. But Augustine in that place comparing the words of Mark and
Luke together, shows that there was no alteration in the shape of Christ's
body, but only that the two disciples eyes were held, that they could not
know him, but in breaking of the bread which signified the unity of ye Church.
For this he writes: Neque quisquam se Christum agnouisse arbitretur, si eius
corporis particeps non est, id est ecclesi; cuius vnitatem in sacramento panis
commendat Apostolus dicens, vnus panis vnum corpus multi sumus: vt cum eis
benedictum panem porrigeret apperirentur oculi eorum and agnoscerent cum.
Neither let any man think that he has known Christ, if he be not partaker
of his body, that is, of the Church, whose unity the Apostle commends in the
sacrament of the bread saying: One bread, we being many are one body: yt when
he reached unto them the blessed bread, their eyes were opened and they knew
him. This is Augustines collection of this matter, nothing agreeable with M.
Heskins allegory of ye sound faith in ye verity of the sacrament, but much
against it, teaching ye true participation of ye body of Christ in ye
sacrament, which is the mystical conjunction of him unto his Church. Moreover
even in ye place by him alleged, I meruell M. Heskins cannot see yt Augustine
calls it the sacrament of bread, which agrees not with his
transsubstantiation, and if he think ye participation of the unity of Christ's
body does help him, Augustine in the same place shows the contrary,
understanding the body of Christ to be his Church, as is before showed. But
what says Theophylact of the same? Another thing also is here insumated,
namely that, that their eyes which take this blessed bread are opened that they
may know him. For the flesh of our Lord, has a great and unspeakable
strength. What is there here in these authorities, either for M. Heskins bil of
the real presence, or for his fond allegory? It pleases him excedingly, that
Theophylact says the flesh of Christ is of unspeakable power, which we do
most willingly admit, and even in receiving of the sacrament, it works
mightily, but he will not see at all, yt Theophylact with Augustine, calls
the sacrament blessed bread, by which they both do show, that ye substance of
bread remains, although it be blessed and consecrated unto an other use then
for bodily food.

Hesk.
The second Cha. expounds the sixth of S. Ioh according to the letter

Fulke.
The sum of this literal exposition is this, that three sundry breades are
mentioned by Christ in this sixte of John, that is, ye bread Manna, the bread
the son of God, and the bread the flesh of Christ, and yt these three breads
are distincted both in nature and in time, in which they were given. For Manna
was a corporal food given of old time in the wilderness. The second bread, the
godhead of Christ, being an eternal and spiritual substance, Christ says his
father does give, in the present tence, and that he is the bread of life, and
requires belief in him which is proper to God only. The third bread, is the
flesh of Christ, which he will give for the life of the world, speaking in the
future tence, and is meant of the sacrament. And this he dare avouch, to be the
native and true understanding of this scripture. But saving his authority,
there are but two breades spoken of in this Chapter, namely Manna, and the
bread of life, which is not the divinity of Christ separated from his flesh,
nor his flesh separated or distincted from his godhead, but even his quickening
and spiritual flesh, which being united to his eternal spirit, was by the same
given for the life of the world, not in ye sacrament, but in the sacrifice of
his body and blood on the cross, and is daily sealed and testified unto us by
the sacrament of his body and blood ministered according to his holy
institution. And this I dare avouch to be the true and native sense of this
scripture, both by the plain circumstances of the same, and by the judgment of
the best approved ancient writers. And first to take away as well the vain
supposed distinction of time, in which the two later breads are said to be
given, as also to prove that they are but one bread: our savior Christ him
self after he has promised to give the bread, which is his flesh, for the
life of the world, and declared what fruit comes to them that eat his
flesh, and drink his blood, etc. in the 58. verse he concludes and says
plainly: that it is the same bread that came down from heaven, and that who
so eats of this bread, shall live eternally. Secondly, that the promise of
giving his flesh, is not to be restrained to the giving of the sacrament: his
words are plain, that he will give his flesh for the life of the world,
which all true Christians will acknowledge to have been performed in the
sacrifice of his death, and not at his last supper. Finally, that his flesh
must not be separated from his spirit, nor his spirit from his flesh, he does
as plainly teach us, when he affirms yt it is the spirit yt quickens, the
flesh profits nothing, and yt except we eat the flesh of the son of man,
and drink his blood, we have no life in us. For neither the flesh profits,
but as it is made quickening by the spirit, neither do we participate the life
of his spirit, but as it is communicated unto us by his flesh, by which we
are made flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone: which holy mystery, is
lively represented unto us in the blessed sacrament. And this your adversaries
confess (Master Heskins) not denying (as you charge them) that any one word
of that Chapter pertains to the sacrament, but affirming the sacrament to be
a seal of the doctrine, which is delivered in that Chapter, and not otherwise.
The judgment of the old writers consonant to this understanding, shall
follow afterward in confutation of M. Heskins ungodly and heretical
distinction, not of the two natures in Christ, but of participation of the one
without the other, which he makes by his two last breades.

Hesk.
The third Chapter proves by the doctors, that the sixth of S. John speaks
as well of the bread Christ's flesh in the sacrament, as of the bread his
godhead.

Chrysostom is alleged in Joan 6. Hom. 44. Iam in mysteriorum etc. Fulke.
Now will he come to the setting forth of the mysteryes, and first of his
godhead, he says thus: I am the bread of life, this was not spoken of his
body, of which about the end he says: The bread which I will give is my
flesh: but as yet of his godhead: for that is bread because of God the word,
even as this bread, because of the spirit coming to it, is made heavenly
bread. Master Heskins asks if we do not here plainly see a distinction of
breades. I answer, no forsooth: but a distinction of two natures in one
bread. Again, he asks: Does not now the sixth of S. John speak of the
body of Christ in the Sacrament? I answer, that no such thing appears by
these words of Chrysostom, otherwise then as the sacrament is a lively
representation of that his body, which he gave for the life of the world. And
that Chrysostom means not to divide Christ into two breades, as M. Heskins
does, he teaches, speaking of the same mystery of his conjunction with us by
his flesh Hom. 45. Vester ego frater esse volui, and communicaui carnem
propter vos, and sanguinem, and per quae vobis coniunctus sum, ea rursus vobis
exhibui. I would be your brother, and so I took part of flesh and blood for
you, and the same things I have given you again, by which I was joined unto
you. So that not the godhead of Christ alone, nor his flesh alone is given us
as two breades, but Christ by his flesh is joined unto us as one bread of life.
Let us now see what S. Augustine says, who expounding the same text writes
thus: Our Lord determines consequently how he calls him self bread, not
only after his godhead which feeds all things, but also after his human
nature which is assumpted of the word of God, when he says afterward: And
the bread which I will give is my flesh, etc. Once again M. Heskins asks
whether Augustine teach not a plain difference of the bread of the Godhead of
Christ, and the bread of his manhood? And once again I answer, not so, but
he teaches directly the contratie, namely, Christ God and man to be one
bread, and not two breades. And that the doctrine of this Chapter, is not to
be restrained unto the sacrament, the same Augustine in the same place teaches
abundantly, while he makes no mention of the Lords supper until he come to
the end, and then shows, that the mystery of this flesh and blood is
represented in the supper, when it is celebrated of the Church in remembrance
of his death and passion. Huius rei sacramentum, id est, vnitatis corporis and
sanguinis Christi, alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis interuallis dierum in
Dominica mensa praeparatur, and de mensa Dominica sumitur quibusdam ad vitam,
quibusdam ad exitium. Res vero ipsa cuius sacramentum est, omni homini ad
vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque eius particeps fuerit. The sacrament of this
thing, that is, of the unity of the body and blood of Christ, in some places
every day, in other some at certain space of days between, is prepared in
the Lords table, and is taken at the Lords table of some unto life, of some
unto to destruction. But the thing it self, whose sacrament it is, to all men
is to life, and to no man for destruction. whosoever shall be partaker thereof.
Note here also the distinction between the sacrament, and the thing whereof it
is a sacrament, and that the sacrament may be received to destruction, but not
the thing or matter of the sacrament, which is the body and blood of Christ.

To these Barons he will join two Burgesses, and the first shall be Theophylact,
one of them which he says is well toward a thousand year old. He would
feign get him credit by his antiquity, but he over reaches too far, to
make him so ancient, which comes nerer to five hundred, then to a thousand
years. But let us consider his speech in 6 Joan. he writes thus: Manifest
etc. He speaks manifestly in this place of the communion of his body. For
the bread (says he) which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the
life of the world. And showing his power, that not as a servant, nor as one
less them his father, he should be crucified, but voluntarily, he says: I
will give my flesh for the life of the world. Note (says M. Hesk.) that Christ
spoke manifestly of ye communion of his body. Who doubts or denies that?
but that he spoke not of the communion of his body, which we receive in the
sacrament. Note say I, that Theophylact speaks manifestly of his crucifying,
and nor of the communion in the sacrament. After this, he interlaceth a fond
excourse of the authority of the later writers, whom he affirms, and we
confess to have written plainly of his side, whereas he says, the old
writers did write obscurely: and then he taxes Bullinger, for alleging
Zwinglius, whom he slaundereth to have been slain in a sedition raised by
him, where as the world, knows it was in war, that was held in defense of
his country. The like foolish quarrel he has, for putting out of Polycarpus
out of the Calender, and placing Thomas Hutten in his stood all which as
unworthy any answer, I pass over it is sufficiently known, what Bullinger
esteemed of m^ns authority, and what Fox (if he mean him) judged of the old
Martyrs divinity. The other reasons following, I could scarce read without
loathsomeness, that preachers must cease if writers may not be received under
1000 years antiquity and more, that speaking and writing are of like
authority, and such like blockish stuff. The elder writers are allowed, not
for their age, but for their agreement with the word of God, the later
preachers are believed, not for yt their speaking is better then Papists
writing, but because they speak things consonant to the word of God, the
touchstone and trial of truth. And therefore we receive not the testimony of
Nicholaus de Lyra the second Burgess, because it is contrary to the word of
God, and the consent of the elder Doctors, that Christ speaks of the
sacrament, when he says the bread which I will give is my flesh: which words
Theophylacte, even now affirmed to be spoken of the passion of Christ.

The fourth Chapter begins a further proof of the former master by S.
Cyprian, and Euthymius. Hesk.


For proof of the two breads, and that the text, Fulk.
The bread which I will give is my flesh, etc. is meant of ye sacrament, Cyprian
is alleged, although ye place be not quoted, but it is in ye sermon upon ye
Lords prayer in these words: Panis vitae Christus est. etc. Christ is the bread
of life, and he is not the bread of all men, but our bread: And as we say our
father, because he is the father of the^ that understand, and believe, so we
call it our bread, because Christ is our bread, which touch his body. And this
bread, we pray to be given us daily, least we that are in Christ, and daily
receive the Eucharistie to the meat of health, some grievous offense coming
between, while being separated, and not communicating, we be forbidden from
that heavenly bread, we be separated from the body of Christ, he himself
openly saying and warning: I am the bread of life, which came down from
heaven, if any man shall eat of this bread, he shall live for ever, and the
bread which I will give, is my flesh for the life of the world. Howsoever M.
Hesk. would falsely gather out of this place, Cyprian makes not two breades,
but one bread of life, Christ God and man, as for ye two respects of his
Godhead, and manhood, that he prateth of, cannot make Christ to be two breads,
but one true food of our souls. And that Cyprian does apply this text to the
sacrament only, it is utterly false, (in that he says:) we must pray for this
daily bread Christ, to feed us, although for some grievous offense, we be
restrained from the sacrament, as is also evident by these words that follow.
Quando ergo dicit in aeternum viuere, si quis ederit de tius pane, vt
manifestum est cos vinera, qui corpus eius (...), and Eucharistitum ^^re
co^municationis accipiunt: ita contrae timendu^ est and erandum, ne dam quis
abstentus separatur a Christi corpore, procul remaneat a salute, comminante
ipso and dicente: Nist ederitis carnem f^ij hominis, and biberi^is sanguinem
eius, non habebitis vitam in vobis. Et ideo panem nostrium, id est, Christum
dari nobis quo^idie petimus, vt qui in Christo manemus and vinimus, a
sanctificatione and corpore eius non recedamus. Therefore when he says, that
he lives for ever, whosoever shall eat of his bread, as it is manifest that
they do live, which touch or come near, unto his body, and by the right of
communication receive the sacrament of thanksgiving: so contrariwise, it is to
be feared, and to be prayed for, lest while any being sequestered, is separated
from ye body of Christ, he remain far from health, he himself threatening
and saying: except ye shall eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, you shall have no life in you. And therefore we pray daily, that our
bread, yt is to say, Christ may be given to us daily, that we which remain and
live in Christ, go not away from sanctification, and his body. In these
words, as in the former, Cyprian directly refers that text to our
spiritual communication with the body of Christ, by right of which
communication, we receive the sacrament thereof. And this participation of
Christ he calls Contingere and attingere corpus Christi, and not to touch his
body with our teeth or mouth in yt sacrament as M. Heskins dreameth. Here
follows Euthymius, of whose antiquity we have spoken in the first book.
Nevertheless we will examine his saying, which is this In 6. Joan. Duobus
modis, etc. Christ is said to be bread two ways, that is after his godhead,
and after his manhood, therefore when he had taught the manner, which is after
his godhead, now does he also teach the manner, which is after his manhood.
For he did not say, which I do give, but which I will give, for he would give
it in his last supper, when thanks being given, he took bread, and brake it,
and gave it to his disciples and said: take, eat, this is my body. M. Heskins
maruelleth that the adversaries cheeks wax not redd for shame, to see so
plain a sentence against them. But if we knew not that Master Heskins had
been as impudent as a friar, we might marvel, that he was not ashamed, first
to allege Euthymius, as a writer within 6. hundredth years after Christ, who
lived about the year of our Lord 1180. And secondly to make two breads of
that which Euthymius says, to be one bread after two manners. Finally,
although Euthymius referred this text to the sacrament, yet says he nothing
for the carnal presence, in as much as it is manifest, that Christ spoke there
of a spiritual communication of his flesh, or else all infantes are damned
that receive not the sacrament.

The fifth Chapter proceeds upon the same text, by S. Augustine, and
Chrysostom. Hesk.


S. Augustine is alleged De Agricultura agri Dominici, a treatise of no
account for the authority, Fulke.
being falsely entitled to Augustine, which was the work of a far later
writer. The words nevertheless are these: The table of thy spouse has whole
bread, and a holy cup, which bread although we have seen broken and bruised
in his passion, yet he remained whole in that his indiuided unity with his
father. Of this bread and of this cup, our Lord himself said: The bread
which I will give is my flesh for the life of the world, and the cup which I
will sanctify is my blood which shall be shed for you unto remission of sins.
This place is falsely and truncatly cited by M. Hesk. thus: Quem pane^ etsi
fractum co^minutumque vidimus, integer tamen cum ipso suo patre manet in
coelis. De quo pane dicit: panis, quem ego dabo, caro mea est pro mundi vita.
Which he Englisheth thus: which bread although we have seen broken and bruised
on ye cross: yet it abides with yt his father whole in heaven: of the which
bread he says, etc. Whereas ye very words are quem panem etsi fractum
comminunumque vidimus in passione, integer tamen mansit in illa sua indiuidua
vnitate. De isto pane, and de isto calice dicebat ipse Dominus. Panis quem ego
dedero caro (...) est pro saeculi vita, etc. Although this writer as it is
manifest to any man that will read his treatise, speaks only of the unity
of the Godhead of Christ, with his Father and the holy Ghost, notwithstanding,
the breaking of his body in his passion, which is represented in the sacrament:
yet M. Heskins, upon his own falsification, infers, that the body of Christ
was and is in three sundry places, on the Table or Altar, on the Cross, and
in heaven with his father. Yea, and he appealeth to the grammarian for the
nature of a Relative, That the same bread is on the table, which was broken on
the cross, and that which was broken on the cross, is it which is whole
sitting in heaven. Which, how vain a reason it is, when it is urged of yt
thing which has two natures united in one person, as our Savior Christ has,
I appeal from all grammarians to al Catholic divines: as in ye saying of
Christ, no man has ascended into heaven, but he that came down from heaven,
even the son of man, which is in heaven, Joan 9. Let M. Hesk. with ye
gra^marian urge the relative in this place, and he shall prove him self both an
Anabaptist, and a Marcionist. For Christ concerning his humanity came not down
out of heaven, neither was he in heaven according to his humanity when he was
on ye earth. But what stand we trifling about this testimony? Seeing Augustine
both in ye interpetation of this whole chapter is so copious, and upon the
Psalm. 98. in exposition of this text is so plain and direct against the carnal
presens of Christ's body in ye sacrament: Nisi quis etc. acceperunt illud
stulte, carn^liter illud cogitauerunt, and puta^eru^t quod praecifurus esset
Dominus particulas quas da^ de corpore suo and daturus illis, etc. Ille aute^
instruxit eos, and ait illic, spiritus est qui vinificat, caro aute^ nihil
predest. Verba quae loquatu^ su^ vobis, spiritus est and vita. Spiritualiter
intelligite, quae loquatus sum. Non hoc corpus quod videtis manducaturi estis,
and bibituri illum sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt, qui me crucifigent: sacramentum
aliquod vobis commendati: spiritualiter intellectum viuificabit vos* ^t si
necesse est illud visibiliter celebrari, oportet tamen inuisibiliter intelligi.
Except a man eat the flesh etc. They took it folishly, they imagined it
carnally, and thought that our Lord would have cut off certain pieces of his
(...) and have given them, etc. But he instructed them, and (...) unto them, It
is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The words which I
have spoken to you, are spirit and life. Understand you spiritually that which
I have spoken. You shall not eat this body which you see, and drink this
blood which they shall shed which shall crucify me: I have commended unto you
a certain sacrament or mystery, which being spiritually understood, shall
quicken you. Although it is necessary that the same be celebrated visibly, yet
must it be understood inuisibly. Likewise In 6. Joan. Tr. 27. Illi enim
putabant eum erogaturum corpus suum, ille autem dixit se ascensurum in Coelum
vtique integrum. Cum videatis filium hominis ascendentem vbi erat prius: certe
vel tunc videbitis quia non eo modo, quo putatis, erogat corpus suum: certe vel
tunc intelligetis, quia gratia eius non consumitur morsibus. (He speaks
plainly if they will understand him.) For they thought yt he would give his
body, but he said that he would ascend whole into heaven. When you shall see the
son of man ascend up where he was before, surely then at the least you shall
see, that he gives not his body after that manner that you think, surely then
at the length you shall understand, that his grace is not consumed with
bitings. If these places were not most manifest, even to the first eye yt
looks upon them, I might spend time in observing and noting out of them.

We come now to Chrysostom, who in his 45. Hom. in Joan. upon those words,
The bread which I will give is my flesh, says, The Jews that time took no
profit of those sayings, but we have taken the profit of the benefit.
Wherefore it is necessarily to be said, how wonderful the mysteries be, and
wherefore they were given, and what profit there is of them. And immediately
after, We are one body and members of his flesh and of his bones: and yet more
plainly, And that we might be converted into that flesh, not only by love,
but also in deed, it is brought to pass by the meat which he has granted
unto us. He adds also an other cause of the giving of this mystery: When he
would show forth his love toward us, he joined him self (...) his body, and
brought him self into one with us, that the (...) might be united with the
head. Finally he adioyneth a plain place for the proclamer: I would be your
brother, and for your sakes I took flesh and blood with you, and by what
things I was conjoined unto you, those things again I have given unto you.
Here he triumphs, as though the game were his, when in deed there is nothing
for his purpose, but much against it: For no one word of all these sentences
proves, that the sixth of John must be understood of the supper otherwise,
then as it is a sacrament of that feeding and conjunction of us with Christ,
which is therein described. And whereas he argues upon the last sentence,
Christ gave us that flesh by which he was joined to us, but he was joined to us
by very substantial flesh, therefore he gave us his very substantial flesh. I
confess it to be most true, for he gave his very substantial flesh to be
crucified for us. If he urge yt he gave his flesh in yt sacrament, although
Chrysostom says not so in this place directly, yet the manner of the
participation of his flesh must be such, as is the manner of his conjunction
with us, but yt is spiritual, by which he is the head, and we the members, and
yet united in one very substantial flesh: therefore the manner of
participation of his flesh in the sacrament, is also spiritual and not
carnal. Master Heskins rejects this participation to be the fruition of
the benefits of his body and blood crucified, because that (says he) is
common to all the sacraments, and not proper to this. But that the substance
of all sacraments is one, and the difference is in the manner of dispensation
of them, we have showed sufficiently in the first book, which were tedious
now to repeat. Wherefore we must now set down what Chrysostom speaks of
the blood of Christ. This blood makes that the kings image does flourish in
us. This blood does never suffer the beauty and nobility of the soul, which
it does always water and nourish, to fade or wax faint. For blood is not made
of meat soudenly, but first it is a certain other thing. But this blood at
the first does water the soul, and indue it with a certain great strength.
This mystical blood drives diuelles far off, and allureth Angels and the
Lord of Angels unto us. For when the diuelles see the Lords blood in us, they
are turned to flight, but the Angels run forth unto us. This blood being
shed did wash the whole world, whereof Paul to the Hebrews does make a long
process. This blood did purge the secret places, and the most holy place of
all. If then the figure of it had so great power in the temple of the Hebrews,
and in Egypt, being sprinkled upon the upper posts of the doors, much more
the verity. This blood did signify the golden altar. Without this blood the
chief priest durst not go into the inward secret places. This blood made the
priests. This blood in the figure purged sins, in which if it had so great
force, if death so feared the shadow, how much I pray thee will it fear the
truth it self? This blood is the health of our souls, with this blood our
soul is washed, with it she is decked, with it she is kindled. This blood
makes our mind cleerer then the fire, more shining then gold. The effusion
of this blood made heaven open. Truly the mysteries of the Church are
wonderful, the holy treasure house is wonderful. From Paradise a spring did
run, from thence sensible waters did flow: from this table comes out a
spring, which powers forth spiritual floods. Chrysostom in these words
does extol the excellency of the blood of Christ shed upon the cross, the
mystery whereof is celebrated and given to us in the sacrament, and therefore
he says, it is Mysticus sanguis mystical blood which we receive in the
sacrament, which word Mystical, M. Heskins a common falsarie, has left out in
his translation, to deceive the unlearned reader. He labors much to prove
that Chrysostom spoke in this long sentence of yt sacrament, which is
needless, for as he spoke of the sacrament, so spoke he of the passion of
Christ, and of the sacrifices and ceremonies of the old law, and all under
one name of blood. By which it is more then manifest, that he uses the name
of blood figuratively, and ambiguously, therefore nothing can be gathered
thereout, to fortify M. Heskins bill of the natural blood of Christ to be in
the challice. The honorable titles of the sacrament, prove no
transubstantiation nor carnal presence in this sacrament more then in the other.

The same Chrysostom upon Cap. 9. ad Heb. Hom. 16. shows how the blood of
Christ that purged the old sacrifices; is the same which is given us in the
sacrament of the new testament. Non enim corporalis erat mundatio, sed
spiritualis, and sanguis spiritualis, Quomodo hoc? Noune ex corpore manauis? Ex
corpore quidem, sed a spiritu sancto. Hoc vos sanguine non Moses, sed Christus
aspersit, per verbum quod dictum est, Hic est sanguis noui testamenti, in
remissionem peccarorum. For that was no corporal cleansing but spiritual, and
it was spiritual blood. How so? Did it not flow out of his body? It did in
deed flow out of his body, but from the holy spirit. Not Moses but Christ
did sprinkle you with this blood, by that word which was spoken: This is the
blood of the new testament for the remission of sins. Thus let Chrysostom
expound him self, touching the mystical or spiritual blood of Christ, which
both was offered in the old sacrifices, and now feeds us in the sacrament:
if it were in the old sacrifices naturally present, then is it so now, if the
virtue only was effectual, so is it also to us, and no need of
transubstantiation or carnal presence.

Hesk.
The sixth Chapter proceeds in the opening of the understanding of the same
text of S. John, by Beda and Cyrillus.

Fulke.
Although Beda our countriman were far out of ye compass of 600. years, and so
unfitly matched with Cyrillus a Lord of the higher house, yet speaks he
nothing for ye corporal presence of Christ's body in the sacrament, but
directly against it, His words upon this text of Saint John are these: Hunc
panem Dominus dedit, etc. This bread our Lord gave, when he delivered the
ministry of his body and blood unto his disciples, and when he offered him
self to his father on the altar of the cross. And where he says, for the
life of the world, we may not understand it for the elements, but for men that
are signified by the name of the world. In these words Beda according to the
custom of the old writers, and the doctrine of the Church of England in his
time, and long after, calls the sacrament, the mystery of the body and blood
of Christ, and not otherwise. Yet M. Heskins pythely does gather, that as he
calls the flesh of Christ on the cross, bread, and yet it is very flesh;
so the flesh of Christ in the sacrament is called bread, and yet it is very
flesh. Alas, this is such a poor begginge of that in question, videlicet, that
the flesh of Christ is in the sacrament according to his gross meaning, that
I am ashamed to hear it. Why might he not rather reason thus? the flesh of
Christ on the cross is called bread, and yet it is not naturally bread: even
so the bread of the sacrament is called flesh, and yet it is not natural
flesh. It is plain that bread, in that text of John is taken figuratively
for spiritual food, and so the flesh and blood of Christ on the cross is our
food, and the same is communicated to our faith in the sacrament.

Cyrillus in 6. Joan. by M. Heskins alleged, speaks never a word either of
the sacrament, or of Christ's corporal presence therein. Antiquus ille panis,
etc. The old bread was only a figure, an image and a shadow, neither did it
give to the corruptible body any thing, but a corruptible nutriment for a
little time. But I am that living and quickening bread for ever. And the
bread which I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the
world. Thou see how by little and little, he more and more opens him
self, and does set forth this wonderful mystery. He said, he was the
living and quickening bread, which should make the partakers of it without
corruption, and give them immortality. Now he says his flesh is that
bread, which he will give for the life of the world, and by which he will
quicken us that are partakers of the same: for truly, the quickening nature of
the WORD being joined to it by that unspeakable manner of union, makes it
quickening, and therefore this flesh does quicken them that are partakers of
it. For it casts forth death from them, and utterly expels destruction.
Master Heskins alleges two reasons to prove that Cyrillus speaks of the
sacrament, and neither of both worth a straw. First, because he calls it a
wonderful mystery, as though the incarnation of Christ whereof he speaks
expressly, were not a wonderful mystery. Secondly, By that he says the flesh
of Christ gives life to the partakers. For the proper partaking of Christ's
flesh, is in the receiving of this holy sacrament. As though we are not
partakers of Christ's flesh by faith, according to that saying of Augustine
upon the same place, Vt quid paras dentes and ventrem? creed and manducasti.
Why do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly? Believe and thou have eaten
etc. you see it is a poor help that he has out of Cyrillus, when he
speaks never a word for his cause nor of his cause.

Hesk.
The seventh Chapter ends the exposition of this text by Theophylact and Lyra.

A short answer shall serve this Chapter, these two Burgesses of the lower
house being late writers, speak favorably for Master Heskins bill. Fulk.
But their authority is so small, that we make none account of their speech,
seeing not only many in the lower house have spoken against it, but all the
whole upper house is manifestly contrary unto it. And whereas he charge
Oecolampadius for adding this word tantum, only, in his translation of
Theophylact, I doubt not but Oecolampadius followed either a truer copy, or a
better reason then Master Heskins in so many additions, detractions, and
falsifications of Doctors, which he has used in this work. Finally, where he
charge the adversaries with cauilling and slaundering; when they say that
Popish Priests make God: he himself slaundereth his adversaries, for we have
learned of their own writers, and namely of S. Bonauentura, that a Priest is,
creator sui creatori^, the creator of his creator, and that Christ is his
prisoner on the altar.

The eight Chapter declares, by whose authority and power, the sacrament is
consecrated and Christ's body made present. Hesk.


As though such blasphemous speeches as I have touched imediatly before, had
never ben uttered by Papists, Fulk.
M. Heskins stomaketh the matter, and rayleth throughout this Chapter against
his adversary, for charging ye priests with such arrogancy, as though they
took upon them to make God. Now concerning the purpose of the Chapter we
agree, that God and no man, Christ and not the minister, does consecrate the
sacrament, and make Christ's body and blood to be present. I might therefore
pass over his authorities, but that out of some of them he gathers also his
corporal presence and transubstantiation. The first is Damascen: De Orth. Fid.
Lib. 4. Ca. 14. If thou ask now how the bread is made the body of Christ, and
the wine and water the blood of Christ? I also answer thee: The holy Ghost
ever shadoweth, and works these things above speech and understanding: The
bread and wine are transsumed. This place Master Heskins notes for a plain
place, both for the presence and for transubstantiation. If it were as plain as
he would have it, yet is Damascen but a Burgess of the lower house, out of the
compass of the challenge. But whatsoever his opinion was of the presence,
certain it is that he knew not transubstantiation, which the Greeks long
after did not acknowledge. And though we take the word of transuming for
changing, turning, transmuting, or transelementing, which words the old
writers do sometimes use, yet mean they not change of one substance into
another, but of the nature and property of the food to be changed from
corporal to spiritual and not otherwise.

Next follows Chrysostom in 2: Tim. Ho. 2. Volo quiddam, etc. I will add a
certain thing plainly wonderful, and marvel ye not, neither be you
troubled. And what is this? The holy oblation whether Peter or Paul, or a
Priest of any manner of life do offer it, is even the same, which Christ gave
unto his disciples, and which the priests do now make. This has nothing less
then that. Why so? because men do not sanctify it but Christ which had
hallowed it before. For as the words which Christ spoke are the same which the
priests do now pronounce so also is the oblation. Here M. Hesk. cutteth of ye
tail of this sentence, for Chrysostoms words are: Ita and oblatio eadem est,
eademque baptismi ratio est, ado omnia in fide consistunt. So the oblation is
the same, and the same reason is of baptism, so all things consist in faith.
Mark here that M. Heskins conceleth that the change and consecration is the
same yt is in baptism, and the thing is received only by faith as in
baptism. And nothing else means Chrysostom in the second place by M.
Heskins cited, Hom. 30. de prod. The same Christ is now present which did
beutifie that table, he does also consecrate this. For it is not man, which by
consecration does make the things set forth on the table, the body and
blood of our Lord, but even Christ which was crucified for us, The words are
spoken by the mouth of the Priest, but by the power and grace of God they are
consecrated. This is (says he) my body, with this word the things set
forth are consecrated. Here we must note that Christ makes the bread and wine
his body and blood. We acknowledge he does so, for the faith of the worthy
receiver, as in the former sentence it is manifest.

Now comes S. Ambrose De benedict. Patr. c. 9. Who is then rische, but he in
whom is the depth of wisdom and knowledge? This rich man then is the treasure
of this fat bread, which who shall eat, he cannot hunger. This bread he
gave to his Apostles, that they should divide it to the believing people. And
now he gives the same to us, which he being the Priest does consecrate
with his own words. This bread then is made the meat of the Saints. Here
again M. Heskins cutteth off that which likes him not for it follows:
Possumus and ipsium Dominum accipere qui sua^ carnem nobis dedit. Sicut ipse
ait, ego sunt panis vitae. Ille enim accipit qui scipsum probat: qui autem
accipit, non moritur peccatoris morte, quia panis hic remissio peccatorum est.
We may receive even the Lord himself which has given us his flesh, even as
he himself says, I am ye bread of life. For he receives him, yt examineth
himself, and he which receives him dies not the death of a sinner, for this
bread is the remission of sins. This place does first overthrow M. Heskins
dream of two breades. Secondly, the Papists assertion, that wicked men
receive the body of Christ. And thirdly teaches, that to eat Christ and his
flesh, is to receive forgiveness of sins, which M. Heskins and the Papists
deny.

Another place of Ambrose is alleged. li. 4. de sacra. Ca. 4. Let us then
teach this. How can that which is bread be the body of Christ? By
consecration. By what and whose words then is the consecration? Of our Lord
Jesus. For all the other things that be said, praise is given to God, petition
is made in prayer for the people, for Kings, and for the rest: but when it is
come to that, the honorable sacrament is made, now the Priest uses not his
own words, but he uses the words of Christ. Therefore the word of Christ
makes this sacrament. This is noted to be a plain place for M. Iuell, but for
what purpose, I cannot tell, except it be to prove that he will not deny, that
the sacrament is consecrated and made the body of Christ to the worthy
receiver, by the words of Christ, as before. Eusebius Emissenus has the next
place in Hom. Pasc. The invisible Priest with his word, by a secreat power,
turns the visible cratures into the substance of his body and blood. This
place being more apparent for his transubstantiation then any that he has
alleged, he urges not, nor gathers of it, but only that Christ is the
author of the consecration and conversion. As for ye conversion, I think his
conscience did tell him, that it was not of the substance, but of the use of
things, a spiritual and not a corporal change, as both Eusebius and other
writers do sufficiently expound what manner of mutation it is. The last man is
Cyprian De Caen Dom. It were better for them a millstone to be tied to their
necks, and to be drowned in the Sea, then with an unwashed conscience to take
the morsel at the hand of our Lord, who until this day does create, and
sanctify, and bless, and to the godly receivers divide this his most true,
and most holy body. Here M. Heskins urges, that he creates not an
imaginatiue body, but his most true body. But ye blind man sees not, that
either this creation is figurative, or else it overthrows
transsubstantiation. For to create, is not to change one substance into
another, but to make a substance of nothing. Secondly, that Christ divides his
body, but to ye godly receivers. Finally, in the same Sermon he says: that
all this mystery is wrought by faith. Haec quotie^ agimus, etc. So often as we
do these things, we do not sharpen our teeth to byte, but with a sincere
faith, we break and divide this holy bread.

To conclude this Chapter, seeing M. Heskins has labored so well to prove
that Christ only and not ye priest does consecrate, and so often charge us
with slaundering them, to make God and the body of Christ, I would demand,
wherefore the Bishop, when he gives them the order of Priesthood, gives them
power to consecrate, saying: Accip^ potestatem consecrandi, and offerend^ pro
vinit and defunctis: Take authority to consecrate, to offer for the quick and
the dead. If the Priest cannot consecrat, whereto serves this power? If the
Priest take upon him to consecrat Christ God and man, how are we charged with
slaundering of them?

Hesk.
The ninth Chapter expounds the next text that follows in Saint John.

Fulk.
The text which he takes upon him to expound in this Chapter is this: The Jews
strove among them selves, saying: How can this fellow give us his flesh to
eat? And first he says, that they being carnal, could not understand the
spiritual talk of Christ, wherein as he says truly, so he speaks
contrary to him self. For he will have those words to be spoken carnally.
They could not understand, (says he) because they did not believe, and
therefore they questioned how it might be, even as the Pseudochristians do. How
can the body of Christ be in the sacrament under so little a piece of bread?
etc. But the answer to all their questions is, that they be don by the power
of God. And if you proceed, to enquire of his will, he has declared it in
these words, the bread which I will give is my flesh, not a fantastical,
nor a mathematical, or figurative flesh, but that same flesh^ that I will give
for the life of the world. But if we proceed to demand further, how he
proves, that he will give yt flesh to be eaten with our mouth, carnally in the
sacrament: then is he at a stay; he can go no further. We doubt not of the
power of God, we will extend his will no further then his word. For to eat the
flesh of Christ is not to eat it with our mouths, but with our hearts, by
faith, as Augustine upon the same text teaches us. Hoc est ergo manducare
illam escam, and illum bibere ponum, in Christo manner, and illum manentem in
se habere. Ac per hoc qui non manet in Christo, and in quo non manet Christus,
procul dubio nec manducat spiritualiter carnem eius, nec bibit cius sanguine^,
licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat dentibus sacramentum corporis and
sanguinis Christie sed magis tant rei sacramentum ad iudicium sibi manducat and
bibit. This is therefore to eat that meat, and to drink that drink, to
abide in Christ, and to have him abiding in them. And by this, he that abides
not in Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, out of doubt does neither
spiritually eat his flesh, nor drink his blood, although carnally, and visibly
he press with his teeth the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ: but
rather he eats and drinks the sacrament of so great a thing to his own
condemnation. Thus Augustine teaches, how the flesh of Christ is eaten, and
by whom, and what difference between the flesh and blood of Christ, and the
sacrament thereof, in all those points directly contrary to the Papists,
which affirm, that the flesh of Christ is eaten with the mouth, and that it is
eaten of the wicked, and last of all, that the sacrament of the flesh of
Christ, and his flesh is all one.

The tenth Chapter proving against the adversaries that the body of Christ may
be and is in more places then one as once. Hesk.


M. Heskins takes occasion of the doubtful (how) of ye Jews, to answer ye
proclaimers (how) that is, Fulke.
how Christ's body may be in a thousand places and more at once: and first he
trifleth of ye number of places, as though he required no less then a
thousand: then he bableth against natural Philosophy, as though our faith were
builded thereupon, whereas the Papists, and especially the schoolmen, (even to
lothsomnesse) do reason out of natural philosophy in the greatest mysteries of
faith. But to put him out of doubt, we buyld upon the Scripture our faith, of
the truth of Christ's body, that it cannot be in more places then one,
because the Apostle says, that in respect of his human nature, he was made
like to his brethren in all things, sin excepted: Heb. 2. And therefore,
where as he will answer us first by Ambrose, De inition. Mist. Cap. Quid hic,
etc. What seek thou here the order of nature in Christ's body, seeing the
self same our Lord Jesus besides nature was borne of a virgin? I say, he
answers nothing to the purpose: for neither does Ambrose speak of the
presence of his body in more places then one, nor of any carnal presence in
the sacrament, but of a mystical, divine, and significatiue presence, as is
manifest by his words that follow immediately, which M. Heskins, as his
custom is, has craftily suppressed. Vera vtique, car^ Christi, que crucifixa
est, quae sepulta est: vere ergo carnis illius sacramentum est. Ipse clamat
Dominus Jesus: Hoc est corpus meum: Ante benedictionem verborum Coelestium alia
species nominatur, post consecrationem corpus Christi significatur. Ipse dicit
sanguinem suum: ante consecrationem aliud dicitur, post consecrationem sanguis
nuncupatur. It was the true flesh of Christ which was crucified, which was
buried: therefore it is truly, the sacrament of that flesh. Our Lord Jesus
him self cries: This is my body: before the blessing of the heavenly words,
it is called another kind, after the consecration, the body of Christ is
signified. He him self says, it is his blood: before consecration it is
called another thing, after consecration it is called blood. By this place you
see, that ye Lords supper is the sacrament of his true flesh that was
crucified, and that the body of Christ is signified by it. Here is no one
word sounding either to the carnal presence* or to the presence in many
places.

His second proof is out of Augustine, that Christ was both in his own hands,
and in his twelve Apostles hands, in Psalm. 33. And he was borne in his own
hands. But brethren, how may this be done in man, who can understand? who is
borne in his own hands? A man may be carried in the hands of other men, in
his own hands no man is borne. How it may be understood in David,
according to the letter, we find not. But in Christ we find it. For Christ was
borne in his own hands, when he commending his own body said: this is my
body. I pass over, that he translateth, comendans ipsum corpus, giving forth
the self same body. But how fraudulently he abuses the authority of
Augustine, it is manifest by that which follows, and ipse se portabat quodam
modo cum diceret, hoc est corpus meum. And he carried him self after a certain
manner, when he said: this is my body. These words declare, that Augustine
would not teach, that Christ absolutely did bear him self in his hands, as
M. Heskins would bear us in hand, but after a certain manner. And no man
writes so plainly, of the necessity of Christ's body to be in one place, as
he. I will cite one only short place, to avoid tediousness: In Joan. Cap. 7.
Tr. 30. Sursum est Dominus, sed etiam hic, and veritas Dominus. Corpus enim
Domini, in quo resurrexit, vno loco esse potesti veritas eius vbique diffusa
est. The Lord is above, and he is also here, and the Lord is truth. For the
Lords body, in which he rose again, can be but in one place, but his truth
is spread over all places. This saying, beside that it limitteth the body of
Christ to one place, will expound the other sayings, which he brings out of
Chrysostom, Basil, etc. that Christ is both in heaven and on earth.

The next proof is out of the Liturgies of Basil and Chrysostom, which he
calls their masses, although written by neither of them. The words in effect
are all one, and therefore it were vain to rehearse them both: Look o Lord
Jesus Christ our God, from thy holy habitation, and from the seat of the glory
of thy kingdom, and come to sanctify us, which sit above with thy father,
and art present with us beneath inuisibly, vouchsafe with thy mighty hand to
give unto us thy immaculate body and precious blood, and by us to all thy
people. The distinction of the two natures in Christ, will soon answer this
presence of Christ, both in heaven and in earth, as in the late rehearsed
sentence of Augustine. And Basil him self, in his book de Spiritu Sancto Cap.
22. proves the Holy Ghost to be God, because he is reported in Scripture to
be present in diverse places at once, so that, except we will with Eutyches
overthrow the truth of Christ's body, we must hold that it is in one only
place at one time, and not in many places, or every where.

But Chrysostom (I trow) shall help him In 10. Heb. Hom. 17. This sacrifice
is an exemplar of that, we offer the self same always. Neither do we now
offer one Lamb, and tomorrow another, but the self same thing always.
Wherefore this sacrifice is one. Or else by this reason, because it is offered
in many places, there are many Christ's. Not so, but one Christ is every where,
both here being full, and there full, even one body And as he, that is every
where offered, is one body, and not many bodies: Even so also is it one
sacrifice.

First, M. Heskins here, I know not for what cause, peruerteth the order of
Chrysostomes words, for where he says: Alioqui hac ratione, Heskins sets
them down vn^m est hoc sacrificium hac ratione. Alicqui, etc. Secondly, which
is no new thing in him, he leaves out that which is the resolution of all
this doubtful disputation, namely, that which follows: Hoc autem quod
facimus in commemorationem quidem fit eius, quod factum est. Hoc enim sacite,
inquit in meam commemorationem. Non aliud sacrificium sicut Pontifex, sed
idipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordationem sacrificij operamur. But this
which we do is done truly in remembrance of that which was done before. For do
this (says he) in remembrance of me. We do not offer another sacrifice, as
the high Priest, but the self same always, but rather we exercise the
remembrance of the sacrifice.

Here is now that sacrifice which is offered every where, by a necessary
correction, brought to the remembrance of that sacrifice, which was once
offered on the cross, but is celebrated every where in the ministration of the
sacrament. And the same words afterward falsely ascribed to Ambrose, have the
same interpretation. The other place upon the 38. Psalm, differs not in
sense, That Christ is offered on earth, when his body is offered. For he
speaks but of a remembrance, or commemoration of the sacrifice of Christ,
even as Chrysostom, and as he him self teaches, lib. 4. Chap. 5. de Sacram.
The words of the Priest in the celebration. Fac nobis (inquit) haenc
oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem: quod est figura corporis and
sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Make (says he) this oblation unto us
ascribed reasonable, acceptable: which thing is the figure of the body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. This was the Priest wont to say in the
celebration of the supper in Saint Ambrose time. And again Chap. 6. Ergo
memores gloriosissimae eius passionis, and ab inferis resurrectionis, and in
Caelum ascensionis, offerimus tibi hanc immaculatam hostiam, rationabilem
hostiam, incruentam hostiam, hunc panem sanctum, and calicem vitae aeternae,
etc. Therefore being mindful of his most glorious passion and resurrection
from hell, and ascension into heaven, we offer unto thee this undefiled
sacrifice, this reasonable sacrifice, this unbloody sacrifice, this holy
bread, and cup of aeternall life. We see therefore, that the sacrifice was a
remembrance and thanksgiving, for the only true sacrifice of Christ once
offered by him self for all.

To conclude, because I will omit Bernard a late writer, not to be heard in
this controversy: Chrysostom in his book de Sacerdotio, lib. 3. speaks not
contrary to him self in other places, saying: O miracle, O the goodness of
God, he that sits above with his father in the same point of time, is
handled with the hands of all, and delivers himself to them that will
receive him and embrace him. Wherefore, this hyperbolical exclamation proves
no more, yt Christ's body is both in heaven and on earth: then these words of
his prove that our bodies are both in heaven and earth, ad Pop. Antioch. Hom.
55. Morduca me, dixi, bibe me, and te sarsum habeo, and deorsum tibi connector.
I said eat me, drink me. I have thee both above, and am knitt to thee also
beneath. Hitherto therefore nothing is brought to prove that Christ's body may
be in more places then one.

Hesk.
The eleventh Chapter proves, that as two bodies may be in one place: so the
body of Christ being one, may be in diverse places.

Fulk.
M. Heskins in this Chapter like a monsterous Giant, cries open battle against
natural Philosophy and reason, and thinks he has a sure shield to fight
under the omnipotency of God. But for as much as the law of nature is the
law and ordinance of God, he does nothing else, but set the power of God
against his will and decree, in making whereof did concur, his power,
wisdom, and goodness. God has decreede that one body can be but in one place
at one time, and that two bodies cannot occupy one proper place at once, nor
one body without comixtion of parts, be in another body. And therefore both
Cranmer and Oecolampadius have truly said, that it is impossible those
things should be otherwise, then God has decreed them. Now rises up this
Gargantua, and will prove by scripture, that one body may be in another, and
two bodies in one place, and alleges the text Joan 20. that Jesus came, the
doors being shutt, and stood in the midst of them and said, peace be with
you, and this being testified for a miraculous coming in of Christ, proves
that he so coming in passed through door or wall, as his pleasure was to do.
Although the words of the text (...) after the doors were shutt, does not
enforce us to acknowledge any miracle, but that he might be let in of the
porter at even, after the doors were shutt up for fear of the Jews soudein
breaking in upon the Disciples that were gathered together in that place: yet
I will willingly acknowledge a miraculous coming in of Christ, but no passing
through the bordes of the door, or stones of the wall: but that by his divine
power, he did either open the door and shutt it immediately after he was passed
through, or else at the uttermost, that the substance of the door or wall gave
place to his divine presence, and immediately returned to his natural state and
place.

And whereas M. Heskins, no less impudently then unlearnedly, does charge
Cranmer with falsifying the Scripture, where he affirms, that Christ might as
well come into the house when the door was shutt, as the Apostles could go out
of prison, the door being shutt, Act. 5. he does nothing else but bewray his
great folly, joined with no less malice against the truth. Cranmer was not
ignorant, that the Angel opened the door to the Apostles, and yet shutt it
again so close, that it could not be perceived that it had been opened, even
^o might the Angel do at the passage of our Savior Christ. What absurdity
or repugnance is here, but in such an absurd persons ear, as Heskins is, that
overthrows all law and order of nature to establish his brutish, and
monstrous error.

But now we shall hear these monsters brought forth of the doctors, which
Scripture has not, and nature abhors: And first shall be Chrysostom Hom. de
Joan. Bapt. Sancta Maria, beata Maria, etc. Holy Maria, blessed Marie, both a
mother, and a virgin. She was a virgin before birth, a virgin after birth.
I marvel at this, how of a virgin, a virgin should be borne, and after the
birth of a virgin* the mother should be a virgin. Will you know how he was
borne of a virgin, and after the birth, how she was both a mother and a
virgin? The doors were shutt, and Jesus entered in. No man doubts, but that
the doors were shutt, he that entered by the doors that were shutt, was no
fantasy, he was no spirit, he was verily a body. For what said he? look and
see, that a spirit has no flesh and bones, as ye see me have. He had flesh,
he had bones, and the doors were shutt. How did flesh and bones enter when the
doors were shutt? The doors are shutt, and he does enter, whom we saw not
go in. How did he go in? all things are close, there is no place by the which
he might go in, and yet he is within, which entered in. Thou know in how it
was done, and do refer it to the omnipotency of God. Give this also to
the omnipotency of God, that he was borne of a virgin. In these words
Chrysostom says, that Christ might as well be borne of a Virgin, as he
entered into the house after the doors was shut, this was not without a
miracle, and no more was that. But for two bodies in one place at one instant,
he speaks nothing as yet. No more does Hieronyme In Apol. cont. Iouin.
Respondeant mihi etc. Let them answer me how Jesus entered in, the doors
being shut, when he showed his hands to be felt, and his side to be
considered, and showed both flesh and bones, least the truth of his body
should be thought to be a fantasy: And I will answer how Saint Marie is
both mother and a Virgin, a Virgin before birth, a mother before she was
known of man.

Upon these places Master Heskins does infer, that if the doors did open as
the going in of Christ, which (he says) is a shaddowing of the miracle, and a
falsifying of the scriptures, as though it were not miraculous enough, except
it took away the truth of Christ's body, and ouerthrewe the immutable decree
of GOD, then his entering In, could not prove that the clausures of the
virginity (I use his own words) of the mother of Christ notwithstanding his
birth remained always closed, which the Doctors intended to prove. I would
not for shamefastness, enter into discourse of the secrets of virginity, and
last of all the high mysteries of the incarnation and nativity of our savior
Christ, of the immaculate Virgin Marie, in any such Physical questions, but
that I am driven unto it by this shameless adversary. And yet will I only
allege the authority of the scripture, referring the collection to the
reverent and shamefast consideration of the honest reader. Saint Luke writes
of his presentation at Jerusalem. As it is written in the law of the Lord,
every manchilde that first opens the matrice, shall be called holy to the
Lord. Luke 2. According to this text, the miracle of his nativity preserving
her virginity, and of his entering in, the doors being shut, are very like
in deed, and agreeable to the Doctors meaning.

But he proceeds with Chrysostomes authority, Hom. 86. in Joan. Dignum
autem dubitatione est etc. It is worthy of doubt, how the incorruptible body
did receive the form of the nails, and could be touched with mortal hand.
But let not this trouble thee. For this was of permission. For that body being
so subtle and light, that it might enter in the doors being shut, was void
of all grossness or thickness: but that his resurrection might be believed,
he showed him self such a one. And that thou might understand, that it was
even he that was crucified, that none other did rise for him, therefore he
roase again with the tokens of the cross. Except we understand Chrysostom
favorably in this place, where he denies the glorified body of Christ to
have any thickness, but that it might pearce through all things as a spirit,
we shall make him author of a great heresy, both concerning the body of
Christ, and concerning our bodies which after the resurrection, must be made
conformable to his glorious body, Philip. 3. But in an other place, as we
shall hear afterward, he does either expound or correct him self in this
matter. And yet this that he says here, helps not Master Heskins one whit,
and that for two causes, one, for that he speaks here of the glorified
body of Christ, who instituted his sacrament before his body was glorified.

An other cause, for that he does not here make two bodies in one place, or
one body in an other, but to avoid that absurdity, does transfourme the
body of Christ into the subtlety and thinness of a spirit. But in an other
sentence, De resurrect. Hom. 9. he is of an other mind concerning the body of
Christ. Non est meum ludificare phantasmate, vanam imaginem visus si timet,
veritatem corporis manus and digitus exploret. Potest fortassis aliqua oculos
caligo decipere, palpatio corporalis verum corpus agnoscat. Spiritus, inquit,
carnem and ossa non habet sicut me videtis habere: Quod Ostia clausa a
penetrani, sola est virtus Diuini spiritus, non sola carnis substantia. It is
not my property to delude my disciples with a fantasy, if your sight fear a
vain image, let your hand and fingers try out the truth of my body. Some
myste peradventure may deceive the eyes, let bodily handling acknowledge a true
body. A spirit (says he) has neither flesh nor bones, as you see me to
have. That I pierced through the doors being shut, it is the only power of
the divine spirit, not the only substance of the flesh. In these words, he
ascribes it to the only power of his divine spirit, that he passed through
when the doors were shut, and not to the subtlety of his glorified body, as
in the former sentence. Likewise in Joan. Hom. 90. Qui intrauit per ostia
clausa, non erat phantasma, non erat spiritus, vere corpus erat. He that
entered in by the doors being shut, was no fantasy, he was no spirit, he
was a body truly and in deed. But we must pass over unto Saint Ambrose, in
Luc. lib. 10. cap. 4. Habuit admirandi causam Thomas etc. Thomas had a cause to
marvel, when he saw all things being shut up and closed, the body of
Christ by clausures without all ways for body to enter, the joints being
unbroken, to be entered in amongst them. And therefore it was a wonder, how
the corporal nature passed through the impenetrable body, with an invisible
coming, but with invisible beholding, easy to be touched, hard to be judged.
In these words of Saint Ambrose, nothing can be certainly gathered, because
he does not him self determine after what manner the body of Christ came in,
but only shows what cause Thomas had to doubt and marvel, saving that in an
other place, I find him write suspitiously of the truth of the body of
Christ, and of the true properties thereof. For in his book De mysterijs
initiandis Cap. 9. he has these words, speaking of the body of Christ:
Corpus enim Dei corpus est spirituale, Corpus Christi corpus est diuini
spiritus. The body of GOD is a spiritual body. The body of Christ is the body
of a divine spirit. These sayings for reverence of the Authors, may have a
gentle construction, but otherwise they are not directly consonant to the
Catholic confession of the truth of Christ's body, and the properties
thereof, remaining even after his Assention, as has been discussed by the
scriptures, especially after the Church was troubled with the heresies of the
Eutychians and Monotholites.

Now follows Saint Augustine, De agone Christiano Cap. 24. Nec eos audiamus
etc. Neither let us give ear to them that deny, that the body of Christ is
risen again of such quality, as it was put into the grave. Neither let is
move us that it is written that he appeared soudenly to his disciples after
the doors were shut, that therefore we should deny it to be an humane body,
because we see that contrary to the nature of this body, it entered by the
doors that were shut, for all things are possible to GOD. For if he could
before his passion make it as clear as the brightness of the Sun, wherefore
could he not after his passion, also in a moment of time, bring it into as much
subtlety as he would, that he might enter in by the doors that were shut.

Here first of all Master Heskins according to his accustomed manner of
falsification, translateth tale corpus, the same body, as though there were no
difference between substance: and quality. Secondly it is manifest, that
Augustine in this place, judges (as in other places most plainly) that the
body of Christ now glorified, retayneth not only the substance, but also
the properties and qualities of a true body, which he had before he suffered.
Although for that moment, he supposes the body of Christ might be
subtiliated, by his Divine power, to pass through the doors being shut, and
yet affirms nothing directly, that it was so, but rather that it might be
so. Whereas more probably he might have thought, that either the door opened:
or the nature of the boordes gave place, then that the body of Christ for the
time was altered.

The like place he has in him Epistle to Volusianus, which I marvel Master
Heskins has not noted: Ep. 3. Ipsa virtus per inuiolatae matris virginea
viscera membra infantis duty, quae posted per clausa ostia membra i^uenis
introduxis. The same power brought forth his body being an infant, by the
Virginal bowels of his undefiled mother, which afterward brought in his body
being a yong-man, by the doors that were shut. Of his nativity whereunto this
Doctor does compare his coming in, after the doors were shut, I have showed
before how it was, out of the scripture. But let us hear what Cyrillus says
of ye same matter, In Joan. lib. 12. cap* 53. clausu foribus etc. After the
gates were shut, the Lord by his almighty power, the nature of things being
overcome, soudenly entered unto his disciples: let no man therefore enquire, how
the body of our Lord entered in, after the gates were shut, when he may
understand that these things are described by the Evangelist not of a bare man
a^ we be now, bu^ of the almighty son of God. For seeing he is true God, he
is not subject to the law of nature, which thing did appear in other his
miracles also. Here Master Heskin^ after his wonted sync^^itie, translateth
(...), through the gates being shut, otherwise the place of Cyrill is of our
side, that he changes not the nature of his body, but overcame the nature of
other things, and so made a passage for him self, although the gates were
shut, as in his other (...) he changed not the nature of his body* when he
walked on the waters. (...) the nature of the waters. He altered not the
truth of his body, when he arose out of the sepulcher, but removed the stone
from the door thereof and. For it stood Cyrillus upon: by reason of the
Eutychian ^eresie, to preserve in all thing the true properties of the body of
Christ, which in all places he does ^onstantly affirm. But the elder fathers,
before they (...) by that here^ie to search out the truth did (...) sometimes
(...) sometimes inconsideratly was beside them, affirms, that he^ (...)
already (...), Hilariu^ does not only passed through the Lands walle^ with his
body, in Psalm. 55. but al^^ that his body felt (...) pain in the time of his
passion: In. Psalm. 4^ (...) and in other p^aces: which i^ a gro^^e and wicked
error, whereunto he was carried, while he studied too much to advance his
Divinity, in the humane nature.

How be it the truth of his natural body by other Doctors was in all times
affirmed, especially after Eutyches; had broched his wicked heresy. First
Origin, as it is cited by Pamphilus in his apollogie out of his book
Peria^chie translated by Ruffinus, thus writes: Corpus assumpfit nostro
corpori simile: eo solo differens, quod natum ex virgin espiritu sancto est.
He took upon him a body like unto our body: in this point only differing, that
it was borne of a virgin by the holy Ghost. This place would the rather be
noted, because it contains the consent of three ancient Doctors, of several
ages. Origenes, Pamphilus, and Ruffinus. Afterward in the counsel of Chalcedon,
and the sixth of Constantinople, they were condemned heretics, which denied
either the truth of the humane nature of Christ, or the true properties
thereof. At in this latter counsel was allowed the Epistle of Leo, Ad
Flauianum written in time of the former, wherein he writes: Simul suit and
altitud^ Deitatis, and humilitas carnis, seruante vtraque natura et^am post
aditatationem, fine defectu, proprietatem suam. Together be both the height of
the Godhead, and the humility of the flesh, both the natures, even after the
adiu^^rion, keeping the property without defect. And again, Nusqu^m (...)
differentia naturarum propter vnitatem, sed potius salua proprietate (...)
^^turae in vnum personam, vnam subsistentium concurrente. In no place taking
away the difference of the natures, because of the unity, but rather having
the propriety of both the natures, concurring in one person, one subsistence.

Those testimonies (...) show the judgment of the Church concerning this
matter, when just occasion was given, narrowly to search out the truth in the
conclusion of this Chapter, Master Heskins yielding a reason of his travel in
this matter, alleges two causes, the one that the miracle might not be
shadowed the other, that he might show the works of Christ to be above
nature. And both these might stand without his labor. For it was a miracle
above nature, that the doors of their own accord, opened to our savior
Christ at his entry, as when Peter also came forth of the prison Acts 12.
But whereas he brings in an example of the eternity of the world, which is
held by some natural philosophers, to prove that Gods works are above nature,
he shows a gross capacity, that can not put a difference between the
errors of natural Philosophers, and the true law and order of nature made by
God himself, which is undoubtedly known to all wise men, as in these
propositions now in question. For it is not the opinion of philosophers we
stand upon, but upon the truth of things natural, which either sense or
first intellections does manifestly approve unto us. For as Tertullian says,
speaking of the truth of Christ's body: Non lic^t nobis in dubam sensus istos
reuocare; n^ and in Christ^ d^ side illoru^ deliberemus. It is not lawful for
us to call in doubt these senses, least in Christ also we should stand in
deliberation of the credit of them. The like is to be judged of such truth in
natural causes* as Christ the true light has kindled in the minds of
natural men, to see the works of God in his creatures, lest beside horrible
confusion of all things, we be driven also into blasphemou^ errour^.

Hesk.
The twelfth Chapter answers certain objections tha^ (...) to imp^^ge the
Catholic doctrine of this matter.

Fulke.
In the beginning of this Chapter* he says, there was never heretics but had
some show of arguments to auouche his heresy, and brings in diverse
examples, only the proclaymer, made no argument in his (...) for yt he would
have the people receive his bare proclamation. What arguments he used, let the
world judge and the Papists if they can, study to answer him. But
Oecolampadius (he says,) has heaped up scriptures to prove the ascension of
Christ, which the Papists do grant, and yet acknowledge his presence on the
earth in the sacrament: as though his departing out of the world, and presence
in the world concerning his bodily presence, could stand together. Then he
flies to his divine power, by which he is able to be present in diverse
places, as well as do such and such miracles as he rehearses, and wishes that
we should not be so straight and cruel to the body of Christ, as to give it no
greater prerogative, then unto any other body. Verily we do acknowledge as
great prerogative thereof, as he himself has given it, whereof we have
understanding by his holy word, and otherwise it were madness in us, to take
upon us to be liberal to him which gives all things. And if we found as good
authority for the vbiquitie, or plurality of placing of his body, as we find
for the feeding us thereby into eternal life, we would as easily confess the
one, as we do the other. But we find not in deed (as M. Heskins says) that
he himself has given or would give his body that prerogative, to be every
where, or in more places then one at once. As for the possibility, we extend
it no further then his will. We know he can do what soever he will. And many
things we know he cannot do, because he will not. But M. Heskins to assure us
of his will, has nothing to bring, but yt which is all the controversy, and
which most impudently he affirms, that he has proved both by scriptures and
doctors, that Christ has caused his body to be in diverse places at one time,
which neither scripture nor any Doctor of antiquity ever did affirm in
proper manner of speaking, otherwise in figurative speech, we may truly say we
eat in the sacrament the body of Christ, which is in heaven, when to speak
properly, and without figure, we eat but the bread, which to the faithful
receiver is a sacrament, and seal of our spiritual nourishment, which we
receive of his flesh and blood, after a divine and unspeakable manner unto
eternal life: says rather lifting us up into heaven, then bringing Christ's
body into the earth.

Master Heskins says, the scriptures that say Christ is in heaven, speak
without exclusiues, or exceptiues, and therefore there is no denial employed,
but that he may be believed to be also on the earth in the sacrament:

When Peter in the Acts 3. affirms that Christ must be contained in heaven,
(which is meant of his humanity) until the time of restoring of all things:
is not this an exclusion of all other places or beeings of his humanity? When
Paul to the Colossians, Colo. 3. wills them to seek those things that are
above, and where Christ is at the right hand of God, to set their minds on
things above, and not on things upon the earth: is not the reason, because
Christ concerning his humanity, is above and not upon earth? Is not this an
exclusive and exception? When Christ says not only, I go to my father, but
also I leave the world Joan. 16. Which saying the Apostles confessed to be
plain, and without all parable. Is not this a manifest exclusion of his bodily
presence from the world? So that it is manifest, that this ascension and
abiding in heaven, concerning his humane nature, in which he ascended, is an
excluding and shutting out, and denying of all other places or presences of his
body, then to be in heaven only. But now that he has thus tombled up the
authorities of the scripture, he will take in hand to answer the objections
brought out of the Doctors. And first shall be the saying of Augustine Ad
Dardanum ep. 57. Which place contrary to his bragg in the beginning, he
alleges truncatly, and by half, beginning at the midst thereof. But this
place is in Augustine: Et sic venturus est, illa angelica voce testante,
quemadmodum ire visus est in Coelum, id est, in eadem carnis forma atque
substantia, cui profecto immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstulis. Secundum
hanc formam non est putandus vbique diffusus. And he shall come even so (as
that voice of the Angel does testify.) even as he was seen to go into heaven,
that is, in the same form and substance of his flesh, to which truly, he
has given immortality, but he has not taken the nature from it. According to
this form, he is not thought, to be diffused in all places. All this has
Heskins left out, and begins thus: Cauendum est enim, no ita veritatem
astru^mu^ hominis, vt veritatem corporis auferamus. Non est enim consequens, vt
quod no Deo est, ita sit vbique vt Deus. For we must beware that we do not so
affirm the Deity of the man, that we take away the truth of his body. For it
is no consequent, that, that which is in God, should so be every where as God
is. Note here, that Saint Augustine does not only flatly deny the vbiquitie
of Christ's body, but also affirms that it reteineth still the nature of a
body, which is to be contained in one only place. Again he says in the
same Epistle Jesus vbique per id quod Deus est: in coelo autem per id quod homo
est. Jesus by that he is God is every where: by that he is man, he is in
heaven. Now let us hear, how wisely Master Heskins will avoid this
authority. First he says, that Augustine in this epistle, speaks not of
the sacrament, and therefore these sentences make not against that matter.

But when Augustine speaks generally of the body of Christ, that it
reteineth the nature of a body, that it is not every where, etc. he does not
except the sacrament. Although it is false, that Heskins says, for in the
latter end of that Epistle he has these words: Huius corporis caput est
Christus, huius corporis vnitas nostro sacrificio commendatur. The head of this
body is Christ, the unity of this body is commended in our sacrifice.

By sacrifice (as Master Heskins will confess) he means the celebration of
the sacrament. Wherefore he forgate not the sacrament in that Epistle, but that
he might have made exception thereof, if he had thought good. The second
answer of Master Heskins is a balde distinction, that a thing may be at one
time in many places two ways, the one is by nature, the other by gift. By
nature he confesses that the body of Christ can not be in two places, but by
gift it may be every where, or in as many places as he will: and then
brings many examples to show that CHRIST'S body has many properties by
gift, which it has not by nature. And in this distinction he triumphs out
of measure.

But the lewd sophister will not see that Saint Augustine denies to Christ's
body his imagined gift, and affirms his denied nature to remain. Cui (says
he) profecto immortalitatem dedit, naturam non abstudit: to which flesh he
has given immortality, but not taken away the nature of it. Does not
Augustine here plainly deny the gift of vbiquitie, affirming the nature to
remain concerning the circum scription of place? You see this very place to
overthrow his blind distinction.

Now follows another place out of this Epistle to Dardanus, in which he
being such an impudent falsarie, as we have so often discovered, yet blusheth
not to accuse Oecolampadius for falsifying of Aug. by a subtle addition.
Spacia locorum toll corporibus, nusquaem erunt, and quia nusquam erunt, nec
erunt. Toll ipsa corpora qualitatibus corporum, non erit vbi fint, and ideo
non alibi, quam in caelo corpore fate^^r Christum. Take the spaces of places
from bodies and they shall be no where, and because they shall be no where, they
shall not be at al. Take the same bodies from the qualities of bodies, and there
shall no place be found, where they may be, and therefore we confess Christ in
body to be no where else but in heaven. These last words: and therefore we
confess Christ in body to be no where but in heaven: as he says truly they be
not in Augustine, so he says falsely, they were added by Oecolampadius,
otherwise then as a conclusion of his own, gathered out of Augustines words.
But he must have some cavil, to shift of the matter. For his answer is so
impudent, that I marvel the beast was not ashamed once to rehearse this
objection, which he could no more colourably avoid: He says these words of
Augustine are not spoken of the body of Christ, but of natural bodies upon the
earth: whereas the only purpose of Augustine is, to show the natural
property of the body of Christ to be contained in one place, according to the
nature of al other bodies either in heaven or in earth.

But because this old fool plays the boy so kindly, let me pose him in his
answer like a child. Speaks Augustine of all bodies or of some? If of all,
then of the body of Christ: If of some, then of particulars follows nothing.
But speaks he of all natural bodies of the earth? Then answer me whether
Christ's body be upon the earth? Yes, or else it could not be in the sacrament.
Well admit it be upon the earth, is it a natural body or no? Take heed
what you answer. Yea, it is a natural body: why then sir, if Christ's body
be a natural body upon earth, and Augustine speaks of natural bodies upon
earth, then Augustine speaks of Christ's body also. This childishe kind of
reasoning were good enough for such childish aunsweres as he makes to so grave
authorities.

But let us see another objection, which is out of Augustine also. In Joan.
tract. 30. Sursum est Domimus, sed etiam hic, and veritas Dominus. Corpus enim
Domini, in quo resurrexit, vno loco esse potest. Veritas eius vbique diffusa
est. Our Lord is above, hi^ also he is here, and our Lord is the truth. For
the body of our Lord, in which he rose again, can be but in one place, his
truth is diffused every where. This place is corruptly cited by Master
Heskins, for he sets it down thus: Sed etiam hic est veritas Domini. His
translation I will not deal with, because it is the matter in controversy. He
answers that Augustine says no more, but that he may be in one only place
at one time, if it please him. A goodly saying, as though ever any man would
think otherwise, then that it were possible for his body to be in one place
at one time. But that one place in these words, is an exclusive of all other
places: if the opposition of one place and all other places will not serve, at
least wise, let the Canon law it self bear some sway with Papists, to
expound it, for in the decrees De contract. Did. 2. prima quidem. Thi^ place
of Augustine is thus cited. Corpus enim in quo resurrexit, in vno loco esse
oportet, veritas autem eius vbique disfusa est. For his body in which he rose
again must needs be in one place, but his truth is diffused in all places By
this it is evident, that Augustines word, Potest esse vno loco assigns his
body to one only place. Now as though there were no more objections out of
Augustine, or any other writer against the vbiquitie of Christ's body, he
ends with this: concluding after his manner, that faith must over rule reason,
which is true, where Gods word has promised any thing, but we deny that
Christ has promised the presence of his body in more places then one,
therefore there is no place for faith where the word has not gone before. But
left the reader should think, M. Heskins has answered all objections out of
Augustine, I think good to set down one or two more, first In Joan. Tract.
31. Christus, homo secundum corpus in loco est, and de loco migrat, and (...)
ad alium locum venerit, in eo loco, vnde venit, non est. Deus autem implet
omnia, and vbique totu^ est, non secundum spacia tenetur locis, etc. Christ,
the man according to his body is in a place, and goes from a place, and when
he is come unto another place, he is not in that place from whence he came, but
God fills all things, and is whole in every place, he is not held in
places according to spaces or distances.

And Tr. 50. Respondent quem tenebo? absentem? Quomodo in coelum maman mittam
vt ibi sedentem teneam? Fidem mitte, and tenuisti. Parents tuitenuerunt carne,
no tene cord, quoniam Christus absens etiam presens est. Nisi praesens esset a
nobis ipsit toneri non posset, sed quoniam verum est quod ait: Ecce ego
vobiscum sum vsque ad consumnationem saeculi: and abijs and his est, and redijt
and nos non deseruit. Corpus enim su^n intulit caelo, maiestatem non abstulis
mundo. They answer (meaning the unbelieving Jews) whom shall I hold? Him
that is absent? How shall I send up my hand into heaven, that I may hold him
which sits there? Send up faith, and thou have held him. Thy parents held
him in flesh, hold thou him in heart. For Christ being absent is also present.
For except he were present, he could not be held of ourselves, but because it
is true which he says: Behold I am with you to the end of the world, he is
both gone away and is here, and is come again and has not forsaken us. For he
has carried his body into heaven, he has not taken away his Majesty from
the world. And in the same treatise, speaking of his presence in the
sacrament: Si bonus es and ad corpus Christi pertines, quod significat Petrus,
habes Christum in praesenti and in futuro. In presenti per fidem, in praesenti
per signum, in praesenti per baptismatis sacramentum, in praesenti per altaris
cibum and potum. If thou be a good man, and perteynest to the body of Christ,
thou have that which Peter does signify, that is, Christ in present, and in
that which is to come. In present by faith, in present by sign, in present by
the sacrament of baptism, in present by ye meat and drink of the altar. And
again: Loquebatur de praesentia corporis sui. Nam secundum Maiestatem suam,
secundum prouidentiam, secundum ineffabilem and inuisibilem gratiam impletur,
quod ab eo dictum est: Ecce ego vobiscum sum omnibus diebus vsque ad
consu^mationem saeculi. Secundum carnem vero, quam verbum sumpsit, secundum id
quod de virgin natus est, secundum id quod a Iudae is prhensus est, quod ligno
crucifixus, quod de cruce depositus, quod linteis inuolutus, quod in sepulchro
conditus, quod in resurrectione manifestatus, non semper habebitis vobiscum.
Quare? quoniam conuersatus est secundum corporis praesentiam quadraginta diebus
cum discipulis suis, and eis deducentibus, videndo, non sequendo, ascendit in
coelum, and non est hic. Ibi est enim sedet ad dextram patris: and hic est, non
enim recessit prsentia maiestatis. Aliter secundum praesentiam maiestatis,
semper habemus Christum: secundum prsentiam carnis recte est discipulis, Me
autem non semper habebitis. Habuit enim illum ecclesia secundum praesentiam
carnis, paucis diebus modo fide tenet, oculis non videt, etc. That is. He spoke
of the presence of his body. For according to his Majesty, according to his
providence, according to his unspeakable and invisible grace, it is fulfilled
that was said of him: Behold I am with you all the days unto the end of the
world. But according to the flesh which the word took upon him, according
to that he was born of the virgin, according to that he was taken of the Jews,
that he was crucified on the tree, that he was taken down from the cross, that
he was wrapped in linen clothes, that he was laid in the sepulcher, that he
was openly showed in his resurrection, you shall not always have me with you.
Why so? because he was conversant with his disciples, according to the presence
of his body, by the space of 40. days, and they bringing him on his way, by
seeing, not by following, he ascended into heaven, and is not here. For there
he is where he sits at the right hand of his father. And he is here also.
For he is not departed concerning the presence of his Majesty, otherwise
according to the presence of his majesty, we have Christ always. But
according to the presence of his flesh, it was well said to his disciples: but
me shall ye not always have. For according to the presence of his flesh, the
Church had him a few days, now she holds him by faith, she sees him not
with eyes.

These places and such like, of which a number might be brought out of diverse
authors, I wish the Readers to consider for the presence of his body in the
world, or in many places at one time, and to see how they will stand with
Popish transubstantiation.

Hesk.
The thirteenth Chapter begins the exposition of an other text in the sixth of
Saint Joan.

The text he means is this: Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man,
Fulk.
and drink his blood, you have no life in you. That this should be spoken of,
in the sacrament of the Lords supper, he will prove by this reason: as a man
must have birth and nourishment, so there be two sacraments, baptism and the
supper, by which we are born, and nourished unto eternal life, and both
necessary: for as Christ speaks here of the one, so to Nicodemus he speaks
of the other, except a man be borne of water, and of the spirit, etc. But
seeing he himself denies, the necessity of the one and of the other, but in
them that are of type age, etc. it is manifest, that neither the one place is
of baptism, nor the of the other supper, but as these sacraments are seals,
to testify the grace of regeneration, and preservation. But if his reason
fail, the doctors interpretation shall help, namely Cyprian, and
Theophylacte. The place of Cyprian, has been already rehearsed, and ^onsidered
in the fourth Chapter of this book, Sermo, de oration. Dom.
whether I refer the Reader for brevity sake. The other place cited by
Master Heskins, to prove that Cyprian by this word Eucharistia means the
body of Christ, is Lib. 3. Ep. 15. Illi contra legem Euangelij, etc. They
contrary to the law of the Gospel, and also your honorable petition, before
penance done, and before confession made of their most grievous and extreme
offense, before hand was laid on them by the Bishop, and the Clergy for
repentance, dare be bold to offer for them, and give them the Eucharistie or
sacrament of thanksgiving, that is to profane the holy body of our Lord.
Thus much Heskins rehearses: but Cyprian proceeds: Cum scriptum sit, etc.
Seeing it is written: he that eats this bread, and drinks this cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. By these
words which Master Heskins concealeth, it is apparent, how they did profane
the body of Christ, that gave the sacrament to unpenitent offenders, namely in
that sense, which S. Paul says they are guilty of the death of Christ. That
Theophylacte understands this text of the receiving of the Divine mysteries,
and requires faith in the receivers: although it, make little for his purpose,
yet because he is a late writer I will not spend time about his authority.

The fourteenth Chapter expounds the same text by S. Augustine, and Cyrill.
Hesk.


Out of Saint Augustine are alleged four places, one In Joan. Tra. 36.
Quomodo quidem detur, etc. How it is given, Fulke.
and what is the manner of the eating of this bread, ye know not.
Nevertheless, except ye eat that flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye shall have no life in you. This did he speak not to dead carkases,
but to living men. By this place says Master Heskins is proved, that the
Jews knew not the manner of eating of Christ's flesh in the sacrament.

And no marvel, for his disciples did not yet know it, nor could, before the
sacrament was instituted, and therefore Saint Augustine in the same place
expounds what this meat and drink was, saying: Hunc itaque e^bum and potum
societatem vult intelligi corporis and membrorum suorum, quod est sancta
Ecclesia in praedestinatis, and vocatis, and iustificatis, and glorificatis
sanctis and fidelibus eius* He would have this meat and drink to be
understood the fellowship of his body and his members, which is the holy
Church in them that are praedestinated, and called, and glorified, even his
saints and faithful ones. And afterward he says: Huius rei sacramentum id
est vnitatis corporis and sanguinis Christi, alicubi quotidie, alicubi certis
interuallis dieru^ in Dominica mensa prparatur. and de mensa Dominica sumitur:
quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res vero ipsa cuius sacramentum est
omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque eius particeps fuerit. The
sacrament of this thing, that is, of the unity of the body and blood of
Christ in some places every day, in some places at certain days between,
is prepared in the Lords table, and from the Lords table is received, unto
some to life, to other some to destruction. But the thing it self whereof it
is a sacrament, is to life unto every man, and to destruction of none that
shall be partaker of it.

These places declare, that the text in hand, is by Augustine expounded not of
the sacrament, but of the society of the members of Christ in his body,
whereof the communion is a sacrament. So that Master Heskins alleges
Augustine directly against his plain meaning.

The second place he cites out of Augustine is in Psalm. 98. Nisi quis, etc.
Except a man eat my flesh, he shall have no life. They took it foolishly,
carnally they thought, and they thought that our Lord would cut certain
pieces from his body and give them. They understood not (says Master
Heskins) that he would give them his flesh to be eaten verily in the
sacrament. But how verily, let Saint Augustine tell his own tale in the same
place. Ille autem instruxit eos and ait eis: Spiritus est qui viuificat, caro
autem nihil prodest. Verba que loquntus sum vobis, spiritus est and vita.
Spiritualiter intelligite quod loquntus sum. Non hoc corpus quod videtis
manducaturi estis* and bibituri illum sanguinem, quem fusuri sunt, qui me
cru^ifigent. Sacramentum aliquod vobis commend^^i spiritualiter intellectum
viuificabit vot. Et sinecesse est illud visibiliter celebrari, oportet tamen
inuisibiliter intelligi. But he instructed them, and says unto them: It is
the Spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The words that I
have spoken to you, are spirit and life. Understand ye spiritually, that
which I speak: You shall not eat this body which you see, and drink that
blood which they shall shead, that shall crucify me. I have commended unto
you a certain sacrament, which being spiritually understood, shall quicken
you. Although it be necessary that the same should be celebrated visibly, yet
it must be understood inuisibly. This saying of Augustine being so plain, I
shall not need to gather any more of it, then every simple man at the first
reading will conceive.

The third place he cites is, de Doct. Christ. lib. 3. Capitul. 16. which he
cites corruptly and truncately, although I see not what frawde lies in his
corruption, save only he declares, that he has not redd the place in
Augustine him self, but takes it out of some collectour or gatherer. The
words of Augustine are these: Si praeceptiua locutio est aut flagitium aut
facinus vetans, aut vtilitatem, aut beneficentiam iubens, non est figurata. Si
autem flagitium aut facinus videtur iubere, aut vtilitatem aut beneficentiam
vetare, figura est. Nisi manducaueritis (inquit) carn^m filij hominis and
sanguinem biberitis, non habebitis vitam in vobis, facinur vel flagitium
videtur iubere, figura est ergo, praecipiens passioni Domini esse communicandum
and suauiter atque vtiliter recondendum in memoria, quod pro nobis caro eius
crucifixa and vulnerata sit. If it be a speech of commandment, forbidding
any wickedness or heinous offense, or commanding any profit or well doing,
it is no figurative speech. But if it seem to command a wicked deed, or an
heinous offense, or to forbidd any profit or well doing, it is a figure.

Except you shall eat (says he) the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, you shall have no life in you. He fe^^eth to command a heinous offense,
or a wicked deed: therefore it is a figure, commanding us to communicate with
the pas^ion of our Lord, and swetely and profitably to keep in a memory,
that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Although this place be
directly against his purpose, and the purpose of all the Papists, yet by a
fond gloss of one Buitmundus, that wrote against Berengarius, he would seem
to make it serve his turn, and wring it out of our hands. And this forsooth is
the shift. The sacrament is not a figure of the body of Christ, but of his
death. But Augustine in this place calls not the sacrament a figure, but
says that the text in hand, is a figurative speech, and shows how it must
be understood.

The fourth place he rehearses out of Augustine is Contra aduers. legis and
Proph. Cap. 9. he omitteth to quote the book, but it is in the second book,
and thus he cites it. Quamuis horribilius videatur humanam carnem manducare,
quam perimere, and humanum sanguine^ potare, quam fundere: nos tamen mediatorem
Dei and hominum Iesum Christum carnem suam nobis manducandam, bibendumque
sanguinem dantem fideli cord and ore suscipimus. Although it may seem to be
more horrible, to eat the flesh of man, then to kill a man, and to drink the
blood of man, then to shed it: yet we for all that do receive the mediator
of God and man Jesus Christ, giving us his flesh to be eaten, with a faithful
heart and mouth, and his blood to be drunken. Thus Augustine. But rather, thus
Heskins, the impudent falsifier, truncator, gelder, peruerter, and lewd
interpreter of Augustine, and all other doctors that come in his hand.

But Augustine him self writes thus: Sicut duos in carne vna Christum and
ecclesiam istis nolentibus fine vlla obscoenitate cognoscimus: sicut mediatorem
Dei and homimum, hominem Christum Iesum, carnem suam nobis manducandam
bibendumque sanguinem dantem, fideli cord and ore suscipimus: quamuis
horribilius videatur, humanam carnem manducare, quam perimere, and humanum
sanguinem potare qaum fundere. Atque in omnibus sanctis scripturis, secundum
sanae fidei regulam figurate dictum vel factum si quid exponitur de quibuslibet
rebus and verbis, quae sacris paginis continentur, expositio illa ducatur non
aspernanter, sed sapienter audiamur. Even as we know, though against these
men's will, two in one flesh, Christ and his Church without any filthiness:
even as with faithful heart and mouth we receive the Mediator of God and man
Jesus Christ, giving us his flesh to be eaten, and his blood to be drunken:
although it seems a more horrible thing to eat the flesh of man, then to
kill him: and to drink the blood of man, then to shed it.

And in all the holy scriptures, if any thing figuratively spoken or done, be
expounded, according to the rule of sound faith, of any things or words,
which are contained in the holy scriptures, let not the exposition be taken
contemptuously, but let us hear wisely.

Where is now that should pinche the proclaimer by the conscience of receiving
the body of Christ with the mouth? Where is that lewd insultation against
Master Horn, whom (he says) he heard in Cambridge, abuse the figurative
speech, and place it there, where it should not be placed, etc. When S.
Augustine makes this whole text a figurative speech.

And if Master Horn (as he says) did not place the figurative speech as
Augustine does: why did not such a doubtie doctor as Master Heskins is,
either in another sermon openly confute him, or in private conference admonish
him of it. But such hedgecreapers as he is, that dare not join with a much
weaker adversary, then that reverend father is, in any conference or open
disputation, can shoot out their slanderous boltes against them, when they
are a far of, and prate of placing and displacing of Augustine, when he
himself (as I have showed) most impudently perverted and displaced the words
and sense of Augustine, even in this very sentence, whereupon he thus takes
occasion to iangle.

Out of Cyrill are alleged two places neither of both any thing to his
purpose, but directly against him, the former In 1^. Joan. Non poterat, etc.
This corruptible nature of the body could not otherwise be brought to
vncorruptiblenesse and life, except the body of natural life were joined to
it. Do thou not believe me saying these things? I pray thee believe Christ
saying: Verily, verily, I say unto you, except you shall ea^e the flesh of the
son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you. Thou hear
him openly saying, that we shall not have life, except we drink his blood,
and eat his flesh. He says, in your selves, that is, in your body. The
same flesh of life, by right, may be understood, life.

What is there here for the sacrament? or that every Christian man of our side
will not grant? But belike the second place makes all plain. Non negamus
etc. We do not deny, that with right faith and sincere love, we are
spiritually joined to Christ: but that we have no manner of conjunction with
him after the flesh, that truly we do utterly deny, and that we say to be
altogether contrary to the holy Scriptures. For who has doubted, that
Christ is even so the vine, and we the branches, that we receive life from
thence into us. Hear Saint Paul saying, that we all are one body in Christ:
For although we be many, yet we are one in him, for we all take part of one
bread. Or peradventure does he think that the power of the mystical
blessing is unknown to us, which when it is done in us, does it not make
Christ to dwell in us corporally, by the participation of the flesh of
Christ? For why are the members of the faithful, the members of Christ? Know
ye not (says he) that the members of the faithful, are the members of
Christ? Shall I then make the members of Christ the members of an harlott? In
this place Cyrill says, that Christ does dwell corporally in us, but how?
by participation of the flesh of Christ, which as he took of our nature, so
has he again given the same unto us, to be in deed our nourishment unto
eternal life, which thing is testified unto us by the sacrament, even as the
unity we have one with another, and all of us with Christ, is testified in
that we all take part of one bread. Otherwise I see nothing in this place that
may help Master Heskins. For such as our unity is, such is our participation
of his flesh, and as we are members of his body, so do we eat his body. This
M. Heskins must grant, if he will allow Cyrills authority, but our unity,
participation, and conjunction of members, though it be in his body, of his
flesh, and unto him as our head, yet is not after a carnal manner, no more is
the eating of his flesh nor the corporal dwelling of him in us after a carnal
or corporal manner, but after a divine and spiritual manner. The place of
Chrysostom he cyteth, has been once or twice considered already.

The fifteenth Chapter continues the exposition of the same text by Leo and
Euthymius. Hesk.


The place of Leo is cyted out of Sermon. 6. de Ieiu. sep. men's. Hanc
confessionem etc. This confession most well-beloved, Fulke.
uttering forth with all your heart, forsake ye the ungodly devises of
heretics, that your fastings and alms may be defiled with the infection of
no error. For then the offering of sacrifice is clean, and the giving of
alms is holy, when they which perform these things understand what they
work. For as our Lord says, except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall have no life in you: you ought so to be partakers
of the holy table, that you doubt nothing of the truth of the body of Christ,
and of his blood. For that is taken with the mouth, which is believed by faith,
and in vain do they answer Amen, which dispute against that which is
received. Leo in these words, as Master Heskins is enforced to confess,
speaks against the Eutychian heresy, which denied the truth of Christ's
body after the adunation thereof to the Divinity (as the papists do indeed,
though not in words, by their vbiquitie and tra^substa^tiatio^) and says, they
cannot be partakers rightly of ye sacrament of his body and blood, which do not
acknowledge yt he had a very body and blood. Therefore it is intolerable
impudency in M. Hes. to note a place for M. Jewel, when he him self after,
confesses, that he spoke not of the truth of his body in the sacrament. And
whereas he says, the mouth receives that which is by faith believed, it
helps him nothing, for he means nothing else, but that those men cannot
receive with their mouth the sacrament of his flesh and blood, which deny him
to have true flesh and blood, for the sacrament is a seal and confirmation of
faith. Now how far Leo was from transubstantiation or vbiquitie, we have
showed before in the 11. Chapter of this book, where his saying may be read.

The testimony of Euthymius is cyted In 6. Joan. Nisi comederitis. Except ye
eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood you shall have no life
in you. They thought this impossible, but he showed that it was altogether
possible, and not that only, but also necessary, which also he did unto
Nicodemus. He adds also of his blood signifying the cup, which as is said
already, he would give to his disciples in the last supper. Here Euthymius a
late writer, and out of the compass of the challenge, understands this text
of the sacrament, yet speaks he nothing of the carnal manner of eating. As
for the other place he braggeth of in Matthew. 26. which he cyteth in the 58.
Chapter of this book, how little it makes for him, I wish the reader before
he go any further, to turn to the Chapter and consider.

Hesk.
The sixteenth Chapter ends the exposition of this text in hand by the
Ephesine Counsel.

The words of the Epistle of the Ephesine Counsel unto Nestorius, Fulke.
be these: Necessario and hoc etc. This also we do add necessarily, for
showing forth the death of the only begotten son of God after the flesh,
that is, of Jesus Christ, and confessing together his resurrection and
ascension into heaven, we celebrate it in our Churches, the unbloody service
of his sacrifice, so also do we come to the mystical blessings, and are
sanctified, being made partakers of the holy body and precious blood of Christ,
the redeemer of us all: Not taking it as common flesh, (which God forbid) nor
at the flesh of a sanctified man, and joined to the word, according to the
unity of dignity, or as possessing a divine habitation, but truly quickening
and made proper unto the word it self. For he being naturally life as God,
because he was united to his own flesh, professed the son to have power to
give life. And therefore although he say unto us: Except ye eat the flesh of
the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall have no life in you, yet we
ought not to esteem it as of a man, that is, one of us. For how can the flesh
of a man after his own nature, be a quickening flesh? But as verily made his
own flesh, which for us was both made and called the son of man. The Fathers
of this Counsel do not (as M. Heskins says) expound this text of the
sacrament, or declare what they receive in the sacrament, but rather show what
they judged of that flesh, whereof they received the sacrament, namely, that it
was not the flesh of a pure man as Nestorius affirmed, but the flesh of the son
of God, and therefore had power to give life being eaten by faith, either in the
participation of the sacrament or without it. And whereas he notes a plain
place for M. Jewel, when they say, They were made partakers of the body and
blood of Christ, there is no more plainness then M. Jewel will confess. But
where he adds, Receiving it, not as common flesh, but as the flesh truly
giving life: he corrupts the sense of the Counsel, referring that to the
receiving of the sacrament, which they understand of their judgment of the
flesh, whereof they received the sacrament. Finally, where he would help the
matter with the opinion of Cyril, of our corporal conjunction with Christ,
how little it avails we showed before in answer to yt place Cap. 14. But
least he should lack sufficient proof of this matter, he confirms his
exposition by the erroneous practice of the Church of Aphrica, from Saint
Cyprians time unto Saint Augustines time at the least, which imagined such a
necessity of tha^ sacrament by this place: Except ye eat etc, that they
ministered the Communion to infants, he might have added that some did minister
it to dead folks. But this absurdity, which follows of the exposition, will
rather drive al wisemen from that exposition, then move them to receive it. And
although the Bohemians used this text, to prove the communion in both kinds,
yet does it not follow, that it is properly to be expounded of the sacrament.

Hesk.
The seventeenth Chapter expounds the next following by S. Augustine and
Cyrill.

The text he will expound, is: He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood,
Fulk.
has life in him. That this text is not to be expounded of the sacrament, it
is manifest by this reason, that many do eat the sacrament that have not life
in them: as Augustine whom he alleges most plainly affirms. But let us see
his profes for his exposition. First Augustine. Tr. 26. in Ioa^. Hanc non habet
etc. He has not this life that eats not this bread, nor drinks this blood.
For without is men may have temporal life, but eternal they can not. He
therefore which eats not his flesh, nor drinks his blood, has no life in
him, and he that eats his flesh and drinks his blood, has life eternal.
He has answered to both, in that he says, life everlasting. It is not so in
this meat which we take to sustain the life of this body. For he that shall
not take it, shall not live. Nor yet he that shall take it shall live. For it
may be, that by age or sickness, or any other cause, many which have taken it
may dye: but in this meat and drink, that is, the body and blood of our Lord,
it is not so. For both he that takes it not has not life, and he that takes
it has life, and that eternal. Although there be not one word spoken here of
the sacrament, and M. Heskins him self alleges the words following, in which
he confesses that Augustine expounds this meat and drink of the society
of Christ and his members, which is his Church: yet either so blind or
obstinate he is, that with vain gloses he will go about to draw Augustine to
his side. First (he says) though this meat signify the mystical body of
Christ, yet it signifies not that alone, but his natural body in the
sacrament, whereof he has never a word in this treatise of S. Augustine:
secondly, Augustine did not go about to instruct the people what they should
receive, but how well they should receive it. Which is utterly false, for he
does both, and there is no better way to instruct men how well they should
receive the sacrament, then to teach them to consider what they do receive. And
therefore the conclusion of this treatise, which he cyteth, is altogether
against him. Hoc ergo totum etc. Let all this therefore avail to this end most
well-beloved, that we ea^e not the flesh and blood of Christ only in a
sacrament, which many evil men do, but that we eat and drink even to the
participation of the spirit, that we may remain in the body of our Lord as
his m^mbers, that we may be quickened by his spirit, and not be offended,
although many do now with us eat and drink the sacraments temporally, which
in the end shall have eternal torments. O^t of these words M. Hes does gather,
that Augustine does acknowledge both spiritual and corporal receiving: by like,
because he says that many evil men do eat and drink the body and blood of
Christ in a sacrament, but what he means is plain by his own words in the
same treatise. Hoc est ergo manducare illam escam and illum bibere potum, in
Christo manner, and illum manentem in se habere. Ac per hoc qui non manet in
Christo, and in quo non manet Christus, procul dubio nec ma^ducat spiritualiter
carnem eiu^, nec bibit eius sanguinem, licet carnaliter and visibiliter premat
dentibus saecramentum corporis and sanguinis Christi: sed magis tantae rei
sacramentum ad iudicium sibi manducat and bibit. This it is therefore to eat
that meat, and to drink that drink, to abide in Christ, and to have him
abiding in him. And by this he that abides not in Christ, and in whom Christ
abides not, out of dout neither eats spiritually his flesh, nor drinks his
blood, although carnally and visibly, he press with his teeth the sacrament
of the body and blood of Christ: but rather eats and drinks to his own
damnation the sacrament of so excellent a thing. And that the wicked receive
not Christ at all, neither spiritually nor corporally, he writes in the 59.
Tr. in Joan. Illi manducabant panem Dominum, ille panem Domini contra dominum,
illi vitam, ille poenam. They (meaning the Apostles) did eat the bread which
was our Lord, but he (meaning Judas) did eat the Lords bread against the Lord,
they did eat life, he did eat punishment. Here he denies that Judas did eat
Christ, who did only eat the bread which Christ gave him, and not that bread
which was Christ as the rest did. But now let us see how Cyrillus does
expound this text of the sacrament In 15. Joan. Mariet enim etc. Both the
natures abide inuiolated, and of them both Christ^ is one, but unspeakably, and
beyond that man's mind can understand. The word conjoined to the manhood
has so reduced it wholly into him self, that it is able to give life to
things lacking life. So has it expelled destruction from the nature of man,
and death, which by sin was very strong, it has destroyed. Wherefore he that
eats the flesh of Christ, has everlasting life. For this flesh has the word
of God, which is naturally life. Therefore he says, and I will raise him
again in the last day. He said I, that is, my body that shall be eaten, shall
raise him again. For he is none other then his flesh. I say not that, because
he is none other by nature, but because after his incarnation he suffers not
him self to be divided into two sons: I therefore (says he) which am made
man, by my flesh in the last day, will raise them up, which do eat it.

But yet an other place of Cyrill In 6. Joan. Cap. 14 Oportet etc. Truly it
must needs so have been, that not only the soul by the holy Ghost should
ascend into blessed life, but also that this rude and earthly body by a like
natured taste, touching, and meat, should be brought to immortality. In
neither of both these sentences is one word of the sacrament, and therefore
they favor M. Hesk. exposition as much, as nothing at al.

Hesk.
The eighteenth Chapter begins the exposition of the next text in the sixth
Chapter of S. John by Origin and S. Ambrose.

The text is: My flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink. Fulke.
And here he makes a fond and childish discourse of the difference of verus
cibus, true meat, and vere cibus, meat in deed, or verily meat. Which
distinction is confounded by Origin, one of his pretended expositors, in the
very text by him alleged, and in many other places of his works, where he
speaks of this text. But to the exposition before he comes to Origin, he
touches a place of Chrysostom, That reipsa conuertimur in ^arnem Christi in
very deed we are turned into the flesh of Christ. Which words, if they be not
understood of a spiritual conversion (good Lord) what a monstrous
transubstantion shall we have of our flesh into the flesh of Christ? But
Papists had rather mingle heaven and earth together, then they will depart
from their prodigious absurdities. But to Origin in Number. Hom. 7. Lex Dei, etc.
The law of God is not now known in figures and images, as before: but even
in plain truth, and such things as were before set forth in a dark speech,
are now fulfilled in plain manner and truth. Of which things, these that
follow are some,

Antea in aenigmate fuit baptismus, in nube, and in mari: nunc autem in specie
regeneratio est in aqua and Spiritu sancto. Tunc in aenigmate erat Manna cibus:
nunc autem in specie caro verbi Dei and verus cibus, sicut ipse dicit: Caro mea
vere est cibus and sanguis meus vere est potur. Before Baptism was in a dark
manner in the cloud and in the s^^: but now regeneration is in plain manner
in water and the holy Ghost. Then Manna was the meat in a dark manner: But
now the flesh of the word of God is the true meat in a plain manner, as he
him self says: my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed.
In these words Origin teaches that the sacraments of the Gospel are clear
and plain, whereas in the law they were obscure and dark. Neither does he
deny that the Gospel has figures, but affirms it has none other figures,
but such as serve to open and set forth the mysteries more plainly, whereas the
ceremonies of the old law did rather hide and cover them. And if it be true
(as M. Heskins says) that the Gospel has no figures, I would know, what
be all the ceremonies of the Popish Church, figures of the Gospel? or false
inventions of men? But if we will believe him, our only spiritual receiving
is impugned by Origin In what words good sir? he answers: The flesh of the
son of God is eaten in very plain manner. And may not this be spiritually,
as well as regeneration is spiritually wrought in baptism, and yet in the same
plain manner, that this eating is spoken of? But let us hear what Orig^n him
self will say in the same book, Hom. 16. Bibere autem dicimur sanguinem
Christi non solum sacramentorum ritu, sed cum sermones eius recipimu^, in
quibus vita consistit sicut and ipse dicit etc. We are said to drink the
blood of Christ, not only in the ceremony of the sacraments, but also when
we receive his sayings in which life consists, as he him self says: In
these words he teaches such a drinking in the sacraments, as in believing
his word, and therefore it must needs be spiritual and not carnal. And as
the cloud and Sea was baptism, so was Manna the body of Christ, by Origens
own words, and therefore the proclamer said truly, that we receive Christ
none otherwise in the sacrament, then the Jews did in Manna concerning the
substance of the spiritual meat. And Master Heskins says falsely, That we
excel the Jews for our incorporation in Christ, and therefore receive him
corporally, as though the Jews also were not incorporated into Christ, and
were not lively members of his body in as great excellency as we, yea, and
with a prerogative of the first begotten, and of the natural olive wherein we
are inferior.

The place of Ambrose he cyteth Lib. 9. cap. 1. De sacramentis. Sicus verus
est Deifilius Dominus noster Jesus Christus, etc. As our Lord Jesus Christ is
the true son of God, not as men by grace, but as a son of the substance of
his father: even so it is true flesh, which we receive (as he him self says)
and very drink. This is noted for an other plain place for the proclamer, as
though the proclamer did not grant that we receive the true flesh and blood of
Christ in the sacrament, but spiritually and by faith, not carnally nor
transubstantiated. But Ambrose is the best expounder of him self, who in the
6. book and Chap. 1. De sacramentis, has these words, Ne igitur plures hoc
dicerent, veluti quidam esset horror cruoris, sed maneret gratia redemptionis,
ideo in similitudinem quidem accipis sacramentum, sed verae naturae gratiam
virtutemque consequeris. Therefore least more should say this, as though there
were a certain horror of blood, but that the grace of redemption might
remain, therefore thou receiuest the sacrament truly for a similitude, but
thou obtainest the grace and virtue of his true nature. By which Ambrose
expresses the whole substance of the sacrament, that it is a similitude of
the body and blood of Christ, but not a similitude only, but such a one, as
by which we receive the grace and power of that true nature which is resembled
by it. This place would satisfy a sober mind, but a froward heart will admit
no wisdom.

The nineteenth Chapter proceeds upon the same text by Eusebius Emiss. and S.
Augustine. Hesk.


Eusebius is cyted out of Hom. 5. pasch. Fulk.
Quia corpus assumptum etc. Because he would take his assumpted body from our
eyes, and bring it into heaven, it was necessary that in the day of his
supper, he should consecra^^ unto us a sacrament of his body and blood, that it
might be celebrated continually by a mystery, which was offered for our price,
that because the daily and unwearied redemption did run for the health of all
men, the oblation of the redemption might be perpetual, and that eternal
sacrifice should live in memory, and that true, only, and perfect sacrifice,
should be present in grace, to be esteemed by faith, not by show, neither to
be judged by outward sight, but by inward affection. Whereupon the heavenly
authority confirms, that my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink
in deed. This sentence being directly against him as every man that reads
it, may easily perceive, he is neither ashamed to allege it, having nothing to
gather out of it for his purpose, nor yet (yt is worse) most breastly to
corrupt it by false translation and wrong distinction or pointing, committing
that childish sophisticatio^ which is called ab accentu. For where the Latin
is, Et perennis victima illa viueret in memoria, and semper prsens esset in
gratia vera, vnica, and perfecta hostia, fide aestimanda non specie etc. he
has dismembered it by this translation: And that perpetual sacrifice should
live in memory, and always be present in grace. A TRVE ONE ONLY AND PERFECT
SACRIFICE, to be esteemed by faith, and not by outward form, etc. And al
because he would not acknowledge ye presence of Christ yt only true sacrifice
by grace, which is absent in the body, as the purpose of Eusebius is to show.
And therefore those words that follow are to be understood by them that go
before. Let all doubtfulnesse of infidelity therefore depart, seeing he that
is the Author of the gift, is also witness of the truth. For the invisible
priest with his word by secret power conuerteth the visible creatures into
the substance of his body and blood. The former sentence sufficiently
declares, that he speaks of a spiritual and not a carnal conversion,
because his body which is absent from us, and carried into heaven, is present
with us by grace and not otherwise.

Saint Augustine is cyted Tr. 26. in Joan Cum enim cibo and potu, etc. For as
much as men by meat and drink, do this desire* that they should neither
hunger nor thirst: nothing perfourmeth this truly, but this meat and drink,
which makes them of whom it is received immortal, and inco^^uptible, that is
the fellowship of the Saints where peace shall be and full and perfect unity.
For therefore truly (as the men of God have understood it before us,) our
Lord Jesus Christ commended his body and blood in those things, which of many
are brought to one certain thing. For the one is made into one of many graynes
and so consists: the other comes into one of many grapes. Because this
sentence is clean contrary to ye carnal presence, and transubstantiation, you
must call to remembrance, the gloss of a certain blind Author, that there be
three things in ye sacrament to be considered. The first the sacrament only,
which is a sign of an holy thing, and yt is the form of bread. The second the
thing signified, and contained, that is ye very body of Christ. The third is
signified but not contained, that is the mystical body of Christ. But this
balde distinction, is so far of Augustines mind, that he clean overthrows
two parts of it. First the carnal presence of Christ's body contained, and
when he affirms that this meat makes them of whom it is received,
immortal and incorruptible, which are only them that receive it by faith,
for if it were contained, wicked men should also receive it: but they receive
it not, therefore it is not contained. Secondly, he overthrows
transubstantiation, when he says that Christ commended his body in such
things, as are made one of many, as one bread of many grains, and one wine of
many grapes. For the form, by which Heskins means the accidents of bread,
is made neither of graynes nor of grapes. Therefore the form of Bread is none
of those things in which Christ commended his body and blood.

But when nothing is in Augustine, then the collections of Prosper must help
on this manner. Hoc est quod dicimus, etc. This it is which we say, which by all
means we labor to approve, that the sacrifice of the Church, is made by two
means, and consists of two things: the visible kind of the elements, and
the invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, both of the
sacrament, and of the thing of the sacrament, that is the body of Christ: as
the person of Christ consists of God and man seeing Christ himself is very
God* and very man. Because every thing contains in it the nature and truth
of those things of which it is made: but the sacrifice of the Church is made
of two, the sacrament, and the thing of the sacrament, that is, the body of
Christ, therefore there is the sacrament, and the thing of the sacrament. This
last sentence M. Hesk. has not translated. But he notes three things in these
words affirmed which ye sacramentaries deny: that is, that the Church has a
sacrifice, that therein is a sacrament, which is the fourmes of bread and wine,
and that there is present the very body and blood of Christ, which he calls
the thing of the sacrament. Concerning the term of sacrifice, it is a stale
quarrel, whereby he means the sacrifice of thanks giving, or the
Eucharistie. For the forms of bread and wine, that is (as Master Heskins
means) the accidents, it is false, he has nothing tending to that end, he
says, Specie elementorum, that is the kind of elements, which is the
substance, and not the accidents of bread and wine. And for the presence,
hear his own words in the same book.

Escam vitae accepit and poculum vit bibit, qui in Christo manet, and Cuius
Christus habitator est. Nam qui discordat a Chricto, nec panem cius manducat,
nec sanguinem bibit, etiamsi tanto rei sacramentum ad iudicium su
praesumptionis quotidie indifferenter accipiat. He has received the meat of
life, and drunk the cup of life, which abides in Christ, and in whom Christ
dwells. But he that disagreeth from Christ, neither eats his bread nor
drinks his blood, although he receive every day indifferently the sacrament
of so great a thing, unto the condemnation of his presumption.

This place is plain against the corporal eating of Christ and M. Heskins
wise distinction, seeing the wicked by the judgment of Prosper out of
Augustine, eat only the sacrament that is bread and wine, and not the body
and blood of Christ, which is not eaten but by faith.

Hesk.
The twentieth Chapter proceeds upon the same text by Saint Hilarie, and
Euthymius.

Hilarious is cited Lib. 8. de Trinitat. Que scripta sunt, etc. Let us read
those things that be written, Fulke.
and let us understand those things that we shall read, and then shall we
perform the duty of perfect faith. Such things as we learn of the natural
truth of Christ in us, except we learn of him, we learn foolishly and
ungodly. For he him self says: my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is
drink in deed. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me
and I in him. There is no place left to doubt of the truth of his flesh and
blood. For now by the profession of our Lord himself it is verily flesh and
verily blood. And this being taken and dronken, bring this to pass, that
Christ is in us, and we in Christ. Out of these words he notes three things.
The first, that the text is spoken of the sacrament containing the body and
blood of Christ, of the verity whereof there should be no doubt: The second
is the corporal receiving of Christ in the sacrament: The third is, that
thereby Christ is in us and we in him. To the first note, this text is none
otherwise spoken of the sacrament, as we have often showed, then as the
sacrament is a seal of this eating and drinking of Christ's flesh and blood
which is also without the sacrament. And that we should not doubt of the truth
of his flesh and blood, it is true, we confess he has true flesh and true
blood, and with the same does feed us, but that this flesh and blood is
contained in the sacrament, Hillarie says not, but Heskins. Neither does he
speak of any corporal receiving of Christ in the sacrament, which is the
second note, but seeing he dwells in all them that receive him (which is the
third note) there is no place for the corporal receiving, which the Papists
confess to be common to the wicked, in whom Christ dwells not, nor they in
him.

But to prove the corporal receiving, he has another place out of the same
book. Si enim vere, etc. For if the WORD was verily made flesh, and we do
truly eat the word made flesh in the Lords meat, how is he not to be
thought to abide naturally in us, which being borne a man has taken upon him
the nature of our flesh now inseparable, and has admixed the nature of his
flesh, unto the nature of eternity, under the sacrament of his flesh to be
communicated unto us. This with him is a plain place, and much ado he makes
about this word, naturally, by which he means nothing else but truly, for
otherwise M. Heskins (if he be in his right wits) will confess, that the
abiding of Christ in us, is not natural nor after a natural manner, but
spiritual, and after a Divine manner. And although he spoke plain enough of
the participation of his flesh under a sacrament, yet more evidently in the
same book in these words. Si vere igitur carnem corporis nostri Christus
assumpsit, and vere homo ille, qui ex Maria natus fuit, Christus est, nosque
vere sub mysterio carnem corporis sui sumimus, and per hoc vnum erimus, quia
Pater in eo est, and ille in nobis, quomodo voluntatis vnitas asseritur, cum
naturalis per sacramentum proprietas perfectae sacramentum sit vnitatis.

If therefore Christ did verily take upon him the flesh of our body, and that
man, which was borne of Marie, was verily Christ, and we do verily receive the
flesh of his body under a mystery, and thereby shall be one, because the
Father is in him and he in us, how is the unity of will affirmed, when the
natural property by a sacrament is a sacrament of perfect unity. Here he
says we do verily eat the flesh of his body: but if you ask how? He
answers under a mystery, as before he said under a sacrament. Therefore to
take that absolutely (as M. Heskins does) which of him is spoken but after a
certain manner as under a sacrament, or a mystery, is a gross abusing both
of the author and of the readers.

Euthymius is cited In Joan. Caro mea, etc. My flesh is meat in deed. It is
true meat: or most convenient meat, as which nourishes the soul, which is
the most proper part of man. And likewise of the blood: or else he said this,
confirming, that he spoke not obscurely or parabolically.

I marvel what Master Heskins gayneth by this place. Forsooth yt this is no
figurative speech, but a plain speech, signifying none otherwise then the
words sound. Well, yet we must not cast away that which Euthymius said in ye
beginning of the sentence, that it is a meat to nourish the soul, and not for
the body to receive, neither received, but where it nourishes the soul. And
that overthrows the corporal manner of eating.

Hesk.
The one and twentieth Chapter continues the same exposition by Chrysostom and
Lyra.

Fulk.
Chrysostom is cited Hom. 46. in Joan. The same words almost that were before
ascribed to Euthymius, who borrowed them of Chrysostom. Quid autem, etc. But
what means this saying: my flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink
in deed? Either that he is the true meat, which saves the soul: or that he
might confirm them in that he said before, least they should think he spoke
darkely in parables. If this be spoken of the flesh of Christ in the
sacrament, then none receive the flesh of Christ in the sacrament, but they
whose souls are saved, but many receive the sacrament, whose souls are not
saved, therefore this is not spoken of the flesh of Christ in the sacrament.
Ye, but are ye advised yt this is a plain place for M, Jewel, that these
words: My flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in is no figurative
speech? Let it be as plain as you will, it must be meat in deed, and drink
in deed to feed our souls, and that must needs be spiritually, for our
souls cannot eat carnally. As for Lyra a late Popish writer, I have often
protested, that I will not stay upon his authority, let him be on M. Heskins
side.

The two and twentieth Chapter continues the exposition of the same text by S.
Cyrill, and Dionyse. Hesk.


S. Cyrill is alleged Lib. 4. Cap. 16. in Joan. Vmbram and figuram nosti, etc.
Fulk.
Know thou the shadow and the figure? Learn the very truth of the thing.
For my flesh (says he,) is meat indeed and my blood is drink in deed.
Again he makes a distinction between the mystical benediction and manna, the
streams of water out of the rock, and the communication of the holy cup,
that they should not more esteem the miracle of manna, but rather receive him
which is the giver of the heavenly bread, and of eternal life. For the
nourishment of Manna brought not eternal life, but a short remedy of hunger.
Therefore it was not the true meat. But the holy body of Christ is a meat
nourishing unto immortality and eternal life. Also that water out of the
rock easied bodily thirst for a short time, neither brought it any thing
beside. Therefore it was not that true drink: but the blood of Christ, by which
death is utterly overthrown and destroyed, is the true drink. For it is not
the blood of a man simply, but of him, which being joined unto a natural life,
is become life. Because M. Heskins cannot tell what to gather out of this place
for his purpose, he takes up yesterdayes cold ashes, of the authorities cited
before, by light of them to wrest this place to his purpose, but all remains
still dark and dyme for his intent. Of the excellency of the flesh and blood
of Christ above Manna and the water as they were corporal food, there is
neither doubt nor question, nor yet that the same is eaten in the sacrament of
the faithful, but whether it be eaten corporally or spiritually is all the
question. And Dionyse the Charterhouse Monk, whom he matcheth indiscreetly
with Cyrill, denies also that the body of Christ is received corporally in the
sacrament. Vere est cibus animae non corporis, quia non visibiliter nec
corporaliter sumitur, quamuis verum corpus sumatur. It is meat in deed, but
of the soul not of the body, because it is not received visibly nor
corporally although the very body be received. So that the Papists them selves
do not al agree of the manner of receiving. In this Chapter beside these two
expositors are also cited Augustine and Chrysostom. Augustine in Saint
Prosper, to avouch the phrase of forms of bread and wine. Caro eius est quam
forma panis opertam in sacramento accipimus: and sanguis eius est, quem sub
vini specie and sapore potamus. It is his flesh, which we receive in the
sacrament covered with the form of bread, and it is his blood, which we
drink under the kind and taste of wine. Beside that this collection of
Prosper is not to be found in any of Augustines own works, I deny the names
of Forma and Species to be taken for accidents in that sense the Papists do:
but for a figure or signification, as by the words immediately following it is
most manifest, which M. Heskins has most lewdly suppressed: Caro videlicet
carnis: and sanguis sacramentum est sanguinis: carne and sanguine, vtroque
inuisibili, spirituali, intelligibili, signatur spirituale Domini nostri Jesus
Christi corpus palpabile, plenum gratia omnium virtutu^ and diuina Maiestate.
That is, the flesh is a sacrament of ye flesh, and the blood is a sacrament of
the blood, by both of them being invisible, spiritual, intelligible, is
signified the spiritual body of our Lord Jesus Christ which is palpable, full
of the grace of all virtues, and divine Majesty. In these words, he calls
the elements of bread and wine, flesh and blood, which are sacraments of his
true glorious and palpable body which is in heaven: as it is yet more plain
by that which follows: Sicut ergo coelestis panis, qui caro Christi est, suo
modo vocatur corpus Christi, cum reuera sit sacramentum corporis Christi,
illius videlicet quod visibile, quod palpabile, quod mortale in cruce positum
est, vocaturque ipsa immolatio carnis, quae sacerdotis manibus sit, Christi
passion, mors, crucifixio, non rei veritate sed significa^te mysterio: sic
sacramentum fidei, quod baptismus intelligitur, fides est. As yt heavenly bread
which is the flesh of Christ, after a certain manner, is called the body of
Christ, when in very deed it is ye sacrament of the body of Christ, which
being visible, which being palpable, which being mortal, was put on the
cross, and the very offering of his flesh, which is done by the hands of the
priest, is called the passion, death, and crucifying of Christ, not in truth
of the thing, but in a signifying mystery: so ye sacrament of faith, which is
understood to be baptism, is faith. In these words he affirms, the elements
to be the body and blood of Christ, as the action of the Priest is his
passion, death, and crucifying: and as baptism is faith, not in truth of the
thing, but in a signifying mystery. Chrysostom is alleged to prove yt the
whole body of Christ is in the sacrament. Hom. 24. in 10. ad Cor. 1. Et
quando, etc. And when thou see that thing set forth, say with thy self, for
this body, I am no more earth and ashes, this body being crucified and
beaten, was not overcome by death. This same body being bloudied and wounded
with a spear, has sent forth founteines of blood and water wholesome to all
the world. Here is much a do, the same body is in the sacrament which was
crucified. We know Christ has no more bodies but even that one, that was
crucified, and the same is eaten in the sacrament as in a mystery,
significatiuely, as the same Chrysostom in the same place does testify. Quid
enim appello inquit communicationem? id ipsium corpus sumus. Quid significat
panis? Corpus Christi. Quid autem fiunt qui accipiunt corpus Christi? non
multa, sed vnum corpus. For what do I call it (says he) a participation? We
are the very same body. What does the bread signify? the body of Christ.
What are they made that receive the body of Christ? not many bodies but one
body. Lo here the bread signifies the body of Christ, which was crucified.
And the faithful that receive it, are made the same body of Christ that was
crucified, but all this in a mystery, not carnally or corporally. What reader
of Cambridge he girdeth at, that alleged obiectio^s of Duns against the
carnal presence, I know not. Duns might frame or rehearse more arguments
against it, then with all his subtilties he could answer: but my think M.
Hesk. should not envy this practice, when he himself has never an argument
nor authority almost out of the doctors, but such as he has of other men's
gathering, and not of his own reading, as his manifold mistakins do declare,
beside wilful corruptions and falsifications.

Hesk.
The three and twentieth Chapter ends the exposition of this text by
Theophylact and Beda.

Of these two being both of the lower house, the testimony of Theophylactus
makes nothing for him, Fulke.
the saying of Beda makes much against him. Concerning Theophylact, let them
that list read his sentence, for I count it superfluous to rehearse their
testimony, whose authority in this matter I will not stand to. But because the
opinion of carnal presence was not received in this church of England in the
age of Beda, nor long after, I think it not amiss, to consider his
authority. He writes therefore in Joan. Dixerat superius etc. He had said
before: he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life eternal. And
that he might show how great a difference is between corporal meat, and
the spiritual mystery of his body and blood, he added: my flesh is meat in
deed, and my blood is drink in deed. Here Beda calls the sacrament a
spiritual mystery of the body and blood of Christ, which although it be
plain against the carnal presence, yet M. Heskins would cloak it with a fond
definition of a mystery, to be that, (I wot not what,) which conteyneth
covertly a thing not to be perceived by senses or common knowledge, and so the
sacrament is a mystery, containing the very body of Christ. Besides that, he
remembers not that Beda calls it not only a mystery, but a spiritual
mystery, I would wit of him, what it is that Beda calls a spiritual
mystery? if he say ye sacrament, I would further know, what he calls the
sacrament? he will answer, the forms of bread and wine, for so they
determine forsooth. Well, then Christ would not show the difference of the
spiritual food of his flesh and blood which is the thing contained, but of
the accidents of bread and wine, from the corporal food. O foolish
conclusion of Beda! or rather, O false definition and counterfeit exposition of
Hesk! For Beda shows the excellency of the spiritual mystery of Christ's
body and blood, which is our spiritual food, above the corporal food, and
never dreamed of M. Heskins mystery.

The four and twentieth Chapter begins the ex-position of the next text in
the sixth of S. John by S. Hillarie and S. Augustine. Hesk.


The text is: Fulke.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me, and I in him.
For understanding of this text, he premiseth a destinction of two manners of
abiding in Christ, that is spiritually and naturally: spiritually, by right
faith and sincere charity, as S. Cyrill does teach, and naturally by
receiving of Christ's flesh, as S. Hillarie teaches. This distinction not
being made by any doctor, but devised upon occasion of terms used by the
doctors, to overthrow the meaning of the doctors, he pleases him very much
therein. I have showed before, that Hillarie by the word naturally, means
truly, that as Christ is truly joined unto us by taking on him our flesh,
and we are truly joined to him, by eating and drinking his flesh, under a
sacrament, and under a mystery, (for both these terms of restreint he has,
to show the manner of our eating to be sacramental and mystical, not as M.
Heskins would, carnal and natural) so Christ is truly one with God, not in
unity of will only, but in unity of Godhead, in substance of divinity, in
essence of eternity. But let us hear his own words. lib. 8. de Trinit. Quod
autem in eo, etc. But that we be in him, by the sacrament or mystery of his
flesh and blood, which is communicated unto us, he testifies him self
saying: And this world does not now see me, but you shall see me for I live,
and ye also shall live, because I am in my father, and you in me, and I in
you, etc. But that this unity in us is natural, he has witnessed saying: He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me, and I in him. For
there shall no man be in him, but in whom he shall be, having only his
assumpted flesh in him, who has taken his. By this place out of which he would
buyld his destinction of natural and spiritual abiding, the same is
manifestly overthrown. For the drift of that distinction (as he confesses) is
to show, that Christ may abide naturally, where he does not abide
spiritually, as in the wicked. But the place of Hillarie is plain, that where
this natural unity is, Christ abides eternally: therefore this natural
unity, is not in the wicked. Thus, while Master Heskins harpeth greedily
upon the term naturally, for the natural presence of Christ's body, he
loses his distinction, and with all his natural presence also. For if his
body be not naturally received of the wicked, it is not naturally present in
the sacrament, as all Papists do confess. And further, that this natural
unity, is after a spiritual manner, it appears by the last words of the
sentence. That he in whom Christ dwells, has only the assumpted flesh of
Christ in him. But this must needs be after a spiritual manner, as the holy
and innocent flesh of Christ is made ours, therefore this natural unity he
speaks of, is not in that sense natural, that Master Heskins immagineth,
but after a divine and unspeakable manner. For otherwise, Godly men have flesh
of their own, yea, and sinful flesh, which is not of the singular substance
of the flesh of Christ, though it be of the nature and kind thereof, but
corrupted with sin, as his never was. Thus the show that Master Heskins
would make, by snatching at one word misunderstoode, by a little diligence
used in discussing the sentence, is turned altogether against him, both in
show and purpose of the author. The other place he cites, though he cites it
truncately, contrary to his promise in his preface, I will cite it whole, as I
did before in the 20. Chap. of this book. If the word in deed be made flesh,
and we do verily eat the word made flesh, in the Lords meat, how is he not
to be esteemed, to dwell naturally in us, which being borne a man, has taken
upon him the nature of our flesh now inseparable, and has joined the nature
of his flesh unto the nature of aeternitie under a sacrament of his flesh to
be communicated to us. For so we are all one, because the father is in Christ,
and Christ is in us. Therefore, whosoever shall deny the father to be
naturally in Christ, let him first deny, that either he is naturally in
Christ, or Christ is in him. For the father being in Christ, and Christ in us,
do make us to be one in them. Therefore if Christ did verily take upon him the
flesh of our body, and that man which was borne of Marie is verily Christ,
and we do verily receive the flesh of Christ under a mystery, and by this,
shall be one, because the father is in him and he in us, how is the unity of
will affirmed, when the natural property by a sacrament, is the sacrament of
perfect unity. In these words the flesh of Christ is communicated unto us,
but under a sacrament, we eat the flesh of his body, but under a mystery:
the natural property by a sacrament, is a sacrament of perfect unity.

And besides all this, mark, that this natural unity is such, as thereby we
are united to the father, and being united to the father by Christ, it must
needs follow, that we are made partakers of eternity, which no wicked men
are, therefore wicked men receive not Christ naturally nor spiritually, and so
the distinction remains without a difference. But now we come to S.
Augustine, of whom he borrows the other part of his distinction, Tract. 26.
in Joan. Denique iam. Now at the last he expounds, how that may be done,
which he speaks, and what it is to eat his body and drink his blood. He
that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him. This
it is therefore to eat that meat, and to drink that blood, to abide in
Christ, and to have him abiding in him. And by this, he that abides not in
Christ, and in whom Christ abides not, out of all doubt, neither eats his
flesh spiritually, nor drinks his his blood, although carnally, and visibly
he press with his teeth sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. But
rather he eats and drinks the sacrament of so great a thing to his
condemnation, because he being unclean, presumed to come to the sacraments of
Christ, which no man receives worthily, but he which is clean of whom it
is said: blessed are the clean of heart, for they shall see God.

S. Augustine in these words makes a distinction of eating the sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ, and of eating the body and blood of Christ: and
not only of eating spiritually and eating carnally, showing that spiritually
the flesh of Christ is eaten, carnally the sacrament, which were vain, if
both were one. And ye whole discourse of that treatise is against that carnal
eating of the body and blood of Christ, which M. Heskins himself confesses
to be unprofitable, yea, damnable without the spiritual eating, whereas the
spiritual eating, undoubtedly causes eternal life. But better to uphold this
distinction of Christ's natural and spiritual abiding, he cites a testimony
out of the 11. Sermon de verbis Dom. in Euangelio under the name of Augustine,
which whether it be rightly entitled to him, I will not contend.

The words are these: Illud etiam, etc. This also that he says: He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him, how shall
we understand? Can we take them here also, of whom the Apostle says, that
they eat and drink their own damnation, when they eat that flesh and drink
that blood? Did Judas also, the seller and ungodly betrayer of his master,
although he did eat and drink that first sacrament of his flesh and his blood
made with his own hands, with the rest of the disciples, as Luke the Evangelist
declares more plainly, did he abide in Christ, or Christ in him? Finally, many
which either with fained heart do eat that flesh and drink that blood, or
when they have eaten and dronken they become Apostataes, do they abide in
Christ or Christ in them? But truly there is a certain manner of eating that
flesh and drinking that blood, after which manner he that shall eat and
drink, abides in Christ, and Christ in him. We must receive this authority,
so that it may stand with all the rest of the undoubted works of Augustine,
we must be as bold to distinguish the words, flesh and blood, as M. Heskins is
the spiritual and natural eating. By flesh and blood aequiuocally, he
understands the sacrament of the flesh and blood of Christ, as where he
says, that Judas did eat the sacrament of his flesh and blood, he does him
self declare. And then he distinguishes of the manner of eating, for the
sacrament, (as Augustine says) is eaten of both wicked and godly, but the
matter of the sacrament, is not eaten but to eternal life. And that Judas did
not eat the bread that was the Lord, as we alleged before, and Prosper in
his collections out of Augustine plainly defines: He that disagreeth from
Christ, neither eats his bread, not drinks his blood, although he daily
receive the sacrament of so excellent a matter unto condemnation of his
presumption. Wherefore, although we should receive this authority, yet it
proves not, that wicked men receive the flesh of Christ, but only the
sacrament thereof, which is in some manner of speaking called the flesh of
Christ, as Augustine every where affirms. Finally, what a blasphemous
absurdity is it, to say, that Christ dwells naturally in wicked men, in
whom he is not spiritually, and that his flesh is there, where his quickening
spirit does not work?

The five and twentieth Chapter, proceadeth in the exposition of the same, by
Chrysostom and S. Gregory. Hesk.


Chrysostom is cited Hom. 45. in Joan. Qui manducat, Fulke.
etc. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in
him, which he says, that he may show him self to be joined unto him (M
Heskins translateth, mingled) with him, And what this mingling is, he wills
us to remember, what this author says in the same Homilye: that we should
not only by love, but in very deed be turned into his flesh, it is brought
to pass by that meat which he has given unto us. I will ask no better
interpretation, for this must either be a spiritual and unspeakable manner of
conversion, or else it would be a monsterous and blasphemous transmutation of
our flesh into the flesh of Christ, as I have diverse times before noted of
this place. But what says S. Gregory? in Job. Cap. 6. Natus Dominus, etc.
Our Lord being borne is laid in the manger, that it might be signified, that
the holy beaster, which long under the law were found fasting, should be
filled with the hay of his incarnation. Being borne, he filled the manger, who
gave him self to be meat to men's minds, saying: he that eats my flesh,
and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him. What wins M. Heskins by
this place? it is the meat of the soul, therefore it must be spiritually
received. Or if he will not have it only spiritually received, wherefore
serves the text alleged, which he affirms to be verified only in them that
receive spiritually? But we must hear further out of Gregory in Hom. Pasc.
Quid namque, etc. For what the blood of the lamb is, you have not now learned
by hearing, but by drinking, which it put upon both the posts, when it is not
drunk only with the mouth of the body, but also with the mouth of the heart.
What news have we here? forsooth, Christ's blood drunk with mouth of body,
and mouth of heart. I hear him say the blood of the Pascall lamb, which he
says, does figure the sacrament, is so drunk, but not the natural blood of
Christ. Why then mark what he says soon after: Qui sic, etc. He that so
takes the blood of his redeemer, that he will not yet follow his passion, he
has put the blood on the one post. In this allegory, if he call the sacrament
of Christ's blood, the redeemers blood, as he calls it, the blood of the
lamb, what great marvel is it, or what great matter is it? the whole speech
being figurative, both allegorical, and metonymicall.

Hesk.
The six and twentieth Chapter, continues this exposition by Saint Cyrill and
Lyra.

Fulke.
Cyrill is cited in Joan. Cap. 15. Qui manducat, etc. He that eats my flesh
and drinks my blood, abides in me and I in him. Whereupon it is to be
considered, that not by disposition only, which is understood by charity,
Christ is in us, but also by a natural participation. For, as if a man do so
mingle wax that is melted with fire, unto other wax likewise melted, that one
thing seem to be made of them both: so by the communication of the body and
blood of Christ, he is in us, and we in him. For this corruptible nature of
our body could not otherwise be brought to incorruptiblenesse and life,
except the body of natural life were joined to it.

By these words Cyrill teaches, that we are joined to the natural flesh of
Christ, so that by participation thereof, we are made one with him: but
wicked men are not made one with Christ, nor partakers of incorruptiblenesse,
therefore wicked men are not joined to Christ by that natural participation
he speaks of, and consequently, Christ is not corporally received of them,
nor of any other. Yet Master Heskins notes, as his manner is, a plain place
for Master Jewel, when he says, we do partake the natural flesh and blood
of Christ. Which we always confess, but we partake it spiritually, by
faith: and have eternal life thereby: therefore wicked men partake it not,
which want both the mean and the effect. Thus Cyrill being answered, we
force not upon Lyra. As for that which follows in the Chapter, to show that
by participation of Christ's flesh, we are not delivered from temporal
death, but from eternal destruction, being no matter of question, I pass over
as needelesse.

The seven and twentieth Chapter, abides in the same exposition by Theophylact
and Ruperius Tuicen. Hesk.


Although there is no great matter in the speech of the two Burgesses, to
help master Heskins purpose, Fulk.
yet because they are too young to bear witness in this cause, I will not
trouble my self, nor my reader, either to rehearse them, or to make answer
to them.

The eight and twentieth Chapter, ends the exposition of this text by Haimo
and Euthymius. Hesk.


As for friar Haimo, I leave him to M. Hesk. although in the words cited by
him, Fulk.
he says nothing greatly to his intent. But for as much as Euthymius
Zigabonus* does often borrowe his expositions of the old doctors, though he
him self be not so ancient a writer, I will rehearse his testimony in Math.
26. Si de vno, etc. If all we that are faithful do partake of one body and
blood, we are all one, by the participation of these mysteries, and we are all
in Christ, and Christ is in us all. He says, he that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him. For the WORD by assumption
was united to flesh, and again, the flesh is united to us by participation.
Here M. Heskins notes a plain proof of the presence, against the proclaimer.
How so? the natural flesh was united to the son of God, and the son is
united to us by participation. What else? but this participation is by faith,
and causes us to be one with Christ, and Christ in us all, and is not in
the wicked, which thing Master Heskins with a dry foot passes over, as also
in translation, he omitteth the word fideles, all we that are faithful,
because he would have the ignorant to think that the unfaithful do partake
the same flesh, as truly as the faithful.

Hesk.
The nine and twentieth Chapter, expounds the next text that follows in the
sixth of Saint John, by Saint Augustine, and S. Cyrill.

Fulk.
The text is this: As the living father sent me, and I live for the father, and
he that eats me, shall live also for me, or by the means of me: In
exposition of this text, he will only declare by Saint Augustine: How Christ
lives by the father: which because it is no matter of controversy betwixt us,
I do altogether omit, and come to Cyrillus, whose words concerning an^ thing
our question are these, for the rest, as impertinent, I pass over.
Quemaedmodum ego factus, etc. As I am made man by the will of my father, and
live by the father: because I have naturally flowed out of that life which is
so of nature, and perfectly do keep the nature of my father, so that I also am
naturally life: even so he that eats my flesh, shall live for me, being
wholly reformed unto me which am life, and am able to give life. And he
says, that he him self is eaten, when his flesh is ^aten. Because the word
was made flesh, not by confusion of natures, but by the unspeakable manner of
union. Here Master Heskins notes, that Christ is eaten when his flesh is
eaten, as a man does see when his eye, or rather his soul by the eye does see,
etc. For the godhead is not eaten, therefore it cannot be spiritually eaten,
but verily. Still he makes spirit and truth contrary, as though what soever
were done spiritually, were not done verily. But he remembers not that Cyrill
says, that he which eats this flesh, is wholly reformed or fashioned anewe
into Christ. Whereby he does not only exclude wicked men, but also teach a
spiritual eating, as the reformation is spiritual. And as the word was made
flesh by an unspeakable union, so we by eating that flesh, are joined to
him, by an unspeakable union.

Finally, where Master Heskins says, that Christ's flesh cannot be verily
eaten but in the sacrament, he excludes all them from the benefits of his
flesh, which are not partakers of the sacrament, and so condemns all
children not come to years of discretion. O cruel transsubstantiation.

The Thirtieth Chapter begins the exposition of the next text by Saint
Ambrose and Chrysostom. Hesk.


The text is: Fulke.
This is that bread that came down from heaven, not as your fathers did eat
Manna in the wilderness, and are dead. He that eats this bread shall live for
ever. Saint Ambrose is alleged, lib. 8. de initiandi, but I think he should
say Capit^ 8. de mysterijs initiandis: Reuera mirabile, etc. Truly, it was
marvelous, that God did rain Manna to the fathers, and that they were fedd
with daily food from heaven. Wherefore it is said, man did eat the bread of
Angels. But yet they that did eat that bread in the wilderness are dead. But
this bread which thou receiuest, this bread of life, which came down from
heaven, gives the substance of eternal life. And whosoever shall eat this
bread, shall not dye for ever. And it is the body of Christ. M. Heskins
notes, that he calls it the body of Christ, as though any man doubted
thereof: But the same Ambrose reaches, that it must be spiritually received,
in the same book, Chap. 9. In illo sacramento Christus est, quia corpus est
Christi, non ergo corporalis esca, sed spiritualis est. In that sacrament
Christ is, because it is the body of Christ, therefore it is not corporal but
spiritual meat. If it be spiritual meat, it must be spiritually received
and not corporally, as it is no corporal meat.

Now follows a long sentence of Chrysostom, Hom. 46. in Joan. which Master
Heskins him self confesses to make no great mention of the sacrament, yet
because he says it follows upon his judgment of the sacrament, I will set
it down to be considered. He says therefore, he that eats my flesh shall
not perish in death, he shall not be damned. But he does not speak of the
common resurrection (for all shall ri^e again) but of that clear and glorious
which deserves reward. Your fathers have eaten Manna in the wilderness, and
be dead. He that eats this bread, shall live for ever. He does often repeat
the same, that it might be imprinted in the minds of the hearers. This was the
last doctrine, that he might confirm the faith of the resurrection and
everlasting life: wherefore after the promise of eternal life, he sets
forth the resurrection, after he has showed that shall be. And how is that
known? By the scriptures, unto which he does always send them to be
instructed by them. When he says, it gives life to the world, he provoke
them to emulation, that if they be moved with the benefit of other men, they
will not be excluded them selves. And he does often make mention of Manna, and
comparing the difference, allureth them to the faith: For if it were possible
that they lived forty years without harvest and corn, and other things
necessary to their living, much more now when they are come to greater
things. For if in those figures they did gather without labor the things set
forth now truly, much more where is no death, and the fruition of true life.
And every where he makes mention of life. For we are drawn with the desire
there of, and nothing is more pleasant then not to dye. For in the old
Testament long life and many days were promised, but now not simply length of
life, but life without end is promised. Hereupon he notes, that we are come
to greater things in the sacrament, then the Jews did in Manna. I grant the
faithful come to greater things then the unbelieving Jews, of whom and to
whom our savior Christ speaks. Otherwise they that were faithful, did eat
the same spiritual meat in Manna that we do in the Sacrament. 1. Cor. 10.
But if the real presence be not in the sacrament (says Master Heskins) Manna
is greater then a bare piece of bread. This comparison is topsituruie.
Chrysostom compares bare Manna, which the wicked received, with the body of
Christ, which the godly take: Master Heskins compares Manna to bare bread.

The one and thirtieth Chapter proceeds in the exposition of the same text by
S. Hierome and S. Cyrill. Hesk.


Hierome is cyted, Ad Hedibiam qust. 2. Si ergo panis, etc. Fulk.
Then if the bread, which came down from heaven, is the body of our Lord, and
the wine, which he gave to his disciples, be his blood of the new Testament,
which was shed for many in remission of sins, let us cast away Jewish fables,
and let us ascend with our Lord into the great parler, paued and made clean,
and let us take of him above, the cup of the new Testament, and there
holding the Passover with him, let us be made drunk by him with the wine of
sobriety: for the kingdom of GOD is not meat and drink, but righteousness
and joy and peace in the holy Ghost. Neither did Moses give us the true
bread, but our Lord Jesus, he being the guest, and the feast, he him self
eating, and which is even. (S. Hierome proceeds with yt which M. Hes.
omitteth.) His blood we drink, and without him we can not drink it, and daily
in his sacrifices we tread out new redd wine of ye fruit of the true vine, and
of the vine of Sorech, which is interpreted chosen: and of these we drink the
wine new in the kingdom of his father, not in the oldenesse of the letter, but
in the newenesse of the spirit. By these words, and more that follows, it is
most evident, that Hieronyme speaks of spiritual eating by faith: as also by
that he says, we ascend with Christ into the parler, by which he means
heaven, and there above, we receive the cup of the new Testament. Master
Heskins notes that the bread which descended from heaven is the body of our
Lord. But he must beware he say not, that the natural body of Christ
descended out of heaven. Again, he forgets not to repeat that that bread is
the body of Christ: but he will not see in Hieromes words, that Christ gave
wine to his disciples. Cyrillus is cyted thus, Non enim prudenter, etc. Those
things which suffice for a short time, shall not wisely be called by that name:
neither was that bread good, which the Elders of the Jews did eat and are
dead. For if it had been from heaven, and of God, it had delivered the
partakers of it from death. Contrariwise, that body of Christ is bread from
heaven, because it gives the eaters of it eternal life. Cyrill says, the
body of Christ is the bread that came down from heaven, and which gives
eternal life being eaten, even in the sacrament, all this we confess always.
But as the body of Christ did not naturally descend from heaven, which he
received here on earth, no more speaks he of a carnal presence, or corporal
manner of eating, but yet of his very flesh and blood, eaten spiritually by
faith.

Hesk.
The two and thirtieth Chapter ends the exposition of this text by S.
Augustine and Theophylact.

Fulk.
Saint Augustine is cyted, Tract. 26. i^ Joan. Hic est panis etc. This is the
bread which came down from heaven, that by eating thereof, we might live,
because we can not have eternal life of our selves. Not (says he) as your
Fathers did eat Manna, and are dead. He that eats this bread* shall live
for ever. Therefore that they are dead, he would have it so to be understood,
that they should not live for ever. For truly they also die temporally that
ea^ Christ, but they live eternally, because Christ is eternal life. Master
Heskins wondereth what gloses the adversaries invent upon this saying, but I
marvel what he can pick out of it for his purpose, except it be this, that
who so ever eat Christ, shall live for ever, but that I am sure, he will none
of. The saying of Theophylact, (but that I stand not on his authority being a
late writer) seems to be directly against him. For he says, that The Lord
by his flesh which he took of the Virgin Marie, shall preserve our spiritual
nature. Which as it is very true, Joan. 6.
so must it needs enforce a spiritual receiving. For our spiritual nature
can not receive carnally or corporally: but only spiritually. And yet the wise
man notes in his margent, a plain place for the proclamer, which is plain
against his own purpose.

The three and thirtieth Chapter proceeds to the next text in the sixth of S.
John. Hesk.


The text is, that when our Savior had taught this doctrine in the synagogue
in Capernaum, Fulk.
diverse of his disciples were offended, and said: This is an hard saying: who
can abide it? He answers out of Saint Augustine In Psalm. 98. They were
hard, and not the saying. The like out of Theophylact. In Joan. 6. Who being
carnal, can eat spiritual meat, and the bread which came down from heaven,
and the flesh which is eaten? etc.

For because they had flesh, they thought he would compel them to be deuourers
of flesh and blood. But because we understand him spiritually, we neither are
deuourers of flesh, but rather we are sanctified by such a meat. This place
for any thing that I can see therein, is directly against the carnal eating of
the Papists, saving that Theophylact living in a corrupt time, writes in
other places suspiciously, of the carnal presence and transubstantiation. Now
where Master Heskins charge us, to be Caparnaites, whom he calls
Sacramentaries, and derideth our carnal understanding, because we can not
conceive how Christ's very body should be in the sacrament, except it should
occupy a place and be felt with our senses, let the world judge whether our
understanding or theirs be more spiritual or else more gross, and like the
Capernaites.

Hesk.
The four and thirtieth Chapter begins the exposition of this text: Si
videritis, etc. by Saint Augustine and Saint Cyrill.

Fulke.
The text is this: What if you see the son of man ascend where he was before?
Ere he enter into his exposition, he moves this doubt: how Christ does say:
the son of man shall ascend where he was before, seeing concerning his
humanity he was never in heaven, before he spoke these words? For answer,
he brings a long sentence of Saint Augustine, which contains this in
effect, that Christ concerning his humanity, would ascend thither where he was
before concerning his divinity. For by reason of the union of two natures in
one person of Christ, that is often spoken of the whole person, which is
proper either to the divine nature only, or to the humane nature only.

For exposition he cyteth Augustine, Tr. 27. in Joan. Quid est hoc? Hinc
soluit etc. What is this? by this he resolves them, whom he knew, by this he
has opened whereby they were offended, by this plainly, if they would
understand. For they thought that he would give forth his body: but he said,
that he would ascend into heaven whole. When you shall see the son of man
ascending where he was before, certainly even then at least you shall see, that
he gives not forth his body after that manner, that you think: certainly
even then at least you shall understand, that his grace is not consumed with
bytinges. Although this place is so directly against him, that nothing can be
more plain: yet he is not ashamed to cite it for his purpose. Affirming, that
Augustine by these words, denies not the giving of Christ's body, but the
manner of the giving of his body. This we confess, but what manner of giving
does he deny? Master Heskins says: only the giving of it by lumpes and
pieces, as the Capernaites did imagine. But that is false, for he denies, not
only the giving of Christ's body by lumpes, but also al corporal and carnal
manner of giving thereof, as both these words above cited, and the whole
discourse of that treatise does show most evidently. First he says, that
Christ by telling them of his ascension, does clearly resolve them, and open
plainly where at they were offended: Which is very true. For when they should
see that he carried his natural body, whole into heaven, they might well
perceive, that he would not give that body to be eaten after a corporal
manner, either in pieces, and much less in the whole. For ye giving thereof in
whole, is much more monstrous, then the giving thereof in pieces. And if there
remained a corporal receipt of his whole body, notwithstanding his absenting
thereof from the earth, the doubt by his ascension is nothing at all resolved,
but by an hundredth times more increased. Again where he says after his
ascension: Then you shall see, that he gives not his body after the manner
that you think, then you shall understand that his grace is not consumed with
bitings. By these words, he does plainly determine, of the manner of giving,
that the Jews thought, which was corporal, whether it were in whole or in
pieces, and after what manner Christ's body is given, namely by grace. But
Master Heskins cites another place out of Augustine In Psalm. 98. to prove,
that he denies the giving of his body by lumpes or pieces. But the place is
altogether against him, if he had alleged the whole, and not cut it off in the
waste. Tunc autem, etc. Then when our Lord setting forth this had spoken of
his flesh, and had said, except a man eat my flesh, he shall not have in him
life everlasting. Some of the seventy were offended and said: This is an
hard saying, who can understand it? And they departed from him and walked no
more with him. It seemed a hard thing to them which he said: Except a man
eat my flesh he shall not have eternal life. They took it foolishly, they
thought of it carnally, and they thought that our LORD would cut certain
pieces of his body and give them, and they said: this is an hard saying.
Here stays Master Heskins: but it follows in Augustine.

Ille a^tem instruxit eos, etc. But he instructed them, and says unto them: it
is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits nothing. The words which I
have spoken to you are spirit and life. Understand you spiritually that which
I have spoken. You shall not eat this body which you see, and drink that
blood which they shall shed, which shall crucify me. I have commended unto you
a certain sacrament or mystery, which being understood spiritually shall
give you life. Although it be needful that it be celebrated visibly, yet it
must be understood inuisibly. In these words Augustine denies, not only the
giving of his body in pieces, but all manner of corporal eating of his
natural and visible body, and aduoucheth only a spiritual understanding of
this text, that we have been so long in expounding. But M. Heskins wills us
not to triumph before the victory, for Augustine In sermo. ad Neophy. has a
plain place for M. Jewel. Hoc accipite in pane, etc. Take ye this in the
bread, that did hang on the cross: Take ye this in the challice, that was shed
out of the side of Christ. He shall have death not life, that thinks Christ
a liar. If M. Heskins had expressed in what book or ^ome, I should have sought
for this sermon Ad Norphil. he might have spared me a great deal of labor
which I have lost in searching for it and yet cannot find it. There are many
homilies and sermons of Augustine Ad Neophyl: and yet in none of them can I
read that which he aduouched out of him. It seems therefore that this place
is taken out of some later writer yt without judgment ascribes it to
Augustine, which is not to be found in his works: And yet the saying is not
such but yt it may have a reasonable interpretation, for ye bread (after a
certain manner as Augustine speaks) is yt which did hang on the cross, and
the wine is yt which was shed out of his side, yt is sacrame^tally, but not
naturally or after a bodily manner. S. Cyril follows ca. 22. sup. 6. Joan. Ex
imperitia multi, etc. Many that followed Christ for lack of knowledge, not
understanding his words, were troubled. For when they had heard, Verily,
verily I say unto you, Except you shall eat the flesh of the son of man and
drink his blood you shall have no life in you: they thought they had been
called by Christ to the cruel manners of wild beasts, and provoked that they
would eat the raw flesh of a man, and drink blood, which are even horrible
to be heard: for they had not yet known the form, and most goodly
dispensation of this mystery. This also (moreover) they did think: how shall
the flesh of this man give us eternal life? Or how can he bring us to
immortality? Which things when he understood to whose eyes all things are bare
and open: he drives them to the faith by an other marvelous thing: Without
cause (says he) O sire are ye troubled for my words. And if you will not
believe that life is given by my body unto you, what will you do, when you see
me fly up into heaven? I do not only say that I will ascend, least you
should ask again how that should be, but you shall see it with your eyes so
to be done. Therefore what will you say when you see this? Shall not this be a
great argument of your madness? For if you think that my flesh can not bring
life unto you, how shall it ascend into heaven like a bird? How shall it fly
into the air? For this is a like impossible to mankind. And if my flesh
beside nature shall ascend into heaven, what lets but it may likewise
beside nature give life? Cyrill notes (as M. Heskins says) two vain
thoughts of the Capernaites, one of eating raw the flesh of Christ, the other
how yt flesh should give life, the latter he answers at large, the other
breefely, they understood not the form and dispensation of the mystery, by
which he means the spiritual and mystical manner of receiving his body,
clean contrary to their gross imagination, for otherwise the ascension of
Christ would not answer that doubt, but increase it. Master Heskins cites
another text, to show the power of Christ's flesh, which is needelesse, for
it is confessed of us to be such, as he himself has declared it to be. Non
verbo soliu, etc. In Joan. 14.
He did not only with his word raise dead men, but also with his touching, to
show that his body also does give life. If then with his only touching,
corrupted things are made sound: how shall we not live, which do both taste
and eat that flesh? it will without all doubt refourme again to immortality
the partakers thereof. Neither do thou inquire after the Jewish manner, how?
But remember that although water by nature be cold, ye^ by coming of fire to
it, forgetting her coldene^, it boyleth with heat. Here M. Heskins will not
allow us our gloss, that Cyril speaks of the spiritual receiving of
Christ's flesh, because he teaches more then once, that we are joined to
Christ not only spiritually, but also after the flesh, and that by eating the
same flesh: as though we could not truly be partakers of the flesh of
Christ* by a spiritual receiving of him, not only in the sacracrament, but
also by faith, without the sacrament. And Cyril says, we do both taste and
eat his flesh, which of necessity imployeth a spiritual manner of
receiving, for other taste we have not of Christ's flesh, but spiritual and by
faith. In the end of the Chapter to deliver himself and his fellows from the
gross error of the Capernaites, he scoffeth finely at our spiritual sifting
of the sacrament so fine, that we leave nothing but the bare bran of the
signifying sign in our own hand, which is the gross bread we feed on. If
we taught a bare sign or bare bread in the sacrament, there were some place
for Master Heskins ieaste. But when we teach that presence and receiving,
which Master Heskins so often confesses to be only profitable, and which we
find in the scriptures and ancient doctors, we have the sacrament so
perfectly boulted and fined to our hand, that we acknowledge no branne or
dross at al to be in the bread, neither yet any dregs at all in the cup,
whatsoever there is in the Popish challice, which the priest has sucked and
licked so dry, that there is not one drop of the blood of Christ in it, to
quench the thirst of the poor people.

Hesk.
The fi^e and thirtieth Chapter proceeds, in the exposition of the same text,
and ends it by Euthymius, and Petrus Cluniacensis.

Fulk.
Euthymius is cited In 6. Joan. following the exposition of Cyrillus, as he does
often of the old Greek writers. Si ergo videritis, etc. If therefore ye shall
see, the son of man ascending where he was before, what will you say? He
speaks of the assumption of him self into heaven, ascending according to his
humanity, where he was before, according to his Divinity. For he that can
make this flesh heavenly, can also make it meat of men. Master Heskins
infers upon this saying, that the argument of the ascension used by Christ,
is vain to prove the spiritual eating, but good to prove the real eating of
his flesh. Note here first, that he counts the argument of his ascension
expounded and used by Augustine in the Chapter next before, to be vain.
Secondly although Cyrillus uses the argument of Christ's ascension, to prove
that Christ's flesh being eaten, may as well give life, as it could ascend into
heaven, does it therefore prove a real, corporal, or carnal presence, and
eating of Christ's body, which is taken away by his ascension? But he says,
The flesh of Christ was spiritually the meat of the holy fathers in the old
law, therefore that needed not to be proved possible, which was known so long
before. A wise reason, as though Christ had to do with faithful Jews, and
not with Infidels, that neither knew nor believed, any such matter: or, if he
had spoken to the Patriarchs them selves, as though they had known and
understood the mysteries of Christ so distinctly and plainly, that Christ's
instruction had been needelesse to them. But Master Heskins in all his
arguments and expositions almost, sets down that, as certain and granted,
which is the whole matter in controversy. His meat is flesh in deed, his
flesh is not eaten spiritually, etc. He must have an easy adversary, or else
he shall gain little by such petition of principles. The saying of Petrus of
Clunie, though he be but a late writer, contains more against him, then for
him, for he denies the mangling of Christ's flesh after the Capernaites
imaginations, and teaches, that it is Divided without pain, parted without
diminution, and eaten without consumption, because it is the spirit that
quickens, and because his flesh being so received and understood, gives
eternal life. What can we here understand but a spiritual receiving?

The six and thirtieth Chapter creates of the next text by Augustine, and
Chrysostom. Hesk.


Fulke.
This text is this: it is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits
nothing. This text is made so familiar (he says) that boys and girls can
blatter it against Christ's presence in the sacrament, as though they denied
the virtue of his flesh, that deny your carnal presence in the sacrament. But
we must hear Saint Augustine. Tract. 27. In Joan. Quid est quod adi^ngit, etc.
What is that he joins? It is the spirit that quickens, the flesh profits
nothing? Let us say unto him for he suffers us not gainsaying but desirous to
know) O Lord good Master, how does not the flesh profit any thing, when then
have said: except a man eat my flesh, and drink my blood, he shall not have
life in him? Does not life profit any thing? And wherefore are we that that we
are, but that we may have eternal life, which thou do promise by thy flesh?
What then is it: it profits not any thing? The flesh profits nothing, but
as they understood it. For they understood flesh so, as it is rent in pieces
in a dead body, or sold in the shambles, not as it is quickened by the
spirit: It is therefore so said: the flesh profits nothing, as it is said:
knowledge puffs up a man. Shall we now then hate knowledge? God forbid. And
what it is then? Knowledge p^ffeth up? being alone without charity. Therefore
he added: But charity does edify. Therefore add charity to knowledge, and
knowledge shall be profitable, not by it self but by charity So now likewise
the flesh profits nothing, that is the flesh alone. But let the spirit
come to the flesh, as charity comes to knowledge, and it profits very
much. For if the flesh had profi^ed nothing: the word should not have been
made flesh that it might dwell in us. If Christ have profited us much by his
flesh, how does the flesh profit nothing at all? But the spirit by the flesh
has done some thing for our health. The flesh was that vessel, mark what it
had in it, not what it was. The Apostles were sent, did their flesh profit
nothing? If the flesh of the Apostles profited us not, could our Lords flesh
not profit us? For how came the sound of the word unto us but by the voice of
the flesh? From whence the style? From whence the writing? All these works be
of the flesh, but the spirit moving it as his instrument. Therefore it is the
spirit which quickens, the flesh profits nothing. As they understood
flesh, so do I not give my flesh to be eaten. Master Heskins does glory that
he brings not this sentence truncately as the heretics do, but wholly, that
the reader should not be defrauded of S. Augustines right meaning, upon this
scripture. And here again he repeateth his rotten distinction, that Christ
gives not his flesh by lumpes and pieces, yet gives it corporally, and that
S. Augustine means none otherwise. But as long a sentence as he rehearsed, he
has omitted the very interpretation of his text in hand. Which Augustine
makes in these words: Quid est spiritus and vita? Spiritualiter intelligenda
sunt. What is spirit and life spiritually to be understood: neither is there
one word in all that treatise for the corporal presence, or receiving. And
yet we confess that Christ truly gives us his flesh, and we are truly fed
therewith, but not after a corporal manner, but after a spiritual and
unspeakable manner. Chrysostom is cited hom. 46. In Joan. Quid igitur? caro,
etc. What then? Does the flesh profit nothing? He speaks not of the very
flesh, God forbid, but of them that carnally take those things that are spoken.
And what is it to understand carnally? Simply as the things are spoken, and
not to think any other thing of them. For th^se things that are seen, are
not so to be judged, but all mysteries are to be considered with inward eyes,
that is spiritually. He that eats not my flesh, and drinks not my blood,
has no life in him self. How does the flesh profit nothing without the
which no man can live? See that this particle (The flesh profits not any
thing) is not spoken of the flesh it self, but of the carnal hearing. M.
Hesk. says that Chrysostom needs no expositor, to open his exposition. And
I am of yt same judgment. For he is so plain against al gross and carnal
imagination, about these mysteries, that nothing can be plainer. He says to
understand these things in ye sixth of John simply, as they are spoken, is to
understand them carnally, which ought not to be, for all mysteries must be
understood spiritually, the receiving of Christ in the sacrament is a mystery,
therefore it must be understood spiritually.

The seven and thirtieth Chapter proceeds upon the same text, by Theophylact,
and S. Bernarde. Hesk.


Theophylacte following Chrysostom, Fulke.
as he does very much, when he is not carried from him by the corruption of his
time, says That the words of Christ must be vnderstood^ spiritually: Whereupon
M. Hesk. makes an objection, how those words may be understood spiritually,
and yet ye carnal presence and receiving retained? He answers, yt the Papists
also confess, the words of Christ must be understood spiritually, and first
alleges Theophylacte, to prove that he allowed the carnal presence, which
though they do not undoubtedly prove it, yet considering ye time in which he
lived, it may be granted that he did allow it. What then? Marie spiritual
understanding lets not ye carnal presence. But I have showed before yt while
Theophylact would follow Chrysostom. and yet maintain the error of his time, no
marvel though he were contrary to himself. But spiritual understanding by M.
Hesk. definition, is to understand, yt these things are not done by any
natural mean, but by the spirit of God, namely transubstantiation and such
like. But Chrysostom as we saw in the Chapter before, determined otherwise of
spiritual understanding of this scripture, namely, that the sayings must not
be taken simply as they are spoken, but as mysteries be considered with ye inward
eyes. But M. Heskins has a plain place for the proclaymer out of S. Aug.
sermon. Ad Infant: Quod videtis in altari panis est, etc. That which you see on
the altar is bread and the cup, which also your eyes do show you. But that
faith requires to be instructed: the bread is the body, the cup is the blood.
In the mind of some man such a thought may arise, Our Lord Jesus Christ we
know whence he received flesh, namely of the virgin Marie, he was nourished,
grew up, was buried, rose again, and ascended into heaven, thither he lifted
up his body, from whence he shall come to judge both the quick and the dead.
There he is now siting at the right hand of the father, how is therefore bread
his bodies? or that which is in the cup how is it his blood? Brethren,
therefore those things are called sacraments, because one thing is seen in
them, another thing is understood. That which is seen, has a corporal
form, that which is understood has a spiritual fruit. What plainnes is in
this place, except it be against transubstantiation, and the real presence,
let the readers judge. And withal I must admonish them, that M. Hesk. cites it
far otherwise then it is in Augustine, beside yt he leaves out that which
follows, and makes all the matter as plain as a pack staff, which are these
words: Corpus ergo Christi, etc. Therefore if you wilt understand the body of
Christ, hear the Apostle saying to the faithful: you are the body of Christ
and his members. If you therefore be the body of Christ and his members, your
mystery is set on ye table, you receive ye Lords mystery, you answer Amen to
yt which you are, and in answering you consent. Thou hear therefore the body
of Christ, and thou answerest Amen. Be thou a member of the body of Christ,
that thy Amen may be true. Why then in bread? Let us here bring nothing of our
own. Let us also hear the Apostle. Therefore when he spoke of this sacrament
he says: One bread, we being many are one body. Understand this and rejoice.
By these words it is most manifest that Augustine excludes the carnal
presence, affirming the elements to be the body and blood of Christ, even as
we are the body and members of Christ, and that is spiritually and mystically:
and as we are ye bread, namely by signification, and not by transubstantiation.
The testimonies of Algerus and Bernard I leave to M. Hesk. for that they are
without the compass of the challenge.

The eight and thirtieth Chapter ends the exposition of this text by
Euthymius and Lyra. Hesk.


Euthymius is cited In 6. Joan. in these words: Spiritus est qui viuificat,
etc. It is the spirit that quickens. Fulk.
Now he calls the spirit, the spiritual understanding of those things which
are said: likewise the flesh, to understand them fleshly. For the speech is not
now of his flesh which quickens. Therefore he says: to understand these
things spiritually, gives that life, which I spoke of before: but to
understand them carnally it profits nothing. Master Hesk. would fain make
Euthymius to speak for him, if he could tell how to wring him in, but it will
not be. Spiritual understanding is, as Chrysostom. before in the 36. Chap. has
declared, and not as M. Heskins would rack it, to make it stand with his
gross and carnal understanding. From the judgment of Lyra as no compotent
Judge, I appeal, although in this place he speak nothing for M. Heskins, but
rather against him, for he agrees with the rest that the words must be
spiritually understood.

Hesk.
The nine and thirtieth Chapter begins the exposition of the next text by S.
Augustine and Cyrill.

Fulk.
The text is this: the words that I speak unto you are spirit and life, of
which Augustine writes thus: Tra. 27. In Joan. Quid est, etc. What is it, they
are spirit and life? They are spiritually to be understood. Have thou
understood them spiritually? they are spirit and life. Have thou understood
them carnally? Even so also they are spirit and life, but not to thee. M.
Heskins having once made a blind determination of spiritual understanding,
takes spiritual understanding wheresoever he finds it for carnal
understanding, and carnal understanding for spiritual understanding, without
all ryme or reason. Hom. 46. in Joan.
But still Chrysostom lies in his way: to understand carnally, is to
understand things simply as they are spoken, for all mysteries must be
understood with inward eyes, that is, spiritually. When the inward eyes see the
bread they pass over the creatures, neither do they think of that bread,
which is baked of the baker, but of him, which called himself the bread of
eternal life. Cyril is cited Cap. 24. In 6. Joan. Verba quae, etc. The words
which I have spoken to you are spirit and life. He shows that his whole body
is full of quickening virtue of the spirit. For here he called his very
flesh, spirit, not because it lost the nature of flesh, and is changed into
the spirit: but because being perfectly joined with it, it has received the
whole power to quicken. Neither let any man think, this to be spoken
indecently, for he that is surely joined to the Lord, is one spirit with him.
How then shall not his flesh be called one with him? It is after this manner
therefore which is said: you think I said this earthly and mortal body of
his own nature to be quickening or giving life, but I spoke of the spirit and
life. For the nature of the flesh of it self cannot quicken, but the power of
the spirit has made the flesh quickening. Therefore the words, which I have
spoken, that is those things which I spoke unto you are spirit and life, by
which my flesh also lives and is quickening. Cyrill having his mind still
bent against the Nestorians, earnestly avouches ye truth of Christ's flesh
united to his Divinity, but for M. Hesk. purpose he says nothing at all, I
mean for the carnal manner of receiving Christ's flesh in the sacrament. The
name of Capernaites M. Hesk. so much misliketh, that he would turn it over to
us, if he could invent any balde reason to prove it agreeing to our doctrine.
The sacramentaries he says are carnal and gross, because they say that
Papists receive nothing but bare flesh, and not the flesh of Christ, which is
united to the Deity, and gives life. But indeed the Papists say as much,
when they say that the flesh of Christ is received, where it gives no life. As
for those whom he calls sacramentaries they will not grant, yt the Papists
(although they prate so grossly of flesh and blood,) yet receive any thing,
but a wafer cake, and a draught of wine.

The fortieth Chapter ends the exposition of this text, and so of the
process of the sixth of S. John by Euthymius, and Lyra. Hesk.


Euthymius to end this long and tedious process, Fukle.
is cited, as before In. 6. Joan. Verba quae, etc. The words which I speak
unto you are spirit and life, they are spiritual and quickening. For we must
not look upon them simply, that is understand them carnally. But imagine a
certain other thing, and to behold them with inward eyes as mysteries, for
this is spiritually to understand. Euthymius affirms the same, that
Chrysostom does Hom. 46. In Joan. and almost in the same words, neither can
M. Hesk. draw any thing out of the^ to serve his humor, but that the
sacraments are mysteries, and therefore some other thing must be present, then
is seen with the outward eye: which is true, so it be such a thing as may be
seen only with the eyes of the mind, of which the author speaks. But the
body of Christ, as Aug. says, even immortal and glorified, is still visible.
Ep. 85. Consentio. To wrangle about ye sentence of Lyra it were loss of time,
who although he will have a real presence, yet he will have The flesh of Christ
to be eaten in the sacrament after a spiritual manner, because the spirit by
the power of God united to the flesh is refreshed. Whereupon M. Hesk. rejecting
the true spiritual manner of eating Christ's flesh in ye sacrament by faith,
as heretical, which he has so often before allowed, as only profitable:
sets up three other spiritual manners of Christ's presence in the sacrament
for three causes. First, because it is wrought by the spirit of God. Secondly,
because, although it be verily present, it is not known by corporal sense,
but by spiritual knowledge of faith. Thirdly, because our spirit by the power
of God, is united to the flesh: of these devises he makes Lyra the author,
and he may be well enough. For such blind teachers, while they wrangled about
words, they became altogether vain in their imaginations, and lost the true
sense and meaning, both of the word of God, and of the sacraments. The railing
stuff wherewith he concludes this Chapter, and this worthy exposition
continued in 36. Chapters, I pass over as unworthy of any answer.

Hesk.
The one and fortieth Chapter begins, the exposition of these words of
Christ: this is my body, after the mind of the adversaries.

The first part of this Chapter conteyneth a fond and lewd comparison of the
doctrine of the Sacramentaries, Fulke.
with the temptation of the devil, used to our first parents* which, because
it shows nothing but M. Hesk. wit and stomach, I omit. It has more color
of reason that he brings in afterward: namely that there are two things,
which ought to move men to resist the temtation of the sacramentaries: their
contrariety to the word of God, and their contrariety among them selves.
Their contrariety to the word of God, he says to be, where Christ said:
This is my body, Satan says, it is not his body. In very deed, if after
Christ has said, the bread and wine are his body and blood, any man should
rise up and say, they are not his body and blood at al, we might well judge
yt he spoke by the spirit of Satan: as when Christ says, drink ye all of
this, and the Pope says to the people, there shall none of you all drink of
this, we may easily acknowledge the spirit of Antichrist. But we (whom he
calls sacramentaries) do with all reverence and humility confess, that the
bread and the wine ministered according to Christ's institution, are the body
and blood of Christ, in such sense, as he said they were. And we say with S.
Augustine: Per similitudinem Christus multa est quae per proprietatem non est.
Per similitudinem and petrae est Christus, and ostium est Christus, and lapis
angularis est Christus, etc. By similitude, Christ is many things, which he is
not by property. By similitude the rock is Christ, ye door is Christ, the
corner stone is Christ, etc. Wherefore, we affirm nothing contrary to the
words of Christ, but altogether agreeable to his meaning. For contrariety of
Sacramentaries among them selves, he cites a saying of Luther written in his
frowardness, that there should be eight several disagreeing spirits among
the Sacramentaries, from which, if you take away Carolostadius, Swenkfeldius,
Campanus, and the eight without name, which is belike H. N. opinion, that every
man may think of it what he list, whose opinions the godly, whom he calls
sacramentaries, did ever more detest as wicked and ungodly: there remains ye
interpretation of Zwinglius, of the words of Christ, This signifies my body:
and of Oecolampadius, This is a token of my bod^e: and two other, Receive the
benefits of my passion: and Take this as a monument, or remembrance of my body
crucified for you, which differ in form of words, and are all one in deed
and meaning. So is the judgment of Melancthon: this is the participation of my
body: And of Calvin, yet not as Heskins like a lewd liar slaundereth him, to
say, This is the very substance of my body, but it is not my bodily
substance, but agreeing in effect with all the rest, that the very body of
Christ is received, but not after a carnal or bodily manner, but after a
spiritual and unspeakable manner. As for the five sects numbered among the
Lutherans, which dissent from us in this point, we make none account of them.

Thus, where M. Hesk has gathered, as he reckons, sixteen several sects,
four of them being condemned of us for heretical, with the authors of them,
five agreeing with the papists in the carnal presence, and Luthers own
sect, if he dissent from them, as Heskins makes him to do, the sixth, ten
are of us generally refused. The other six, that remain in Master Heskins
number, are falsely forged to disagree, when they hold all one thing in
effect, although they express the same thing in diverse forms of words, as
it is not possible for diverse interpreters, though they agree in sense and
interpretation, to iump all in one form of words, for then all commentaries
should be one. But as God gives his gifts diuersely, some expound the
scriptures briefly, some more at large, some more plainly, some more
obscurely: so all these, and five hundred more, (God be thanked) learned men
either in writing, or in preaching, have showed the understanding of Christ's
words, hardly five of them agreeing in all terms and phrases, yet all most
sweetly consenting in one sense, and meaning, which consent and agreement is
more notable, when it is uttered in so many diverse forms of words. And yet,
to take away all cauels and flaunders, all the churches for the most part in
France, Scotland, Sauoy, Heluetia, Germany, Hungary, Piemont, Polonia, etc.
beside the persecuted Churches of Italians, Spaniards, and others, have
subscribed to one form of confession, concerning not only the sacrament, but
all other principal points of religion, which we do likewise receive in this
Church of England. And if disagreing of men among themselves, were a matter of
such importance, it were no hard thing, to show the battles of the school
doctors among the Papists, not only about other matters, but even about the
manner of the presence of Christ's body in the sacrament, and
transsubstantiation. If you say, all these, whom you reiecte, as the Lutherans
in this point, the Swinkefeldians, Anabaptists, Libertines, Henrinicolaites,
and such other, do all disagree with you, from the Catholic church of Rome,
therefore you are all together naught. By this reason, all Christianity might
be condemned of the Jews and Gentiles, because so many sects and heresies as
be under the name of Christianity, together with the true Church of Christ,
be all against Iudaisme and Gentilisme. But agreeing or disagreeing of men
among themselves, is a weak argument, to prove or disprove any thing, only
agreeing with the truth, is a sure reason to allow, and disagreeing from the
truth, is a certain argument to refuse, either men, or matter propounded by
them.

The two and fourtieth Chapter, begins the exposition of the words of
Christ, after the Catholic manner, with certain proves of the same. Hesk.


First, Fulk.
he sets down the sayings of the three Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, and
Luke, and of the Apostle Paul, in which they describe the institution of the
sacrament: of which he says, not one makes any mention of tropes, figures,
or significations, wherein he uses a shameless kind of Sophistry: for
although they name no tropes, or figures, or signification, yet by the Papists
own confession, Saint Luke, and S. Paul, use manifest tropes, figures, and
significations, namely, where they say: This cupp is the new testament in my
blood. First, it is a trope or figure, to say, the cupp, for that which is
contained in the cup, unless they will say, that the cupp, of what metal or
matter so ever it was, was likewise transubstantiated into the blood of Christ.

Likewise, where he says: this cup is the new testament or covenant, he
must either acknowledge a signification, this cup signifies the new
testament, or else he must make the new testament to be nothing else but a
cup.

Finally, where he says, this cup is the new testament in my blood, except
he acknowledge a trope or figure, he will utterly deny that, which is in the
cup, to be the blood of Christ.

And out of all controversy, this manner of speech used by Saint Luke and
Saint Paul, is a manifest interpretation of the words used by S. Mathewe, and
Saint Mark, this is my blood, which are all one in sense and meaning, and
teach us how the words spoken of the bread are to be interpreted, this is
my body, this is the new testament in my blood, which is as much to say,
this is a seal, and confirmation of the new covenant, (which is remission of
sins) purchased by the breaking of my body, and the shedding of my blood for
you. This bread and this cup received of you, shall assure you, that you are
truly incorporated into my body, and so made partakers of eternal life. This
interpretation has in it nothing far fetched, or strange, from ye words of
Christ, and ye usual manner of speaking in the scripture.

But now M. Heskins will prove, that the words of Christ are to be
understood without trope or figure, by the slanders of the Infidels, which
defamed ye Christians in the primitive Church, for eating the flesh of men and
of children, as appears in Eusebius. lib. 5 Cap. 2. and 3. in the story of
Blandina and Attalus martyrs: when they did eat the flesh of Christ. But none
of them, neither in Eusebius, nor yet Iustine, Origin, Tertullian, or any other
that have written Apollogies, defended the Christians, by the commandment of
Christ, to eat his body, but utterly denied and derided the slander, that
they were said, to eat the flesh of men or children, as they did other
slanders, which had no ground nor similitude of truth, as that they
worshipped an Asses head, yt they companyed together in the dark like brute
beasts, and such like: whereas, if they had eaten the natural flesh of
Christ, as the Papists teach, they would neither have simply denied ye eating
of a man's flesh, nor yet have spared to show, how it was eaten under the
forms of bread and wine, to avoid all cruelty and lothsomnes. As for the
legend of S. Andrews passion, which M. Heskins says was written per
Presbyteros and diaconos Achaie, is of as good credit, as ye book of Beuis of
Hampton, ye like I say of ye fable of Amphilochius a new found old writer:
concerning the Jew, that saw a child divided when the sacrament was broken.
The Legend and festival have many such miracles. But why did he not see a man
divided, seeing Christ is not now a child, but a man? Belike the authors of
those miracles thought, that if they feigned him to be a little child like Tom
Thumb, their miracles should be more credited, that such a one should be
contained in their cake, rather then a tall man of perfect stature. O impudent
asses! But it proves well the real presence (says M. Hes.) that Auerrois a
Philosopher says: I have walked over the world, I have found diverse sects,
and yet have I found none so foolish a sect. is is the sect of the Christians.
For they devour with their teeth their God whom they worship. Hereof it is
easy to perceive (says he) that ye fame was, that they did receive and eat
Christ, whom they honored. But herein M. Hes. bewrays either his falsehood,
or his ignorance. For he speaks as though Auerrois were an ancient
Philosopher, that lived in the days of the primitive Church, whereas he was a
Spanish Mahometist, or rather Athist, not past three or four hundredth years
ago, when Popery was in ye greatest pride, and Idolatry covered the face of
the earth. His saying therefore proves nothing, but how great an offense ye
popish Idolatry did give to ye Heathen, Turks, and Jews. And whereas
Justinius in his Apollogie to the Emperor, declares whatsoever was done in the
assemblies of the Christians, he well discharges them of all slanders that
were raised against them, but defends not the corporal eating of man's flesh
by the commandment of Christ, although he confess that they received that
bread not as common bread, nor as common drink: but as their flesh and blood
was nourirished by that food, so they were persuaded that it was the flesh and
blood of Jesus Christ for the spiritual food of their souls.

As for the curse that Rupertus threatens to them that add unto the word of
God* pertains not to them yt give the true sense of the word of God, whether
it be in more words or fewer. And whereas Rupertus says these words of
Christ, I am a vine, and this is my body, be no like speeches: I confess, they
are not in every respect, because in the one he did institute a sacrament, in
the other he taught as by a similitude, the true end, use, and signification of
the sacrament. Yet are they not altogether unlike, because they are both
figurative, and so judged and compared together by the ancient Fathers. But
Rupertus will prove by two reasons, that the latter is no figure. First,
because in the former, there is a continuation of the Allegory, which proves
it to be a figure, in the other there is none such. This is a fond reason, for
both we have showed a continuation of the trope, where he said, this cup is
the new Testament, and although there were none, yet that can not exclude a
figure, no more then when baptism is called regeneration, when the lamb is
called the Passover, which be sacramental speeches and such like, where no
continuation of the figure follows. The other reason of Rupertus, M. Heskins
divides into two parts. The first is, to note the enunciation of both
scriptures, for he does not take a branch of a vine, and say, I am this vine,
or this vine is my body, but he says of the bread, this is my body. A strong
reason: he says (as signanter) by a certain demonstration of substance, and
speaking of the same sacrament, That rock was Christ, and in the time when it
was a sacrament, it was and might be truly said, pointing to the rock, this
is Christ, and to the water issuing out of it, this is the blood of Christ, and
so no doubt, Christ spoke by his spiri^e in the consciences of the faithful.
The second part of Rupertus reason is, that ye words which follow, which is
given for you, etc. can not be applied to the figure, therefore the sense of
that place is proper, and not figurative. But contrariwise, these words can
not be applied to the sacrament, therefore the speech is not proper but
figurative, and show how the bread and the cup are the body and blood of
Christ, namely, as his body is broken and his blood shed for us, for the
virtue of the sacrament stands in his passion, by which his body and blood
offered in sacrifice for our sins, are made a spiritual food of our souls.
The conference that Rupertus makes between the words of Christ, and the
words of the serpent, I pass over, as containing no argument in them for the
proof of M. Heskins bill, but only showing the corrupt judgment of the
author, whose reasons I am content to weigh, but I esteem not his authority,
as being a late prop of the Popish church.

The three and fortieth Chapter begins to prove the understanding of
Christ's foresaid words not to be figurative, by the authority of the
Fathers. And first by Alexander and Justinius. Hesk.


Iustine is alleged in this second Apology in a corrupt Latin translation,
Fulk.
which he makes worsse by falsifying the same in his English translation. The
place has been already considered in the first book Chap. 27. according to
the original Greek copy. I will now rehearse the same after his Latin
translation, and afterward show M. Heskins falsification. Cum autem etc. When
he that is ouerseer has given thanks, and all the people have assented, they
which are called Deacons with us, do distribute to every one that is present,
that they may take part in the bread in which thanks is given, and of the
wine and water, and carry it to those which are not present. And this food
which is called thanks giving: Of which it is not lawful for any other to
take part, but he that believes those things to be true which are taught by
us, and which is washed in the lauer unto remission of sins and regeneration,
and so lives as Christ has taught. Neither do we take these things as common
bread and a common cup: but even as by the word of God Jesus Christ our savior
being incarnate, had both flesh and blood: so we are taught that the food
through the prayer of his word being consecrated by thanksgiving, of which our
flesh and blood by transmutation are nourished, is the flesh and blood of Jesus
Christ, which was incarnate. For the Apostles in their commentaries, which are
called Gospels, have taught that he did so command them, That when he had
taken bread and given thanks, he said, Do this in remembrance of me, this is my
body. And likewise when he had taken the cup and given thanks that he said:
This is my blood, and gave first to them alone. M. Heskins has falsified this
author in his translation. First, where he turns is qui pressed, the priest,
as though there were Mass priests in that time. Secondly, quae docentur a
nobis, that be taught of us, as though none should receive the sacrament, but
they which believe the real presence, which he surmiseth to be taught to the^.
But more notably, where he translateth these words: Sie verbi sui oratione,
consecratum gratiarum action alimentum, ex quo caro nostra, and sanguis per
transmutationem aluntur, ipsius incarnati Jesus Christi and carnem and sanguinem
esse educti sumus. Into this English, with foysting in a parenthesis, and
changing his letter. EVEN SO WE BE TAVGHT THAT THE FOOD (wherewith our flesh
and blood be nourished by alteration) WHEN IT IS CONSECRATED BY THE PRAYER OF
HIS WORD, TO BE THE FLESH AND BLOOD OF THE SAME JESUS INCARNATED. In this
beastly racking and perverting, he has left out thank^giuing, not knowing where
to place it. The cause of this falsification is, for that he can not abide,
that the food after it is consecrated, should nourish our bodies, which Justinius
does most expressly affirm. But before I proceed to his collections, I will
gather my self out of this place, that which the Papists will not well like of,
and yet although they would burst for anger, they can not avoid, but that they
be necessary collections. First, that there was no private Mass in his days,
for all that were present did communicate. Secondly, that the people, as well
as the ministers, received in both kinds. Thirdly, that the things whereof they
were partakers, were bread, wine, and water, which after they were consecrated,
were the nourishment of their bodies. Now let us hear M. Hes. collection for
the real presence. First he says not, these things were signs, figures,
tokens: therefore they were none. A tried argument of the authority, of a man
negatiuely. Secondly he says, they were taught that by consecration, they were
made by ye power of Gods word, the flesh and blood of Christ that was
incarnated. We believe the same likewise. Thirdly M. Hes says, the real
presence was as certain to the primitive Church, as the incarnation. So says
not Justinius, neither that the sacrament was the same substance of natural
flesh and blood of Jesus that was incarnat by that divine and wonderful means,
by which he was incarnate, and this do we most constantly believe. And
therefore here is no plain place for the proclamer to prove the real
presence, whereof Iustine speaks none otherwise, then the proclamer did
speak, and believe while he lived.

But M. Heskins, although there was never seen a more impudent falsifier of
the Doctors sayings and meanings, and even in this place as I have plainly
discovered, most lewdly corrupted the authors words by false translation: yet
he shameth not to slander holy and learned Cranmer of the same crime. But what
should an harlot do? but after she has played the strumpet, call every honest
woman she meets whore first? Cranmer (says he) reports, as though Iustine
should say, the sacrament is but called the body of Christ. This is first an
intolerable lie. For Cranmer says, it is called the body of Christ, he says
not it is but called so, that is only called so. Secondly Cranmer said out of
Justinius, that these creatures after they be consecrated do nourish the bodies,
and are changed into them. And therein he says most truly, and as the words
of Iustine are, and as the Latin translation is, and Master Heskins most
falsely has corrupted them, as I showed before. Of which falsification being
guilty in his own conscience, he flees from his former Latin translation
which is true in this point, to the translation of Petrus Nannius a Papist,
which yet helps him not, but by false pointing and displacing of the words,
Ita quoque per preces verbi illius, cibum ex quo caro nostra and sanguis per
immutationem aluntur cum benedictus fuerit, Jesus ipsius incarnati, carnem and
sanguinem didicimus esse. But the Greek Article is so placed, as it can abide
no such patcherie: (...).

Even so we are taught that that food after thanks are given for it by prayer
of his word, of which our flesh and blood by permutation are nourished, is the
flesh and blood of that Jesus which was incarnated. So are the very words of
Iustine.

But to help out the matter, Ambrose is alleged. Lib. 4. de sacra. Cap. 5.
Before it be consecrated it is bread, but when the words of Christ are come to
it, it is the body of Christ. But the same Ambrose in the same book and
Chapter, says of the sacrament in the prayer of the Church: Fac nobis, inquit,
hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabile^: quod est figura corporis
and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Make unto us (says the priest) this
oblation ascribed, reasonable, acceptable: which is the figure of the body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ. By these words it is manifest, how Ambrose and
the Church in his time, took the bread to be the body of Christ. The like may
be said of Augustine, whose words M. Heskins cyteth, De verbis Domini, ser. 8.
Before the words of Christ that which is offered is called bread, when the
words of Christ are spoken now it is not called bread, but is called his body.
Who sees not yt these words are uttered by comparison, it is not caled bread,
but his body, that is, it is rather called his body then bread, as S. Paul
says, Christ sent me not to baptize, but to preach, that is, rather to preach
then to baptize?

But now comes in the authority of Alexander sometime Bishop of Rome, to
which I will not vouchsafe to make any answer, because it is a mere forgerie
and counterfeit Epistle, as all ye pack of these decretall Epistles are, yt are
feined in the name of those ancient holy Martyrs, sometimes Bishops of the
city of Rome, by some lewd Losel, that could not write true Latin, as is
easy to see of all men that will take pains to read such beastly baggage. I
will give you a taste of this counterfeit Alexander, speaking of holy water: If
the ashes being sprinkled with the blood of a heifer did sanctify the people,
much more shall water sprinkled with salt, and hallowed with godly prayers. See
how the brutish blasphemous Ass, transferreth the argument of the Apostle,
Heb. 9. from the precious blood of Christ to his beggarly holy water. I will
therefore leave M. Heskins rooting with his groyne in this draffe sack, and
pass to the next Chapter.

The four and fortieth Chapter by occasion of the words of Alexander,
treats of the adoration and honoring of Christ's body in the sacrament. Hesk.


It is a worshipful Alexander, that gave you the occasion of this discourse by
his words. But let the occasion go, we will look to the matter. First he
rehearses half a side of M. Jewels words against the adoration of the
sacrament, out of which he gathers two arguments, the one thus: Christ never
gave commandment to worship the sacrament: ergo, it is not to be done. This
argument he answers is negative, and therefore concludes nothing. But under
correction of his great Logike, when God charge us to do that only, which he
commands, an argument of negatiues of Gods commandment concludes al
things to be unlawful, which God has not commanded. He brings examples of
many that worshipped Christ, yet had they no commandment of him so to do. A
great number worshipped him not as God, but as the Prophet of God, for which
they had commandment in the law, and they that worshipped him as God most
especially. But M. Heskins will make the like argument, Christ gave the
sacrament of his body to the Apostles only, and gave no commandment that all
people should receive it indifferently, wherefore it ought not to be done.
Reverend M. Doctor, I deny your antecedent, for ye can not prove, that he
gave it only to his Apostles, nor that he gave no commandment, for he gave an
express commandment to continue ye same ceremony until his coming again,
as S. Paul does testify. Therefore your argument is as like, as an apple is
like an oyster. But to pass over the rest of his babbling against the
proclamers learning, too well known, to be defaced by such an obscure
Doctors censure: I come to his second argument. S. Paul that took the
sacrament at Christ's hand, and as he had taken it, delivered it to the
Corinthians, never willed adoration or godly honor to be given to it. This
argument he will not vouchsafe to answer, as concluding nothing, but he
denies the antecedent, saying, It is false, that S. Paul delivered no more to
the Corinthians then Christ did. First he will make Paul a liar, when he
said, that which I received I delivered, etc. But how will he prove that he
delivered more then Christ did? If you can spare laughter in reading, I could
not in writing. Forsooth S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians, that the
unworthy receiver shall be guilty of the body and blood of Christ, whereas
Christ when he instituted the sacrament gave no such law. O noble Divine! as
though that if Christ at his supper had used no longer discourse of this
sacrament, then those few words, which the Evangelists do rehearse, as a
sum thereof, yet it was not necessarily to be gathered, that the unworthy
receiver contemning the body and blood of Christ, which is offered to him, is
guilty of heinous injury against the same, and therefore it is necessary
that every one that receives it, should examine him self that he receive it
worthily. Whether Christ received Judas or no, which is not agreed upon: but if
he did, knowing him by his divine knowledge to be a reprobate, though not yet
discovered to the knowledge of man, he gave us none example to receive
notorious wicked persons, whom we as men know to be unworthy without
repentance.

But to make the matter out of doubt, Saint Paul, though not by the term of
adoration, yet willed honor to be given to the sacrament. When he says, let a
man examine him self, and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this
cup. For a man cannot examine him self without great honor given unto the
sacrament. And for more manifest proof, Saint Paul refers the honor or
dishonor that is done by worthy or unworthy receiving, not to the grace of
GOD, or merit of Christ's passion, but to the sacrament. Who so eats this
bread, and drinks this cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of Christ. Nay rather, he refers the honor or contempt
of the sacrament to the body and blood of Christ, whose sacrament this is, as
the words are plain. But who would think that Master Heskins would play the
fool so egregiously, to abuse his reader with ambiguities and aequiuocations?
as though there were no difference between adoration and honoring, that is,
giving of due reverence unto the sacraments, and worshipping them as Gods. But
S. Augustine (I trow) helps him, Ep. 118. ad Ian. Placuit etc. It has
pleased the holy Ghost, that in honor of so great a sacrament, the body of
Christ should enter into the mouth of a Christian man before other meats. I
hold him as blind as a beetle, that sees not honor in this place to
signify reverence, which is given to holy things, and not adoration, which
pertayneth only to GOD. His last reason to prove, that Saint Paul taught the
adoration of the sacrament, is that, which is the whole controversy, that
Saint Paul taught the carnal presence, but that remains to be proved
afterward.

The five and fortieth Chapter proves by the same Doctors, that the proclamer
names, that the sacrament is to be honored. Hesk.


This is a mere mockery, the Bishop speaks against adoration of the
sacrament as God, M. Heskins proves, Fulke.
that it is to be honored, that is to say, reverenced as a holy ceremony.
And none otherwise then the sacrament of baptism, as we shall see by his
proofs. First, Chrysostom being one that is named by the Bishop, makes so
clear mention thereof, as M. Heskins thinks, the reader will marvel, he was
not ashamed to name him. And what says he? De sacerdotio lib. 6. thus he
writes: Quum autem ille etc. But when he (meaning the Priest) has called
upon the holy Ghost, and has finished that sacrifice, most full of horror and
reverence, when the common Lord of all men is daily handled in his hands: I
ask of thee in what order shall we place him? How great integrity shall we
require of him? How great religion? For, consider what hands those ought to
be, which do minister, what manner of tongue, that speaks those words.
Finally, then what soul, that soul ought not to be purer and holier, which
has received that so great and so worthy a spirit? At that time eue^ the
Angels do set by the Priest, and all the order of heavenly powers lifts up
cries, and the place near to the altar in honor of him which is offered, is
full of the companies of Angels. Which thing a man may fully believe, even for
the great sacrifice which is there finished. And I truly did hear a certain
man reporting, that a certain wonderful old man, and one to whom many
mysteries of revelations are opened by God, did tell him, that God did once
vouchsafe to show him such a vision, and that for that time he saw as far
as the sight of man could bear, soudenly a multitude of Angels clothed in
shining garments compassing the altar, finally so bowing the head, as if a man
should see the soldiers stand when the king is present, which thing I do
easily believe. In these words Chrysostom does hyperbolically amplify the
excellency of the Ministers office, unto which no man is sufficient. But
notwithstanding, he rehearses a vision by hearesay, of angels reuerencing the
presence of God, to advance the dignity of the ministry, yet speaks he not
one word, that the sacrament is to be worshipped and adored as God. And
therefore M. Heskins makes a poor consequence, the ministration of ye
sacrament is honorable: ergo, much more a man ought to honor the sacrament.
The ministration of baptism is honorable, does it therefore follow, that the
water of baptism is to be worshipped as God? An other testimony he cyteth out
of Chrysostomes Liturgy, which he calls his Mass, which though it be out of
doubt none of Chrysostomes penning, yet makes it nothing for the adoration of
the sacrament: Thou that fittest above with the father, and art here present
with us inuisibly, vouchsafe to give unto us thy undefiled body, and thy
precious blood, and by us to all the people. Then the Priest adoreth, and the
Deacon in the place where he is, thrice says secretly. God be merciful to me
a sinner. And all the people likewise with godliness and reverence do adore.
It is said here they do adore, but not the sacrament, but God. For here have
passed no words of the consecration as yet by the Papists own rule, therefore
this adoration can not be referred to the sacrament. And yet M. Heskins is so
blockish to gather, that he fitteth in heaven, and yet is here present, as
though he were present in body before they had prayed that he would give them
his body, etc. But yet an other place of Chrysostom, Hom. 24. in 1. Cor. 10.
Christus suam, etc Christ has given v^ his flesh, that we might be filled
therewith, whereby he has allured us very much into his love. Let us therefore
with feruencie and most vehement love come unto him, that we suffer not a more
grievous punishment. For the greater benefit we take, so much more shall we
be punished, when we shall appear unworthy of it. This body did the
wisemen reverence in the manger, and being both ungodly men and barbarous,
after they had ended a long journey with much fear and trembling did worship
it. Let us therefore that are citizens of heaven follow those strangers. For they
when they did see only that manger and cottage, and none of those things which
thou now beholdest, came with great reverence and horror. But thou see it
not in the manger but in the altar, not a woman which holds it in her arms,
but the Priest present, and the spirit so abundantly powered upon the
sacrifice that is set forth. Neither do thou see a simple body, as they
did, but thou do acknowledge his power, and all the administration. And thou
art not ignorant of any of the things that by him were made, and t^ou art
diligently instructed in all things. Let us be stirred up, and tremble, and
declare more godliness then those barbarous men* Note here* reverence and
trembling, but no worshipping of the sacrament, no, not although he says the
wise men did worship his body in the manger, yet dare he not conclude, that
we ought to adore it in the sacrament. Wherefore it is intolerable, that M.
Heskins gathers that in the first place, he declares that it is to be
honored, in the second, he declares the practice of him self, his ministers,
and all the people in worshipping it, and in the last yt he provoke al men to
honor it in the altar by the example of the wise men. For none of these three
can be concluded out of ye same places. Next follows Ambrose, De spiritu
sanct. lib. 3. cap. 12. Per scabellum terra etc. By the footstool the earth is
understood, and by the earth the flesh of Christ, which as this day also we do
adore in the mysteries which the Apostles, as we have said before, did adore
in our Lord Jesus: For Christ is not divided, but one. By adoring, he means
the reverent use of the mysteries, and not worshipping ye sacraments as though
Christ were present in them, as he is in heaven, for that he acknowledges not,
but only a sacramental presence, as has been showed often already, and more
shall be, as occasion serves. And he says we worship or reverence the flesh of
Christ in the mysteries, he says not we worship the mysteries as the flesh of
Christ. Finally we worship Christ in the sacraments as we do in the word, and
yet we imagine no carnal presence in either of them. Yea, we honor him, his
ministers, both civil Magistrates, and Ecclesiastical teachers, and yet we
have none of the^ as transubstantiated into Christ. The last is S. Augustine In
Psalm. 98. Adore ye the footestole of his feet, for it is holy. But see
brethren what he bids us to adore. In another place the scripture says:
Heaven is my seat, and earth is the footestoole of my feet. Then he
commands us to adore the earth, because he said in an other place, that it is
the footestoole of God. And how shall we adore the earth? when the scripture
says plainly, thou shall adore the Lord thy God, and here he says, adore his
footestoole. And expou^ding to me what is his footstool, he says: the earth
is my footstool, I am made doutful, I am afraid to adore the earth, least he
condemn me, which has made heaven and earth. Again, I am afraid not to adore
the footstool of my Lord, because the Psalm says to me, Adore ye his
footstool. Thus wavering up and down I turn me unto CHRIST, because I seek
him here, and I find how without impiety the earth may be adored, without
impiety his footestoole may be adored. For he has taken on him earth of the
earth, because flesh is of the earth, and of the flesh of Marie be took flesh.
And because he walked here in that flesh, and gave that flesh to be eaten of us
to salvation: And no man eats that flesh except, he do first adore it, it is
found out how such a footestoole of the Lord may be adored, and we should not
only not offend in adoring, but offend in not adoring. The Papists make no
small account of this place, and yet there is no place in all S. Augustines
works, yt makes more against them then this, if it be well marked with that
which follows. For first he says not that the sacrament must be, or may be
worshipped as God, but that the flesh of Christ may be worshipped as the earth,
which is Gods footstool, whereunto Divine honor is not to be given, but
reverence as to an holy thing, and no man eats his flesh, but he that before
has worshipped it, not as really present in the sacrament, but he that has
reverently acknowledged his incarnation, passion, and giving of his flesh to be
wholesome unto us. But to put al out of doubt, he so makes the sacrament Gods
footestoole, that he does expressly deny speaking in the person of Christ,
yt his body which was seen and crucified should be eaten, but a sacrament
which being spiritually understood, should quicken them or give them life. The
place has been already once or twice set down. Non hoc corpus quod videtis
mandicaturi estis, etc. You shall not eat this body which you see, etc. The
corporal presence therefore being flatly taken away by S. Augustine in that
place, it is easy to see what kind of worship is left to the sacrament.

But he is cited again Lib. Confess 9. Cap. 13. speaking of his mother. Illa
imminente, etc She when the day of her departure was at hand, took no care to
have her body sumptuously buri^d, or to be spiced with sweet spices, neither
did she covet a chosen monument, or cared for her fathers sepulcher. She did
not give us in charge any of these things, but only she desired that
remembrance should be made of her at thine altar, which she without any days
intermission had served, from whom she knew that holy sacrifice to be
dispensed, by which the hand writing that was against us, was put out, by which
triumph was obtained against the enemy. Master Heskins would learn of the
proclaymer what service she did, was it not the service of Christ her Lord God?
Yes, and why did she it at the altar, and not in heaven? Have you heard of such
a blind question? While she lived on earth, although she worshipped him that is
in heaven, yet she served him in the place appointed for public prayer and
administration of the sacraments, and she served him with prayer and
thanksgiving, not with knocking and kneeling to the sacrament, which is the
thing he would have if he could tell how to bring it about: as for the carnal
presence it was spoken off even in the place next before cited out of the 48.
Psalm.

After this he says, the same that the Christians did honor Ceres and
Bacchus, proves their adoration of the sacrament. A substantial proof I
promise you. It may argue they had some use of bread and wine in their
religion, but no adoration of it. For the Heathen men did not take bread and
wine to be Ceres and Bacchus, but Ceres and Bacchus to be the Gods of bread and
wine. S. Augustine is cited Contra Faust. Lib. 2 Cap. 13. Quomodo etc. How then
do thou compare our bread and cup, and say that error which is far
differing from the truth to be like religions being more mad then some
which for the bread and the cup think us to honor Ceres and Bacchus? The
Heathen did offer bread and wine to Ceres and Bacchus, so they imagined yt the
Christians did, not that they honored bread and wine, as Master Heskins
dreameth. The like is to be said of the other place. Si^ut a Cerere, etc. As
we are far from Ceres and Bacchus the Gods of the Pagans, although we embrace
after our manner the sacrament of the bread and the cup, which you have so
praised as you would be equal with us: so our fathers were far from the
chains of Saturn, although for the time of the prophecy they have observed
the vacation of the Sabbath. Because there is nothing in this place for the
purpose, M. Heskins after his accustomed manner, has falsified the word by
wrong translation, to deceive the unlearned. For he has translated, Quamuis
amplectamur sacramentum, although we honor the sacrament. Yet again S.
Augustine is cited In Psalm. 48. Edent pauperes, etc. The poor shall eat and
be satisfied. What eat they? That which the faithful know. How shall they be
satisfied? In following the passions of their Lord, and not without cause
taking their price. What do the rich? They also do ease: but how do they eat?
All the rich of the earth have eaten and worshipped. He says not, they have
eaten and are satisfied: but they have eaten and worshipped. They do in deed
adore God, but they will not show brotherly humanity, they eat and adore,
these eat and are satisfied, yet all do eat. Augustine says expressly the
rich adore God, but of adoring the sacrament he speaks never a word. Last of
all he cites him Ep. 120. ad Honoratum. Neque enim frustra ita distincti sunt,
etc. Neither are they without purpose so distincted, that before it was said of
the poor: The poor shall eat and be satisfied: And here all the rich of the
earth have eaten and have worshipped. For they also are brought to the table of
Christ, and receive of his body and his blood, but they do adore only, they
are not also satisfied, because they do not follow. For eating the poor men,
they disdain to be poor because Christ suffered for us leaving v^ an example,
that we should follow his steps. This place being the same in effect, that
the next before, has never a word of adoring the sacrament, but that Master
Heskins in his drowsy head dreameth, that where mention is made of eating and
worshipping, it must needs follow that those things are worshipped which are
eaten. And thus you see how pithily he has proved the adoration of the
sacrament, out of those Authors, whom the proclaymer named, as making no
mention thereof.

The six and fortieth Chapter proves by other Doctors that the sacrament is
to be adored. Hesk.


First he takes this principle, Fulke.
that if Christ very God and man, be there, he is to be honored: but that is
the matter in question, although it does not follow, if he were there, that
the sacrament is to be worshipped. The dove was an undoubted sacrament of the
presence of the holy Ghost, so was the fiery tongs, yet none of them
worshipped. For God will not be worshipped in outward shapes, as he has often
testified in the law, otherwise then he has appointed, therefore would he not
appear in any visible form unto the people, least they should be deceived to
worship God therein. But to his Doctors. The first is Erasmus who pleases him
well, in affirming that he would still worship Christ in the Eucharistie. Then
he presses his principle of the real presence, and that he will prove by
Algerus, that was more then 400. years before him, and then by Paschasius that
was more then 200. years before Algerus, and last of all by Leo that was more
then 400. years before Paschasius. As for Algerus and Paschasius as being
far without the compass of the challenge I will pass over and come to Leo:
saving that I will note, that though Paschasius alleges Hilarie, Ambrose,
Augustine, Cyrill, and the counsel of Ephesus, he does but wrest their
sayings, as the Papists do now to uphold ye error yt was not so old in his
time. The words of Leo are Ep 22. ad Constant. Separentur and huiusmodi, etc.
Let such men be separated from the holy member of the body of Christ, neither
let the Catholic liberty suffer the yoke of the unfaithful to be laid upon
it. For they are to be accounted without the house of Gods grace, and without
the sacrament of man's health, which denying the nature of our flesh in Christ,
do both speak against the Gospel, and strive against the Symbol. Neither
do they perceive through their blindness, that they are brought into such a
steep place, that they stand neither in the truth of the Lords passion, nor of
his resurrection for both is made void in our savior, if flesh of our kind
be not believed to be in him. In what darkness of ignorance, in what
sluggishnes of sloth have they (...) hitherto, that they would neither learn
by hearing, nor acknowledge by reading that, which in the Church of God, in the
mouth of all men, is so agreeably spoken? That not as much as of the tongues of
infantes, the verity of the body and blood of Christ is unspoken of among the
sacraments of the common faith: for in that mystical distribution of that
spiritual food, this thing is given forth, this thing is received, that
receiving the virtue of that heavenly meat, we may go into his flesh, which
was made our flesh.

First M. Heskins as his fashion is, to make the matter more clear on his
side, falsely translateth, Hoc impertitur, hoc sumitur, this body is given
forth, this body is received. Where as Hoc is either taken absolutely for this
thing, or else at the least, must have relation to Sacramentum, which is the
next substantive of the neuter gender in any reasonable construction.

Secondly, it is manifest that Leo speaking against the heretics Eutyche^ and
Dioscorus, sets forth the truth of Christ's body and blood, as one of the
common known sacraments or mysteries of Christian faith: and says never a
word of his carnal presence in the mystery of his supper, but contrariwise
teaches that it is a mystical distributio^, a spiritual food, an heavenly
meat, which words import not a carnal manner, but a spiritual manner of presence
and eating. Thus real presence (as he terms it) being not yet proved, ye
adoration cannot follow, as he pretends.

The seven and fortieth Chapter proceeds in the proof of the adoration of
the Sacrament by doctors. Hesk.


The first doctor named, Fulk.
is Dionysius Areopagita disciple of S. Paul (as he says) Eccles. Hierarch.
3. part. Cap. 3. who makes this prayer to the sacrament: O very godly and
holy mystery, opening favorably the couerings of signifying signs,
wherewith thou art covered, shine openly and apertly unto us, and fill our
spiritual eyes with the singular and open brightness of thy light. That this
Dionyse, although of some antiquity, yet is not that Dionyse, that was
converted by S. Paul, nor any that lived 600. years after, at the least, it is
plain by this reason; that neither Eusebius, nor Hieronyme, nor Gennadius,
which wrote the Catologs of all ecclesiastical writers, that were before them,
or were famous in the church in their time, nor yet any other writer within the
compass of 600. years after Christ, makes any mention of any such Dionyse,
to be a writer of those books, which are said to be written by him. Now
touching his supposed prayer, it is but an exclamatio^ rethoricall, named
apostrophe, not unto the bread and wine, but to him, that in that mystery is
represented, which is Christ, that he would vouchsafe to open him self, and
shine in the hearts of the faithful, as the outward signs are seen with the
outward eyes. And that he allowed no transubstantiation, it is manifest by
that he says in the same place, that the Bishop does after consecration, cut
in pieces the undivided bread, and speaking of ye sacrament, does often
affirm, that by those symboles or signs, we are changed into God and Christ,
meaning, we are renewed by his spirit, but never affirms, the bread and wine
to be turned into the body and blood of Christ. Howbeit, what I judge of his
authorite and antiquity, I have declared before. The next is Gregory
Nazianzen in Epitaph. Gorgoniae sororis. Quid igitur, etc. What then did the
soul both great and worthy of greatest things, and what remedy had she
against her infirmity? For now the secreat is disclosed, when she had
dispaired of all other, she flies to the Physician of all men, and taking the
solitariness of the night, when the disease had given her a little respite,
she fell down with faith, before the altar, and with a loud voice and all
her might, she called upon him which is worshipped at is, and unto him she
rehearsed all the miracles that he had done of old time. M. Heskins
immagineth, that it was such an altar as they have in the popish Churches,
which is untrue, for it was a table, and men stood round about it, as is to be
proved by many testimonies of antiquity. Secondly, he immagineth, that ye
sacrament was hanged over the altar to be worshipped, as it is among them, but
that is utterly false: for it was received at such time as it was consecrated,
except some remanents that were kept to be eaten. Therefore, though she made
her prayer at the altar, she made no prayer to any thing upon the altar,
but to God, whom she did worship and reverence, and whose mysteries she used
to receive at the same altar. Therefore M. Heskins falsifieth Gregory's words,
which are these: (...), etc. but thus they are turned by him into latin, ante
altar cum fide procubuit, and illum quem super altar venerabatur etc. She
prostrated her self with faith before the altar, and called upon him whom
she worshipped upon the altar. But Gregory says: (...), in it, or at it,
meaning the altar where she prayed. And to put all out of doubt, yt she
worshipped not the sacrament upon the altar, it follows afterward? (...).
And if her hand had laid up any where, any part of the figures of the
precious body, or of the blood, that she mingled with tears, O marvelous
thing! and immediately departed feeling health. By these words it appears,
that she brought this remanent of the sacrament with her, which Gregory
calls (...), the signs or tokens, or figures of the body and blood of
Christ, and not the very natural body of Christ: and those she worshipped
not, but wett them with tears, whether superstitiously let the Papists judge,
for they them selves will allow no such fashions, nor yet reservation for such
purposes, but as for adoration of the sacrament, which is the matter intended,
here is none spoken of in this place. After this, he touches the fact of
Satyrus the brother of S. Ambrose, which is answered before, lib. 1. Cap. 24.
whose hope was in God, and not in the sacrament. Although Satyrus as a young
nouice, not thoroughly instructed in Christian religion, cannot simply be
defended, though he may be excused, howsoever by his brother Ambrose he is
highly commended. Then followed Eusebius Emisser^us Hom. Pascal. Because he
would take away his assumpted body from our eyes, and carry it into heaven,
it was needful that this day he should consecrate unto us the sacrament of
his body and blood: us coleretur iugiter per mysterium quod semel offerebatur
in precium: that it might be continually worshipped or exercised by a mystery:
(for colere signifies both) which was once offered for our price.

M. Heskins gathers hereof, that the same body, should be honored by
mystery, whose visible presence not his body, was taken away from the earth.
But Eusebius says, not only that he would take his body from our sight, but
also place it in heaven, and in steed thereof, he leaves the sacrament of his
body and blood, which no man doubts, but it ought to be honored, as so
high a mystery deserves, but not as God or Christ. The other saying of
Eusebius, which he adds, does show, how it is to be honored: When thou
come to the reverend altar to be satisfied with heavenly meats, behold
with faith the holy body and blood of thy God, honor it, wonder at is, touch
it with thy mind, take it with the hand of thy heart, and cheefely, receive
it with the inward draught. What can be laid more plainly for the spiritual
receiving, and the like reverence to be given to so holy a sacrament? But
because M. Heskins thinks this saying to make more against him, then for him,
therefore he says, to avoid cauilling, Eusebius proceeds sone after in
these words: Sicut autem, etc. As any man coming to the faith of Christ,
before the words of baptism, is yet in the bands of the old deis, but when
the words are spoken, is forthwith delivered from all dreg^ of sin: So when
the creatures are set upon the holy altares to be blessed with heavenly
words, before they be consecrated by invocation of the most highest name, there
is the substance of bread and wine, but after the words of Christ, the body
and blood of Christ. This is a plain place for M. Iuell, what else? But if it
be rightly understood, it is a plain place against M. Hesk. for he shows the
change or transubstantiation that is in the Lords supper, to be the same, that
it is in baptism, which is spiritual, and not carnal, and so does very
fitly compare them together, or else his similitude were to no purpose, if it
were not to show by that which is don in baptism, what is likewise done in
the other sacrament.

M. Heskins still blattereth of a bare figure, which is of us always denied.
Consequently he cites Bernarde, whose authority I leave unto him, being a
burgess of ye lower house, in which he has many voices, as he has never a
one in ye upper house, though he wrest their speeches most injuriously. To
confirm some phrase of Bernard, he rehearses certain phrases of the old
writers like to them in words, but not in sense, which have been answered
already, as Hierom. ad Head. qu. 2. Our Lord Jesus is the feaster, and the
feast: he that eats and which is eaten. Ambrose in praepara. ad miss. which
is none of his, but falsely entitled to him: Thou art the Priest and the
sacrifice, wonderfully and unspeakably appointed. And Augustine in Psalm. 33. He
was borne in his own hands. But he leaves out a word, which expounds both
Augustine, and all the rest that speak so: quodam modo, after a certain
manner Christ was borne in his own hands, is the feast and that which is
eaten, and the sacrifice. I say quodam modo, therefore not simpliciter. Last of
all, he will join issue, to subscribe on this point, that the proclaimer can
bring but one ancient doctor, that says the sacrament is not to be adored. To
whom I answer, that forasmuch as in the primitive church, the opinion of
transubstantiation was not known, there never grew any question of the
adoration of the sacrament, as yt Papists now do use it and command it.

The eight and fortieth Chapter, confuteth the rest of the proclaymers words
before rehearsed, against the honoring of Christ in the sacrament. Hesk.


The words which he takes upon him to confute, Fulk.
are these: It is a new devise to worship the sacrament. About three hundredth
year past, Pope Honorius commanded it to be lifted up, and the people
reverently to bow unto it. How does he confute these words? First, he says it
is no new devise, but ye contrary, that is, the denying of the adoration, is
not past forty years old, and yet he confesses before, that some infected
with the heresy of Berengarius and Wickliffe, might whisper it in corners, yet
Berengarius and Wickliffe preached openly, and before them Bertrame wrote a
book to Charles the great, wherein he confuteth the real presence, which
began in that time to be received of some, as it seems, and upward even to
Christ, all the ancient fathers are against that carnal presence, and
consequently against adoration. But to proceed: Admitting that Honorius was
the first yt commanded it to be worshipped, which was 300 years ago, yet is
he elder then Oecolampadius and not defamed of heresy as Oecolampadius was:
yes M. Hesk he is defamed of more then heresy, and proved to be an
antichrist. As for the continuance of 300. years in an error can make no
prescription against ye truth. But he says, it is a fond argument of the
proclaimer: Because Honorius commanded the adoration of the sacrament,
therefore it was never in use before. But if it were generally believed and
used in all ages before, as M Hesk. would bear us in hand, what need had
Pope Honorius to command it? He says: in like manner the fleshly sort of them
dispute to maintain their shameless abode with their women it is a new
devise that priests should not marry, invented by Urban and Gregory.

Whether M. Heskins were married, or else had a shameless abode with a woman,
I leave to be tried by God and the country, in the county of Cambridge. But
to the purpose, I have not heard any affirm, these late Popes to be the first
forbidders of marriage, and therefore it is to no purpose, that he cites
Syluester before them, and Calixtus before him, and the counterfeit Canons of
the Apostles before them all. And yet by the prohibition of the latest Popes,
it is certain, that Priests were married until their time. And for as much,
as the scripture allows their marriage, and condemns the forbidders
thereof, and the eldest fathers in the primi^iue church confess no less, it
is not to be regarded, although a whole hundredth Popes in a row, did every
one forbid it. The like example he brings of fasting in Lent, decreede in the
eight Toletane counsel, near 700. years after Christ, but yet affirmed of
Hierome, to be a tradition of the Apostles (For so they used to father such
ceremonies and vsages, as they knew not the beginning of them, upon tradition
of the Apostles) nevertheless, he cannot show any Pope, or any council
before Honorius, that did command adoration of the sacrament, wherefore the
words are vnconfuted until the contrary can be showed.

After this, the Proclaimer, (says he) falls to mocking the Scholasticall
doctors, as S. Thomas, Duns, Durand, Holcos and such like to make it seem a
dangerous thing to honor the sacrament, for that the people cannot discern
the accidents from the body of Christ, and so may committ idolatry in
honoring the outward forms, in steed of Christ, or if the priest do ^mitt
consecration. This M. Heskins calls a mocking, but he is not able to avoid
it in good earnest. He calls it a fantasy, like to that which joined with
avarice, pulled down all the Abbeys in England. The like fantasy, he says,
might move us, not to honor Christ in heaven, and much more the Apostles that
honored Christ in the flesh, percase not sufficiently discerning the humanity
from the Deity, and so likewise others that worshipped Christ and yet do,
even some of the proclaymers scholars, understand not these quiddities. Shall
they therefore fly the honor of Christ in heaven? A wise comparison, between
Christ both God and man, who no doubt is to be worshipped both as God and as
the mediator of God and man, and the accidents of bread and wine, or bread and
wine, when they are not consecrated. Christ in the flesh is to be worshipped,
because he was incarnate and joined to the humanity in a personal union, but
he is not to be worshipped in bread and wine, or in ye accidents of bread and
wine, because he is neither impanated, nor inuinated, nor inaccidentated, that
is, not joined to any of them in a personal union. To these doubts that are
moved by his own schoolmen, what if the Priest do not consecrate? what if he
speak not the words of consecration? what if he had none intention to
consecrate? in all which cases, the schoolmen define, that the people committ
idolatry if they worship their host. First he says: he goes about to
shake the foundation of this sacrament, as Brentius does of baptism.
Concerning Brentius, although it were easy to defend his assertion even by
the schoolmen, yet because it is no matter of our controversy, I will
briefly pass it over. Brentius held that Christ has not bound us to baptize
in certain form of words to be pronounced by the minister, so the meaning be
observed, that he baptize into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy ghost. Hereupon, charitable M. Heskins rayleth on him, that he
impugneth the form of baptism, and rejects ye words of baptism, which is
utterly false: and then he reasons, that if the words of baptism may be
without danger omitted, why may not the words of consecration likewise? as
though Brentius says, they might be omitted, where he speaks of altering
the form of words, when the same sense remains. Next to this he farceth in
another slander of us, that we agree not in the number of the sacraments, some
admitting three, some two, some four, and some never a one. The world knows
what we hold herein. After this, he shows out of Basil and Damascen ye
necessity of the form of baptism, which we confess, and Brentius him self
does not deny. At length he defines contrary to ye scholemen, yt if
consecration be omitted, ye danger is to the priest, and not to ye people that
worship an idol. Finally, he will move the like doubt of our ministration, what
if the minister of ye communion, do neither speak ye words of consecration,
nor have intent to minister, what do the people receive? I answer, with his
intention we have nothing to do, but for as much as nothing is whispered, or
mumbled in our Communion, but so uttered, yt all men may hear and understand,
if any thing be omitted that is necessary to the consecration of ye sacrament,
if ye people communicate with him, they are in as great fault as he. As for
Richerus, whom he calls a Caluenist, yt forbids to pray to Christ, and
rejects ye words of consecration, if any such be, let him answer for him
self, we have nothing to do with him. Although we acknowledge not any mumbling
of words, but the whole action according to Christ's institution, to be the
form of consecration of the sacrament.

Hesk.
The nine and fortieth Chapter, proceeds in the understanding of Christ's
words, by Irenaeus and Tertullian.

Fulke.
Irenus is cited, lib. 4. Cap. 32. Sed and discipulus, etc. But also giving
counsel to his disciples, to offer to God the first fruits of his own
creatures, not as to one that has need, but that they also should neither be
unfruitful nor unthankful: he took that bread which is of the creature, and
gave thanks saying: this is my body, and likewise he confessed the cupp,
which is of the creature that is among us, to be his blood and taught the new
oblation of the new testament, which the church receiving of the Apostles in
all the world, offers to God. Here M. Hesk. choppeth off ye tail, for it
follows: Even to him which gives food unto us, the first fruits of his
gifts: which words do both open the purpose of Irenaeus, and show that the
oblation was of bread and wine, and not the natural body of Christ, as M.
Hesk. gathers, together with the real presence. But for clearer proof, he
adds another testimony out of Irenus, which he quoteth lib. 5. but it is
lib. 4. ca. 34 which it seems he redd not him self in the author, both
because he knew not where it was written, and also because he omitteth some
words in it. Quomodo autem constabit eis, etc. he leaves out autem and eis:
but thus the words are in English. But how shall it be known unto them, that
that bread, in which thanks are given, is the body of their Lord and the
cupp of his blood, if they say not that he him self is the son of the maker
of the world? etc. And how again do they say, that the flesh comes to
corruption, and receives not the life which is nourished of the body and
blood of our Lord? Out of these places he notes, that ye sacrament is the
body and blood of Christ, and that our flesh is nourished by the same body
and blood. This we confess, so he mean spiritually, but yt he will not have.
And therefore, to draw the places to his carnal presence, and nourishing, he
says that Irenaeus hereby impugned two heresies: One, that Christ was not the
son of God that made the world, but a man living in Iewrie, which dissolved
the law and the Prophets, and all the works of God that made the world: The
other, that the soul only should be saved and not the body. And therefore to
confute the former, he makes an argument of the real presence, How could a
bare natural man compass, that his body should so be, if he were not the
son of God that made the world? etc. This proceeds of gross ignorance, or
rather of intolerable malice, to deceive the ignorant. For the heresy
against which he writes, was not yt Christ was a bare man, and not the son
of God, but yt he was the son of another God, then he yt made ye world, for
they made two gods, one ye maker of ye world, which they said was God of ye old
testament, and another ye father of Christ, which they said, was God of the
new testament. Now Irenaeus proves by institution of ye sacrament, in the
creatures of bread and wine, yt Christ is the son of God yt created ye world,
and of none other God, to which purpose he says in the 57. Chapter of that
fourth book: Quomodo autem just Dominus si alterius patris existens, huius
conditionis quae est secundiom nos accipiens panem fuum corpus confisebatur,
and temperamentum calicis sui sanguinem confirmanit? How did our Lord justly,
if being son of another father, taking bread which is of this creation that
we are* confess it to be his body, and the temperament of the cup he
confirmed to be his blood? Thus you see neither in the one place, nor in the
other, he reasons of the divine power of Christ, to make a real presence,
or transubstantiation, but of the inconvenience that Christ should ordeine his
sacrament in the creatures of another God. The second heresy he impugneth in
deed, by the receipt of the body and blood of Christ in the sacrament, by
which our flesh is nourished unto immortality, which nourishing, M. Heskins
in no wise will have to be understood spiritually, but corporally, and says,
it does inuincibly prove the real presence. I will not rippe up what
absurdities do follow, if we say, that Christ's flesh does nourish our flesh
corporally, or after a carnal manner, as of the concoction and digestion
thereof, to be turned into our nature, where he said before, that our flesh is
turned into his flesh: but I will prove out of Irenaeus, that he meant
nourishing spiritually and not corporally. For lib. 5. he has these words.

Quando ergo and mixtus calix, and factus panis, percipit verbum Dei, fit
eucharistia sanguinis and corporis Christi, ex quibus augetur and consistit
carnis nostrae substantia: quomodo carnem negant capacem esse donationis Dei
qui est vita aeterna, quae sanguine and corpore Christi, nutritur and membrum
eius est.

When therefore the cup that is mixed, and the bread that is made, receives
the word of God, it is made the Eucharistie of the blood and body of Christ,
of which the substance of our flesh is increased and consists: how do they
deny, that the flesh is capable of the gift of God, which is eternal life,
which is nourished with the body and blood of Christ, and is a member of him.

Here you see plainly, that our flesh is so nourished of the body and blood
of Christ, that it is increased of the same, and so consists of them, that
we are his members, but our bodies are not increased, etc. but spiritually:
therefore they are not nourished but spiritually, and after an heavenly manner.

But most plainly, for impugning of both the heresies aforesaid, and other
heresies more of transubstantiation and the carnal presence, and the sacrifice
propitiatory of the mass, he writes, lib. 4. Cap. 34. Nostra autem consonans
est sententia Eucharistiae, and Eucharistia rursus confirmat sententiam
nostram. Offerimus enim ei qu sunt eius, congruenter communicationem and
vnitatem praedicantes carnis and spiritus. Quemadmodum enim qui est a terra
panis, percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis panis est, sed Eucharistia
ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and caelesti: sic and corpora nostra
percipientia Euchaeristiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem resurrectionis
habentia. Offerimus autem ei non quasi indigenti, sed gratias agentes donationi
eius, and sanctificantes creaturam. But our sentence is agreeable to the
Eucharistie or sacrament of thanksgiving, and the Eucharistie again does
confirm our sentence. For we offer unto him those things that be his own,
agreeably setting forth the communication and unity of the flesh and the
spirit. For as the bread which is of the earth receiving the calling of God,
is not now common bread, but the Eucharistie consisting of two things, an
earthly thing and an heavenly thing: even so our bodies also receiving the
Eucharistie, are not now corruptible, having hope of resurrection. And we
offer to him, not as to one having need, but giving thanks for his gift and
sanctifying the creature.

By this place is transubstantiation overthrown, where" he says, the
sacrament consists of two things, an earthly and an heavenly, the carnal
presence, when he defines it to be a heavenly thing, that is a divine and
spiritual communication of the body and blood of Christ, the propitiatory
sacrifice, when he says, that the creatures of bread and wine were offered
for a thanks giving, etc. That Melancton defending the popish presence abused
the authority of Irenaeus against Oecolampadius, it ought to be no prejudice
to us, especially seeing as M. Heskins before confessed, that Melancthon him
self forsook that opinion in the end.

Now come we to Tertullian, whose testimony, though it be flatly against him,
yet he has labored if it were possible, by wrestling and wrangling, to make
it serve his turn, or a least to avoid it, that it should not hurt his cause,
Lib. 4. contra Marcionem. Professus itaque, etc. When therefore he had
professed that with desire he desired to eat the Passover, as his own (for
it was unmeet that God should desire any thing pertaining to an other) the
bread that was taken and distributed to his disciples, he made it his body,
saying. This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body. But it had been
no figure except his body had been of truth. Here M. Heskins cutteth off: but
it follows in Tertullian, Caeterum etc. For a vain thing which is a fantasy
could receive no figure. Or if therefore he feigned the bread to be his body,
because he lacked the truth of a body, then ought he to have given the bread
for us. It would have made for Marcions vanity, that the bread should have
been crucified. The alteration, falsification, and truncation of Tertullians
words, which Master Heskins uses, was noted in the first book partly, and
it wearieth me to note these faults so often as he commits them. But here
he turns these words: Figura autem non fuisset nisi veritatis esset corpus.
But it had not been a figure except it were a body of truth. As though the
bread were both a figure and a body of truth, which clean peruerteth the
sense of Tertullian, and is contrary to his purpose, as you may see by that
which follows. For Marcion agreed with Valentinus, against whom Irenus
writ, that Christ was not the GOD of the old Testament, and moreover
affirmed, that Christ had not a true body, but a fantastical body. Against
both these heretical opinions, he reasons in this sentence. First he says,
Christ desired to eat the Passover, therefore it was of his own institution,
for it was unmeet that God should desire any thing of an other Gods
institution. And that Christ had a true body, he proves by the institution
of the sacrament, which was a figure of his body, for a fantastical body, or a
vain thing, can have no figure, for a figure has a necessary relation to a
thing of truth, whereof it is a figure, the sacrament is a figure of Christ's
body, therefore Christ has a true body.

That this is the true meaning of Tertullian, it appears plainly by the
words before alleged, and by these that follow, and by the whole discourse
of his work, Lib. 5. he says. Proinde panis and calicis sacramento iam in
Euangelio probauimus corporis and sanguinis Dominici veritatem aduersus
phantasma Marcionis. Therefore by the sacrament of the bread and the cup,
now in the Gospel we have proved, the truth of the body and blood of our
Lord, against the fantasy of Marcion. But M. Hes. interpretation of
Tertullians meaning, is not only false, but also ridiculous. He says, that
Tertullian to prove that Christ had a true body, brings in the institution of
the sacrament, saying, that Christ made the bread his true body, therefore he
had a true body, as though Marcion, which would not believe that Christ had
a true body when he lived on the earth, would acknowledge that Christ had a
true body in the sacrament. But Marcion acknowledged the sacrament to be a
figure of Christ's body, and thereupon Tertullian infers that he had a true
body, whereof the sacrament was a figure.

But now it is a sport to see how M. Heskins takes upon him To open
Tertullian, and to deliver him from the sacramentaries. His saying has two
parts, the one that Christ made the bread his body, the other that he says:
This is my body, that is to say, a figure of my body. Now he will require of
ye adversary, whether of these two parts he will receive? and he is certain
they will not receive ye former part, because Zuinglius, Oecola^padius, and
Bullinger, with the rest, denies the bread to be the natural body of Christ.
But he is foully beguiled, for all these and we with the^ will neither receive
the first part by it self, nor the latter part by it self, but both parts
together, as they are uttered by Tertullian, that Christ so made the bread his
body, yt he made it a figure of his body. That is to say, that he made it a
sure and undoubted pledge of his body. And we agree with Cyprian De cae^. Deu^.
that The bread which our Lord gave to his disciples to be eaten, being not
cha^nged in shape, but in nature, by the almighty power of the word was made
flesh: and with S. Ambrose. li. 4. de sacr. cae. 4. That this bread before the
words of the sacrament is bread, but when the consecration comes to it, of
bread it is made the flesh of Christ. Places often answered before by
interpretation of the same Authors. And we do so understand Tertullian, as he
is not contrary to him self, nor to any Catholic writer of his time in this
matter, which is Master Heskins rule to understand a Catholic Author, And
we so understand the sacrament to be a figure, as it is not a bare figure. But
now, because Master Heskins must needs acknowledge the sacrament to be a
figure, he makes two kinds of figures. A figure of a thing absent, and a
figure of a thing present. Because there is no doubt of the former, I will
touch only the latter. An example of a figure of a thing present, he makes in
these words: As the spouse beholding her very husband, and sees the scarres
and tokens of wounds that he suffered for her defense and safeguard, and of his
children and hers: is brought in remembrance of his loving kindness, and of
the dangers sustained for her sake. In which case although the substance of the
man be present, yet to his wife he is a figure and token of remembrance of him
self absent, in condition of a man now in fight and dangered with sore and
deep wounds. For now he is no such man, but whole and sound, and a perfect
man. Have you not heard a wise similitude think you? Is the substance of the
man present, a figure of his actions and passions absent? or rather the scarres
present, a token of his wounds suffered, and acts passed? If he be so gross,
that he cannot distinguish between substance and accidents, and the properties
and effects of them both, yet very children can plainly see, that the
substance of the man occasioneth no such remembrance as he speaks of, but the
scarres of the wounds: neither do they bring the substance of the man in
remembrance, but the actions and passions of the man. And therefore this is too
blockish an example, that a figure may be of a thing present in substance. But
Augustine Lib. sentent. Prosperi. does help this matter as he weeneth: Caro
carnis, etc. The flesh is a sacrament of the flesh, and the blood is a
sacrament of the blood. By both which being invisible, spiritual, and
intelligible, is signified the visible and palpable body of our Lord Jesus
Christ, full of the grace of all virtues, and divine Majesty. M. Hes. notes,
that the invisible body of Christ in the sacrament, is a figure of the same
visible. Very good. But let me go with him. Although S. Augustine or Prosper
speak not of an inui^ible body. But he says directly, that the flesh and the
blood in the sacrament, are both spiritual and intelligible flesh and blood,
which is as much as I ask. Then the spiritual flesh of Christ which is in
the sacrament, does signify yt visible and palpable body of Christ, then the
which nothing can be said more plainly against the corporal presence, nor for
ye spiritual presence. But he obiecteth further, yt the scriptures also use
such speeches, saying, that Christ was made in the likeness of a man. Ph. 2.
When he was a man in deed, and so Tertullian might well call it a figure,
although it be the body it self. As though S. Paul in that place speaks of
the substance of his humanity, and not rather of the base show and condition
that he took upon him in his humanity, whereas he might have behaved him self
as God, being both God and man. Yet Augustine has two places, by conference
whereof this thing shall appear; that the sacrament is both a figure and the
very thing it self. The first place is in Psalm. 3. speaking of Judas the
traitor, which place M. Heskins read not in Augustine, but in some other man's
collections, for both he cyteth it truncately, and also adds words both in
the Latin and the English, which are not in Augustine, although he do not
alter the sense. But Augustines words in deed are these. Et in historia etc.
And in the history of the new Testament, the patience of our Lord was so
great and wonderful, that he suffered him so long as though he had been good:
Whereas he was not ignorant of his thoughts, when he had him present at the
feast, in which he commended and delivered to his disciples, the figure of his
body and his blo^d. The other place is cyted Ep. 162. Our Lord him self does
suffer Judas, a diuill, a thief, and his seller. He lets him take among his
innocent disciples, that which the faithful know, our price. But when Augustine
him self says, ye sacraments bear the name of those things whereof they are
sacraments, it is no marvel, if the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
be called our price, whereof it is a figure or sacrament, especially seeing
Augustine flatly denies, that Judas did receive the bread which was the Lord,
but only the Lords bread. This conference therefore makes against him, not for
him: As for Theophylactes authority, which he calls a plain place for the
proclamer, we refuse, although it is not so plain as he pretends, for we
also affirm, that the sacrament is not a bare figuration of the flesh of
Christ, but his flesh in deed, spiritually received. Finally, Tertullians
place De resur. Car. is nothing at all for him. Ca^o corpore etc. The flesh
eats the body and blood of Christ, that the soul may be fed with God. For by
the body and blood of Christ, he means the sacrament of them, which is
called by the name of that is figured or signified by it. As for the last
shift, that No Catholic Doctor says, that the sacrament is only a figure,
is too childish for a Doctor to use; for in these words of Tertullian: Corpus
meum, id est* figura corporis met, my body, that is to say, a figure of my
body, there needs not to be added the exclusive only, for the latter part is
a description of the former, which must contain all that is in the thing
described, or else it is nothing worth: as for example. If I say M. Heskins is
a man, that is to say a soul, it were fond and ridiculous, but when I say he
is a man, that is to say, a reasonable ^ight, I need not say he is only so,
for I have said before as much as he is, and so has Tertullian: Meaning that
the sacrament is a figure, but not a common or bare figure, but a divine and
mystical token, not only to signify, but also to assure us, of the spiritual
feeding of us with the body and blood of Christ.

The fiftieth Chapter abides in the exposition of the same words by S.
Cyprian and Athanasius. Hesk.


First he alleges Cyprian de cna Domini in these words, Fulk.
Significata olim a tempore Melchisedech, etc. For understanding of which
place, seeing he refers his reader to the first book and 29. Chapter, where
he handles it more at large, thither also will I refer him for answer, where
the place is at large rehearsed and discussed. But out of the same sermon of S.
Cyprian, he has a plain place for M. Jewel: Which is this: Non^ est ^uius
sacramenti doctrina, etc? The doctrine of this sacrament is new, and the
Evangelical schools first brought forth this manner of teaching, and Christ
being the teacher. This learning was first made known to the world, that
Christian men should drink blood, the eating whereof the authority of the
old law does most straightly forbid. For the law forbids the eating of
blood, the Gospel commands that it should be drunk. In which commandem^^t^
this most cheefely ought the Christian religion to discern, that the blood of
beasts differing in all things from the blood of Christ, has only the
effect of temporal relief, and the life of them ha^h an end appointed without
reuocation. Hereupon he notes yt the Christians drink the blood of Christ,
which I grant: but spiritually: for so Cyprian expounds himself in the same
sermon: vt sciremus quod mansio nostra in ips^ fit manducatio, and potus quasi
quaedam incorporatio. That we should know that our eating is our dwelling in
him, and ou^ drinking it as it were a certain incorporatio^ in him: And
again: Esus igitur carnis huius quaedam auiditas est and quoddem desiderium
manendi in eo, etc. Therefore the eating of his flesh is a certain desire to
abide in him, etc. These and such like places do prove a spiritual eating and
drinking of his blood, and none other.

He notes further, that this is called of Cyprian, a new doctrine, and
therefore it can not be the drinking of the figure of the blood of Christ, for
that was old. I answer briefly, it was so new, as the gospel is the new
Testament, which yet was preached to Adam and Eve, but not so clearly and
distinctly as since the time of Christ, and so was the eating of the body and
blood of Christ, all one with that it is now, differing but in manner of
revelation, and not in substance of spiritual food.

Athanasius is alleged as he is cited in Theodoret Dial. 2. in confus. Corpus
est, etc. It is therefore a body to whom he says: for them on my right hand.
Whereof the devil was enemy, with the evil powers, and the Jews and the
Greeks. By which body, he was in deed and so was called an high priest and
Apostle, by that mysteria which he d^liuered to us saying* This is my body
which is broken for you. And the blood of the new Testament, not of the old,
which is shedd for you. The Godhead has neither body nor blood, but man,
which he did take of the virgin Marie. He means nothing less, than that ye
sacrament was his natural body and blood, but that he could not have instituted
a mystery of hi^ body and blood, except he had been a very man, which has
body and blood, for the godhead has none. And therefore the rule that M.
Heskins gives, that scriptures must be alleged in their literal sense in
matters of faith, is to little purpose, although it may stand well in this
place. For the mystery of his body proves his humanity, without any
allegory or other figure, as I have showed before. Athanasius is likewise
alleged in the second Nicen counsel: Sermon. de (...). Jesus in Berito. How
truly I will not say, but thus he is reported to say of ye blood of Christ,
which was said to be in many places, which he deniet^ to have come from Christ,
but from an image that was crucified Nec esse aliter (...) a vere Catholicis
prae^^r id quod (...) a nobis, quasi ex carne and sanguine Christi aliq^id
pas^^ i^ (...) inu^^iri, nisi (...), quod in era altarit per manus sacerdanu^
quoti^ie spiritualiter officitur. Neither is it otherwise to be thought of true
Catholics, then is written of us, as though any part of the flesh and blood
of Christ may be found in the world, but that which on the altar is every day
made spiritually by the hands of the priests. I do not cite this, as the
undoubted authority of Athanasius, but think rather it was forged in his
name, as many other things were in that wicked idolatrous counsel, yet it
appeared that the maker of that sermon, and so ye Church in such time as he
lived, had not received the Popish corporal presence.

The one and fiftieth Chapter shows the mind of Iunencus, and Eusebius.
Emissen, upon the words of Christ. Hesk.


Iuuencus a Christian Poet is cited Lib. 4. Euang. Histor. Haec vbi dicta dedit
palmis sibi frangere panem, etc. Fulke.
When he had thus said, he took bread in his hands, and when he had given
thanks he divided it to his disciples, and taught them that he delivered unto
them his own body. And after that our Lord took the cup filled with wine,
he sanctified it with thanksgiving, and gives it to them to drink, and
teaches them that he has divided, to them his blood, and says this blood
shall remitte the sins of the people. Drink you this my blood. Because this
Poet, does but only rehearse the history in verse, without any exposition
and interpretation, and says no more then the Evangelists say: I will not
stand upon him, only I will note the vanity of Master Heskins, which like a
young child that finds miracles in every thing he sees, still notes a
plain place for Master Jewel, a plain place for the proclaymer: when either
there is in it nothing for his purpose, or as it falls out oftentimes, much
against him.

Eusebius. Emissen is cited Hom. 5. Pasc. Recedat omne, etc. Let all doubtfulnesse
of infidelity depart. For truly he which is the auctour of the gift, is also
the witness of the truth. For the invisible priest by secret power does with
his word convert the visible creatures into the substance of his body and
blood saying thus: This is my body. And the sanctification repeated: take and
drink says he, this is my blood. This place has been often answered, to be
meant of a spiritual and not a carnal conversion, as diverse other places out
of ye same homily alleged by M. Hesk. himself, do prove. First it follows
immediately. Ergo vt, etc. Therefore as at the will of our Lord suddenly
commanding, of nothing the height of the heavens, the depths of the waters, the
wide places of the earth were in substantial being: even so by like power in
the spiritual sacraments, virtue is given to the word and effect to the
thing. Therefore how great and notable things, the power of the Divine
blessing does work, and how (...) ought not seem to the too strange and
impossible that earthly and mortal things are changed into the substance of
Christ, ask of thy self which now art borne again into Christ. Here says
M. Heskins, he proves the change possible, I grant, and with all shows
what manner a change it is, even such a one as is in regeneration, namely
spiritual. The same is showed in the other places following. Non dubites
quispi^^, etc: Neither let any man dout, that by the will of the Divine power,
by the presence of his high majesty, the former creatures may pass into the
nature of the Lords body, when he may see man himself by the workmanship of
the heavenly mercy, made the body of Christ. And as any man coming to the
faith of Christ, before the words of baptism, is yet in the band of the old
debt, but when they are rehearsed, he is forthwith delivered from all dregs
of sins: So when the creatures are set upon the holy altars to be blessed
with heavenly words, before they be consecrated by invocation of the highest
name, there is the substance of bread and wine, but after the words of
Christ, the body and blood of Christ. And what marvel is it, if those
things, which he could create with his word, being created, he can convert by
his word? Yea rather it seems to be a less miracle, if that which he is
known to have made of nothing, he can now when it is made, change into a
better thing. Upon these sayings Master Heskins urges the change. I
acknowledge the change, and urge the kind or manner of change to be
spiritual, according to the examples of baptism and regeneration. Unto these
authorities he annexeth a large discourse of transubstantiation, and cites
for it diverse testimonies old and new, what the old are, we will take pains
to view, as for the younger sort, we will not stick to leave unto him.

First Gregory Nicene is cited, Sermon. Catech. de Divine. Sacram. Sicut antem
qui panem videt, quodammodo corpus videt humanum, etc. And as he that sees
bread, after a certain manner, sees a man's body, because bread being in the
body becomes a body: so that divine body, receiving the nourishment of
bread, was after a certain manner the same thing with that meat, (as we have
said) being turned into the nature of it. For that, which is proper to all
flesh, we confess to have apperteined to him. For even that body was
sustained with bread, but that body, because God the WORD dwelled in it
obtained Divine dignity. Wherefore we do now also rightly believe, that the
bread sanctified by the word of God, is changed into the body of God the
WORD. Master Heskins after his usual manner translateth Quodammodo in a
manner, if not falsely, at the least obscurely. But that word Quodammodo, that
is after a certain manner, loses all the knotte of this doubt. For even as
the body of CHRIST was bread after a certain manner, because it was
nourished with bread, and bread was after a certain manner the body of
Christ: even so we believe, that the sacramental bread is after a certain
manner changed into the body of Christ, that it may be the spiritual food
of our souls.

Ambrose is cited De his, qui initian. Cap. 9. Where Master Heskins beheadeth
the sentence, for it is thus: Prior enim ^ux quam vmbra, veritas quam figura,
corpus authoris quam manna de coelo. For light is before the shadow, the
truth before the figure, the body of the author before manna from heaven.
Which words we may understand, how he takes the body of Christ, that
says it was before manna, namely, for the effect of his death and sacrifice
performed by his body. But M. Heskins begins at these words. Forte dicat,
etc. Peradventure thou may say. I see another thing. How do thou assure me
that I take the body of Christ? And this remains for us to prove. How many
examples therefore do we use, that we may prove this not to be that which
nature has formed it, but which the blessing has consecrated, and that there
is greater force of blessing, then of nature, for by blessing nature it self
is changed?

Moses held a rod, he cast it do^ne, and it was made a serpent. Again, he
took the serpent by the tail, and it re^^rueth into the nature of the rod.
Thou see therefore by the prophets grace, the nature of the serpent and of
the rod to (...) been twice changed: And after many examples: Quod si, etc.
If then the benediction of man was of so great power, that is changed nature,
what say we of the very divine consecration, where the very words of our Lord
and Savior do work. For this sacrament which thou reciuest is made with the
word of Christ. And again. Thou have read of all the works of the world,
that he said and they were made, be commanded and they were created. Therefore
the word of Christ which could of nothing make that which was not, can it not
change those things that are, into that they are not? For it is no less thing
to give new natures to things, then to change natures. Hitherto you have
heard Ambrose speaking earnestly for a change of nature, in the sacrament, now
hear him expound it in the same place for a spiritual change: Vera vtique
caro Christi quae crucifixa est, quae sepulta est: vere ergo carnis illius
sacramentum est. Ipse clamat Dominus Jesus: Hoc est corpus mo^m: ante
benedictionem verborum coelestium, ali^ species nominatur, post consecrationem,
Corpus Christi significatur. Ipse dicit sanguinem suum, ante consecrationem
a^ud dicitur, post. consecrationem sanguis nuncupatur. It was the very flesh
of Christ which was crucified, which was buried: therefore this is truly a
sacrament of that flesh, our Lord Jesus cries out saying, This is my body.
Before the benediction of the heavenly words, it is called another kind,
after the consecration, the body of Christ is signified. He himself says, it
is his blood, before consecration it is called another thing, after
consecration it is called blood. And in the same place again. In illo
sacramento Christus est, quia corpus est Christi, non ergo corporalis esca, sed
spirituali^ est. In that sacrament Christ is, because the body of Christ is.
Therefore it is not corporal meat but spiritual meat. Well then, ye bread is
changed from the nature of common bread, to be a true sacrament of the body
of Christ, whereby Christ his body is signified, and to be spiritual meat, and
this is the change and conversion he speaks of, and nor the Popish
transubstantiation. Next is alleged Chrysostom, Hom. 83. in Matthew. Non sunt,
etc. These are not the works of man's power, he that then in that supper made
these things, he also now works, he performs them. We hold the order of
ministers, but it is he which does sanctify and change these things. Here is a
change or transmutatio^, but no word of ye manner of ye change, therefore it
makes nothing for Popish transubstantiation, and this place has been more
then once answered before, by Chrysostom. authority. After him he cites
Cyrillus ad Colosirium in these words. V^uificati^^em, etc. The quickening
WORD of God uniting himself to his own flesh made that also quickening. How
when the life of God is in us, the WORD of God being in us, shall our body
also be able to give life? But it is an other thing for us to have the son of
God in us after the manner of participation: and an other thing, the same to
have been made flesh, that is, to have made the body which he took of the
blessed virgin his own body. Therefore it was meet, that he should be after
a certain manner united to our bodies, by his holy flesh and precious blood,
which we receive in the quickening blessing, in bread and wine. For least we
should abhor flesh and blood set upon the holy altars, God condescending to
our fragilities, inspireth to the things offered, the power of life, turning
them into the truth of his own flesh, that the body of life may be found in
us all, certain seed giving life. Here Master Heskins in his translation
clean leaves out Quodammodo, after a certain manner Christ is united to our
bodies by the sacrament, and so is this change made after a spiritual manner,
for otherwise this place is directly against transubstantiation, where he says
we receive the flesh and blood of Christ in bread and wine.

Euthymius is the next In Matthew 26. Quemadmodum, etc. As he did supernaturally
Deifie (as I may so say) his assumpted flesh, so he does also unspeakably
change these things into his quickening body and his precious blood, and
into the grace of them. When he says the bread and wine are changed into the
grace of his body and blood, it is easy to understand, that he means a
spiritual change, and the last clause is an exposition of the former, they
are changed, into the body and blood of CHRIST, that is, into the grace of
them.

Remugius follows 1. Cor. Cap. 10. The flesh which the word of God the
father took upon him in the womb of the virgin in unity of his person, and
the bread which is consecrated in the Church, are one body of Christ, for as
that flesh is the body of Christ: so this bread passes into the body of
Christ, neither are they two bodies but one body. He means, that the bread
is a sacrament of the very and only true body of Christ, otherwise his
antiquity is not so great, to purchase him authority, but as a Burgess of
the lower house, what so ever he speak. The rest that remain although I might
well expound their sayings so, as they should not make for Popish
transubstantiation, which the Greek Church did not receive: yet being late
writers out of the compass, as Damascen, Theophylact, Paschasius, I omit them.
But of all these doctors, M. Heskins gathers, that it is a marvelous and
wonderful work, that is wrought in this change of the sacramental bread and
wine, therefore he would prove it ca^ not be into a bare token, or figure, but
it may well be into a spiritual meat, to feed us into eternal life, which
is a wonderful and great work of God, as likewise that the washing of the body
in baptism, should be the washing of the soul from sin. And therefore be
says very lewdly, yt the institution of sacramental signs, as the Pascall
lamb, and such like, is no wonderful work of God, and as fondly compares he
the institution of sacraments with bare signs and tokens of remembrance, as
the twelve stones in Iordane, etc. And yet more lewdly, with the superstitious
bread used to be given to the Cathechumeni in Saint Augustines time, that had
no institution of God. Finally touching the determination and authority of the
late Laterane counsel for transubstantiation, as we do not esteem it being
contrary to the word of God: so I have in ye first book showed what a gross
error it committed, in falsification of a text of scripture, out of Saint
John's Gospel.

Hesk.
The two and fiftieth Chapter opens the minds of S. Basil, and S. Ambrose upon
the words of Christ.

Fulke.
Basil is cited Quaest. comp. explic. qu. 17^. In answer to this question,
with what feate, what faith or assured certeintie, and with what affection the
body and blood of of Christ should be received? Timorem docet, etc. The
Apostle teaches us the fear saying: He that eats and drinks unworthily,
eats and drinks his own damnation, but the credit of our Lords words
brings in the perfection of certeintie, who said: This is my body which is
given for you, do this in remembrance of me. In this answer, seeing he
brings no exposition, but only cites the bare words of the text, there is
nothing that makes for M. Heskins. He says the words are plain enough, and
need none other interpretation. It is true, before the world was troubled
with the heresy of carnal presence, the text seems plain enough, and these
words: Do this in remembrance of me, were thought a sufficient interpretation
of those words: This is my body: and so does Basil use them.

But S. Ambrose he says, is so plain, that if his mother the Church had not
been good to him, he should have been shut out of the doors. For
Oecolampadins rejected his book of the sacraments, as Luther did the Epistle of
S. James. Touching Luther, although he were too rash in yt censure, yet had he
Eusebius for his author, twelve hundredth years before him. And not only
Oecola^padius, but many other learned men do think both the phrase, and the
matter of that book to be unlike S. Ambrose. But for my part let it be
received, I hope M. Hesk. shall gain little by it: he has noted many short
sentences which I will rehearse one after another. First Lib. 4. Ca. 5.
Antequam. Before it be consecrated, it is bread, but when the words of Christ
are come to it, it is the body of Christ. Finally hear him saying: take and
eat ye all of it, This is my body. And before the words of Christ, the cup
is full of wine and water, when the words of Christ have wrought, there is
made the blood which redeemed the people. Ibi. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. Tu forte. Thou
peradventure say my bread is usual bread, but this bread is bread before
the words of the sacraments, when consecration is come to it, of bread it is
made the flesh of Christ. And again in the same Chapter. Sed audi, but hear
him saying that says: he said and they were made, he commanded and they were
created. Therefore that I may answer thee. Before consecration it was not the
body of Christ. But after consecration I say unto thee, tha^ now it is the
body of Christ. He said and it is made, he commanded, and it is created. And
in the same book Cap. 5. Ipse Dominus, Our Lord Jesus himself testifies unto
us, that we receive his body and blood, shall we doubt of his truth and
testification? Out of these places, he concludes not only that figures be
excluded, but also that the term of consecration is used seriously. I grant,
but not in such sense as the Papists use it, but as the word signifies, to
hallow or dedicate to an holy use. How figures be excluded, and how these
places are to be taken, that are so plain, as he pretends, I pray you hear
what he writes in the same books of sacraments. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. Ergo
didicisti quod ex pane corpu^ fiat Christi, and quod vinum and aqua in calicem
mittitur, sed fit sanguis consecratione verbi Coelestis. Sed forto dicis
speciem sanguinis non video. Sed habet similitudinem. Sicut enim mortis
similitudinem sumpsisti: ita etiam similitudinem preciosi sanguinis bibis, vt
nullus horror cruoris sit, and precium tamen operetur redemptionis. Didicisti
ergo quia quod accipis, corpus est Christi. Therefore thou have learned that of
the bread is made the body of Christ, and that the wine and water is put into
the cup, but by consecration of the heavenly word, it is made his blood. But
perhaps thou say, I see not the show of blood. Yet has it the
similitude. For as thou have received the similitude of his death, so also thou
drinkest the similitude of his precious blood, that there may be no horror of
blood, and yet it may work the price of redemption. Thou have learned then yt,
that which thou take is the body of Christ. Here you see it is so the body
of Christ, as it is the similitude of his death, and so ye blood, as it is ye
similitud of his blood. Moreover in ye same book Ca. 5. Dicit sacerdos, etc.
The priest says make unto us, (says he) this oblation, ascribed, reasonable,
acceptable: which is the figure of the body and blood of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And Cap. 6. Ergo memores, etc. Therefore being mindful of his most
glorious passion and resurection from hell, and ascension into heaven, we offer
unto thee this undefiled sacrifice, this reasonable sacrifice, this unbloody
sacrifice, this holy bread and cup of eternal life. And again Lib. 6. cap.
1. Ne igitur plures hoc dicerent veluti quidam esset horror cruoris, sed
maneret gratia redemptionis, ideo in similitudinem quidem accipi^ sacramentu^,
sed verae naturae gratiam virtus emque consequeris. Therefore lest any man
should say this, and there should be a certain horror of blood, but that the
grace of redemption might remain, therefore truly, thou take a sacrament
for a similitude, but thou obteinest the grace and virtue of his true nature.
Thus Ambrose has spoken sufficiently to show him self no favorer of Master
Heskins bill, although (as the scripture teaches,) he call the sacrament the
body and blood of Christ and declares why it is so called, because it is a
figure, similitude, and a memorial thereof.

The three and fiftieth Chapter continues in the exposition of Christ's words
by Gregory Nicene, and S. Hierome. Hesk.


Gregory Nicene is cited, Fulk.
Ex serus. Catatholico. De Diuinis sacram. Qua ex causa panis in eo corpore
mutatus, etc. By what cause the bread in that body being changed, passed
into the divine power, by the same cause, the same thing it done now. For as
there the grace of the word of God makes that body, whose nourishment
consisted of bread, and was after a certain manner bread: So bread as the
Apostle says, by the word of God and prayer, is sanctified, not because it is
eaten, growing to that that it may become the body of the WORD, but
forthwith by the word it is changed into the body, as it is said by the
WORD. This is my body. This place says Master Heskins overthrows three
heresies. The first of Luther or Lutherans: that the sacrament is not the body
of Christ, except it be received. Gregory says, it is not the body of
Christ, because it is eaten. But that is no overthrow to Luthers assertion, for
Gregory means, that the sacrament by nourishing our bodies, is not made the
body of Christ, as the bread that a man eats is turned into his body, and
so was the bread yt our savior did eat, turned into ye substance of his body
while he lived, but by the power of God, and this notwithstanding, it is made
that body of Christ, only to the worthy receiver. Of which a^sertion M. Hesk.
says, they have no substantial ground in scriptures: as though an argument
framed out of the scripture, of the end and use of ye sacrament, were not a
substantial ground. And as for the popish counsel of Florens, is a sorry
ground without scripture. Although (...) nor, (as he slaundereth us) yt the
power of consecration depends upon the will of the receiver, but upon the
wonderful work of God, with such practice as he requires. The second
supposed heresy, to be overthrown, is, that the substance of bread and wine
do still remain, because Gregory says, it is changed into the body of
Christ. But this change is not of substance, but of use, for as he says, it
is changed into the body, so he says it is changed into the divine virtue,
which words, though Master Hesk. would rack to signify the divine flesh of
Christ, yet cannot he avoid a manifest figure in the speech of Gregory, and
therefore it is nothing so plain for him, as he pretends. To this he
adioyneth a defense of the term of transubstantiation, which he confesses to
be but new, (as in deed the doctrine thereof is) but yet he compares it with
the term used of old by the fathers Homousion, to signify that Christ is of
the substance of the father. But to be short, for terms, we will not strive,
let him prove transubstantiation so old as he pretends, and we will
acknowledge the term. The third pretended heresy to be overthrown, is, that
he teaches a real presence, and therefore the words: This is my body, are
to be understood without trope or figure. But this is avoided in answer to
the second, and so we leave him discharged of M. Hesk. cauils.

Hierome is alleged ad Hedibiam. qu. 2. the place has been already handled,
and proved to be against M. Hesk. in the 31. Chap. of this book, whither I
refer the reader for breuities sake, only in this place I will deal with such
points as were not spoken of there, and rehearse the whole discourse of S.
Herome together, and not in patches as M. Hesk. has done, interlacing his fond
gloses. Question secunda. Quomodo accipiendum sit, etc. The second question. How
that saying of our savior in Matthew is to be taken: I say unto you, I will not
drink from hence forth of this fruit of the vine, until that day, in which I
shall drink it new with you in the kingdom of my father. Out of this place,
some men build the fable of a thousand years, in which they contend, that
Christ shall reign corporally, and drink wine, which he has not drunk from
that time, unto the end of the world. But let us hear, that the bread which
our Lord brake and gave to his disciples, is the body of our Lord and savior,
as he says unto them. Take and eat ye, this is my body, and that the cupp is
that, of which he spoke again: drink ye all of this: this is my blood of the
new testament, which shall be shed for many, etc. This is that cupp, of which we
read in the Prophet: I will take the cupp of salvation. And in another place,
Thy cup inebriaeting is very noble. If therefore the bread, which came down
from heaven, is the body of our Lord: and the wine, which he gave to his
disciples, is his blood of the new testament, let us reject Jewish fables, and
ascend with our Lord into the great parler, prepared and made clean, and let us
receive of him above, the cup of the new testament: and there holding passover
with him, let us be made drunk with the wine of sobriety. For the kingdom of
God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, and joy, and peace in the holy
ghost. Neither did Moises give us the true bread, but our Lord Jesus, he being
the guest and the fest, he himself eating, and which is eaten. His blood we
drink, and without him we cannot drink it, and daily in his sacrifices, we
tread out of the generation of the true vine and the vine of Sorec, which is
interpreted chosen, the red new wines, and of them we drink new wine of
the kingdom of his father, not in the oldnesse of the letter, but in the
newness of the spirit, singing a new song, which none can sing, but in the
kingdom of the Church, which is the kingdom of the father.

This bread also did Jacob the Patriarch covet to eat, saying: if ye Lord
shall be with me, and give me bread to eat, and raiment to cover me. For as many
of us as are baptized in Christ, have put on Christ, and do eat the bread of
Angels, and do hear our Lord saying: My meat is, that I may do the will of
him that sent me, my father, that I may accomplish his work. Let us therefore
do the will of his father which sent us, and let us accomplish his work: and
Christ shall drink with us his blood in the kingdom of the Church. This is
the whole discourse of Hierome, and by the distinction of ye letter, you see
what Master Heskins has left out, both in the beginning, and in the end, and
yet he raileth at ye proclaimer, for snatching truncately a few words, to
make a show to deceive his auditorie. But by this whole treatise, you may see
what the question is, and how it is answered, namely, that the promise of
Christ must be understood, of a spiritual drinking in the Church, which
utterly overthrows the popish fantasy of real presence. For Christ is so
present at every celebration of the supper in his church, that he eats his
body, and drinks his blood, as Hierome says: which no man, except he be
mad, will say to be otherwise then after a spiritual manner, and in the end,
Hierome opens what is his meat, and how he drinks his blood with us, and
that we so eat his body, as we put him on for a garment in baptism, and as
Jacob did eat it, which must needs be spiritually. More collections, if any
man desire, let him resort to the 31. Chapter of this second book.

Hesk.
The four and fiftieth Chapter testifyeth the understanding of the same words
by Isychius, and S. Augustine.

Fulke.
Isychius is alleged in Leuit. lib. 6. Cap. 2^. upon this text. He that eats
of the holy things unwittingly, shall put the fifth part thereunto, and give
unto the Priest the hallowed thing. Sancta sanctorum, etc. The most holy
things properly are the mysteries of Christ, because it is his body, of whom
Gabriell said unto the virgin: The holy ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the most highest shall ouershadowe thee, therefore that holy one that
shall be borne of thee, shall be called the son of God. And Esaias also: The Lord
is holy, and dwells in the heightes, that is to say, in the bosom of his
father. For from this sacrifice he has forbidden, not only strangers and
soiourners and hired servant, but he commanded also, not to receive it by
ignorance. And he takes it by ignorance, which knows not the virtue and
dignity thereof, which knows not that this body and blood is according to
the truth, but receives the mysteries, and knows not the virtue of the
mysteries. Unto whom Solomon says, or rather the spirit which is in him:
When thou sit to eat with a Prince, attend diligently, what things are set
before thee. He also compelling openly and constraining him that is ignorant to
add a fifth part. For this fifth part being added, makes us to understand
the divine mysteries, intelligibly. Now, what the fifth part is, the words
of the Law giver may teach thee. For he says: he shall add a fifth part,
with that he has eaten. And how can a man add a fifth part of that which he
has already eaten and consumed? For he bids not another thing, or from any
other where. But a fifth part to be added of it, or with it, or as the 70.
interpret upon it. Then the fifth part of it, upon it, is the word which was
uttered by Christ him self upon the Lords mystery. For that being added,
delivers and remoueth us from ignorance, as to think any thing carnal or
earthly of those holy things, but decrees, that those things should be
taken divinely and spiritually, which is properly called the fifth part, for
the divine spirit which is in us, and the word which he delivered, does set
in order the senses that are in us, and does not only bring forth our taste
unto mystery, but also our hearing and sight and touching and smelling, so
that of these things which are very high, we do suspect, nothing that is near
to less reason or weak understanding.

This place M. Hesk. notes, that the mysteries are called a most holy thing,
and a sacrifice. We confess it is a most holy thing, and a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, for so ye fathers meant, and not a propitiatory sacrifice.
Moreover he notes, that it is called the very body and blood in very deed.
Although the words of the author sound not so roundly, yet let that be
granted also, what is then the conclusion? Marie then, have ye a plain place
for the proclaimer, and issue joined thereupon, that no one writer of like
auncientie, says, it is not the very body. For the plainness of the place, I
wish always, that the author may be his own expositor. First, where he says,
that the fifth part added, makes us to understand the mysteries intelligibly
(that is as he uses the term) spiritually and mystically, although M. Hesk.
translate intelligibiliter easily.

Secondly, where he says, we must think nothing carnally or earthly of the
holy things, and that the word of God decrees, that they should be taken
divinely and spiritually. As for the issue it was joined and tried in the one
and twentieth Chapter of the first book. But we must hear what Hesychius
says further. Quicunque ergo sanctificata etc. Whosoever therefore shall eat of
the things sanctified by ignorance, not knowing their virtue (at we have said)
shall add a fifth part of it upon it, and give it to the Priest into the
sanctuary. For it behooves the sanctification of the mystical sacrifice, and
the translation or commutation from things sensible to things intelligible, to
be given to Christ, which is the true Priest, that is, to grant and impute to
him the miracle of them, because that by his power and the word uttered by
him, those things that are seen, are as surely sanctified, as they exceed all
sense of the flesh. Out of these words M. Hesk. would prove transubstantiation,
because he says, there is a translation or co^mutation from things sensible to
intelligible, yt is, from bread, which is perceived by ye senses, to ye body of
Christ, which in this manner is not perceived by senses. But M. Hesk. must
prove the body of Christ to be no sensible thing, but a thing which may be
perceived by understanding only, or else his exposition will not stand, for here
is a division and exposition of things sensible and intelligible, which is a
plain overthrow of popish transubstantiation, and carnal presence, for yt
whereunto the things sensible are changed, is not a sensible thing, as the
natural body of Christ is, but they are changed into things intelligible* yt
is, which may only by understanding be conceived, and so is the spiritual
feeding of our souls by faith, with ye very body and blood of Christ. Next
Augustine is cited in Ps. 33 a place which has been cited and answered more then
once already. Et ferebatur, etc. And he was carried in his own ba^ds. Brethren
how could this be true in a man? etc. I will remit the reader to the 10. Chap.
of this second book, where it is answered by Aug. him self, and in the same
exposition. Christ carried himself, says Aug. in his hands, quodam modo, after
a certain manner, but not simply. Master Hesk. iangling of an only figure,
has been often reproved: we make not the sacrament such an only figure, as
David might carry in his hands of him self, for David could make no
sacrament of him self, but such a figure, as is a divine and heavenly work,
to give in deed, that it represents in sign. An other place of Augustine,
is cyted De Trin. lib. 3. cap. 4. but truncately (as he terms it) for he
neither alleges the head nor the feet, by which the scope of Augustines
words might be perceived. But the whole sentence is this. Si ergo Apostolus
Paulus, etc. If therefore the Apostle Paul, although he did yet carry the
burden of his body, which is corrupted and presses down the soul, although
he did as yet see but in part, and in a dark speech, desiring to be dissolved
and to be with Christ, and groaning in himself for the adoption, waiting for
the redemption of his body, Could nevertheless preach our Lord Jesus Christ by
signifying, otherwise by his tongue, otherwise by his Epistle, otherwise by the
sacrament of his body and blood for neither his tongue, nor the parchments, nor
the ynke nor the signifying sounds uttered with his tongue, nor the signs of the
letters written in skins, do we call the body and blood of Christ, but only
that which being taken of the fruits of the earth, and being consecrated with
mystical prayer, we do rightly receive unto spiritual health, in remembrance
of our Lords suffering for us: which when it is brought by the hands of me^, to
that visible form, it is not sanctified that it should be so great a sacrament,
but by the spirit of god working inuisibly: when God works al these things
which in that work are done by corporal motions, moving first the invisible
parts of his ministers, either the souls of men, or of secret spirits yt are
subjects serving him: what marvel is it, if also in the creature of heaven and
earth, the sea, and all the air, God makes what he will both sensible and
invisible things, to set forth him self in them, as he him self knows it
should be: his own substance as it is not appearing, which is altogether
unchangeable, and more inwardly and secretly, higher then all the spirits
which he has created.

He rayleth upon Oecolampadius, for leaving out of S. Augustine that which
makes against him, as though he him self has not an hundredth times done so
as he charge him. Although it is not to be thought, that Oecolampadius used
any fraud, when he took as much as served his purpose for which he alleged
it, and nothing followed, that was contrary to it, for all M. Heskins loud
crying out. For Paul preached Christ by signifying in the sacrament, which is
called the body and blood of Christ, because it is a sacrament thereof, whereas
his tongue, nor his parchment, nor ynke, nor sound of words, nor figures of
letters were no sacraments, and yet he preached the same Christ by signifying,
in speaking, writing, and ministering the sacrament. But besides this, M.
Heskins would have us note two things. That the bread is sanctified and made a
great sacrament: and that it is sanctified and made by the invisible work of
the holy Ghost. The first (he says) is against Oecolampadius and Cranmer, that
say, the creatures receive no sanctification, but the souls of men. They
mean, that holiness is not included in the creatures, but consists in the
whole action, and so Augustine adds to the consecration the due receiving in
remembrance of Christ's death, without which the bread is no sacrament. But M.
Heskins would learn what he means by calling it a great sacrament, and what
the work of the holy Ghost is in it? If it please him to understand, the holy
Ghost working inuisibly, makes it a great mystery of our salvation, assuring
our consciences, that we are fed spiritually with the body and blood of Christ,
as our bodies are corporally with bread and wine. As for S. James his Mass,
and other such ma^king disguisings, I will not vouchsafe to answer, being
mere forgeries and counterfetings.

But how S. Augustine did expound these words, M. Heskins if he durst, might
have cyted this place, Contra Adimantum. Nam ex eo quod scriptum est sanguinem
pecoris animam eius esse, prter id quod supra dixi, non ad me pertinere quid
agatur de pecoris anima, possum etiam interpretari praeceptum illud in signo
esse positum: non enim Dominus dubitanit dicere: hoc est corpus meum, cum
signum daret corporis sui. For of that which is written, that the blood of a
beast is the life thereof, beside that which I said before, that it pertains
not to me what becomes of the life of a beast, I may interpret that
commandment to be given in a sign: for our Lord doubted not to say: this is
my body, when he gave the sign of his body. This place is plain, and will not
suffer M. Heskins gloss, that the accidents are called a sign of his body, for
then it is nothing like to the text, which he compares to this: blood is the
life of the beast. Let this place expound Augustine, when so ever he names the
sacrament the body of Christ.

The five and fiftieth Chapter tarieth in the exposition of the same words by
Chrysostom and Sedulius. Hesk.


Chrysostom is cyted In 26. Math. Hom. 83. Fulk.
Credamus vbique etc. Let us believe in every place, neither let us resist him,
although it seems to be an absurd thing to our sense, and to our cogitation,
which is said. Let his word I beseech you overcome both our sense and our
reason, which thing let us do in all matters, and specially in mysteries, not
looking upon those things only which lie before us, but also holding fast his
words. For we can not be deceived by his words, but our sense is most easy
to be deceived: they can not be false, but this our sense is often and often
deceived. Therefore because he has said: This is my body, let us be held with
no doutfulnesse, but let us believe, and thoroughly see it with the eyes of
understanding. Here M. Heskins notes that it passes not reason, to make
present a figure of his body, as though the mystery of the sacrament were
nothing, but a figure of his body. Secondly, that Chrysostom wills Christ's
words to be understood as they be spoken. No doubt, but he would have them
to be understood as they were meant by Christ, and that is spiritually, for
which cause he wills us to behold the matter with the eyes of our
understanding and by faith. And whereas M. Heskins does further allege this
Doctors words In Marc. 14. Hom. 51. Qui dixis etc. He that said, This is my
body, did bring to pass the thing also with his word. We confess he did so,
but thereof it does not follow, that al figure is wiped away, as he says:
neither is there any plain place for the proclamer, or in any thing that
follows in the same Homely. Quando igitur etc. When then thou see the
Priest give the body, think not the hand of the Priest, but the hand of
Christ is put forth unto thee. Surely in these words, we must either say
that the Priests hand is transubstantiated into the hand of Christ, or else
we must acknowledge a figurative speech. It follows in Chrysostom, for more
persuasion. Qui enim maius etc. For he that has given a greater thing for
thee, that is to say, his life, why will he disdain to deliver his body to
thee? Let us therefore hear both Priests and other, how great and how
wonderful a thing is granted to us. Let us hear I pray you, and let us
tremble, he has delivered his flesh unto us, him self offered has he set
before us. What satisfaction therefore shall we offer, when after we are
nourished with such a food, we do offend? When eating a lamb, we are turned
into woolues? when being satisfied with sheep flesh, we rauine as lions? M.
H. notes, yt here be terms to plain for figurative speeches, and yet in
spite of his nose, he must confess all this speech to be figurative, or else he
must make Chrysostom. Author of gross absurdities. I will only speak of one,
which is most apparent. Chrysostom. says, it is a greater matter that Christ
gave his life, then yt he gives his body. Let me ask him this question. Does
he give a dead body in the sacrament, or a living? If he give a living body,
he gives his life in the sacrament, and then how is it less, when he
gives both his life and his body? But Chrysostom means, that he suffered
death, which is a greater matter, then that he gives us his body in the
sacrament, for that is a memorial of his death, and receives all the virtue
from his death, and so the giving of his life is a greater matter, then the
giving of his body in the sacrament, for ye was in act, this in mystery. But
let us follow M. Hes. The sacrament is a wonderful thing, therefore no figure,
nor spiritual receipt only, which are not wonderful. This argument is false,
for sacramental figures and spiritual things are great wonders, thought not
sensible miracles. As for eating the Lamb, the Sheep, and such other, are so
plain figures, that impudency her self would not deny them to be figures.
Finally he notes, that sinners receive the body of Christ in the sacrament,
which he says, the Protestants deny, which is as grossly, for except
sinners should receive Christ in the sacrament, no men should receive him. But
the Protestants say, that wicked men or reprobate men, ungodly men, unpenitent
sinners, receive not the body of Christ, which though it have been
sufficiently proved before, yet I will add one more testimony out of Saint
Augustine De ciuitate Dei. Lib. 21. Cap. 25. Nec isti ergo dicendi sunt
manducare corpus Christi, quoniam nec in membris computandi sunt Christi.
Denique ipse dicens: Qui manducat carnem meam, and bibit sanguinem meum, in me
manet and ego in eo, ostendit quid sit, non sacramento tenus, sed reuera corpus
Christi manducare, and eius sanguinem bibere. Neither is it to be said, that
these men (meaning heretics and other wicked men) do eat the body of
Christ, because they are not to be accounted among the members of Christ.
Finally he himself saying: He yt eats my flesh and drinks my blud, abides
in me and I in him: shows what it is, not touching ye sacrament only, but
indeed to eat ye body of Christ, and drink his blood. But now let us return to
Chrysostom. who Hom. 83. in 26. Math. has these words, Praecipua^ and. He
dissolueth their chief solemnity, and calls the^ to another table full of
horror saying: Take ye and eat ye, this is my body. How then were they not
troubled hearing this? because they had heard many and great things of these
before. Here M. Hes. troubles him self very much and his readers more, to
prove yt by the doctrine which they heard before, uttered in the sixth of John,
they were so instructed as they were not troubled, which we confess to be true,
although that doctrine does none otherwise pertain unto the sacrament, then as
the sacrament is a seal of the doctrine. But Chrysostom says further in the
same Homely. Hac de causa etc. For this cause with desire I have desired to
eat this passover with you, that I might make you spiritual. He him self
also drank thereof, least when they had heard his words, they should say:
what then do we drink blood and eat flesh? and so should have been troubled.
For when he spoke before of those things, many were offended only for his
words. Therefore least the same thing should happen now also, he him self
did it first, that he might induce them with quiet mind, to the communication
of the mysteries. Here M. Heskins falls into a sound sleep, and then
dreameth a long dream of the real presence, and the trouble of the Apostles,
and lothsomnesse of blood, the contradiction of Chrysostomes words, and I wot
not what beside* But to a man that is awake, Chrysostom speaks plain enough.
He says, this was ye cause, why Christ desired to eat the Passover with
them, which he takes to be, that he did first drink before them etc. that
he might make the^ spiritual, that is, yt they might not have carnal
imaginations of eating his body and his blood as the Capernaites had, but
understand those things spiritually, the rather when they saw him eat and
drink of them, which if he had eaten his own natural body, and drunk his
own natural blood, would have troubled them more, then if he had not tasted of
them. And how so ever M. Heskins drumbleth and dreameth of this matter, Cranmer
says truly, that if Christ had turned the bread into his body, as the
Papists affirm, so great and wonderful a change, should have been more
plainly setfoorth in the scripture, by some of the Evangelists.

Sedulius for variety of names is cyted In 11. pri. ad Cor. Accipite hoc est
corpus meum etc. Take ye, this my body, as though Paul had said, take heed
ye eat not the body unworthily, seeing it is the body of Christ. What is there
here that the proclamer will not confess? and yet is there nothing to bind
him to subscribe, for the proclamer would never deny, that the sacrament is
the body and blood of Christ, though after an other sort, then it is affirmed
by the Papists.

The six and fiftieth Chapter abides in the exposition of the same words by
Theophylus and Leo. Hesk.


Theophylus Alexandrinus is brought on the stage in this show, cyted Lib. 2.
Pasch. Consequens est etc. Fulk.
It is consequent, that he that receives the former things, should also
receive those things that follow. And he that shall say, that Christ was
crucified for devils, must allow also that it is to be said unto them: This
is my body, and take ye, this is my blood. For if he be crucified for devils
(as the author of new doctrine does affirm) what privilege shall there be, or
what reason that only men should communicate with his body and blood, and not
devils also for whom he shed his blood in his passion? He says here is no
mention of tropes and figures. A substantial reason, therefore none are used.
It is a good reason that Theophylus uses: that Christ died not for the devils,
because he gives them no participation of his body and blood, but it hangs
on a rush that M. Hes. concludes. Such as are partakers of his real body, may
be made partakers of his spiritual body: but devils can not of his real body,
therefore not of his spiritual body be partakers. See how this perverse man,
makes the sacrament to be the real body of Christ, and that which was
crucified, his spiritual body. By which he does not only make Christ have two
bodies, but also overthrows the truth of the one, to establish the falshod of
ye other. But the same writer in ye first book, does more certainly avouch the
real presence, and deny the figures in these words: Dicit spiritum sanctum
etc. Origin says, that the holy Ghost does not work upon those things, which
are without life nor comes to unreasonable things. Which when he says, he
thinks not that the mystical waters in baptism by the coming of the holy
Ghost to them are consecrated, and that the Lords bread by which our saviors
body is showed, and which we break for sanctification of us, and the holy cup
which are set on the table, and be things without life, are sanctified, by
invocation and coming of the holy Ghost to them. M. Hes. translateth quo
saluaioris corpus ostenditur, in which the body of our Savior is showed, but
it is plain enough, Theophylus means, that by the bread the body of Christ
is showed, that is signified, or figured, or represented. As for consecration,
which term he gives to the waters in baptism, Master Heskins chattereth I
wot not what about it, nor to what purpose. Certain it is, that he uses not
the term as the Papists do, for they apply it only to the sacrament of the
altar, as they call it.

Leo is cited Sermon. 7. de pass. dom. Jesus confisij sui certus etc. Jesus being
at a point with him self, and ready to do his fathers disposition without
fear, finished the old Testament, and made the new Passover. For his
disciples sitting with him to eat the mystical supper, while they in the
house of Caiphas were treating how Christ might be slain, he ordaining the
sacrament of his body and blood, did teach, what manner of sacrifice should be
offered to God, and from this mystery removed not the traitor. This place
being against Master Heskins, where he calls it the sacrament of his body
and blood etc. he would answer the matter by this principle, that old
writers did so call the very natural body of Christ in the sacrament, which is
all the matter in question. But he will prove it by an other saying in the
same place. Vt vmbrae etc. That shadows might give place to the body, and
images might cease under the presence of the truth, the old observance is
taken away with a new sacrament, the sacrifice passes into the sacrifice,
blood excludes blood, and the festiuitie of the law while it is changed, is
fulfilled. These words must needs be referred to the passion of Christ,
whereof the sacrifice is a memorial: for the sacrifice of Christ, and his
blood shedding on the cross, was the very fulfilling of the shaddowe and image
of the Paschall Lamb in the old law, and not the institution of the
sacrament, which is a figure or sacrament thereof. And so the groundwork of al
M. Hes. building is quite ouerthrown.

Hesk.
The seven and fiftieth Chapter proceeds in the exposition of the same words
by S. Cyrill and S. Gregory.

Cyrillus is cited, as he is often, ad Colosyrium. Non dubites an etc. Fulke.
Doubt thou not whether this be true, when he says manifestly, This is my
body: but rather receive the word of our Savior in faith. For seeing he is
the truth, he does not lie. Master Heskins infers, that the words of
Christ are manifest, and so to be taken in the literal sense without figure,
because he uses these words, Christ said manifestly, this is my body: but
this is a childish mockery. Christ said manifestly, I am the door. Does it
therefore follow, that it is no figurative speech, and that the words of
Christ are manifest, and therefore to be taken in the literal sense? And yet
I believe, because Christ said manifestly, I am the door, that he is in deed
the door, though not literally but figuratively taken. It greueth M. Hes. that
the proclamer should play with Duns his indiuid^um vagum, saying, that by the
like means, he might disgrace the faith of the trinity, to open the
quiddities of distinctions, and relations of persons, that be spoken thereof.
And I think the same, if he should teach that holy mystery after the
school manner, and not after the word of God. But he returns to an other
place of Cyrill. Ne horreremus carnem and sanguinem. Because this place is
already rehearsed more at large, and answered in the 51. Chap. of this book, I
will send the reader back, to consider it in that place.

Gregory is cited Lib. 4. dialog. cap. ^8. Debemus itaque praesens sculum etc.
We ought therefore, seeing we see this present world to be passed away, with all
our mind to contemn it, to offer to god the daily sacrifices of tears, the
daily sacrifices of his body and blood. For this sacrifice does singularly save
the soul from eternal destruction, which repayreth to us the death of the only
begotten, by a mystery. Who although since he arose from death, he does not
now die, and death shall have no more dominion of him: yet living in him self
immortally and incorruptibly, is sacrificed again for us in this mystery of
the holy oblation. For his body is there received, his flesh is divided for the
health of the people, his blood is shed, not now upon the hands of the
Infidels, but into the mouths of the faithful. Hereof therefore let us
consider, what sacrifice this is for us, which for our deliverance does
follow the passion of the only begotten Son. For which of the faithful
ought to have any doubt, that in the same hour of the immolation, the heavens
are opened at the Priests voice? that the companies of Angels are present in
the mystery of Jesus Christ? That the lowest things are coupled to the
highest: earthly things are joined to heavenly things, and that one thing is
made of things visible and invisible? Of these last words of joining high and
low, heavenly and earthly things, he makes a great matter, which is (says
he) that Christ is joined to the earthly forms of bread and wine. Where
note (I pray you) that he names the accidents of things, for the things them
selves, which is a toy to mock an ape. And yet he pleases him self so well
therein, that he would draw Irenaeus, which is clean contrary to
transubstantiation, to be a great patron thereof: Li. 4. ca. 34.
Irenaeus says as we have showed before more at large, that Eucharistie
consists of two things, earthly and heavenly. Now he inquireth of us, what
is the heavenly part of the sacrament? And he reasons that it is neither the
grace of God, nor thanksgiving, nor the word of God, nor sanctification. Well:
what is it then? Gregory says, it is the body of Christ, and so say we,
spiritually received. But if I should ask M. Hes. what is the earthly part of
the sacrament, he will say, the accidents of bread and wine, but saving his
wisdom, accidents be neither earthly not heavenly, but the earthly thing must
needs be a substantial thing, and what other earthly substance can there be,
but the substance of bread and wine? He says, that corporal receiving is here
avouched by Gregory. Then must he tell me how in these words, the sacrifice of
tears, is matched with the sacrifice of his flesh and blood, and how the death
of Christ is repaired by a mystery, how the flesh of Christ is divided or
parted, if this can not be done, but spiritually, then Christ's body can not
be eaten, but spiritually.

The judgment of Barnard which follows, we leave to be weighed according to
the corruption of the age in which he lived.

Hesk.
The eigth and fiftieth Chapter ends the exposition among the eldest Fathers
by Euthymius and Isidorus.

Fulk.
Although neither of these writers are within the compass of the challenge, yet
because Euthymius uses much to follow ancient Doctors, and Isidorus was
near the time of the challenge, I will set down their places and examine
their words. Euthymius is cyted In 26. Math. Sicut vetus testamentum etc. Even
as the old Testament had sacrifices and blood: so has the new, namely the
body and blood of our Lord. Now he did not say: These are the signs of my
body and my blood: but these things be my body and blood. Therefore we must
not look to the nature of those things that are set forth, but to the virtue
of them. For as he did supernaturally deifie (if I may so speak) his assumpted
flesh: so does he also unspeakably transmute these things into the same his
quickening body, and into his precious blood, and into the grace of them. And
the bread has a certain similitude unto the body, and wine to blood. For both
the bread and body are earthly: but the wine and the blood are airie and hot.
And as bread does comfort, so the body of Christ does the same and much more,
it sanctifies both the body and the soul. And as the wine does make glad: so
the blood of Christ does the same, and moreover is made a defense. Although the
chiefest parts of this place are answered in the 17. Chapter of the first
book, and in the 51. Chap. of this second book: yet as M. Hes. gathers here
two other matters, so I will make answer to them. First he says, That the
figurative gloss of the sacrame^taries is flatly denied: But by what words I
pray you* Marry where he says: Christ said not these be signs of my body
and blood, but these are my body and blood, if this be a flat denial of a
figure, because Christ said not so, then is it likewise in these speeches, he
said not the rock was a sign of Christ, but the rock was Christ, the
Lamb is the Passover etc. Euthymius means not to exclude all figures from
the saying of Christ, but to show that the sacrament is not a bare, naked, and
vain sign, but a true sign of the very body and blood of Christ, given to
the faithful in the administration of the supper.

The second matter that Master Heskins notes, is, of the unspeakable
transmutation, and that must needs be meant of transubstantiation of the
bread and wine into the natural body and blood of Christ, by this reason:
there be four things called the body of Christ. 1. The figure. 2. The
Church. 3. The merit, fruit, or virtue of his passion. 4. And his body
natural, but it can not be into the figure, nor into the Church, Nor into the
spiritual body of Christ, I mean the merit, virtue, and grace of Christ's
passion, Ergo it must needs be spoken of the natural body of Christ. But
vouchsafe (gentle Reader) to run over once again these words of Euthymius,
which in Latin are these. Ita and hec ineffabiliter transmuta^ in ipsum
vinific^^^ corpus, and in ipsius prciosum sanguinem si^on, and in gratiam ipso
(...): Even so he does unspeakably transmute and change these things into the
same his quickening body, and into his own precious blood, and into the grace
of them. Now tell me whether M. Heskins does flatly deny, that which Euthymius
does flatly affirm, that the bread and wine are changed into the grace of
the body and blood of Christ? By which words he does sufficiently expound,
what kind of change he means of them into the body and blood of Christ, not
a corporal but a spiritual transmutation. To the rest of the sentence which
is a good exposition of the former part, showing both the bread and wine to
remain in the sacrament, and for what cause they are used to represent the
body and blood of Christ, namely, for the similitude they have unto the body
and blood of Christ: Master Heskins says nothing. But let the reader weigh
it well, and he shall see it clean contrary both to transubstantiation, and
the carnal presence.

Now we come to Isodorus, whom he confesses to be somewhat out of the
compass of the challenge, and his words De Offi. Eccle. Lib. 18. are these.
Sacrificium, etc. The sacrifice that is offered of the Christians unto God,
Christ our God and Master did first institute, when he commended to his
Apostles his body and his blood before he was betrayed, as it is read in the
Gospel: Jesus took bread and the cup and blessing them gave unto them.

In this place is nothing for the carnal presence, but that Isydore calls
the sacrament the body and blood of Christ, which we also do, and acknowledge
to be so rightly called. And Master Heskins can conclude nothing but upon a
negative, he says not he gave a figure, so may I conclude, he says not he
gave his natural body, and no figure. After this he reasons as fondely of
Christ's blessing of the bread, which although the Evangelists do expound to
be giving of thanks, yet admit blessing to signify consecration, and what has
he gained? Forsooth Christ would not have blessed it to make but a figure: still
he plays the fool with that babble, but a figure, only a figure, a bare
figure, which we utterly do forsake. But toward the end of the Chapter, he
falls to gathering his voices, and affirms that none of the old fathers
call the sacrament a figure, except Tertullian only, wherein he lies
impudently, for beside Ambrose, and Augustine, which both use the very word
figure, we have showed in due places, that both they and in a manner all the
rest of the fathers, have either written plainly against the carnal presence,
or else nothing for it. As for his last challenge, that all the protestants
must bring forth when any country did profess the same religion that is now
preached, is vain: and has been sufficiently answered in other treatises.
It is certain, that all nations yt were converted by the Apostles, before they
were corrupted by heresy and Antechristianitie, professed the same religion
that we do. As for the alterations in King Henry's time, King Edwardes, and
the Queens Majesty's, that now is, it is easy to answer. King Henry began
the work, which King Edward finished, and the Queen repaired and vpholdeth
in spite of the devil and the Pope. As for the consent and peace of the
Popish Church, it proves nothing, but that the devil had then all things at
his will, and therefore might sleep on both sides, but now he is disturbed of
possession of the house, now he stormeth, and of Robin good fellow, which he
was in the Popish time, is become plain Satan the Devil.

Hesk.
The nine and fiftieth Chapter begins the exposition of the same text by the
fathers of the latter days, and first Damascen, and Haymo.

Fulke.
Before M. Heskins begin his pretended exposition, he charge Luther, to be a
proud contemner of the fathers, who reverenced them as much as it was meet
they should be reverenced, although he preferred one authority of scripture,
before a thou^^nd Cyprians and Augustines. Next to Luther, he rayleth on the
bishop of Sarum, who^ he calls the proclaymer, charging him with mocking of
the holy fathers, whereof some he says be saints in heaven, what the rest be
he does not determine, he means Siluester, Isodore, Innocentius, Betram,
Durand, Holcot Dunce, etc. Which if they have written any thing that is
ridiculous, in defense of Popery, it were better men should laugh at their
folly, then be still deceived with their errors. But whereas M. Hesk. will
set a player on a stage, and a boy in the Pa^^is to answer the Bishop, I ween
it be more then the reverend M. Doctor Heskins reuested in Doctoralibus and
inthronized in his Doctors chayer, dare well take upon him to do. That which
follows in this Chapter, is consumed in cyting and urging of the forenamed
writers, whose authority we do not admit, appealing always from the lower
house of punys Burgesses, to the higher house of ancient Barons.

Hesk.
The sixtieth Chapter proceeds in exposition of the same text by Theophylacte
and Paschasius.

Fulke.
Although we might demurre upon the understanding of those words of
Theophylact, In 14. Matthew. That the bread and wine are transelementated into
the virtue of his flesh and blood: yet considering the corrupt time in which he
lived, his authority is not worth the striving for. And whereas Master
Heskins would make him so say no more then the old fathers, Hilar. Iren.
Cyril. Chrysostom. etc. Seeing we have already considered their testimonies, it
were superfluous to repeat them again in this place, and as often, as it
pleases Master Heskins to abuse their names.

The one and sixtieth Chapter continues in the exposition of the same words
by Oecumenius and Anselmus. Hesk.


Oecumenius says little to the purpose, too or fro. But Anselmus goes more
roundly to ye matter, Fulke.
as one yt was ye scholar of Lanfra^cus, which wrote against Berengarius.
Nevertheless upon these words of his, rises some other matter: Neque eminet.
For we do neither altogether exclude a figure from this sacrament, nor admit an
only figure. This place M. Hesk. would have to expound Tertullians figure, but
we have showed before, it will not serve. Unto this he adds Augustine, cited
in the Popes decrees, but not to be found in his works in these words. The
body of Christ is both the truth and a figure: The truth while the body and
blood of Christ in the virtue of the holy Ghost is made of the substance of
bread and wine: but that is the figure which is outwardly perceived. De cons.
Did. 2. Cap vtrum. When these words are found in any work of S. Augustines,
we will make answer to them, otherwise we may not receive them of the only
credit of the Popes law. Unless they have such meaning as the saying of
Hilarious B. of Rome which follows. Corpus Christi, etc. The body of Christ
which is taken at the altar is a figure, while the bread and wine are seen
outwardly, and a truth, while the body and blood of Christ inwardly are
believed. It seems to me this saying to be plain enough, that the sacrament
is an outward figure of the body and blood of Christ, which is inwardly
received spiritually by faith. As Gratian also reports the words of the same
Hilarie. De Cons. Did. 2. Vbi pars est. Non enim est quantitas visibilis in
hoc aestimanda mysterio, sed virtus sacramenti spiritualis. The visible
quantity is not to be regarded in this mystery, but the spiritual virtue of
the sacrament. But M. Heskins proceeds, and by Anselmus authority he will
avoid the trifling sophysticall argument, made by Master Pilkinton in the
open disputation holden in Cambridge.

By like Master Heskins had not learned the solution at that time, and
therefore now he sends it over the sea to him. The argument was this:
Christ took bread, he blessed bread, he brake bread, wherefore he gave bread
to his disciples: if he gave bread, then not his body. M. Heskins says, he so
uses the words, as though by the acts which the verbes express, nothing had
been done. Yes M. Heskins he changed the use, but not the substance. But by
the like sophisme (says Master Heskins, he might prove that he gave no
sacrament of his body. For that he delivered which he took, but he took
bread, no sacrament: therefore he delivered bread, no sacrament.

But by his patience, this sophisme of his, is nothing like Master Pilkintons
argument. For in one proposition, he speaks of the substance, in the other of
another quality or affection beside the substance, as in this example: that
which you bought in the shambles you have eaten, but you bought cow flesh,
therefore you have eaten caulfes flesh. Every child sees this follows
not. But if I speak of the substance in both alike, it follows as thus. That
which you bought in the market, you have eaten, but you bought mutton, therefore
you have eaten mutton. Upon the premises granted, this argument follows of
necessity, and such is the argument of Master Pilkinton, which all the
Papists in Louayne can not answer.

Hesk.
The t^o and sixtieth Chapter abides in the exposition of the same words by
Rupertus, and Nicholaus Methonen.

Fulke.
In this whole Chapter is nothing worth the reading, and much less the
aunswering, for he does nothing but cite and urge the sayings of these two
late writers, of whose authority he knows we make none account, as there is
no reason why we should, they being members of the Popish Church. For the
ancient writers whom he names, their sayings have been already weighed and
answered.

The three and sixtieth Chapter, taryeth in the exposition of the same words
by Innocentius and Germanus. Hesk.


The authority of Pope Innocent the third, which called the Laterane Counsel,
Fulk.
in which transubstantiation was first decreede, must needs be of great
credit with us. But Germanus, bishop of Constantinople, the Popes sworn
enemy, I marvel why he is joined with the Pope. For that he says, is small
to M. Heskins purpose, and therefore he helps him out with Damascen: yet he
confesses his saying subject to cauilling. For where he writes, that in the
sacrament, Dominus and conspicitur etc. Our Lord is both seen and suffers
him self to be touched, by the fe^^full and holy mysteries, etc. and so says
Chrysostom, thou see him, thou touchest him, thou eatest him, etc.

Master Heskins says we reason (and so we may in deed) that we eat him,
as we see him, which is only by faith: But M. Heskins with profound Logike,
will answer this argument, that a thing is said to be seen, when the
outward forms are seen: and so Christ is seen, when the forms of bread
and wine are seen. But by his favor, a thing is seen: when the proper forms
and accidents thereof are seen, but the form or accidents of bread and wine
are not the proper forms of Christ's body, therefore Christ's body is not
seen by them, no more then I see a man, when I see the house wherein he is, or
then I see a knife, when I see the close case or sheath wherein it is. And the
words of Germanus can abide no such boyish sophisme, for he says: Christ is
seen by the fearful and holy mysteries, but neither bread nor wine by M.
Heskins confession, and much less the accide^ts of them are fearful and holy
mysteries, therefore the whole sacrament is so called, by which Christ is seen,
and touched, and eaten, but with the eye, hand, and mouth, of faith.

The four and sixtieth Chapter, shows the exposition of Petrue Cluniacensis
and Bessarion upon the same, Hesk.


In this Chapter, beside the sayings of this Dan Peter of Clunye and Bessarion,
which for a Cardinals hatt in the counsel of Florence, forsook the unity of
the Greek church, he makes a short repetition of all the authors names and
sayings, whom he has cited upon this text: This is my body, which because I
have answered at large, it were needelesse to recapitulate in this place. I
trust the indifferent reader will confess, that not one of the highher house
has given a clear voice on his side, but all are most clear against him.

Hesk.
The five and sixtieth Chapter, treats of the bread, blessed, and given by
Christ to the two disciples in Emaus, and proves by Theophyl^st and Bed^, that
it was the sacrament,

It shall be easily granted him, that not only these two whom he names of late
time, Fulk.
but also diverse of the ancient doctors, are of opinion, that Christ did
give ye sacrament at Emaus, but yet it follows not, that it was so. For no
certain circumstance of Scripture, can lead us or them so to think. Beda in
24. Luke writes thus: ^erti mysterij causae, etc. It came to pass for the
cause of a certain mystery, that another shape should be showed to them in
him, and so they should not know him but in the breaking of bred* left any man
should say, that he has known Christ, if he be no^ partaker of his body,
that is to say, of his Church, whose unity, the Apostle commends at the
sacrament of the bread, saying: one bread, we many, are one body, that when he
reached to them the blessed bread, their eyes were opened, that they might know
him. This place indeed shows, yt Beda his opinion was, that ye sacrament was
there given, but either for transubstantiation, or the real presence, or for
the communion in one kind, he says nothing. For the English church in his
time knew none of all these monsters.

Hesk.
The six and sixtieth Chapter, proves the same by S. Augustine and Chrysostom.

Fulk.
I said before, we confess, that not Augustine only, but other also of the
fathers were of this opinion. The place of Augustine has been already cited
and considered. I would also omit the place of Chrysostom, but that he
gathers further matter out of it, then the pretense of this Chapter. He is
cited in Hom. 17. in Math. Quia de sanctis, etc. Because we have begone to
speak of holy things, it is not to be left unspoken, but that sanctification
is one thing, and the thing sanctified another: For that is a sanctification
that sanctifies another thing: but that which is sanctified cannot sanctify
another thing, although it self be sanctified. As for example, thou ^ignest
the bread which thou eatest, as Paul says, it is sanctified by the word of
God and by prayer. Thou have sanctified it, thou have not made it
sanctification. But that which the priest gives from his hand is not only
sanctified, but also it is sanctification, because that only is not given
which is seen, but also that which is understood. Of the sanctified bread
therefore it is lawful to cast to beasts, and give it to infidels, because it
does not sanctify the receiver. But if that which is taken of the hand of the
priest, were such, as that which is eaten at the table, all men would eat of
the table, and no man receive it of the priests hands. Wherefore our Lord also
did not only bless the bread in the way, but gave it with his hand to
Cleophas and his fellow. And Paul fasting did not only bless the bread, but
also reached it with his hand to Luke, and the rest of his disciples.

Three things M. Heskins notes. First, that Chrysostom calls the sacrament,
not only a sanctified thing, but also sanctification it self. And here he
would have the adversary to answer him, where this sanctification rests? in
the bread, or in the priest. I answer in neither of both, but in Christ, which
is the heavenly matter of ye sacrament received by faith: for if sanctification
rested in the bread, then all they that receive the bread should be
sanctified, but all they that receive the bread, receive not sanctification,
neither be they sanctified, therefore sanctification rests not in the bread:
and so consequently, ye body of Christ is not in ye bread. And whereas M.
Hesk. reasons, that ye priest gives sanctification, I answer, yt is said,
because he gives the outward sacrament, as John baptized, yet speaking
properly of the ministry of man, he restrains it to the washing of water.
The second thing he would have noted, is, that Christ delivered the sacrament
to Cleophas and his fellow, whereof, as Chrysostom has no ground in the
scripture, so that which he affirms, that Paul in the ship should minister
the sacrament (which is the third thing M. Hesk. observes) is utterly false,
and confuted by the text. For his exhortation was to the whole multitude,
whereof the greatest part, and almost all, were infidels. And the text says,
that they did all receive food; and being satisfied, cast the rest over board
to lighten the ship. But the place, Acts 2. that they continued in the
doctrine of the Apostles and communication, and breaking of bread and prayers:
I confess may well and aptly be understood of the participation of the Lords
table, and yet nothing less may be gathered out of it, then that horrible
sacrilege of robbing the church of the Lords cupp, because bread is only
named, as in the next Chapter shall be showed.

Hesk.
The seven and sixtieth Chapter, proves by the scripture^, and practices in the
last Chapter handled, that the Communion under one kind is lawful and good.

Fulk.
It answers to one part of the challenge (he says) to prove, that the
communion was ministered within 600 years after Christ in one kind only. And
this he will do very easily. For he begins with Christ himself, whom
most impudently and blasphemously, he affirms to have ministered the
Communion in one kind only, to the disciples at Emaus. First, although
diverse of the old writers are of opinion, and yet wthout asseueration, that
Christ there gave the sacrament, yet none of them is so bold, to gather any
such division of the sacrament out of that place. Secondly, notwithstanding
their opinion, it is most probable, that he never ministered the sacrament
after his first institution thereof, not only, because there is no mention
thereof, but because he gave that as the last pledge of his presence with them,
immediately before he departed from them. And although after his resurrection
he appeared to them at sundry times, by the space of forty days, eating
and drinking with them, to show the certeintie of his resurrection, speaking
of the kingdom of God: yet is there no word of celebrating of the sacrament
with them. And it is altogether unlikely, that he would give ye sacrament, the
comfort of his absence, at his first return again to them, and that he would
celebrate the same to two disciples, and not to the whole number of his
Apostles, who had as great need to be confirmed in faith, as those two.

Finally, if ever he had repeated the use of ye sacrament, it is most
probable, he would have done it immediately before his assention, but then he
did not (which S. Luke, who shows that story exactly, would not have
omitted) therefore there is no likelihood, that he did it before. But admit
that he did then minister the communion, does it follow because bread is only
named, therefore the cup was not given? But Master Heskins would have it
proved, that the figure Synechdoche is here used, that is, part named for the
whole. For proof, the institution of Christ, and practice of the church, for
more then a thousand years after Christ, may serve a reasonable man.

Also the usual phrase of the scripture, which by bread means whatsoever is
joined with it to be received: as Math. 15. and Mark. 7. The disciples are
accused for eating bread with unwashed hands, etc. shall we here exclude meat
and drink, because bread is only named? Also, Mark the 3. they had no
leisure to eat bread: and Luke 14. Christ came into the house of the Pharizee
to eat bread. And John. 6. You seek me not because you have seen the
signs, but because you have eaten of ye bread and are satisfied. And 2. Cor.
9. He that gives seed to the sower, shall minister bread for food. And 2 Thessalonians. 3. we have not eaten our bread freely. And in the same Chapter, the
disordered persons are exhorted, to labor and eat their own bread.

In all these places and a great number more, bread only is named, in which
it were mere madness to affirm, that only bread is spoken of, and not meat or
drink. So the whole supper of Christ consisting of bread and wine, for the
outward or earthly part: under the name of bread, the cup also is
comprehended. Wherefore the practice of Christ is not contrary to his
institution, as M. Heskins most arrogantly, wickedly, and unlearnedly
affirms. The second reason he uses is, that the institution pertains only
to priests, because Christ did then minister it only to priests. But first,
that is not proved nor like to be true: for, seeing our Savior Christ did
minister the communion in the house of one of his disciples, with whom he did
eat the passover, it is not like that he excluded him from the sacrament of
the new testament, with whom he was partaker of the sacrament of the old
testament. For proof that both he and his family were partakers of the
Passover with him, it is manifest, that it was not possible for thirteen
persons to eat up a whole sheep and other meat also at one meal. For it was
a sheep of a year old, although it were a very small one, and must be eaten
with the head, feet and the purtenaunce, and nothing reserved unto the
morrow. But grant that only the Apostles were partakers of the first
institution by the same reason, yt the one part of the sacrament perteined to
them only, the other part also might be left to them only, and so the people
should have neither of both kinds, because only priests had both kinds
delivered unto them.

Further he says, the doctrine of Saint Paul is not sufficient to prove,
that the sacrament ought to be ministered in both kinds: for Saint Paul does
but only set forth the institution without an exclusive, excluding all other
manners but this. O shameless dog: is not the institution of Christ an
exclusive of all other manners? take example of baptism, is it lawful to
baptize with any other lycour then water? into any other name, then the name of
the Father, the Son* and the holy Ghost? yea, it is said in the Acts, that
the Apostles baptized in the name of Jesus Christ: and yet no man will say,
yt they brake the institution of Christ, and baptized only in the name of
Christ, excluding the father and the holy ghost. Even so it is said, they
continued in breaking of bread, shall we not understand this after the
institution, as well as the other? Again, if the institution of Christ, had
not heene an exclusive of all other manners, how does the Apostle, by the
institution of Christ, reprove another manner brought in by the Corinthians?
Finally, when the holy Ghost by Saint Paul, commands every Christian man
and woman to try themselves, and so not only to eat of that bread, but also
to drink of that cupp: what Lucifer is that, which will oppose him self
against the flatt commandment of the holy ghost, 1. Cor. 11. and say, the
lay people shall not drink of that cup, or may be without the cupp well
enough? But the doctrine of the Catholic church (as he says) is, that the
whole sacrament is in either of both kinds, the blood is in the body, and
the body in the blood. But this is neither the doctrine of Christ, nor the
doctrine of the church of Christ. For Christ to show, that he is a perfect
nourishment unto us, which of necessity consists of meat and drink, and
neither of both can be lacking, for the nourishment of our bodies: has
instituted his sacrament both in bread and drink, to testify unto us, that
we are perfectly fedd in him, and therefore has divided the sacrament into
two signs, the one to signify his body, as meat, the other to represent his
blood, as drink: and therefore confounded be he, ye confounds these things,
which his heavenly wisdom has thus mercifully distinguished. Justinius also a
most ancient writer of the church affirms, that the sacrament consists of
a dry and moist nourishment, in Dialog. Cum. Tryphone aduersus Iudos.

And even this very division of the sacrament, sufficiently confuteth both
transubstantiation and the carnal presence. For, if he had purposed to give us
his natural body in the form of bread, or otherwise in the bread, he would
not have divided his blood from his body. But even hereby he taught us, that
he spoke of an heavenly, mystical, and spiritual manner of eating his body,
and drinking his blood by faith, and not of a swallowing or gulping in of the
same at our mouth and our throat. But the cup (says Master Heskins) is the
body of Christ, and how is it consecrated? by these words, This is my blood.
Why? where is now the plain words of scripture, where blood is taken for a
whole body? But seeing Christ says further, This is my blood which is shed
for you, and that blood, which was shed for us, was separated from his body,
therefore this blood in ye cup is separated from his body. And in very
deed, the mystery of the cup is set forth, in that he says, his blood
was shedd for us, and not as it remained in the veins of his body: for, not
his blood in his body, but the shedding of his blood, has washed our
consciences from dead works, to serve the living God. So the breaking of his
body on the cross, has made it a spiritual meat for us to feed upon, and
therefore he says: this is my body which is given for you. And so says
Hesychius very well of the cross, Quae etiam superimpositam Dominicam carnem
esibilem hominibus reddit: nisi enim superimposita fuisset cruci, nos corpus
Christi nequaquam mystice perciperemus. The cross makes our Lords flesh
laid upon it eatable of men: for except it had been laid upon the cross, we
should not receive mystically the body of Christ in Leu. lib. 2. Cap. 6.

But M. Heskins by miserable detorting of a word or two, would make the
ancient fathers patrones of his monstrous sacrilege, as though they taught
whole Christ to be under each kind, of which opinion, there is not one title
to be found in all their works. First, Cyprian de Cana Domini, Panis iste
communis in carnem and sanguinem Domini mutatus, pro^urat vitam. This common
bread being changed into the body and blood of our Lord, procures life. But
here Master Heskins plays his old part most impudently, falsifying the
words of Cyprian, by adding Domini, and leaving out that which follows, and
makes all out of doubt, that Cyprian speaks not here of the sacramental
bread, but of common bread. His words are these: Panis iste communis in
carnem and sanguinem mutatus, procurat vitam and incrementum corporibus,
ideoque ex consueto rerum effectu fidei nostrae adiuta infirmitas, sensibili
argumento edocta est, visibilibus sacramentis inesse vitae ternae effectum, and
non tam corporali, quam spirituali transitione nos Christo vnitos. This common
bread being changed into flesh and blood, procures life and increase to our
bodies: therefore the weakness of our faith being helped by the accustomed
effect of things, is taught by a sensible argument, that in the visible
sacrament, is the effect of eternal life, and that we are united to Christ,
not so much by a bodily, as by a spiritual transition. You see therefore, how
shamefully he abuses Cyprian.

Who seeing he was so vehement against them that used water only in the
cup, would he (think you) allow, that neither wine nor water should be
given? Especially, when he gives a general rule, that the institution of
Christ be precisely observed, and that nothing else is to be done concerning
the cup, then that Christ him self did before us, lib. ^. Ep. 3. Caecilio.
But are Papists ashamed of forgerie, to maintain their false doctrine of
transubstantiation?

After Cyprian, he depraueth the words of Irenaeus lib. 5. Calicem qui est
creatura suum corpus confirmauit. The cup which is a creature, he confirmed
to be his body: but it follows, which he craftily omitteth, Ex quo nostra
auget corpora. Quando ergo and mixtus Calix and factus panis percipit verbum
Dei, fit Eucharistia sanguinis, and corporis Christi, etc. Of which he does
increase our bodies. When then the mixed cup and bread that is made,
receives the word of God, the Eucharistie or sacrament of the body and blood
of Christ is made.

Whether there be eclipsis or synechdoche in the former words, thou may see
plainly here, that he meant not to exclude the bread, but that they both
together make the sacrament. But Master Heskins alleges further out of
Irenaeus: Sanguis non est nisi a venis, and carnibus and reliqua quae est
secundum hominem substantia. Blood is not but of veins and flesh, and other
substance of man. By these words which he uses to prove, that Christ had a
true body, because he had blood, M. Heskins like a wise man would prove that
wheresoever blood is, there must be flesh, and veins also, wherein all the
pudding wives of Louayne will hold against him. In deed, blood comes from
veins and flesh, (as Irenus says) but it does not follow, that where blood
is, there must be veins and flesh. As for the saying of Bernarde, we are as
little moved withal, as M. Heskins with Melancthon, to whom in his bravery,
he says vale, and will cleave to the substantial doctrine of the fathers for
the communion in one kind, of which he is not able to bring one. But to
conclude this Chapter, If he be asked why Christ did institute the sacrament
under both kinds, if it be sufficient to receive one: he answers, to
frequent the solemn memorial of his death and passion. But all Christian men
ought to frequent the solemn memorial of his death and passion, therefore he
did institute it, for all Christian men to receive under both kinds. And so S.
Paul concludes, as often as you eat of this bread, and drink of this cup,
you show the Lords death until he come. Wherefore the scripture is directly
contrary to the sacrilegious decree of the Papists, of receiving the
sacrament in one kind only.

Hesk.
The eight and sixtieth Chapter, proves the same receipt under one kind to be
lawful, by the ancient practice of the Church.

Before these substantial proves come in, he takes upon him to answer the
objections of the adversaries. Fulke.
And first of the Bohemnians, who used that place out of the sixth of S. John,
Except you eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his blood, you shall
have no life in you. These and such like textes out of that Chapter, must
needs be invincible arguments against the Papists, which hold that those
sayings are to be understood of the sacrament, first and principally. And
otherwise, for as much as the Lords supper is a seal and sacrament of that
doctrine and participation of the flesh and blood of our savior Christ,
which he there teaches: we may necessarily gather, yt seeing he joins eating
and drinking in ye thing, we may not omit either of them in the sign.

And where as ye Papists would shift off that matter with their concomitans of
blood with the body, it will not serve, seeing he requires drinking, as
necessarily as eating, even as he is a perfect food: and therefore, is not
meat without drink, but both meat and drink.

Therefore, diverse counsels, and specially Bracarense tertium Capitul. 1. and
it is in the decrees De Con. Dis. 2. cum omne, as it reformed many corruptions,
that were crept into the Church about the ministration of the cup, so this was
one, which they reproved, that they used to dippe the bread in the cup, and so
deliver it to the people. Illud vero quod pro complemento communionis intinctam
tradunt eucharistiam populis, nec hoc probatum ex Euangelio testimonium
receperunt, vbi Apostolis corpus suum commendauit and sanguinem, Seorsim enim
panis and seorsim calicis commendatio memoratur. Nam intinctu^ panem alijs
Christum praebuisse non legimus, excepto illo tantum discipulo, quem intincta
buccella magistri proditorem ostenderet, non quae sacramenti huius
institutionem signaret. That also is to be condemned, that to make perfect the
communion, they deliver to the people, the sacrament dipped in the cupp,
neither have they received this testimony brought out of the Gospel, where he
delivered to his Apostles both his body and his blood, for severally of the
bread, and severally of the cupp, the delivery is mentioned. For we read not
that Christ gave dipped bread to others, except that disciple only, whom the
dipped soppe showed to be the traitor of his master, but did not set forth
the institution of this sacrament. Note here the judgment of this Counsel,
that the institution of Christ is to be observed. Secondly, that they are
condemned, that receive not the testimony of that first institution, as an
only rule to follow in the ministration of the sacrament, as the Papists do.
Thirdly, that the blood must not be delivered in the bread, and the body in the
cup, but severally the bread, and severally the cup must be delivered.
Fourthly, that the communion is not perfect, without both kinds, which even
they confessed, that dipped the bread in the wine, and so gave it forth.
Fifthly, consider if this Counsel could not allow the joining of both kinds in
one soppe, what would they have thought of taking one kind clean away?

But to follow Master Heskins. The second objection, and that presses him
hardest, is the saying of Gelasius bishop of Rome: That the division of one and
the same mystery cannot be done without great sacrilege. To avoid this most
manifest and clear authority, he thinks it sufficient to show, that the
decree was made against other heretics, namely, the Manichees and Eutychians,
as though it were sacrilege in one kind of heretics, and lawful in an
other. He says, the Manichees, to cloak their heresy, would dissemblingly
receive the bread, and would not receive the cup, because they held that
Christ had but a fantastical body, without blood. And the Eutychians joined
with them, which received the bread as a sacrament of the divine body of
Christ, in which was no blood.

Concerning the Eutychians, there might be some such fantasy, if they joined
with the Manichees in this point, which presently I do not remember that I
have read. But concerning the Manichees, it is certain, there was an other
cause of their refusal of the cup, because they condemned all drinking of
wine. And of them it seems, that Leo spoke, Sermon. 4. de quadra. which M.
Heskins rehearses. Abducunt se etc. They withdraw them selves from the
sacrament of the health of man, and as they deny Christ our Lord to be borne
in the verity of our flesh, so they do not believe, that he did verily die,
and rise again, and therefore they condemn the day of our health and of our
gladness, with the sadness of their fasting. And when to cover their
infidelity, they are so bold to be present at our mysteries, they so temper
them selves in the communion of the sacraments, that sometimes they are more
safely hidden. With unworthy mouth they receive the body of Christ, but the
blood of our redemption they altogether refuse to drink: which thing we will
your holiness to understand for this cause, that such kind of men may be
known to you and by these tokens, and that they whose sacrilege and
dissimulation shall be found out being noted and bewrayed, by the Priestly
authority, may be banished the society of the Saints. This M. Hes. confesses
to be spoken against the Manichees. And I would he would further note, that Leo
charge them with dissimulation joined with sacrilege, which yet is more
tolerable, then the Papists open impudency and violent sacrilege. But here
he notes a plain place for the proclamer, in that Leo says: with unworthy
mouth they receive the body of Christ, but that Leo so calls ye sacrament of
the body of Christ, which after a certain manner is the body of Christ, and
not simply or absolutely, it appears by that which follows imediatly, that
those heretics refuse to receive the blood of our redemption, whereby he
means the cup and the sacrament of his blood, for if he should not mean the
outward sacraments, but the body and blood of Christ indeed, how could his
body be received without his blood? Therefore it is manifest he speaks of
the signs and not of the things signified even by their own rule of
concomitance.

And now follows the whole saying of Gelasius, Comperimus autem etc. We have
found out of a certainty, that certain men after they have received a portion
of the holy body, do abstain from the cup of the holy blood, who (because I
know not by what superstition they are taught to be withholden) let them
without all doubt receive the whole sacraments, or else let them be forbidden
from the whole. For the division of one and the same mystery, can not be done
without great sacrilege. Master Heskins to shift off this place, says, it
was written against the Manichees. But that is altogether unlike, for then
Gelasius would not have said, he knew not by what superstition they were led,
for he knew well the blasphemies of the Manichees. Wherefore it is certain,
they were other such superstitious people, as the Papists be now. But if it
were written against the Manichees, the Papists following their steps, shall
gain nothing, but prove them selves to join with the Manichees.

Secondly Master Heskins says, the division of one mystery, is not the
dividing of the cup from the bread, but of the body of Christ from his
blood, which the Manichees did. Although he be worthy to be knocked in the
head with a mall, that will not understand Gelasius, to speak of the
sacrament, yet there is no shadow of reason to shrowde him most impudently
affirming the contrary. For the Manichees did not divide the body of Christ
from his blood, but utterly denied him to have either body or blood. Again,
when he said immediately before, that they should either receive the whole
sacraments, or abstain from the whole, he adds this for a reason. For the
division (says he) of one and the same mystery, can not be done without
great sacrilege. He therefore that denies him to speak one title of
dividing the one kind from the other, is worthy to be divided in pieces,
and to have his parts with hypocrites, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. But as though he had not passed impudency her self already, he
falls on railing against the proclamer, that had not brought forth past
half a score words of this place, suppressing the rest for very shame, they
make so much against him. Surely, in all reasonable men's consciences, what so
ever he left out of this place, he left the advantage of his own cause, and
no title against him.

But let us see here what Master Heskins, a man of invention passing Sinon the
Grcian, has gathered out of it. There be two things in this place plainly
taught: The first is, the real presence of Christ's body and blood, in that he
so reverently calls the sacrament under one kind, the portion of the Lords
body, and the other he calls the cup of the holy blood. For the spiritual
blood is not contained in external or material vessels. No sir, but the
sacrament of his natural blood is, whereof he speaks: as it is manifest by the
words immediately before, the portion of the Lords body, for his natural body is
not broken into portions, but the bread which is a sacrament thereof, is
broken, and thereby is showed, what wicked men receive both in this saying of
Gelasius, and in the other of Leo, not the natural body of Christ, which
cannot be received in portions, but a portion of the sacramental bread, which
is therefore called the body of Christ, because it is so indeed to them that
receive it worthily, and is consecrated to that use, that it may be the
communication of the body of Christ. And as it has been often showed,
sacraments bear the names of the very things whereof they are sacraments. The
second thing that he teaches (says M. Hes.) is, that he calls not these two
kinds, Sacramentum, a sacrament, but, Sacramenta, sacraments, in the plural
number signifying thereby, that each of them is a whole sacrament. O new
Divinity! the^ ye Papists have eight sacraments. But are you such a prudent
gatherer M. Hes? it appears you will lease none advantage for the taking up. I
commend you. But for all yt, does not your Author Leo call both kinds
sacramentum a sacrament? and that is more (for it is too too childish, to
reason of the singular number) does not Gelasius call the sacrament in both
kinds, Vnum idemque mysterium, one and the same mystery? And when he uses ye
plural number, the ground of your Achillean argument, does he not say, Integra
sacramenta percipiant, aut ab integris arceantur. Let them take the whole
sacraments, or else let them be kept from the whole, signifying, that they
which took the bread only, took but half the sacraments, and none took the
whole, but they that took the cup also.

But now for the practice of the Primitive Church to have received in one
kind: he says, that in time of persecution, the Priest delivered them of the
sacrament wrapped in fine linen clothes to carry home with them, and to
receive it secretly by them selves, and this could be none other, but the
sacrament under the fo^ne of bread. Admit it were so, that they carried home
the sacrament, yet it follows not, but they might as well carry the wine in a
fair pot, as they carried the bread in a fair cloth. And although Tertullia^
writing to his wife, name bread only, yet does it not follow, but that he
comprehends the cup also. The words of Tertullian are before rehearsed and
answered, Lib. 1. cap. 24. and 27.

Next is brought in Basil. Episto. ad Caesareant patriciam. Illud autem etc. As
for that to be a grievous thing in the times of persecution, any man to be
enforced to receive the communion with his own hand, the Priest or Deacon not
being present, it is more then needs to prove, for because the same thing is
by a long custom, and by the very use of things established. For all they that
in the wilderness lead a solitary life, where there is no Priest, keeping the
communion at home, communicate of them selves. But in Alexandria and Ae^ypt,
every one of the people for the most part, have the communion in their own
house. For when the Priest does consecrate the sacrifice and distribute it, we
must well believe to participate and receive it. For in the Church the Priest
gives part, and he that takes it receives it with all liberty, and puts
it to his mouth with his own hand It is therefore the same thing in virtue,
whether a man take one part of the Priest, or many parts together. Of the
credit and authority of this Epistle, which being cited in the name of Saint
Basil, is not to be found in all his works, I have spoken before sufficiently,
as also of the reservation of the sacrament gathered out of it in the first
book cap. 27. But for the communion in one kind, I see nothing that he says,
saving that Master Heskins gathers, that Such small portions of wine will
not be kept in those hot countries conveniently in their own kind such long
time, as they were forced to reserve the sacrament in the wilderness and else
where. But I answer him, that such strong wine as they have in those hot
countries, will be kept longer from sowring, then the bread will be from
moulding, and therefore his gathering is altogether fond and ridiculous. But
now you shall hear a more plain testimoine for this receipt under one kind,
if you will hearken to S. Cyprian. He is cited In sermon de Lapsis, a long
saying and to little, yea to no purpose at all. Praesente ac test meipso, etc.
Hear what came to pass, my self being present and witness. The parents of
a child flying by chance, while for fear they took no good aduisement leaft
their young daughter under the cherishing of a nource, the nource brought her
so left, unto the Magistrates. They before an Idol where the people were
gathered, because for her age she could yet eat no flesh, gave unto her bread
mixed with wine, which remained also of the sacrifice of them that perish.
Afterward the mother received her daughter. But the little maid could no more
speak and declare the offense, that was committed, then understand it before
and forbid it. Through ignorance therefore it fell out that her mother brought
her in with her, while we were sacrificing. But truly the girl being among
the Saints, not abiding our prayer and supplication, sometime was constrained
to cry out, sometime with vehement grief of mind was tossed here and there,
even as though a tormentor compelled her, the ignorant soul, by such tokens as
she could, acknowledged the conscience of her fact in those young and tender
years. But after the solemnities being accomplished, the Deacon began to offer
the cup to them that were present, and when the rest had received, and her
place was next, the little one by the instinct of Gods Majesty, turned away
her face, pressed her mouth with her lips stopped, refused the cup. Yet the
Deacon persisted, and though it were against her will, powered in somewhat of
the sacrament of the cup. Then followed belking and vomit. In a body, and a
mouth that was defiled, the Eucharistie could not remain. The drink
sanctified in the blood of our Lord, brake out of her polluted bowels, etc. Out
of this History, Master Heskins gathers two things. First, that the
sacrament in that time was ministered to infantes which was in deed a great
abuse, contrary to the word of God. Secondly, that this child received only
the cup, which is false, for though she was not so troubled at the receipt of
the bread, yet it follows not that she received no bread, but contrariwise
Cyprian says, the Eucharistie (by which words the fathers always understand
the whole sacrament) could not remain in her body. And whereas he reasons
foolishly, that if she had received the bread, she should like wise have been
troubled: he must understand, that when God works a miracle, he takes times
and occasions at his pleasure. And it is like he would not discover her
pollution that come by bread and wine, before she had received both bread and
wine as the sacrament. If I should urge upon this place, as the scoole men do,
whether this that was vomited, was the blood of Christ, and what should be done
with it, or what was done with it in this story, I should trouble him more
then he could easily answer.

Another tale he tells out of Sozomenus. Eccl. hist. lib. 8. Cap. 5. Ioanne
Constantinopolitanum, etc. When John Chrysostom did very well govern the
Church of Constantinople, a certain man of the Macedonian heresy, had a wife
of the same opinion. When this man had heard John teaching what was to be
thought of God, he praised his doctrine, and exhorted his wife to be of the
same mind with him. But when she did more obey the words of noble women, then
his conversation, and after many admonitions her husband had profited nothing:
Except (quod he) thou be a co^panio^ with me in Divine matters, thou shall not
be hereafter a partaker of living with me. When the woman heard this, and
promised her consent dissemblingly, she communicated the matter with a certain
maid servant, which she judged to be trusty unto her, and uses her service
to deceive her husband. And about the time of the mysteries, (they that be
received to them know what I say) she keeping that she had received, fell down
as though she would pray. Her maid, standing by, gives her privily, that
which she brought in her hand with her, which thing, when it was put to her
teeth, it congeled into a stone. The woman being astonnied fearing least any
evil should happen to her, for that thing which came to pass from God, made
have to the Bishop, and bewraying her self, shows the stone, having yet upon
it, the marks of her bit, and showing an unknown matter, and a wonderful
color, and also desiring pardon with tears, promised that she would agree
with her husband. And if this matter seem to any man to be incredible, this
stone is a witness which is kept to this day among the Jewels of the Church
of Constantinople. If this story be true, as it is no article of our belief,
yet proves it not, that the communion was ministered in bread only, to all the
rest, that would receive the cup, although I wot not what was turned into a
stone, before the time came she should receive the cup. If M. Heskins will
urge, she could not have any thing to convey into her mouth in steed of the
wine, I answer, she might easily counterfeit the drinking, by kissing the
cup, and so letting it pass from her, without tasting thereof. Wherefore
this is but a blind and unreasonable conjecture of Master Heskins, that the
sacrament was ministered in one kind, because she that had dissembled in the
receipt of one kind, was punished with deprivation from both kinds.

The last reason he uses, Is that it is testified by learned men, that the
manner of receiving under one kind, which is used in all the Latin Church
upon good Friday, on which day the priest receives the host consecrated upon
maundie Thursday, has been so used from the primitive Church. But what learned
men they be, except such as him self, and what proofs they have of this
usage, he says not so much as half a word. The whole matter stands upon
his own credit. But if he, and all the learned of that side, should fast from
good Friday until they have showed proof of such an use in ye primitive
church, (not as they use to fast in Lent,) but from all manner of nourishment,
there would not one learned Papist be left alive on gang Monday to show what
proofs they have found. Thou have seen (Reader) what his reasons and
authorities are, judge of the answers according to thy discretion.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF MASTER HESKINS PARLEAment repealed by W. Fulke.
Hesk.
The first Chapter enters by Preface into the first text of S. Paul, that
touches the sacrament, and expounds it according to the letter.

TThe Preface is out of Didymus, that divine matters are to be handled with
reverence, Fulk.
and considering the difficulty of the scriptures by Hierome, that in matters
of doubt, recourse must be had, by Irenus his advise, unto the most ancient
Churches, in which the Apostles were conversant. In so much that Irenaeus
says: Libro 3. Cap. 4. Quid autem, etc. And what if the Apostles, had left us
no writings, ought we not to have followed the order of tradition which they
delivered to them to whom they had committed the Churches? Whereupon Master
Heskins gathers, that not only for matters contained in scripture, but also
for traditions unwritten in the holy scriptures, the fathers are to be
credited. But he goes far from Irenaeus mind, who confuted the heretics
both by the scriptures, and by the authority of the most ancient Churches,
whose traditions must have been all our institution, if there had been no
scriptures: But seeing yt scriptures inspired of God by his gracious
providence, are left unto us, al traditions are to be examined by them, and
that is twice proved (after Irenaeus mind,) which is proved both by the
scriptures, and by the authority of the Churches. Otherwise the scriptures are
sufficient of them selves. 2. Tim. 3. And no tradition or authority is to be
received which is repugnant or contrary unto them. The text of Saint Paul,
that he speaks, is written, 1. Cor. 10. Brethren I would not have you
ignorant, that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all passed through
the sea, and were all baptized by Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and did
all eat the same spiritual meat, and did all drink the same spiritual
drink, for they drank of the same spiritual rock, which followed them, and
the rock was Christ. Where it is to be noted, that Master Heskins in steed
of the same spiritual meat, and the same spiritual drink, translateth one
spiritual meat, and one spiritual drink, as though the sense were, that the
Fathers did all eat and drink of one spiritual kind of meat and drink, but
not of the same that we do. Which is directly contrary to the meaning of the
Apostle, as it appears by many reasons, whereof some I will set down,
because this one text of scripture, if it be rightly understood, is sufficient
to determine all the controversies that are between us and the Papists,
concerning the sacraments. First therefore the argument of Saint Paul is of
no force to convince the Corinthians, except he show, that the fathers of the
old Testament, had the same sacraments in substance, that we have, and yet
pleased not God by means of their wicked life, no more shall we, having the
same sacraments if we follow their wicked conversation. Secondly, except he
had meant to make the fathers equal unto us in the outward signs or
sacraments of Gods favor, he would rather have taken his example of
circumcision, and the pascal lamb, which all men know to have been their
principal sacraments: then of their baptism and spiritual food, which in them
was so obscure, that except the spirit of God had by him revealed it unto us
it had been very hard for us to have gathered. Thirdly, when he says the
fathers were all baptized, there is no doubt, but that he means, that they
all received the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, for there were no
reason, why they should receive the one sacrament, rather then the other.
Fourthly, seeing the Apostle says expressly, they did eat the same
spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, and after does
precisely affirm, that they drank of the same rock, which was Christ, it is
most evident, that their spiritual meat was our spiritual meat, namely the
body of Christ, and their spiritual drink was our spirirituall drink, namely
the blood of Christ.

And this place overthrows transubstantiation, the carnal presence, the
communion under one kind, the grace of the work wrought, the five false
sacraments, the Popish consecration, the Popish reservation for adoration, and
in a manner, what so ever the Papists teach of the sacraments contrary to
the truth. For if we have no prerogative above the fathers concerning ye
substance and outward signs of the sacraments, then we receive the body and
blood of Christ in the sacraments, none otherwise then they did before his
body was conceived of the virgin Marie, and that is spiritually by faith, not
carnally with our mouth. The rest of this Chapter is consumed in rehearsing out
of Chrysostom, the general purpose of the Apostle in these words, which we
have showed before, and it is most plain, by the text as it follows: Finally
in declaring what temporal benefits the Israelites received by the cloud,
the sea, manna, and the water of the rock. But that which is principal, and
for which cause the Apostle alleges their example, namely, for the spiritual
grace that was testified by these outward signs, Master Heskins speaks
never a word.

Hesk.
The second Chapter shows what these four things done in the old Law, did
figure in the new Law.

In this Chapter he labors to show, that these sacraments of theirs, Fulk.
were not in deed the very same in substance, that ours are, but only figures
of them. And for this purpose, he cites diverse authorities of the fathers,
especially Chrysostom, and Augustine, which call them figures of our
sacraments, whereof we will not strive with him. But he does not consider, yt
in so calling them, they compare not the substance, or things signified by
these ancient sacraments, with the substance or things signified by our
sacraments, but the outward signs of theirs with the substance and things
signified by ours. As it appears in sundry places of S. Augustine, whose
authorities in this Chapter he cites: which affirms that the fathers also
received, not only ye signs of our sacraments, as bare figures, but also the
grace and substance of them, whereof they were no counterfeit seals. Neither
does Chrysostom or Origin say any thing to the contrary, for Chrysostme
says, that as all sorts of men, rich and poor were under the cloud, passed
through the sea, and were fed with the same spiritual food, so in our
sacraments of baptism and the supper, there is no respect of persons, but all
members of the Church are partakers of them alike.

And Origin saying that: Baptism was then in a dark manner, in the cloud,
and in the sea, but now in clear manner regeneration is in water and the
holy Ghost: Does both affirm the same sacrament to have been then, which
is now, namely baptism, and also shows the only difference between this
and that, when he says, that was after a dark manner and this after a clear
manner. But Augustine is most plain in many places, namely: Tract. in Joan.
26. speaking of the bread of life, in the sixth of Ihon, he says: Hunc panem
significauit manna, hunc panem significauit altar Dei. Sacramenta illa
fuerunt: in signis diuersa sunt, sed in re, quae significatur, paria sunt.
Apostolum audi. Nolo enim (inquit) vos ignorare fratres, quia patres nostri
omnes sub nube fuerunt, and omnes mare transierunt, and omnes per Mosen
Baptizati sunt in nube and in mari: and omnes eandem escam spiritualem
manducauerunt: spiritualem vtique eandem, nam corporalem alteram: quia illi
manna, nos aliud: spiritualem vero, quam nos. This bread did manna signify,
this bread did the altar of God signify. Those were sacraments: in signs
they are diverse, but in the thing which is signified, they are equal. Hear
what the Apostle says. For I would not have you ignorant brethren (says he)
that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed the sea, and were
all baptized by Moses in the cloud and in the sea, and they did all eat the
same spiritual meat: I say the same spiritual meat, for they did eat
another corporal meat, for they did eat manna, and we another thing: but
they did eat the same spiritual meat that we do.

Likewise in his exposition of the 77: Psalm upon this very text in hand, he
says thus: Idem itaque in mysterio cibus and potus illorum, qui noster, Sed
significatione idem non specie: quia idem ipse Christus illis in Petra
figuratus: nobis in carne manifestatus. The same meat and drink in mystery
was theirs, which is ours: but the same by signification, not in clear manner:
because the self same Christ was figured to them in the rock, which is
manifested in the flesh unto us.

The same S. Augustine also in his book De vtililate poenitentiae Cap. 1.
writes thus, upon the same text. Eundem inquit cibum spiritualem
manducauerunt: Quid est eundem? Nisi quia cundem queen nos. They did eat
(says he) the same spiritual meat, what is the same? but the same that we
eat? and a little after. Eundem (inquit) cibum spiritualem manducauerunt.
Suffeceras vt diceret: cibum spiritualem manducauerunt: Eundem inquit: eundem
non inuenio quomodo intelligam, nisi eum quem manducamus and nos. Quid ergo,
ait aliquis^ Hoc erat manna illud quod ego nunc accipio? Ergo nihil modo venit
si ante iam fuit. Ergo euacuatum est scandalum Crucis? Quomodo ergo eundem,
nisi quod addidit spiritualem. They did eat (says he) the same spiritual
meat. It had suffised that he had said, they did eat a spiritual meat: he
says the same. I can not find, how I should understand the same, but the
same which we do eat. What then says one? Was that Manna the same thing
that I do now receive? Then is there nothing come now, if it were then
before. Then is the slander of the cross made void? Therefore how should it
be the same, but that he added spiritual? I could cite other places out of
Augustine, but that I will not cloie the Reader, with two many at once.

"The last part of the Chapter, would prove, that the baptism of John was not
the baptism of CHRIST, whereupon I will not stand, because it is an other
controversy, out of the purpose of the book, only I will note these gross
absurdities: that he denies the baptism of John to be the very baptism, and
then it follows, that CHRIST was not baptized with the very baptism, who
was baptized of John.

Secondly, he denies, that sins were remitted in the Baptism of John,
which is directly contrary to the Scripture: Luke. 3. verse 3. He alleges
Chrysostom for his proof, but the blind buzzarde can not see the difference
between the ministry of John in his baptism, and the work of CHRIST in
the same, which makes him with his fellows to imagine a difference of
baptismes, by as good reason as they might make a difference between the
Supper which was celebrated by CHRIST him self, and that which was
ministered by his Apostles.

Finally, where the Apostle says expressly, that the Fathers were baptized,
he is so bold as to say, they were not baptized in deed, but only received
a bare figure of baptism, which is as much for the Apostles purpose, as if
he had said nothing at all.

The third Chapter expounds the residue of the text: Et omnes candem escam
spiritualem, etc. Hesk.


First he declares that this one meat, which the Fathers did eat, was
Manna, Fulke.
and that he proves by the authority of Saint Chrysostom, and Saint
Augustine, as his manner is to heap up testimonies of the Fathers, where no
need is of any proof.

Secondly, he determines wherefore it is called spiritual meat, and the
water that flowed out of the rock, spiritual drink. Namely, because it was
given unto them miraculously, and not naturally, and for none other cause,
which is altogether untrue: for as it has been proved before, both out of
the text, and confirmed by the judgment of Saint Augustine, manna was called
spiritual meat, because it fed the faithful, not only bodily, but also
spiritually, with the body of CHRIST, and the water with his blood. But
Master Heskins seems to build upon Chrysostomes authority, who in 1. Cor.
10. writes thus. Quanuis, etc. Although those things that were given were
perceived by sense: yet they were given spiritually, not according to the
nature of consequences, but according to the grace of the gift. By these
words Chrysostom means, that although Manna and the water were sensible
things, yet had they a spiritual signification and virtue given with them: for
as they were not given by the ordinary course of nature, but by special
Divine power: so they had more then a natural property of nourishment, and
were to be esteemed according to the special grace, by which they were given.
But Master Heskins will acknowledge nothing in this miracle of manna, but the
feeding of their bodies, nor in the water of the rock, but the quenching of
their thirst, and serving their bodily necessity. In which gross madness,
he makes no difference between the faithful, and their brute beasts, whose
thirst and bodily necessity, that water did satisfy, as much as their
Masters.

So that if the water be called spiritual drink, only because it was
miraculously given, this horrible absurdity will follow, that the cattle
which drank thereof, did also drink of the spiritual rock which followed
them, which rock was Christ: which every Christian man detesteth to hear.
But contrariwise, seeing that water was a sacrament of the blood of Christ, we
may see no less then three heresies of the Papists about the sacrament
overthrown thereby.

First, because all the people did drink of the sacrament of Christ's blood,
and not the Priests only.

Secondly, that the elements are no longer sacraments, then they be in use of
ministration. For the water which was a sacrament of Christ's blood unto the
Israelites, so often as they drank of it, was no sacrament when they occupied
it to other necessary uses.

Thirdly, that brute beasts, as Dogs, Apes, and myse, eating and drinking
the bread and wine that has been consecrated to the use of the sacrament, do
not eat and drink the body and blood of CHRIST. For the brute beasts did
drink of this water, which to the faithful was consecrated in the right use
thereof, to be the blood of CHRIST. Yet did not the brute beasts touch the
sacrament of his blood.

But Master Heskins will have us to note, That Saint Paul says not, they
drank of that material rock: but they drank of a spiritual rock which
followed them, which spiritual rock was Christ. And hereupon he condemns
Oecolampadius, for abusing Saint Paul's words. The rock was CHRIST, to make
it a figurative speech, whereas the said proposition is to be understood
grammatically or literally, and not tropically, or figuratively: And so is
nothing like, to this proposition. This is my body. Peradventure the Reader
looks for a new transubstantiation, when he hears Master Heskins exclude
all tropes and figures from this saying, The rock was Christ. But vouchsafe
to hear his reason, and you shall more marvel at his monstrous impudency.
Because it is called a spiritual rock, therefore there is no trope or figure
in the speech.

But admit that Saint Paul had no relation to the material rock, out of
which the waters did flow, is this a proper and essential praedication to
say, Christ is a spiritual rock? will not all the Grammarians, Logicians,
and Rhetoricians in the world throw stones at him, that will so affirm? But
all men endewed with reason will confess, that Manna and the rock are in one
sense of Saint Paul, called spiritual: but the material manna was the
spiritual meat, by Master Heskins own interpretation, therefore the
material rock was the spiritual rock out of which flowed the spiritual
drink.

But Master Heskins has another reason, to prove that the material rock was
not called the spiritual rock, because the material rock stood still in the
Wilderness, but the spiritual rock followed them. Although Saint Paul mean
of the streams and rivers of water, which flowing out of the rock, followed
them all along their iourneys in the wilderness: Yet if we understand it (as
he does) of Christ who rather went before them then followed them, it proves
not, that the material rock was not called the spiritual rock. For in
sacraments, that is spoken of the sign often times, which is proper to the
thing signified, and wrought by them, as baptism is called regeneration, the
Pascall Lamb, the passing over, so the spiritual rock followed them, and was
Christ. But he would feign father his monstrous absurdity, upon
Chrysostom, 1. Cor. 10. Cum dixisset, etc. When he had said, that they drank
spiritual drink, he added: For they drank of the spiritual rock which
followed them, and joined to it, and that rock was Christ. For not of the
nature of the rock (says he) flowed out the water, for then it would have
flowed out before that time, but a certain other spiritual rock, wrought all
things, that is Christ, which being present every where, did all the miracles,
therefore he said following them.

In these words, Chrysostom puts a difference between the sign, and the
thing signified, that is, the material rock, and Christ whom because it
represented, it was called a spiritual rock, as Manna being a corporal
food, was called spiritual meat, because it represented Christ's flesh,
which is the spiritual meat of our minds. Otherwise, that the material rock
was not called the spiritual rock, Chrysostom says not. But Saint
Augustine, as we have showed before, affirms plainly, that which Master
Heskins denies impudently.

Proceeding in his confutation of Oecolampadius his principle, that figures
bear the names of things, of which they be figures, as the fiery tongues, the
Dove, and the breathing of Christ upon his Apostles, of the holy Ghost, and
John Baptist, of Helias, he denies that any of these examples do prove it:
for that neither any of these is called the holy Ghost, nor John called
Helias. But he is foully beguiled: for although he quarrel at the aduerbe
veluti, as it were fyerie, alleging Chrysostom to prove, that it was not
natural fire, or wind, but the holy Ghost: yet was that visible form,
called the holy Ghost, as both in the second of the Acts, and in the
eleventh it is plain: He sat upon every one of them.

If Master Heskins were posed (as boys be in the school) who or what sat?
he may not say the fiery tongues, which is the plural number, but the holy
Ghost which was represented by them. And Acts. 11. Peter says: The holy
Ghost fell upon them, even as upon us at the beginning, that is those
visible signs, of his invisible and incomprehensible presence. And whereas he
cauelleth, that the Dove is not called the holy Ghost: I ask him how could
John say, he saw the holy Ghost which is invisible, but that he saw the
bodily shape of a Dove, which was a sacrament of him? And as for the breathing
of Christ, to signify the holy Ghost, and to be so called: how could the
Apostles understand it otherwise, at that time, when giving them his breath,
he said, receive the holy Ghost, then when he gave them bread, and said:
receive this, it is my body? for in both, by an outward and visible
sacrament, he testified, what he did give them in deed, no more turning the
bread into his natural body, then his breath into the substance of the
holy Ghost.

But of all the rest, it is most intolerable impudence, that he denies John
Baptist to be Helias that was prophesied by Malachie, affirming that the
prophecy speaks of the coming of Helias before the second coming of
Christ, which shall be to judgment: saying that Christ does not assertiuely
say, that John was Helias, but if ye will so take it, this is he. But to
knock his blockishe ignorance, or rather serpentine malice in the head, the
Angel in Luke 1. does assertiuely apply that Prophecy to John Baptiste,
saying: He shall go before him in the spirit and power of Helias, to turn
the hearts of the fathers unto the children, which be the very words of the
Prophet. And our savior Christ him self, Math. 17. and Mark the 9. does
assertiuely say, that Helias was already come, according to the Prophecy,
and his disciples understood, that he spoke to them of John the Baptist. What
a shameless beast is this Heskins, to reason against so manifest a truth, to
maintain so false an error? But we must answer his reasons, although no
arguments are to be heard against the express authority of the scriptures.

First, he says, that Prophecy cannot be expounded of the first coming of
Christ, because he says, Helias shall come before the great and fearful day
of the Lord: whereas the first coming of Christ, was not fearful, but
peaceable, not to judge, but to save. But he will not understand, that Christ's
coming, as it was most comfortable to the penitent sinners, so most terrible
to the hypocrites and obstinate wicked men: witness John Baptist him self,
Math. 3. from the seventh verse to the end of the twelfth. What should I
spend time in so clear a matter? His second reason is of the authority of
Euthymius, and Chrysostom, which if they go against the plain authority of
Christ, who will receive them? Although neither of them both in the places by
him cited, affirm that he says. For Euthymius, in 11. Math. Si vultis
recipere quod suturum esse dictum est de hoc tempore, sieve suscipere, id est,
rebus animuni aduertere, ipse est Helias qui venturus erat, vtpote ipsum illius
ministerium perficiens: If you will receive that which is said shall be of this
time: or if you will give your minds to mark the things, he is Helias, which
was to come, as one perfourming his ministry: which Master Heskins has
falsified by translating thus: If ye will receive that that is spoken to be
done hereafter to be of this present time.

And although Euthymius do hold, that Helias shall come before the second
coming of Christ: yet does he affirm, that John is called Helias for
similitude of office: Sicut primus Helias, secundus praecursor dicitur: ita
sane and primus praecursor secundus Helias appellatur, propter simile
ministerium. As the first Helias is called the second forerunner: so the
second forerunner, is called the first Helias by reason of like ministry.

The place of Chrysostom, although either the words going immediately before,
or coming after, do plainly express his mind, which Master Heskins has
fraudulently concealed: yet as it is cited by him, it makes nothing for him,
but against him. I will only rehearse the place, and leave the judgment to the
readers. Recte apposuit, etc. He has well added, if you will receive it: I
came not to compel any man: that he might seem to require a thankful mind
of all men. And he signified that John is Helias, and Helias is John. For both
they have taken upon them one administration, and both are appointed
forerunners, wherefore he said not, this truly it Helias, but if ye will
receive it, this is he: That is, if with diligent study, and with a gentle,
not a contentious mind, you will consider the doings of them both. Thus
Chrysostom. And yet I am not ignorant, that else where, he supposes that
Helias the Thesbite shall come before the day of judgment, which sauoureth of
a Jewish fable, more then of a Christian truth, as is plainly proved before.

The fourth Chapter begins to declare by the holy fathers of what things
Manna and the waters be figures. Hesk.


He begins this Chapter, with a shameless lie: Fulke.
for he says, that we affirm Manna to be a figure only of the word of God,
which is utterly false: for we affirm, that it was a sacramental figure of
the body of Christ, and so a figure, that it was in deed the body of
Christ, after a spiritual manner, to them which received it worthelie. But
Master Heskins will have it a figure, not only of the word of God, but also
of the body of Christ in the sacrament, and so a figure, that is was nothing
else but a bare figure, and not a sacrament.

And this he hops to prove out of Saint Ambrose ad Iren. Ep. 62. Quaeria^
me, etc. Thou ask me, why the Lord God did rain Manna to the people of
the fathers, and does not now rain it? If thou know, he rayneth and daily
rayneth from heaven Manna to them that serve him. And that bodily Manna truly,
is found at this day in many places. But now it is not a thing of so great
miracle, because that which is perfect is come. And that perfect is the bread
from heaven, the body of the virgin, of which the Gospel does sufficiently
teach thee. How much better, are these things then the former? For they which
did eat that Manna, that is that bread, are dead. But whosoever shall eat
this bread, shall live for ever. But it is a spiritual Manna, that is, a
rain of spiritual wisdom, which is powered into them, that be witty and
searching is from heaven, and deweth the minds of the Godly and sweeteneth
their jaws.

Because there is nothing in this saying of Saint Ambrose for his purpose, he
falls into a great rage against Oecolampadius, for leaving out of this
sentence: Quanto praestantiora sunt haec superioribus? How much more excellent
are these, then the other above rehearsed? Which, howesoeuer it was, as I am
sure, it was not of a falsifying mind, so no man in the world, might worse
exclaim against falsifying of the doctors then Master Heskins, as I have
often showed, and doubt not but I shall show hereafter.

But to the purpose, it is evident, that Saint Ambrose in the former sentence,
speaks of Manna, as a corporal food, not as a sacrament, in which respect,
there is no comparison between it, and the body of Christ. And he is so far
from saying, that Manna, as it was a sacrament, was but a figure of the body
of Christ (as M. Heskins belyeth him) that he says not at all, that it was a
figure.

But he charge us with two other wicked opinions, namely, That the
sacraments of the new law give no grace, and that they are of no more
excellency then the sacraments of the old law. To the first we answer, and
say, that the sacraments give not grace of the work wrought, as they teach,
but that GOD gives grace by his sacraments in all his elect, we affirm. And
to the second, we answer, that as in substance the sacraments of the old
time were not inferior to ours, so in cleerenesse of revelation and
understanding, ours are far more excellent then theirs, and that the place
of Saint Ambrose, which Master Heskins does next allege, does very well
show. Orient autem etc. The son of righteousness arising, and more bright
sacraments of Christ's body and blood shining forth, those inferior things
or sacraments should cease, and those perfect should be received of the
people. Master Heskins notes, that if the sacrament were but a bare sign, it
should not be so magnified by Saint Ambrose. But so often as he charge us
with a bare sign, so often must we charge him again with an impudently. For
we do as much detest a bare sign or figure, as he does a sign or figure.

As for the three kinds of Manna that Master Heskins gathers, is altogether
out of Saint Ambrose his compass. For he has no more but the bodily Manna,
and the spiritual Manna, as the sign and the thing signified. And the rain
of spiritual wisdom, is the spirit of GOD, which seals inwardly in the
heart, that which is expressed outwardly by the external signs. I marvel
Master Heskins alleges not Saint Ambrose upon this text 1. Cor. 10. whose
words might seem to have more color of his bare figure, although they be
flat against it in deed. Manna and aquaquae fluxit de Petra, haec dicit
spiritualia, quia non mundi lege parata sunt, sed Dei virtute sine elementorum
commixtione ad tempus creata, habentia in se figuram futuri mysterij quod nunc
nos summus in commemorationem Christi Domini. Manna, and the water which flowed
out of the rock, these he calls spiritual, because they were not prepared
by the order of the world, but by the power of God, with out commixtio^ of the
elements created for a time, having in them a figure of the mystery to come,
which now we receive in remembrance of Christ our Lord. By these words it
is evident, that our sacraments do so differ from theirs, as a figure of that
which is to come, and a remembrance of that which is past do differ. For all
sacraments have their strength of the death of Christ. Secondly, we see that
this father calls our sacrament, a mystery in remembrance of Christ: which
speech is far from a corporal manner of presence, that M. Heskins would
maintain by his authority.

The other places cited out of Euthymius a late writer, as we have often said,
affirm that Manna was the figurative bread, and a figure, but not Christ
which was the truth. Howbeit, he means nothing else, but that Christ was not
in flesh present to the fathers in Manna, before he was incarnate, and so uses
the term, figure, as a prefiguration and shadowing, not of the sacrament, but
of Christ him self, which is the matter of the sacrament, even as Christ him
self in the 6. of S. John, opposing Manna against the true bread that came
down from heaven, speaks not of that spiritual meat which Manna was to the
faithful, but of the outward creature, which was only considered of the
wicked, to fill their bellies, and not to feed their soul.

But M. Heskins remitteth his reader, for all matters concerning the 6. of John,
to the second book 36. chapter etc. and so do I to the same places for
answer. Nevertheless, he will touch a word of Oecolampadius, where he says,
that the inward man is fed by faith, which is so strange to him, that he never
read the like phrase in any authentike author. By which woondring, he shows
him self to be a great stranger in S. Augustine, who says In Joan. Tr. 25.
etc. Vt quid paras dentes and ventrem? creed and ma^ducasti. Why preparest thou
thy teeth and thy belly? Believe, and thou have eaten. Here faith feeds the
soul, for it feeds not the belly. The last text he cites out of Chrysostom,
is alleged more at large in the 30. Chapter of the second book, where it is
also answered.

The fifth Chapter, teaching that Manna and the water of the stone be figures of
the body and blood of Christ, by Origin and Saint Ambrose. Hesk.


That the old writers called Manna and the water, figures of the body and
blood of Christ, Fulk.
it shall be no controversy between us and M. Heskins: but whether they denied
them to be sacraments of the body and blood of Christ, or affirmed them to be
nothing but prefigurations of the sacrament, is now the question betwixt us.
And therefore these long sentences out of Origin and Ambrose make nothing for
him, but much against him. But let us view them: Origin is cited In Number. Hom.
7. Modo enim etc. Now when Moses came unto us, and is joined to our
Aethiopesse, the law of God is not now known in figures and images as
before, but in the very appearance of the truth. And those things, which were
first set forth in dark speeches, are now fulfilled in plain show and
truth. And therefore he, which declared the plain form of figures and dark
speeches, says, we know that all our fathers were under the cloud, and all
passed through the sea etc. Thou see how Paul assoyleth the dark riddles
of the law, and teaches the plain show of those dark speeches. And a
little after. Then in a dark manner Manna was the meat, but now in plain
show, the flesh of the son of God is the true meat, as he himself says* my
flesh is meat in deed, and my blood is drink in deed. M. Heskins thinks,
this is as plain as need to be, for his only figure, and the bodily
presence: and me think it is as plain for the contrary. For he affirms,
that Manna was the same spiritual meat, that the flesh of the son of God is
now, and lays the difference in the obscure manner of delivering the one,
and the plain manner of delivering the other, which can not be understood of
the outward signs, which are in both of like plainness or obscurity, but
of the doctrine or word annexed to the signs, which to them was very dark,
and to us is very clear, that Christ's flesh and blood are our meat and
drink. For it is well known, that Origin knew neither the Popish
transubstantiation, nor the bodily presence. For writing upon the fifteenth of
Saint Matthewe, after he has showed that the material part of the sacrament
goes into the belly, and is cast forth, he adds: Nec materia panis sed
super illum dictus sermo est, qui prodest non indigne comedenti illum. Et hae^
quidem de typico symbolicoque corpore. Multa porro and de ipso verbo dici
possent, quod factum est caro verissque cibus, quem qui comederie omnino viuet
in aeternum, quem nullus malus edere potest. Neither that matter of the bread,
but the word which is spoken of it, is that, which does profit to him which
eats it not unworthily. And these things are of the typical or symbolicall
body: Many things also might be said of the Word it self, which was made
flesh and the true meat, which he that shall eat, shall undoubtedly live for
ever, which no evil man can eat. Do thou not here see (Christian reader)
what Origens mind was of transubstantiation, when he speaks of the matter
of the bread which is eaten? And what his judgment was of the bodily
presence, when he calls it the typical and symbolicall, or figurative
body, distinguishing it from the word made flesh, and the meat in deed?
Finally, whether he thought that any evil man could eat of the body of
Christ, which is the spiritual part of the sacrament?

To Origin he joins Ambrose, or rather disioyneth him, for he divides his
saying into two parts, pretending to inueigh against Oecolampadius, for
leaving out the former part, but in deed, that he might raise a dust with
his stamping and staring, least the latter part might be seen to be, as it is,
a clear interpretation of the former, and an application of the writers mind
concerning the corporal manner of presence, In Ps. 118. Sermon. 18.
I will rehearse them both together. Ille ego ante despectus etc. Even I before
despised (speaking in the person of the Gentiles converted) am now preferred,
am now set before the chosen. Even I before a despised people of sinners, have
now the reverend companies of the heavenly sacraments, now I am received to
the honor of the heavenly table. The rain is not powered down on my meat,
the spring of the earth labors not, nor the fruit of the trees. For my
drink no rivers are to be sought, nor wells. Christ is meat to me, Christ
is drink to me. The flesh of GOD is meat to me, the blood of GOD is my
drink. I do not now look for yearly increase to satisfy me: Christ is
ministered to me daily. I will not be afraid; least any distemperature of the
air, or barrenness of the country should hang over me, if the diligence
of godly tillage do continue. I do not now wish the rain of Quayles to
come down for me, which before I did marvel at. Not Manna which erst they
preferred before all meats, because those Fathers which did eat Manna, have
hungered. My meat is that, which does not fatten the body, but confirms
the heart of man. Before, that bread which came down from heaven, was
wonderful to me. For it is written, he gave them bread from heaven to eat,
but that was not the true bread, but a shaddowe of that was to come. The
father has reserved for me that true bread from heaven.

That bread of GOD descended from heaven to me, Here begins Oecolampadius.
which gives life to this world. It has not descended to the Jews, nor to
the Synagogue, but to the Church, to the younger people. For how did that
bread which gives life, descend to the Jews, when all they, that did eat
that bread, that is Manna, which the Jews thought to be the true bread, are
dead in the wilderness? How did it descend to the Synagogue: when all the
Synagogue perished and fainted, being pyned with everlasting hunger of faith?
Finally, if they had received the true bread, they had not said: Lord give
us always this bread. What do thou require, O Jew, that he should give
unto thee? The bread which he gives to all, which he gives daily, which he
gives always, it is in thy self, that thou may receive this bread. Come
unto this bread, and thou shall receive it. Of this bread it is said, all they
that estrange them selves from thee shall perish. If thou estrange thy self
from him, thou shall perish. If thou come near unto him, thou shall live. He
is the bread of life. He that eats life can not die. For how does he die*
whose meat is life? How shall he fail, which has that vital substance? Come
ye unto him, and be satisfied, for he is bread. Come ye unto him and drink
for he is a well Come ye unto him and be lightened, for he is light. Come ye
unto him, and be delivered for where the spirit of the Lord is, there is
liberty. Come ye unto him, and be absolved, for he is remission of sins. You
ask who this may be? Hear ye him self saying I am the bread of life, he
that comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me, shall never
thirst. You have heard him, and you have seen him, and you have not believed
him, therefore you are dead.

The latter part of this long discourse sufficiently expounds the former.
That Christ and the flesh and blood of God (which M. Heskins notes to be a
plain place for the proclamer) is so our true meat and drink, as he is
bread, as he is a well, as he is light, as he is liberty, as he is remission
of sins: that is, after a spiritual manner. And where he says, Manna was a
figure or shaddowe, and not the truth of that which was to come: he means of
Manna, as it was corporal meat, and eaten of the unfaithful that are dead,
and not as it was spiritual meat, and eaten of the faithful which are alive,
as S. Augustine says. Moreover, it is to be noted, that S. Ambrose says, that
he which eats this bread which is life, can not dye. Therefore no wicked man
eats this bread, this meat, this flesh of God, which with S. Ambrose are all
one. As for the difference of our sacraments, what it is, we have showed
before, and this place shows none. For Ambrose speaks of Manna as a
corporal meat, and not as it was a spiritual meat and sacrament.

Hesk.
The sixth Chapter declares, that Manna was a figure, by the testimony of S.
Cyprian and Chrysostom.

It has been often confessed, Fulke.
that Manna of the old fathers is called a figure of the body of Christ, but
that it was only a bare figure, and not the body of Christ unto the faithful,
that is it we deny. Cyprian is cited to little or no purpose in ser. de Coen.
Dom. Huius panis etc. Of this bread Ma^na was a figure, which rayned in the
desert. So when we are come to the true bread in the land of promise, that meat
failed. M. Heskins says, it is more manifest, then that it can be denied, that
this bread he speaks of, is the holy bread of the sacrament: in which he
acknowledges to be no bread at all. Then as manifest as he makes it, it was
a figure of Christ, which is the spiritual matter of the sacrament, and not of
any holy bread thereof. But this he says, will be proved by the last words
of that sermon, which in deed, prove the clean contrary to his purpose. Sed
and nos ipsi etc. But we also being made his body, both by the sacrament, and
by the thing of the sacrament, are knit and united unto our head, every one
being members one of an other, showing the ministry of love mutually, do
communicate in charity, are partakers of one cup, eating the same meat, and
drinking the same drink, which flows and runs out of the spiritual
rock, which meat and drink is our Lord Jesus Christ. Here is a plain place
for the proclamer, the meat and drink is our Lord Jesus Christ. But what
proclamer denies, that our meat and drink in the sacrament, is the body and
blood of Christ? This we deny, that the same is present after a bodily manner,
or after a bodily manner received, but spiritually only, or by faith: even as
the same writer faith immediately before Haec quoties agimus etc. As often as we
do these things, we sharpen not our teeth to eat, but with sincere faith we
break and divide that holy bread. But how can M. Heskins avoid this, that we
are made the body of Christ, as we are partakers of his body in the sacrament?
which must needs be spiritually. How likes he the distinction of the
sacrament, and the thing or matter of the sacrament, when with Papists, either
there is no difference made between the sacrament of his body and his body it
self, or else the sacrament is nothing else, but the accidents of bread and
wine, by which we are neither made the body of Christ, nor united to him. But
to avoid our gloss of spiritualitie, he flees back to the saying of Cyrillus
in 15. Joan. which he has so often repeated, and yet mangled and gelded, least
the true sense might be gathered out of it. Non tamen negamus etc. Yet do we
not deny, but that we are spiritually joined to Christ, by right faith and
sincere love, but that we have no manner of conjunction with him after his
flesh, that truly we do utterly deny, and say it to be altogether repugnant
to the holy scriptures. For who has doubted that Christ is also a vine, and
we the branches, which from thence receive life into us. Hear what Paul
says, that we are all one body in Christ. For although we be many, yet are we
one in him. For we all take part of one bread. Or does he think, perhaps
that the virtue of the mystical benediction is unknown to us? Which when it is
done in us, does is not make Christ to dwell in us corporally, by communication
of the flesh of Christ. For why are the members of the faithful the members of
Christ? etc. In these words Cyrillus reasons against an Arrian, which
abusing this text, I am a Vine, and my father is the husband man, said it was
spoken of the deity of Christ, and could not be expounded of his manhood,
which Cyrill denies, showing that we are not only spiritually joined to
Christ, as to God, but also corporally, that is, to his body as to man, yet
after a spiritual manner, as the textes by him alleged do prove
sufficiently, and namely the argument taken of the virtue of the mystical
blessing, which by communication of his flesh, makes us his members of his
body, which all men confess to be so after a divine manner, that even they
which never received that sacrament, are yet members of Christ, having put him
on, and being ingrafted to him in baptism.

But Master Heskins will tell us the difference of the sacrament, and the
thing of the sacrament, out of August. in deed out of the sentences of
Prosper: Hoc est quod dicimus etc. This is that we say, that by all means we
labor to prove, that the sacrifice of the Church is made of two things,
consists of two things, the visible form or kind of the elements, and the
invisible flesh and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, both of the sacrament and
of the thing of the sacrament, that is, the body of Christ. etc. This visible
form, Master Heskins will have to be the accidents only, then he will have
a sacrifice, whereof one part by his own interpretation is bare accidents
without a subject: and thirdly, that it is the body of Christ corporally
received. But let us hear, not Prosper, an uncertain Author, but Augustine
him self, declare these things unto us in Joan. Tr. 26. Huius rei
sacramentum, id est vnitatis corporis and sanguinis Christi, alicubi quotidie,
alicubi certis interuallis dierum in Dominica mensa prparatur, and de mensa
Dominica sumitur, quibusdam ad vitam, quibusdam ad exitium. Res vero ipsa,
cuius sacramentum est omni homini ad vitam, nulli ad exitium quicunque eius
particeps suerie. The sacrament of this thing, that is, of the unity of the
body and blood of Christ, in some places daily, in some places with certain
distaunces of days, is prepared in the Lords table, and from the Lords table
is received, of some persons to life, and of some to destruction. But the thing
it self whereof it is a sacrament, is life to every man, and destruction to no
man, who so ever shall be partaker of it. Now judge whether S. Augustine
esteems the sacrament to be only accidents, and the thing of the sacrament
to be a bodily presence, which the wicked can not be partakers of: or
whether the wicked receive nothing, but the accidents to their destruction,
seeing they receive the sacrament, but not the thing of the sacrament.

Chrysostom the second barron named in this Chapter, is cited in dictum Apost.
Nolo vos igno. Dixi enim quod. etc. For I said, that the truth must have a
certain excellency above the figure. Thou have seen concerning baptism,
what is the figure, and what the truth. Go to, I will show thee also the
tables, and the communion of the sacraments, to be described there: if thou will not again require of me the whole, but so requirest these things that are
done, as it is meet to se^ in shadows and figures. Therefore because he had
spoken of the sea, and of the clo^d, and of Moses, he added moreover: And they
all did eat the same spiritual meat. As thou (says he) coming up out of
the l^uer of the waters, came to the table, so they also coming up out of
the sea, came to a new and wonderful table: I speak of Manna. And again, as
thou have a wonderful drink the wholesome blood: so had they also a
wonderful nature of drink. Here Master Heskins gathers, that our drink is
the wholesome blood of Christ, which we confess spiritually received; as it
was of the Fathers: likewise to prove that by the table, he meant the body of
Christ, he cites an other place. Sicut autem etc. Even as he said, that they
all passed through the sea, so he prefigured the nobility of the Church, when
he said: They did all eat the same spiritual meat. He has insinuated the
same again: for so in the Church, the rich man receives not one body, the
poor man an other, nor this man one blood, and that man an other. Even so then
the rich man received not one Manna, and the poor man an other, neither was
this man partaker of one spring, and that man of a less plentiful. Not
content with this, he adds another sentence out of the same Homely. Sed cuius
gratia etc. But for what cause does S. Paul make mention of these things? For
that cause which I told you at the first, that thou may learn, that
neither baptism, nor remission of sins, nor knowledge, nor the communion of
the sacraments, nor the holy table, nor the fruition of the body, nor the
participation of the blood, nor any other such thing can profit us, except we
have a right life, and a wonderful, and free from all sin.

Here Master Heskins gathers, that Christ's body and blood may be
received of wicked men, but either he must understand Saint Chrysostom
speaking of the sacraments, by the name of the things whereof they be
sacraments, or else he will fall into a great absurdity, for he says,
forgiveness of sins shall not profit, by which he means, the ceremony of
absolution, and not the forgiveness of God in deed. Again he must note an
hyperbole or ouerreaching speech in this sentence, or else whom shall the body
and blood of Christ profit, when no man is free from sin? But we yet must
hear a sentence or two more out of Chrysostom, in 1. Cor. 10. Hom. 23. Quae
autem etc. Those things that follow, do signify the holy table. For as thou
eatest the Lords body, so did they eat Manna. And as thou drinkest his blood,
so did they drink water out of the rock. But here Master Heskins plays his
old part, for he leaves out that which following immediately expounds
Chrysostom contrary to his purpose. Quamuis in sensu quae dabantur,
perciperentur, spiritualiter tamen dabantur, non secundum naturae
consequentiam, sed secundum muneris gratiam, and cum corpore etiam animam in
fidem adducentem nutriuit. Although those things that were given, were
perceived by sense, yet were they given spiritually, not according to the
consequence of nature, but according to the grace of the gift, bringing into
faith, he nourished ye soul also with the body. By these words it is most
evident, that Manna and the water, were not bare figures or corporal food
only, but also food of the soul through faith, how so ever Chrysostom in
other places speaks of them as figures, and as corporal food, and in those
respects prefers our sacraments before them.

But let us hear the last sentence: Qui enim illa illis etc. For he which gave
those things unto them, even he has prepared this table: And even he him self
brought them through the sea, and thee through baptism: And to them gave Manna
and water, and to thee his body and blood. Upon all these places of
Chrysostom, Master Heskins reasons, that the Fathers only received a
figure, and we the verity, or else there were no difference, if we both
receive a verity spiritually, and a figure outwardly. I have showed the
difference before, to be, not in the substance or virtue, but in the manner of
revelation, which was to them obscure, to us clear, to them in expectation of
that which was to come, to us in assurance of that which is fulfilled, namely,
the redemption by Christ's death. For Jesus Christ was the Lamb slain from
the beginning of the world, and the only food that came down from heaven,
to give eternal life to all them that did receive him in all ages past and to
come.

Hesk.
The seventh Chapter proceeds to declare the same by Saint Hierome, and Saint
Cyrill.

Fulk.
In the beginning of this Chapter Master Heskins maruelleth that we (whom he
counts the adversaries of the truth) would leave a doctrine so universally
taught and received, as though he had proved their doctrine of the sacrament
to be such, comparing the protestants, to Esopes dog that snatching for a
shadow lost the bone out of his mouth: nevertheless he will proceed on his
matter, if there be any hope to reclayme us. And first he will choke us with
the authority of Saint Hieronyme In 1. Cor. 10. expounding that saying: They
did eat the same spiritual meat, etc. Manna figura corporis Christi suit.
Manna was a figure of the body of Christ. It is very true, we never said the
contrary. But the same Hierome in the same place upon that saying: The rock
was Christ, Says, that the rock was a figure of Christ, which Master
Heskins utterly denies. Quia Christus erat postmodu^ sequnturus, cuius figuram
tunc Petra gerebat: idco pulchre dixit consequente eos Petra. Because Christ
was afterward to follow, of whom the rock was a figure: therefore he said
very fitly of the rock, that followed them. By which words it is most
manifest, that by his judgment, they drank of Christ's blood, who was to
come, and consequently did eat his body, whereof Manna was a figure. But it
follows after in Hieronyme which Master Heskins rehearses at large, and to
no purpose Omnia enim, quae in populo, etc. For all things, which at that time
were done in the people of Israel in a figure, now among us are celebrated in
truth: for even as they by Moses were delivered out of Egypt, so are we by
every priest or teacher delivered out of the world. And then being made
Christians, we are led through the wilderness, that by exercise of contempt
of the world, and abstinence, we may forget the pleasures of Egypt, so that we
know not to go back again into the world. But when we pass the sea of
Baptism, the devil is drowned for our sake with all his army, even as Pharao
was. Then we are fed with Manna, and receive drink out of the side of
Christ. Also the clearenesse of knowledge, as a pillar of fire, is showed in
the night of the world, and in the heat of tribulation, we are covered with
the cloud of Divine consolation. In these words Master Heskins notes two
things, the applications of the truths to the figures, and the drink flowing
out of the side of Christ. concerning the first, it is clear, that he makes
their temporal benefits, figures of our spiritual benefits, and in that
sense he uses the terms of figures and truth: for otherwise he confesses,
that those things were truly done among them, and in a figure were the same,
that ours are, immediately before these words before rehearsed by Master
Heskins: Ipsis vere facta sunt, quae in figura erant nostra, vt ^imeamus talia
agere, ne talia incurramus. Those things were truly done unto them, which in
figure were ours, that we might fear to do such things, least we incur
such things. As for the drink flowing out of his side, we confess to be the
blood of Christ, as I have showed a hundredth times, received after a
spiritual manner. But Master Heskins reasons wittily (as he thinks) when
he says: as the Jews did verily eat Manna, so we do verily eat the body
of Christ. But he marketh not how Hieronyme says: We are fed with Manna,
and we receive drink flowing out of the side of Christ. Whereupon I will
infer, as we are fed with Manna, so we eat and drink the body and blood
of Christ: but are not fed with Manna corporally, but spiritually: so we
eat and drink the body and blood of Christ, not corporally but spiritually.
After this, least we should doubt of this authority, as falsely ascribed to
Hierome, he returns to Hierome Ad Hedibiam qu. 2. which we cannot refuse to
be S. Hierome. But seeing that place is sufficiently answered in the 53.
Chapter of the second book, I will not trouble the Reader with the repetition.

Likewise the place of Cyprian De Coena Dom. in the 17. Chapter of the first
Book. Likewise the other parcels of Chrysostom he cites In Matthew. 25. Hom.
83. In the 55. Chapter of the second Book. The other named and not rehearsed
be oftentimes answered throughout ye Book, and none of them all have any thing
in them for his purpose. Now comes Cyrill In 6. Joan. Cap. 19. Non enim
prudenter, etc. Those things that suffice but for a short time, shall not
wisely be called by this name, neither was that bread of God which the elders
of the Jews did eat and are dead for if it had been from heaven, and of God,
it had delivered the partakers of it from death. But contrariwise, the body of
Christ is bread from heaven, because it gives eternal life to them that
receued it.

Here (says M. Heskins) is a brief and plain testimony, that manna was a
figure, and the body of Christ is the thing figured. This is granted, but
that Cyrill meant to make it only a figure, or a bare figure, it is utterly
false, as appears in his commentary upon the same Chapter, Lib. 3. Cap. 34.
Manna vero figura quaedam vniuersalis Dei liberalicatis, loco arrhae hominibus
concessa. Manna truly, was a certain figure of the universal liberality of
God granted to men, in place of a pledge, or earnest. By these words you see,
that Manna was not a bare figure, but an earnest, or assurance of all the
bountifulnes of God. And in the same place he says. Sic enim plane videbitur
quod verum Manna Christus erat, qui per figuram Mann^ priscis illis a Deo
dabatur. For so it shall plainly be seen, that Christ was the true Manna,
which was given of God to those ancient fathers by the figure of Manna. Thus
it is most evident, that Manna was not a figure only of Christ, but that
Christ in deed was given by that figure, as he is by our sacrament, and so
no corporal presence by his judgment. Nevertheless M. Heskins harpeth on his
old string, really, and substantially, and that by this authority of Cyrillus
Cap. 14. in 6. Joan. Quoniam, etc. Because the flesh of our savior is joined
in the WORD of God, which is naturally life, it is made able to give life when
we eat it, then have we life in us, being joined to him which is made life.

These words indeed do declare, that whosoever eats the flesh of Christ
is partaker of eternal life, which M. Heskins will not grant, but with his
distinction, spiritually: therefore this place makes nothing for him, for
Cyril speaks generally. So that no man eats Christ, but he that eats him
spiritually, and has life by him. Then no wicked man eats him, which has
not life, and consequently no man eats him corporally. But hear what the
same Cyril writes in the same Book and Chapter. Haec igitur de caussa Dominus
quomodo id fieri possit non enodauit, sed fide id quaerendum hortatur: sic
credentibus discipulis fragmenta panis dedit dicens, accipite, and manducate,
hoc est corpus meum: calicem etiam similiter circuntulit dicens: Bibite ex hoc
omnes, hic est calix sanguinis mei, qui pro multis effunditur in remissione^
peccatorum. Perspicis quia, sine fide qurentibus mysterij modum nequaquam
explanauit, credentibus autem etiam non qurentibus exposuit. For this cause
thefore, the Lord did not expound how that might be done, but exhorts that
it be sought by faith, so to his disciples which believed, he gave pieces of
bread, saying take ye, and eat ye, this is my body: likewise he gave the
cup about and said: drink ye all of this, this is the cup of my blood,
which shall be shed for many for remission of sins. Thou see, that to them
which inquire without faith, he has not explaned the manner of the mystery,
but to them which believed, although they inquired not, he has set it forth.
In this saying of Cyril, beside that he teaches yt Christ his flesh and blood
are received in a mystery, it is good to observe that he calls the
sacrament, which Christ gave to his Disciples fragmentes or pieces of bread,
which utterly overthrows Popish transubstantiation.

The eight Chapter proceeds in declaration of the same by S. Augustine and
Oecumenius. Hesk.


The first place of Augustine he cites, but names not where it is written, is
this: Cathechumeni iam credunt, etc. Fulk.
The learners of Christian faith do now believe in the name of Christ, but
Jesus commits not him self to them, that is he gives not unto them his
body and his blood. Let them be ashamed therefore because they know not: let
them go through the red sea: let them eat Manna, that as they have believed
in the name of Jesus so Jesus may commit himself unto them. M. Heskins
himself upon this place says: It is common by the name of the figure, to
understand the thing figured. Therefore as Manna is called the body of Christ,
so is the sacramental bread and wine called his body and blood. What is here
for a Papist? But Augustine in his Book De vtilitate poenitentiae (as he
weeneth) makes much for him. I am ergo lumine illato etc. Now therefore the
light being brought in, let us seek what the rest signify? What meaned the
sea, the cloud, Manna. For those he has not expounded. But he has showed
what the rock is. The passage through the sea is baptism, but because
baptism that is the water of health, is not of health, but being consecrated
in the name of Christ, which shed his blood for us, the water is signed with
his cross, and that it might signify this, the red sea was that baptism.
Manna from heaven is openly expounded by our Lord himself. Your fathers (says
he) have eaten Manna in the wilderness and are dead. For when should they
live? For the figure might pronounce life, it could not be life. They have
eaten manna (says he) and are dead. That is, Manna which they have eaten could
not deliver them from death, not because Manna was death unto them, but because
it delivered not from death. For he should deliver the^ from death, which was
figured by Manna. Surely Manna came from heaven, consider whom is figured: I
am, says he, the bread of life that came down from heaven. M. Heskins joins
another place of Augustine Lib. Nou. and vet. Test. Quast. 65. Manna cypus est,
etc. Manna is a figure of that spiritual meat, which by the resurrection of
our Lord is made truth, in the mystery of the Eucharistie. By this he will
prove, that Manna in the former place, was meant to be a figure of the body of
Christ in the sacrament.

But in spite of his beard he must understand it of the spiritual manner of
receiving thereof, by faith, with ye benefits of his death which are made perfect
in his resurrection, or else how says he, yt the figure was made truth by the
resurrection of Christ? For the truth of Christ's body, did not depend
upon his resurrection, and the sacrament was instituted before his death, but
it took and takes force of his death and resurrection. And concerning the
former sentence, I can but marvel at his impudency, yt would allege that
treatise which is directly against him, as partly you may see by the places
cited by me out of the same, and follows immediately this place, in the
second Chapter of this book: partly by these places following, taken out of
the same book: Patres nostri, inquis ^undem cibum spiritualem manducauerunt:
and eundem potum spirituale^ biberunt. Erant enim ibi qui quod manducabant
intelligebant. Erant ibi, quibus plus Christus in cord, quam Manna in ore
sapiebat: Our fathers (says he) did eat the same spiritual meat, and drink
the same spiritual drink. For there were there, which did understand what
they did eat: There were there, to whom Christ sauoured better in their
heart, then Manna in their mouth. And again: Breuiter dixerim: Quicunque in
Manna Christum intellexerunt, eundem quem nos, cibum spiritualem manducauerunt:
Quicunque autem de Manna solam saturitatem quae fierunt patres infidelium,
ma^ducauerun^ and moriui sunt: Sic tui am eundem potum. Petra enim Christus.
Eudem ergo potum quem no^ sed spiritualem: id est qui fide capiebatur, non qui
corpor^ hauriebatur. I will say briefly: whosoever understood Christ in
Manna, did eat the same spiritual meat that we do. But whosoever sought
only to fill their bellyes of Manna, which were the fathers of the
unfaithful, they have eaten and are dead. So also the same drink. For the
rock was Christ. They drink therefore the same drink that we do, but
spiritual drink, that is, which was received by faith, nor which was drawn
in, with the body. And again: Eundem ergo cibum, eundem potum, sed
intelligentibus and credentib^s. Non intelligentibus autem illud solum Manna,
illa fola aqua, ille cibus osurienti, potus iste suienti: nec ille, nec iste
credenti: Credenti autem idem qui nunc: Tunc enim Christus venturus, modo
Christus venit. Venturus and venit diuersa verba sims, sed idem Christus. The
same meat therefore, and the same drink, be to them that understood and
believed. But to them which understood it not, it was only Manna, that was
only water: that meat to the hungry: this drink to the thirsty: neither
that, nor this to the believer: But to the believer, the same which is now:
for then Christ was to come: now Christ is come. To come, and is come, are
diverse words, but the same Christ.

Let M. Heskins now go and say, that Manna was a figure only of Christ, and
not Christ him self to the believers: let him say, that our sacraments in
substance are not all one with theirs. Finally, that we eat Christ corporally,
which eat him none otherwise then they did before he had a body. For in all
these Augustine is directly contrary to him, though he be not ashamed to abuse
his name, as though he were of his opinion. Now follows Oecumenius a writer,
far out of the compass of the challenge. But what says he in 1. Cor. 10.
Comederunt nempe Manna, etc. They have eaten Manna, as we the body of Christ.
They have drunk the spiritual water flowing out of the rock or stone, as we
the blood of Christ.

Master Heskins infers, that the fathers did eat Manna, and drink the
water corporally, therefore we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ
corporally. By the same Logike he may conclude, the fathers did eat manna
visibly and sensibly, therefore we eat the body of Christ visibly and
sensibly. Or else, as the words of Oecumenius sound, we eat the body of
Christ inuisibly, so the fathers did eat Manna inuisibly. But every man that
has but half an eye, sees these gross inconsequences, and yet they are as
good as Master Heskins argument and illation. Oecumenius therefore means,
that as Manna and the water were their sacraments, so we have ours, whose
spiritual substance is the body and blood of Christ, the earthly substance,
is bread and wine, and Manna and the water were to them sacraments of the same
Christ, whom we receive. And whereas M. Heskins says, that no catholic
doctor teaches the sacrament to be only a figure, we agree with him, for we
hold him accursed that compteth it to be only a figure, or a bare figure, as
he does often most injuriously charge us. The rest of the Chapter is spent in
vain repetitions of sentences and collections before set down and answered.

The ninth Chapter, proceeds in the declaration of the same by Haimo and
Theophylact. Hesk.


Although neither Haimo nor Theophylact, speak more for M. Hesk. then the
former auctors, Fulke.
yet because they are but burgesses of the lower house, which whether they give
their voices with the bill or against it, it shall pass never the sooner, I
will spend no time in aunswering their authorities. They are both but late
writers. The patches of Chrysostom, Ambrose, and Cyprian are often answered
at large in their proper places. But, whereas he challenges the spirit of
unity unto the Papists, and charge the Protestants with the spirit of
division: it is well known, that in the cheifest articles of religion, we
agree, God be thanked, better then the Papists do, who have not yet agreed,
whether the Pope, or the counsel be to be followed in matters of faith, so
that they disagree in the very foundation of their religion. Finally, where he
charge us with the heresies of the Anabaptists, we may be bold to charge
him with the spirit of Satan, who was a liar and a slaunderer of Gods Saints
from the beginning.

The tenth Chapter, proceeds upon the same text, by Ruper^us and Rich. Holkot
and ends with Gagnegus. Hesk.


If a man should vouchesafe to admit such authorities as these, there should
be no end of quarrelling. Fulk.
I am content to yield them to Master Heskins, and five hundredth more such as
they be: as for the sayings of Ambrose and Cyrill, which he enterla^eth, they
are answered in other places, although that of Ambrose be flat against him, the
other of Cyrill nothing for him.

Hesk.
The eleventh Chapter declares the prophesies of the sacrament under the names
of Manna and the water of the rock.

Fulk.
These Prophesies he imagines to be contained in 77. Psalm, and 104. Psalm,
which as the whole Psalms declare to them that read them, be praises and
thankesgiuings for Gods benefits past, and not prophesies of things to come.
The first sentence is this: He commanded the clouds above, and opened the
gates of heaven. And he rayned to them Manna to eat, and gave them the bread
of heaven. So man did eat the bread of Angels. Upon this text he cites
Hierome: Sed and fantem, etc. But the same stone also shows out the founteine
of baptism. For out of his side, when he was stricken, came forth water and
blood, which figured baptism and martyrdom. Here he makes the water a figure
of baptism and martirdom, not of the blood of Christ in the sacrament, and
much less a prophecy, except Master Heskins be so mad, as to make a figure
and a prophecy all one. But Hierom says more: Panem C^^^i dedit etc. He gave
them the bread of heaven, man did eat the bread of Angels. He him self gave
meat unto man, which said, I am the bread of life, which came down from
heaven: he that shall eat of this bread, shall live for ever. This is so far
from a prophecy of the time to come, that he declares, that God did feed
the Israelites with the flesh of Christ, which is the bread of life that
came down from heaven, figured in Manna, being the food of all the Saints of
God, from the beginning of the world: as is most manifest by the very next
words following in Hierome, which Master Heskins has craftily left out: Ex
hoc enim pane coeli, Sancti reficiuntur and Angeli: For of this bread of
heaven, both the Saints are fedd, and the Angels. Where note also, that he
says: the Angels to be refreshed with this bread of life, even a^ the Saints
are: but the Angels eat not the flesh of Christ corporally, therefore
neither do the Saints.

Finally, Hierome in that place is so far from a corporal manner of eating
and drinking, that he writes thus: Praestita sunt haec Haebries, sed and modo
in ecclesia Prophetis and Apostolis praecipitur, vt nobis verbum
praedicationis, quo anima spiritualiter pascatur, annuncient. These things were
performed to the Hebrews: but now also in the church it is commanded to the
Prophets and Apostles, that they declare to us the word of preaching,
wherewith our soul is spiritually fedd. In these words, he makes Manna and
the water, figures of the preaching of Gods word, which is a spiritual food
of our souls.

Now upon the other text, Psalm. 104. He satisfied them with the bread of
heaven: Saint Hierome says: For, as they were refreshed by Manna rayning from
heaven, so we at this day are refreshed, receiving the body of the Lamb. He
brake the rock, and the waters flowed. For that precious corner stone was
stricken, and brought forth unto us unmeasurable fountains, which wash away
our errors, and water our dryness. Here is as before, a comparison of Gods
benefits toward them, and toward us, which he seems to make equal, as
they were in deed in substance, and all matters perteining to aeternall life:
but here is no prophecy spoken of, neither does Master Heskins gather one
word out of it, for that intent.

The like is to be said of Saint Augustine upon the 77. Psalm: Quid enim,
etc. For he which commanded the clouds above, and opened the gates of heaven,
and rayned to them Manna to eat, and gave them the bread of heaven, so that
man did eat the bread of Angels: He which sent unto them meat in
abundance, that he might fill the unbelievers, is not unable to geeue to the
believers, the very true bread from heaven, which Manna did signify, which
is in deed the meat of Angels, which WORD of God feeds them that are
corruptible incorruptibly, which that man might eat, was made flesh and
dwelled among us.

Here is no word of Prophecy, neither can Master Heskins himself find any,
and the words which do immediately follow, do plainly show that Augustine
spoke neither of corporal presence, nor corporal manner of eating: Ipse enim
panis per nubes Euangelicas vniuerso orbi pluitur, and apertis praedicatorum
cordibus tanquam coelestib^^^ ianuis, non murmur anti and tentanti synagogae,
sed credenti and in illo spem ponenti ecclesiae praedicatur. For this bread
thorough the clouds of the Gospel is rayned unto all the world, and the
hearts of the preachers, as it were ye heavenly gates being opened, is
preached, not to the murmuring and tempting synagogue, but to the church
believing and putting her trust in him. Here Augustine says, that the WORD,
which became flesh, is rayned from heaven, by the preaching of the Gospel,
and eaten by faith: Unto Augustine he joins Cassiodorus, as he says, and
truly nothing dissenting from the former writers, but altogether from M. Hesk.
purpose, he is cited in Psalm. 77. Et pluit illis, etc. And he rayned to them
Manna to eat, he says he rayned, that he might show the great plenty of
the meat, which like unto rain came down from heaven. And lest thou should
doubt, what rain that was, it follows: To eat Manna: Manna is interpreted,
what is this? which we very fuly apply to the holy Communion: for while this
meat is sought by wandering, the gifts of the Lords body are declared. He
has added. He gave them the bread of heaven. What other bread of heaven is
there, but Christ our Lord, of whom the heavenly things receive spiritual
food, and do enjoy inestimable delight? Finally, thus it follows: Man has
eaten the bread of Angels. Therefore, Christ is said to be the bread of
Angels, because they are fed with his eternal praise. For the Angels are not
to be thought to eat corporal bread, but with that contemplation of our
Lord, with the which, that high cr^ature is fedd, they are fedd: but this
bread fills the Angels in heaven, and feeds us on earth. In this
exposition, it is worthy to be noted, that Cassiodorus affirms, that Christ
our Lord was the bread from heaven, which God gave to the fathers, in the
sacrament of Manna. Also, that the Angels in heaven, and we upon earth are
fed with the same bread, which must needs be a spiritual food: For as he
says, the Angels eat no corporal bread, so do they not eat any corporal
thing, or after any corporal manner. The last authority he cites out of
friar Titelman, I will not trouble the reader withal, although, if he never
had spoken worse, then in this sentence, he were not greatly to be reprehended.
But to M. Heskins, all is fish that comes to the nett.

The twelfth Chapter, proves by occasion of that that is said with further
authority, that the sacraments of the new law, are more excellent then the
sacraments of the old law. Hesk.


The first reason is taken out of S. Augustines rule, Fulk.
cited in the first book, That all good things figured, are more excellent
then the figures, which we grant: for Christ figured by Manna, was more
excellent then. Manna, as he is more excellent then the bread and wine, by
which he is likewise represented. The second reason he uses is this, yt if the
body of Christ were not so present in the sacrament, as they imagine, Manna
should be better then the sacrament: for Manna has twelve wonders declared by
Roffens. lib. 1. Chap. 12. The first: that he that gathered most, had but his
measure. The second, that he that gathered least, had his measure full also.
The third: that which was kept until the next day, putrified, except on the
Saboth day. The fourth: it was kept many years in the Arc vnprutrified. The
fifth: it would melt in the Son, and be hard in the fire. The sixth: it fell
all days, saving upon the Sabbath day. The seventh: that on the day before
the Saboth day, they had two gomers full, and all other days but one. The
eight: that whether they gathered more or less, they had that day two gomers
full. The ninth: that measure sufficed all stomachs and appetites. The tenth:
that to them that were good, it tasted to every one, according to his desire.
The eleventh: although to the godly it was a most pleasant taste, yet to the
ungodly, it wa^ loathsome. The twelfth: the children of Israel were fedd with it
forty years in the Wilderness. Of some of these speaks Chrysostom in dict.
Apost. Nolo vos: which, because it is long and contains nothing more then is
collected by Fisher, I will not set down. Augustine also witnesses for one
miracle, that Manna tasted to every man as he would. Hereuppon he concludes,
that Manna far excels the sacramentaries sacramental bread, which shall be
granted, and so it does the Papists consecrated host, which is subject to
putrefaction, and in none of the twelve miracles comparable to Manna. But Manna
for all this does not excel the body and blood of Christ, which is given us
that are faithful with our sacramental bread and wine. He says the Jews
receiving Manna, received Christ spiritually. Now at the length he says
truth. And we also receiving the sacramental bread and wine receive Christ
spiritually. Neither are our sacraments, as I have said, concerning the
spiritual or heavenly substance more excellent then theirs, as our salvation
is the same with theirs, but in clearness of signification more excellent, as
the doctrine of our salvation, is more plainly revealed unto us. But M. Hesk.
replyeth, that if our sacraments excel not theirs, then their sacraments and
figures far excel ours, and that in three things. The first: In excellency
of ye thing signified. The second: in ye fullness and liveliness of the
signification. The third: in the work of God about the same figures. But I
answer, concerning the first, they are aequall: concerning the second, ours
are superior and more excellent: and concerning the third, I distinguish of
outward working of God, and inward. Concerning the outward work of God, about
their sacraments and figures, it was meet it should be more notable, because
the doctrine was more obscure, and that the creatures themselves, that were the
elements of their sacraments and figures should be more excellent and glorious,
because ye inward grace, was not so clearly revealed: and it was meant, the
sacraments and figures should be many more in number, because the doctrine was
much less manifest, then it is to us. But concerning the inward working of
God, there is no doubt, but it is as marvelous, and as wonderful in our
sacraments, as in theirs: and in respect of illumination, according to the
doctrine, which is more lightsome, and of full assurance, as of that mystery,
which is already accomplished, it is much more excellent and notable in our
sacraments, which are (as Augustine says) in number most few, in matter most
simple, in signification most excellent. Ep. ad Ian. 118. Primo itaque tenere
te volo, quod est huius disputationis caput: Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum,
sicut ipse in euangelio loquitur, leui iugo suo nos subdidisse and sarcinae
leui. Vnde sacramentis numero paucissimis, obseruatione facillimis,
significatione praestantissimis, societatem noui populi colligauit, sicut est
baptismus Trinitatis nomine consecratus, communicatio corporis and sanguinis
ipsius, and si quid aliud in scripturis canoni^is contineatur. First therefore I
would have thee hold this, which is the head of this disputation: that our lord
Jesus Christ, as he him self speaks in the Gospel, has submitted us to his
gentle yoke and easy burden. Therefore, by sacraments in number most few, in
observation most easy, in signification most excellent, he has bound
together ye fellowship of the new people, as is baptism being consecrated in
the name of the Trinity, the communication of his body and blood, and if any
thing else be contained in the canonical scriptures. Thus you see,
notwithstanding the vain cauils of M. Hesk. wherein our sacraments are equal
with theirs, and wherein ours are more excellent then theirs: so that we have
no need of his real presence, to make a difference between ye sacraments of
the new testament, and the sacraments of the old fathers, which though they
lived under the old testament, yet were they saved by the new testament, in
the forgiveness of their sins, by Christ as we are.

The thirteenth Chapter, proves the same by scriptures and Doctors. Hesk.


In the beginning of this Chapter, Fulk.
he rayleth against Luther, Oecolampadius, Calvin, etc. but without proof of
any thing, and therefore I count it not worthy of answer. Secondly, he will
prove, that the sacraments of the old law, are weak and beggarly elements,
not only now when they be abrogated, but also when they were in their
greatest strength, and therefore in no respect equal with ours. For proof
hereof, he alleges the Apostle to the Hebrews, 7. that the law brought
nothing to perfection, and Chap. 10. The law having the shadow of good things
to come, and not the very facion of the things them selves, can never with
sacrifices which they offer, make the comers thereunto perfect. But he is
very ignorant, if he know not, as he pretends, or else very obstinate, if
he will not acknowledge, that the Apostle, as he writes to the Hebrews, so he
speaks of the law, as the unbelievers esteemed it, that is altogether
separated from Christ, and so of the ceremonies thereof: and not as the law and
the ceremonies thereof, were considered of the faithful, with Christ the end
and accomplishment of it and them. For otherwise Christ him self is called a
minister of circumcision, for the truth of God, to establish the promises of
the fathers, Romans 15. ver. 8 After this he gapeth and cries out upon
Oecolampadius, for saying, that our bread is no better then ye Lamb of the
spiritual fathers. Whereas, if he speak of the elements in both, there is no
question, if of the heavenly part, that he says is true, nevertheless, there
is a dignity, and an excellency of our sacrament about these, and that is in
clearnes of understanding the mystery thereof, as I have often showed. And all
the textes and authorities that Master Heskins cites, prove nothing else. As
first, John Baptist was greater then all the Prophets, because he spoke more
clearly of Christ being present, who^ they described to come, when he said:
behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world: that
confirms Chrysostom, in Math. Hom. 38. comparing John to that noble man that
comes next to the King. And Oecumenius prefers John, because he prophesied
of him, whom he saw and baptized. Whereupon Master Heskins gathers, that if
John were the more excellent Prophet, because he saw Christ present, of whom
he prophesied, then the sacrament must be more excellent, because he was
present whom it figured. By like reason, he may gather, that they yt were
baptized in Christ's presence were better baptized then we are now. But the
reason holds (as I said before) not of the bodily presence, but of the
clearer doctrine, that was by means of his presence. So Abraham desired to see
the day of Christ, and saw it, Joan. 8. yet blessed are your eyes (says he)
which see that you see, for many Prophets and righteouse men, desired to see,
and have not seen the things that you see, that is, although they have seen
them by faith, yet not so clearly as you have seen them, and so be the very
words of Chrysostom, which M. Hesk. cites in 13. Math. Hom. 46. upon that
place: Many Prophets and righteous men, have desired, etc. that is says
Christ, My coming, presence, miracles, voice. For here he does not only
prefer them before those lost and damned men, but also he affirms them to
be more excellent and happy, then the Prophets and righteous men. Why so?
Because they do not only see these things which they have not seen, but also
those things which they desired to see, these men saw with their eyes. For
they also by faith, did behold these things, but these much more clearly did
see all things. You see therefore, how vainly he cauelleth against
Oecolampadius and the truth, when the texts and authorities he cites, be al
clean contrary unto him self.

The fourteenth Chapter, proceeds in the proof of the same, by the
Scriptures and doctors. Hesk.


His first proof shall be, Fulke.
that the sixth Chapter of John is to be taken of the blessed sacrament, and
this is proved in his second book: where also I have answered, how it is
taken, and in what respect it pertains to the sacrament: namely, as the
sacrament is a seal of the doctrine contained in that Chapter. To this proof
he adds the consent of the church until Luther, in so much that when the
heresy of the Communion under both kinds wa^ raised in Bohemia, they grounded
it upon that Chapter. Note by the way, that the Communion under both kinds
instituted by Christ, and practiced in the Church a thousand years after
Christ, is called of Master Heskins an heresy. The third proof is, that John
spoke nothing of the institution of the sacrament, because he spoke of it most
plentifully in this Chapter by Augustines judgment. Ioannes etc. John said
nothing in this place of the body and blood of our Lord, but plainly in an
other place he testifies, that our Lord spoke of them most plentifully. Here
he will have us note, that Augustine calls it not a sign or figure, but
plainly the body and blood of Christ, therefore it is not a figure or sign. By
ye same reason he may say, Augustine calls it not a sacrament, therefore it
is no sacrament. But Christ him self says: Not as your fathers did eat Manna
in the wilderness and are dead. He that eats this bread shall live for ever.
In which words M. Heskins notes two things: The first, that Manna is a
figure of Christ in the sacrament, for proof of which he sends us back to
the 4.5.6.7.8.9. and 10. Chapters of this book: The second is the excellency
of the body of Christ in the sacrament, above Manna, the eaters whereof are
dead: but the eaters of the body of Christ in the sacrament shall live for
ever. M. Heskins says he wot not what, for if you ask him whether all they
that eat the body of Christ in the sacrament shall live eternally, he will say
no. For wicked men (as he says) eat it, which shall not live eternally.
Again, if you ask him, whether al they that did eat Manna are dead, he will
say no. For though they be dead in body, yet because many did eat Christ
spiritually by faith, they shall live for ever. You see what pith is in his
reason, and substance in his doctrine. But in very deed, Christ compares his
flesh with Manna, as it was a corporal food only, and so all that did eat it
are dead: but all they that eat the flesh of Christ, which is eternal life,
shall live eternally; for though they dye corporally, yet will be raise them up
in the last day.

And whereas Master Heskins voucheth S. Augustine to warrant, De vtilita,
poenit. Manna de coelo etc. I must send the reader to the eight Chapter of this
book, where that authority is cited and answered, to be flat contrary to M.
Heskins. Likewise, the sentence of Cyprian de Coen. Dom. Coena disposita etc.
is handled in the first book, Chapter 17. and the other beginning Significata
in Lib. 1. Cap. 39. The saying of Ambrose Lib. 4. de sacra. Cap. 5. is also
against Master Heskins, as we shall plainly see. Ipse Dominus etc. The Lord
Jesus him self testifies unto us, that we receive his body and blood, ought
we to doubt of his fidelity and testification? Now return with me to my
proposition. It was truly a great and a venerable thing, that he rayned Manna
to the Jews from heaven. But understand which is the greater, Manna from
heaven, or the body of Christ? The body of Christ truly, who is the maker of
heaven. Further, he that has eaten Manna has dyed, but he that shall eat
this body, it shall be made to him remission of sins, and he shall not dye
for ever. By the effects of the sacrament, which are remission of sins and
eternal life, M. Hes. says, ye excellency thereof is proved above Manna. I
answer, Ambrose following our savior Christ, does not compare Manna the
sacrament with our sacrament, but Manna the corporal food, with the body of
Christ the heavenly substance of our sacrament, and so it is more excellent
without comparison.

But Master Heskins skippeth over with a dry foot, that Ambrose says,
Whosoever shall eat of this body, it shall be made to him remission of sins,
and he shall not not die for ever, by which words it is evident, that no wicked
man eats this body, but they only which eat it spiritually by faith. An other
place of Ambrose he cites: De myster initiand. Cap. 9. Considera nunc etc.
Consider now whether is better, the bread of Angels, or the flesh of Christ,
which truly is the body of life. That Manna was from heaven, this above heaven:
that of heaven, this of the Lord of heavens: that subject to corruption, if it
were kept until the next day, this far from all corruption, which who so
ever shall taste religiously, he can feel no corruption. The water did
satisfy them for an hour, the blood does wash thee for ever. The Jew drank
and thirsts, when thou have dr^nke thou can not thirst. And that was in a
shaddowe: this in the truth. And after a few words he says. Thou have
known better things, for light is better then a shaddowe, the truth then a
figure, the body of the Author then Manna from heaven. This place of Ambrose
utterly denies the body of Christ to be received of the wicked which perish,
and so consequently denies it to be corporally present. But least we should
object that Ambrose speaks not of the sacrament, he adds a long discourse
following immediately. Forte dica^ etc. which because it is contained in the 51.
Chapter of the second book, I will send the reader thither, where he shall see
it answered by Ambrose him self, and in the same place, and in the tenth
Chapter of the second book, where some part of it is touched. For it were in
vain to trouble the reader with one thing so often as M. Heskins lists to
repeat it.

Hesk.
The fifteenth Chapter proving all our sacraments generally to be more excellent
then the sacraments of Moses.

Fulk.
First baptism in respect of The noble presence of God the Father, the Son,
and the holy Ghost, must bring with it some more noble gift, then a bare sign
or token. See how this impudent beast would make Popish fools believe, that
we teach baptism to be nothing else, but a bare sign or token. We think and
speak of it, as honorably as the scripture teaches us. Let the form of
baptism used in the Church of England testify, whether we make it nothing but
a bare sign or token. Let our catechismies of al sorts bear witness of the
same. But nothing will stop a slanderous mouth. Yet to answer the title of
that Chapter, S. Augustine is cited, contra Faust. lib. 19. cap. 13. Prima
sacrame^ta etc. The first sacraments, which were observed and celebrated by the
law, were the foreshewing of Christ, that was to come, which when he had
fulfilled by his coming, they were taken away, and therefore they were taken
away, because they were fulfilled. For he came not to break the law, but to
fulfill it. And other are instituted greater in power, better in profit,
easier to be done, fewer in number.

Master Heskins asks wherein be they greater in power, but in this that the
sacramenets of the old law had no power but to signify only, ours not
only to signify, but also to give that they signify? And I will ask him,
seeing he makes the sacraments instruments of Gods grace, by what instrument
did they receive the grace of God, if they received it not by the sacraments?
But Augustine, as I have often showed before, is far from M. Heskins
judgment, wherefore in this place against the Manichees, which denied the old
testament, he shows the abrogation of those rites, not because they were
evil, but because their time was expired, and they fulfilled in Christ: who
has instituted new sacraments, more effectual and more profitable, because
according to the doctrine whereof they be seals, they do more lively
strengthen the faith of the receivers, in respect of the mystery of redemption
already accomplished, then those old sacraments did, which obscurely and
darkely preached unto the receivers yt redemption, which was not accomplished
in act, yet was as effectual in power, for their salvation. And that this is
Augustines mind, it appears plainly in that which follows immediately in
the same book, 14. Chapter. Veruntamen si antiqui iusti, qui sacramentis illis
intelligebant venturam prnunciari reuelationem fidei: ex qua, licet adhuc
operta and abscondita munera pietatis tamen intellecta, etiam ipsi viuebant
quia in hac vita nemo esse potest iustus, nisi qui ex fide viuit.
Nevertheless, if those ancient righteous men, which by those sacraments
understood the revelation of faith that was to come to be foreshewed, by which,
although the gifts of godliness were yet covered and hid, were
notwithstanding understood, even they also did live: because in this life no
man can be righteous, but he that lives by faith.

And afterward in the same Chapter. Tunc ergo and occulta erat fides: Nam eadem
credebant, eademque sperabant omnes iusti and sancti etiam temporum illorum,
and promissiua erant illa omnia sacramenta, omnisque vitus ille sacrorum, nunc
autem reuelata est fides, in quam conclusus erat populus quando sub lege
custodi^batur, and quod fidelibus promittitur in indicio, iam completum est in
example, per (...), qui legem and Prophetas non venit soluere, fed adimplere.
Then therefore says was hid, for all the just and holy men even of those times
believed the same things, and hoped for the same things, and all the
sacraments and holy ceremonies of those times contained promises, but now that
faith is revealed, into which the people was enclosed while they were kept
under the law, and that which is promised to the faithful in judgment, is
already accomplished in the example, by him which came not to break the law
and the Prophets, but to fulfill them. And following the same matter in the
16. Cap. Interim aduersus calumniosam imperitiam Fausti demonstrare suffecerit,
quanto errore delirent, qui putent signis sacramentisque mutatis, etiam res
ipsas esse diuersas, quas ritus Propheticus prnuncianis promissas, and quas
ritus Euangelicus annunciauit impletas: aut qui censent cum res eaedem sins,
non eas alijs sacramentis annunciari debuisse completas, quaem his quibus adhuc
complendae praenunciabaentur. Si enim soni verborum, quibus loquimur pro
tempore commutantur, eademque res aliter enunciatur facienda, ali^er facta,
sicus ista ipsa duo verba quae dixi, Facienda and Facta, nec paribus morarum
interuallis, nec ijsdem vel totidem literis sillabisue sonu^runt: quid mirum si
alijs mysteriorum signaculis Passio and Resurrectio Christi futura promissa
est, alijs iam facta annunciatur? quandoquidem ipsa verba futurum and factum,
passurus and passus, resurrecturus and resurrexit, nec tendi aequaliter, nec
similiter fon^re potuerunt. In the mean time against the slanderous
unskillfulness of Faustus, it shall suffice to show, in how great error they
doat, which think, that the signs and sacraments being changed, the things
them selves be diverse, which the Prophetical ceremony foreshewed to be
promised, and which the ceremony of the Gospel has declared to be fulfilled,
or which think, that seeing the things be the same, they should not have been
declared to be fulfilled already by other sacraments, then those by which they
were foreshewed as yet to be fulfilled in time to come. For if the sound of
words which we use in speaking, are changed according to the time, and the
same thing is pronounced otherwise when it shall be done, and otherwise when it
is done, as these two very words which I spoke it shall be done, and it is done,
have not founded with like distance of spaces, nor with the same or equal number
of letters and sillables: what marvel is it if the passion and resurrection of
Christ was promised to come by other signs of mysteries, and is declared to be
accomplished by other? Seeing the very words, that shall be and that is done, he
shall suffer and he has suffered, he shall rise again and he is risen again,
could neither be equally extended nor sound alike. Thou see now by these
places, in what respect he calls our sacraments greater in virtue then the
old sacraments: not that another thing is given in them, but ye same after a
more clear manner of revelation. And consequently thou see, how Christ is
present in our sacraments. But M. Hesk. will confute us by the definition of a
sacrament, which he says by common consent of learned men, to be this. A
sacrament is a sign of an holy thing in such manner as it may bear the
image, and be the cause. If we do admit this definition, being rightly
understood, what gains he thereby? Forsooth, that the sacrament is an
instrumental cause by which God gives grace. Well, grant this, what then? Marie
Then it is not a bare sign. Gods curse light on him, that teaches Gods
sacraments to be bare signs. And then sacraments give grace. Nay M. Heskins
hold you where you were before, God gives grace by the^, but not Opere
operato, of the work wrought, which is all the question, but to the elect
freely, for grace is called so, because it is freely given. After much
quarelling about this definition, which is neither so clear nor so perfect as
yt which Aug. gives. A sacrament is a visible sign of an invisible grace. He
comes to a large text of August. In prol. Ps. 73. Opportune non, etc. It came
to pass fitly, not by our, but by Gods disspensatio^, that we heard even now
out of the gospel, that the law was given by Moses, but grace and truth by
Jesus Christ. For if we discern the two testame^ts, the promises are not the
same, yet most of the precepts are the same. Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
commit adultery. Thou shall not steal. Honor thy etc. Thou shall bear no, etc.
Thou shall not co^et thy neighbors goods, thou shall not covet thy neighbors
wife is commanded to us, and who does not observe these things, goes out of
the way, and is not worthy at all to obtain the holy hill of God, of which
it is said: Who shall dwell in thy tabernacle, or who shall rest in thy holy hill?
He that is innocent of hands, and of a clean heart. These things we say most
dear brethren, that you may al learn out of the new Testament, not to clean
to earthly things, but to obtain heavenly things. The precepts therefore
being discussed, are found to be all the same, or else scarce any in the
Gospel, which have been said of the prophets. The precepts are the same, the
sacraments are not the same, the premises are not the same. Let us see wherefore
the praecepts are the same: because that according to them we ought to serve
God. The sacraments are not the same, because they be other sacraments giving
salvation, other promising the savior. The sacraments of the new Testament,
do give salvation: the sacraments of the old Testament promised the savior.
Therefore now that thou hold the things promised, what seek thou things
promising the savior, now having him? I say, hold the things promised not
that we have already received eternal life, but because Christ is already
come, which was foreshewed by the prophets. The sacraments are changed, they
are made easier fewer, holsomer. Notwithstanding the vain exclamation of M.
Hesk. upon this place, (except we will make S. August. contrary to him self in
ye places before alleged) we may plainly see, how he expounds himself in the
latter end of this long passage, whereof the greatest part might altogether
have been spared. Namely yt there is no difference in ye substance of our
sacraments from theirs, but ye Christ is already come. And our sacraments do
not give salvation, as though we had eternal life delivered by them in
possession, but because Christ ye author of eternal life, yt in the other was
promised, is now come. Not yt grace in them was only promised, and not given
for them. M. Hesk. own definition of a sacrament should be false, wherein he will
not allow any thing yt is superfluous, and much less untrue. But M.H. is not
content with this interpretation, saying yt S. Augustine compares ye
sacraments of the old law to childrens trifles in ye same place: Numquid
quiniam puero, etc. Because there are given to a child certain childish
playing trifles, by which the childish mind is called away, are they not
therefore plucked out of his hands, when he waxes a great one? No more
therefore God, because he has plucked away those things as childrens trifles,
out of the hands of his sons by the new Testament, that he might give the^
something more proprofitable they being now waxed greater, is to be thought
not to have given those former things. Gentle Reader, I wish thee to turn over
to this place in S. Augustine, and except thou be too much blinded in affection
toward M. Hesk. thou will confess that he has aduouched a manifest untruth,
when you shall see that Augustine utters not these words of the sacraments of
the old Testament, but of the promises of earthly benefits, made unto the
Fathers of those times. I can say no more, confer and judge.

The sixteenth Chapter proceeds to the next text of S. Paul, which is: Calix
cui Benedi. Hesk.


This text which he pretends to expound is written in 1. Cor. 10. The cup of
blessing which we bless, Fulke.
is it not the communion of the blood of Christ? The bread which we break, is
it not the communion or partaking of the body of Christ? This text (he says)
proves the real presence and sacrifice. And first he will have no trope or
figure to be understood in this place, but the very things themselves: with
how gross absurdity it is, I refer it to the judgment of al reasonable
Papists, that know what a trope means. Secondly he says, it is an evil
manner of disputation, to go about to prove like effects, of unlike causes.
Wherein I will agree with him. But what upon this? Forsooth, then it follows,
that as the Jews, of whom S. Paul takes example, were partakers of the
altar, because they did eat the sacrifices, so we are partakers of the body
and blood of Christ, because we eat and drink the body and blood of Christ
corporally, and not because we eat a piece of bread and drink a little wine.
Again, as the Corinthians, by eating meat offered to idols were made partakers
of idols: so ye Christians, because they did eat ye body of Christ, are made
partakers thereof. But to discuss this vain cloud of sophistry, I will
reason upon his own Maxim: like causes, have not unlike effects: S. Paul
says, he would not have the Corinthians partakers of Devils by eating meat
offered to idols, which in effect was offered to devils. As they that were made
partakers of Devils, because they did eat meat offered to devils, were not
partakers of the substance and nature of devils, neither did they eat the
substance of devils, no more does it follow, yt we eating and drinking the
bread of thanksgiving, and cup of thanksgiving, which are a communication of
the body and blood of Christ, do corporally eat and drink the body and blood
of Christ, or be made partakers corporally of the nature and substance of the
body and blood of Christ. The like I say of ye altar. Now concerning the
sacrifice M. Hesk. says, yt if S. Paul did not as well take the cup, and
table of the Lord to be a sacrifice, as the cup and table of devils to be a
sacrifice, and as the sacrifices of the Israelites, he would not have used like
terms, but showed a difference. I answer, if the sacrament had been a
sacrifice, he would have so called it, especially in this place, or at least in
some other place, therefore it is no sacrifice: and he showed a sufficient
difference, when he called the one a sacrifice, and not the other. Although if
I should grant it to be a sacrifice of thanksgiving M. Hes. were never the near
of his propitiatory sacrifice.

But the fathers of Christ's Parleament house must be heard to establish this
interpretation of M. Hes. and first Chrysostom. In 1. Cor. 10. Maxim, etc. With
these words he does get greatly to him self, both credit and fear. And the
meaning of them is this, That which is in the cup, is the same, which flowed
one of his side, and thereof we are partakers. And he called it the cup of
blessing, because that when we have it in our hands with admiration and a
certain horror of that unspeakable gift, we praise him giving thanks, because
he has shed his blood, that we should not remain in error. Neither has he
only shed it, but made us all partakers of it. Therefore (says he) if thou
desire blood do not sprinkle the altar of idols with the slaughter of brute
beasts, but my altar with my blood. What is more marvelous then this? Tell me I
pray thee wha^ is more amiable? This also lovers when they see those whom they
love allured with desire of other men's things, give their own unto them, and
counsel them to abstain from these. But lovers truly do show this desire in
money, garments, possessions: no man ever in his own blood. But Christ in this
has showed both his care, and his vehement love toward us. And in the old
Testament, when they were more imperfect, that blood which they offered to
idol^ he himself would accept, that he might turn them away from idols, which
also was a sign of inspeakable love. But here he has prepared a much more
wonderful and magnificall sacrifice, both when he changed the sacrifice it
self, and for the slaughter of brute beast: commanded him self to be
offered. Although M. Hesk. has disioyned this place to make show of variety,
I have set it down whole and entire. Here M. Hesk. triumphs not a little,
railing against blessed Cranmer for abusing S. Paul's words, because
Chrysostom says, that which is in the cup is that which flowed out of
Christ's side, therefore it must needs be his blood, and that corporaly
received, neither can he abide to hear tell of a trope or figure in these
words. Bu^ in spite of his heart, Chrysostom must be understood with a trope
or figure, because he says immediately after yt Christ wills the Corinthians
to sprinkle his altar with his blood. I am sure M. Hesk. would not dip his
holiwater sprinkle in the challice, and shake it over the altar. Therefore the
whole speech of Chrysostom is a continued trope and allegory. And therefore
neither M. Hes, his presence, nor his sacrifice ca^ be proved out of this
place. Concerning the sacrifice, I have often showed, how the ancient fathers
called the sacrament a sacrifice, namely of thanksgiving. First, not of
propitiation, and so we grant that Christ did institute a sacrifice in the
supper. Secondly improperly, as a remembrance of Christ's sacrifice, and so
does Chrysostom expound him self, upon the tenth to the Hebrews: Non aliud,
etc. We offer not another sacrifice, as the high priest, but ye same we do
always, but rather we work the remembrance of that sacrifice. Another place of
Chrysostom he cites out of his Ser. de Eucharist. in Enconija. Reputate
salutare^, etc. Esteem that wholesome blood to flow, as it were out of his
Divine, and unpolluted side, and so coming to it, receive it with pure lips.
This (says he) must needs prove a real presence, because it is received with
lip^, as ye spiritual receiving is not. And these words must be spoken in a
plain manner without all figure, because he spoke them in a sermon, to the
common people. O blockish reasons: surely he has not read this place in
Chrysostom, but borrowed it of some note book. For immediately before these
words, is a place that has a great show of transubstantiation, but in deed
it clean overthrows both ye corporal manner of receiving, and M. Hesk. two
doughtie reasons. Number vides panem, number vi^um* No^^ ficut reliqui ^ibi in
secessum vadunt? Absit ne sic cogites, que^aed^o^^ enim si cera igni adhibita
illi assimulatur, nihil substantia vemanet, nihil superfluit: sic and hic pu^a
mysteria consumi corporis praesentia, Prop^er, quod and accedentes ne putetis,
quod accipiatis Diuinum corpus ex homine, sed ex ipsis Seraphim forcipe igne^,
quem scilices Esaias vidit, vat accipere. What do thou see bread or wine? Do
they go into the drought like other meal? God forbid, that thou sholdest so
think. For as wax if it be put to the fire, is made like unto it, none of the
substance remains, nothing ouerfloweth: so here think the mysteries, to be
consumed by the presence of ye body. Therefore you that come to it, think not
that you receive the divine body of a man, but that you receive, the fire
which Esaie saw with a pair of tongs of the Seraphims themselves. If M. Hesk.
will not allow any figures in this sermon, because it was made to the common
people, that we receive not the Lords body at the Priests hand, but fire from
the altar by an Angels hand: and yt Chrysostom allowed none but a spiritual
receiving of Christ, not corporally present on the altar, but in heaven, he
teaches sufficiently, both by this place, and more plainly following ye
former place which M. Hesk. cited before In 1. Cor. 10. Ad hoc (...) nos
inducis sacrifici^on formidand^^ and admirabile, quod iubet nobis vt cum
concordia and charitate maxima ad se accedamis, and aquilae in hac vita facti,
ad ipsum c^lum euotemus, vel potius supra (...). Vbi enim cad^uer, inquit,
illic and aquilae. Cadauer Domini corpu^ propter mortem, nisi enim ille
cecidisset, nos no^ resurrexissemus Aquilas (...) appellat, vt oftendat ad alta
eum oportere conte^dere, qui ad hoc corpus ac^edit, and nihil cum terra debere
ei esse commune, neque ad inferiora trahi and repere sed ad superiora se^per
volare, and in solemn institiae intueri, mentisque oculum acutissimum habere.
Aquilaerum enim non gracculorum hec mensa est. For unto this does the
fearful and wonderful sacrifice bring us, that he commands us, that we come
unto him with concord and great charity, and being made eagles in this life,
we fly up into heaven or rather above heaven. For where the carkase is, says
he, there are the Eagles. The Lords body is the carkas in respect of his
death, for except he had fallen, we had not risen again. And he calls them
Eagles, to show, that he must get up on high yt comes to this body, and must
have nothing to do with the earth, nor be drawn and creep to the lower places,
but always to fly up on high, and to behold the son of righteousness, and
to have a most clear eye of the mind. For this is the table of Eagles and not
of Iayes. These words may satisfy a reasonable man, that Chrysostom in this
homily, meant none other, but a spiritual manner of receiving of Christ in
heaven, and not transubstantiated in the sacrament on the altar, in earth: ye
other places he sows together after his manner, to piece out his Chapter, out
of Cyprian De Coen. Chrysostom. De prodition. Iudae. August. contra literas Pet.
Iren. Lib. 4. Cap. 32. are answered at large before in several places, namely
in order. Lib. 1. Ca. 17. Lib. 1. Cap. 18. Lib. 1. Cap. 19. and Lib. 2. Cap.
49. The place of Ambrose In prima oratione praepar. etc. Deserves none
answer, being none of his works but a counterfeit, as Erasmus, and all
learned men do judge, that be not wedded to their own affection.

The seuententh Chapter proceeds upon the same text by the exposition of
Chrysostom and S. Hierome. Hesk.


Chrysostom is cited as before upon this text In 1. Cor. 10. upon these
words: The bread which we break, Fulke.
is it not the communication of the body of Christ? Quare non dixit
participatio? Why said he not the participatio^? because he would signify
somewhat more, for we do not communicate only in participation and receiving,
but in unity: for as that body is united to Christ, so are we by this bread
joined together in an union. But why does he add: Which we break? This may we
see in the Eucharisty but in the cross not so, but altogether contrariwise.
There shall no bone of his be broken, (says he) but that he suffered not in the
cross, he suffers in the oblation and permits for thee to be broken. Here
first he misliketh ye translation of the English Bible, that calls it
participation. A simple quarrel. I would see the Bible perfectly translated
into English by the Papists. And yet the vulgar Popish Latin has
Participatio, and M. Heskins himself translateth it the partaking. But beside
the communion which he passes over, M. Heskins gathers his real presence
and sacrifice. I will add none other place of Chrysostom, to explane his
meaning, this is so manifest of it self against both. First whereas M. Heskins
reasons for the real presence of the communion, which is such with us and
Christ, as is with Christ and his body, and that is substantially, and not
spiritually: I answer he utterly falsifieth Chrysostoms meaning, for he
speaks of our conjunction one with another, which is spiritually, and not of
Christ with us: we communicate (says he) in unity, that we might be joined
one with an other in an union. Therefore M. Heskins argument holds not.
Secondly, yt he speaks of breaking of Christ in the sacrifice, is so manifest
to be understood spiritually, that it overthrows, both the presence and the
sacrifice: for Christ is not broken but spiritually: therefore he is not
present but spiritually. M. Heskins ^ombleth out the matter with a foolish
caveat, yt though Christ suffer and be broken in ye sacrament, yet he suffers
no violence nor pain. But let him speak plainly, if he dare for his ears,
that Christ is really and substantially broken, though without pain, for that
breaking of his body, which Christ speaks of in the institution of ye
sacrament was performed really and substantially upon the cross. Wherefore
upon Chrysostom. authority I will conclude against all ye Papists in the world:
Christ is so present in ye sacrament, yt he is broken therein, but he is not
broken corporally but spiritually, therefore he is not present corporally, but
spiritually. Beside this, it is to be noted in yt saying of Chrysostom. that he
compares yt body, with this bread. As that body is united to Christ, so are
we by this bread joined together in an unity or union. Hoc and il^ud be spoken
of diverse things, else he would have said: so by the same body we are joined in
an union, but he says, by this bread, therefore the body is one thing, and this
bread another thing in corporal substance. S. Hierom is cited 1. Cor. 10.
Calix. benedictionis etc. The cup of blessing, etc. Therefore he named the cup
first, that he might dispute more at large of the bread. Is it not the
communication of the blood of Christ, as our savior himself says? he that
eats my flesh, and drinks my blood abides in me and I in him. Here is
nothing but yt we do all confess, saving yt M. Hes. will deny the bread yt S.
Hierome speaks of, to al men, and ye cup to all lay men. The other place of
Hierome yt he interlaceth after his manner, In Psalm. 110. is answered before
Lib. 1. Ca. 30. The third place follows in Hierome immediately after the
first. Et panis quem frangimus no^ne participatio corporis Domini est? Ita and
panis idolatry, daemonu^ participatio esse monstratur. And is not the bread
which we break a participation of the body of our Lord? Even so also the
bread of idolatry is a participation of devils. Here M.H. to maintain his
fond quarrel against the translation of the English Bible has falsified S.
Hier. and in steed of Participatio, set down Co^municatio corporis, etc. a
communication of ye body, etc. The place it self is directly against M. Hesk.
bil, because ye participation of ye Lords body is compared with the
participation of devils, which cannot be a corporal manner of partaking. And it
follows: Omnes quide^ de vno pane, and de vno Calice participamus. Ita si cu^
idololatris de vno pane comedimus, vnu^ cu^illis corpus efficimur. videte
Israel secundu^ carne^. Carnalis Israel carnales hostias offerebat sicut
spiritualis sacrificia spiritualia offert Christo. We al truly are partakers of
one bread and of one cup, so if we eat of one bread with idolaters, we are made
one body with them. Behold Israel according to the flesh. The carnal Israel
did offer carnal sacrifices, even as ye spiritual Israel does offer spiritual
sacrifices to Christ. In these words observe, that we are so made one body,
by partaking of one bread and cup, as by eating one bread with idolaters, which
can not be after a corporal manner.

Secondly, that we offer not Christ in sacrifice, but offer spiritual sacrifice
to Christ. Finally he says upon ye same Chapter: Non potestis calicem Domini
bibere, and calicem Daemoniorum. Non potestis Dei and Daemonum esse particip^s.
You can not drink of the cup of our Lord and the cup of devils: you can not
be partakers of God and of Devils. See now by S. Hieromes judgment, yt to be
partaker of the cup of the Lord, is to be partaker of God, and not of the blood
of Christ after a corporal, but after a spiritual manner. For if the blood of
Christ were contained locally and substantially in the cup, and that wicked men
might drink ye blood of Christ, (as Papists hold) then a man might be
partaker both of the cup of the Lord, and of the cup of devils, yea of the
body of ye Lord, and of the table of devils, which Saint Paul does so expressly
deny. As touching his bald reason of the sacrifice, it is answered before, and
out of Hierome even now, and his real presence being taken away, it passes
away with it.

Hesk.
The eighteenth Chapter proceeds in the exposition of the same text by S.
Augustine, and Damascen.

Fulke.
He cites S. Augustine Contra Inimic. Leg. and prophet. naming neither what
book nor Chapter, to cloak his shameful corruption, and falsification. For
in the very mids he leaves out a sentence or two, beside that, he cutteth
off the later part, which does clearly open Saint Augustines mind, and thus
he cites it: Nol^ vos socies Daemorum, etc. I will not that ye be made
fellows of Devils. He did truly forbid them from idolatry. For the which
thing he would declare to them, that they should even so be made fellows of
devils, if they did eat Idolathytes of the sacrifice, as the carnal Israel
which did eat of the sacrifices in the Temple* was fellow of the altar. By
occasion of that he began, that he would say this: wherefore my most beloved
fly from the honoring of Idols. Afterward following he shows to what
sacrifice they ought to appertein: saying, I speak as unto wise men, judge what
I say, is not the cup of blessing which we bless a communication of the blood
of Christ? and is not the bread which we break a communication of the body of
our Lord? In this saying, after the word, altar, he has gelded out thus much:
Ideo quippe addidit carnaliter, vel secundum carnem, quia est Israel
spiritualiter vel secundum spiritum, qui veteres vmbras iam non sequitur, sed
eam consequentem quae his vmbris praecedentibus significata est, veritatem. For
therefore he added carnally or after ye flesh, because there is a Israel
spiritually or according to the spirit, which does not now follow the old
shadows but the truth following, which was signified by those shadows. All
this is left out of the very midst. From the end he cutteth of these words
following. Quia vnus panis and vnum corpus multi sumus: omnes enim de vno pane
participamus. Et propter hoc subiunxit, videte Israel secundum carnem, nonne
qui de sacrificijs manducant, socij sunt altaris? vt intelligerent ita se iam
socios esse corporis Christi quemadmodum illi socij sunt altaris. Because there
is one bread, and we being many are one body, for we are all partakers of one
bread. And for this cause he added: Behold Israel according to the flesh, are
not they which eat of the sacrifices fellows or partakers of the altar? That
they might understand, that they are now so fellows or partakers of the body
of Christ, as those are partakers of the altar. What can be said more plain,
for the spiritual manner of participation of the body of Christ? Except M.
Heskins will say, that the Jews were really, corporally, and substantially
partakers of the altar. And this is contained in the first book and Cap. 19.
And whereas M. Hesk. iangleth of the sacrifice mentioned in this place, hear
what sacrifice it may be, by Augustines own words in the 18. Chapter of the
same book. Sed nec laudibus nostris eget, etc. But neither has he need of our
praises, but as it is profitable for us and not for him, that we offer
sacrifice to God, and because the blood of Christ is shed for us in that
singular and only true sacrifice, therefore in those first times God commanded
the sacrifices of immaculate beasts to be offered unto him, to prophecy this
sacrifice by such significations: that as they were imaculate from faults of
their bodies, so he should be hoped to be offered for us, who alone was
immaculate from sins. Here the sacrifice of death is ye singular sacrifice, and
the only true sacrifice propitiatory of the Church, otherwise for the
sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, or for the sacrament to be called
improperly a sacrifice of the ancient fathers, I have often confessed before.
As for Damascenes authority, li. 4. Ca. 14. it is not worth the aunswering,
being a late writer, more then 100. years out of the compass, and full of
gross absurdities, and in the place by M. Hesk. alleged, denies that Basil
calls bread and wine (...), or exemplaria, exemplaries of the body and
blood of Christ after the consecration, which is an impudent lie: for before
the consecration they are no sacraments, and so no exemplars of the body and
blood of Christ: therefore if he called them exemplars, it must needs be when
they are sacraments, and yt is after consecration: but such lips such
lettyce, he is a sufficient author for M. Heskins, and yet he is directly
against transubstantiation. For he says: cum sit mos hominum edere panem and
bibere vinum, ijs rebus adiunxit suam diuinitatem: whereas it is the manner of
men to eat beead and drink wine, he has joined his divinity to these
things. In these words he acknowledges the bread and wine to remain in the
sacrament, and the divinity of Christ to be joined to them.

Hesk.
The nynteenth Chapter continues the exposition of the same text, by Isidore
and Oecumenius.

Fulk.
M. Hesk. has many friends in the lower house, as he has never a one in the
upper house that favors his bil: Yet Isidorus says little for him, but
rather against him. He cites him, lib. 1. offic. Cap. 18. Panis, etc. The
bread which we break, is the body of Christ, which says I am the bread of
life, which came down from heaven, and the wine is his blood, and this is it
that is written, I am the true vine. M. Hesk. says truly, that Isidore is the
rather to be credited, because he alleges the scripture: and therefore,
according to these two textes of scripture, he must be understood, but neither
of both these texts, is to be understood literally, but figuratively:
therefore his saying: the bread is the body, and the wine is his blood, must
be understood figuratively, and not literally, which M. Heskins perceiving,
would help him out by foysting in a place of Cyrillus in Joan. Annon
conuenienter, etc May it not be conveniently said, that his humanity is the
vine and we the branches, because we be all of the same nature? For the vine
and the branches be of the same nature: So both spiritually and corporally we
are the branches and Christ is the vine. In these words Cyrill reasons
against an Arrian, as is more at large declared in ye sixth Chapter of this
third book, yt would interpret this place only of the divinity of Christ, to
make him less then his father, as the vine is subject to the husbandman. But
Cyrill contendeth, yt it may well be understood also of his humanity, because
we are not only joined to the divinity of Christ, but also to his flesh,
which is testified unto us by the sacrament, wherein we are spiritually fedd
with the very body and blood of Christ, and so Christ is the vine both
spiritually and corporally, that is both after his godhead and after his
manhod. But Cyrillus would never deny that this saying: I am the true vine, is
a figurative speech, which is the matter in controversy between M. Hesk. and
us.

Oecumenius is alleged to as little purpose as Isidorus, in 1. Cor. 10. Poculum
vocat, etc. He calls the cupp of the blood of Christ, the cupp of blessing
which we bless, which having in our hands, we bless him which has given us
his blood. Here is never a word, but I will willingly subscribe unto it, and
yet M. Hesk. says, it is a common manner of speech, that the vessel is named
by the thing that it contains, he dare not say, it is a figurative speech,
lest while he would have the blood of Christ locally contained in the cupp, he
might be pressed with the figure in the word blood, which he cannot deny,
though he dissemble in the word cupp. In the end he braggeth of an evident and
stronger sentence of these writers, which when it comes, we shall examine it,
in the mean time, they have no voice in the upper house, and therefore we
fear not greatly what they say.

Hesk.
The twelfth Chapter proceeds upon the same text by Haime and Theophylact.

It were loss of time, to quarrel about the testimonies of these two
burgesses of the lower house. Fulk.
Master Heskins says, that there wants nothing in Theophylact, that is
necessary for a credible witness. At least, he should have excepted, that he
defended an heresy of the proceeding of the holy Ghost, against the church
of Rome in 3. Joan. As for his antiquity, which he makes to be before the
controversy was moved by Berengarius, although it were so, yet it were none
argument of his truth. But it seems, he was much about the time of
Berengarius Anno. 1049. Neither does Peter Martyr, whom Master Heskins
rayleth upon, so much esteem his authority, that he would wrest it to his
side, more then the very words of Theophylact would bear, as the learned that
read his works can testify.

Hesk.
The one and twentieth Chapter, proceeds yet upon the same text by Anselmus
and Bruno.

Fulk.
Let M. Hesk. make the most of those burgesses, the bill will pass never the
sooner, though all the lower house allowed it, so long as it cannot be received
into the higher house. The latter end contains a vain repetition of Cyprian
and Prospers sayings so often answered before, with a foolish insultation
against the proclaimer, as though he saw not these doctors, as well as M.
Heskins, who (I believe) never opened half the books of them, whose sayings
he has alleged, he has cited the most of them so corruptly, not only
falsifying them, to serve his turn, but also, when there was no advantage for
him, in his corruption.

Hesk.
The two and twentieth Chapter, ends the exposition of this text, by Dionyse
and Gagneius.

Two worshipful burgesses, unto whom he adds Bishop Fisher for the third,
Fulke.
after he has made a short rehearsal of all those writers, whose authority
he has used, and abused, to maintain this his exposition.

The three and twentieth Chapter, begins the exposition of this text:
Quoniam vnus panis, etc. Hesk.


The text is this: Because there is one bread, and we being many, are one
body, for we are all partakers of the same bread, Fulk.
and of the same cupp. First. M. Hesk. says, that the Apostle speaking of our
Communion with Christ, and with our selves, declares, that bread and the cup
be not taken for bare figures of the body and blood of Christ, in which
argument he fights with his own shadow, for we detest bare figures, as much
as gross transubstantiation. Secondly, he says, our communion with Christ,
is both spiritual and corporal: spiritual in baptism, and corporal in this
sacrament, or else this sacrament was instituted in vain, if we have none
other communion with Christ thereby, then spiritual, which is in baptism. I
answer his argument is naught, for the diverse dispensations of the same
grace, is testified and confirmed to us by diverse sacraments, our regeneration
by baptism, and our preservation, as by spiritual food, by ye Lords supper.
As for the superstitious bread that was given in Saint Augustines time to those
that were Catechumeni in steed of the sacrament, he does well to compare to
their popish holy bread, saving that there is great difference: for that was
given only to them that were not baptized, this altogether to them that are
baptized, and many that have received the other sacrament at their hands. But
where he has tossed his corporal communion to and fro, at last he adds a
condition of receiving worthily, so that he denies in effect, that he said
before, that by receipt of Christ's body, men are incorporate to Christ, and
forces the words of the Apostle to be many, and not all, which is false, for
he says all yt eat of this bread, though we be many yet are made one body.
Finally, in that the Apostle says, we all eat of one bread and drink of one
cupp, M. Hesk* says, that he took it not for bare material bread, for then it
were not true: as for his bare bread, let him keep to crome his pottage. But
how proves he, that Saint Paul spoke not of material bread, as the earthly
part of the sacrament? Forsooth all do not eat one bread: for the Greeks eat
leuened bread, and the Latins fine and unleavened bread. In the Popish church
is given to every communicant a sundry bread, in the scismaticall church,
every conuenticle has a sundry bread, and sometimes diverse breades, therefore
it is no material bread, that S. Paul speaks of, but the heavenly body of
Christ. If I were as froward a reasoner, as M. Hesk. I would ask him whether
the body of Christ be not a material body, because he makes material and
heavenly, diverse differences, as though he were an Eutychian. But admit that
by material bread he means bread properly so called, and the heavenly body
figuratively called bread, which he is loath to come to: what mad man would
understand that one bread which S. Paul says, to be distributed in every
communion to all that are present, and whereof every one takes part in token
of the communion or fellowship of many in one body, for all the kinds and
fashions of bread that are used in all communions in the world? For the
Apostles argument is grounded of ye similitude of bread, which of many grains
is made one bread, so we being many are made one body. And therefore in vain
does he rack these words of S. Paul, to the meaning of Barnarde, whose
authority we receive not, or to the words of Chrysostom, which he falsely
alleges to be in 1. Cor. 10. Hom. 17. whereas they be in ad Hebraeos. 10.
Hom. 7. which is nothing, but an objection of his: the place is wholly cited in
the first book and 37. Chapter, where you shall see how much it makes for M.
Hesk.

Hesk.
The 24. Chapter proceeds upon the same text by Chrysostom and S. Augustine.

Fulk.
Chrysostom upon this place is cited thus: Quoniam vnus panis and vnum corpus,
etc. For there is one bread and we being many are one body. For what do I
call (says he) a commemoration? we are the self same body. What is the
bread? the body of CHRIST, and what are they made which receive it? the body
of Christ, not many bodies but one body. For as the bread is made one of many
corns, so that the corns do not appear, and yet there are corns, but joined
together, so that they can not be discerned: so are we joined one with an
other, and with Christ. For thou art not nourished of one body, and he of an
other* but all of the same, therefore he added all we, which do partake of the
same bread. Of these words Master Heskins will have us to learn three things.
First, that communication is to be all of one body, which is true, so we
understand a spiritual kind of conjunction, by which we are not only joined
to Christ, as Chrysostom says, but also one to an other in one body.
Secondly, that it is the body of Christ, by the eating whereof we are made one
body, and this also is true, for we contend not for the eating of Christ's
body, but for the manner of eating.

The third note I think he makes, that by Chrysostomes judgment Saint Paul
meant not material bread, but the body of Christ, which is proved to be
false and absurd by these two reasons. First, if Saint Chrysostom by bread
meant not the sacramental bread, but the body of Christ, then his question
is nothing else in effect, but what is the body of Christ? And then he
answers, the body of Christ, which is very absurd and ridiculous. Secondly,
that he means material bread used in the sacrament, it is manifest in that
he says, it is made of many grains, but the body of Christ it not made of
grains, therefore he can not mean the body of Christ, but the sacramental
bread, which signifies the body of Christ. But here Master Heskins, as
though he were the first that espied the matter insulteth upon him that
translateth this part of Chrysostom, which was Franciscus Aretinus, whom
either of ignorance or of malice, he charge to have falsified Chrysostom,
and in steed of his words which according to the Greek are, What is the
bread? to have turned it, What does the bread signify? For my part, although
the Greek copies commonly extant in print, are not as he has translated it,
yet I suppose, yt he followed either some other copy that I have not seen,
peradventure printed, peraduentur^ written. For undoubtedly, although he were
ignorantly or wilfully deceived, yet the sense of Chrysostomes words must
needs be: what does the bread signify? which M. Heskins can not altogether
dissemble, but then he will have it not material bread, but the word, bread.
But how frivolous that is, I have showed before, for this word, Bread, is not
made of corns, but the material bread given in the sacrament. Neither does
the other word he cites, any thing help him. Non enim simpliciter etc. For
he has not simply given his body, but when the former nature of the flesh
formed out of the earth, by sin being made mortal, was forsaken of life, he
brought in an other (as I might so say) lump or leaven, that is, his flesh, in
nature truly the same, but free from sin and full of life, which he gives to
all, that they might be made partakers of it, that being nourished with it, and
the first that was dead being cast away, we might be joined together by this
living and immortal table. Lo (says M. Heskins) this is not a piece of dead
bread, but a living and immortal meat, he dare not say, table, as
Chrysostom does, for fear of a figure. But is he so blind, that he sees not
the partaking and nourishing of the new flesh to be such, as the casting away
of the old is? which no man doubts to be spiritual. But seeing he braggeth
so much of Chrysostom, and is such an enemy to signs and figures, let him
hear what he writes in Math. Hom. 83. Sed ficut in veteri, eodem h^c modo in
beneficio reliquit memoriam mysteriorum colligendo and hinc haereticorum ora
frenando. Nam quando dicunt vnde patet immolatum Christum fuisse, and alia
multa mysteriae? Haec enim adferentes, eorum ora consuimus. Si enim mortuus
Jesus non est, cuius symbolum ac signum hoc sacrificium est? Vides quancum ei
studium fuerit, vt semper memoria tentamus pro nobis ipsum mortuum fuisse. But
as in the old Paschal* even likewise here in this benefit he has left the
memory of the mysteries, by gathering, and hereof bridling the mouths of
heretics. For when they say, how is it known that Christ was sacrificed, and
many other mysteries? For when we bring forth those things, we so up their
mouths. For if Jesus be not dead, of whom is this sacrifice a token and sign?
Thou see how great care he had, that we might always keep in remembrance,
that he dyed for us.

There can nothing be spoken more plainly, to declare either what the sacrament
is, or for what end it was ordained, or finally, what manner of sacrifice it is
accounted of Chrysostom, and the ancient Fathers. But now follows S.
Augustine Ser. 2. Pasc. Quia Christus passus est etc. Because Christ has
suffered for us, he has commended unto us his body and his blood in this
sacrament: which also he has made our own selves. For we also are made his
body, and by his mercy we are that which we receive. I like this saying very
well, it makes altogether for the truth on our side. Yet M. Heskins notes,
that he says not, he has commended a figure or memorial, but his body and
his blood. I agree well, but he says, that he has commended his body and
blood in a sacrament, he does not say, the sacrament is his natural body
present under the forms of bread and wine corporally, that I may follow M.
Heskins negative argument. But especially let us note what he says, and not
what he says not. He says, we are the same that we receive, but we are not
his natural body after a corporal manner, therefore we receive not his
natural body after a corporal manner. The rest that follows to move us to
abide in this body of Christ, confirms the same. Dic mihi quid est etc. Tell
me what is it whereof thou live? Does thy spirit live by thy body, or thy
body by thy spirit? Every one that lives answers: I live by my spirit.
And he that can not answer this, I know not whether he lives. What answers
every one that lives? My body truly lives by my spirit. Will thou therefore
live by the spirit of Christ? Be thou in the body of Christ. For whether does
my body live of thy spirit? Mine lives of my spirit, and thine lives of thy
spirit. The body of Christ can not live but by the spirit of Christ. Hereof it
is, that the Apostle Paul expounding this bread: One bread (says he) we are
one body. All men see, that this writer speaks of our mystical and
spiritual conjunction with Christ, neither can M. Heskins him self make any
other thing of it.

Hesk.
The five and twentieth Chapter proceeds upon the same text by Damascene and
Haimo.

Master Heskins store is far spent, and therefore he makes much of the
remnants. Fulke.
Damascene and Haimo we have before diverse times excepted against, as unlawful
witnesses, and therefore we will spend no time in examining their sayings. But
whereas Master Heskins, makes great ado in this Chapter of our conjunction
with Christ, both in soul and body, we know it, and do rejoice in it, but
for any thing that he says, or all the Papists in the world, it is not
necessary, that Christ's body should be eaten with our mouth after a corporal
manner, that we may have conjunction with his body. For then infants which eat
not the sacrament, should want a necessary manner of the conjunction of their
bodies with the body of Christ, and so be out of hope of resurrection. The
places of Cyrill that he cites in 6. Joan. Cap. 14. be cited before, the one
Lib. 2. Cap. 17. the other Lib. 2. Cap. 34. where they are answered. Then
follows a discourse to prove that communion or fellowship ought not to be had
with heretics, which is very true, and therefore not to be had with
Papists, the greatest heretics that are. After the saying of Haimo
rehearsed, he is angry with us, that we will reject his authority, being as
he says, near a thousand years of age, but surely in some Chronicles that I
have read he is an English man, general or provincial of Friars preachers,
and I am sure there was never a Dominike Friar in the world one thousand years
after Christ, and they that make him oldest, make him to be 840. years since
Christ. The parcel of Chrysostom in 1. Cor. 10. Hom. 24. whereunto he would
compare his Haimo, is rehearsed more at large Lib. 1. Cap. 18. and that of
Cyrill Cap. 15. in 6. Joan.

Hesk.
The six and twentieth Chapter proceeds upon the same text, by S. Cyrill and
S. Thomas.

Hesk.
Cyrill, whom unfitly he matcheth with Thomas of Aquine, is cited in 17. Joan.
Cum trinitas vnum natura sit etc. For as much as the Trinity in nature is one,
let us consider how we our selves also among our selves corporally and with God
spiritually are one. The only begotten son coming out of the substance of
God his father, and possessing in his nature the whole father, was made flesh
according to the scriptures, and has unspeakably joined and united himself to
our nature. For he that is God by nature, is made man in deed, not Theophorus,
that is, having God in him by grace, as they that are ignorant of the mystery
do contend, but he is both very God and very man. So he has joined together in
him self that is one, those things which according to nature differ very much
among them selves, and has made us partakers of the divine nature. For the
communication of the spirit, and as I may say, the dwelling, was first in
Christ, and from him has perced into us, when being made man, he him self
anointed and sanctified his temple with his own spirit. The beginning
therefore, and the way by which we are made partakers of the holy spirit, and
are united to God, is the mystery of Christ. For we are all sanctified in him.
Therefore that he might unite every one beetwene our selves and God, (although
we be asunder both in body and soul) yet he has found out ae mean agreeable
to the counsel of his father and his own wisdom. For blessing the beleuers by
the mystical communion, by his body he has made us one body both with himself
and also among our selves. For who shall think them strange from this
natural union, which by the union of one holy body are united in one Christ?
For if we all eat one bread, we are all made one body. For Christ suffers
us not to be divided and disioyned. Therefore all the Church is made the body
of Christ, and every one of us the members of Christ after S. Paul, for being
conjoined to one Christ by his body, because we have received him in us which
is indivisible, our members be rather appropriated to him, then to us.
Concerning the unity of God the father with the son, of the two natures of
God and man in Christ, and of the unity of the members of Christ with their
head, which M. Hesk. notes out of this place of Cyril, it shall be no need to
speak, seeing there is no controversy between us, but that these three
unities be there. Only of the manner how we be united, is the difference. We are
united to ye body of Christ, but whether by eating the same with our mouths,
or by faith, through the unspeakable working of Gods spirit, is all the
question. All the hold, he catches of this place, is, that Cyrill calls it
a natural union, as he does also in the same place a corporal union, by which
he means, not that we are united after a natural manner, or after a bodily
manner, but that we are united unto the very humane nature and body of Christ,
but after an heavenly and divine manner. For thus it follows in the same
place, I mean in Lib. 11. Cap. 26. of Cyrill upon the 17. of John, which M.
Hesk. note book belike, did not serve him to set down: Quod autem corporalis
haec vnio ad Christum, participatione carnis eius acquiritur, ipse rursus
Paulus de mysterio pietatis differens testatur: quod alijs inquit
generationibus non est agnitum filijs hominum, sicut nunc reuelatum est sanctis
apostolis eius and prophetis in spiritu, esse gentes cohaeredes, and
concorpores, and comparticipes promissionis in Christo. Si autem omnes inter
nos in Christo vnum sumus corpus, nec inter nos solum, veruum etiam cum eo, qui
per carnem suam ad nos transiuit, quomodo vniuersi and inter nos, and in
Christ, vnum non erimus? And that this corporal union unto Christ, is obtained
by participation of his flesh, Paul him self again does testify, disputing
of the mystery of godliness: which in other ages (says he) was not known to
the sons of men, as it is now revealed to his holy Apostles and Prophets in
the spirit, that the Gentiles should be coheires and of the same body and
compartners of the promise in Christ. If then we be all one body among our
selves in Christ, and not among our selves only, but also with him which by
his flesh is come unto us, how shall we not be all one, both among our selves
and in Christ? This place of Paul by which the faithful of the Gentiles are
said to be made one body with the faithful of the Jews, speaks nothing of
eating of the body of Christ in the sacrament, but of the spiritual
incorporation by faith in the promises of the Gospel, now made common unto
the Gentiles with the Jews, whereof the sacrament is not a bare sign, but a
lively and effectual seal and confirmation.

Moreover, the same Cyrill in the same book Cap. 22. in 17. Ioa^, writes
thus: Nihil ergo mali accidere vobis potest, ai^, si carne alfue^o, cum
deitatis incae potestas, que vos huc vsque seruauit, in posterum etiam
seruatura fit. Hc non ideo dicimus, quia Domini corpu^ non magni aestimemus,
sed quia mirabiles hos effectus gloriae deno^is attribuendos pat amus. Nam
ipsum etiam Domini corpus coniu^cti virtue verbi sanctificatur, and ad
benedictionem mystica^ ade^ actiuum fit, vt possit sanctificationem nobis fuam
im^^ttere. Therefore (says he) none evil can happen unto you, though I shall
be absent in flesh, seeing the power of my Godhead, which has saved you
hitherto, shall also preserve you hereafter. We speak not these things
therefore, because we do not greatly esteem the Lords body, but because we
think that these marvelous effects are to be attributed to the glory of his
Godhead. For even the same body of our Lord is sanctified by the virtue of the
Word, that is joined with it, and made so effectual unto the mystical
blessing, that it can send in to us the sanctification thereof.

Note here gentle reader, that the flesh of Christ though it be absent, yet by
the divine power is able to make us partakers of his sanctification. Absent I
say, as concerning local presence, after which it is in heaven, and not upon
earth, yet has it these marvelous effects by the glory of his Godhead, as
Cyrill says, that joining us unto it by faith, in the participation of the
holy mysteries, it feeds us unto eternal life. The place of Cyrill in 15.
Joan. Cap. is contained and answered in the 6. Chapter of this third book,
where you shall see that the proclamer denies nothing, that Cyrill in that
place affirms. As for the saying of Thomas of Aquine, one of the
scholasticall sophisters in Divinity, I pass over, he is cock sure of M.
Heskins side.

The seven and twentieth Chapter proceeds upon the same text, by Euthym. and
Hugo. Hesk.


Concerning the antiquity of Euthymius, Fulke.
I have often testified before, that he is no Lord of the higher house.
Notwithstanding, because he borrows most of his matter of the elder writers,
I will set down his words which make nothing for M. Heskins purpose. In Math.
6. Quemadmod^m etc. As bread does comfort, so the body of Christ does the same
and more also: it sanctifies both the body and the soul. And as wine does
make glad, so the blood of Christ does the same, and moreover is made a
defense. And if all we that are faithful do partake of one body and blood, we
are all one by the participation of these mysteries, both all in Christ, and
Christ in us all. He that eats (says he) my flesh, and drinks my blood,
abides in me, and I in him. For the word^ truly by assumption is united to
the flesh: and this flesh again is united to us by participation. This place
seems to M. Heskins to be very plain, and so think I: for there is nothing
in it but I grant to be true, being rightly understood. M. Heskins says, he
expounds the bread and the cup, to be the body and blood of Christ, or
else the text were cleerer then the exposition, in which fantasy he pleases
him self exceedingly. We grant, that the bread and cup in S. Paul, signify
the body and blood of Christ, which we receive in the sacrament, after a
spiritual and divine manner. Thirdly he notes, that we are united by
participation into the flesh of Christ, which he says we deny, but he lies
impudently, for we constantly affirm, that except we be partakers of the flesh
and blood of Christ, we can not be partakers of eternal life. But that this
partaking is after a corporal manner, or only in the sacrament, that we deny.
And that also does Euthymius deny in effect, where he teaches, that whereas we
are united to Christ, and Christ to us, so are we united together. but this
is after a spiritual and ineffable manner: so is the other. We grant yt Cyril
says, we could not be partakers of eternal life except we were joined to ye
body of natural or true life, that is, to the body of Christ, in Joan. 6. li.
15. but we are joined otherwise then by ye Lords supper, or else no infants
should be partakers of eternal life. Finally where M. Hes. affirms, yt the
words of Euthymius by no engine* can be wrested from his carnal manner of
presence, because he speaks before of the transmutation of the bread and wine
into the body and blood of Christ, I answer, he speaks of no such
transmutation, but yt we do grant the same, namely a sacramental change, such
as is of the water in baptism, of which also he takes a similitude. Siquidem
in baptismo sensibilis quidem est aqua: sed donum intelligibile, est
regeneratio. Quonia^ enim in nobis anima co^serta est corpori, in sensibilibus
intelligibilia tradidit nobis Deus. For in baptism also, ye water truly is a
sensible thing, but regeneration is an intelligible gift. For because our soul
is enclosed in our body, God has delivered unto us intelligible things in
sensible things. The water in baptism is not changed into regeneration, nor
regeneration included in the water: and speaking of the same transmutation, he
says, the bread and wine are transmuted into the body and blood of Christ,
and into the grace of them. But the substance of ye bread and wine is not
turned into the grace of the body and blood, therefore neither into the body and
blood. And this is the great help he has out of Euthymius. As for Cardinal
Hugh, I will not trouble ye reader with his saying, whose authority I utterly
refuse. In the latter end of this Chap. as he uses to deal, when he has such
single witnesses in hand, he patcheth in a piece or two of his old stuff,
served before, as that of Dionyse, falsely called the Areopagite, Eccle.
Hierach. 1. part. cap. 3 answered before. Li. 1. Ca. 35. That of Ambrose de
mysterijs initiandis Cap. 9. lib. 2. cap. 10. and ser. 2. and else where
oftentimes. He names also Irenaeus Lib. 5. aduers. haer. but he sets not
down his words.

The eight and twentieth Chapter proceeds upon the same text by Oecumenius
and Anselmus. Hesk.


In the beginning of this Chapter, he glories vainly of the multitude of
writers of his side, Fulk.
but then they must be such as he names in ye title that is, late writers,
although Oecumenius has nothing yt makes strongly for him, and the place yt
is here alleged in 1. Cor. 10. is in a manner the very words of Chry. which we
had even now in ye cap. 24. Vnus panis etc. We are one bread and one body. For
we are al partakers of one bread. He adds a reason how we are made the body
of Christ. For what is the bread (says he)? forsooth the body of Christ. And
what are they made which partake it? Surely the body of Christ. For that
makes us also partakers of the body of Christ. For one bread, is Christ.
For of many grains (as for example we may speak) one bread is made, and we
being many partaking of that one, are made one body of Christ: For because our
old flesh is corrupted under sin, we had need of a new flesh.

I had not thought to have noted Master Heskins falsification in this place,
translating Corpus nempe Christi, Verily the body of Christ, but that he
would delude the ignorant reader afterward, and say, if it be verily the
body of Christ, it is not figuratively his body, as though nempe were the same
that vere or proprie. But herein I will leave him to children in the Grammar
school to be derided, and boys that never read three leaves of Aristotle's
Logike in the Universities. The like folly he shows in preventing our
answer, that Oecumenius speaks of the mystical body of Christ, because
he speaks first of the bread that we receive, and after of us that receive
it. But does he not say, we are made the same body, that we receive?
Wherefore I will thus infer, we are made the same body that we receive, but
we are not made the same natural body corporally, therefore we receive not
the same natural body corporally.

Now let Master Heskins make as much as he can of Oecumenius authority, and
ray^e as long as he list against the disagreement of Luther, Zuinglius, and
Oecolampadius, they shall be found to agree better where they most disagree,
then the Pope and al his clergy agree with Christ and the truth, when they
all agree to persecute and oppress. And as concerning these properties of a
true Priest, that he gathers out of Malachie, the law of truth in their
mouth, peace and equity in their ways, and conversion of men from iniquity,
notwithstanding Master Heskins slanderous pen, shall be found in them and in all
the true preachers of our church in the judgment of Christ, when the Pope and
his Popish shauelings shall be condemned of false doctrine, cruelty, and
abominable life in them selves, and teaching the doctrine of licentiousness
unto others, I mean the doctrine of merits, satisfactions, purgatory,
pardoning, and such like. The authority of Anselme a professed enemy of
Berengarius I resign to M. Hes. with ten thousand such as he is, not
comparable in credit with one of the higher house, who only are me^te to
determine this controversy of the manner of Christ's presence in the sacrament.

The nine and twentieth Chapter treats of the same text by Theophylact and
Dionyse, and ends with Remigius. Hesk.


The last couple, says M. Heskins, make up a full Iewrie, Fulke.
to pass for life and death, but we may lawfully challenge the array, being
enpanelled by M. Heskins a partial shirif, and also we have excepted against
many of the Iewrors, and now do except against both these, namely Theophylact
of Bulgarie, as a late writer and an heretic, and Dionyse of the
Charterhouse, as one of the feeid and fed servants of ye Pope. Although
Theophylact being reasonably expounded, according to his own sayings in other
places, says nothing directly against us. But in default of these, here is a
third man taken, belike de circunstantibus, and that is Remigius, whom M.
Heskins to make him a lawful Iewrie man, affirms to have lived Anno Dom.
511. and so within the compass of ye challenge. But if he deal so, we must
have a writ against him de identitate nominis. For as we find that there was
in deed one Remigius bishop of Remes about that time, so likewise we find
that the author of this commentary in 1. Cor. 10. was bishop Antisiodocensis
almost 400. years after, namely about the year of Christ. 894. Notwithstanding,
because his words are almost the same which are before ascribed to Hierom Cap.
17. I will not spare to set them down. Calix benedictionis etc. The cup of
blessing which we bless, is it not the communication of the blood of Christ?
Therefore he named the cup first, because he would afterward treat more at
large of the bread. It is called the cup of blessing which is blessed of the
priests in the altar, and the cup it self is called a communication as it
were a participation, because all do communicate of it, and receive part of
the Lords blood which it contains in it. And the bread which we break in
the altar, is it not the participation of the Lords body? Surely it is first
consecrated and blessed of the priests, and of the holy Ghost, and afterward
is broken, when as now although bread be seen, in truth it is the body of
Christ* Of which bread whosoever do communicate they do eat the body of
Christ. Because we being many, which eat that bread, are one bread,
(understand of Christ,) and one body of Christ. Master Heskins notes that
the cup conteyneth the blood of Christ, which speech may be allowed, because
the cup contains the wine, which is the blood of Christ after a certain
manner, as S. Augustine says. Secondly that though it seem bread, yet indeed
is ye body of Christ, he says Lices panis videatur, Though bread be seen, yet
Christ his body is present, after a spiritual and incomprehensible manner.
But M. Heskins will note, that all men did drink the blood of Christ out of
the cup. And that he says, the bread is broken, when it is the body of
Christ, by which words he denies transubstantiation, as in the former, the
communion under one kind. Finally in affirming us that eat that bread, to be
the same body of Christ which we do eat: he does clearly overthrow the
carnal manner of eating Christ's body in the sacrament, as he does establish
the spiritual manner of conjunction, that we have with the body and blood of
Christ.

Hesk.
The thirtieth Chapter, begins the exposition of this text, Ye cannot drink
of the cup of our Lord and of the cup of devils, by S. Cyprian, and
Chrysostom.

Fulke.
This text says M. Heskins is a conclusion, therefore it must include
sacrifice, that was in the premises. But I deny that sacrifice was any of the
terms in the premises, of that argument whereof this is the conclusion,
although it were named in the sacrifices of the Jews, and of the Gentiles,
even as Israel, Gentiles, altar, temple, were likewise named, and yet not to be
found in this conclusion, because that although they were spoken of in the
discourse, yet they were not in the premises of this argument, for this it is:
Who so ever is made one body with CHRIST can not drink of the Lords cup
and of the cup of Devils: but you are made one body with Christ: therefore
you cannot drink the Lords cup, and the cup of devils. Now therefore to
Saint Cyprian Ser. 5. de Lapsis. Contra Euangelij vigorem, etc. Against the
force of the Gospel, against the law of our Lord and of God, by the rashness
of some, communication is set as liberty to them that are unprovided. Which is
a vain and a false peace, perilous to the giuers, and nothing profitable to
the receivers. They seek not the patience of health, nor the true medicine by
satisfaction. Repentance is shut up from sinners. The remembrance of a most
grievous and extreme offense is taken away. The wounds of them that are in
dying are covered, and the deadly strype in the deep and inward bowels is
hid with dissembled sorrow.

Retourning from the altar of the devil with hands filthye and defiled with
the greasy savor, they come to the holy of the LORD. Almost yet belching
out the deadly meats of Idols, with their laws yet breathing out their
wickedness, and sauouring of their deadly infections, they set upon the Lords
body: whereas the Scripture comes against them and cries, and says:
Every clean person shall eat the flesh: But if any eat of the flesh of
the wholesome sacrifice which is the Lords, having his uncleanness upon
him, the same soul shall perish from among his people. The Apostle also
witnesses and says: ye can not drink the cup of the Lord, and the cup
of Devils: Ye can not communicate of the table of the Lord, and the table of
devils. In this sermon Cyprian reproved those men which had admitted to the
communion, such persons as had sacrificed to idols, before they were thoroughly
penitent, and had made satisfaction to the Church which was offended by them,
contrary to the order of good discipline. Now says Master Heskins he would
not so sharply have reproved them, if the thing they received, had been but a
piece of bread. A wise reason. What if a man at that time had come irreverently
to baptism, had it not ben an horrible offense, although the outward element
of baptism be nothing but a little water? Although when we say* that bread is a
part of the sacrament, we never teach, that it is but a piece of bread,
neither do we say that baptism is nothing but water. They that irreverently
rush unto the Lords sacraments are punished for their presu^ption, not in
respect of that they receive, whether it be bread, wine, or water, but for that
they receive it unworthily. Another thing he notes out of Cyprian, is, that
Christ's body is a sacrifice, because he alleges the scripture of Leuiticus,
which is spoken of a sacrifice, as though the scripture could not be rightly
applied, that spoke of holy meat vnreuerenely received, unto the vnreuerent
receiving of the sacrament, except the sacrament were a sacrifice: this is out
of all compass of reason. He might as well say, the sacrament is a burnt
offering, because it is compared to a sacrifice which is a burnt offering, and an
hundredth other absurdities may likewise be inferred, which for reverence of the
blessed mysteries, I spare to name. But it follows in Cyprian immediately,
where Master Heskins leaves: Idem conu^^nacibus and pertinacibus comminatur
and detr^^iciat dicens: quicunque, ederis panem aut biberit calicem Domini
indigne, reus eri^ corporis and sanguinis Domini. Spretis his omnibus atque
contemp^is, vis infertur corpori cius and sanguini eiut. Plus modo in Dominum
manibus atque ore delinquunt, quam cum Dominum neg^uerunt. The same Paul
threateneth and denounces to ye obstinate and froward, saying: whosoever shall
eat of ye bread and drink of the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of
the body and blood of the Lord. All these sayings being despised and
contemned, violence is done unto his body and his blood. They do more offend
against the Lord now with their hands and their mouth, then when they denied
the Lord. These words declare that Cyprian calls not the bread and cup the
body and blood of Christ* as M. Hesk. would have it, properly, but
figuratively: for no force or violence can be done to the body and blood of
Christ, but to the sacrament thereof there may, and Christ is injured in the
contempt of his mysteries: as the Prince in contumelious breaking and abusing
of the broad seal by rebellious subjects, though he suffer no violence in his
own person. Chrysostom is cited Ho. 11. ad Populum Antiochen. Quomodo sacru^
videbimus pascha? etc. How shall we see the holy passover? How shall we
receive the holy sacrifice? How shall we communicate in these marvelous
mysteries with that tongue, with which we have contemned the law of God? With
that ^ong, with which we have defiled our soul? For if no man durst take the
Kings purple robe with foul hands: how shall we receive the Lords body with a
defiled tongue? For swearing is of the wicked, sacrifice is of the Lord.
Therefore what communication is there between light and darkness, what
agreement between Christ and Beliall? Here says M. Hesk. by the excellent
titles he gives the sacrament, is proved the real presence. The holy
sacrifice, wonderful mysteries, the body of our Lord, light, and Christ
himself. But one of these titles is manifestly improper and figurative, namely
that of light, and why may not ye rest be so likewise? Baptism has honorable
titles, yet is there no transubstantiation therein. The second note, to prove
the real presence is, that saying: how shall we with defiled tongue receive the
Lords body? Here the body is received with the mouth and tongue, therefore
corporally. But if I should say, that Chrysostom by this interogation denies,
that it can be received with a defiled tongue, where were the strength of this
place: but I will grant, that he uses so to speak, but improperly, that the
hand and the tongue receive the body and blood of Christ, and yet means no
carnal manner of presence, as Ho. 21. ad Pop. Antioch. Cogita quid manu capias,
and ipsam ab omni auaritia and rapina liberam conserua. Consider what thou
receiuest with thy hand, and keep it free from all covetousness and
extortion. This peradventure pleases M. Heskins. But it follows soon after.
Etenim perniciosum est tam tremendis ministra^^em mysterijs linguam, and
sanguine tal purpuratam, and factam aureum gladium, ad cornicia and contumelias
and scurrilitates transfer. For it is a pernicious thing to transfer that
tongue which ministers unto so reverend mysteries, and is died purple with such
blood, and made a golden sword, unto railing, reuiling, and scoffing. Here the
tongue does not only receive ye blood of Christ, but also is made red or purple
with it, and is made by it a golden sword. If these be not figurative speeches,
they be monstrous absurdities. And yet again in the same place: Sed rursum
aduertens quod post manus and li^guam, cor suscipit horrendum illud mysteri^en,
ne vnquam in proximu^ sumas dolum sed mense^ tuam ab omni malitia mund^m
conserua: fic and oculos and aures munire poteris. But again considering that
after thy hands and thy tongue, thy heart receives that fearful mystery,
never devise any craft against thy neighbor, but keep thy mind clean from
all malice, so may thou defend thine eyes and thine ears. And the like
speeches he has of the eyes and the ears. By which it is evident, that
although he speak figuratively in the way of exhortation, yet he meaned not to
teach any other, but a spiritual manner of receiving the body of Christ with
the heart, although the eyes, ears, hands, and tongue. were occupied about the
sacrament thereof After M. Heskins notes, that Chrysostom in the place by him
cited, calls the sacrament a sacrifice: so does he an hundredth times
elsewhere, but yt proves not a propitiatory sacrifice, but rather a memory of
Christ's only sacrifice as he teaches himself In Ep. ad Heb. Ca. 10. Hom. 17.
And here he takes upon him to refute the rule of Cranmer, or of him that set
forth ye book in his name, as though that learned father, was not able to set
forth his book himself as well, as this blind buzzard Heskins, who has
nothing in effect, but yt he has stolen out of Gardiners M. Constantius. But
let us hear this wise refutation. A sacrifice of thanksgiving, says he, is
not received of us, but given from us to God. No more is any sacrifice in yt it
is a sacrifice, O ye unlearned confuter of so learned a fathers rule, yet yt
which is received is called a sacrifice in respect yt it has been offered. So
was ye sacrament of the old writers called a sacrifice improperly, because it
was a memorial of ye only sacrifice of Christ once offered by him self, and in
respect of yt action of ye administration, which is a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, and therefore of them was called Eucharistia, a thanksgiving.
Another reason to prove it no gratulatorie sacrifice, is, because he calls it
a wonderful sacrifice, but thanksgiving is but an ordinary duty. Shore up
your drousie eyes M. Hesk. and you shall see, he calls it a holy sacrifice,
and so the sacrifice of thanksgiving. He calls it not a wonderful sacrifice,
but a wonderful mystery, except mystery and sacrifice be al one with you, but
if he had called it a wonderful sacrifice, as else where he calls it a
fearful or terrible sacrifice, does yt prove it to be no sacrifice of
thanksgiving? He calls it fearful, terrible, reverend, wonderful, in
respect of ye divine working of our savior Christ, to make us partakers of his
bodi and blood, by receiving these outward creatures worthily, according to his
appointment, as for the names I have answered before, they prove no sacrifice
propitiatory. But now at length M. Hes. (having builded on this place of Paul
and Chrysostom. which deny ye partaking of ye body and blood of Christ to them
that are made partakers of ye table of devils, or otherwise be wicked men)
gives S. Paul and Chryso. a new interpretation. S. Paul (says he) does not
absolutely deny, but conditionally, saying, yt men cannot be partakers of ye
Lords table, and of ye table of devils: that is, yt they ought not, so yt ye
cannot, and ye ought not, is al one with M. Hesk. for ye cannot (says he) if
you do well. But thinks this gross expositor, to escape with this gloss? I
ask him whether light and darkness can agree, whether Christ and Belial can
have any fellowship? Be these negatiues absolutely or co^ditionally? Is it now
otherwise to be taken but light and darkness ought not to agree, or cannot
agree, if they do well? and Christ and Belial ought not to agree, or cannot
agree if they do well? O blind interpreter, or rather shameful peruerter of
the straight ways of the Lord. You see in despite of the devil, the Popish
doctrine of the wicked receiving Christ, manifestly borne down by the
authority of Gods word, and of the ancient fathers, and consequently
transubstantiation laid in the dust. And yet this arrogant expounder, as
though he had found out a sword to cut in sunder this Gordian knot, with
like madness runs at Origens saying, which he will not vouchsafe to quote,
least any man should read it to his shame, and overthrow of his popish
transsubstantiation. But it is written in Math. cap. 15. Multa p^rro etc. Many
things may be said also of the WORD him self, that was made flesh and very
meat, whom whosoever shall eat, shall love for ever, which no evil man can
eat. First, as he has learned of brazen faced Gardener, he will not
certainly admit that work to be Origens, which is an impudent shifte, when
none of them can allege any reason, why they should doubt of it: Secondly,
he heweth at it with his leaden sword, saying: an evil man can not eat of it
to his profit, but yet he may eat of it. But it follows in Origin
immediately: Etenim si fieri posset, vt qui malus adhuc perseuerat, edat verbum
factum carnem, cum sit verbum and panis viuus, nequaquam scriptum fuisset:
Quisquis ederic panem hunc viuet in aeternum. For, if it were possible, that
he which as yet continues an evil man, should eat the word made flesh:
seeing he is the word and the bread of life, it had not been written,
whosoever shall eat of this bread shall live for ever. Here Origin says,
that no man can eat him, but he must take profit by him, so the knott is too
hard for Master Heskins wodden dagger to cleave a sunder. For as he himself
concludes, betwixt God and Beliall is none agreement, neither can Dagon stand
in the presence of the Arc, and much less wickedness where Christ is
received, for he is the bread of life rejected of the wicked, but cause of
eternal life to all that receive him.

Hesk.
The one and thirtieth Chapter, ends the exposition of this text by
Theophylact and Anselmus.

I had thought to have said nothing of these late writers, Fulk.
but that Master Heskins will make Theophylact so ancient, as to be three
hundred years elder then Anselmus, which was Archbishop of Caunterburie almost
500. years ago, so that Theophylact should be near 800. years old. But to
confute his impudency: First, you must understand, that the Bulgars, of whom
he was Bishop, were not converted to the faith before the year of Christ 865.
and after their first conversion, they agreed with the church of Rome, but in
process of time, they forsook the church of Rome, and joined with the church
of Constantinople. After this, Theophylact was there bishop, and although the
histories be not certain what time he lived: yet it must needs be gathered,
to be when the contention was hot between the Greeks and Romans, about the
proceeding of the holy Ghost, because that in his exposition upon the third
of John, he inueygheth against the church of Rome, defending the Greeks about
the proceeding of the holy Ghost, and this was about the year of Christ 1049
when Berengarius lived and reproved the church of Rome for the carnal presence
that then or not long before was begone to be grossly defended. But the chief
matter he gathers out of Anselme is, that he expounds the table in Saint
Paul, for an altar, whereupon Master Heskins will make a discourse of
Altares, and prove the use of them, even from the Apostles times: And first he
begins with Dionyse the disciple of S. Paul, Eccl. Hier. part. 3. Cap. 3.
Sed and illud, etc. But behold that more reverently, that after the venerable
signs are laid upon the altar, by which Christ is signified and received,
there is present by and by a description of saints or holy ones. It is meet
that a false matter should begin with a counterfeit doctor. I have showed
before, that neither Eusebius, nor Hierome, nor Gennadius knew any such
Dionyse, by the space of five or six hundredth years after Christ; therefore
his testimony must be so many hundred years short of the Apostles times. But
M. Hesk. will not see that his Dionyse calls the sacrament signs, by which
Christ is signified and received. He can see nothing but the altar in yt
saying. Next to Dionyse, he brings Ambrosius in orat. prpar^t. ad missa^t, a
mere counterfeit, as Erasmus has observed, and therefore worthy of none
answer. But before I proceed to the next author, that he cites for the
altar, which is Augustine, I will set down a manifest disproofe of M. Hesk.
proof, that altars have been used since the Apostles times. First, it is
certain, that our savior Christ did institute this sacrament at a table, and
at no altar, whereas if it had been a sacrifice, he would have caused an altar
to be made, which had been soon done. Secondly, the Apostle Paul calls it
the Lords table, and never calls it an altar. M. Hesk. alleges for the
sacrament out of the acts of the Apostles, that the disciples continued in
breaking of bread in every house, but I suppose he will not dream, that there
was an altar in every house. In the primitive church, when ye people met in
corners and secret places, no man of reason will imagine they had altars set up
in those places. Nay it is certain by Origin and Amobius, they had neither
altars, nor temples, nor images. Origin. Cont. Cel lib. 4. reports that ye
heathen man Celsus obiecteth against us, yt we have no images nor altars, nor
temples. The like is in Arnobius. lib. 2. against yt Gentiles, who declares yt
they acuse us, that we have neither temples, nor images, nor altars. By these
ancient writers it appears, yt it was a common objection of the heathen men,
against the Christians, yt they had no altars. The like shows Tertullian ad
Scapulam. Itaque and sacrificamus pro salute imperatoris sed Deo nostro and
ips^ut sed, quo modo prcepit Deus, pura prece. Therefore we also do offer
sacrifice for the health of the Emperor, but unto our God and his only, but,
as God has commanded, with pure prayer. These words of Tertullian declare,
yt the Christians had neither altar nor sacrifice, other then prayer. In
Cyprians time also it was a table de cana Dom. Inter Dominicae mensae
cormuines, animalis homo non recipitur: the natural man is not received among
the guestes of the Lords table.

And although of diverse of the old writers, it was called an altar, yet was
it so called improperly, even as the communion was called of them a sacrifice,
for still it was a table and nothing like the popish altars, which are of stone
and set against a wall, for they stood in the midst of the church, so that ye
people came round about them as appears by Eusebius. lib. 10. ca. 4. ad
Paulin. Tyr. Episc. Absoluto templo and sedibus excelsissimis ad honorem
praesidentium, and subsellijs ordine collocatis, ornato, and post omnia sancto
sanctorum, videlicet altari in medio constituto: The temple being finished, and
garnished with high seats for ye honor of ye governors, and lower seats
placed in order, and after all the holy of holies, that is to say the altar
placed in the midst. The like has Augustine de verb. Dom. Ser. Joan. Ser.
46. de eo quod scrip. qui manduc. Christus quotidie pascit: Mensa ipsiut est
illa in medio constituta. Quid causae est o audientes, vt mensam videatis and
ad epulat non accedatis. Christ feeds daily that is his table, which is
placed in the midst. What is the cause O you hearers, that seeing the table
ye came not to the feast. He speaks to the nouices or Catechumeni.

Gregorius Nazianzenus calls it a table ad imperator. Irasceus: showing what
intercessors he would bring to pacify the Princes displeasure, as the death,
passion, resurrection, and ascension of Christ. Aut etiam mensam hanc ad qua^
communiter accedimus, and meae sabutis rypos, quos eodem celebro ore quo nunc
fungor legatione sacram dico and ad superna ducentem mystagogiam: or else even
this table, unto which we come all together, and the figures of my salvation,
which I do celebrate with the same mouth, with which now I execute this
Embassage of entreaty, I mean yt holy mystery, leading to high things.
Beside the table in the saying of Greg mark what terms he uses in describing
the sacrament, he calls it the types or figures of his salvation, and a holy
and heavenly mystagogie. Chrysostom. most commonly calls it a table, for
example, Hom, 45. in Joan. A mensa hac prodit fons qui fluuios spirituales
diffundit. From this table comes a spring, which powers forth spiritual
rivers. And in a great number of places, he calls it the holy table. But
now we must hear Master Hesk. citing Augustine. lib. 9. Conf. Ca. 13. Illa
imminente, etc. She, the day of her death being as hand, was not careful to
have her body sump^uously buried, or to be spiced with spices, or coueted to
have a solemn monument, or to be buried in her own country. These things she
did not command us, but only she desired, that remembrance of her should be
made as thine altar, which she without any days intermission, had served.
From whence she knew, the holy sacrifice to be dispensed, by which the hand
writing was put out that was against us. In these words S. Augustine calls
it an altar, reporting the superstitious request of his mother, according to
the error of that time. We make no question, but that they did call the table
an altar, but we affirm, they called it so improperly, even as they did call
the sacrament a sacrifice, and the minister a priest, and the deacon a Leuite.
And as they called it an altar, so there is few or none, but called it a
table also, and so does Augustine often times, as de cultur. agr. Dom. Mensa
sponsi tui panem habet integrum and poculum sanctum. The table of thy spouse,
has whole bread and a holy cupp. And again, Contra liter. Petilian. lib. 2.
Chap. 47. Non dicunt ifta nisi qui de Mensa Domini vitai^ su^ru^nt sicut
Petrus, non iudicium sicut Judas. None say these things, but such as receive
life at the Lords table, as Peter, and not damnation, as Judas. But Master
Heskins has another place out of Saint Augustine, wherein he calls it the
altar of God: Sermon ad infant. Hoc, quod videris in alcari Dei, etc. This
that you see on the altar of God, you saw the night last past. But what it
was, what i^ mean^ of how great a thing it contained the sacrament, you have
not yet heard: therefore, that which you saw is bread and a cup, which thing
also your eyes do tell you* But that your faith requires to be instructed.
The bread is the body of Christ, the cup is his blood. Our Lord Jesus
Christ, we know whence he received flesh, (...) of the virgin Marie. He
was suckled being an infant, he was norished, he grew, he came to the age of a
young man, he suffered persecution of the Jews, he was hanged on the tree, he
was killed on the tree, he was buried, he rose again the third day. That day
he would ascend into heaven, thither he lifted up his body, from whence he
shall come to judge both the quick and the dead. There he is now sitting at
the right hand of the father. How is the bread his body? and the cup, or
that which the cupp contains, how is it his blood? Brethren, these things are
therefore called sacraments, because one thing in them it seen, another thing
is understood, that which is seen has a corporal show, that which is
understood, has a spiritual fruit. I doubt not but every Christian man that
reads this saying, understands it, to be very clear, against both
transubstantiation, and the carnal presence, as is showed before lib. 2. Cap.
37. which that Master Heskins might obscure, he makes a smoke, to bleare men's
eyes, that they might not see any thing therein, but the altar. Wherefore he
rayleth like him self against the proclaimer, charging him both to have
falsified S. Augustine, and also truncately to have alleged him, because
(says he) he cites him thus: Quod videtis in mensa, panis est: that ye see in
the table is bread: whereas Augustine says in the altar, and not on the
table, which he durst not name for shame. But with what shame Heskins can so
revile and slander that godly learned father, you shall see by that which
follows immediately, where he leaves in Augustine, and judge whether Master
Heskins left out the words for shame, or else because his note book served
him no further. Corpus ergo Christi si vis intelligere, audi Apostolum dicentem
fidelibus: vos estis corpus Christi and membra. Si ergo vot estis corpus
Christi and membra, mysterium vestrum in MENSA positum est: Mysteria Domini
accipitis ad quod estis, Amen respondetis, and respondendo subscribitis. Audis
ergo corpus Christi and respondes Amen. Esto membrum corporis Christi vt verum
sit Amen tuum: quare ergo in pane? nihil hic de nostro affiramus: Ipsum
Apostolum item audiamus. Cum ergo de isto sacramento loqueretur, ait, vnus
panis, vnum corpus multi sumus. Intelligite and gaudete.

Therefore, if thou will understand the body of Christ, hear the Apostle
saying to the faithful: you are the body of Christ and his members. If you
therefore be the body of Christ and his members, your mystery is set on the
TABLE: you receive the Lords mystery, whereunto you are, you answer, Amen:
and in aunswering, you subscribe. Thou hear therefore the body of Christ and
thou aunswerest, Amen: be thou a member of the body of Christ, that thy Amen
may be true. Why then in bread? let us here bring nothing of our own. Let us
likewise hear the Apostle. Therefore, when he spoke of this sacrament, he
says: There is one bread, we being many are one body: understand ye and
rejoice ye. I trust you see by this, that the altar he spoke of, was a table,
as you see also how the sacrament is the body of Christ.

But lest he might replye, that the table was an altar, I must further allege
Saint Augustines authority, that it was a table, for it was made of boordes
and was remouable. For speaking of the Deacons of Rome in Quaest. vet. and non.
test. q. 101 he says: Vt antem non omnia ministeria obsequiorum per ordinem
agant, multitudo fecit clericorum: nam vtique and altar portarem, and vasa
euis and aquam in manus sunderent sacerdoti, ficut videmus per omnes ecclesias.
But that they do not perform all the ministeries of their service in order,
the multitude of Clerks has caused: for surely they should both carry the
altar and the vessels thereof, and power water on the Priests hands, as we
see it in all churches.

That they were of boordes and timber, and not of stone, lest the Papists
should dream of their Altar portatiue, that their hedge priests carry in
their sleeves to say Mass in corners, the same Augustine writing to Bonifacius
Ep. 50. shows in these words, speaking of the insurrection of the Donatistes
against Maximianus a catholic bishop of Sagium: Stantem ad altar irruente^
horrendo impetu and furore crudeli, fustibus and huiusmodi telis, lignis
denique eiusdem altaris effractis immaniter ceciderunt. Rushing in with an
horrible violence and cruel fury, they stroke him most outragiously standing
at the altar, with staves and such like weapons: yea, even with the boordes of
the same altar, which they brake in pieces. The like complaint makes Optatus
in his book against the Donatistes, saving that he names not wood or bordes,
yet it is plain by the circumstance that he spoke of none other. The place,
as Master Heskins cites it, is this: Quid est tam sacrilegum, etc. What is so
great sacrilege, as to break, scrape, or shave, and remove the altares of
God? in which you also sometimes have offered, on which the prayers of the
people, and the members of Christ have been borne, at which God almighty has
been called upon, where the holy Ghost being desired has come down, from
which the pledge of aeternall life, and the sauegarde of faith, and the hope of
resurrection has been received of many: the altares I say upon which our
Savior has commanded the gifts of the fraternity, not to be laid, but
such as are made of peace. Lay down (says he) thy gift before the altar,
and return and first agree with thy brother, that the Priest may offer for
thee. For what is the altar but the seat of the body and blood of Christ? All
these your fury has either scraped, or broken, or removed. What has God done
to you, which was wont to be called upon there? What had Christ offended you,
whose body and blood dwells there at certain momentes? And what do you
offend your selves to break the altars, on which long time before us (as you
think) you have offered holily? Thus have you followed the Jews. They laid
hands upon Christ on the cross: of you he was stricken in the altar: of
whom the Prophet Helias complains to the Lord, speaking in the same words,
with which you among other have deserved to be accused. Lord (says he) they
have broken down thine altares. While he says thine, he shows that the
thing is Gods, where any thing is offered of any man to God. Upon pretense of
this place, Master Hesk. charge us with great sacrilege, for pulling down
their popish altares, on which they committed idolatry and most horrible
sacrilege. And therefore we are commanded to overthrow such altares, to
break down their pillars, and burn their images with fire, Deuteronomy. 7. And
whereas he compares us to one Iulianus an heathen man, that pissed against the
altar, and therefore was horribly punished, he shows his wisdom. For there
an idolater did vilanously contemn ye Christians religion, and therefore was
justly plaged of God, but we as Christians have obeyed the law of God, in
overthrowing their antichristian and idolatrous altars. And yet I think the
fact of Iulianus was not worse then the filthiness of Pope John, that lay with
his whores upon your altares. In the conclusion of this chapter he affirms
that the altar, and sacrifice are correlatiues, and therefore there could be
none altars, but there was also sacrifice. I have showed sufficiently how the
old writers called the communion table an altar, and the sacrament a
sacrifice, namely a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and not of propitiation, and yet
more must I say upon M. Heskins discourses that follow.

Hesk.
The two and thirtieth Chapter upon occasion that it is proved, that the
primitive Church used the altar, and reputed the body and blood of Christ to
be a sacrifice, begins to treat of the same sacrifice which we commonly
call the Mass.

Fulk.
Because the names of altar and sacrifice have been improperly used by ancient
writers (for we have showed that their altar was a table, and their sacrifice
a thanksgiving) therefore M. Hesk. will treat of the sacrifice of the Mass.
And first of the name of Mass, which he says we abhor, and justly, because
it has been used of many years, to signify a most blasphemous and idolatrous
service. The name he will derive in all the haste, out of the Hebrew tongue
from a word that is called Mas, from whence the Latins have derived their
word Missa, being the same that the Greeks called Liturgia, and the Latins
officium, which is in English a service. To this I answer: first, that if
Missa or Mass be nothing but a service, then Even song may be called Mass,
because it is a service. Secondly it carries no show of truth, that the
Latins would borrowe their name of the Hebrews, rather then of the Greeks.
Thirdly, that there is no such Hebrew word, as Master Heskins affirms to
be, Mas, signifying a service, as I report me to all that have but mean
knowledge in the tongue. Fourthly, that although the name of Missa be of some
antiquity in the Roman church, yet is it neither so ancient as he makes it,
and that which is chiefly to be regarded, it is never found in the holy
scripture.

But now let us consider his authority. First, Leo bishop of Rome Epist. 79.
says thus: Necesse est vt quaedam pars populi sua deuotione priuetur, si
vniut tantum Missae more seruato sacrificium offerre non possunt, nisi qui
prima diei part conuenerint. It must needs be that some part of the people
be deprived of their devotion, if the manner or custom of our only mass
being observed, they cannot offer sacrifice, except such as came together the
first part of the day. Upon color of this place Master Heskins will not
only prove, that the name of Missa is ancient, but also that it is lawful
to say more then one Mass in one church in one day, if two then three, if
three then ten, if ten then fifteen, and so twenty, which the proclaimer
said could not be proved. But you shall see how lewdly he abuses his
reader. The proclaimers challenge was of ten or twenty private Masses said
in one church and commonly at one time. Master Heskins brings in authority
of Leo, which proves, that when one communion could no serve any more, then
so many as the church would hold at one time, it was meet it should be
celebrated twice, or as often as the same was filled with people, until all
had received, which as we confess to be true, so makes it nothing in the
world for the private Mass, but altogether against it, as is plain by the
whole treaty going before, which Master Heskins according to his accustomed
synceritie has clean left out.

Vt autem in omnibus obseruantia nostra Concordet, illud quoque volumus
custodiri, vt quum solennior festiuitas conuentum populi numerosioris
indixerit, and ad eam tanta multitudo conuenerit, quam recipere Basilica simul
vna non possit, sacrificij oblatio indubitanter iteretur, ne his tantum
admissis, ad hanc deuotionem, qui primi aduenerint, videantur hi qui posimodum
confluxerint, non recepti, cum plenum pietatis atque rationis fit, vt quoties
Basilica^ prsentia nonae plebis impleuerit, toties sacrificiu^ subseque^s
offeratur. And that our observation may agree in all things, this also we will
have to be kept, that when a more solemn festiuitie shall call together a
greater assembly of people, and so great a multitude is gathered unto it, that
one great Church can not receive them altogether, the oblation of the sacrifice
without doubt may be done again, least those only being admitted which came
first, they which came together afterward, might seem not to be received,
whereas it is a matter full of godliness and reason, that how often so ever
the presence of a new people shall fill the Church, so often the sacrifice
following should be offered. But M. Heskins urges in the place by him cited,
that the word missa is used, which is not denied, but this was almost 500.
years after Christ, about the year 480. Secondly, that the Mass is a
sacrifice. But he will not see that it is such a sacrifice, as all the people
offer, which can not be a sacrifice propitiatory, but of thanksgiving.
Howbeit, he says, The Mass is a sacrifice, that is or ought by join
affection and devotion of the people to the Priest, to be offered of them all.
What affection or devotion he would have to the Priest, I do not well
understand, but let him shadow him self, in what fond phrase of word he will,
yet can he not avoid, but that the people by the words of Leo, did offer
sacrifice in as ample manner as the Priests, and then they were all Priests.
Besides this, in the words of Leo he observes not, yt it was a custom of ye
Church before his time to have but one Mass or Communion in a day, so
straightly kept, that upon necessity they would not relent therein, until he
took this order with them. But Master Heskins asks what scripture the
proclamer has to the contrary for twenty Masses in one Church in one day? I
answer: Saint Paul wills the Corinthians to tarry one for an other 1. Cor.
11. for the Communion. By which it is evident, that it is not lawful for every
man to have his private Mass, as M. Heskins would most absurdly prove. As for
ye sacrifice propitiatory of their Mass, has all those scriptures against
it, that set forth the only propitiatory sacrifice of Christ, and namely Heb.
9. and 10.

Furthermore, M. Heskins finds the name of Mass used of Saint Ambrose, Ep.
33. Ego mansi in munere, missam facere coepi, orare in oblatione Deum vt
subueniret. I did abide in mine office, I began to say mass, to pray to God
in the sacrifice, that he would help. How faithful a reporter of antiquity
Master Heskins is to be counted, this place among a great number does
sufficiently declare, and that he received not this text out of Ambrose him
self, but out of some other man's collection or relation. Ambrose in that
Epistle writing to his sister Marcellina about delivering of a church to the
heretics, which he refused to do at the Emperor Valentinianes request,
writes thus: Sequenti die (erat autem Dominica) post lectiones atque tractatum
dimissis Catechumenis, Symbolum aliquibus competentibus in baptisterijs
tradebam Basilicae. Illic nunciatum est mihi, comperto quod ad Portianam
Basilicam de palatio decanos misissent, and vela suspendere^t, populi partem eo
pergere. Ego tamen mansi in munere, missam facere coepi. Dum offero raptum
cognoui a populo Castulum quendam, quem Presbyterum dicerent Arriani. Hunc
autem in platea ostenderant transeuntes. Amarissime flere and orare in ipsa
oblatione Deum coepi, vt subueniret, ne cuius sanguis in causa Ecclesiae
fieret, certe vt meus sanguis pro salute non solum populi, sed etiam pro ipsis
impijs effunderetur. Quid multa? Missis Presbyteris and Diaconis eripui iniuria
virum.

The day following, which was Sunday, when the learners of Catechism were
dismissed after the Lessons that were read, and the treatise made upon them, I
was instructing in the Creed certain that desired Baptism, in the baptizing
place of the Church. There it was told me, after it was known, yt they had
sent officers from the Palace unto the church called Portiana and hanged up
clothes (for ye Emperor) yt part of the people were going thither. I for all
that abid in mine office, I began to let it go. While I offered, I
understood by the people, that one Castulus was taken by force, whom the
Arrians said to be a Priest. Him had they found as they passed by in the
streate. I began to weep most bitterly, and to pray to God in the very
oblation, that he would help that no man's blood might be shed in the cause
of the Church, and truly that my blood might be shed, not only for the
sauegard of the people, but also for the ungodly them selves. What need many
words, I sent Priests and Deacons, and delivered the man from injury. I
know M. Heskins will not allow me to translate, missam facere, to let go the
Church, seeing they had entered upon it, the rather because offero and
oblatione does follow. But notwithstanding, seeing Mass is never named in S.
Augustine, Hierome, nor any other place of Ambrose in his or their authentical
writings, I can not of the only color and conjecture of oblation following be
resolved, that S. Ambrose uses missam facere, to say Mass. For although I
confess, that the name of Missa for the Communion, began near about that time
to be in use, yet did they never use that phrase missam facere, but missum or
missarum solennia celibrare, to celebrate the Mass or the solemnities of
Masses, for so they called the administration of the Communion. Whereas missam
facere can not be translated to say Mass, but rather to make Mass. Again, if
the only conjecture of offero and oblatione following, were sufficient to prove
missa to signify Mass, M. Heskins might by ye like color of Priests and
Deacons following, translate Missis, Presbytery, and Diaconibus etc. with
Masses, Priests and Deacons, I delivered the man from injury. But to take it
at the worst that the name of missa is here used for Mass, yet was this within
the time of the Bishops limitation, and no Popish Mass, but a Christian
communion, although some abuses perhaps were in it.

And for the decrees of Thelesphorus, Sixtus, Alexander, and such like
Bishops of Rome, because they be mere mockeries, and counterfeted long
after their times, to get credit by the antiquity of their names, I will
loose no time in confuting them. And whereas M. Heskins says, the proclamer
rejects them without proof, although it be not to be required, that in a
sermon such matters should be debated at large, as in public writings are
thoroughly known to be debated and determined among the best learned: yet will
I add this one disproofe or two, of those Epistles to be forged. First
Eusebius which was a most dilligent gatherer of such writings found none such in
his time. Secondly, if there were nothing else, the very barbarous phrase of
them all, and the false Latin that is in many, is sufficient to convince them
for counterfets: seeing there was no unlearned woman in Rome in those times, but
spoke better Latin the^ these men feign those learned Bishops to have written
in those decretall Epistles. But M. Hesk. will prove Alexander to be the
Author of that Epistle which is ascribed to him, and therein will use neither
bare words, nor faint likelyhoods. In deed, for likelihoods he uses none,
either faint or strong, but in steed of authority whereof he bosteth, he
uses none at all but very bare words. He only quoteth in the margent, The 6.
Counsel of Constantinople, not naming so much as in what part or action thereof
this matter is entreated of, the acts of that counsel, being contained in a
great book as large as M. Hesk. third book at the least. And surely, although
I have used some diligence in search, yet I can find no such matter, nor this
Alexander once named in that Counsel. In deed I found long since, Dionysius
authority cited by the name of Dionyscus Areopagisa Bishop of Athens, which is
the matter yt perhaps deceived M. Hes. or him yt ministered notes of authorities
unto him. But to be short, the assurance remains still unshaken, which the
proclamer made in his sermon, that the name of Mass is not found in ancient
writers, until 400. years after Christ. As for the Mass it self, if he mean
that form of service used in the Church of Rome, and of them commonly called
Mass, he knows it was not thoroughly peeced together, 600. years after
Christ. For Gregory had no small share in it, and he confesses in this
Chapter, that Telesphorus, Sixtus, Alexander, Felix, added somewhat unto it. As
for the preparatorie prayers of Ambrose, he does well not to avouch them to be
his, because no man of learning will acknowledge them to be his. And seeing the
Greek Liturgies are very unlike the Latin Mass, he does but mock the
ignorant readers, to say they be all one. Finally, he does most absurdly
conclude, that his Mass should be within the compass of Saint Augustines
rule. ad Ian. Ep. 118. That those things, which the universal Church
observes throughout the world, we may understand that they are retained, as
ordained either of the Apostles them selves, or of the general Counsels, whose
authority in the Church is most profitable. Illa que per orbem vniuersa
obseruat Ecclesia, datur intelligi vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel a plenarijs
concilijs, quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrim a authoritas statuta, retineri.
Thus has M. Hes. cited Augustine, to have a starting hole under the name of
the church, but Saint Augustines words are somewhat otherwise. Illae autem
quae non scripta, sed tradita custodimus, qu quidem toto terrarum orb
obseruantur, datur intelligi, vel ab ipsis Apostolis, vel plenarijs concilijs,
quorum est in Ecclesia saluberrima authoritas, commendata atque statuta
retineri, sicuti quod Domini passio, and resurrectio, and ascensio in Coelum,
and aduentus de Coelo Spiritus sancti, anniuersaria solennitate celebrantur:
and si quid eliud ^ale occurrerit, quod seruatur ab vniuersis quacunque se
diffundat Ecclesia. Those things which we observe being not written, but
delivered, which truly are observed throughout all the world, it is given to
be understood, that they are retained as commended and decreed, either by the
Apostles, or by general Counsels, whose authority in the Church is most
wholesome, as yt the Passion and resurrection of our Lord, and his Ascension
into heaven, and the coming of the holy Ghost from heaven are celebrated with
yearly sole^nitie, or if there be any such like matter, which is observed of
all men wheresoever the Church spreads her self. But seeing the Popish Mass
was unknown to the world in Augustines time, and never used throughout the
world of all men: (for the oriental Churches never received it to this day)
if it have no better hold then it gets by this place of Augustine, it must
needs fall to the ground. And thus much concerning the name and form of the
Mass. In the next Chapter we shall hear of the matter or substance of the
Mass it self.

The three and thirtieth Chapter treats of the Mass it self. Hesk.


Master Heskins first with railing terms, Fulke.
takes exception to the proclaymers division of the Mass, into four parts,
Prayers, consecration, receiving, doctrine, except he add oblation as the
fifte, or comprehend it under the name of consecration. Moreover he says, this
is but a description of Mass in the large signification. But the Mass it
self properly is the holy consecration of the body and blood of Christ, the
holy oblation and offering of the same, in the memorial and remembrance of his
passion and death, with humble and lowly thanks, lawdes and praises for the
same, and holy receiving of that body and blood so consecrated. Here is the
Lions skin covering the ass, but yet not so closely but the long ears may
be seen hanging out. For as the form of these words for the most part may
be applied to the holy communion, so almost by every word, he understands
another thing then either the scriptures or the ancient fathers do teach, as
we shall best see in the examination of the parts which follow. First where
he says, the proclaymer cannot abide consecration, he says falsely, for
both he grants consecration and the presence of Christ's body and blood,
but not the Popish charming, nor their carnal manner of presence, which how
they be proved by M. Heskins let the readers judge. Oblation the second part,
he says is proved in the first book, and declaration of the prophesies of
Melchisedech, Damascen, Malachie, and in the 37. Chapter. In the same places
let the reader consider the answer.

In receiving, which is the third part, two things (says Master Heskins)
offend the proclaymer, that is; receiving under one kind, and receiving of the
Priest alone. The former is defended by him Lib. 2. from the 64. Chap. to the
end of 67. Chap. and there it is in this book confuted. The private receiving
(he says) shall be defended afterward. In doctrine the 4. part, he knows not
what fault the proclaymer can find, wherein is greatest fault of all, but M.
Heskins will have nothing to be the doctrine of the Mass, but the Gospel and
Pistle and other scriptures that are read in it.

In prayer the fifth and last part, he finds two faults, namely prayer to
Saints, and for the dead, for trial of these, he will have recourse to the
primitive Church. It is well he can have no recourse to the holy scriptures,
nor to the most ancient Church, which is properly called the primitive Church,
although these two errors be of great antiquity. But before M. Heskins
undertake these trials, he girdeth at the communion ministered in copes, and the
proclaymer wearing Aarons garment for a bishopric. If the Popish priests had
no more pleasure to say mass in their vestments, then the proclaymer to
minister in copes, I think the common sort of Papists would have less
devotion to the Masses, then Gods people have to ye communion, when it is
ministered without any ceremonial attire. But Master Heskins will prove (that
never yet was heard off) that Christ himself said Mass. For he instituted
the Mass in his last supper, and that he will prove by Cyprian, but why does
he not rather prove it by ye Evangelists? Forsooth, because the scriptures
have no such improper speech to make any show of the Mass, as Cyprian and the
rest of the fathers have. Well let us hear how Cyprian affirms that Christ
said Mass. Master Heskins says: First for the consecration, Lib. 2. Ep. 3.
He writes thus: Vt in Genesi, etc. That the blessing in Genesis by
Melchisedech the priest might be duly celebrated about Abraham, the image of
the sacrifice appointed in bread and wine goes before, which thing our Lord
perfecting and fulfilling offered bread and the cup mixed with wine, and he
that is that fullness has fulfilled the veriti^ of the prefigured image: In
these words M. Heskins forgetting that Christ offered bread and wine, gloseth
upon the verity of the image fulfilled by Christ, and expressed by Cyprian in
other words. Obtulit, etc. He offered the same thing which Melchisedech had
offered, that is bread and wine, even his body and blood. Here again is bread
and wine offered by Christ, which is his body and blood after a spiritual
manner, as it was offered by Melchisedech. Hitherto no word of consecration,
nor of the carnal manner of presence, but directly against it. Now let us
hear how he proves oblation. Quaerendum est, etc. It must be asked whom they
have followed. For if in the sacrifice which is Christ none but Christ is to be
followed, we must then obey and do that which Christ did, and which he
commanded to be done. Here Master Heskins notes yt Christ is the sacrifice. I
answer even as the bread is his body and the wine his blood. But yt Christ
commanded the Church to offer this sacrifice in remembrance of him, he
teaches plainly (says M. Heskins.) Yea sir, but where does he teach, either
plainly or obscurely, that the Mass is a sacrifice propitiatory for the
quick and the dead, which is the matter in question? And not the name of
sacrifice used by Cyprian improperly and figuratively, meaning a remembrance
and thanksgiving for the only once offered sacrifice of Christ. But let us
hear his words. Quod si nec minimia, etc. If it be not lawful to break the
least of the Lords commandments, how much more is it not lawful to infringe
or break things so great, so weighty, so apperteining to the very sacrament
of the Lords passion, and our redemption, or by man's tradition to change it
into any other thing then is ordained of God? For if Jesus Christ our Lord and
God be himself the high Priest of God the father, and he himself first did
offer sacrifice, and commanded this to be done in his remembrance, that Priest
supplyeth the room of Christ truly, which follows that which Christ did. And
then he offers a true and full sacrifice in the Church to God the father if
he so begin to offer, as he has seen Christ him self to have offered. Here
M. Hesk. reproves our ministration in two points: First, for that we minister
with wine alone contrary to Christ's institution. But when he can prove that
Christ added water to his cup of wine, we will grant it to be a breach of his
institution, and not before. Secondly he reasons, if it be so great a matter
to take away wine or water from the ministratio^, it is much greater to take
away. Christ's body there fro: but it is as false that we take away his body,
as it is true, that they take away his blood. Now concerning the term
sacrifice, used by S. Cyprian, his words in the same Epistle declare plainly,
that he used it (as I said before) improperly: Et quia passionis eius mentionem
insacrificijs omnibus facimus (passio est enim Domini, sacrificium^ quod
offerimus) nihil aliud quam quod ille fecit facere debemus. And because we make
mention of his passion in all our sacrifices (for the sacrifice which we offer
is the passion of our Lord) we ought to do nothing, but that he has done. By
this you see, that the sacrifice is Christ, even as it is the passion of
Christ, that is to say, a sacramental memorial of Christ's body, and of his
passion, and not otherwise. But Master Heskins taking occasion of the former
saying of Cyprian by him cited, rayleth at his pleasure upon the author of the
apology, for saying, the contention between Luther and Zwinglius, was about a
small matter. And so it was in deed, in comparison of these chief and
necessary points of religion, in which they did agree. And if you make the
most of it, yet was it no greater, then the matter of rebaptising, wherein
Cyprian his author, dissented from Cornelius Bishop of Rome. Nevertheless
Master Heskins returning to urge the image of the sacrifice, set forth in
Melchisedeches feast of bread and wine, brings in Tertullian Contra Marcion.
Ita nunc sanguinem suum in vino consecrauit, qui sunc vi^^um in sanguine
figurauit. So now he has consecrated his blood in wine, which then figured
wine in blood. He quoteth not the place, least his falsification might appear.
For first he applies this figure to Melchisedech, which Tertullian does to
Judah, and translateth Vinum in sanguine figurauit. He figured wine in his
blood, whereas Tertullian speaking of the blessing yt Jacob gave to Judah, that
he should wash his garment in the blood of the grape, says, he figured wine
by blood, that is, by the name of blood of the grape, he meant figuratively
wine. As for the name of consecration in the true sense thereof, we neither
abhor nor refuse to use. But he has never done with Melchisedeches bread and
wine, and when all comes to all, Christ offered neither bread nor wine, as
they say. Yet M. Heskins affirms, (if he would abide by it) that Christ offered
bread and wine in verity. But if you ask him whether he mean bread and wine in
truth and verity, he will say no verily, so M. Hesk. verity is contradictorie
to truth. To draw to an end he cites Ambrose In praefatione Missae in coena
Do. Christus formam sacrificij perennis instituens, hostiam se primus obtulit
and primus docuit offerri, etc. Christ instituting a form of perpetual
sacrifice, first offered himself for a sacrifice, and first taught it to be
offered.

But where Master Heskins found this authority, I leave to all learned men to
consider, when there is not such a title in all the works of Saint Ambrose
that are printed, new or old. Therefore whether he feigned it him self, or
followed some other forger, he shows his honest and faithful dealing. But if
we should admit this testimony as lawful, whereas it is but a counterfete:
yet understanding how the ancient writers abused the name of sacrifice for a
memorial of a sacrifice; and not for a propitiatory sacrifice, it helps
Master Heskins nothing at all. Saint Ambrose himself very improperly uses
the name of Hostia, or sacrifice as De Virgin Lib. 1. Virgo matris hostia est
cuius quotidiano sacrificio vis diuina placatur. A Virgin is the host or
sacrifice of her mother, by whose daily sacrifice the wrath of God is pacified.
If Master Heskins could find thus much in Saint Ambrose for the sacrifice
of the Mass, he would triumph out of measure, that he had found it a
propitiatory sacrifice, even for the quick and the dead: and that those
words of Christ: do this in rememembraunce of me, were expounded of the
Fathers for, offer a sacrifice propitiatory. But who so lists to hear the
truth, need not to be deceived in the word of sacrifice and phrase of
offering used by the old writers, which was not properly, but figuratively etc
sometimes abusiuely. For further instruction of consecration, and oblation he
sends his Reader back to the 2. book, 41. Chapter, to the end of the book.
For the rest unto the 1. book, 33. Chapter, to the end of that book. And even
in the same places shall the Reader find mine answer.

Hesk.
The four and thirtieth Chapter shows the use of the Mass used and practiced
by the Apostles.

Fulk.
It is marvel the Apostles were such great sayers of Mass, and yet never make
one word mention of it in all their writings. But we must see what Master
Heskins can pick out of them. And first he makes another division of his
Mass into inward substantial parts, which are consecration, oblation, and
receiving, instituted by Christ, and into outward ceremonies, prayers,
gestures, and manners Instituted by the ministry of the holy Ghost, but not
of Christ. In these later he grants, that the Masses of S. Peter, of S.
Andrew, of S. James, of S. Clement, of S. Dionyse, S. Basil, Chrysostom, S.
Ambrose do differ one from another, but not in the former substantial parts:
and specially in consecration, and oblation, wherein the controversy stands:
which M. Heskins will prove adding two handmaides unto them, that is, to
consecration intention, and to oblation, prayer for acceptance. So by his
Divinity, the intention of the priest, has more force then the words of
consecration to make the body of Christ present, and when it is present and
sacrificed, it has need of the priests prayers for acceptance. But he will
begin with S. Peter's Mass, and that he proves by this reason, the proclaymer
confesses (though in scorn) that some say S. Peter said Mass at Rome, but
no ancient writer says, he did not say Mass, therefore it is true, that he
did say Mass. This argument is of like force with this that I will bring: some
say that Master Heskins in King Edwards time married a Nun, which no
ancient writer denies, therefore it is true yt he married a Nun, and so
peradventure it is, although it follow not upon the assumption that no
ancient writer denies it. And as for S. Peter's Massing, as there is no
ancient writer that writ within 600. years of Christ that denies it, so
is there none that affirms it. But you shall hear another reason. S. Peter
that sat 2^. years at Rome and had said Mass at Antioche, is not like to
have neglected his duty at Rome. Admit it were true, that he was at Rome,
which is not all out of doubt, and that he sat as Bishop there 25. years,
which is proved false by the scriptures, all though Hierome and Eusebius do
affirm it: yet how proves M. Hesk. that it was any part of his duty to say
Mass, either there or else where, or that he did say Mass at Antioche? His
first witness is Hugo de S. Lib. 2. de Sacra. par. 8. Cap. 14. Who although he
be a late writer, unworthy of credit in this cause, yet I will set down his
words, that you may see how much they make for M. Heskins cause. Celebratio
Miss etc. The celebration of the Mass is done in commemoration of the Passion
of Christ, as he commanded the Apostles, delivering to them his body and his
blood saying: This do ye in remembrance of me. This Mass S. Peter the Apostle
is said first of all men to have said at Antioch. In the which in the
beginning of the faith, there were only three prayers said. If this be true,
none of the Apostles said Mass at Jerusalem many year after Christ, but it
is manifest, that they ministered the Lords Supper, therefore the Mass is not
the Lords supper. But if he will restrain the words of Hugo to mean, that
Peter was the first that said Mass at Antioch, the consequence will be the
same, for it is certain, that the Gospel being first preached at Antiochia
by those Cyprians, and Cyrenians that fled upon the persecution of Stephan,
Barnabas, and Paul, sent thither by the Apostles, brought the Antiochians to be
perfect Christians, in so much that the name of Christians began there, before
Peter came thither to say Mass, but they could not be Christians, without the
celebration of the Lords supper, therefore the Lords supper is not the Mass.
Again where he says, there were but three prayers in S. Peter's Mass, and
some Popish writers affirm, that he used no prayers but ye lords prayer: if
this were true, what liklyhod has S. Peter's Mass with ye Popish Mass, but only
yt it pleases them to call the celebratio^ of ye Lords supper, (which Peter no
dout ministered purely after Christ's institution,) by ye name of their impure
Mass? After the testimony of Remigius, he brings in Isidorus, whom he
confesses to have been before Remigius, and yet he was without yt compass of 600
years after Christ, whereas in other places before, he makes Remigius almost
200. years elder the^ Isidorus. But Isidorus affirms Li. 1. de Off. Ecc. Cap.
15. That the order of the Mass, or prayers with which the sacrifices offered
to God are consecrated, was first instituted by S. Peter. Although he lived in
an erroneous, and superstitious time, yet he means yt S. Peter did appoint an
order and form of prayers, for ye celebration of ye Lords supper. But certain
it is, yt the same order was not extant in his time, much less now. For
Gregory is made ye institutor of the Popish Mass, which was not long before
Isidorus. Next he will prove, that S. Paul said Mass, though no old writer
faith it: for (says he) S. Paul did yt he taught: but he taught the Mass:
Therefore he said Mass. He ministered the communion, according to the doctrine
he taught in those Chapters, 1. Cor. 10. and 11.
in which in deed is mention of consecration, and receiving, but no syllable
of oblation of Christ in the sacrament. As for ye order and form of
ministration, it was agreeable to that doctrine: and when he said, Other things
I will set in order when I come, although it be not necessarily to be referred
to matters concerning ye sacrament, saving ye authority of Hugo, Hierom, and
Augustine: yet it is out of question, yt he did dispose nothing contrary to the
doctrine of yt Epistle, as all the Popish filthiness is, which M. Hesk. would
thrust upon us, under ye name of those things, which S. Paul ordained. But it
is wonderful to see, his blockish frowardnes, yt he would prove out of Aug. yt
the order of the Mass now used, is ye order of the Mass yt S. Paul speaks
of: Ep. 118. Vnde datur, etc. Whereby it is given to be understood, because it
was much, that in an epistle he should set forth all that order of doing, which
the universal Church through out the world observes, that it is ordained of
him, which by no diversity of manners is altered. He speaks of receiving of ye
communion fasting, which M H. wilfully has corrupted, by a false translation,
and by wrong pointing, and falsifying ye relative Quod to make it a
Conjunction, yt he might apply it to ye whole order of his Popish Mass, which
Aug. speaks but of yt one ceremony of receiving fasting, and not after
supper. Augustines words are these: Vnde datur intelligi quia mulium erat, vt
in Epistola totum agendi ordinem insinuaret, quem vniuersa per orbem obseruat
Ecclesia, ab ipso ordinatu^ esse quod nulla moru^ diuersitate variatur. Which
M. Hes. has corrupted thus: whereby it is given to be understood, that it
was too much that in an epistle he should declare all that order of
ministration, which the universal Church throughout the world takes to be
ordained of him, for as much as it is not, by any diversity of manners varied,
or altered. But if it were as he fableth, yt S. Paul ordained the ceremonial
part of the Mass yt was used in Augustines time, ye Popish Mass being not ye
same in ceremonial parts, (as he will confess,) that it was in Augustines
time: it follows, that the Popish Mass is not yt, which was ordained of S.
Paul: for it is well known, it was patched and peeced together by many pieces
long since August. time. And as certain it is, yt almost every Church in his
time, had a several form of liturgy, and therefore by his own words they
cannot be that, which S. Paul set in order at the Church of yt Corinthians.
The like impude^cie he shows in ye next saying of Aug. which he cites Et
ideo non proecipit, etc. And therefore he commanded not in what order it should
be received afterward, that he might reserve this place to the Apostles by who^
he would set the Churches in order. It follows which M. Hesk. has omitted,
Etiamsi hoc ille monuisset, vt post cibos alios semper acciperetur, credo quod
eum more^ nemo variasset. For if he had charged this, yt it should always be
received after other meats, I believe yt no man would have varied from yt
manner. When August. speaks so expressly of that one order of receiving ye
communion before meat, what boldness is it to say, yt crouching, kneeling, and
other dumb ceremonies, although they were not instituted by Christ, yet were
ordained by S. Paul, upon color of Aug. authority, who in ye same epistle,
wished al such idle ceremonies utterly to be abolished. The next Massemonger he
makes, is S. Andrew, out of whose legend, written by I know not what priests
and deacons of Achaia, he will prove, yt S. Andrew did both say Mass, and also
therein offer in sacrifice the body and blood of Christ. But he is too much
deceived, if he think any man of reasonable understanding will in these days
give credit to such fabulous legends: after S. Andrew comes in S. James with
his Mass, said at Jerusalem, which is in print: but not heard of in ye Church
600. years after Christ, yet M. Hesk. says it is allowed and praised by the
proclaymer, which is utterly false: for he proves by a manifest argument, that
ye liturgy, which is in print under the name of S. James, is a coun^erfet,
because therein is a special prayer contained, for such as live in Monasteries,
whereas there was never a monastery in the world, many hundredth years after
the death of S. James. And for a further proof of the false inscription of
that liturgy to S. James, I will add this argument, that he uses the word
(...) or consubstantial which, as the learned know, was never heard of in the
Church, before the heresy of Arrius was condemned in the Nicene counsel,
although ye Catholic Church did always confess, yt Christ was God of the
same substance, equal with the father and the holy Ghost. In deed the B. of
Sarum, confesses, that there is more in those liturgies against the Papists,
then for them, as by examining these parcels which M. Heskins cites, we shall
easily perceive. First the liturgy of James, has these words. Dominus, etc.
Our Lord Jesus the same right, in which he was betrayed, or rather in which
night he delivered himself for the life of salvation of the world taking bread
into his holy, undefiled, innocent and immortal hands, looking up into
heaven, and showing it to the God and father, giving thanks, sanctifying,
breaking, he gave it to us his disciples saying Take ye, eat ye, this is my
body, which is broken for you, and given unto remission of sins. Likewise
after he had supped, he took the cup, and mingling it with wine and water, and
looking up into heaven and showing it to the God and father, giving thanks
sanctifying, blessing, filling it with the holy Ghost, he gave it to us his
disciples, saying, Drink ye all of this: this is my blood of the new
Testament, which is shed for you and many, and given for remission of sins.
This says Master Heskins was his manner of consecration, unlike the manner of
the new ministers in their communion, which only rehearse the words of Christ
historically, not directing the^ to God as a prayer, wherein he lies most
impudently, as every man that hears or reads the prayer immediately before
ye receiving of the sacrament can testify. Concerning the term of
consecration. I have often showed, that in the true sense thereof, we both
allow and use it, although he would make ignorant and obstinat papists, yt will
neither hear our preachings, nor read our writings, to believe ye contrary,
only because he says it. Another ridiculous cauil, he has, that we take not
ye bread into our hands before we consecrate it, But let it lie on the table,
as though we had nothing to do with it. Surely we do not acknowledge such
holiness in our hands, yt it can consecrate the bread, but we pray to God to
bless those his creatures of bread and wine yt they may be unto us the body
and blood of Christ his son our Lord. If the Papists have such holy,
undefiled, and immortal hands, as this James speaks of, it is more then we
know, or will confess, before they can prove it. In the consecration of ye
wine, he charge us. yt we mingle no water with the wine. But when he can
prove, by the word of God, yt our savior Christ did so, we will confess our
error, otherwise we see no necessity of the water, and so their own
schoolmen do confess. We acknowledge yt in the primitive Church, it was an
ancient custom, to mingle water with the wine, but not as a ceremony at the
first, but as the common usage of al men yt drank ye hot wines of the East
countries: but afterward it grew to be counted a ceremony, including some
mystery, and at length with some it excluded the wine altogether, as with
those that were called Aquarij, so dangerous a matter it is to use any thing
in Gods service, more then is prescribed by himself. But M. Heskins cannot be
persuaded, that after all this sanctifying, blessing, and filling of the cup
with the holy Ghost, there should be nothing else but a bare hungry figure.
As though there were no choice, but either transubstantiation, or a bare
hungry figure. In baptism there is sanctification, blessing, and filling with
the holy Ghost, as much as in the communion, is there therefore
transubstantiation in baptism, because there is not a bare hungry figure? But
if I might be so bold, as to examine him in his own fained Mass of S. James, I
would ask him, how the cup is filled with the holy Ghost? essentially, so
that ye holy Ghost, or any part of him is contained in the cupp? I dare say
he will say no. And why then may not the body of Christ be present, and yet
not corporally nor locally contained in pixe, corporax, cupp, hand, or mouth,
but after a spiritual manner, as the holy Ghost is in the cup, by his own
James his saying. The last quarrel he picketh, is to our ministers, who
(says he) have none authority to consecrate, because they receive it not
from the catholic succession. As for that authority which we have received of
God by the outward calling of the church, we mind not to exchange with the
Popes triple crown, and much less with Master Hesk. shaven crown. But to
shape him an answer according to his lewd objection: seeing many are suffered
to minister in our church, which were made priests after the Popish order of
antichrist, why should he deny any of them, them at the least, to have power
to consecrate, according to the Popish divinity, though the words be spoken
in English, so long as he has intentione^ consecrandi, before he be of them
disgraded, and has his indebeble character scraped out of his hands and
fingers ends? I answer he is not able to defend his opinion, that they
cannot consecrate, neither in Sorbona of Paris, nor in the school of Louain.
To shutt up this Chapter, he flappeth us in the mouth, with S. Mathewes Mass,
testified by Abdias in the devils name, a disciple of the Apostles (as he
says) but one that saw Christ him self, (as M. Harding says) in very deed
a lewd lying counterfeter of more then Caunterburie tales. And thinks he that
such fables, will now be credited? except it be of such as wilfully will be
deceived.

The five and thirtieth Chapter, shows the manner of consecration used and
practiced by the disciples of the Apostles, and the fathers of the primitive
and ancient church. Hesk.


His first author is Nicolaus Methonensis a Grecian, Fulk.
but a late writer, who affirms that Clemens did write a Liturgy, which
Peter, Paul, and the Apostles used. Although that, which he rehearses of
Clemens his Liturgy, be to small purpose, and little or nothing differing from
that he had before of James, yet Nicolaus Methon, is too young a witness to
be credited in this case. For he was not of years of discretion to discern
that for the authentical writing of Clemens, which the more ancient church,
by a thousand years could not have perfect knowledge to be his. Neither does
the testimony of Proclus help him any whit. For, as it is not to be doubted,
but S. James and the other Apostles, and Clemens also appointed some form of
Liturgy for ye churches by them planted and instructed, which is all that
Proclus says: yet how proves M. Hesk. that those which we have, were ye same
which were written by James, Clemens, or any other of lawful antiquity, when
we bring manifest demonstrations for the contrary? Again, where he says
that Peter used the Liturgy of Clemens, he is contrary to Hugo cited in the
last Chap. which says that Peter used a Liturgy of his own, consisting of
three prayers only. The next witness should be Dionysius falsely surnamed
Areopagita, but yt he is clean contrary to M. Hes. transubstantiation, carnal
presence, private Mass, or sole communion, and therefore under pretense of his
obscurity he dare cite never a sentence out of him. Then follow the Liturgies
under the names of Basil and Chrysostom. very little in words and nothing at al
in matter, differing from yt former Liturgy ascribed to S. James, which
because M. Hesk. knows, we cannot receive as ye lawful writings of Basil and
Chrysostom. he would underprop them by ye authority of Proclus B. of
Constantinople, as he did S. Clem. and S. James mass even now. The reason
alleged by Proclus, will clean ouerturne his ground work, and prove that
none of these Liturgies, were written by the^ to whom they be ascribed. For
Proclus says, that Basil and Chrysostom made the ancient Liturgies received
from the Apostles shorter, cutting many things away from them, because they
were too long for the peoples cold devotion to abide. First, this is a cold
reason to alter the tradition of the Apostles, so many years continued in the
church, for want of the peoples devotion. But be it, that they followed this
reason, then does it follow most manifestly, that this Liturgy which is
ascribed to S. James is none of his, because it is as short as either that of
Chrysostom. or the other of Basil. But, if M. Hesk. will defend that of S.
James, then he must needs refuse these of Basil and Chrysostom. for these are
as long as it, and therefore none abridgements of it. After these Liturgies, he
adds the testimony of the sixth counsel of Constantinople, which condemned
Pope Honorius for an heretic, wherein it is reported, ye S. James, Basil and
Chrysostom ministered, and in their Liturgies prescribed wine to be mixed with
water. But this proves not, that these Liturgies which we have are the same,
that were set forth by those fathers, and as for ye water, they strive not for
it, but for wine to be used, and not water only. Finally, where the fathers of
that counsel call the celebration of the communion, an oblation and an
unbloody sacrifice, they speak in the same sense, that the elder fathers use
the same terms, otherwise that counsel, being an hundredth years without the
compass of the challenge, has no place but in the lower house among the
Burgesses, whose speeches may be heard, but they have none authority to
determine in this cause by M. Heskins order, according to the challenge.

Now at length M. Hesk. thinks it time to see the manner of consecration in
the Latin church: as though Clemens, if he were bishop of Rome, and wrote a
Liturgy, as he affirms before, that of his making might not serve the Latin
church. But Ambrose is cited, lib. 4. de Sacr. Ca. 5. Vis scire, etc. Would
thou know, that the sacrament is consecrated with heavenly words? Mark what
the words be. The Priest says: Make unto us (faith he) this oblation
ascribed, reasonable and acceptable, which is the figure of the body and blood
of our Lord Jesus Christ, which the day before he suffered, took bread in his
holy hands, looked up to heaven to the holy father, almighty, eternal God,
giving thanks blessed it, brake it, and being broken gave it to his Apostles
and disciples saying: Take ye, and eat ye all of this: for this is my body,
which shall be broken for many. Likewise also he took the cupp, after he had
supped, the day before he suffered, looked up to heaven to the holy father,
almighty, eternal God, giving thanks, he blessed it, delivered it to his
Apostles and disciples, saying: Take ye, and drink ye all of this for this is
my blood. M. Hesk. passes over that the oblation of the church, is the figure
of the body and blood of Christ, and for fear he should be espied and taken
with such an assertion, he flies in all the haste to other words of Ambrose
following. Vide, etc. See all those be the Evangelists words, unto these words:
Take either the body or the blood, from thence they be the words of Christ.
Note every thing. Who (says he) the day before he suffered, took bread in
his holy hands. Before it be consecrated it is bread, but after the words of
Christ be come unto it, it is the body of Christ. Finally, hear him saying:
Take ye and eat ye all of it, this is my body. And before the words of Christ
the cup is full of wine and water, after the words of Christ have wrought,
there is made the blood which redeemed the people. To the like effect be the
words taken out of his treatise, de oration. Dom. Memini, etc. I remember my
saying, when I entreated of the sacraments* I told you that before the words
of Christ, that which is offered is called bread, when the words of Christ are
brought forth, now it is not called bread, but it is called his body. Here M.
Hesk. triumphs in his consecration, and of the virtue thereof. But he must
remember what Ambrose says, De ijs qui myster, initiant. Ipse clamat Dominus
Jesus, etc. Our Lord Jesus him self does speak alowde. This is my body,
before the blessing of the heavenly words, it is named another kind, but
after the consecration, the body of Christ is signified. And lib. de Sac. 4.
Cap. 2. Ergo didicisti, etc. Then have thou learned, that of the bread, is made
the body of Christ, and that ye wine and water is put into the cup, but by
consecration of ye heavenly word, it is made his blood. But peradventure thou
say, I see not the show of blood. But it has a similitude. For as thou have
received the similitude of his death, so also thou drinkest ye similitude of
his precious blood, yt there may be no horror of blood, and yet it may work
the price of redemption. Here M. Hesk. for all his swelling brags has not
gained one patch of his popish Mass, out of the ancient writers: for none of
them understood consecration, to cause a transsubstantiation of the elements
into the natural body of Christ, but only a separation of them, from the
common use, to become the sacraments of the body and blood of Christ. As for
ye foolish cauil he uses against protestants refusing to follow the primitive
church, for love and liking of innovation, is not worthy of any reputation,
for in all things which they followed Christ, most willingly we follow the^, but
where ye steps of Christ's doctrine are not seen, there dare we not follow them,
although otherwise we like never so well of them.

Hesk.
The six and thirtieth Chapter declares what was the intention of the Apostles
and fathers in and about the consecration in the Mass.

Fulke.
M. Hesk. will prove that their intention was to transsubstantiate the bread and
wine into the body and blood of Christ. And first ye idol of S. James is
brought forth on procession in his Liturgy, which M. Hesk. had rather call his
Mass: Miserere, etc. Have mercy upon us God almighty: have mercy upon us
God our Savior: have mercy upon us o God, according to thy great mercy, and
send down upon us, and upon these gifts set forth, thy most holy spirit the
Lord of life, which sits together with thee god the father, and the only
begotten son, reigning together, being consubstantiall and coeternall, which
spoke in the law and the prophets, and in thy new testament, which descended
in the likeness of a dove upon our lord Jesus Christ, in the river of Jordan
and abode upon him, which descended upon thy Apostles in the likeness of
fiery tongue in the parler of the holy and glorious Sion, in the day of
Pentecost send down that thy most holy spirit now also o lord upon us, and
upon these holy gifts set forth, that coming upon the^ with his holy, good,
and glorious presence, he may sa^ctifie and make this bread, the holy body of
thy Christ, and this cup the precious blood of thy Christ, that it may be to
all that receive of it, unto forgiveness of sins, and life everlasting. M.
Heskins says, he would not have prayed so earnestly, that the holy Ghost might
have sanctified the bread and wine, to be only figures and tokens, which they
might be without the special sanctification of Gods spirit, as many things
were in the law. As for only figures and tokens, it is a slander confuted,
and denied a hundredth times already. But what a shameless beast is he, to
affirm, that the sacraments of the old law which were figures of Christ,
had no special sanctification of ye holy Ghost, or that baptism which is a
figure of the blood of Christ, washing our souls, may be a sacrament without
the special sanctification of Gods spirit? you see, how impudently he
wresteth and wringeth the words of this Liturgy, which if it were granted
unto them to be authentical, yet hitherto makes it nothing in the world for
him.

But let us hear how S. Clement came to the altar: Rogamus vt mittere digneris
etc. We pray thee that thou would vouchsafe to send thy holy spirit upon
this sacrifice, a witness of the passions of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he
may make this bread the body of thy Christ, and this cup the blood of thy
Christ. Here says M. Heskins his intent was, that the bread and wine should be
made ye body and blood of Christ. And so they be, to them yt receive worthily.
But M. Heskins will not see, yt he calls the bread and wine a sacrifice,
before it is made the body and blood of Christ, by which it is plain, that
this Clemens, intended not to offer Christ's body in sacrifice, as the Papists
pretend to do. S. Basil in his Liturgy, has the same intention in
consecration. Te postulamus etc. We pray and beseech thee o most holy of al
holies, that by thy well pleasing goodness, thy holy spirit may come upon us,
and upon these proposed gifts, and to bless and sanctify them, and to show
this bread to be the very honorable body of our Lord God and Savior Jesus
Christ, and that which is in the cup, to be the very blood of our Lord god and
savior Jesus Christ, which was shed for the life of the world. Of this prayer
M. Hes. infers, yt Basil by ye sanctification of ye holy ghost believed the
bread and wine to be made Christ's body and blood, he means corporally and
tra^substantially. But yt is most false, for this prayer is used in yt
liturgy, after the words of consecration, when by ye Popish doctrine, the body
and blood of Christ must needs be present, imediatly after the last syllable
vm, in hoc est corpu^ me^um, pronounced. Wherefore, seeing the Author of this
Liturgy, after the words of consecration pronounced, prays that God will
sanctify the bread and wine by his spirit, and make it the body and blood of
Christ, it is evident, that he neither believed transubstantiation, nor the
carnal presence, nor consecration, nor intention after the manner of the
Papists, as also by this that he calls the bread and wine after
consecration, (...), exemplaries or figures. You see therefore, how with
patches and pieces, rent off here and there, he goes about to deceive the
simple readers, which either have no leisure, or no boookes, or no skill, to
try out his falsifications and malicious corruptions.

The like sincerity he uses in citing Chrysostomes Mass, for so he calls
his Liturgy, in which is a prayer for Pope Nicholas, and the Emperor Alexius,
which was seven hundredth years after Chrysostomes death, and therefore could not
possibly be written by him. Besides this, there be diverse copies in the Greek
tongue, one that Erasmus translated, which is very unlike that copy which is
printed in Greek since that time, as the learned sort do know. The words he
cites, be in a manner the same that were in Basils Liturgy, saving that in
the end he adds, Permutans ea sancto spiritu tuo, changing them by the spirt.
This change may well be without transubstantiation, as has been often showed
before. The saying of Ambrose is more at large in the Chapter next before. As
for the prayer of the Popish Mass, that the oblation may be made the body and
blood of Christ, as it is understood of them, is nothing like the prayers of
the elder Liturgies, although in sound of some words it seem to agree. And as
foolishly as unjustly, he finds fault with our prayer in the communion, that
we receiving the creatures of bread and wine in remembrance of Christ's death
according to his institution, may be made partakers of his most blessed body
and blood. S. James, S. Clement, and the rest (says he) prayed not that they
might receive bread and wine. No more do we, thou foolish sophister. But that
receiving bread and wine, we might be partakers of Christ's body and blood, and
this did all the Apostolic and Primitive Church pray, as we pray in baptism,
not that we may receive water, but that receiving water we may be borne a new.
Neither did they ever pray, that the bread and wine might be transubstantiated
into the body and blood of Christ, but that they might be made the body and
blood of Christ to the^, after a spirtual and sacrame^tal manner. But I am much
to blame, to vouchsafe these childish sophismes of any answer. Next to this,
he would know what authority the Protestants can show, that the eating and
drinking of bread and wine, is of Christ's institution. That it is a part of
his institution, the Evangelists and S. Paul do show most evidently. But
though he took bread and wine in his hands (says M. Heskins) he changed it
before he gave them, so that it was no more bread and wine, but his body and
blood, and therefore we charge Christ with an untruth: to say, that receiving
of bread and wine is of Christ's institution. O Master of impiety and folly!
Christ made no such change in his hands, but that which was in the cup was
still the fruit of the vine, as he himself testified, saying: I will no more
drink of this fruit of the vine, until the day come when I shall drink it a
new with you in the kingdom of my father. Math. 26. As for the prayer of
those Liturgies of James and Basil, That God would make them worthy to receive
the body and blood of Christ, without condemnation, proves not, that they
meant to receive the body of Christ after a corporal manner, nor that the very
body of Christ may be received to damnation. The third Liturgy of
Chrysostom, which Erasmus expounds, has it otherwise. Dignos nos read
potenti manu ^ua, vt participes simu^ immaculati tui corporis, and preciosi tui
sanguinis, and per nos, omnis populus. Make us worthy by thy mighty hand, that
we may be partakers of thy undefiled body, and of thy precious blood, and so
may all the people by us. This prayer is godly and sound, and so are the other,
being rightly understood, namely, that they which eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup of the Lord unworthily (as S. Paul says) do eat and drink
their own damnation, not considering the Lords body. But M. Heskins urges,
that the spiritual body of Christ, or Christ spiritually, cannot be delivered
by the Priests to the people, but ye real body may. Yes verily, much rather
then the body of Christ corporally, even as the holy Ghost may be delivered, in
baptism, and as eternal life and forgiuesse of sins may be given in
preaching the Gospel, and none of these feinedly, but truly, yet otherwise are
they given by God, otherwise by this Ministers. But in this distinction of M.
Hes* it is good to note, yt he makes Christ to have a real body, which is not
spiritual, and a spiritual body which is not real. Christ has in deed a
mystical body, which is his Church, and yt is not his natural body, but by
spiritual conjunction united to his only true and natural body. But of this
mystical body, M. Hes. speaks not. Further, he takes exceptions to our
prayer, and affirms, that It is not the institution of Christ to receive the
creatures of bread and wine in the remembrance of his death. But notwtstanding
all his childish and blockish quarrels, our prayer is waranted by the Apostles
words 1. Cor. 11. As often as ye eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, ye
show the Lords death till he come. In the last part of this Chap. he will
determine of the intention of the ministers of the new Church. And yt is, that
Desiring to receive the creatures of bread and wine, they exclude the body and
blood of Christ. Who ever heard a more shameless lie, or a more inconsequent
argument? But seeing there be two sorts of ministers in this new founded Church,
he will speak of them both: one sort were made Popish Priests, and so have
authority to consecrate, but they lack intention, now they be fallen to
heresy: there is a second sort; which thought they could not have intention to
consecrate, yet being none of the greasy and blasphemous order, they lack
authority. But I would there were not a third sort, of whom I spoke in the last
chap. yt were made popish Priests, and so continue, but in outward
dissimulation join with us, if these intend to consecrate when they minister
the communion, how can M. Hes. dissuade the Papists from receiving of them, or
count their sacrament nothing but bare bread? And whereas M. He. seems in the
end to inueigh against such, I will willingly confess, that they are worse
then he is, or such as profess what they are, but not worse then he has
been in King Henry's and King Edwards days, when he dissembled and swa^e as
deeply as any of them all. As for our intention, seeing it is to do that
which Christ commanded to be done, and to receive that which he delivered us to
be received, if the particular explication of our faith will not satisfy M.
Hes. at least, let him after his own Popish Divinity, hold us excused for
our implicit faith: or if his own principles can hold him no longer then he
lists, let him give us leave to esteem none otherwise of them, then he
gives us example to do.

The seven and thirtieth Chapter treats of the oblation and sacrifice of the
Mass, as it was used of the Apostles and Fathers. Hesk.


When not one of the Apostles or Evangelists make one word mention, either of
Mass or sacrifice therein, Fulke.
M. Heskins takes upon him much more then all the Papists in the world can
prove. Concerning the Fathers, as they use the term of sacrifice, so I have
often showed, that they mean a sacrifice of thanksgiving, and not of
propitiation, or else they use the name of sacrifice improperly for a memorial
of the only sacrifice of Christ, which he once offered never to be repeated.
Neither do any of these Liturgies, which M. Heskins calls Masses, though they
be falsely ascribed to Saint James, Saint Clement, Saint Basil, Saint
Chrysostom, etc. show any other thing, but manifestly the same that I have
said. First that which is falsely ascribed to Saint James, in these words:
Memores etc. Therefore we sinners being mindful of his quickening passions, of
his healthful cross and death, his burial and resurrection from death the
third day, of his ascension into heaven, and sitting at the right hand of thee
o God the father, and of his second glorious and fearful coming, when he
shall come with glory to judge the quick and the dead, when he shall render to
every one according to his works, we offer unto thee o Lord, this reverend and
unbloody sacrifice, praying that thou will not deal with us according to our
sins. No reasonable man can understand here any other but a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, or prayer, or a memorial of the sacrifice of Christ. For he
says not, we offer the body and blood of Christ, but being mindful of his
sufferings etc. we offer this reverend and unbloody sacrifice, for such is the
sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving.

The like and more plain is that which is ascribed to Clemens by Nicholas
Methon. Memores igitur: Therefore being mindful of his passion, death, and
resurrection, returning into heaven, and his second coming, in which he shall
come to judge the quick and the dead, and to render to every man according to
his works, we offer unto thee our king and God, according to his institution,
this bread and this cup, giving thanks unto thee by him, that thou have
vouchsafed us to stand before thee, and to sacrifice unto thee. This is so
plain against M. Heskins, for the oblation of Christ's body and blood etc.
that he is enforced to flee to shameful petitions of principles, the end of
which is, that this bread is no bread, and this cup is no cup, but as Christ
called bread in the 6. of John, and S. Paul in the 1. Cor. 10. and 11. in
exposition whereof lies all the controversy. That Liturgy which is entitled
to S. Basil, is yet more plain for a spiritual oblation of thanksgiving.
Memores ergo etc. Therefore being mindful o Lord of his healthsome passions,
of his quickening cross, three days burial, resurrection from death,
ascension into heaven, sitting at thy right hand o God the father, and of his
glorious and terrible second presence, we offer unto thee, tua ex tuis, thy
gifts of thy creatures. M. Heskins says, he abhors not from the name of
sacrifice, as we do, but he falsely, belyeth us, for if he will look in our
Liturgy or communion book, he shall find, that we also offer a sacrifice of
thanksgiving, even our selves, our souls and bodies, (as the Apostle
exhorts us) to be a holy, lively, and acceptable sacrifice to God. But he
will not remember, that the sacrifice he speaks of, is not the body and blood
of Christ, but tua ex tuis, thy creatures of thy gifts, or thy gifts of thy
creatures, namely the bread and wine which also after consecration, he prays
to be sanctified by Gods holy spirit, but the body of Christ has no need of
such sanctification. Secondly, he notes not, that his Basil makes but two
presences of Christ in the world, the first, when he lived in humility in
the the world, the second which shall be terrible and glorious, by which he
does manifestly exclude ye third imagined presence of Christ in the sacrament.
To the same effect prays the Priest in the other Liturgy, ascribed to
Chrysostom: Memores etc. Therefore being mindful of this wholesome
commandment, and of all those things which are done for us, of his cross,
burial, resurrection, ascension into heaven, sitting at the right hand, of his
second and glorious coming again, we offer unto thee, tua ex tuis, thy gifts
of thy creatures. Master Heskins says, he will not seek the deapth of this
matter, but only declare, that al these fathers did offer sacrifice. In which
words he mocketh his readers egregiously, whereas he should prove, that they
offered the body and blood of Christ to be a propitiatory sacrifice, and that
he proves never a whit. Now that the meaning of yt Liturgy was not, to offer
Christ in sacrifice, this prayer therein used before ye words of consecration
(as they term it) does sufficiently declare: (...). O Lord, receive this
sacrifice unto thine heavenly altar. So that it is manifest, they called the
bread and wine a sacrifice, not the body and blood of Christ. The like is that
of Ambrose, The Priest says: Therefore being mindful of his most glorious
passion, resurrection from death, and ascension into heaven, we offer unto thee
this undefiled sacrifice, this reasonable sacrifice, this unbloody sacrifice,
this holy bread and cup of eternal life. This undefiled sacrifice (says M.
Heskins) must needs be the body and blood of Christ, for else there is
nothing undefiled, that a man can offer. But why may it not be as Ambrose
calls it here, the holy bread and cup of the communion, or as he calls it a
little before in the same place, the figure of the body and blood of Christ?
For the bread and the wine, which improperly he calls a sacrifice, in steed
of a memorial of a sacrifice, in that they be the holy sacraments of Christ's
body and blood, are holy, undefiled, and the food of eternal life. The same
Ambrose, called the soul of his brother, an innocent sacrifice, and offered
the same to God in his prayer: De obi^^ fratris etc.

To conclude, not one of all these Liturgies, no, not the Canon of the Mass it
self says, that the body of Christ is the sacrifice that they do offer, or
that they offer a propitiatory sacrifice, or that they offer any other, but a
sacrifice of thanksgiving, or a memorial of the sacrifice of Christ, by which
it is easy to judge how the doctrine that the Papists do now hold of the
propitiatory sacrifice of the Mass, does agree with the ancient Liturgies,
ascribed to the Fathers of the Primitive Church.

Hesk.
The eight and twentieth Chapter treats of the prayer for acceptance of the
oblation or sacrifice made in the Mass and used as well by the Apostles, as
the Fathers.

Fulk.
That the Apostles and Fathers commended to God by prayers the sacrifice which
they offered, it is a manifest argument, that they offered not a propitiatory
sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, for that needs no commendation of
our prayers. They prayed therefore, that their sacrifice of thanks giving, and
duetifull service, celebrated in the memory of Christ's death, might be
acceptable to God, as you shall see by all their prayers. First ye Liturgy
untruly ascribed to James prays thus: Pro oblatis. etc. For these offered and
sanctified, precious, heavenly, unspeakable, immaculate, glorious, fearful,
horrible, divine gifts, let us pray to our Lord God, that our Lord God
accepting them into his holy and heavenly, mental and spiritual altar for a
savor of spiritual sweet smell, may give us again, and send unto us the
divine grace and gift of the most holy spirit. These sanctified gifts can not
be the body and blood of Christ, which are holy of them selue, but the bread
and wine sanctified, to be a memorial of the death of Christ in a spiritual
sacrifice of thanksgiving. Saint Clement, if we believe Nicholas Methon,
prayed thus: Rogamus etc. We pray thee, that with merciful and cheerful
countenance thou will look upon these gifts set before thee, thou God which
have no need of any thing, and that thou may be pleased with them to the
honor of thy Christ. These words are plain that he offered not Christ, but
the bread and wine to be sanctified to the honor of Christ, namely that
they might be made the body and blood of Christ, to as many as receive them
worthily. In the Liturgy imputed to Basil, the Priest prays thus: Dominum
postulemus etc. Let us desire the Lord for these offered and sanctified the
most honorable gifts of our Lord God, and for the profit of the goods of
our souls, that the most merciful God, which has received them in his holy,
heavenly, intelligible altar, for a savor of sweet smelling, would send unto
us, the grace and communion of his holy spirit. The same words in a manner be
in the Liturgy fathered upon Saint Chrysostom, though it be manifest that it
was written seven hundredth years after his death, as is showed before. Pro
oblatis etc. For the offered and sanctified precious gifts, let us pray the
Lord, that our merciful God, who has received the^ in his holy, heavenly,
intelligible altar, may send us therefore grace, and the gift of the holy Ghost.
Master Heskins would have us note, that these Fathers seem to pray for their
sacrifice, which we note very willingly, for thereby is proved, that their
sacrifice was not the very body of Christ, for that needs no commendation of
our prayers. Well, S. Ambrose follows. Lib. de Sacr. 4. Cap. 6. Petimus etc.
We pray and desire, that thou will receive this oblation in thy high altar by
the hands of the Angels, as thou have vouchsafed to receive the gifts of thy
servant righteous Abel, and the sacrifice of our Patriarch Abraham, and that
which thy high Priest Melchisedech offered to thee. The very name of gods
heavenly, mental, intelligible, holy, and high altar, do argue a spiritual
sacrifice, and not a real oblation of the natural body and blood of Christ.
Next to these Liturgies, Master Heskins adioyneth the words of the Canon of
the Popish Mass, agreeing in effect with these of Ambrose, but nothing at all
in understanding. For that the Papists esteem their sacrifice to be very
Christ, God, and Man, which none of the ancient fathers did. For which cause
the Bishop of Sarum justly reproved those three blasphemies in their Canon, not
in respect of the words, but in respect of their understanding of them. The
first, that they seem to make Christ in his fathers displeasure, that he
needs a mortal man to be his spokesman. The second, that the body of Christ
should in no better wise be received of his father, then a Lamb at the hands
of Abel. The third, that they desire an Angel may come and carry away Christ's
body into heaven. These three blasphemies M. Heskins takes upon him to avoid
or excuse. To the first, after many loud outcries and beastly raylings against
that godly learned father of blessed m^mory, he answers, defending it first
by example of these ancient Liturgies: that they prayed for their sacrifice:
but this helps him not, for they neither thought nor said, that their
sacrifice was very Christ, God, and Man, but a sacrament and memorial of him.
Afterward he says, the meaning of their Church, is not to pray for Christ,
but by Christ, to obtain favor because they say in the end of every prayer,
per Christum Dominum nostrum, by our Lord Christ. But this hole is too narrow
for him to creep out at. For he confesses, that he prays for his sacrifice,
and he affirms, that his sacrifice is Christ, therefore he prays for Christ.

To avoid the second blasphemy, he says, that the meaning of their Church
is not, to pray that God will accept the sacrifice, which is acceptable of it
self, but their devotion and service, and them selves the offerers, as he did
accept Abell and his sacrifice etc. and so flies to the example of the old
Liturgies: but that will not serve him. For their sacrifice was not a
propitiatory sacrifice of the body and blood of Christ, but a service and
duty of thanksgiving in remembrance of Christ. And therefore they might
well pray that their sacrifice might be accepted, as Abell and his sacrifice,
as Noe and his burnt offering, and so of the rest, but this meaning will not
stand with the words of their Canon, which are that God will accept the
sacrifices, that is, the body and blood of Christ, as he accepted the gifts
of his just servant Abell etc. Therefore they must either change the words
of the Canon: or his answer to the second accusation, by the meaning of their
Church, can not stand, how so ever Hugo and Heskins would seem to salve or
rather to daub up the matter. To the third and last he answers, denying
that the meaning of their Church is, that the body of Christ should be carried
by an Angel, but that their prayers should be offered by an Angel or Angels in
the sight of GOD, making a long and needless discourse, of the ministry of
Angels, and how they offer our prayers to GOD, which is nothing to the
purpose. For the Master of the sentences: affirms, that an Angel must be
sent to consecrate the quickening body, or else it can not be called a Mass,
which is nothing like to Master Heskins service? Lib. 4. did. 13. In the end,
he will join issue with the proclamer that no Catholic ever thought, that
Christ's body was carried into heaven by an Angel. And it seems plainly, that
they are all ashamed of the gross absurdities and blasphemies of their Mass,
and therefore are forced to feign meanings and interpretations, which are
clean contrary to the words thereof. The truth is, that these and some
other prayers of their Canon, were used in the Roman Church, before the
opinion of transubstantiation, carnal presence, or propitiatory sacrifice of
the Mass were received, and this is the cause, that being now applied to
these monstrous errors, they employ such detestable blashemies, as all the
Papists in the world are ashamed to hear of, and not able to defend, whereas
before these errors received, some of them were good prayers, some were
tolerable.

Hesk.
The nine and thirtieth Chapter treats of the value of the Mas^^ to the quick
and the dead.

Fulk.
Prayer for the dead being an ancient error, Master Heskins triumphs out
of measure, that he finds some spots thereof, in the ancient writers
books. But there is great difference between praying for the dead, which is
an error rising of superstition and infidelity, and offering the body of
Christ in sacrifice for the dead which is a most horrible blaspheming.
Therefore he does maliciously wrest such things, as are spoken of prayer for
the dead, or the sacrifice of prayer for the dead, yea and sometimes the
sacrifice of thanksgiving for the dead, to the oblation of CHRIST for the dead.

Thus he abuses first all the liturgies, falsely ascribed to Saint Iame,
Basil, Chrysostom. Which as we have proved before, pretended not to offer
Christ's body in sacrifice, and therefore offered it not for the dead, although
they offer prayers for the dead. And here it is to be noted that Clementes
liturgy forsakes him for prayer for the dead, or else we should surely have
heard of him as we did before. He would get credit to that which is untruly
ascribed to Saint James, by the proclaymers testimony, because he said it was
full of knowledge, and full of errors also. When Dionysius can say nothing for
him, concerning the sacrifice of the Mass to be available for the dead, he
brings him in, speaking of prayers made for the party deceassed at his
burial. Concerning the antiquity of this Dionysius we have showed before,
that he cannot be so old by six hundredth years, as the Papists would make
him. That the Apostles taught not prayer for the dead in their writings, he
says the cause was, that they needed not, for that the Jews used both, prayer
and sacrifice for the dead before Christ's coming* by testimony of the Book
of Machabees which (he says) S. Augustine allows canonical, and by
witness of one Antonie Margarita, a late converted Jew to Papistrie. Touching
the verity of that history of the Machabees, though Augustine allow it to be
read, so it be soberly, yet does not he take it for Canonical, and Hierome
utterly denies it for Canonical: Expre^at. in Proverb.

But for as much as this controversy of praying for the dead, is vnpertinent
to this cause, and requires a larger discourse then the answer to this
Chapter may contain, and also that Master Heskins in the end joins issue
and makes a new challenge, I think it best, to refer the Readers to mine
answer against Master Allens Book of Purgatory, where he shall find all
those and a number more of places alleged and answered both touching prayers
for the dead, and the sacrifice of the Mass to be available to the dead, in
the same also is some treaty of prayer unto dead Saints. In the mean season,
this is sufficient against all man's authority, that the word of God
prescribes neither the one nor the other, but condemns them both, for what
so ever is not of faith is sin: and whatsoever is not of the word of God, is
not of faith: therefore prayers for the dead and to the dead, being not of the
word of God are sin. Neither were they used in ye Church more then an
hundredth years after Christ. And the first that makes mention of any prayers
for the dead, which is the elder error by two or three hundredth years, is
Tertullian, when he was an heretic, who had received it with other heresies of
ye Montanistes, who were two hundredth years after Christ: notwithstanding yt
Epiphanius and Augustine number it among ye errors of Arrius, that he denied
prayers for ye dead, yet they both do also number it for one of the heresies of
the Heracleonites, to redeem their dead with inuocations, and other ceremonies
used at their burial. How M. Heskins falsifieth the council of Carthage, which
made a decree that such as denied to pay the oblations of the dead, should be
excommunicated as murderers of the poor: I shall not need to rehearse,
understanding dead men's legacies for the use of the poor, for Masses said for
the dead. The same does M. Allen with this and other councels.

Likewise M. Heskins falsifieth Cyprian De Cerna Dom: In huius praesentia non
superuacue in endicant lachrymae veniam, nec vnquam patitur contriti cordis
holocaustum repulsam. In presence of him tears do never beg pardon in vain,
neither does the sacrifice of a contrite heart ever suffer repulse. Here does
he translate Huius of this sacrifice, and applies it to the sacrifice of the
Mass for the dead, whereas there is not one word in all that sermon, either
of prayer or sacrifice for the dead. But leaving this argument of praying and
offering for the dead, M. Heskins charge the ye proclaimer with three
untruths in one sentence, where he said, that Saint James in his Mass
preached and set forth the death of Christ, but the Papists in their Mass
have only a number of dumb geastures, and ceremonies which they themselves
understand not and make no manner mention of Christ's death. To the first he
answers, that they have all things that S. James had in his Mass, by the
proclaymers confession, who divides their Mass into holy prayer, holy
doctrine, holy consecration, holy receiving. See the impudent quarrelling of
this froward sophister. The Bishop says, ye Papists divide their Mass into
these parts, therefore he acknowledges their Mass to consist of these parts:
and yet all these are but dumb gestures and ceremonies, because the people
understand none of them, were they never so good, as a great part of them is
stark naught.

To the second he says, that they them selves understand not their own
gestures and ceremonies: he says that diverse writers have expounded every
parcel of them, as Isidorus, Rabanus, Hugo, Hoffnester, Garetius and others,
he leaves out Bonauentur, and Durandus the chief, belike being ashamed of
their ridiculous interpretations. But admit these things to be set forth in
books, does it therefore follow, that all or the most priests do
understand them, whereof a great number, can neither conster the Latin of
their mass, nor of those books? And generally it may be said, that they all
understand them not, because these writers themselves, do not agree in the
interpretation of them.

The third he says, is A plain lie that in the Mass they make no mention of
Christ's death, whereas the Mass sets forth the death of Christ more
lively then the new communion. For with great outcries he says, that there is
mention of his death, where it is said, The day before he suffered, and The
blood of the new Testament that it shed for you, and being mindful of his
passion, resurrection, etc. and do this in remembrance of me. Here is all the
preaching of Christ's death, that he can find in the Mass. But seeing he
grateth upon the words, No mention of his death, Which was not the Bishops
meaning, but no profitable mention to the institution of the people, who
understand nothing although there were never so long a sermon of Christ's death
in Latin: yet I say, he has not showed the death of Christ once mentioned in
the Mass, I say not by implication, but in form of words, whereof he takes
advantage, to charge the Bishop of a lie. But how open plain, loud, and
impudent a lie it is, that The Mass sets forth the death of Christ more
lively then the new communion, as (he terms it) I will not in one word go
about to confute, least I should acknowledge any never so small show of truth
to be in it.

The fortieth Chapter treats of private Masses, as the proclaymer terms
them, and solueth his arguments. Hesk.


Master Heskins first rehearsing the Bishops Arguments, against the private
Mass, Fulke.
first makes this general answer to them al, that they prove it is lawful
for the people to receive with the Priest, but not, that it is necessary. And
first he charge him with falsifying of Hierome In 1. Cor. 11. That the supper
of the Lord must be common to all the people, for Christ gave his sacraments
to all his disciples that were present. Where (says Master Heskins) he has
left out this word equally, by which is meant, that poor men have as good
right to the sacrament, as rich men, but not that it is necessary, that all
men present at Mass, should receive with the Priest. In deed the words of
Hierome are these: Conuenientibus etc. Iam non est Dominica sed humana, quando
vn^s quis quae tanquam caenam propriam solus inuadis, and alij, qui non
obtulerit, non impereit. Ita vt magis propter saturitatem, quam propter
mysterium videamini conuenire. Caeterum coena Dominica omni^us debes esse
communis, quia ille omnibus discipulis suis, qui aderant, qualiter tradidit
sacramenta. Coena aute^ ideo dicitur quia Dominu^ in coena tradidit
sacramentum. Item hoc ideo dicit quia in ecclesia conuenientes, oblationes suas
separatim offerabant: and post communionem quae cunque eis de sacrificijs
supersuissent, illic in Ecclesia communem coenam co^medentes pariter
consumebant. Et alius quidem esurit, etc. Quicumque non obtulisset non
communicabat, quira omnia soli qui obtulerunt, insumebant.

When you come together, etc. Now is it not the LORDS supper, but a man's
supper, when every one falls to it alone, as it were his own supper, and
gives no part to another, which has offered nothing: so that you seem to
come together, rather to fill your bellies, then for the mysteries sake. But
the Lords supper ought to be common to al men, because he delivered his
sacraments to all his disciples that were present, equally. And it is
therefore called a supper, because the Lord at supper delivered the
sacrament. Also he says this, therefore, for that when they came together in
the Church they offered their oblations severally: and after the communion,
whatsoever was left to them of ye sacrifice, even there in the Church, eating a
common supper, they consumed it together. And one truly is a hungered:
whosoever had not offered did not communicate, because they that had offered,
consumed all alone. By this let the Reader judge, what falsifying the
proclaymer used and whether Hierome that condemned several communions of rich
men, would allow a singular partaking of ye priest alone.

An other reason he has of baptism, which though it be common to all men,
and that two special times in the year were appointed for the ministration
thereof, yet it may be ministered alone. But the example is nothing like, for it
was always lawful and often used, to baptize singular persons at all times,
so was it never of the Lords supper, because the mystery that S. Paul
speaks of, 1. Cor. 10. Many partaking of one bread, cannot be expressed,
when one priest receives alone. The third reason he brings, is a counterfeit
decree, ascribed to Fabianus of Rome 242. years after Christ, that people
should receive thryse in the year, which had been needless, if they received
so often as the priest said Mass. In deed the impudent forgerie of this
decree is manifest, when two hundred years after Fabianus the people of Rome,
as both Saint Augustine, and Saint Hierome do write, and Master Heskins cannot
deny, received the communion every day. As for the decree of once a year
receiving, I know not when it was made, but wicked it was whenever it was
made. But Chrysostom, I wene does make much for private Masses, for he
writes, but Master Heskins dare not tell where for shame: Nonne per singulos
dies offerimus? offerimus quidem, sed ad recordationem facientes mortis eius.
Do we not every day (says he) make oblation? we offer in deed, but doing it
to the remembrance of his death. This question of Chrysos. is but an objection
of the usual phrase of offering, which he expounds to be nothing else, but a
celebration of the remembrance of Christ's death: and therefore in the end of
that discourse for a full resolution he sets down: Non aliud sacrificium
sicut Pontifex, sed id ipsum semper facimus, magis autem recordationem
sacrificij operamur. We offer not another sacrifice as the holy priest, but
the same always: but rather we make the remembrance of that sacrifice. This
correction shows, what he means by the name of sacrifice.

And whereas Master Heskins urges, that they ministered daily, and none were
bound but priests to communicate, above thrice in ye year, he concludes the
priest received oftentimes alone. But he plays the papist notably in taking,
rather then begging two principles: one that the people were not bound, which
he is not able to prove; another, that there was but one Priest in a church,
whereas at that time commonly there was but one church in a city, in which
were many priests, which by his own confession were bound to receive as often
as the sacrament was ministered, therefore one Priest did not eat up all alone
in Chrysostomes time.

To the saying of Ambrose which the Bishop alleges in 1 Cor. 11. Inuicem
expecta^^, etc. Ad inuicem expectandum dicit, vt multorum oblatio simul
celebratur: and vt omnibus ministretur. He says, they ought to tarry one for
another, that the oblation of many might be celebrated together, and that it
might be ministered unto them all. M. Heskins answers, that this doctor does
only reprove their want of devotion, which is false: for he does also show,
that all ought to communicate together, or else it is not to eat the Lords
supper, upon which words of the Apostle, he says also: Murius enim oblatum
tosius populi sit, quia in vno paene omnes significantur: per id quod enim vnum
sumus, de vno paene omnes n^c sumere oportet. For the gift which is offered
belongs to all the people, because they are all signified in one bread: for
in that we are one, we ought to receive all of one bread. If al must, then one
ought not alone. As for that balde shift he flies unto, that all priests in
several places communicate together, is too bad for a beggar to use, for so
might the Corinthians whom the Apostle reproves for not tarying one for
another, say they communicated with them whom they left out, and with all
Christians in the world. But now M. Heskins with full sail in railing seas
inueigheth against the proclaimer, for falsifying and wrong translating of Leo,
when he does not translate him at all; but only does gather the sum of his
saying in few words, and that truly: though he name neither Mass nor
sacrifice, which are in ye saying of Leo, which, how little it makes either
for the popish Mass, or for the sacrifice propitiatory, or finally for ye
private Mass, I desire the reader to return to the 32. Chapter of this book,
where he shall find the place at large set down and urged, which therefore I
thought it in vain to repeat in this Chapter. After this he defends, that
by the Mass book they are not bound to have a communion, but one priest may
receive alone. And whereas the Bishop rehearses diverse exhortations to
prayer, used in the Mass, as: Oremus, let us pray: Orate pro me fratres and
sorores, pray for me brethren and sisters, etc. And after the Agnus Dei: haec
sacro sancta, etc. This holy commixtion and consecration of the body and
blood of our Lord Jesus Christ be unto me and to all that receive it, health
of mind and body: All which sayings import a number present, and the last a
number receiving, whereas in the private Mass, there is never a brother or
sister present many times, but one sorry boy, that helps ye priest to Mass,
and though they be present, yet understand they not that they are bidden to
pray for the priest, when he turns about: Master Hesk. trifleth upon the
former prayers, separating them from the last, and affirming that they may pray
together, though they do not receive together. For he says: there be two
communions in the Mass, beside the receiving, (and therfore-belike that is not
needful) the one of prayer, the other of sacrifice, and as for the last
prayer for them that receive, is not meant only of them that receive in the
church at that time, but for all receivers of all places and times, when and
wheresoever. But what reason has he to persuade us, that those brethren and
sisterne whom the priest first exhorts to pray for him, that their
sacrifice might be acceptable to God, are not the same, which ought to receive
with him? nevertheless in the end, supposing the priests prays with
limitation of time and place, he says it is no reason, that if the people will
not receive, the priest should not: ye as verily, because Christ instituted a
communion of many participantes in one time and place, and not one priests
breakefast in a corner by him self. Again, the words of the Mass: Omnibus
sumentibus, to all which do receive, and quae sumpsimus, which we have
received, do prove a number of receivers, and which have received at tha^
time, and in that place, or else the Priest should say, to me which receive
it, and which I have received. And whereas Master Heskins charge the
proclaimer, for adding the word, Consecration, which is not in their Mass
book, I confess I know not whether it be in all coppies omitted, but I am
persuaded, the bishop had some ground of his saying, or else it might be the
fault of the Printer. But whereas the proclaimer alleges ye Canons of the
Apostles, and decrees of the bishops of Rome, Master Heskins says, as odious
as the Popes be to him, feign he is to pray aid of them. But he is altogether
deceived, God be thanked the holy scriptures are sufficient for us, both to
prove al truth, and to disprove all errors. But if either counsels or Popes
decrees, be alleged, it is to beat down the Papists with their own weapons,
and to cast their own doung in their own faces, as the Prophet says. But
let us hear the Canon of the Apostles, Can. 9. Fideles, etc. The faithful,
which come to the Church and hear the Scriptures, and receive not the holy
communion, let them be excommunicated, as men that disquiet the church. Here he
does most impudently charge ye proclaimer with falsification, which he himself
commits, alleging it, not out of the book of Canons, but out of the Popes
dirtie decrees: Omnes fideles, etc. All Christian men that in the solemn
service come together to the church, let them hear the scriptures of the
Apostles and the Gospel. And such as continue not in prayer until mass be
all done, nor do receive the holy communion, it is meet they be
excommunicated, as such as move disquietnesse to the church: but that the
learned reader, may see how syncerely ye bishop has dealt, and how falsely
Hesk. belyeth him, I will set down the Canon in Greek, as it was first written
(...). All the faithful or Christians which enter into the church, and hear
ye Scriptures, but tarry not out the prayer and the holy communion or
participation, ought to be separated, as causers of disorder in the Church.
Here you see no mention of Mass at all. And if any ignorant papist dare not
trust my translation out of Greek, let him understand yt in ye book of
councels, he shall find two translations of this and the rest of those Canons,
called the Canons of the Apostles, of which ye bishop has followed the one,
but Hesk. neither of both: for as I said before, there is no mention of the
Mass in any of them. Therefore, what is the falsification committed in the
Popes law, out of which he cites it, how honestly in so doing, and reproving
the bishop for following the truth, let the readers judge. But for all yt he
foysteth in the name of his Mass, yet can he not exclude ye necessity of
receiving the communion, of all ye lay people, which is the matter in question.
And therefore it is a very shame to report, what an absurd interpretation of
the Canon he would make, namely, that it was not decreede against good
Catholic people, which joined in prayer and received when devotion served
them, but against licentious and yet dissembling heretics and schismatikes,
which being present in the church, would not communicate, either in prayer or
in receipt of the sacrament. For confutatio^ of which blind meaning: first, I
would ask, whether omnes fideles, all the faithful (as the Canon says) does
signify all licentious and dissembling heretics and scismatikes? Secondly,
when the Canon is made expressly against them that after they have heard the
scriptures, depart when ye prayer and celebration of ye communion begins,
whether those yt be present and join not in prayer and participation can be
understood? Thirdly (if he knew what kind of Censure this was, yt is spoken of)
whether (...) or separation were a sufficient punishment, for men known to be
licentious, dissembling, heretics, and scismatikes? But he will father his
feyned understanding, upon the council of Antioch, which (says he) expounds
it so almost, word for word: Omnes qui ingrediuntur, etc. All that come into
the Church of God, and hear the holy scriptures, and communicate not in
prayer with the people but of a certain wantonness turn them selves away from
the receiving of the holy communion, let them be removed from the church,
until by confession they show fruits of repentance, and by prayers obtain
pardon.

But with excommunicate persons it is not lawful to communicate, neither may
we pray with such, as go from house to house avoiding the prayers of the
church. But who will grant to M. Heskins, that this should be an
interpretation of the former Canon, contrary to the words thereof? Secondly,
when this Canon consists of two parts, and in deed comprehends two of
those Canons of the Apostles, the former part concerning all men that come
into ye church, the later onel^ excomunicate persons, and scismatikes: who is
so deuoyde of reason, to grant that this Canon was made only against
heretics and scismatikes? But in the end, as it were forsaking his hold, he
claspeth another rotten post, that the Canon was made against the slacknesse of
the people, and not against the devotion of the priest: so that if none of the
people would communicate, the priest might receive alone. Surely yt private
Mass is such a monster, as it is not credible, that it once entered into any of
their heads, that decreede those Canons. But seeing they would not suffer any
small number of Christians to withdraw them selves from ye communion, is it
like they would suffer all not to receive? And seeing the word of God was the
ground of their decree: Tarry one for another, 1. Cor. 11. etc. who doubts,
but that if the peoples devotion served them not, the priest was as well bound
to tarry for the people, as one lay man for another? So that all the
congregation ought to communicate together, and none to be left out, but such
as either be unworthy, or have some necessary impediment. Finally, if the
Papists were grieved at the seeldome receiving and communicating with the
priest, as they pretend, why do they not execute the censures of these Canons
against all that be present at their Masses, and do not receive with them?

But M. Heskins proceeding in confutation of the proclaimers arguments, first
charge him to father a decree upon Calixtus, which was decreede by Anacletus,
as though one thing might not be decreed by two bishops, and as though in the
Canon law and other like-recordes, one law is not fathered upon diverse
bishops. And Gratian ascribes it to both, and namely to Calixtus did. 2. Cap.
Peracta. The words are these: Peracta consecratione, etc. When the consecration
is done, let every man receive the communion, unless he will be put from the
unity of the church. For this thing the Apostles have ordained, and the holy
church of Rome continues the same. Two great faults M. Hesk. finds in this
allegation. First, he does detort, abuse, and wrest the place: secondly he does
mutilate it, and cut it off by the knees. Here be vehement accusations, but in
the trial you shall see the bishop clearly discharged, and all the slander
verified upon the accusers own dealing. For first to reprove the bishops
allegation, which was brought out of a decree of Calixtus, he brings in an
Epistle of Anacletus. Secondly, he will not allege the words of the Epistle,
but the report of Bartholomewe Garanza, a common falsifier of Canons and
decrees, and thus he cites it: Sacerdotes quando, etc. The priests when they
do offer sacrifice unto our Lord, they ought not to do it alone, but let them
take witnesses with them, that they may be proved to sacrifice perfectly unto
the Lord in places dedicated to God, according to that of Deutron. 12. Take
heed thou offer not sacrifice in all places that thou see, but in the place
that thy Lord God has chosen. Let a bishop sacrificing to God have witnesses
with him, and more then another priest, with whom when the consecration is
done, let all the ministers communicate, which will not be forbidden the
entry of the church. Master Heskins in his translation has falsified the
words, for where ye Latin is Non soli hoc agere debent, The Priests ought
not to do it alone, he has turned it, they shall not do it alone: and where
the Latin is, sed testes secum adhibeant, he turns it, but they shall have
witnesses with them: whereas he should say, let them take witnesses with them.
His policy is easy to espy. He would have it seem to the English reader,
that witnesses are appointed, which if they fail to be present, the Priest
might notwithstanding say his private Mass alone, whereas by the words of
the decree, the Priests are commanded to get witnesses, and it is told them,
they ought not to do it alone. But M. Hesk. to justify the falsification of
his spanish Garanza, which says: omnes ministri communicent, let all the
ministers communicate, as though the commandment were to them, and not to the
people, brings forth a patch or two, out of the Epistle of Anacletus. But
that the truth of the proclaimer, and the falsehood of this exclaimer may be
more manifest, I will set down all the discourse of this matter, out of that
Epistle set forth under ye name of Anacletus, by Peter Crabbe, as errant a
Papist as Bartholomew Garanza for his heart: nothing therein by diversity of
letter, yt which M. Hesk. has rent out from the rest. Ipsi autem quando Domino
sacrificant, non soli hoc agere debent, sed testes secum adhibea^t vt Domino
perfect in sacratis Deo sacrificare locis probentur. Ait namque authoritas
legis Divine: Vide ne offeras holocausta tua in omni loco quem videris, sed in
loco quem elegeris Dominus Deus tuus. Episcopus Deo sacrificans testes, vt
praefixum est, secum habeat, and plures quam alius sacerdos. Sicut enim maioris
honoris gradu fruitur, sic maioris testimonij incrementatione indiget. In
solennioribus quippe diebus aut septem, aut quinque aut tres diaconos, qui eius
oculi dicuntur, and subdiaconos atque reliquos ministros secum habeat, qui
sacris induti vestimentis in front and a tergo, and presbyteri e regione
dextra laeuaque contrito cord and humiliato spiritu, ac prono stent vultu,
custodientes eum a maleuolis hominibus, and consension eius praebeant
sacrificio. Peracta aue^ consecratione omnes co^municent, qui noluerint
ecclesiasticis carere liminibus. Sic enim Apostoli statueruns, and sancta
Romana tenes ecclesia. And when the priests do sacrifice, they ought not to do
it alone, but let them take witnesses with them, yt they may be proved to do
sacrifice to the Lord perfectly, in places dedicated to God. For the authority
of Gods law says: Take heed thou offer not thy burnt offerings in every
place which thou shall see, but in ye place which the Lord thy God shall
choose. Let a bishop sacrificing to God have witnesses with him, as is before
said, and more then another priest. For as he enjoys a degree of greater
honor, so he has need of the increase of greater testimony. For in more
solemn days, let him have with him either seven, or five, or three deacons,
which are called his eyes, and the subdeacons and the rest of the ministers,
which being clothed in the holy vestimentes, let them stand before and behind
him, and the priests over against him on the right hand and on the left hand
with contrite heart, and humbled spirit, and sober countenance, preserving
him from malicious men, and let them give their consent to his sacrifice. And
when the consecration is ended, let al communicate, which will not be deprived
of entry into the church. These be the words of that Epistle which M. Hesk.
mangleth and falsifieth thus: Episcopus, etc. The bishop doing sacrifice unto
God, let him in the solemn days have either seven, or five, or three deacons
which be called his eyes, and subdeacons and other ministers. First, he leaves
out, That, no priest ought to sacrifice alone, but must take witnesses with him.
Secondly, that a bishop ought to have more then another priest at all times.
Thirdly, he cites the words so, as though the bishop should have no need of
witnesses, but only on solemn days. Fourthly, he leaves out, how the deacons
and other ministers should stand before and behind the bishop, which will not
agree with his popish altar: for who can stand before the popish priest,
except he stand in the window, or upon the altar? Finally, whereas omnes may
reasonably be understood of al present, he restrains it only to ye
ministers, which if it were so, yet it overthrows the Popish private Mass.
For, if there be twenty or forty priests and clerks, as there be often so
many at Mass, and sometimes an hundredth and more, as at a Synod, yet not one
of them will receive with ye priest, neither are they banished yt refuse to
communicate. But to prove yt this word, all, should be referred to all the
clergy, he cites the Can. 9 Apost. Si quis episcopus, etc. If any bishop,
etc. when the oblation is made, do not communicate, either let him show a
cause, that if it be reasonable he may obtain pardon, or if he show none, let
him be excommunicated, as one that is cause of offense to the people, giving
suspicion of him which did sacrifice, that he has not well offered it. This
Cano^ must be no interpretation of ye Epistle, and though it were, yet is his
private Mass in never the better case: for here are still a number necessarily
bound to communicate with the Priest, under pain of excommunication. But M.
Hesk. says: possible it might be, that when the bishop had been three
attendant upon him, or such small number, they might all have cause to
abstain. This is a possibility not to like to come in esse, or being, once in
20. years. For where finds he yt the bishop might have but three with him?
The decree before cited, requires three deacons at the least, beside
subdeacons and other ministers: of which in the ancient church, there was
great store and diverse functions, as acolytes, exercistes, readers,
dorekeepers, etc. But admit it were possible, that all these should abstain
(yet says he) there is no prohibition for ye priest to receive alone. The
decree says they ought not to sacrifice alone, and both it and the Canon,
command all Christians, and especially the Clergy that be present to
communicate: yet M. Hesk. says, they are not prohibited to say Mass alone,
or yt it is not said, yt the private Mass is naught. What reason is in these
aunswers let the readers judge. But for clear proof and overthrow of ye
proclaimers challe^ge, M. Hesk. says, that in the Mass of Chrysostom. there is
a plain rule given, what was to be done, when the priest received alone, and
that the Proclaimer had not learned so far, as to know this. Indeed this is
an high point of learning (M. Hesk.) that ye proclaimer could never attain
unto, to play with your readers noses so impudently, which cannot smell out
your falshod, when you bear them in hand yt that was Chrysostomes Mass,
which was written seven hundredth years after Chrysostom was dead, as appears
plainly by the prayer for Pope Nicolas, and the Emperor Alexius that is in it,
which the proclaimer as unlearned as you make him, yet had wit to find out and
lay abroad to your open shame, and to all their shames that use the same
Liturgy, as authentical and rightly to be ascribed to Chrysostom. The issue
that you join, that private Mass is not naught, nor prohibited in scripture,
council, or catholic writer, is tried already by sufficient evidence, given
by the B. of Sarum against Harding, and by answer to your counterfeit and false
evidence uttered in this chapter and in the next. As for the receiving of a
sick man alone, has nothing to do with private Mass, which sole receiving if
it were admitted, yet a case of extreme necessity, approoueth not an usual
and daily contempt of Christ's holy institution.

The one and fortieth chapter proves that the mass may be said and the
Sacrament received* without a number of communicantes at one time in one place.
Hesk.


When all is said and done (says M. Hesk.) the Mass shall be holy and good,
and this shall be a truth, Fulke.
yt a priest saying Mass, or any other man godly disposed, sick or whole, may
receive the holy sacrament alone: and for proof of this, he uses this reason:
All things forbidden us to do (as the adversary says) be contained in the
scripture, private Mass and sole receiving are not forbidden in scripture,
therefore they may be done. His Mayor is grounded upon the authority of his
adversaries. But which of his adversaries says that all things forbidden are
forbidden by name? In deed we say that all things that are contrary to Gods
commaundment are forbidden, so are private Mass and sole receiving, therefore
they are forbidden. That private Mass and sole receiving are contrary to Gods
commandment, it is manifest by the institution of Christ, which is of a
communion, and not of a private Mass or sole receiving. Vnus panis, etc. One
bread we being many are one body, etc. After this fond argument, which is
returned upon his own neck, he cauilleth at ye proclaimers words, because he
says, he knows they have such replies, yt as there be many things spoken in
ye old doctors of yt communion, so as many things or mo, are spoken by them of
ye private Mass: but this latter part says M. Hesk. he passes over and will
not rehearse one. I cannot blame M. Hesk. if he would feign have the Bishop
find something for him in ye doctors, yt sounds for the private Mass,
because he can find nothing him self. But when the bishop says, he knows
they have such replies, he does not grant, that their reply is true, but
denies it, as false, and if it were so, that any thing were in the old
Doctors that might seem to favor the private Mass, yet what obligation has
M. Hes. of the bishop, wherein he is bound to show it forth in a sermon. I use
more words about this cauil, then the matter needs* only to show ye foolish
frowardnes and perverse foolishnes of this man, yt will seek a knot in a rush,
to take occasion to rail and slander: But to the purpose, M. Hes. confessing,
yt in the Primitive Church the people did often co^municat, addresseth him self
to prove, yt the sacrament may lawfully be received of one alone, and yt by
Justinius, whom both Cranmer and the proclamer (he says) does pitifully abuse,
and truncatly allege: but he him self does falsify and truncatly allege, as
we have showed before. But first I wish the reader to consider, yt he has
forsaken his private Mass, for which is no show in the Doctors, and flees to
sole receiving in cases of necessity, or in superstitious abuse, which prove
not yt any private Mass was said. Justinius he cites thus: Diaconi distribuunt
etc. The Deacons deliver of the consecrated bread and wine and water to every
one that is present, and if there be any away, they carry it home to them. In
this translation he leaves out ad participandum, to be received, which is in
his Latin text, and only makes mention of ye delivery, omitting for what use
it was delivered. In deed the Greek is otherwise, (...). The distribution and
participation of those things, for which thanks has been given, is made to
every one, and to them yt are not present, by the Deacons there is sent. First
I say, as there is a communion confessed of them that are present, so it was
not clear yt that which was carried to the^ yt were absent, was carried as ye
sacrament, but as alms: but admit it were carried as the sacrament, yet it
follows not, yt it was received of every man alone, but of every family, which
upon necessary cause was absent from the whole congregation, or of diverse
families meting in one, which could not meet in the common assembly, so that
here is no private Mass said, but a communion ministered, neither is there so
much as any sole receiving proved, which if it were, yet proves it not the
private Mass. And therefore all M. Heskins babbling of the sacrament to be one,
that is ministered or received in diverse places, and at diverse times, is vain,
and to no purpose, and most fond it is, that he compares it to the sacrament
of baptism, which is but one to all men. For of that I may thus reason: though
every man's baptism is not a diverse baptism, but all is one baptism, as there
is one faith and one God, yet as no man is baptized by other men's baptism, but
by his own, so no man communicates with other communions but only in that
action wherein he is a communicant him self. Therefore M. Heskins fantasy of
one Priest communicating with all Priests in all places, is overthrown by his
own argument and similitude. But he will prove sole receiving by Tertullian, S.
Cyprian, Basil, and Hierome, by whom (he says) it may be gathered, that the
godly brought with them, a fine linen cloth, or a pretty box to carry it
home. I find the sacramental bread in some old writers of credit, carried in
a cloth or a wicker basket, but I remember not any pretty box. For they had
not such pretty cakes six hundredth years after Christ, as M. Heskins imagines
the pretty box served to carry them in. In the superstitious Dialogues of Pope
Gregory Lib. 4. Cap. 56. we read of two cakes called Coronae, which should
have been given to a poor man in alms, for his service done in the Bathe, but
this supposed poor man being a ghost, desiered that the same might be offered
in Mass to redeem him out of that his purgatory: Out of this fable which
Gregory rehearses, this truth is proved, that the bread they said Mass
withal at that time, was so great, ye two of these cakes would give a poor man
his dinner at the least: for two of the Popish singing cakes would have done
him small pleasure for his bodily relief, for which at the first it was meant
to be bestowed. But let us hear Tertullian, who writing to his wife, and
dissuading her from marrying with an Infidel after his death, says thus: Non
sciet maritus quid secreto ante omnem cibum gustes? Et si sciuerit panem non
illum credet esse, qui dicitur. Shall not thy husband know what thou do
secretly eat before all meat? And if he know it to be bread, he will not
believe it to be that bread, which it is said to be. I pass over how M.
Heskins has corrupted Tertullian by false pointing, how be it he can gather
nothing of this place, but ye superstitious receiving of women in corners, and
that in time of persecution. But their superstition proves neither sole
receiving to be good, and much less private Mass to be lawful. That this
custom was superstitious and naught, M. Heskins can not deny, for it was
abolished by ancient councels, and the Papists them selves do not observe it,
nor suffer it to be used, else why send they not over their consecrated cakes
to their friends, as they do their Agnus Dei, their grains of the Trinity,
and such other gaudes and bables? But Saint Basil he weeneth gives a notable
testimony, who writing to a Gentlewoman called Caesaria Patritia, which feared
to touch the sacrament with her own hand, says thus. Co^municare per
singulos dies etc. To communicate every day, and to participate of the holy
body and blood of Christ, it is a godly thing and very profitable, as he says
manifestly. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life eternal.
For who doubts, but the often participation of life, is nothing else but many
ways to live? Wherefore we communicate four times in every week: On Sunday
and Wednesday, on Friday and Saturday, and on other days, if there be the
memory of any Saint. But that it is no grievous thing, that any man should be
constrained by necessity in times of persecution, when the Priest or the
Minister is not present, to take the Communion with his own hand, it is
superfluous to declare, for so much as it is by the very use of the thing
confirmed by a long custom. For all they that lead a solitary life in the
wilderness where there is no Priest, keeping the Communion at home, do
receive it of them selves. But in Alexandria and in Egypt, every one of them
which are of the people for the most part, has the Communion in his own
house. For after the Priest has consecrated the sacrifice and distributed it,
we must believe worthily to participate and receive it. For in the Church the
Priest gives part, and he which receives it, takes it with all liberty, and
puts it to his mouth with his own hand. Therefore it is the same in virtue
whether any man take one part of the Priest, or many parts together. Here M.
Heskins urges, that every man in his own house received the sacrament in time
of persecution. But this proves not a sole receiving, if private men have the
Communion in their house, for they might receive many together. But concerning
the Hermites that dwelled in dens and caves alone, he says they could have no
company, and thereupon insulteth against the proclamer, for saying the
Indians, Arabians, Armenians, Grecians, etc. never received nor used the private
Mass. And has he proved the private Mass by the receiving of the Hermites,
which were Lay men, and no Priests? No forsooth. For he is feine to fasifie the
words of this epistle in translating, to prove that they received alone. The
words are in Greek thus, (...). in Latin a se ipsis co^municant. Which he
turns falsely. They communicate by them selves, as though they did receive it
alone, whereas he should say, they receive the Communion of them selves, that
is one of an other, for it is well known, they were not so solitary, but they
had meetings at sometimes, as appears by the histories. As for other things
that M. Heskins notes out of this place, because they are noted and answered
in other parts, where some of these sentences are alleged, I will spend no
time in repeating of them here. Only concerning ye authority of this fragment
of an Epistle, which is not extant in all S. Basils works, I give the reader to
understand, that it may be doubted of what antiquity it is, whether it were
written by the ancient Basilius surnamed the great, or by some other of yt name
of much later time. Next is brought in Hieronyme, to testify that ye like has been used in Rome in his time, in time of persecution. I marvel why M. Hes.
adds in time of persecution, for in Hieromes time there was no such
persecution at Rome, and he speaks not of it as a shift in time of
persecution, but as a custom in time of peace. Belike M. Hes. would have the
custom excused by necessity of persecution, which otherwise he can not allow
to be good of it self. But what says Hier. ad Iouin. Apoll. Scio Romae hanc
esse consuetudinem etc. I I know this custom is at Rome, that the faithful do
always receive the body of Christ, which thing I do neither reprehend nor
allow. For every one abounds in his own sense. But I appeal to their
conscience, which the same day after carnal copulation do communicate, and as
Persuis says, purge the night with water: Why dare they not go to the
Martyrs? Why come they not into the Churches? Is Christ one in the public
place, an other in the private houses? That which is not lawful in the church,
is not lawful at home. Nothing is hid from God, yea, the very darkness is
bright with him. Therefore let every man examine him self, and so let him come
to the body of Christ.

Here he urges that the people did communicate in their houses sometimes,
namely after company with their wives, when they durst not come to Church. But
this custom does Hierom severely reprove, and would not have them communicate,
but when they might come to the Church without scruple of conscience. So that
Master Hesk. brings in an unlawful custom, to prove his private Mass to
be lawful, which yet is never ye nearer, although this custom were good: for
thereby is not proved so much as sole receiving, nor reservation as we have
showed before, because nothing appears to the contrary, but that they might
have the Priest to consecrate and minister to them at home. As for the
admonition he gives to married persons, to abstain from company with their
wives etc. I pass it over, as not worthy ye rehearsal. Married men are to be
exhorted to temperance and chastity, and further to prescribe times etc. it
may be Popish Divinity, but it has no ground in the word of GOD. As for the
married Priests, he has little to do with them, let him take thought for his
unmarried Priests.

But Chrysostom he thinks says much for the private Mass in Cap. 1. ad
Ephe. Hom. 3. Frustra habetur quotidiana oblatio, frustra stamus ad altar.
Nemo est qui participet. The daily oblation or sacrifice is done in vain, we
stand at the altar in vain. There is no man that will partake with us. By this
(he says) it is evident, that Mass was said in the Greek Church, though
there were no communicants with the Priest* But this evidence is false (Master
Heskins) for first there was a number of ye Clergy which always did
communicate: although none of the people would receive, as was proved before by
the ancient canons commonly called of the Apostles. And where as you labor to
prove, that ye Mass was not in vain, although no man did receive with the
Priest, because the Mass had two ends: the one of oblation, the other of
receiving, so that although it were in vain in respect of the receiving, yet it
was not in vain in respect of oblation, I pray you look back again to
Chrysostoms words, and see if he do not say, yt was done in vain, which you
labor most to prove could not be in vain, namely Frustra habetur quotidiana
oblatio, The daily offering or sacrifice (as you turn it) is done in vain. For
make what respects you can, the oblation is in vain to them that do not
receive it. And where you would prove that Chrysostom said Mass, though no
man receive with him, because he says: Nemo est qui participet: There is no
man to participate: you may as well say that Chrysostom himself did not
participate, because he says generally no man, and then he said no Mass by
your own rule, for you hold it necessary that the priest himself should
receive. But to show that Chrysostom means not generally as the word
sounds, that none of the people did communicate, it appears by the whole
circumstance of his discourse in yt sermon. For immediately before the words
cited by M. Heskins he says Multam video huius rei inaequalitatem. In alijs
quidem temporibus saepenumero, neque cum mundi estis acceditis, in paschate
vero etiamsi quid temerarium vobis sit commissum nihilominus acceditis: o
co^suetudinem, o praesumptionem. I see great inequality of this matter. At
other times truly oftimes you come, not when you are clean, but at Easter
although you have committed any rash thing nevertheless ye come: O custom, O
presumption. By these words it appears yt he rebukes the neglecte of some
in coming to the communion but seldom, and yet coming rashly at Easter, to
such therefore ye celebratio^ of ye communion was in vain. And therefore
exhorting the^ to prepare themselves he takes away their objection Non es
oblatione atque commu^on^ dignus? Igitur neque precatione. Art thou not worthy
o^ the oblation and the communion? Then neither art thou worthy of the
prayers. Yea, he is very earnest, that al they that do not communicate, should
depart with the penitentes and Catechumeni, and compteth them impudent which
tarry and do not communicate with the rest. Quisquis enim mysteriorum consors
non est, impudent and improbu^ ^stat. For whosoever is not partaker of the
mysteries, in standing by, he is impudent and wicked. Thus by Chrysostoms
judgment all they that hear Mass, and do not communicate with the priest, are
impudent and wicked persons. Again to prove that many did always communicate
he says: Ita tu quoque aduenisti, hymnum cecinisti cum omnibus reliquis, ex
little te numero esse, qui digni sunt, hoc ipso confessus es, quod non
abcessisti. Quomodo cum manseris, de mensaista non participas? Indignus sum,
inquis: indignus es igitur and ea communione, quae in precibus est. Thou also
art come, thou have sung the hymn with all the rest, thou have professed thy
self to be of the number of them that are worthy even by this, that thou have
not departed. Seeing thou have tarried, how have thou not participated of this
table? Thou say, I am unworthy: therefore thou art unworthy of that
communion, which is in prayers. By this place it is manifest, that a great
number did always receive, although many did refrain. And that Chrysostomes
communion was nothing like a private Mass, mumbled in a corner, (as M. Heskins
most impudently affirms,) but such a one, as all the people sung hymns
together at it, and they were counted wicked and impudent, which stood by and
did not communicate. Finally that Chrysostom compted it not lawful for any to
be present, which did not communicate, he says also: Post acta mysteria
accedere licet ac videre: praesentibus vero mysterij^ abito. Nihil hic tibi
quam Catechumeno plus licet. When the mysteries are ended, thou may come
near and see, but when the mysteries are present, depart. It is no more lawful
for thee to be here, then for a learner, that is not baptized. Thus Chrysostom
you see makes nothing for the private Mass, but altogether against it. His
next argument is of Serapion, who being sick at the point of death, for his
comfort, (because he had been excommunicated) desired to receive, at which
time the minister was also sick, which should have received with him, and
therefore sent him the sacrament by his boy. So that here is a case of extreme
and double necessity, for sole receiving, to prove what might lawfully be done
where no necessity urges: Eusebius. Lib. 6. Cap. 34.

Concerning S. Augustines priest, that said Mass in a private house, to drive
away spirits, we shall hear more in the next Chapter. After this follows the
counterfeit decree of Soter, that no priest should say Mass except two were
present to answer him, when he says Dominus vobiscum, which yet the Popish
priests do not observe, for they say Mass, when they have but one boy with
them, or their Parish clearke, and sometimes perhaps none at al. Here says M.
Heskins some are commanded to be present, but none are commanded to
communicate. An argument like the authority of the decree, howbeit if a man
would stand to reason with him, there is like cause, why they should communicate,
as why they should be present, for as the priest says: The Lord be with you,
therefore two must be present: so he says of the sacrament, Quod sumpsimus,
which we have received, which is not true, when he only has received. To this
decree, he joins a Canon of the council of Agatha. Wherein the people are
commanded to hear Mass every Sunday, and to tarry to the end, but they are
not commanded to communicate.

First I answer this Canon is not found in the ancient records, as Peter
Crabbe honestly confesses. Secondly, where it is found, it is Missas die
Dominico secularibut tenere, which signifies, that seculer men are commanded
to frequent the assemblies, (for so Missae of old time did signify,) for
which Master Heskins turns it, Missas tota^ audire, etc. That they are
commanded to hear the whole Masses, which is the corruption of Gratiane. The
like decree he brings out the council of Orleans: That the people should not
depart before the solemnity of the Mass be ended.

All which prove not a private Mass: for either they meant, that the people
should communicate that were present, or else at the least the Clergy
received with the Bishop. For long after the time of these councels, it was
decreed, that al persons both men and women should receive every Sunday. As
Matisconense. 2. Cap. 4. Decernimus vt omnibus diebus Dominicis, altaris
oblatio ab omnibus viris and mulieribus offeratur tam panis, quam vini: vt per
has immolationes and peccatorum suorum fascibus careant and cum Abel vel
caeteris just offerentibus promereantur esse consortes. We decree that every
sunday, the oblation of the altar be offered of all persons men and women, both
of bread and wine: that by these offerings, they may be loosed of the bands of
their sins, and with Abel and the rest offering righteously, they may be
worthy to be companions.

The last authority he cites, is out of the Popes law, entitled to S.
Augustine, but not to be found in all his works, not sauouring of his style,
or of any man's meanly learned, and therefore I will not vouchsafe such a gross
counterfeit of any answer. The rest of the Chapter, being spent in railing, I
will answer with silence, concluding that as here is little for sole
receiving, contained in this Chapter, so for private Mass, here is nothing at
all.

Hesk.
The two and fortieth Chapter proves the truth of those matters of the
sacrament, by that it has pleased God to confirm the same with miracles.

Fulke.
First M. Hesk. compares himself with Helias, which challenged the Priests of
Baal to show a miracle, so he challenges the Lutherans and sacramentaries to
bring forth first some miracle. But he could never hear of any saving one, and
that was of Luther, which he reports of himself (as he says) in his Book
of the private Mass, and as Prateolus says, in his Book De Missa Angulari,
but where it is written I could never yet find, though I have made some
search for it. Luther reports that the Devil awaked him out of his sleep
at midnight, and disputed with him that the private Mass is horrible
idolatry, etc. For any thing that I can perceive, by the words cited by
Master Heskins, there is no miracle at al spoken of by Luther, but only he
confesses what inward temptations of Satan he sustained, for saying private
Mass, by the space of 15. years together. Which the Papists after their
accustomed synceritie do interpret, as though he boasted of a miracle, as
though he were persuaded by the devil, to forsake the private Mass, as a
thing abominable. But Luther in deed in this book written against the private
Mass, utterly rejects all miracles, that are alleged to maintain false
doctrine contrary to the word of God, and namely those miracles that are
reported to have been done, to confirm the credit of the private Mass,
which either were feigned (as a great number were) or else wrought by the
sleight of Satan, to establish idolatry, as in all Heathen nations, the
devil has thus wrought miracles to confirm the people in their errors.

Thus therefore we are to judge of miracles, that they are even as the
doctrine, for which they are alleged, so that if Master Heskins can not prove
his private Mass, and other heresies by scripture, they will be made
nevertheless by miracles. But let us hear in order, what worshipful miracles
he alleges. First a feigned fable out of a counterfeit writer called
Amphilochius, that a Jew saw in Saint Basils hand a child divided. Then a
tale out of Vituspatium of as good authority as Legenda Aurea, that the
sacrament was turned into bloody flesh to a doubting old man. Next out of
Optatus Libro 2. Contra Donat. That dogs after they had eaten the sacrament,
cast unto them by the Donatistes, ran mad and werried their Masters.

Which last might be a true and just punishment of God against the Donatistes,
for their heresy, yet proves it not that the dogs did eat the body of
Christ, which God forbid that any Christian man should think. Another miracle
is reported by S. Augustine, Lib. 22. De ciuitate. Dei Cap. 8. That one of his
priests saying Mass in a house, that was molested with the power of the
devil, delivered the house from such disquietnesse. This belike is alleged
for the private Mass. But that proves nothing. For Augustine in that place
names no Mass: he says, he offered there the sacrifice of the body of
Christ, praying that the house might be delivered from that molestatio^, and
so it came to pass. Now it is nothing credible, that he offer^d that sacrifice
alone, but that the owner of the house and all his family did there
communicate with him, and therefore here is nothing to help the private Mass
in this miracle.

Next unto this, interlacing certain sentences of Bernarde of the virtue of
the sacrament, he returns to miracles, and then tells a tale out of Paul
the Deacon, of a noble woman of Rome for whom S. Gregory by prayer, turned the
sacramental bread into the form of A very bloody fleshly little finger. A
fair miracle I promise you, but if it had been true, Gregory that was so
light of credit, to believe and report so many miracles, would have written it
him self. But Gregory, though otherwise full of superstition, was not yet
come to the carnal manner of presence. Two miracles are rehearsed of his
report, one of a prisoner that was delivered out of his chains, when Mass
was said for him by his wives procurement, supposing he had been dead. Gregory
in deed speaks of sacrifices, which perhaps were prayers, and not the
Mass. But if he speak of that profanation of the sacrament, that in his time
took some strength, to offer it for the dead, yet he speaks of another manner
of offering, then the Papists use. For thereof he says, in the same place as
Master Heskins confesses: Hinc ergo, etc. Of this decree brethren gather you
certeinely, how great a band of conscience in us the holy sacrifice offered by
our own selves, is able to loose, if being offered for another it could in
another loose the bands of the body. These words declare, the sacrifice was
such as every one might offer for himself, which could not be the sacrifice
of ye Mass, which only the priest offers. The last miracle is of Agapetus,
that by giving the sacrament to a dumb man, restored him to his speech.

Admitting this to be true, it makes nothing for the carnal manner of
presence, which the Church of Rome at that time had not received. And although
such miracles might now be wrought by Papists, we would give no more credit
unto them, then they could win by Gods word: for so we are taught by God him
sefe. Irenaeus a most ancient writer of great credit testifies, Lib. Cap.
9. that Marcus the heretic by his sorcerie caused the wine in the cup at his
ministration to appear purple and red like blood, that the people might
think, that Christ dropped his blood into his cup through his prayer: likewise
he wrought so cunningly, that he multiplied the wine, so that out of a little
cruse, he filled a great pot, so full that it ran over. But the Church of God
was not moved by these lying miracles, to give credit to his false doctrine,
or to think that he had the blood of Christ in his challice for all that
counterfeit show of blood, which he made: no more will we believe the Papists
pretending miracles contrary to the word of God. And as for diverse of these
miracles, which he alleges to confirm the dignity of the Mass, they were
done, or at least said to be done, before the Mass was thoroughly shapen, and
therefore if they be true, yet they confirm not the doctrine of ye Mass, which
was afterward invented. Finally whereas he urges the proclaymer to bring one
miracle, for the confirmation of his religion, although it were an easy matter
to bring forth many signs of more certeintie, and better credit then the
Papists can bring any, showed by God since the restitution of the Gospel: yet
because our doctrine is the same, that was confirmed by all the miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, we seek no confirmation thereof by later miracles,
but only by the scriptures. And herein we follow the example of S. Augustine,
who urges ye Donatistes to prove themselves to be the Church of God, only by
Canonical scriptures and not by miracles, whereof they boasted more then the
Catholics: Lib de vnitate Ecclesiae Cap. 16. Et sic ostendat, vt non dicat
verum est, quia ego hoc dico: aut quia hoc dixit ille collega meut, (...) illi
collegae mei, aut illi Episcopi vel clerici vel laici nost^i aut ideo verum
est, quia illa and illa mirabilia fecit Donatus, vel Pontius, vel quilibet
alius: aut quia homines ad memorias mortuorum nostrorum orant and exaudiuntur,
aut quia illa and illa ibi contingunt, aut quiae ille fraeter noster, aut illa
soror nostra tale visum vigilans vidit, vel tale visum dormiens somnianis.
Remoueantur ista vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium
spirituun: ut eni^^ non sunt vera qu dicuntur, aut sihreticoru^ aliqua mira
facta sunt magis canere debemus. And so let him show the Church, that he do
not say, this is true, because I say it, or because such a one my fellow said
it, or those my fellows, or those our bishops or clearkes, or laymen: or it is
therefore true, because Donatus or Pontius, or any other has done those and
those miracles: or because men pray at the memories of our dead men, and are
heard, or because those things and those things happen there, or because this
our brother or that our sister saw such a vision waking, or dreamed such a
vision sleeping. Let these things be set aside, which are either the
counterfetting of lying men, or else ye wonders of deceiving spirits: for either
those things are not true that are told, or else if any miracles are done of
heretics, we ought the more to beware of them. And after a little he says in
the same Chapter. Sed verum ipsi Ecclesiam teneant, non nisi diuinarum
scripturarum canonicis libria ostendant, quia nec nos propterea dicimus nobis
credere oportere, quod in Ecclesia sumus, quia ipsam quam tenemus commendauit
Mileuitanus Optatus, vel Mediolanensis Ambrosius, vel alij innumerabiles nostre
co^munionis episcopi, aut quia nostrorum Collegaru^ concilijs ipsa praedicata
est, aut quia per totum orbem in locis sanctis quae frequentat communio nostra,
tanta mirabilia vel exauditionu^ vel sanitatum fiant, ita vt latentia per tot
annos corpora Martyrum (quod possunt a mu^tis interroga^tes audire.) Ambrosio
fuerint reuelata, and ad ipsa corpora caecus multorum annorum ciuitati
Mediolanensi notissimus oculos lumenque reciperet, aut quia ille somnium vidit.
and ille spiritu assumptus audiuit, sieve ne iniret in partem Donati sieve vt
recederet a part Donati. Qucunque talia in Catholica fiunt ideo sunt
approbanda quia in Catholica fiunt, non ideo ipsa manifestatur Catholica, quia
haec in ea fiunt. But whether they hold the Church or no, let them show none
otherwise, but by the Canonical Books of the holy scriptures: for neither do
we say, that men ought therefore to believe us that we are in the Church,
because Optatus of Mileuitum, or Ambrose of Millain or innumerable other
Bishops of our fellowship have commended this Church which we hold, or
because it is set forth and praised in the councels of our fellowships, or
because yt in holy places thorough the world, which our fellowship does
frequent, so great miracles are done, either of hearing men's prayers, or of
restoring to health, so yt the bodies of Martyrs which have been hidden so many
years (which thing if they will ask they may hear of many) were revealed to
Ambrose, and at the same bodies one that had been blind many years, very well
known to the city of Millain, received his eyes and sight, or because this
man saw a dream, or that man was taken up in spirit and heard either that he
should not go into the faction of Donatus, or that he should depart from it.
Whatsoever such things are done in the Catholic Church, they are therefore to
be allowed, because they are done in the Catholic Church, but the Church it
self is not thereby proved Catholic because these things are done in it. And
thus much concerning miracles. The issue that M. Hesk. joins is tried by all
Catholic and ancient Doctors, that the Mass is idolatry, because it is a
worshipping of creatures in steed of the creator, although none of the old
writers call the Mass Idolatry, which had neither name nor being in their
days.

The three and fortieth Chapter makes recapitulation of the conference of the
Masses of the Apostles, and Fathers of the primitive Church, and of the
Catholic Church that now is, with a breef^ Hesk.
confutation of the conference made by the proclamer, between the Mass of
Saint James, and that is now used.

Fulk.
The recapitulation containing nothing but that, which is confuted in the
discourse at large, I will omit it, and come to the conference, that the
Bishop made between the liturgy falsely ascribed to S. James, and the Popish
Mass, being content for the time to call it Saint James Mass, as Master
Heskins does, although neither it is a Mass, nor such as it is, was it written
by S. James the Apostle, but by some of much later time as appears by the
prayer therein contained, for such as live in Monasteries, and other things
favoring of the errors of that time, in which it was written. The first point
of the conference is, that S. James said Mass in the common tongue understood
of the people, the Papists say Mass in a strange tongue. M. Heskins
answers, that this point touches not the substance: for the Mass may be
good, though it be not understood: but he himself makes ye doctrine of the
Mass, to be of the substance of it, wherefore seeing there lacks doctrine in
the Mass, there lacks one of the four substantial parts. But he would
make the reading of the epistle and Gospel in Latin Doctrine, and good
doctrine. What doctrine that is, by which the people are not taught, let
reasonable men judge, for although all the Mass were nothing but scripture,
yet it were not good to be read in the Church, in a strange tongue: 1. Cor. 14.
because it were not profitable for edifying. His childish sophismes of Plato,
his substance and his accidents, I disdain to rehearse: the truth is manifest.

The second comparison S. James spoke out of the words of consecration. They in
their Mass suppress them and keep them close. Master Heskins answers,
this is a small fault, and from the Mass of S. James, flies to S. Basils
Mass, Where it is said, the Bishop prays secretly, yet he spoke the words
(as they call them) of consecration openly. The third comparison S. James in
his Mass ministered the communion to the people, The Papists in their Mass,
receive them selves alone. To this he answers, denying that S. James did
always minister the communion to the people, which is an impudent shift, except
he will deny the form of that liturgy, which prescribes the ministration
to the people after the consecration. His reason is, because in Chrysostomes
liturgy, which was written more then a thousand years after S. James, and
falsely bears the name of Chrysostom, there is a rule what the priest shall
do when there are no communicants.

The fourth comparison: S. James ministered the communion to the people under
both kinds: The Papists in their Mass in one kind only. Here has he none
other refuge, but to say, that S. James did not always minister under both
kinds. Then let him deny the credit of the liturgy, which prescribes the
communion to be ministered in both kinds.

The fifth comparison: Saint James preached and set forth the death of Christ:
They in their Mass have only a number of dumb gestures and ceremonies, which
they themselves understand not, and make no manner of mention of Christ's
death. M. Hes. complayneth of the Bishops repetitions, imputing them to want of
stuff, when he himself most absurdly repeateth his three untruths surmised
to be in this assertion, which he set down before in the 39. Chapter, whither
I refer the Reader for the answer. Only this I will note, that he can find
no other preaching to the people, but the Aulbe to signify the white garment
that Christ was sent in from Herod: the vestiment, the garment that he was
mocked in, in the house of Pilate: the Cross upon the vestiment signifies the
cross of Christ which he did bear, as the priest does on his back: the
elevation signifies the lifting up of Christ on the cross: he might say by
as good reason, the Priests hands signified the two thieves, and the Priest
himself the tormentors, that did lift him up to the cross. Behold this is
the preaching of Christ's death in the Mass, whether it be an impudent
untruth, (as Master Heskins terms it) to call these dumb gestures and
ceremonies, or M. Heskins an impudent beast to defend these dombe signs for
preaching of Christ's death, let the reader in Gods name consider and judge.
The sixth comparison: S. James Mass was full of knowledge: their Mass is full
of ignorance. M. Heskins answers, that there is as much knowledge in their
Mass, as in S. James Mass, because in substance it is all one: which if it
were true, as it is most false, yet what knowledge can be, when al is done in a
strange language, and no preaching, but by dombe signs, as we heard before?
The seventh: S. James Mass was full of consolation: their Mass is full of
superstition. To this he answers, they have as much consolation, which
cannot be when they have no preaching of the Gospel: and how can he say that
they have no superstition, when they have an hundred idle ceremonies and
gestures, which Christ never instituted, and therefore are mere will worship
and superstition. The eyghth comparison, he says, is all one with the third:
that the people resorted to receive the communion, when S. James said Mass.
Although it follow of the third, yet is it not all one with it, for as S.
James was ready to minister, so the people ordinarily were ready to receive,
which is not looked for of the popish priests, because they reach them that it
is needelesse so to do. The last comparison: Saint James in his Mass had
Christ's institution: they in their Mass have well more nothing else but man's
invention. To this he answers, that they have Christ's institution for their
Mass, which is an impudent falsehood, either for their carnal manner of
presence, or for their sacrifice, or for their private receiving, or for their
depriving the people of all doctrine, but such as is by dombe signs, which he
is not afraid to ascribe to the invention of the holy Ghost, as though the
spirit of God in ceremonies, would be contrary to him self in the scriptures.

After this he reports the substantial differences, between the Mass, and
the new communion as he calls it, which because they be all set forth and
answered before in the 34.35.36. Chapters of this book, I will leefe no time
about his vain recapitulation, or repetition of them, containing nothing but
railing and slaundering.

The four and fortieth Chapter returning to the exposition of S. Paul
expounds this text: As often as ye shall eat of this bread, etc. by S. Hierom
and Theophylact. Hesk.


M Heskins having wandered abroad to seek the Mass in ancient writers, Fulke.
now is come home again to his text, and that is this: As often as you shall
eat of this bread and drink of this cupp* you shall show forth the Lords
death until be come. Upon this text (says he) the ministers of Satan (for so
it pleases him to call us) have grounded two arguments against the real
presence: One that the sacrament is a memorial of Christ, and therefore
Christ is absent; because a memorial is of a thing absent: the other, that it
is bread, for so the Apostles called it, and not the body of Christ. The
solution of the first argument is, that the receipt of the sacrament is not a
memorial of Christ's body, but of his death and passion. This is a noble
distinction, but when Christ says: do this in remembrance of me, whether is
the remembrance of Christ, the remembrance of his body, or only of the
temporal act of his dying and suffering, which is past? I think all Christian
men will confess, that the communion is a memorial of Christ that was
crucified, and not of his crucifying only. But when Saint Paul says: until
he come, how can he say that he is present in body, which is yet to come in
body? To the second argument he answers, that Saint Paul calls it
bread, as Christ calls bread his flesh, and therefore he calls it, this
bread, signifying a special bread. No man says the contrary, but that it is
a special bread (and as Saint Augustine says) after a certain manner the
body of Christ. But if Master Heskins in this place may deny bread to be
taken in the proper sense for bread, why does he exclame against them, that
in these words: This is my body, deny the word body, to be taken in the
proper signification thereof, for a natural body?

But let us take Master Heskins interpretation of bread, to signify the body
of Christ, then the sense of Saint Paul's words shall be this: As often as ye
eat of the body of Christ, and drink his blood, you shall show the Lords
death until he come. How is he that is to come distinct from him that is
present? for Saint Paul makes an exposition of this bread and this cup
which are present, to show the Lords death, that is to come. But let us hear
what Saint Ieronyme says, that may help him in 1. Cor. 11. Ideo hoc, etc.
Therefore our Savior has delivered this sacrament, that by it we might
always remember, that he dyed for us. For therefore also when we receive it,
we are warned of the priests, that it is the body and blood of Christ, that
we might not be thought unthankful for his benefits. I like this saying
very well, which teaches that the sacrament is therefore called the body and
blood of Christ, yt thereby we might be put in mind of the benefit of
Christ's death, to be thankful for it. And yt his meaning is none otherwise,
his own words shall declare, going both before and after. Upon these words:
Gratias egit, etc. Hoc est benedicens etiam passurus vltimam nobis
commemorationem sine memoriam dereliquit. Quemadmodum si quis peregre
proficiscens, aliquod pignus ei quem diligit derelinquat, vt quotiescunque
illud viderit, possit eius beneficia and amicitias memorare: quod ille si
perfect dilexit, sine ingenti desiderio non potest videre vel fletu. That is
blessing or giving thanks, even when he was to suffer, he left to us his last
commemoration or remembrance. Even as a man going into a far country, does
leave some pledge to him whom he loves, that so often as he sees it, he may
remember his benefits and friendship, which pledge he (if he loved perfectly)
cannot behold without great desire or weeping. In these words you see S.
Hierom compares the sacrament to a pledge, which is left in remembrance of
love and benefits received of him, that in person is absent. The same writer
upon the same words of our text donec venerit until he come, thus writes: Tam
diu memoria opus est, donec ipse venire dignetur: So long we have need of a
remembrance, until he him self vouchesafe for to come. Nothing can be more
plain to show his meaning, not to be of a carnal or bodily presence:
although as Christ has given us the president, he call the bread and cup by
the name of the body and blood of Christ. The testimony of Theophylact being
a Greek Gentleman of the lower house, I have hitherto refused to admit, and
therefore in this place also will not trouble the reader with him. The
challenge was made of writers within six hundredth years after Christ, this
man lived about a thousand years after Christ, yet if I would wrangle about
his words, he has nothing that may not be reasonably construed on our side
without any wresting.

The five and fortieth Chapter abides in the exposition of the same text by S.
Basil and Rupert. Hesk.


S. Basil is alleged, de baptismo: Oportet accedentem, etc. Fulk.
It behooves him that comes to the body and blood of our Lord, to the
remembrance of him that was dead for us, and rose again, not only to be pure
from all uncleanness of body and soul, lest he eat and drink to his own
condemnation, but also to show evidently, and to express the memory of him
that has dyed for us and risen again. And what says Basil in these words,
that we do not grant, understanding pureness by faith, and repentance?
Master Hesk. says, in steed of that S. Paul said: this bread and this
cupp, he says the body and blood of Christ, although I might stand with
him, that this is no interpretation of Saint Paul's words, but an
exhortation, which Basil makes to the worthy receiving of the sacrament, what
inconvenience is it to grant that it is both bread and wine, and also after a
spiritual manner his very body and blood which is received of the faithful?
But either Master Heskins note book served him not, or else his malice against
ye truth would not suffer him to see what the same Basil writes not many
lines before these words, which he cites upon the rehearsal of the words of
Christ, of the institution of this blessed sacrament, and immediately after the
very text of the Apostle now in hand. As often as you eat of this bread and
drink of this cup, you show the Lords death until he come. (...). What
then do these words profit us, yt eating and drinking we might always remember
him which dyed for us, and is risen again, and so we might be instructed of
necessity to observe before God and his Christ, that lesson, which is
delivered by the Apostle, where he says: for the love of Christ does
constreine us judging this, that if one has dyed for all, then all are dead.
M. Heskins denies the sacrament to be a remembrance of Christ, for fear he
should confess Christ to be absent, affirming it is a remembrance only of the
death of Christ. But Basil says, that in eating and drinking we must remember
Christ that is dead and risen again for us, and so be transformed into his
image by mortification and newness of life. This is all the profit that Basil
gathers of the institution of the supper of the Lord. Where is then the
carnal presence, the sacrifice propitiatory, the application of it according
to the priests intention, and such like monsters of the Mass? The testimony
of Rupertus a burgess of ye lower house I will not stand upon, notwithstanding
it little helps Master Heskins cause. For he does not say, that the
sacrament is so a remembrance of Christ's death, that it is not a remembrance
of Christ him self. But Master Heskins says, all the rabble of
sacramentaries cannot bring one couple of catholic authors, that say Saint
Paul spoke here of material bread, neither can Master Heskins bring one
single ancient writer, within ye compass of the challenge, which is 600.
years after Christ, yt denies that S. Paul spoke of material bread, as the
earthly part of the sacrament. He has named Hierome and Basil, but neither of
them deny it, as for Theophylact and Rupertus, although neither of them also
deny it, in the places by him cited, yet I know not why we might not as well
produce Berengarius and Bertrame, as ancient as they, which affirm that Saint
Paul spoke here of bread. But that there is material bread in the sacrament,
as the earthly part thereof, we have already cited Irenaeus Lib. 4. Cap. 34.
Origin in 15. Matthaei. Cyrill in Joan. Lib. 4. Cap. 24. and many other.

Toward the end of this Chapter, Master Heskins takes upon him to answer an
objection of Oecolampadius, who justly charge the Papists of wilful
ignorance, in that they make the body of Christ, both the exemplar, and the
thing exemplified, the figure and the thing figured, the sign and the thing
signified, whereas relation must be betwixt two things distincted, and not of
one thing to it self, because every relative must have a correlatiue. For
answer to this objection, he says he will not use the quiddities of the
schools, but plain examples: but he pretends quiddities where the matter
is plain, and his examples be mere sophistications. The first is, That in the
divine presence be sundry relations, grounded upon the one nature of God.
Therefore relation must not be of necessity betwixt two things distinct. A
wise example, as though the persons between which there is relation, be not
two distinct things, though they be one undivided GOD: There is relation
between the person of the Father and the person of the Son, therefore the
Father is not the Son, nor the Son is the Father, yet are they both with
the holy Ghost one God.

The second example, Christ being transfigured in the mount, and showing him
self in a glorious manner, was an exemplar or figure of him self now in glory,
and of his glorious coming. It is well that he flees out of the schools,
before he utters these absurdities, for surely every boy in Cambridge, that
has but once kept sophisme, would hiss at him for this assertion, wherein he
confounds the substance with the accidents. But to leave the school terms
which M. Heskins can not now abide, because they bewray his folly: I deny
that Christ's body then, was a figure or exemplar of his body now, but the
glory of his body then, was a figure of his glory now, and wherewith he shall
come: and I am sure he will confess, that they be two distinct things, for
his glory now, is greater then the brightness of the Sun, whereunto it was
then compared. Likewise to his third example I answer, denying That his
immortal body which he showed to Thomas, with the signs and tokens of his
wounds, was an exemplare of the same body both mortal and passible. I say yt,
his immortal body was no exemplar of his mortal body, but even the very same,
changed in quality, not in substance, and the signs of his wounds, were
signs of his passion, and they were two distinct things.

It is all one that he cites out of Chrysostom, that Christ shall come to
judgment with the signs of his passion: whereupon he gathers, That Christ's
body shall then be a sign memorial or exemplar of it self. The scripture
says, they shall see him whom they have perced, but whether with signs of
wounds, I dare not say, saving Chrysostomes authority, but admit he shall
come with the same print of wounds, yet I deny that his body shall be a
figure, exemplar, or memorial of it self, but those signs should be an
argument of their cruelty and ungodliness that crucified him. You see the
plainness of these examples, how they are plainly against him, and that it
still remains vnremouable, that a sign and the thing signified, be distinct
things. Therefore the sacrament being a sign, figure, exemplar, and memorial
of the body and blood of Christ is not the same after a corporal manner.

Hesk.
The six and fourtieth Chapter begins the exposition of this text. Whosoever
therefore shall eat of this bread and drink of the cupp, etc.

Fulke.
The text is this: Whosoever shall eat of this bread and drink of this cupp of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. M.
Heskins requires to the worthy receiving two things, faith, and charity, and
therefore he concludes, that neither heretics nor scismatikes can receive
worthily, which we confess to be true. Afterward he charge us with abusing
this text in two points: The one, that we affirm material bread to remain
after consecration, the other that we deny that wicked men can receive the body
and blood of Christ, and both these errors he promises to confute, but in the
end you shall see they be so assured truths, that all the smoke and mist of
his confutation can not darken the light of their verity. The first witness
he cites for interpretation of the text, is S. Cyprian, Lib. 3. Ep. 15. Illi
contra Euangelij legem etc. They against the law of the Gospel, and your
honorable petition, before repentance showed, before open confession made of a
most grievous and extreme offense, before hands laid on by the Bishop and the
clergy unto repentance, are so bold as to offer for them, and give them the
Eucharistie, that is, to profane the holy body of our Lord, seeing it is
written, Whosoever shall eat of the bread, and drink of the cup of the Lord
unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Of these words
M. Heskins gathers, that the body of Christ is delivered, and not material
bread, for if material bread, and not the body is delivered, then the bread is
profaned, and not the body. A proper collection. If the Kings seal for a
benefit be delivered to the Kings enemy or a traitor, that receives it
irreverently and unthankfully, is not the King iniuried, and his favor abused?
I think al wise men will grant, and not say the wax and parchment only is
iniuried and abused, because the Kings body is not delivered, but wax and
parchment. Moreover, I marvel how M. Heskins can avoid blasphemy, when he
says in the literal sense, the body of Christ is profaned or unhallowed,
for to speak properly, the body of Christ can not be profaned or unhallowed,
but the sacrament of his body which bears the name thereof may, and the abuse
of the sacrament is justly counted an injury unto his body and blood, whereof
it is a sacrament, although his body in deed can suffer no injury or hurt. But
ye Cyprian acknowledged bread and wine to remain in the sacrament, many places
of his writings do clearly show, namely lib. 1. ep. 6. ad Magnum. Denique
vnanimitate^ Christianam firma sibi atque insuperabili charitate connexam,
etia^ ipsa domini sacrificia declarant. Nam quando Dominus corpus suu^ pane^
vocat de multoru^ granoru^ adunatione congestu^, populu^ nostru^, quem
portabat, indicat adunatu^. Et quando sanguinem suum vinum appelat, de botris
atque acinis plurimis expression atque in vnum coactum, gregem item nostrum
significat commixtione adunatae multitudinis copulatum. Finally, even our Lords
sacrifices do declare the Christian unanimity, which is knitted unto him with
an insuperable unity. For when the Lord calls bread, which is made one by
the gathering together of many corns, his body, he declares our people which
he did bear to be united together. And when he calls wine, which is pressed
out of many clusters and grapes, and so gathered into one, his blood, he does
likewise signify our flock, coupled together by conjunction of the multitude
that is brought into one. Here you see ye bread which is now ye sacrament, and
is called the body of Christ, to be made of many grains: likewise the wine to
be pressed out of many grapes, by which nothing can be understood, but
material bread and wine. The same Cyprian Lib. 2. Ep. 3. ad Caecilium thus
writes, Sic vero calix Domini non est aqua sola, aut vinum solum, nisi
vtrumque sibi misceatur, quomodo nec corpus Domini potest esse farina sola aut
aqua sola nisi vtrumque adunatum fueris and copulatum, and panis vnius compage
sclidatum, quo and ips^ sacramento populus noster ostenditur adunatus. So water
only, or wine only, is not the Lords cup, unless both be mingled together,
even as only meal, or only water, can not be the body of Christ, except
both be joined and coupled and compacted together in one bread, by which very
sacrament our people is showed to be united. Here bread made of meal and
water, is called the body of Christ, therefore material bread. The next
authority M. Hesk. cites is Chrysostom Hom. 83. in 26. Matthew. Non permittam
etc. I will not suffer these things to be done, I will first deliver up my
life, before I will deliver the lords body to any person unworthily, and I will
suffer my blood to be shed rather then I will give that most holy blood to any
other then to a worthy receiver. Out of this saying he gathers, yt the body
of Christ may be received of an unworthy and wicked person. How be it, no such
thing follows of these words, for though Chrysostom deliver the body of
Christ, it follows not that they receive it which receive the sacrament
unworthily, which is as much as to refuse it. Chrysostom in the same Homely,
says, this sacrament to be a symbol and sign of Christ crucified, and
speaking of the cup, he says: Sed cuius gratia non aquam sed vinum post
resurrectionem bibit? Perniciosam quandam hresim radicitus euellere voluit
eorum, qui aqua in mysterijs vtuntur, ita vt ostenderet quia and quando hoc
mysterium traderet, vinu^ tradidit, and iam post resurrectionem in nuda
mysterij mensa, vino vsus est. Ex germine autem, ait, vitis, quae certe vinum
non aquam producit. But wherefore did he not drink water but wine after his
resurrection? He would pluck up by the roots a certain most pernicious
heresy of them which use water in the mysteries, so that he would show, yt
both when he delivered this mystery, he delivered wine, and now after his
resurrection in the bare table of the mystery, he used wine. And he says of
ye fruit of ye vine, which truly brings forth wine and not water. Now
compare these two sayings of Chrysostom. in one sermon: Christ delivered wine,
Chrysostom. would not deliver the body and blood of Christ, and see whether the
later prove any transubstantiation or carnal manner of presence. Besides this,
it is good to note that Chrysostom says, that Christ used wine in the
sacrament after his resurrection, contrary to all the Papists, which hold
that he ministered to the two disciples at Emaus in bread only. And because M.
Heskins urges the delivery of Christ's body to the wicked, and thereby will
gather, that the wic^ed receive the very body of Christ, let him hear also
what Chrysostom says in the same place, speaking of the unworthy coming to
the sacrament: Illud enim pessimum est, ficus Paulus ait, Christum conculcare,
and testamenti sanguinem ducere communem, and spiritus gratian contemnere. For
this is the worst thing that can be, as Paul says, to tread Christ under
feet, and to esteem the blood of the covenant as unclean, and to contemn
the grace of the spirit. Will he say that very body of Christ is trodden under
the feet of the unworthy receiver? And because he stands so much of the
word, body and blood, Chrysostom says further. Nullus communicet, nisi ex
discipulis sit: nullus impuro animo sicut Judas, panem assumat, ne similia
patiatur. Corpus Christi etiam hc multitudo est: quare cauendum tibi est qui hc
mysteria ministras, ne Dominum irrites, corpus hoc non purgando, ne acutum
gladium pro cibo praebeas. Let none communicate except he be of the disciples:
Let no man with an vnpure mind as Judas, receive the bread, least he suffer
the like punishment. Even this multitude also is the body of Christ: wherefore
thou that do minister these mysteries, must take heed, that thou provoke
not the Lord, by not purging this body, least thou deliver a sharp sword in
steed of meat. In this saying, let the indifferent reader observe, that Judas
received bread, and wicked men receive bread: that the multitude of Christians
is the body of Christ, as the sacrament is: finally, that the minister to a
wicked man delivers a sharp sword in steed of spiritual meat: and let him
judge, how honestly M. Heskins urges the delivery of the body and blood of
Christ to the wicked, to exclude bread, and to prove that they receive the very
body of Christ.

His third witness is Origin Hom. 5. in diuorsos. Quando sanctum cibum,
illudque incorruptum epulum accipis etc. When thou receiuest that holy meat,
and the vncorrupt banquet, when thou inioyest the bread and cup of life, thou
eatest and drinkest the body and blood of the Lord, then the Lord enters under
thy roof, and do thou then humbling thy self, follow this Centurion, and
say: Lord, I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof. For where
he enters unworthily, there he enters to the condemnation of the receiver.
Here M. Heskins first notes the presence of Christ: secondly that the
sacrament it not bare bread, both which are granted: thirdly that the body of
Christ may be received of evil men. But all men will confess, that this is
an Alegoricall and figurative manner of speaking, that Origin uses, and may be
well understood according to the rule of sacraments: which bear the names of
those things whereof they be sacraments. And seeing Origin does else where
expressly affirm, that evil men do not, neither can eat the body of Christ,
in Matthew. Cap. 15. it is great unshamefastness, to wrest his figurative saying
in these words, contrary to his plain meaning uttered in plain words.
Master Heskins him self confesses this may be objected, and refers us to
the thirtieth Chapter of this book for the answer, whither I also refer the
reader both for the place it self, and for the reply to M. Heskins answer.

The seven and fortieth Chapter proceeds in the understanding of the same, by
S. Basil and S. Hierome. Hesk.


Saint Basil is alleged de baptism. Li. 2. Qust. 93. Fulk.
Quoniam Deus in lege etc. For so much as God in the law has ordained so
great a pain against him, that in his uncleanness dare touch the holy things,
(for it is written to them figuratively, but for our advertisement:) And the
Lord said unto Moses, say to Aaron and his sons, that they take heed to the
holy things of the children of Israel, and they shall not defile my name what
so ever they sanctify to me, I am the Lord. Say to them and to their
families, Every man that is of your seed, and comes to the holy things, what
so ever the children of Israel shall sanctify unto the Lord and his
uncleanness be upon him, that soul shall be rooted out of my presence, I am
the Lord. Such threatenings are set forth against them, that only come to those
things, that are sanctified by men. But what shall a man say against him,
which dare be bold against so great and such a mystery? For look how much
greater a thing then the temple is here, according to the Lords saying, by so
much the more grievous and fearful it is, in the filthiness of his soul, to
touch the body of Christ, then to touch Rams or Bulls (for so the Apostle
has said) wherefore he that eats the bread, and drinks the cup of the
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. But more
vehemently and also more horribly, he does set forth and declare the
condemnation by repetition, when he says: Let every man examine him self,
and so let him eat of this bread, and drink of this cup. For he that eats
and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his condemnation, not discerning
the Lords body. If then he that is only in uncleanness, (and the property
of uncleanness we learn figured in the law) has so horrible a judgment,
how much more he that is in sin, and presumes against the body of Christ,
shall draw unto him self horrible judgment?

First, I will note M. Heskins falsifications, which are two, the one as it
seems, partly of ignorance of the Greek tongue, partly of greediness to
draw Basils words to his understanding, for where the Greek is, (...). Here
is a thing, or one greater then the temple, he turns it, look how much
greater this is then the temple, as though hic which is an Aduerbe, were a
Pronoune. The other is altogether of malicious corruption, for he translateth
his Latin, Contra corpus Christi audet: which is, He dares presume against
the body of Christ, he translateth it, He dares to presume upon the body of
Christ, as though he received the body of Christ. Now he notes two
differences in these words of Basil, the one of the sacrifices of the old
law which were Bulls and Rams, the other of the new law, which is the
body of Christ. But in the words of Basil, there is no mention of any
sacrifice of the new law, only he compares the ceremonies of the old law,
with the heavenly part of the sacrament of the new Testament, which we
confess to be the body and blood of Christ.

The second difference is, the uncleanness of the law made unworthy
partakers of the sacrifices, but deadly sin makes men unworthy receivers of
the body of Christ. Yet has Basil no such words of receiving the body of
Christ by wicked men. Only he denounces their grievous punishment, that
presume against ye body of Christ, when with irreverence and unrepentance, they
presume against such and so high a mystery, as the blessed sacrament is, and
this is the plain sense of his words without any cauilling. If M. Heskins
will urge their touching of the body of Christ, it is a very nice point, and
must either be referred to a figurative speech, or else it will breed infinite
absurdities. Basils mind is plain, the wicked ought not to presume to touch
the blessed sacrament, which after a certain manner of speaking, is the body
of Christ. But he annexeth an other place of Basil: Dominus dicens etc. The
Lord saying: Here is one greater then the temple, teaches us that he is so
much more ungodly, that dare handle the body of our Lord, which has given him
self for us, to be an oblation and offering of sweet savor, by how much the
body of the only begotten son of God exceeds Rams and Bulls, not in
reason of comparison, for the excellency is incomparable.

This place says Master Heskins proves well, that the receiver of the
sacrament receives the body of the only begotten son of God, and not a bare
figure, for else how should he sin incomparably, by receiving unworthily? I
answer, he sins incomparably, not because he receives the body of
Christ unworthily, but because the body of Christ being offered unto him to
be received, he does contemn it, and refuse it most unthankfully and
injuriously. Again, Basil does here compare the outward signs or elements of
the old sacrifices, with the thing represented and offered by our sacrament,
the like speeches he has of Baptism.

But that you may hear him (says Master Heskins) by most plain words teach
that the body of Christ is received of evil men, hearken what he says, de
baptism. lib 1. cap. 3. Si vero is qui etc. If he that for meat offends his
brother, falls from charity, without the which both the works of great
gifts, and justification do nothing avail: What shall a man say of him, which
idly and unprofitably dare eat the body, and drink the blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ?

But M. Heskins to make it seem more plain on his side, has cut off those
words which do plainly declare, that Basil speaks not of wicked men that
are void of the spirit of God, but of such as be not zealous and earnest
enough, to practice mortification, and reuocation, therefore it follows
immediately: (...): And thereby much more greeuing the holy spirit: which
words being added to the former, do plainly testify, that Basil speaks
not of wicked and ungodly persons, but of the faithful in whom the spirit of
God was, and yet they had not so great care of profiting in newness of life as
they ought to have. For against the words (...), idly and unprofitably, he
opposes afterward (...), earnestly and effectually, so that those Aduerbes
idly and unprofitably, are spoken in comparison, and not simply, as if he
said, they take nothing such pains in mortification as they should, they
profit nothing in comparison that they might by the Lords body, which labor
not to be renewed according to his spirit, and as he says, they grieve the
spirit of God, (whereby they are sealed to eternal life,) when they do not
with more earnestness and profit come to the Lords table.

The second Author Hierome, is cited in Psalm. 77. Haec de his etc. These
words are spoken of them which forsook GOD after they had received Manna, For
now in the Church, if any man be fed with the flesh and blood of Christ, and
does decline to vices, let him know that the judgment of God does hang over
him: as Paul the Apostle says, He that shall take the body and blood of our
Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. I
marvel what Master Heskins means, to alter the words of Hierome, for he
cites them thus: Qui acceperit corpus and sanguinem Domini indigne, reus erit
corporis and sanguinis Domini. Whereas the words of Hierome be. Qui acceperit
corpus and sanguinem Christi indigne iudicium sibi sumis and bibit. He that
shall receive the body and blood of Christ unworthily, receives and drinks
judgment to him self. To answer to the judgment of GOD, which he said
did hang over him, that after he is fed with the body and blood of Christ,
declineth to vices: not meaning wicked reprobates, but Gods elect children,
which are sometimes ungrateful to GOD for his mercies, and fall into grievous
sins, but yet by Gods grace rise again: as the words immediately following
do most plainly declare: Et electos Israel impediuit. Impedumtur and nunc
electo Ecclesiae, si ne ipsi quoque sacerdotes innocenter haec sacramenta
percipiunt. And he hindered the elect of Israel. The elect of the Church are
now also hindered, if the Priests them selves do not receive these
sacraments innocently. In which words he shows the cause, that many of the
elect do decline to vices, after the sacrament received, even by the evil
example of the Priests, and therefore worthily are to be awaked out of the
sleep of sin and security, by this sentence of Paul. Now whereas M. Hes.
excuses S. Hierome, for altering the words of Paul, and in steed of the
bread and the cup, placing the body and blood of Christ, it is nothing so
needful, as that he should render a reason why he does him self alter the
words of Hierome: except he think he may be as bold to change the words of
Hierome, as Hierome was to change the words of Paul. Although M. Hes. is
less to blame in this place, where he changes the words without any great
alteration of the sense, then in almost an hundredth places beside, where he
falsifieth the words, and peruerteth the meaning also.

The eight and fortieth Chapter abides in the exposition of the same text, by
Chrysostom and S. Augustine. Hesk.


Chrysostom is cited Hom. 45. in Joan. Fulk.
Qui enim manducat etc. For he that eats and drinks the blood of our Lord
unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to him self. For if they which
defile the kings purple are none otherwise punished, then they which rent it:
what marvel if they which receive the body of Christ in an unclean
conscience, suffer the same punishment that they did which fastened him with
nails to the cross Two things M. Hes. notes out of these words, one that the
body of Christ is received in the sacrament, the other, that evil men receive
the sacrament. Concerning the first, there is no doubt, but that the body of
Christ is received in the sacrament after a spiritual manner of faith, and
touching the latter, this place proves not, that wicked men receive the body
of Christ with their mouths wherein is the controversy: for neither does
Chrysostom. here speak of reprobates, but of the faithful that were sinners,
which received Christ's body in an unclean conscience, and not carnally with
their mouths. But admit he did speak of reprobates and wicked persons, yet
he speaks of the sacraments, that are called the body and blood of Christ,
and not of the natural body and blood of Christ, and therefore he uses the
similitude of the Kings purple, whereunto he compares the sacrament. For even
as he that abuses by rending or defyling the Kings purple robe, though he
touch not his person, yet is he punished as a traitor: so he that abuses the
sacrament, either as an open contemner, or as a profane receiver, is guilty
of the body and blood of Christ. And to put the matter out of question he
faith, not three lines before, speaking of the blood of Christ: Qui huius
sanguinis sunt participes, cum Angelis, and Archangelis, and supernis
virtutibus commorantur, ipsam regiam Christi stolam induti spiritualibus armis
muniti (sed nihil dixi) immo ipsum induti sunt regem. They that are partakers
of this blood, do dwell with Angels, and Archangels, and the high powers,
having put on the very royal robe of Christ, being armed with spiritual armor
(but I have said nothing) yea they have put on the King himself. By these
words it is plain, that every one that is partaker of the sacrament, is not
partaker of the blood of Christ.

But Master Heskins will bring forth other places of Chrysostom wherein he
does plainly affirm, that Judas the traitor did receive the body of Christ
with the other Apostles. But suspend thy judgment gentle Reader, until thou
have read his places. The first is Hom. ^0. de proditione Judah. Cum manducarent
and biberent, etc. When they did eat and drink, Jesus took bread and brake
it and said: This is my body. They that be consecrated to the divine
mysteries, know what I speak. And again he took the cup and said, This is
my blood, and Judas was present when Christ spoke these words: This is my
blood. Say Judas, whom have thou sold for thirty pence? Is this the blood for
which thou have made a bargain before with the Pharisees: O the mercy of
Christ! O the madness of Judas! He bargained that he might sell him for
thirty pence, and Christ offered him the blood which he has sold, that he
might have forgiveness of sins, if he would not have been ungodly. For Judas
was present, and was partaker of that sacrifice. Here we see plainly that
Christ offered his blood to Judas, that he might have remission of sins, but
no word that Judas received the blood of Christ. It is said, that Judas was
partaker of yt sacrifice, that is of the outward sacrament (for so Chrysostom
often calls it) but not of the body and blood of Christ. And whereas Master
Heskins notes, that because Christ offered the same blood that Judas sold,
therefore the sacrament is the natural blood of Christ, it is a most frivolous
reason. For every child understands, ye selling of Christ's blood is a
figure of betraying Christ, even as the blood which he offered is a figure of
that, which was betrayed, and so the reason makes altogether against him. But
Chrysostom has other words in the same sermon.

Nullus igitur fictus accedat etc. Therefore let no feigned person come: Let
none be so bold with a counterfeit mind to come near so great mysteries least
he be condemned, deserve sentence, and suffer that which Judas suffered. For
after the partaking of the table, the devil entered into him, not because he
despised the Lords body, but because the impudency of Judas and the
maliciousness of his mind, caused that the adversary dwelled in him. By
these words M.H. would prove, yt ye Lords body had entered into Judas, before
the devil, but ye contrary may more probably be gathered: for Chrysostom.
answers a secret objection, that might be made upon the appellation of ye
sacrament, to be ye body of Christ. It might seem ye devil contemned the body
of Christ, yt he entered immediately after ye body of Christ received, but he
says, he contemned not ye body of Christ (for Judas was so full of wickedness,
that ye body of Christ entered not into him) but ye devil before had possessed
him. And yt this is more agreeable to ye mind of Chryso. his words in the Hom.
45. In Joan. do declare: Daemones cum Dominicum sanguinem in nobis vident, in
fugam vertuntur. When the devils do see the blood of our Lord in us, they are
put to flight. This proves, that Judas received not the blood of Christ,
seeing immediately after the receipt of the sacrament (as he says) the Devil
entered into him. Therefore the other place, which Master Heskins alleges out
of Chrysostom. Ho. 83. In Mat. is likewise answered: Caenantibus, etc. When they
were a^ Supper: Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and gave it to
his disciples: O the blindness of that traitor, which when he had been
partaker of the unspeakable mysteries, he remained the same man, and being
admitted to Gods table, would not be changed into better, which Luke signified
saying: that after this, Satan entered into him, not because he despised the
Lords body, but because he laughed to scorn the folly of the traitor. These
unspeakable mysteries M. Hesk. says can not be a bare piece of bread, and a
cup of wine, but must needs be the body and blood of Christ. But saving his
authority, is not the baptism, wherewith wicked men are baptized, an
unspeakable mystery? and yet no wicked man in baptism, receives the spirit
of regeneration. But Chrysostom proceeds in the sentence before alleged:
Maius enim peccatum vtraque ratione fiebat: quia tali animo mysterijs
susceptis, nec timore, nec beneficio, nec honor melior factus est. For his
offense was made greater both ways: because, that having received the
mysteries with such a mind, neither with fear, nor with the benefit, nor
with the honor, he was made better. Chrysostom says, he received the
mysteries, he does not say he received the body of Christ. Now judge whether
Chrysostom does plainly affirm, that Judas received the body of Christ,
with the other Apostles, or whether M. Heskins does lie, that so affirms of
Chrysostom and can no better prove it then you have heard. Now follows S.
Aug. In Ep. contra Donatist. post Collat. Quisquis autem, etc. Who so ever
shall live well in this church, other men's sins do nothing hinder him: for in
it every one shall bear his own burden, as the Apostle says: and whosoever
shall eat the body of Christ unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself: for the Apostle him self has written this. In these words
Augustine calls the sacrament of the body of Christ, the body of Christ,
as it follows immediately after: Cum autem dicit, iudicium sibi manducat,
satis oftendit, quia non alteri iudicium manducat sed sibi. Hoc nos egimus and
ostendimus and obtinuimus, quia communio malorum non maculat aliquem
participatione sacramentorum, sed consensione factorum. And when he says, he
eats judgment to himself, he shows sufficiently that he eats not
judgment to another but to himself. This have we treated, and showed and
proved, that the fellowship of evil men does not defile any man by
participation of the sacraments with them, but by consent of their deeds.
Likewise he terms the sacrament by ye name of the body of Christ. Cont.
Donat. Lib. 5. Cap. 8. Sicut enim etc. As Judas to whom our Lord gave the
morsel, gave place himself to the devil, not by receiving an evil thing, but
by receiving is amiss: so any man receiving unworthily the Lords sacrament,
causes not, because he himself is evil, that it should be evil, or because
he receives it not to salvation, that he receives nothing. For it was
nevertheless the body and blood of our Lord, even to them whom the Apostle
said: He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks judgment to
himself. In these words, he reasons against the Donatistes, that said,
that baptism ministered by heretics, was no sacrament, which he confuteth by
example of the other sacrament of Christ's body and blood, which Judas and
other wicked men received. So that in these words the body and blood of the
Lord, are to be taken for the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ.
Which sacrament as Augu. says, Tract. 26. in Joan. is received of some to
destruction: Res vero ipsa, cuius sacramentum est, omni homini ad vitam, nulli
ad exitium quicunque eius particeps fuerit. But the thing it self whereof it
is sacrament, is unto life to every man and to destruction to no man,
whosoever shall be partaker thereof. But M. Heskins flies to his distinction of
receiving spiritually and corporally, as though Augustine ever said, that the
body of Christ was received corporally of any man. But let us hear his own
words, which M. Heskins has cited in the same treatise. Quantum pertinet ad
illam mortem etc. As touching that death, of which the Lord said that their
fathers be dead: Moses also did eat Manna, and Aaron did eat Manna, and
Phinees did eat Manna, and many did eat, which pleased the Lord, and died
not. Wherefore? Because they understood the visible meat spiritually, they
hu^gred spiritually, they tasted spiritually, that they might be filled
spiritually. For we also at this day have received a visible meat. But the
sacrament is one thing, the virtue of the sacrament another thing, which many
do receive of the altar and do die, and in receiving do die. Wherefore the
Apostle says, he eats and drinks his own judgment. In these words
Augustine teaches, that the visible (meat which is the sacrament) may be
eaten to comdemnation, which is ye thing we affirm, and as for eating the body
of Christ, otherwise then spiritually, he speaks not one word. But M.
Heskins would learn of ye adversary, what Augustine means by this word
Virtue, which many do dye in receiving it: and therefore it cannot be the
virtue of his passion, so it must needs be his very body. So that by this
conclusion, Christ's body may be received without the virtue of his passion. But
if it please him to learn what Aug. means by this word Virtue in yt place, I
answer he means force or efficacy, which is either to life or to death, as
the receiver is affected that takes the sacrament, for immediately after, he
says: Nam bucella Dominica venenum suit Iudae, and tamen accepit. For the
Lords morsel was poison to Judas, and yet he received it. You see therefore a
double virtue in the sacrament, one to salvation, another to condemnation, and
no bodily presence necessary for either of them. Another place he cites In
Joan. Tr. 6. Recordamini vnde sit scriptu^. Remember from whence it is written,
Whosoever ever shall eat the bread and drink the cup of our Lord unworthily, shall be
guilty of the body and blood of our Lord. For when the Apostle said this,
he spoke it of them which received the body of our Lord indiscreetly and
negligently, as they would do any other meat. Whersoeuer he borrowed these words
they are not to be found in yt treatise of Aug. which he cites. But if they be
August, in any place, they have none other sense then before is expressed, yt
such men are said to eat the body of Christ, which eat the sacrament thereof,
which in some manner of speech is called the body of Christ. The words that I
find in Augustine sounding any thing like, are these: Et sancta possunt obesse:
in bonis enim sancta ad salutem insunt, in malis ad iudicium: Certe enim
fratres nouimus quid accipiamus, and vtique sanctum est quod accipimus, and
nemo dicit non esse sanctum. Et quid ait Apostolus? Qui autem manducat and
bibit indigne, iudicium sibi manducat and bibit, Non ait quia illa res mala
est, sed quod ille malus, male accipiendo, ad iudicium accipit bonum, quod
accipit. Non enim mala buccella erat quae tradita est Iudae a Domino. Absit:
medicus non daret venenum: Salutem medicus dedit, sed indigne accipiendo ad
perniciem accepit. Even holy things may hurt. For in good men holy things are
unto salvation, in evil men unto condemnation. For surely brethren, we know
what we receive, and no man says that it is not holy. And what says the
Apostle? He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his own
condemnation. He says it not because that thing is evil, but because that
evil man by evil receiving receives unto condemnation that good thing, which
he receives. For the morsel was not evil which was delivered by our Lord to
Judas. God forbid: the Physician would not give poison: the Physician gave
health, but he by receiving unworthily, received to his destruction. To this
judgment of Augustine we do subscribe, that wicked men receive a holy
thing, namely the sacrament, for profaning whereof, they heap up damnation to
them selves, besides their other sins. But that the natural body of Christ
void of his quickening spirit, enters into the mouth of any man, we do
utterly deny: and of the same judgment is Augustine, as we have showed in
this Chapter, and in many other places.

The nine and fourtieth Chapter continues the same exposition by Isychius and
Sedulius. Hesk.


In the beginning of this Chapter, by a saying of Augustine he exhorts us to
hear the doctoures of the Fulke.
Catholic church, affirming yt he has already brought six plainly
expounding this text of the body of Christ, and more will bring hereafter,
whereas the proclaimer required but only one. But what truth is in his
affirmation, the reader I doubt not, will be able to discern, that is not
blinded with affection. Isichyus is cited in Leuit. Cap. 26. Propter quod, etc.
Wherefore let us fear his holy place, that we neither defile our body, nor
rashly come to the body of Christ, in the which is all sanctification (For in
him abides the fulness of the godhead) without diligent examination of our
selves, but rather let us examine our selves remembering him that said:
Whosoever shall eat the bread or drink the cup of the Lord unworthily,
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord. Because Master Heskins
knows not what to gather out of these words with any show of likelihood to
maintain his cause, he runs into another matter altogether impertinent and
needelesse, to show out of Theophylact, how the fulness of the Godhead does
dwell in Christ. At length he comes to ridiculous questions, why should he
dehort wicked men from eating the body of Christ, if they cannot eat it at
all? As though their presumption may not be condemned, which cannot attain
their purpose. Why should wicked men be dehorted from seeking the overthrow
of Christ and his church, seeing it is impossible for them to prevail either
against the one or the other? yet Master Heskins thinks him self witty,
when he says: It were strange to persuade a man not to pull down heaven, or
to eat the stars, because it is vain to move men not to do that, which is
impossible to be done. But because Master Heskins is so angry with a piece of
bread in the sacrament, let him hear what the same Hesychius, or as he
calls him Isichius writes in Leuitic. lib. 2. Cap. ^. Propterea carnes cum
panibus comedi praecipient, vt nos intelligeremus illud ab eo mysterium dici,
quod simul panis est and caro. Therefore commanding the flesh to be eaten
with the bread, that we might understand, that he spoke of that mystery,
which is both bread and flesh together. You see that Hesychius acknowledged
bread to be in the mystery naturallye, as the flesh of Christ is
spiritually.

Now let us hear Sedulius: Accipite, etc. Take ye, this is my body. As though
Paul had said: take heed ye eat not that body unworthily, seeing it is the
body of Christ. You shall eat this unworthily, if you shame the poor, and
if you eat any meat before the spiritual meat and the supper of the Lord.

Here again he notes, that the body of Christ may be received of unworthy
persons, he means wicked persons, for otherwise all men are unworthy of it,
but no such thing can follow of the words of Sedulius, both because he
speaks of receiving the sacrament, which after a certain manner, is the
body of Christ, and also because he speaks not of wicked persons and
reprobates, but of faithful persons offenders, and that not in great
matters, namely, in shaming the poor with their plentiful feasts, and eating
bodily meat before they receive the Lords supper. This place is cited before,
lib. 2. Cap. 55. The argument that we bring of the inseparable conjunction of
Christ with his spirit, he says is vain, for though Christ be never
disioyned from his spirit, yet his spirit is not always effectual, which is
as absurd, as the other, to say that the quickening spirit of Christ,
together with his body, is in the wicked and works not life. But he weeneth
Cyprian shall stand with him whose words he cites In Sermon de Coena:
Sacramenta quidem quantum in se est, etc. The sacraments truly, as concerning
them selves, cannot be without their proper virtue. Neither does the Divine
majesty by any means absent it self from the mysteries. But although the
sacraments do suffer them selves to be taken or touched by unworthy persons:
yet cannot those be partakers of the spirit, whose infidelity or
unworthiness gaynsayeth so great holiness. And therefore those gifts are to
some the savor of life unto life, unto some the savor of death unto death.
For it is altogether meet, that the contemners of grace should be deprived of
so great a benefit, and that the purity of so great grace should not make a
dwelling for it self in unworthy persons. I am very well content, yt this
place shall determine the controversy between us. Cyprian says, the majesty
of GOD does never absent it self from the sacraments, but either he works
salvation or damnation by them; as well in baptism, as in the Lords supper,
for he speaks of both in the plural number. And seeing infidels and wicked
persons cannot be partakers of the spirit of Christ, it follows they
cannot be partakers of the body of Christ, for Christ his body is never
separate from his spirit.

But Augustine contra Crescen. is alleged, the place is not quoted, but it is
lib. 1. Cap. 25. Quid de ipso corpore, etc. What shall we say even of the
body and blood of our Lord, the only sacrifice for our health? Although the
Lord him self does say: Except a man do eat my flesh and drink my blood
he shall have no life in him: does not the Apostle teach, that the same is
made hurtful to them, that use it amiss? For he says: whosoever shall eat
the bread and drink the cup of the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty of the
body and blood of the Lord.

But it follows imediately: Ecce quemadmodum obsint diuina and sancta male
vtentibus. Cur non eodem modo baptismus? Behold how divine and holy things do
hurt them that use them amiss: why not baptism after the same manner? By
which words it appears, that Augustine speaks of the sacrament, and not
of the thing signified by the sacrament. For he compares baptism ministered by
heretics, with the Lords supper unworthily received, which comparison cannot
stand, except you understand the outward part of the sacrament in both.
Baptism is ministered by heretics, that is to say, the outward sacrament of
baptism, the body of Christ is received unworthily to destruction, that is,
the outward sacrament of the body of Christ: for as we heard in the last
Chapter, Res ipsa sacramenti, the thing it self of the sacrament is received
of every man to life, and of no man to destruction whosoever does receive it.

The fiftieth Chapter shows the understanding of the same ^ext by Effrem and
Primasius. Hesk.


Effrem is cited in tract. de die Iudicij: Si procul a nobis est Siloe, etc. If
Siloe, whither the blind man was sent, Fulk.
be far from us, yet the precious cup of thy blood full of light and life,
is near us, being so much nearer as he is purer that comes unto it. This
then remains unto us, O merciful Christ, that being full of grace, and the
illumination of thy knowledge, with faith and holiness we come to thy cup,
that it may profit us unto forgiveness of sins, not to confusion in the day
of judgment. For whosoever being unworthy, shall come to thy mysteries, he
condemns his own soul, not cleansing himself, that he might receive the
heavenly king and the immortal brydegrome into the most pure chamber of his
breast. For our soul is the spouse of the immortal bridegroom, and the
heavenly sacraments are the couple of the marriage. For when we eat his
body, and drink his blood, both he is in us, and we in him. Therefore take
heed to thy self brother, make speed to garnish continually the chamber of
thine heart with virtues, that he may make his dwelling with thee, with his
blessed father: And then thou shall have praise, glory, and boasting before
the Angels and Archangels, and with great joy and gladness thou shall enter
into Paradise.

This saying being directly contrary, both to the corporal manner of eating
and drinking the body and blood of Christ, and also to that absurd opinion
that the wicked receive the body of Christ: Master Heskins is not ashamed,
not only to allege it as making for him, but also tryfleth off the nearness
of the blood of Christ, which he says we deny, when we affirm Christ
to be always in heaven. As though the blood of Christ cannot purge and
cleanse us, except it come down from heaven, and be powered in at our mouths.
As though faith cannot make Christ him self to dwell in us.

But where Effrem says, his blood is so much the nearer, as he is purer that
comes unto it, why cannot M. Hesk. understand, that the more vnpurer the
receiver of the cup is, the further off the blood of Christ is, and so farthest
of all from them that be most vnpure, that is, the wicked and the reprobate?
But he would have the blood of Christ to be as near the wicked, as the
godly. Again when Ephrem says: when we eat and drink his body and blood,
he is in us and we in him: with what face can Master Heskins or any papist
in the world say, that the wicked receive the body and blood of Christ, in
whom Christ is not, nor they in him?

The like syncerity he uses, in racking the words of Primasius: He that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me and I in him: As though
he should say: they that so ea^^ as it is to be eaten, and so drink as my
blood is to be dronken. For many, when they seem to receive this thing, abide
not in God nor God in them, because they are affirmed to eat their own
damnation: M. Hesk. has so corrupted this place in translation, that you may
see he meant nothing but falsehood and treachery. The latin text, he cites
thus. Qui edit mean carneus and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet and ego in
eo, pro eo ac si diceret: qui sic edent us edenda est, and sic bibent us
bibendus est sanguis meus. Multi enim cum hoc videantur acciper^, in Deo non
manent, nec Deus in ipsis, quia sibi iudicium manducare perhibentur. He
translateth in English thus. He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood,
dwells in me and I in him: As if he should say, they that so shall eat my
flesh as it is to be eaten, and shall so drink my blood as it is to be
dronken. For many when they are seen to receive this sacrament, neither dwell
they in God nor God in them, because they are witnessed to eat and drink
their own damnation.

Now let the reader, though he be but a mean Latinist, judge whether he have
not corrupted Primasius in translation, especially where he says: Multi cum
hoc videantur accipere, which is, many when they seem to receive this thing,
namely the body and blood of Christ, of which he spoke, Master Heskins
turns it into many, when they are seen to receive this sacrament. Many
seem to be Christians, that are not: many seem to be baptized with the holy
Ghost, which are not: so many seem to eat and drink the body and blood of
Christ, which do not, because God dwells not in them, nor they in God.
Therefore, take away Master Heskins false (translation, and this saying of
Primasius is directly against him, that wicked men receive not the body and
blood of Christ. And whereas he notes that the sixte of John and Saint Paul
in this text speak of one thing, it is clean contrary: for Christ speaks
of that, which is testified and given in the sacrament to the faithful, Paul
of the sacrament received unworthily. And Primasius joins them to show the
diversity of these textes, and not as though they signified one thing. For by
Saint Paul he proves, that not all eating and drinking, is the eating and
drinking of the body and blood of Christ, but the eating and drinking
worthily.

The one and fiftieth Chapter, abides in the exposition of the same text, by
Cassiodorus, and Damascene. Hesk.


Cassiodorus is cited in Psalm. 110. upon this verse: Fulke.
Tu es sacerdos, etc. Thou art a priest after the order of Melchizedeche, in
these words: Cui enim putest veracitet and euidenter aptari, nisi Domino and
saluatori, qui corpus and sanguinem s^um in pani^ and vini erogatione
salutariter consecrauis. Sicut ipse in Euangelio dicit: nisi manducaueritis
carnem filij hominis and hiberitis eius sanguinem, non habebitis vitam in
vobis? Sed in ista carne and sanguine nil cruentum, nihil corruptibile men's
humana concipiat (ne sicut dicit Apostolus: Qui enim corpus Domini indigne
manducat, iudicium sibi mandueas) sed viuifica^ricem substantiam atque
salutarem. and ipsius verbi propriam factam, per quam peccatorum remissio and
aeterno vitae donapraestuntur. For unto whom may it be truly and evidently
applied, but to our Lord and Savior, which has healthsontly consecrated his
body and blood, in the giving forth of bread and wine? as he him self
says in the Gospel: except ye shall eat the flesh of the son of man and
d^inke his blood you shall have no life in you, but in this flesh and blood,
let the mind of man conceive nothing bloody, neither corruptible (left as the
Apostle says: For he that eats the Lords body unworthily, eats his own
damnation) but a substance giving life and health, and made proper to the WORD
himself, by which remission of sins, and the gifts of eternal life are
performed. This saying being directly contrary to all Master Heskins three
assertions, namely, transsubstantiation, carnal manner of eating, and the
wicked receiving Christ's body, he has cloked the two first with a false
translation, the last with a needelesse excursion into ye heresies of Marcion,
Manicheus, etc. For where it is first manifest by Cassiodorus, that when
Christ gave the sacrament to his disciples, he gave forth bread and wine,
Master Heskins translateth: Corpus and sanguinem suum in panis and vini
erogatione salutariter consecrauit: In the giving forth of bread and wine to
our health, he consecrated his body and blood: whereas every little boy, will
teach him, that the Aduerbe must be joined with the Verb in construing, to
declare his signification. Therefore his meaning must needs be as I have
translated it: he did helthsomly or profitably consecrate his body and blood
in giving forth of bread and wine, therefore he gave forth bread and wine.
Touching the second of the carnal manner of presence, whereas Cassiodorus
says: In ista carne and sanguine nil cruentum, nihil corruptibile men's humana
contipia^, which is: In this flesh and blood, let the mind of man conceive
nothing bloody, nothing corruptible, Master Heskins translateth it: Let not
the mind of man conceive any thing gross, any thing corruptible: whereas the
mind of the author is, seeing we must in this flesh and blood conceive
nothing bloody, we must not conceive the flesh of Christ to be present
carnally, nor the blood of Christ to be present bloudily, but spiritually, and
as he adds a quickening and healthful substance, giving forgiveness of
sins and eternal life, to all that receive it. And therefore impertinent is
all that discourse that Master Heskins makes afterward, against ye old
heretics, of which some denied the humanity, some the divinity of Christ,
and ridiculous is that railing of his, by which he would charge us with their
heresies, for mainteining the truth against their carnal manner of presence,
which in deed sauoureth of the heresy of the Marcionistes, Mannyches, and
Eutychians. Finally, where Cassiodorus says, he that eats the body of our
Lord unworthily, eats his own damnation, it is manifest, that he calls
the sacrament by the name of that which it signifies, as many of the fathers
do. But where he says, that forgiveness of sins and eternal life are
given by the flesh and blood of Christ, it follows, that the wicked which
are not partakers of the one are not partakers of the other.

Concerning Damascene a corrupt writer, far out of the compass of the
challenge, who writes so monstrously of this sacrament, that the Papists them
selves do not receive him in all things, as I have always refused his
authority, so now I will not trouble the reader with it.

The two and fiftieth Chapter ends the exposition of this text by Theodoret
and Anselmus. Hesk.


In the beginning of this Chapter, he makes much ado that Damascenes
authority might be received, Fulke.
and so he should have twelve which make a quest, to give verdict in this
matter. But seeing Damascene cannot be taken, he presumes him self to be
the foreman of the quest, and to speak for all the rest. But because he was
never impannelled, nor returned foreman of the quest, we will not take the
verdicte or rather the falsedict at his mouth, but as the manner of Lords of
the parleament is, to let every man give his verdict for him self, so I wish
the reader to consider their several sayings, and he shall find, that not
one of them, being rightly understood, speaks on Master Heskins side.

But Theodoret (he says) though Cranmer would deceive the people by his
authority, is altogether on their side. He cites him in. 1. Cor. 11. Hic eos
quidem pungit, etc. Here truly he pricketh them that were sick of ambition.
Also he pricketh him, which had committed fornication, and with them, those
that without any difference were partakers of those things that were offered
to idols. Besides them, also us, which with an evil conscience, dare receive
the divine sacraments. As for that he says: He shall be guilty of the body
and blood, signifies this, that as Judas betrayed him, and the Jews mocked
and reuyled him: even so do they dishonor and disworship him, which receive
his most holy body with filthy hands, and put it into a filthy and
defiled mouth.

Here Master Heskins notes, that the body of our Lord is received with
hand and mouth, clean or unclean. In deed the sacraments, which are called
by the name of that whereof they be sacraments, are so received, and of them
does Theodoret speak, by express words. Another sentence he alleges out
of the same Chapter: Sacram illam and ex omni part beatam noctem, etc. He
calls again to memory that holy, and by all means blessed night, in which
he both made an end of the figurative passover, and showed the true pattern
of the figure, and also opened the gates of the wholesome sacrament, and gave
not only to the eleven Apostles, but also to Judas the traitor, his most
precious body and blood. To this I answer, as before, that he calls the
sacrament which he gave, the precious body and blood of Christ, not that
he meant that ye bread and wine in the sacrament are turned into the body and
blood of Christ, and so given to good and badd, but that the signs bear the
names of the things signified, as shall most plainly appear by the words
of Theodoret him self in his first dialogue called Incommutabilis.

Orthodoxus: Scis quod Deus suum corpus appellauit panem? Eranistes. Scio.
Orthodoxus. Porro etiam alibi carnem tritieum nominauit. Eran. Hoc etiam scio.
Audiui enim eum dicentem, venit hora vt glorificetur filiut hominis. Et nisi
granum tritici, quod cecidit in terram, mortuum fuerit, solum manet: sin autem
mortuums fuerit, fert multum fructum. Orth. In mysteriorum autem traditione
corpus panem appellauit, and id quod in calito infusum and commixtum est,
sanguinem. Eran. Itae nominauit. Orth. Atqui and quod est secundum naturam
corpus, corpus iure vocabitur: and itidem sanguis. Eran. In confesio est. Orth.
Seruator cerie noster nomina commutauit: and corpori quidem, id quod erat
symboli and signi, nomen imposuit: symbolo autem quod erat corpuris. Ita cum se
vitem nominasset, sanguinem id, quod erat symbolum appellauit. Eran. Hoc quidem
vere dixist^. Vellem autem scire causam mutationis-nominum. Orth. Manifestum
est institutum ijs qui sunt diuinis mysterijs initiati. Volebat enim eot qui
sunt Diuinorum mysteriorum participes, non attendere naturam eorum quae
videntur: sed propter nominum permutationem, mutationi, qu fit ex gratia,
credere. Qui enim quod natura est corpus, triticum and panem appellauit, and
vitem se rursus nominauit: is symbola quae videntur, appellatione corporis and
sanguinis honorauit, non naturam quidem mutans, sed naturae gratiam adijciens.
Eran. Et mystice mystica dicta sunt, and aperte declarata quae non sunt nota
omnibus. Orth. Quoniam ergo in confesso est, and Patriarcham corpus Domini
vestem and indumentum nominasse, ad dicendum autem de Diuinis mysterijs
ingressi sumus, dic per veritatem cuius symbolum, and figuram esse existimas
alimentum sanstissimum? Diuinitatis ne Domini Christi, an corporis and
sanguinis? Eran. Clarum quod illorum, quorum appellationem susceperunt. Orth.
Corporis and sanguinis dicis. Eran. Ita dico. Orth. Vi decet amicum veritatis
dixisti, Etenim Dominus cum accepisset symbolum aut signum, non dixit, Hoc est
Deitas mea: sed, hoc est corpus meum. Et rursus hic est sanguis meus.

Et alibi: Panis autem quem ego dabo, caro mea est quam ego dabo pro mundi
vita. Eran. Vera sunt haec. Sunt enim diuina eloquia Orth. Si ergo vera, corpus
vtique habuit Dominus.

In English thus:

Orthodoxus. Know thou that God called his body bread? Eranistes. I know
it. Orth. Moreover, in in one place he called his flesh wheat. Eran. This also
I know. For I have heard him, saying: The hour is come, that the son of man
shall be glorified. And except the grain of wheat which is fallen into the
earth do dye, it remains alone: but if it dye, it brings forth much fruit.
Ortho. And in the delivery of the mysteries he called bread his body, and
that which is powered in the cup and mingled, his blood. Eranistes. He called it
so in deed. Orthodoxus. Why then, that which is a natural body, shall of
right be called a body, and likewise blood. Eranistes. That is confessed.
Orthodoxus. Certainly our Savior changed the names: and gave that name to
his body, which was the name of the token or sign: and to the token, that
which was the name of his body. So when he called him self a vine, he called
his body that which was the token thereof. Eranistes. This thou have said
truly. But I would know the cause of the change of the names. Orthodoxus.
The purpose is manifest to them that are made partakers of the Divine
mysteries. For he would have them, which are partakers of the Divine
mysteries, not to regard the nature of those things that are seen: but in
respect of the changing of the names, to give credit to that change which is
by grace. For he which called his natural body wheat and bread, and named
him self again a vine: even he has honored the tokens that are seen, with
the name of his body and blood: not changing their nature, but adding grace
unto the nature. Eranistes. Those mystical things are both uttered mystically,
and those things are openly declared, which are not known to all men.
Orthodoxus. Therefore seeing it is confessed, that the Patriarch called the
Lords body a vesture and a garment, and we are entered to speak of the Divine
mysteries, tell truly, whereof do thou thank this most holy food to be a
token and figure? of the Godhead of our Lord Christ, or of his body and
blood? Eranistes. It is clear to be of them whose names they have received.
Orthodoxus. Thou say of his body and blood. Eranistes. So I say. Orthodoxus.
Thou have said as becomes a lover of the truth. For when our Lord had taken
the token or sign: he said not, This is my Godhead: but, this is my body. And
again: This is my blood: and in an other place: The bread which I will give
is my flesh, which I will give for ye life of the world. Eranistes. Those
things are true. For they are the word of God. Orthodoxus. Then if they be
true, our Lord had a body.

This discourse of Theodoret is so plain, as I need to add no exposition
thereof, to declare what his judgment was. As for the authority of Anselmus,
which he adioyneth, there is no more reason why we should admit it, then why
Master Heskins will not receive the authority of Cranmer, which was
Archbishop of Canterbury as well as Anselmus. He anueth also a saying of
Oecumenius, but both because he is a late writer, and his words in a manner
are the same that he alleged out of Theodoret, of whom it seems that
Oecumenius borrowed them, I omit them as already answered, in answer to
Theodoret.

The three and fiftieth Chapter begins the exposition of the next text of S.
Paul, which is, Let every man examine him self, and so let him eat. Hesk.


In this Chapter Master Heskins promises to teach men how to examine them
selves, Fulk.
that they may receive worthily. And two things he requires in due
examination, uprightness of faith, and purity of life. And this faith he
determines to be the Apostolic and Catholic faith, which must be learned
of hearing, as Saint Paul says, Faith comes of hearing, and as he says, it
must be learned of the Elders, and so be continued by tradition. But Saint
Paul says: Hearing must be of the word of God, for Elders may err, as well
as youngers, but the word of GOD can not err, neither can he err that
follows the doctrine of the word of GOD in any thing.

Unto pureness of life he requires confession, alleging the confession of
Augspurge for the confirmation thereof, as though Christian confession and the
Popish shrift, were all one. As fond it is, that he says, the Apostles were
instructed by Christ in the faith of the sacrament before the institution
thereof, by the miracle of the five loaves, and in pureness of life by washing
of his disciples feet. Where yet was neither contrition, confession, nor
satisfaction. After this he rayleth upon Luther, for saying that only faith
makes men pure and worthy to receive, as though by so saying, he did exclude
the fruits of repentance and reformation of manners, which necessarily do
follow of a true and lively faith, which only makes us righteous in the
sight of God, and worthy receivers by reputation or acceptance, which in the
conclusion, Master Heskins himself confesses to be all the worthiness, that
any man has or can have, to be partaker of the body and blood of Christ.

Hesk.
The four and fiftieth Chapter begins the exposition of the Fathers upon the
same text with Saint Hierome and Saint Chrysostom:

Fulk.
S. Hierome is alleged in 1. Cor. 11. Si in linteum vel vat sordidum non illud
mittere audeat etc. If a man dare not put that thing into a soul cloth or
vessel, how much more in a defiled heart, which uncleanness God above all
things detesteth, and which is the only injury that can be done to his body?
For even therefore did Joseph that righteous man bury the Lords body? wrapped
in a clean linen cloth, in a new tomb, prefiguring that they which should
receive the Lords body, should have both a clean mind and a new. M. Heskins
says, these words make plain for the presence of Christ, in that Hierome
says, we receive the body of Christ. And who denies either the presence of
Christ, or that we receive the body of Christ in the sacrament? Only we differ,
whether Christ be present bodily, and whether we receive his body after a
corporal manner, or after a spiritual or heavenly manner. It is pity he can
not see in Hieromes words, that Christ's body must be received in a clean
sort, as in a clean vessel. And whereas Master Heskins translateth mittere
illud, to put that body into a foul cloth or vessel, it is marvel he
considered not, that which answers in similitude to a foul vessel, namely
a foul heart. He thought by that translation, or rather falsification, to make
it seem, that wicked men receive the body of Christ with the mouth, but his
author says, with a filthy heart, which is the only injury that can be done
to the body of Christ, therefore he speaks of the wicked presuming to
receive the sacrament of his body and blood, not affirming that they do it in
deed. For upon these words, He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats
and drinks his own damnation, he says: Dupliciter reus effectus,
presumptionis scilicet and peccati: Being made twice guilty, namely of
presumption and sin: and upon those words: He shall be guilty of the body
and blood of our Lord.] he says: Quia tanti mysterij sacramentum pro vili
despexerit: because he has despised the sacrament of so great a mystery as
nothing worth.

But Master Heskins cites another place of Saint Hierome, against ye
licentious doctrine of Luther, as he says, that would have none other
preparation but only faith: also to maintain his carnal presence: Lib. 1.
Apoll. contra Iouinian. Probet se vnusquisque etc. Let every man examine him
self, and so let him come to the Lords body: He would not (says he) call it
the body of Christ, if it were but bread. How often shall I tell him, that it
is one thing to say, it is bread, an other thing to say, it is but bread. The
former we say, and also that it is Christ's body: the latter we utterly deny.

But Saint Hierome more at large is cited, in 1. Cor. 11. upon these words of
Saint Paul: Who so ever shall eat of this bread, and drink of this cup of
the Lord unworthily, shall be guilty: of the body and blood of our Lord:
Sicut scriptum est: Omnis mundus manducabit etc. As it is written, Every clean
person shall eat it, and again: The unclean soul that shall eat it, shall
be rooted out from his people. And our Lord him self says: If before the
altar thou shall remember, that thy brother has any thing against thee, leave
thy gif^ before the altar, and go and be reconciled to thy brother. Therefore
the conscience must first be searched, if it do in nothing reprehend us, and
so we ought either to offer, or to communicate. There be some that say, he does
not here forbid an unworthy person from the holy thing, but him that receives
unworthily. If therefore the worthy person coming unworthily he drawn back,
how much more the unworthy person which can not receive worthily? Wherefore it
behooves the idle person to cease from vices, that he may holily receive the
holy body of our Lord.

In these words Master Heskins notes the preparation required, against
Luthers only faith, and the thing received to be the holy body of our Lord. I
have answered before, that Luthers only faith does not exclude, but of
necessity draw with it all things requisite to a due preparation. And that
the holy body of our Lord is received of the faithful, we do willingly
confess, but not of the unfaithful and wicked persons. For the same Hierome
in the Chapter before cited, upon this saying of the Apostle, This is my body,
writes thus: Qui manducat corpus meum, and bibit meum sanguinem, in me manet
and ego in eo. Vnde agnoscere se debet quisquis Christi corpus edit, aut
sanguinem bibit, ne quid indignum ei faciat cuius corpus effectus est. He that
eats my body and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him. Wherefore
he ought to know him self, who so ever either eats the body of Christ, or
drinks his blood, that he do nothing unworthily, to him whose body he is
made.

This sentence plainly declares, both how the body and blood of Christ are
eaten and dronken, and of whom, namely, they are so received, as he that
received them is made the body of Christ, that is of necessity spiritually,
and they are received of them, in whom Christ dwells, and they in him,
therefore of no wicked men.

Now let us hear Chrysostom whom he cites in four places, but the two
first are one count In 1. Cor. 11. Probet seipsum etc. Let a man examine
himself, which thing also he says in the second Epistle: prove your selves
whether you be in the faith: examine your own selves, not as we do now^
coming rather for the times sake, then of any earnest desire of the mind.
Neither do we come as full of compunction prepared to purge out our vices, but
we consider that we may be at the solemnities when all men are present. But
Paul does not so command, but he knew one time in which we should come to
the pureness of communication and conscience. For if we would never
communicate at a sensible table, if we be sick of an ague, and do abound
with humors, least we should be cast away: much more wickedness it is to
touch this table, being entangled with noisome lusts, which are more grievous
then fevers. And when I speak of noisome lusts, I speak of lusts of the
body, and of money, and of anger, and of wrath, and plainly all lusts that
be naught. All which he that comes to receive, must avoid, and so touch
that pure sacrifice, not to be slouthfully disposed, nor miserably to be
compelled for the solemnities sake to come. Neither again being penitent and
prepared, to be hindered because there is no solemnity. For solemnity is an
evident declaration of good works, pureness of soul, certeintie of life,
which things if thou have, thou may always celebrate a solemnity, and
always come, therefore (says he) let a man examine him self, and so let him
eat. It follows immediately: Non iubet vt alter alteri probetur, sed ipse
sibi, non publicum faciens iudicium, and sine test argutum. He does not
command that one should be examined of an other, but each man of him self,
making the judgment not public, and the accusation without witness. Master
Heskins alleged the place to prove the necessity of preparation, which no man
denies, but these last words of Chrysostom do clearly overthrow auricular
confession, which Master Heskins compteth for a necessary part of
repentance. He notes further, that the sacrament is called of him a pure
sacrifice, and the body of Christ. How it is called either a sacrifice, or the
body of Christ, we have often showed before, yet he will press us, with an
other place, out of his Hom. Oporte^ haereses, etc. Deinde vbi multum, etc.
Then when he had disputed much of those, which unworthily are partakers of the
mysteries, and had gre^uously rebuked them and showed, that they should suffer
the same punishment, that they did which had slain Christ, if they receive
his blood and body without examination and rashly, he turns again his
communication unto the matter in hand.

Of these words M. Heskins will needs gather both his carnal presence, and
the presence of Christ unto the wicked receiver, but seeing Chrysostom
expressly names the partaking of the mysteries, it is plain in what sense,
ye body of Christ is said to be received unworthily, namely when the mysteries
yt is his sacrament are received unworthily. But our doctrine (he says) is
without all ground of scriptures, yt only faith makes Christ present in the
sacrament: in deed meaning either such a presence as he fantasieth included in
the sacrament, or such an only faith, as he slandereth us withal, neither do
we affirm it, neither is it in the scriptures to be found, but that Christ
dwells in our hearts by faith, both in the receiving of the sacraments, and
in receiving of the word of God, the Apostle teaches us, Ephesians. 3. and our
savior Christ testifies, Joan. 6. that whosoever eats his flesh and
drinks his blood has life everlasting, even as he said before he that
believes in him has life everlasting, whereupon Augustine In Joan. Tract. 26.
does rightly gather, Credere in eum, hoc est manducare panem viuum: To believe
in him, that is to eat the bread of life: and Tra. 25. Vt quid paras dentes
and ventrem, creed and manducasti. Why do thou prepare thy teeth and thy
belly, believe and thou have eaten it.

Yet another place of Chrysostom M. Heskins heapeth upon us Hom. 3. in Ep. ad
Ephesians. Considera nunc etc. Consider now what great sobriety of life those
partakers of the old sacrifice did use. For what did they not? They were
purified every time. And do thou coming to this wholesome sacrifice, which
the Angels them selves do receive with trembling, measure so great a thing
with the compass of times? With what face will thou appear before the
judgment seat of Christ, which have been so bold with unclean hands and
lips so impudently to touch his body? Thou would not choose to kiss the
King if thou have a stinking mouth: and do thou shameless man, kiss the
King of heaven with thy soul so stinking of vices? Surely this manner of thing
is a cruel reproach. Tell me would thou take upon thee to come to so
honorable a sacrifice with unwashed hands? I think not, but as I conjecture,
thou had rather altogether to refrain from coming, then to come with
foul hands. And whylest thou art so religious in so small a thing, thou
come having thy soul defiled with the mire of vices, and dare thou touch
it thou impudent man? Although a man for the uncleanness of his hands do
withholde himself for a time yet to cleanse his soul, from the filthy puddle
of all vices, let him return altogether. Master Heskins notes in this
figurative speech, three things, first the corporal presence of Christ's
body, that it may be touched with hands or lips. And he is not ashamed to
cite the saying of Christ: handle me and see that a spirit has no flesh and
bones, as you see we have: as though any man either by sight or feeling, could
discern Christ corporally present in the sacrament. But what a shameless man
is this, to urge the kissing of Christ with a foul mouth, which is a
figurative and improper speech, when it follows, that he is kissed of the
wicked with a foul soul? Like impudency is in the second note, that the
body of Christ may be touched and received of him, that has a filthy soul,
which Chrysostom says not, but inueyeth vehemently against their presumption,
that having a filthy soul, would presume to receive the sacrament. The
third, that it is an wholesome sacrifice, which the Angels do honor, does no
more prove the corporal presence of Christ on earth, then the same Authors
words soon after do prove the corporal presence of the receivers in heaven.
Dic quaeso si rex quispiam praecepisset ac dixisset, si quis istud vel istud
fecerit, mensa mea abstineat, an non huius gratia omnia fecissetis? In coelot
nos vocauit Deus, ad mensam magni and admirandi Regis, and recusamus, and moras
nectimus, ad rem tantam nec festinantes, nec accurrentes? Tell me I pray thee If
any King had commanded and said: if any man have done this or that, let him not
come to my table, would not thou have done any thing for his sake? God has
called us into heaven, unto the table of the great and wonderful King, and do
we refuse, and make delays, neither making haste nor coming to so great and
excellent a matter? This place of Chrysostom does teach us, that Christ's
body comes not down corporally to us, but that we are called up into
heaven, to receive him there spiritually by faith. This is in deed a great and
wonderful mystery, which Chrysostom does garnish with many figures (as he
was an eloquent preacher) to make the people to have due reverence thereof.

Neither is Luthers doctrine one hair breadth differing from Chrysostoms
judgment concerning the preparation necessary for all them, that shall
receive the sacrament worthily, howsoever it pleases Master Heskins never to
have done railing and reuiling him, and charging him with yt, which I think
the holy man never thought, certain I am he never did teach, but the
contrary. And because this is the last testimony he cites out of
Chrysostom, I thought good to set down one place also directly overthrowing
his transubstantiation, for which he strives so egerly. It is written, Ad
Caesa. monachum. Et Deus and homo est Christus: Deus propter impassibilitatem:
homo propter passionem: vnus filius, vnus Dominus: idem ipse procul dubio,
vnitarum naturarum vnam dominationem, vnam potestatem possidens, etiamsi non
consubstantialiter existant and vnaquaeque incommixta proprietatis conseruas
agnitionem, propter hoc quod inconfusa sunt duo. Sicut enim antequam
sanctificetur panis, panem nominamus: Diuina autem illum sanctificante gratia,
mediante sacerdote liberatus est quidem ab appellatione panis, dignus autem
habitus est Dominici corporis appellatione, etsi natura panis in ipso remansit
and non duo corpora sed vnum filij corpus predicatt^r: sic and haec Diuina
inundante corporis natura vnum filium, vnam personam vtraque haec secerunt.
Christ is both God and man, God because of his impassibilitie, man for his
passion: being one son and one Lord: he himself doubtless possessing one
domination, one power of the two natures being united, although they have not
their being consubstantially, and either of them unmingled does keep the
acknowledging of his property, because they are two unconfounded. For even as
the bread before it be sanctified is called of us bread, but when the grace of
God does sanctify it, by means of the priest, it is in deed delivered from
the name of bread, and is compted worthy of the name of our Lords body,
although the nature of the bread has remained in it, and it is not called two
bodies but one body of the son, so both these, the divine nature ouerflowing
the body have made one son, one person.

I know Stephan Gardener when he can not answer this place denies it to be
written by John Chrysostom, ascribing it to an other John of Constantinople,
but seeing it ca^ not be denied to be an ancient authority, it is sufficient
to prove the doctrine of transubstantiation, to be new and unknown to the
Church of God in the elder times.

The five and fiftieth Chapter proceeds upon the same by Isichius and S.
Augustine. Hesk.


To garnishe his Book, with the name of Isichius, Fulke.
he continues his most unjust and slanderous quarrel against Luther, as
though he denied all preparation requisite to the worthy receiving of this
holy sacrament, which is so impudent an untruth, that all the world does see
it, And God in time will revenge it. Isichius is cited In 26. Leuit. Probet
autem etc. Let a man examine him self and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup. What manner of examination does he speak of? It is
this, that in a clean heart and conscience, and to him that intends to
repent those things wherein he has offended, men should participate of the
holy things to the washing away of their sins. M. Hesk. would make men
believe, that Luthers doctrine were contrary to this saying, and multiplieth
his slanders against him, which seeing they be without al proof, yea and
manifest proof to the contrary, it shall suffice to deny them, and so to
consider what he will bring forth of S. Augustine.

He cites him Ad Iulianum Ep. 111. Whereas in deed there is no such Epistle in
any good edition of Augustine, and the treatise he speaks of, may rather be
called a Book then an Epistle for the length of it. But the style of it, is as
like unto the style of Augustine, as our Ass is to a Lion. It has no
inscription to whom it should be directed, and therefore some say to Iulianus,
some to Bonifacius. It begins O mi frater, etc. and so continues in such
balde Latin that Erasmus has not only rejected it out of the number of
Augustines Epistles, but also out of his authentical works, such judgment or
honesty M. Heskins uses in citing the fathers, all is fish that comes to
his net. I will set down the words: Ab ijs pietas, etc. From them let the
piety of our Lord Jesus Christ deliver us, and give himself to be eaten,
who said I am the bread of life which came down from heaven, he that eats
my flesh, and drinks my blood has everlasting life in him. But let every
man before he receive the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, examine
himself, and so according to the commandment of the Apostle, let him eat of
that bread and drink of that cup. For he that unworthily eats the body and
blood of our Lord, eats and drinks his own condemnation, making no
difference of the body of our Lord. Therefore when we shall receive, we ought
before to have recourse to confession and repentance, and curiously to search
out all our actions, and if we find in us any punishable sins, le^ us hasten
quickly to wash them away by confession and true repentance, least we with
Judas the traitor hyding the devil within us, do perish protracting and
hyding our sins from day to day. And if we have thought any evil or naughty
thing let us repent us of it, and let us make have to scrape that speedily out
of our heart.

This is the saying of this counterfeit and forged Augustine, out of which
Master Heskins gathers not only his manner of presence, to be such as the
wicked receive the body and blood of Christ, but also his auricular confession.

But what the judgment of the true Augustine is, you have heard before
concerning the former: as for the later question is never touched in all his
own works. De ciuit. Dei Lib. 21. Cap. 25. Non dicendum eum manducare corpus
Christi, qui in corpore non est Christi. It is not to be said, that he does
eat the body of Christ, which is not in the body of Christ. Again: Vnus
panis, vnum corpus multi sumus, qui ergo est in eius corporis vnitate, id est,
in Christianorum compage membrorum, cuius corporis sacramentum fideles
communicantes de altari sumere consueuerunt, ipse vere dicendus est manducare
corpus Christi, and bibere sanguinem Christi. There is one bread we being many
are one body, he therefore that is in the unity of his body, that is, in the
conjunction of Christian members, the sacrament of which the faithful
communicating are accustomed to receive from ye altar, he is truly to be said
to eat the body of Christ, and to drink the blood of Christ. And again: Nec
isti duo ergo dicendi sunt manducare corpus Christi, quoniam nec in membris
computandi sunt Christi. Vt enim alia taceam, non possunt simul esse and membra
Christi and membra meretricis. Denique ipse dicent, Qui manducat carnem meam
and bibit sanguinem meum in me manet and ego in eo, ostendit quid sit non
sacramento tenus sed reuera corpus Christi manducare and eius sanguinem bibere:
Hoc est enim in Christo manner, vt in illo maneat and Christus. Sic enim hoc
dixit tanquam diceret: qui non in me manet, and in quo ego non maneo, non se
dicat aut existimet manducare corpus meum, aut bibere sanguinem meum. Neither
are those two sorts of men to be said to eat of the body of Christ,
because they are not to be accounted among the members of Christ.

For, that I say nothing of other matters, they can not be both the members of
Christ, and the members of an harlot. Finally he himself saying: he that
eats my flesh and drinks my blood abides in me and I in him, shows what
it is (not in the sacrament only, but in very deed) to eat the body of
Christ, and to drink his blood. For this it is to abide in Christ, ye Christ
may abide in him. For so he spoke this, as if he had said: he that abides not
in me, and in whom I do not abide, let him not say or think that he eats my
body or drinks my blood. Thus much for Saint Augustines judgment. As for the
matter of Auricular confession which Master Heskins without warrant of Gods
word, is so bold to call Gods ordinance, upon the authority of his forged
Augustine, I think it not worthy any answer, if any man list to see the
three properties of a Ghostly Father, and two commodities of confession, let
him resort to Master Heskins book for them. Other reason or authority he
brings none for them, but this Iewde foolish and barbarous counterfeit, whom
he called most falsely and injuriously S. Augustine.

Hesk.
The six and fiftieth Chapter ends the exposition of this text by Theodoret,
and Anselme.

Fulke.
Theodoret whom he greatly commends, he cites in 1. Cor. 11. upon this text
in hand. Sic tui ipsius Index, etc. So thou being thine own judge exactly
judge thine own life: search and examine thy conscience, and then receive the
gift. As this saying is good and godly, so it excludes auricular confession,
as Chrysostom does upon the same place. But that you might know what
Theodoret means by the gift, he cites him in Dialog. 2. Quid appellas donum
quod offertur post sanctificationem? Orthodoxus. Corpus Christi, and sanguinem
Christ. Eranistes. Et credis te participem fieri Christi corporis and
sanguinis? Orthodoxus. Ita credo. What do thou call the gift, which is
offered after sanctification? Orthodoxus. The body of Christ and the blood of
Christ. Eranistes. And do thou believe that thou art made partaker of the
body and blood of Christ? Orthodoxus. So do I believe.

Thus much Master Heskins vouchsafes to rehearse out of Theodoret, and says
it is a plain place for the proclaymer, both for real presence and sacrifice.
But how plain it is, and how honestly Master Heskins rendeth this piece
from the rest, to abuse Theodorets name, you shall perceive by the whole
discourse, which I will set down. Orthodoxus. Dic ergo, mystica symbola quae
Deo a Dei Sacerdotibus offeruntur, quorumnam symbola esse dicis? Eranistes.
Corporis and sanguinis Domini. Orthodoxus. Corporis eius quod vere est, an eius
quod vere non est? Eranistes. Quod vere est. Orthodoxus. Optime. Oportet enim
imaginis esse exemplar Archerypum. Etenim pictoret imitantur naturam: and eorum
quae videntur pingunt imagines. Eranistes. Verum. Orthodoxus. Si ergo Diuina
mysteria corpus, quod vere est, repraesentant, ergo corpus etiam nunc Domini
quoque corpus est, non in Diuinam naturam mutatum, sed impletum Diuina gloria.
Eranistes. Opportune accidit vt verba faceres de D^uinis mysterijs. Nam and ex
eo ipso tibi ostendam corpus Domini mutari in aliam naturam. Responde ergo ad
mea interrogata? Orthodoxus. Respondebo. Eranistes. Quid appellas donum quod
offertur ante inuocationem sacerdotis? Orthodoxus. Non oportet ap^rte dicere:
est enim verisimile, adesse aliquos mysterijs non initiatos. Eranister.
Respondeatur aenigmatice? Orthodoxus. Id, quod fit ex huiusmodi seminibus
nutrimentum. Eranistes. Aliud etiam signum quomodo nominamus? Orthodoxus.
Commune etiam hoc nomen, quod potus speciem significat. Eranistes. Post
sanctificationem autem quomodo ea appellas? Orthodoxus. Corpus and sanguinem
Christi. Eranistes. Et credis te fieri participeni Christi corporis and
sanguinis? Orthodoxus. Ita credo. Eranistes. Sicut ergo symbola corporis and
sanguinis Domini, alia quidem sunt ante inuocationem sacerdotis, and post
inuocationem mutantur, and alia siunt: ita etiam corpus Domini post
assumptionem mutatur in Diuinam substantiam. Orthodoxus. Quae ipse texuisti,
retibus captus es. Neque enim signa mystica post sanctificationem recedunt a
natura sut. Manent enim in priori substantia, figura and forma: and videri and
tangi possunt sicut prius. Intelliguntur autem ea esse quae facta sunt, and
creduntur and adorantur, vt quae illa sint, quae creduntur. Confer ergo
imaginem cum exemplari: and videbis similitudinem? Oportet enim figuram esse
veritati similem. Illud enim corpus priorem habet formam, and figuram and
circumscriptionem and vt semel dicam corporis substantiam. Immortale autem post
resurrectionem factum est, and potentius, quam vt vlla in illud cadat
corruption, and interitus, sessioneque ad dextram Dei dignatum est: and ab omni
creatura adoratur, vt quod appelletur corpu^ naturae Domini. Eran. Atqui
symbolum mysticum priorem muta^ appellationem. Neque enim amplius nominatur,
quod vocabatur prius: sed corpus appellatur. Oportet ergo etiam veritatem,
Deum, and non corpus vocari. Ortho. Ignarus mihi videris esse. Non enim corpus
solum sed etiam panis vitae nominatur. Ita enim Dominus ipse appellanit. Porro
autem ipsum corpus Diuinum corpus appellanus, and viuificum, and Dominicum:
docentes non esse commune alicuius hominis, sed Domini nostri Jesus Christi: qui
est Deus and homo. Orthodoxus. Say then, the mystical tokens which are offered
to God by the Priests of God, of what things say thou they are tokens?
Eran. Of the body and blood of our Lord. Orth. Of that body which truly is?
Or of such a body as truly is not? Eran. Which truly is. Ortho. Very well.
For it behooves the pattern to be example of the image. For painters do
follow nature: and do paint the images of those things which are seen. Eran.
It is true. Orth. Then if the Divine mysteries do represent that body which
is a body in deed, therefore our Lords body is even now also a-bodie not
being changed into his Divine nature, but filled with Divine glory. Eran. It
came well to pass that thou did speak of the Divine mysteries. For even
out of the fame will I show unto thee, that our Lords body is changed into
another nature. Therefore answer unto my questions. Orth. I will answer.
Eran. What do thou call the gift, which is offered, before the invocation
of the Priest? Orth. I may not speak it openly, for it is like that some are
present, that are not admitted to the mysteries. Eran. Then answer darkely.
Orth. That meat which is made of such kind of seeds. Eran. And how do we
call the other sign? Ortho. That is also a common name which signifies a kind
of drink. Eran. But after sanctification how do thou call them? Ortho. The
body and blood of Christ. Eran. And do thou believe that thou art made
partaker of the body and blood of Christ? Orth. So I believe. Eran. Therefore
even as the tokens of the body and blood of our Lord are other things before
the invocation of the priest, and after the invocation are changed and made
other things: even so the Lords body after ye assumption is changed into his
Divine substance. Orth. Thou art taken with thine own nets which thou haste
made. For the mystical signs after sanctification, do not depart from their
nature. For they remain in their former substance, figure, and shape: they may
be both seen and handled, even as before. But they are understood to be those
things, which they are made to be, and are believed, and reverenced, as those
which are the same things that they are believed to be. Compare therefore the
image with the examples, and thou shall see the similitude. For the figure
ought to be like to the truth. For that same body has the former shape and
fashion, and circumscription, and to speak at once the substance of a body.
But it is made immortal after his resurrection, and more mighty, then that
any corruption or destruction can befall unto it, and it is made worthy to sit
at ye right hand of God: and is worshipped of every creature, as that which is
called the natural body of our Lord. Eran. But yet the mystical token
changes the former name. For it is no more called that it was called before:
but it is called the body. Therefore the truth also ought to be called, God,
and not a body. Orth. Thou seem unto me to be ignorant. For it is not only
called the body, but also the bread of life. For so our Lord himself called
it. But his very body, we call a Divine body, and a quickening, and our
Lords body: teaching that it is not a common body of any man, but of our
Lord Jesus Christ, which is both God and man. By this discourse of Theodoretus,
you may see both how syncerely Master Heskins has cited his authority, and
also what the writers mind was both concerning transubstantiation and the
carnal manner of presence. The authority of Anselmus Bishop of Canterbury, I
pass over as I have done always with Burgesses of the lower house. But
Master Heskins affirms that the preparation we are commanded to make for the
receipt of the sacrament, and the danger of unworthy receiving, do argue the
real presence: for such preparation and peril should not be for receiving a
piece of bread. And if we answer, that by faith we receive Christ's body and
blood verily, but yet spiritually, he will confute us by that we affirm, the
fathers to have received Christ as verily as we do, who yet had not like
preparation, nor like punishment for unworthy receiving. For their preparation
was only in outward things, their punishment only bodily and temporal.

But who is so gross of understanding, as M. Heskins, that will not
acknowledge that the fathers of the old Testament by that purifying and
preparation in bodily things, were admonished that inward and spiritually
pureness was more necessary? And whereas he says, the unworthy receivers of
those ancient sacraments were punished only with temporal death, how often
does those threatenings occur in the law: That soul shall be rooted out from
my face: that soul shall perish from his people, he has broken my covenant
etc? Will ye make us believe that God threateneth only a temporal and not an
eternal death to the contemners of his ordinances? Finally, when the same
punishment of condemnation remains to them yt receive baptism unworthily,
which abides them that receive the Lords supper unworthily, how will he
prove a real presence more in the one sacrament then in the other?

Hesk.
The seven and fiftieth Chapter expounds this text: For this cause many are
weak and sick, etc. by Origin and Saint Ambrose.

Fulk.
Origin is cited in Psalm. 37. Iudicium Dei parui pendis? etc. Set thou
little by the judgment of God? and despisest thou the church admonishing thee?
Thou are not afraid to communicate the body of Christ, coming to the
Eucharistie, as clean and pure, as though nothing unworthy were in thee, and
in all these thou think that thou shall escape the judgment of God. Thou
do not remember that which is written: that for this cause many among you
are weak and sick, and many are fallen a sleep. Why are many sick? Because
they judge not them selves, neither examine themselves, neither do they
understand what it is to communicate with the church, or what it is to come to
so great and so excellent sacraments. They suffer that, which men that be sick
of agues are wont to suffer, when they eat the meats of whole men, and so cast
away them selves.

Here Master Heskins notes, first, that Origin calls the sacrament in
plain words the body of Christ, therefore it is no bread, figure, or
sign, of the body of Christ. Secondly, he calls it mysteries, therefore it
is two sacraments, and whole Christ body and blood, is under each kind.
Thirdly, sick men sometimes will eat whole men's meat, therefore evil men
receive the body of Christ. These be all as good reasons as yt* common jest:
The staff stands in the corner, therefore ye good man is not at home. As for
the saying of Origin, we receive it willingly, for he speaks of such
receivers as Saint Paul does, that is not wicked and reprobate persons, but
such as for their offenses were chastened of the Lord, that they might not be
condemned with ye world. But he will press us with a more vehement place of
Origin: Hom. 13. in 25. Exodus Volo vos admonere, etc. I will admonish you with
the examples of our own religion. You that are wont to be present at the divine
mysteries do know how you receive the Lords body, you give heed with all
wariness and reverence, that no little portion of it should fall down, that
no part of the consecrated gift should fall away, for you believe your selves
to be guilty, and you believe rightly, if any of it should fall from you
through negligence. If then you use so great wariness about the conseruing of
his body, and worthily do use it, how do you think it is less offense to
have neglected the word of God then his body?

Master Heskins notes two things in this sentence: First, a plain saying for
the proclaimer, that without mention of figure, sign or sacramental bread,
he says the people received the body of Christ.

Secondly, that he commends the reverend usage of the same. Concerning the
first, there is express mention of the Divine mysteries, and not that only,
but then in yt he calls the sacrament the body of Christ, it appears both
that there is bread, and that it is not so his body, as the Papists do deem.
For whereof be those little portions, that may fall away, parts? of the bread,
or of the body of Christ? I think he is not so mad to say, that pieces may
fall off from Christ's holy and natural body. Then it remains, that they
be pieces or crommes of bread that may fall away. And seeing that whereof
pieces may fall away is called the body of Christ, it is manifest that he
means not the natural body of Christ to be corporally present, from which
no pieces can fall away. Finally, seeing Origin makes it as great a fault to
neglect the word of God, as to neglect the sacrament, it follows that
Christ is none otherwise present in the sacrament, then in his word, and that
is spiritually, and after an heavenly manner. As for the other matter, that
Origin allows the reverence of the people in handling the sacrament, we also
do allow the same, so far as neither idolatry nor superstition be
maintained. And whereas he raileth against us, for our usage of that bread and
wine, which remains after the ministration of the communion, he shows his
wisdom and charity. For that, which remains on ye table when the
ministration is ended, is no more the sacrament then it was before the
ministration began: and therefore may be used as all other bread, whatsoever
the Popes decrees are to the contrary. Now let us hear what he can say out of
S. Ambrose against us. He cites him in 1. Cor. 11. Vt verum probaret, etc.
That he might prove that there is a judgment to come of them which receive the
Lords body, he does now show a certain image of the judgment upon them,
which unadvisedly had received the body of our Lord, while they were punished
with fevers and infirmities, and many dyed, that by them the rest might learn,
and being terrified by the example of a few, they might be reformed, knowing
that to receive the body of our Lord negligently, is not left unpunished, but
if his punishment be here deferred, that he shall be more grievously handled
hereafter, because he has contemned the example. Here again M. Heskins
charge Ambrose to say, that the sacrament is the natural body of Christ,
and that it has been received of evil men, when he says neither of both:
for he speaks of them that were faithful, and that might be reformed,
whereas the wicked reprobates be incurable. And as for the carnal manner of
presence, how far he was from it, let his own words in the same place
declare. Upon this text: You show the Lords death until he come. Quia enim
morte Domini liberati sumus, huius rei memores, in edendo and potando, carnem
and sanguinem, qu pro nobis oblata sunt, significamus: Because we are delivered
by the death of our Lord, being mindful of this thing, in eating and drinking,
we do signify his flesh and blood, which were offered for us: And in the same
place a little after: Testamentum ergo sanguine constitutum est, quia beneficij
Diuini sanguis testis est: in cuius typum nos calicem mysticum sanguinis, ad
tuitionem corporis and animae nostr percipimus. The testament therefore is
established by blood, because his blood is a witness of the divine benefit,
in figure of whose blood, we do receive the mystical cup to the
preservation both of our body and of our soul. These sentences are plain to
declare to any man that will be satisfied with reason, that this writer
acknowledged, not a carnal, but a spiritual manner of presence. But Master
Heskins will urge us with another place that follows: Deuoto animo and cum
timore accedendum ad communionem docet, vt sciat men's reuerentiam se debere ei,
ad cuius corpus sumendum accedit: He teaches us to come to the communion with
a devout mind and with fear, that the mind may know that it owes
reverence to him, whose body it comes to receive.

Master Heskins says, here be plain terms for the proclaimer: in deed, I
would wish no playner for the spiritual manner of presence of Christ's body
in the sacrament, because this author says, the mind must yield reverence to
him whose body it comes to receive. If the mind receive the body of Christ,
it must needs be spiritually, for the mind can receive nothing corporally. And
there follow as plain terms in the next sentence immediately: Hoc enim apud
se debet iudicare, quia Dominus est cuius in mysterio sanguinem petat, qui est
testis beneficij Dei. For this it ought to consider with it self, that it is
the Lord whose blood it drinks in a mystery, which blood is a witness of
the benefit of God. In the former sentence the mind received the body of
Christ, now in this it drinks the blood of Christ in a mystery, which is a
witness or assurance of the benefit of God, namely the redemption of the
world by the blood of his only son our Lord Jesus Christ.

Hesk.
The eight and fifty chapter ends the exposition of the same text by
Theophylact and Anselme.

Fulk.
Theophylact says nothing but of the temporal punishment that God lays upon
the contemners of his mystery. Anselme borrowed his words of Ambrose cited in
the last chapter. And both Theophylact and Anselme, though great prelates in
their life, yet in this account of Master Heskins, they are burgesses of the
lower house, and lived much about a time.

To fill up the chapter, he cites certain miracles reported by Saint Cyprian
Sermon, 5. De lapsis: to show how God punishes the unworthy receiving of
the sacrament, although they do not all show it, for the first example is of
an infant that could not brook the sacramental wine, after it had tasted of
bread and wine offered to Idolles, where the negligence of the parents was
rather punished then the unworthiness of the child. The whole story is at
large set down in the last chapter of the second book.

The second example is of a woman, who receiuinge unworthily, was stricken with
sudden death.

The third of a woman who kept the sacrament in her coffer, and when she would
with unworthy hands open the coffer, in which was the holy thing of the
Lord, there sprange out a fire by which she was so terryfied, that she durst
not touch it. A just punishment for her reserving of that, which should have
been received. The fourth miracle is of a man who presuming to receive the
sacrament unworthily, could never eat the holy thing of God nor handle it.
For when he had opened his hand, he saw nothing in it but ashes. This is a
marvelous thing says Master Heskins. Whereby is declared that God is not
willing that his holy sacrament should be received of a filthy sinner, for so
much as sodeinly it pleases him to change it into ashes, he himself
departinge from it. In deed this is a strange and miraculous
transubstantiation. But if I might be so bold to ask M. Heskins, what is that
which is changed, if there be no bread in the sacrament? God he says is
departed from it, there remains the aceidentes only of bread and wine, and
so belike the accidents are changed into ashes. O monstrous mutation.

But why does not M. Hes. gather by this miracle, that if the sacrament could
not be received of a wicked man much less the body of Christ, and so does
Cyprian gather of it. Documento vnius ostensum est, Dominum recedere cum
negatur, nec immerentibus prodesse ad salutem quod sumitur, cum gratia
salutaris in cinerem sanctitate fugiente mutetur. By example of this one it is
showed, that the Lord does depart when he is denied, neither does that which
is received profit to salvation the unworthy persons, seeinge the wholesome
gifts, the holiness departing from it, is changed into ashes. Cyprian
gathers by the change of the outward sacrament, before it was received,
that Christ departs from them yt deny him, and is not received at all. But
M. Hes. would learn forsooth, what one thing is in the sacrament received that
profits and hurts, he answers it cannot be the bread and wine (for they
profit alike to al men) therefore it must needs be the body of Christ: a
wholesome conlusion, by which the body of Christ is made a hurtefull thing:
but if it please him to understand our answer, we deny that there is any
thing included in the bread or wine, that either profits or hurts to
salvation. It is the grace and spirit of God, which works as well by this
sacrament our spiritual nourishing, as by baptism our spiritual
regeneration. And that, which hurts the wicked man, is in him self, and not
in the sacrament, even his own wickedness and detestable presumption, to
defile the holy sacraments of God. Wherefore it is devilish and blasphemous,
that M. Heskins affirms the body of Christ to be hurtful to any, because the
unworthy receiving of the sacrament, hurts him that receives, by his own
act, and not by any thing that is received.

Hesk.
The nine and fiftieth Chapter treats of these words of Saint Paul. We are
members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones: by Irenaeus and Hilarious.

Fulk.
Irenaeus is cited Lib. 5. Quomodo carnem negant esse capacem etc. How do they
deny that the flesh is able to receive the gift of God, that is, eternal life,
which is nourished with the blood and body of Christ, and is made a member of
him, even as the Apostle says, in that Epistle which is to the Ephesians:
Because we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, speaking
this not of any spiritual and invisible man (for a spirit has neither flesh
nor bones) but of that disposition which is after the nature of man, which
consists of flesh, and sinews, and bones, which is nourished of the cup,
which is his blood, and is increased of the bread, which is his body. That both
our bodies and souls are nourished unto eternal life, by eating and drinking
the body and blood of Christ, we do most willingly confess and acknowledge.
But withal we affirm, that as our bodies are not naturally nourished and
increased with the body of Christ, but spiritually after a divine manner, so
only spiritually and after a divine manner, we do eat and drink the body
and blood of Christ, and not after a carnal, natural, or papisticall manner.
And this is the plain sense and meaning of Irenaeus his words. As our bodies
are naturally nourished and increased with the bread and wine of the sacrament,
so are our bodies and souls spiritually nourished and increased unto eternal
life. For M. Heskins him self denies, that our bodies are naturally nourished
and increased with the body and blood of Christ, when he says, The flesh of
Christ is not turned into our flesh, which must needs be, if we understand
that Irenaeus says, our flesh is nourished and increased of the body of
Christ, but he says, of the bread which is his body, and of the cup which is
his blood, our flesh is nourished and increased. Therefore there is natural
and very bread in the sacrament, for our flesh can not be nourished and
increased by accidents, even as certainly, as there is the body and blood of
Christ after a spiritual manner dispensed unto the faithful, which are the
members of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone. Therefore also the
wicked receive not the body and blood of Christ, because they are no members
of his body. That I have not in this interpretation varied from the mind of
Irenaeus, his plain words shall testify, Lib. 4. Cap. 34. Quemadmodum enim
qui est a terra panis percipiens vocationem Dei, iam non communis est, sed
Eucharistia, ex duabus rebus constans, terrena and coelesti: sic and corpora
nostra percipientia Eucharistiam, iam non sunt corruptibilia, spem
resurrectionis habentia. Even as that bread which is of the earth receiving the
calling of God, is not now common bread, but the Eucharistie or sacrament of
thanksgiving, consisting of two things, an earthly thing and an heavenly
thing: so also our bodies receiving the Eucharistie, are not now corruptible,
having the hope of resurrection. The place that Master Heskins cites out of
Cyril in 15. Joan. Non poterat aliter etc. agrees in effect with Irenaeus, and
is set down and answered in the second Book and foureteenth Chapter, whither
I remit the reader.

The places of Hilarious are also answered in the 20. and 24. Chapters of the
second Book, yet because he applies them to an other text, I will set them
down here also. They are in the eight Book De trinitate, though Master
Heskins quote not the place: Eos qui inter patrem and filium etc. I ask them
that bring in the unity of will between the Father and the Son, whether
Christ be now in us by verity of nature, or by agreement of will? For if the
word was verily made flesh, and if we do verily receive the word made flesh
in the Lords meat, how is he not to be thought to abide in us naturally, who
being borne man, did both take our nature now inseparable upon him, and also
has admixed the nature of his flesh unto the nature of eternity under the
sacrament of his flesh to be communicated unto us? For so we be all one,
because the Father is in Christ, and Christ is in us. Whosoever therefore shall
deny the Father to be naturally in Christ, let him first deny, that he himself
is not naturally in Christ, as Christ in him, because the Father being in
Christ, and Christ in us, make us to be one in them. Therefore if Christ
have truly taken upon him the flesh of our body, and that man which was borne
of Marie, was truly Christ, and we do truly under a mystery receive the
flesh of his body, and by this we shall be one, because the Father is in him,
and he in us.

Here Master Heskins cutteth off the conclusion, which is this: Quomodo
voluntatis vnitas asseritur, cum naturalis per sacramentum proprietas perfectae
sacramentum sit vnitatis? How is the verity of Will maintained, when the
natural property by the sacrament, is a sacrament of perfect unity? Hilarie
reasons against the Arrians that said, God was not naturally or essentially
in Christ, but by unity of will, as God is in us, but he proves that Christ
is naturally joined to us by his incarnation, and does also communicate his
flesh unto us by the holy sacrament, which (as he expounds him self in the
last sentence, that M. Hes. has cut off) is a sacrament or mystery of our
perfect unity with Christ. Therefore he does not simply say, yt we do
naturally eat ye flesh of Christ, but under a mystery, under a sacrament, by
which he means, yt we do not eat the flesh of Christ carnally, but
spiritually, not after a corporal manner, but after a spiritual manner.
Finally he says, that Christ is so naturally in us, as we are naturally in
Christ, but we are only spiritually in Christ, therefore Christ is only
spiritually in us. For naturally as he uses it for essentially, is not
contrary to spiritually. But he alleges another place of Hilarie, where he
affirms, that Christ is in us both carnally and corporally: Haec idcirco a
nobis commemorata sunt etc. These things are for this cause spoken of us,
because the heretics falsely affirming an unity of Will only to be between
the Father and the Son, did use the example of our unity with GOD, as though
we being united to the Son, and by the same to the Father, only by obedience
and will of religion, no property of natural communion should be given by the
sacrament of his natural flesh and blood, seeing that both by the honor of the
son of God given to us; and by the son of God carnally abiding in us, and
we being corporally and inseparably united in him, the mystery of the true and
natural unity is to be declared. By the words of corporally and carnally, he
means essentially, as he did before by the word naturally, both because
Christ took our nature verily upon him, and also does communicate unto us by
the same, his eternity. And that he means not carnally and corporally as the
Papists do, it is manifest by that he says, we are not only corporally, but
also inseparably united in him. For there, corporal conjunction makes not an
inseparable union, because they say, that Christ is as naturally; carnally, and
corporally united to the wicked, from whom he is separated, as to the godly,
wherefore it is left of necessity, that this natural, carnal, corporal, or
essential dwelling of Christ in us, is not after a natural manner, but after
a wonderful manner, not after a fleshly but after a spiritual manner, not
after a bodily, but after a divine and heavenly manner. To conclude, how
plain these places be for the proclamer, and plain against Master Heskins
the exclamer, let the readers judge. The proclamer does admit these sayings
according to the mind of the writers, and not according to Master Heskins
falsifications and gloses.

The Sixtieth Chapter treats upon this text of S. Paul to the Hebruer: We
have an altar etc. Hesk.


The text is written Heb. 13. We have an altar, of which is it not lawful for
them to eat, which serve in the tabernacle. By which he means, that none can
be partakers of the sacrifice of Christ, that remain in the ceremonial
observation of the Leuiticall law. But Master Heskins understands it, that
we have the body of Christ in the sacrament, of which it is not lawful for
any Jew abiding in Moses law to eat. And this he will prove by Isichius and
Theophylact. Isichius he cites in Leuit. Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Omnem sanguinem etc.
He commanded all the rest of the blood of the calfe to be powered out about the
foot of the altar of the burnt offering, which is in the tabernacle of
witness. Let us again understand, the altar of the burned sacrifice, to be
the body of Christ. For as he is the Priest and the sacrifice, so he is the
altar. And know that S. Paul does understand the intelligible altar to be the
body of Christ: for he says we have an altar, of which they have no power to
eat, which do serve in the tabernacle, that is to say, the body of Christ.
For of that it is not lawful for the Jews to eat M. Heskins would have it
plain, that he means the real presence of Christ's body in the sacrament,
when neither the Apostle, nor Isichius speak one word of the sacrament, but
of the spiritual participation of the sacrifice of Christ's death, for he
says, Christ is the Priest, the sacrifice, and the altar. Therefore he
speaks of that sacrifice that Christ him self did offer, not of that
sacrifice, which the Papists do imagine their blasphemous Priests do offer.
And whereas M. Heskins trifleth of M. Hoopers gloss of edere and credere, that,
to eat is to believe, although to eat the flesh of Christ be the effect of
faith, because that by faith we eat Christ, yet may we more aptly say, to eat
is to believe, then the Papists say, that men may eat Christ which do not
believe at all. And it is a very childish sophisme, out of which M. Heskins
would gather, that if to eat be to believe, and it be not lawful for the
Jews to eat Christ, it is not lawful for them to believe in Christ. For
continuing in Iudaisme they can no more believe in Christ, then they can eat
the flesh of Christ. But contrariwise by their doctrine, if the sacrament be
given to a Jew, that is no Christian, yet he eats the body of Christ as he
that believes in Christ. The testimony of Theophylact, although it make
little for M. Hesk. yet as always before, so now at the last I will refuse to
examine, because I will not yield to his authority, he being a late writer.
But M. Hesk. notes upon ye Apostles words, We have an altar, that ye Church
has but one altar, which is the body of Christ, and that is very true, of the
true Catholic Church: but the heretical and schismatic Church of Rome
has many thousand altars, which they can not say are all one altar, although
they cavil that their infinite multitudes of hosts, are one sacrifice of
Christ's body. Therefore the Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church of
Christ, by his own reason. And the saying of Hierome, which he cites, Lib 2.
in Hose. Cap. 8. and wresteth against us, does very aptly condemn him self
and his fellow Papists for heretics: Vnum esse altar etc. The Apostle
teaches, that there is in the Church but one altar, and one faith, and one
baptism, which the heretics forsaking have set up to themselves many altars,
not to appease God, but to increase the multitude of sins, therefore they are
not worthy to receive the laws of God, seeing they have despised them, which
they have received before. And if they shall speak any thing out of the
scriptures, it is not to be compared to the words of God, but to the senses of
Ethnikes. These men do offer many sacrifices, and eat the flesh of them,
forsaking the only sacrifice of Christ, nor eating his flesh* whose flesh is
the meat of the believers, whatsoever they do counterfeting the order and
custom of the sacrifices, whether they give alms, whether they promise
chastity, whether they counterfeit humility, and with feigned flatterings,
deceive simple persons, the Lord will receive nothing of such sacrifices. We
forsake not the only sacrifice of Christ once offered, but our whole trust is in
the merits of that sacrifice, therefore we set up no new altars. The Papists
set up an other sacrifice, and therefore other altars. If our allegation and
interpretation of ye scriptures may not be warranted by the spirit of God,
judging in the same scriptures by other textes, that are plain and evident: we
desire not that any man shall receive them, as the Papists do, whatsoever the
Popish Church does define, though it be contrary to the express word of God.
And although we admit not that gross and carnal manner of Christ's body in
that sacrament that they do hold, yet do we eat the flesh of Christ verily
after that manner, which the Papists themselves do confess to be the only
profitable eating thereof, namely that which is spiritual. What our works be,
I refer them to the judgment of God, we boast not of them. And although
fasting for merit be justly punishable by statute, yet godly and Christian
fasting is not clean exiled out of our Church, though not so often perhaps
used, as mere it were it should. Our doctrine of fasting is sound and
agreeable to the word of God, and therefore we dare justify it, our doing we
will not justify, nor excuse our faults, but humbly submit our selves to
his judgment, who knows our hearts, of whom we crave pardon for our
offenses, and grace to keep his commandments. But now to conclude this
matter, I will produce one testimony of Gelasius an ancient Bishop of Rome,
which I think should be of great weight with all Papists, if they give in deed
such reverence either to yt See, or to antiquity as they pretend. And thus he
writes Cont. Eusychet. Certe sacrame^ta, quae sumimus corporis, and sanguinis
Christi, diuina res est: propter quod and per eade^, divine efficimur consortes
naturae: and tamen esse non desinit substantia and natura panis and vini* Et
certe imago vel similitudo corporis and sanguinis Christi in action
mysterioru^ celebratur. Satis ergo nobis euidenter oste^ditur, hoc in ipso
Domino Christo sentiendu^, quod in eius imagine, profitemur, celebramus and
sumimus. vt sicut hc in diuina^ tra^ feu^t spiritu sancto perficiente
substantia^ permanent tamen in su proprietate naturae: sic illud ipsu^
mysteriu^ principale, cuius nobis officientia^ veritatemque veraciter
reprsentat, ex ijs quibus conflat, proprie permanentibus, vnu^ Christu^,
quoniam integru^ veru^que permanere demonstret. Certainly, the sacraments of
the body and blood of Christ which we receive, are a divine thing: and
therefore by them we are made partakers of the divine nature, and yet the
substance and nature of the bread and wine ceasseth not to be. And surely, an
image or similitude of the body and blood of Christ, is celebrated in ye action
of ye mysteries. Therefore it is showed unto us evidently enough, that we must
judge ye same thing even in our Lord Christ him self, which we profess,
celebrate, and receive, in yt which is an image of him: yt as by the working of
the holy Ghost, they pass into a divine substance, and yet abide still in ye
property of their own nature: even so ye same principal mystery does show,
that one Christ abides whole and true, whose efficiencie and truth, it does
truly represent unto us, those things of which he consists properly still
remaining. Thou see, gentle reader, yt this ancient Bishop of Rome, first
does utterly overthrow transubstantiation, when he says, that the substance
and nature of the bread and wine do remain still in the sacraments, although
they be a divine thing. Secondly, that he excludes ye carnal manner of
presence, when he says, we celebrate and receive an image and similitude of
the body and blood of Christ in ye sacraments, and lastly, yt he aduoucheth ye
spiritual and divine manner of presence of Christ, when he says, yt the
sacraments are turned into a divine substance, which he means not of ye
substance of ye deity, but of ye heavenly and wonderful manner of presence, by
which Christ vouchsafes to give unto his faithful members, his very body and
blood in a mystery. And yt the Church of Rome in much later times did not
acknowledge this carnal presence, it shall appear even out of the Popes own
Canon law, even in ye decrees. De Consecrat. distinct. 2. Cap. Hoc est.
Coelestis panis qui Christi caro est, suo modo nominatur corpus Christi, cum
reuera sit sacramentu^ corporis Christi. Vocaturque ipsa i^molario carnis, que
sacerdotis manibus fit, Christi passio, mors, crucifixio, no^ rei veritate, sed
significa^te mysterio. The heavenly bread which is the flesh of Christ, after a
peculiar manner, is called the body of Christ, when as in very deed it is ye
sacrament of the body of Christ. And even ye oblation of his flesh, which is
done by ye hands of ye priest, is called the passion, death, and crucifying of
Christ, not in truth of ye thing, but in a signifying mysteri. Those words
which are borrowed out of August. into ye decrees, the gloss does thus
understand, Coeleste sacraementu^, quod vere repraesentat Christi carnem,
dicitur corpus Christi sed improprie. Vnde dicitur, suo modo sed non in
veritate, sed significante mysterio^ Vt sit sensus: vocatur corpus Christi, id
est significat. The heavenly sacrament, which does truly represent ye flesh of
Christ, is called the body of Christ, but improperly. Therefore it is said to
be: after a peculiar manner, but not in truth of the thing, but in a signifying
mystery. So that the sense is: it is called the body of Christ, that is, it
does signify the body of Christ. If these testimonies, that are taken out of
the Romish Bishops own writings, decrees, and gloses, that are so plain will
not satisfy the Papists, that their doctrine of transubstantiation and
carnal presence is neither true, ancient, nor Catholic, it is in vain to
spend more words with them, as with men that are obstinate, and will not be
satisfied with any truth contrary to their presumed heresy.

Hesk.
The one and sixtieth Chapter makes a recapitulation of that, that is done in
this work.

Fulk.
Seeing this Chapter contains no argument or authority to defend his cause,
but only rehearses what he fantasieth, that he has brought in other places
throughout all his book for the maintenance of the same, I refer it to the
indifferent readers judgment, what I have done in this brief confutation of
the same. And here I conclude this act of repeal, that notwithstanding this
bill offered to the Parleament by Tho. Hesk. in the lower house has many
friends, so that the greater part of voices, if the house were divided, might
seem to overcome the better: yet for as much as in the higher house, the
greatest number have spoken directly against his bill, and no one lord of that
house, which lived within the compass of 600. years of the challenge, has
given his voice to allow it, not only the pretensed act of Parleament set
forth by the said Tho. Hesk. is proved to be false, forged, and counterfeit, but
also the bill that he has put in to be considered, is utterly rejected and
condemned, and spurned out of the house.

GOD BE PRAISED.
A CONFVTATION OF AN IDOLATROVS TREATISE OF NICOLAS SANDER Doctor in Divinity,
which mainteyneth the making and honoring of Images, by W.F. Doctor in
Divinity.
ECCLESIASTIC. 45.
The memorial of the beloved of God is blessed, that is to say, any thing that
makes us to remember him that is beloved of God, is worthy of praise and
honor. Sander.


A Doctor like interpretation: Fulke.
and a pithy argument, whereupon I may conclude: The idols that Solomon made
are things that make us remember Solomon, who was the beloved of God, and so
called of God him self: therefore the idols were worthy of praise and honor.

The preface containing a brief declaration, which is the true Church. Sander.


Master Sander taking in hand so absurd and wicked an argument, as is the
defense of idolatry, Fulk.
or honoring of Images, thought good to present it in the best vessel that he
had, which is the painted box of the Church: which that he might the rather
commend to his countrymen, he has taken upon him to describe it, both inside
and outside, as he says, by certain known truethes in number no less then
112. which after they have been all well vewed and sufficiently considered, I
doubt not, but to the reasonable and indifferent Reader, shall appear nothing
else but a fair colored, but yet an empty vessel. I will follow his
divisions, and where I find any truth I will confess it without wrangling,
where in steed of truth he offers falshode, I will breefely confute it.

1 The first I grant, that Christ has always had and always shall have a
Church on earth, out of which there is no salvation. This Church consists of
men which believe in him, have their faith sealed and confirmed by outward
sacraments.

2 The Church is the kindome of Christ, the City of God, and the kingdom of
heaven, wherein Christ shall reign for ever.

3 The kingdom is spread more largely, and governed more prudently, then any
earthly kingdom ever was, even to the ends of the world, and to continue
world without end.

4 Notwithstanding all this, to say that the Church, or this kingdom of
Christ was hidden any one hour from the eyes of the world, is not to make it
more obscure then any earthly kingdom ever was as Master Sander does
affirm: for the glory of this Kingdom which is spiritual never did, nor
shall appear to the wicked of this world. The Church is an article of our
faith, and faith is of those things which are not seen, Hebru. 11. but with
spiritual eyes. Therefore the exaltation of the Lords hill that Esaie 2. and
Micheas 4. do speak of, is of a spiritual advancement, and a city built
upon an hill, is every true minister of Gods word. Matthewe 5. and not the
whole Church. Finally the glory and joy that Esaie 60. promises unto the
Church, and her happy enlargement among the nations, Cap. 61. prove no worldly
pomp or greatness, to be seen with carnal eyes, but is meant of the joyful
and comfortable addition of the Church of the Gentiles, unto the Church of
the Jews. For otherwise these words could not be verified of all wicked men:
All that see them shall know them, that they are the blessed seed, which the
Lord has blessed.

5 The chief mean whereby the Church is so clearly seen, and so glorious in
the sight of men, is that Christ being the true light, has communicated his
brightness to his Apostles, sayng you are the light of the world. A city
built upon an hill can not be hidden. Neither do men light a candel and put it
under a bushel, but upon a candlestick, that it may give light to al them, that
are in the house. But this brightness is heavenly and spiritual, not worldly
and carnal, to be seen of the children of light, not of the blind bussards of
the world.

6 The Church dyed not when the Apostles dyed, for Bishops and Pastors
succeeded in their place, as lights set upon the candlestickes, which are the
several Churches: Apoc. 1.

7 The light and glory of Gods Church, comes chiefly from the Bishops and
Pastors thereof, I mean from their heavenly doctrine, not from their persons,
as Master Sander perhaps would insinuate. And the history of the Church is
described by Eusebius, Socrates Theodore, etc. by the doctrine uttered in
preaching, writings, and consent in councels, and doings, and sufferings of the
Elders of the Churches, and not altogether or cheefely, by their known
government, as Master Sander affirms: As for example Eusebius shows the
doctrine of Clement out of his writing, for the allowance of marriage, who
affirms yt the Apostles were married and begot children, Lib. 3. Cap. 30.
Socrates shows that, Spiridion a Bishop of Cypres in time of his Bishopric,
of great humility kept sheep Lib. 4. Cap. 12. Sozomenus says he had a wife
and children, and shows his judgment for eating flesh on a fasting day,
accounting him no Christian that would refuse it, Lib. 1. Cap, 11. Finally
although some Churches have been known by their Pastors and Bishops, yet have
there been infinite Churches known to be in the world, whose Bishops and
Pastors are altogether unknown. And although some heretical and Schismatical
companies, have been known by their heads, yet not all, for the Acephali were
so called, because they had no head, the Anthropomorphites also were rustical
Monks or Eremites in Egypt, under no head of their own, but the Bishop of
Alexandria, which was a Catholic. Niceph. Lib. 13. Cap 10.

8 Although the Church of Christ ceased not at the end of the first five or
six hundredth years, nor the glory of Christ's kingdom was ever darkened: yet
a great number of the Bishops and pastors of the visible Church, began then to
be dim, and some altogether dark, because they lighted not their candels at
the word of God, the only true light, shyning in the dark, but declined to
the inventions of men and doctrine of devils according to the prophecy, of
Saint Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2. of the apostasy and departing from the faith, 1.
Tim. 4. toward the coming and revelation of Antichrist. Neither is it true,
that M. Sander says, that after the first 600. years, the Church was spread
into mo countries, then it was before, but the contrary. For Mahomet soon
after perverted the greatest part of the world, whereas Africa, long before
was ouerrunne, and Christianity spoiled by the Vandales, which were either
Heathens, or Arrians. Notwithstanding, some small countries have been since
that time turned to the Christian profession. And as it is true that Pastors
and Doctors must still be to the end of the world in the Church, and Christ
never forsakes the same: so is it false, that Popish Bishops, and Priests,
which either were ignorant or altogether negligent in feeding and teaching the
Church with the food and doctrine of Gods word, whereof Saint Paul spoke
Ephesi. 4. or taught the doctrine of Devils in steed thereof, be those
Pastors, and Doctors by whom the preaching of the Gospel is continued,
though they sit in the same places, where sometime, the true teachers satt,
even as Antichrist their head, sits in the Temple of GOD, which is the
proper place of Christ. Neither is the credit of such late writers, as
account them for successors of the Apostles and godly pastors and teachers,
sufficient to authorize them for such in deed, when their whole life and
doctrine is contrary to the writings of the Apostles, and those ancient godly
Pastors and Doctors.

9 We say not, that the Church of Christ was known for the first ^00. years
after Christ only or chiefly by ye Bishops and Pastors thereof, but by their
doctrine agreeable to the word of God. And therefore it is sufficient ground for
us, to deny the later rout, that professes not ye same doctrine, to be the
church of Christ. The succession of persons or places, without the continuance
of the same true doctrine, can no more defend the Pope and popery, then it
could defend Caiphas and Sadduceisme. For Caiphas a Sadducei, which denied the
resurrection, could more certainly declare his personal and local succession
from Aaron, then the Pope can from Peter.

10 I have proved before, that it is false, which Master Sander again says
to be true, that Eusebius and other writers point forth the church of 500.
years, only or chiefly by Bishops which ruled in Rome, Antioche, Alexandria,
etc. The doctrine and acts of those Bishops agreeable to the scriptures, The
later church compared with the former.
is their description and not their personal or local succession, as it was
accounted in the latter times, when they had nothing else to commend their
counterfeit Bishops, being in life and doctrine contrary to the word of God,
and the testimony of the primitive church. And where he says noting in ye
margent, August. Ep. 165. that in old time they were known to be heretics,
which departed from the known company of Bishops and Pastors, agreeing in one
faith, etc. it is very true, but then this faith was proved to be true, not
only by successions of Bishops, but by the holy scriptures, as the same
Augustine says in the same place: Quanquam nos non tam de istis documentis
praesumamus, quam de scripturis sanctis. Although we do not presume so much of
those documentes, as of the holy scriptures. To conclude, all practices and
councels, that are contrary to the holy Scriptures, were then refused,
Practices Councels.
even as they be now. Cyprian refused the practice of ministering the communion
with water, because it was contrary to the scripture. Augustine refused the
practice of Cyprian, and the Council of Carthage* for rebaptizing them that
were baptized by heretics: and for the same cause, our church refuses the
Mass, the Laterane, and the Tridentin councels, without danger of schism or
heresy.

11 The universal church is a spiritual collection, of many members into one
body, whereof Christ is the only head, both in heaven and earth, as the
Apostle says Ephesians. 3. Cor. 15. The unity hereof is mainteyned by following
the direction of his word, and his holy spirit. The order of particular
churches, is maintained by the several government of them. But their whole
church, although it be like an army of men well set in arraye, yet can it
have no one chief Captain in earth to direct it, but he that is omnipotent,
and fitteth in heaven, not only to ouerlooke it, but to rule and order it. For
no mortal man can look into all places, know all cases, provide against all
mischiefs, nor give aid in all dangers.

12 Therefore Peter was none such: and although Pascere be both to feed and
rule, yet it is to rule like a Shepeheard, and not like an Emperor. Neither
were the sheep by Christ committed to Peter more then to the other, because
he loved more then the other, but Peter was charged as he would by his
forwardness show more zeal and love then the rest, so to employe the same to
the feeding of Christ's flock. And whereas Master Sanders quoteth Chrysostom
in Joan Hom. 87. I know not wherefore, except it were to show the prerogative
of Peter above the rest. You shall hear what his judgment was of Peter's
authority, notwithstanding all his prerogative, in Act. Apost. Hom. 3. Iam and
illud considera, quod and Petrus agit omnia ex communi discipulorum sententia,
nihil authoritate sua, nihil cum imperio. Now consider this also how even
Peter does all things by the common decree of the disciples, nothing by his
own authority, nothing by commandment, or with rule.

13 Therefore it is false which Master Sander affirms, that the government
of the faithful was committed to one above all other: for it did as well
perteine to every Apostle, as to Peter to feed the sheep of Christ. And when
distinction for orders sake was made in the ministry by God, Peter
acknowledged the Apostleship of the circumcision, which was neither the
greatest nor the chiefest part of the church, to be allotted to him Gal. 2.
verse. 7. Therefore, although there be one flock of Christ upon earth, yet
Christ is the only one shepeheard thereof, One shepeheard.
as he affirms John. 10. verse. 16 Although he have many servants that
ouersee his sheep, as they be scattered in many places, whose collection into
one flock, as it is not local, nor visible, so they must needs have an
almighty, and invisible shepeheard to gather them together, and no mortal man
were he never so excellent, least of all the Pope the vilest man alive.

14 For which cause, although every particular flock must have one Pastor, A
particular flock.
which is not necessary, for some may have more then one, yet cannot the whole
church militant on earth, Church militant.
have one earthly man to be head thereof. And albeit M. Sander would prove it
particular, in respect of the whole number of the elect, yet is it universal
in respect of all particular congregations on earth, at one time, and so
universal, as no singular man can possibly know it, much less govern it.

15 And therefore although Christ the universal shepeheard will suffer no
particular church to continue without a servant to ouersee it under him, yet
will he committ to no servant any charge, which is impossible for him to
execute, as is the oversight of the Catholic or universal Church upon earth.
And here note the impudency of the Papists, which affirm that their
particular Synagogue of Rome, is the Catholic or universal Church, and yet
deny, the whole church of Christ militant on earth, to be the Catholic church.

16 It shall never be proved, that Peter was made by Christ the first
sheapheard over all the sheep of Christ on the earth, otherwise then as all
the Apostles were.

And yet if that were true, and that which Master Sander infers also, that
one chief sheapeheade should be like Peter, as one that executes the same
office that Peter did: yet it follows by no reason of consequence, that he
concludes, that all other bishops are excluded from this office, saving, he
that occupyeth his place at Rome, if ever he had any there. For he that were
most like to Peter in gifts, meet to execute such an office, were by all
reason more meet to succeed Peter, then every unlearned ass, and wicked
helhound, that is advanced into that chair of Rome, where Peter is supposed
to have sit.

17 Now seeing Peter is said, first to have sit at Antioche, and afterward to
have removed to Rome, what reason is there seeing his supremacy was personal,
that his successoures of Antioche after his death should not claim it, as
well as they of Rome, if it went by right of succession? For change of place
can make no change of right. And the title of Antioche is the elder, therefore
the better. Except Master Sander will say, that Rome has it by his legacy,
and then he must show us S. Peter's last will and testament.

18 And whereas he says, it is well known, that S. Peter dyed at Rome, it is
not so well known, as yt Christ dyed at Jerusalem, wherefore ye Bishop of
Jerusalem should more reasonably claim this supremacy and vicarship unto
Christ. And that Peter writes from Babylon, it is an argument he was not at
Rome, but in Babylon of Egypt, although S. Hierom thinks he was at Rome, and
calls Rome Babylon as the seat of Antichrist, which M Sander is content to
take, yt he might have some color of Scripture, to prove yt S. Peter was at
Rome. Although it be such, as may serve to prove Rome to be the seat of
Antichrist, but not the chief seat of the Church of Christ. Apoc. 19.

19 It is true that among al countries and cities, none was so notable as the
city and people of Rome, because of the seat of the Empire that was there, in
which respect also the church of Rome was much noted and reverenced, so long
as it continued in synceritie. But the bishops thereof, have not been so
notable as many other of other cities. What one bishop of Rome like to
Athanasius of Alexandria, Chrysostom of Constantinople, Ambrose of Millain?
Yea poor Augustine of Hippo, or Osius of Corduba in their times, or before
their times? And whereas he says, no places so convenient for the head of
Christ's church to be settled in, it is altogether false, because it was not
convenient, that the head of Christ's church should be settled there, where
Antichrist should sit, lest the one should be taken for the other.

20 And although it were granted that Italy is the fittest place for worldly
Empire, yet it follows not that it is aptest for spiritual government. For
in all worldly respects, the land of Promise far excels Italy, which now is
the most slauishe country in Europe, being parted into so many seignories
almost, as there be great cities, as Machiauill does confess.

21 Although at sometime, no city in Italy was so notable as Rome, yet was it
not so always, since Christ's birth, for it has been diverse times taken and
destroyed by the Gotthes, and for many years left uninhabited. And although it
was most notable in worldly glory, yet that was most unmeet for to set up the
kingdom of Christ, and when it was in greatest glory it did always withstand
it. Therefore Jerusalem in the land of promise, if God would have chosen one
city for his vicare to sit in, had been in all respects the meetest place in
the world.

22 That he says no Apostle was more glorious then S. Peter, it is untrue, for
S. Paul affirms that he was equal with him, and the rest, and labored more
then they all. 2. Cor. 11. verse. 5. and 1. Cor. 15. verse. 10. But admit that
Peter was the chief, yet it follows not, which M.S. affirmed, that the
bishop of Rome has the most notable predecessor or founder of his chair, that
ever any bishop had. For the bishop of Antioche, has the same by his own
confession, and the elder title.

23 Where he says that the church of Rome, was also founded by S. Paul, it is
a manifest untruth: for ye church was there before S. Paul ever came there, as
it is plain by his Epistle to the Romans, and before Peter also came
thither, as it is plain by the Epistle to the Galath. cap. 2. And therefore
seeing the church of Rome was first founded, neither by Peter nor Paul, she
has nothing to brag of their pre-eminence, which many churches planted by the
Apostles, might with more equity challenge. As for the bequething of Peter and
Paul, that he speaks of, when he can show us a copy of their Testament, we
will shape him an other answer.

24 That there were many martyrs and confessors at Rome in the primitive
church, the cause was the great multitude of people in that church, by reason
of the frequens of the imperial city. But this proves no prerogative of
ancestrie over other churches. That so many of ye first bishops suffered death
for Christ's cause (although it may be doubted of ye number of 30. and upward,
because no ancient writer does testify it) it was by reason they were nearest
unto ye greatest persecutors, which were the emperors of Rome. But this proves
not ye supremacy of ye bishop of Rome, before the bishops of other cities, who
have likewise suffered death for Christ.

25 It is utterly false yt he affirms yt no faithful people of any city had
ever so notable witness, as the church of Rome of S. Paul, your faith is
preached in ye whole world. In which translation he falsifieth ye words of S.
Paul, for he says your faith is reported, or commended in all the world, not
yt it was preached, for the^ an insufficient faith should have bin preached,
which needed the justification of yt Epistle. And whereas M.S. says, yt
Cyprian says, the Apostle spoke it prophetically, not only in respect of
their faith present, but also of the^ yt should follow, it is to small purpose,
except M.S. can prove yt the Romans now do hold the same faith which S. Paul,
and S. Cyprian commended in his fellow bishop Cornelius and the Romans of his
time. And as for as notable, and a more notable testimony of an other people
then ye Romans, read the beginning of the 2. Thessalon. capit. 1.1.
Collossians, cap. 1.

26 Whereas he says that S. Hiero. proves the faith of the Romans which
Saint Paul praised, to have remained in his days, because none other people
did so devoutly visit the sepulchers of the martyrs, which the protestants
count for infidelity, rather then faith, he shows himself to be an
impudent wrangler. The words of Hierom be these, In prooem. lib. 2. in Epist.
ad Gal. 3. Vultis scire o Paula and Eustochiu^, quomodo Apostolus vnam qua^que
prouincia^ suis proprietatibus denotarit? Vsque hodie cadem vel virtutum
vestigia permanent vel errorum. Romanae plebis laudatur fides. Vbi alibi tanto
studio and frequentia, ad ecclesias and martyrum sepulchra concurritur? vbi sic
ad similitudinem caelestis tonitrui Amen reboat, and vacua idoloru^ templa
quatiuntur? Non quod aliam habeant Romani fidem, nisi hanc quam omnes Christi
ecclesie, sed quod deuotio in eis mayor sit and simplicitas ad credendum.
Rursum facilitatis and superbi arguuntur. Will you know, o Paula and
Eustochium, how the Apostle has described every province in their own
properties? Even to this day, the steps remain either of virtues or of
errors. The faith of the Pope of Rome is praised. Where is there such concourse
any where else, with so great desire and frequence, unto the churches and
sepulchers of martyrs? Where does Amen so rebound like to heavenly thunder,
and the emptye temples of Idols, so shaken with it? Not that the Romans have
any other faith, but the same which al ye churches of Christ have, but because
in them is greater devotion and simplicity to believe, likewise they are
reproved for too much facility and pride. These words declares yt Hierome
speaks of no Popish pilgrimage, but of resorting to the churches, which were
builded upon the sepulchers of ye martyrs, therefore called ye memories of the
martyrs. Secondly, what he means by faith, namely, devotion and simplicity
of believing and not doctrine. Thirdly, that the Romans retained as well ye
vices as the virtues of their auncesters. But now they retain only the vices.

27 The Papists live under a visible head, but ye same is Antichrist, the
protestants under an invisible head, which is Christ. The Pope fitteth in Rome
the mother of al abominations, having nothing to brag of, but the virtues of
such as have dwelled there before him, and no good quality of his own. Yet
the title of universal shepherd M.S. denies unto him, although he most
arrogantly do usurp it. Howbeit properly M.S. says, he ought not to have it.

28 Therefore the bishops of Rome before Gregory the first, refused the same
title as profane and proud, which belongs only to Christ. Yet the council
of Chalcedo^ offered it to Pope Leo the first, but he refused it as slanderous.
This being confessed by M S. choose whether you will say the council did err in
offering the same, or Pope Leo in refusing, or the latter Popes in using the
same.

29 Gregory the first in deed, took upon him the humble style of the
servant of the servant of God, as M.S. says, but his successors, using that
title for a formality, having been content to be called Lord of Lords, and God
above all gods, and our lord God the Pope, and the most holiest, and an
hundredth more blasphemous titles, beside treading on the Emperors neck, and
such like examples of profane pride, as Nero, Heliogabalus, no Dioclesian ever
showed the like.

30 It is not to be proved that he says, there were 4. Patriarks at the
beginning, nor that the Pope of Rome was chief. For the council of Nice,
Canon 6. does make the patriarch of Alexandria, and the rest equal with the
bishop of Rome. Although afterward ye bishops of Rome, as they were commonly
ambitious, when persecution was stayed, by prerogative of the imperial city,
challenged a kind of primacie, yet not of authority, but of order. And
whereas he says, other Patriarchs were preferred in respect of the affinity
they had with S. Peter, it is false: for the Patriarch of Constantinople was
placed next to him of old Rome, because Constantinople was new Rome, and the
imperial city Council. Constantinop. Cap. 2. or after Garanza. Cap. 5. That
the Pope did erect patriarchal Seas at Aquileia, and at Senis, it was not for
that the other were infected with heresy, but that they refused to acknowledge
his Antichristian authority, bought of Phocas the murderer, by Boniface the
third: for if his authority had been so great, as is pretended, he would have
deposed those heretical bishops, and set up Catholics in their places, rather
then to have spoiled the seats of their dignities for ever, for the fault of
the bishops.

31 It is false yt he says, never any bishop was so much esteemed as the
bishop of Rome, for Athanasius of Alexandria, was more esteemed of the godly,
then any bishop of Rome, in his time. Likewise when the Sea of Rome usurped
prerogative, it was rejected by the Council of Africa, which decreed that none
should appeal thither and discovered the counterfaiting of the bishops of
Rome. Con. Mileuit. Cap. 22. and Conc. Aphrican. Ep. ad Coelestin. Likewise it
was rejected of the church of Alexandria, whereof great dissension arose, Con
Affric. Cap. 68. That Irenaeus, Tertullian, Optatus, Hierom, Augustine,
Eugenius, Theodoretus poynted to the church of Rome, as to a witness of
truth, it proves her clearness from those heresies in their times, but
gives her none authority over other churches, nor yet makes her a rule of
truth to all churches, for then there needed none other arguments against
heretics, but the authority of the church of Rome, whereas the testimony of
that church was one of the weakest reasons they used, and that least prevailed.

32 That he affirms other cities to have chosen Bishops of their own tongue,
it is also true of Rome. For he cannot show one Pope yt was ignorant of the
Latin tongue, while it was spoken in Rome. And not many, I think not one
ignorant of the Italian tongue, since that time, although they were borne in
other countries. Besides that it is the fondest reason that ever I heard, one
or other allege, that the Popes have been borne in diverse countries,
therefore they are supreme head of the church, more then other bishops that
were bishops in the countries where they were born: and yet more foolish that
speaking of Bishops of other tongues, he names so many places all of one
tongue: As Syna, Antioche, Galile, Jerusalem, Bethelem, which are all of one
tongue: Campania, Thuscia, Aquileia, Pisa, Genua, Bononia, Millaine, Parma,
Rauenna, which are all Italian: Gascoyne, Lorayne, Sauoy, Burgundy, Rhemes,
Tholose, which are all french: Saxony, Bauier, Hollande, Alsaria, Mastriche,
which are all duche: Cappadocia, Thracia, Creta, Sicilia, Sardinia, Athens,
Nicopolis, which are all Greek. There remains Spain, which is in a manner
Italian, and last of all England and Afric. So that there are not past five
or six diverse tongues of so many places as he has alleged to bleare the
eyes of foolish Papists: As if one should say, the Bishops of Caunterburie
have been borne, some in York shire, some in Durham, some in Chester, some in
London, some in Norfolk, some in Cambridge, etc. Some in Italy, some in
Greece, some in France, some in Wales, some in Normandy, therefore that
church of Caunterburie is the chief Sea in the world.

33 The Sea of Rome in deed was very forward in usurping authority of a
chief judge over other churches, as Victor in excommunicating the bishops of
Asia, about the celebration of Easter. But they utterly neglected his sentence,
yea, and diverse did not (as Master Sanders says) gently wish him not to
deal so severely, but sharply rebuked him for his presumption and contention,
as Eusebius says, lib. 5. Cap. 25. Extant autem and verba illorum qui
victorem acriter reprehenderunt, Equibus and Irenaeus, etc. Their words are
extant, which sharply reprehended Victor, of which number Irenaeus was one. And
whereas he says that Saint Cypriane desires Pope Stephanus to depose
Martianus bishop of Arles in France, it is false, for he exhorts Stephanus
being somewhat slack, against the Nouatians, to write his letters unto his
fellow Bishops in France, as he him self often had done, that they would
depose Martianus the heretic, and suffer him no longer to insult over the
church, which argues the remissenes of Stephanus, to do that which was the
charitable duty of every bishop, as Cyprian shows, but proves not his
authority over all bishops. That Felix the third deposed Aacarius bishop of
Constantinople, he showed the time of the full revelation of Antichriste to
be at hand, yet did he it not of his own authority, but by authority of a
Synod, and afterward by a Synod restored him.

But Iustinianus the Emperor deposed two bishops of Rome, Syluerius and
Vigilius by his own authority.

34 That the bishop of Rome has been made the Committie of diverse Councels,
to receive the subscription of such as have been noted of heresies, after
their repentance, it proves no superiority in the world, but a good opinion
that those Councels had of his fidelity.

35 The letters of Leo to Flauianus and Theodosius, prove not that the
Patriarchs Flauianus and Anatolius were commanded to give an account to the
Bishop of Rome: but rather Leo humbly desired the Emperor Theodosius to
command a Synod to be gathered in Italy, because Flauianus had appealed not
only to the Bishop of Rome, but to all the Bishop^ of Italy, Ep. 23. And that
he writ that Anatolius should confess his faith before he were ordained, it
was his good council to the Emperor, no commandment to either of them, Ep.
31.

36 It is false that all nations appealed to the Pope of Africa, and did
excommunicate all them, that so would or thought meet to appeal. Council.
Mileuit. Ca. 22. Council. Aph. Ep. ad Coelest. And although some appealed to the
judgment of the church or Bishop of Rome, yet that proves no general
authority. The Council of Sardike which M. Sanders cites Can. 7. did
moderate those appeals which had not been lawful, if they perteined to the
Bishop of Rome de iure of right. Liberatus whom he cites for the appeal of
Athanasius, affirms that the Council of Chalcedon confirmed by the Emperor,
gave no place to the contradiction of the Bishop of Rome, nor his legates. Cap.
13. which disproueth his supremacy, more then any appeal can prove it. As for
the appeal of Athanasius, if any were, it was ever ruled by the Emperor, who
appointed him a synod to judge his cause at Tire. Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. 28. and
Theodorete testifies, that after he was called to Rome by Julius the bishop,
by the Emperor Constantius his commandment, his cause was referred to the
council of Sardica, when he had first appealed to the Emperor Constans, lib.
2. Cap. 4. He cites Chrysostom. Ep. ad Innocentium, to prove that he did appeal to
the Bishop of Rome, where there is no such matter. Only he declares how
injuriously he was dealt withal, by means of Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria,
from whom he appealed not to the Bishop of Rome, but to a Synod. Of the
appeal of Flauianus, we have spoken even now by the confession of Leo himself
Ep. 23. As for other appeals of later times, they prove the ambition of ye
Romish bishops that would receive them, although of many they were misliked.

37 That Gelasius affirmed bishops condemned by prouincial councels were
restored by the Pope alone, he cites his Epist. ad Faustum, in which is no
such matter, and yet if it were so, I say it proves nothing, but the ambition
of that See, which before his time, began to increase toward a supremacy, and
not long after obtained, that it sought for. But from the beginning it was not
so. The bishop of Rome bearing witness of him self for his own advantage is
not to be credited. In that Epistle he shows that Acacius by Lyra was
condemned according to the Council of Chalcedon, which was lawful not only for
him, but for any other Bishop to have done, in as much as he invented no new
heresy, but did communicate with an other heresy already condemned in a
Council.

38 In the third general Council holden at Ephesus, there is mention that
Cyrillus was President of the council, but not that he was Lieuetenant of the
Bishop of Rome, although Euasius a late writer in comparison, does so suppose.
But the words of the Council are these: Denique Petrus and Ioannes aequalis
sunt ad alterutrum dignitatis, propter quod Apostoli and sancti discipuli esse
monstrantur. Peter and John are of equal dignity, one with the other, because
they are showed to be Apostles and holy Disciples. This confession of the
Council makes more against the Popes supremacy, then the Lieuetenantship of
Cyrillus to the Pope, if it were true, could prove for it.

39 Master Sander says (without proof but of declining times almost 500.
years after Christ, and later) that the Sea of Rome had Legates both
ordinary and extraordinary, throughout all Christendom, which if it were
true, proves no more his supremacy, then that the King of Spain has
dominion over all those countries, where he has Legates ordinary and
extraordinary. He cites the seventh Canon of the council of Sardica, which
was, that he might send a Priest from his side: Which in deed was a restraint
of his usurped authority, and not a confirmation or an enlargement thereof.
For the Canon is this: That if any Bishop, yt was deposed by the Bishops of his
own country, did appeal to the Bishop of the Church of Rome, the Bishop of
Rome should write to the Bishops of the next province, to examine his cause,
and if the party by his opportunity should move the Bishop of Rome the second
time to be heard again, then he might send Presbyterum a latere, an elder from
his side, one or more, which either with the Bishops aforesaid, should judge
and determine the matter, or else leave it wholly to the judgment of the Bishops
of the Province. By this Canon the singular authority of the Romish Bishop is
modestly excluded.

40 The examples of Bishops Perigenes and Martinus translated by the Bishops of
Rome, in the declining times, proves not the perpetual supremacy of the Pope:
seeing by general Councels al such translations have been forbidden in elder
times. Nic. c. 15. chalc. c. 5.

41 The consent of the B. of Rome was not so necessary to general Councels,
but yt they were held without his presence, or his sending. For concerning his
personal presence, he was not at any of the 4. first approved general
Councels: neither any for him at the second of the^, which was held at
Constantinople, where Nectarius Bishop of ye city was president. Also the
fourth of Chalcedon, made ye See of Constantinople equal with the Sea of Rome,
which although Leo Bishop of Rome disalowed, yet did it take place as Liberatus
testifies, Cap. 13.

42 Although the Bishop of Rome had his Legate in some provincial Councels,
yet it is great impudency to say, he had them in all. And such as then were
present, they bare no rule or pre-eminence, but as the Legates of other
Bishops. Philippus and Asellius were at the Council of Aphrica, in which
decrees were made against the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, and yet they
subscribed, cap. 92

43 That the Pope has procured a few nations to be converted within these
thousand or 900. years, as England by Augustine, Saxoni by Bonifacius etc: it
can not excuse him from being Antichrist him self* although M. Sander says,
we account him to be but the forerunner of Antichrist. For though Gregory
otherwise a ceremonial and superstitious man, was moved with zeal of Christ's
glory, to seek the conversion of as many as he could, yet the Popes which
followed after him, in procuring the conversion of some countries, rather by
cruel wars, then by preaching of the Gospel, as Prusia, Liuonia, Lithuania,
etc. sought their own glory and advantage, under the color of Christ's
religion, and therefore were not divided against Satan, but joined with him in
hypocrisy.

44 As for the conversion of the Infidels in the new found lands, is a new
found argument, to prove the primacie of the Sea of Rome. Like as the
conversion of Elias the Jew by Pius. 5. Many Jews and some of great learning
as Emanuel Tremelius, have been converted to the Gospel. And one within this
two years was baptized in London.

45 That the Sea of Rome has so long flourished like a Queen in worldly
pomp, it is the more like to the Sea and city of Antichrist, Apoc. 18. verse.
7. And that the cities of the other Patriarchs, and their Bishops be oppressed
with Infidels, it lets them not to be true Christians. For Esaie 60.
prophesies not of worldly pomp, but of the spiritual glory of the Church,
which was as great before Constantius stayed the persecution, as ever since.

46 That no Bishop was ever so honored of Princes, Kings, or Emperors, as the
Pope etc: it proves him to be Antichrist, and his Church the whore of Babylon,
Apo. 17. verse. 2. and. 17. and. cap. 13. and 16.

47 That the Frenchmen deposed their King Childericus by the Oracle of Pope
Zachary, which discharged them of their lawful oath of obedience, it proves
mightily the Pope to be Antichrist. Peter says, Fear God, honor the King, 1.
Pet. 2.

48 And much more that Pope Leo the third did transfer the Empire it self
into the West. For Peter commanded obedience to be given to every ordinance of
man, for the Lord, whether to the King, as to the most excellent, or to those
rulers that are sent of him. 1. Pet. 2.

49 That Pope Gregory the fifth gave an order for the election of the Emperor,
confirms our judgment of the Pope to be Antichrist, as also that Nicholas
the first, threatened the Emperor Michael the overthrow of the Empire of the
East, whereof he by his proud rebellion and disobedience, and dividing the
West part from it, was a cause.

50 That the succession of the Bishops of Rome has been continued in histories
with the reign of Emperors and Kings, it proves in deed, that the Church of
Rome has been either very famous, when it was governed of good Bishops, or
infamous when it was degenerated into Antichristian tyranny, but this proves
no more the authority thereof to be lawful, or the religion good, then the
succession of Heathen tyrants, Emperors, Kings, and great Turks, proves
their religion true, or their usurpation lawful. As for ye light of worldly
fame, that M.S. boasts of, is spiritual darkness, and not the light of the
Gospel, which our Savior speaks of, Luke 5. No man lights a candle, etc.

51 As it is true, that the Bishops of Rome in the first 300. years were
greatly persecuted by tyrants, so is it false, that all heretics agreed to
resist that See. For diverse Bishops were heretics. Liberius was an Arrian
perverted by Fortunatianus: Hierom. in Catalog. Vigilius was privily an
Eutychian, as appears by an Epistle of his, written to those heretics at
the procurement of the Empress: Liberatus Cap. 22. Honorius was a Monothelite,
condemned in the sixth general Council at Constantinople: Act. 13. Anastasius
was a favorer of Nestorians, as many Ecclesiastical histories do confess:
Garanza in Anast.

52 That the Church of Rome has continued, although diverse Christian Princes
have opposed them selves against it with the citizens of Rome, and the
Cardinals, and that neither the wicked life of the Popes, nor the schisms of
many Popes at once have subverted it, does not prove it to be the rock,
against which the gates of hell shall not prevail. For when Antichristian
heresy, and devilish wickedness has ouerflowed all the Church of Rome, it is
manifest, the gates of hell have mightily prevailed against that See, although
the final overthrow of that Antichristian head with the body, be reserved
unto the almighty power of our Savior Christ toward the end of the world: 2.
Thessa. 2. And it is false that Christian Princes, the Roman Citizens, the
Cardinals, or the factions of Diverse Popes have assaulted the Sea of Rome, but
rather the ambition, and tyranny of some persons occupying the same.

53 It is false that all countries which forsook the obedience of the Bishop
of Rome, were shortly after possessed by Infidels, for Africa was none
otherwise possessed by the Vandales, then Italy by the Goths and other
barbarous nations. The Graecians immediately before their oppression by the
Turks, were reconciled to the Church of Rome in the council of Ferrar, and
Florens* Before which time the Bohemians forsook the Romish See, and yet
remain a nation at this day: how many mighty nations have forsaken the the
Pope? which by Gods grace shall be kept as long from oppression of Infidels, as
they keep in obedience of ye Gospel, the contempt whereof, and not of the Pope
was punished in the Asians, Africans and Graecians. And the prophecy of Esaie,
60. That nation and kingdom, which shall not serve thee shall perish, is to be
understood, of final and eternal perdition, and not of oppression by
Infidels. For the nation of the Persians, Turks, Saracens, and other which
submit not themselves to the Church of Christ, shall perish, although they
triumph in the world never so long.

54 Diverse councels without the bishop of Rome, did with as great and greater
credit, determine of the Canonical Books of holy scripture, as Gelasius did
with his 70. Bishops, Cap. 59. Carth. 3. Cap. 74. and others.

55 The Popes liberality toward foreign nations, was never so great by the
hundredth part, as his covetous extortions and Antichristian exactions have
been, witness Matthew. Paris. Matthew. West, Anno Reg. 1244. and in a manner all
Popish Historiographers of late times. As for his liberality in these times,
is but to his own bondslaues, whom he hyreth with a little exhibition, to blase
his charity, least he should be forsaken of all men.

56 The greatest archheretike that ever was, is the Pope of Rome, so far
passing the archheretikes that have been in the other patriarchall Sees, as
Antichrist the head of all heresies, passes the members of that body. For
other heretics take away but some part of Christ's person, or his office, but
the Pope under pretense of honoring him, puts him quite out of place, by his
usurped supremacy, false doctrine, blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass, and all
other his abominations. And that our Savior CHRIST prayed for Peter, that
his faith might not fail, it perteined only to his person, and to the
temptation that immediately followed. For otherwise Peter erred, when he was
reproved of God in vision Act. 10. and of Paul Gallath. 2. And that Bishops of
Rome have erred and been heretics, I have proved in the 51. article, to
which you may add John the 23. that was condemned in the council of Constance
for that he denied the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the
body, and the life everlasting. Sess. 11.

57 That the Sea of Rome has made so many wicked decrees, so universally
observed, with such consent of many nations, it came not of the spirit of
godly unity, but of the efficacy of error, which God sent into the world
for a just plague of the contempt of the truth. 2. Thessalonians 2. And this
consent of so many nations unto her abominable decrees, proves Rome to be
Babylon the mother of all abominations, that has made all nations drunk with
the wine of the fury of her fornications, Apoc. 18. verse 3. The degrees of
marriage prohibited, are of the Law of God, and not of the Pope: the
celebration of Easter although it be an indifferent ceremony, yet it is elder
then the Antichristian authority of the Pope. Albeit the mystery of iniquity
began to work in Victor about it. That many Bishops and private men have
written to such Bishops of Rome as were learned, namely Leo, and Gregory, for
their resolution in diverse questions, it proves no supremacy: for as many
have written in like cases to Augustine a poor Bishop of Hippo, and to
Hieronyme but a Priest of Rome, yea Damasus Bishop of Rome himself has
written to Hieronyme for his judgment. Pope Sergius did write to Ceolfride
Abbot of Woremouth in England, to be resolved of certain questions of Beda,
one of his Monks. Math. West. Ant. 734.

59 That this resort to Rome for council, was not only of devotion but of
duty, because the Pope had reserved the hardest cases to his own judgment
as Moses did, he brings no proof but the Popes own decrees, which are of
small credit in his own case, and the corrupt practice of the later times,
when men had submitted themselves unto the beast.

60 That not only the Bishops of Italy, but also of Sicilia, which is not
far off did come in person to Rome at certain times, it proves not that
all Bishops in the world were obedient to the Bishop of Rome, or were bound
so to visit him, or that they did so visit him.

61 The primacie of the Bishop of Rome in old times, was but of order, not
of power, his presidence in councels was but honor, not of authority, and
that by grant or permission at the pleasure of the council. Joan. Patr. Ant.
in con. Basil. The council of Nice made him equal with other Patriarchs: The
council of Constantinople made the sea of Constantinople equal with Rome.
Sozomen. Lib. 7. Cap. 7. and 9* so did the council of Chalcedon leaving Rome
no prerogative but of Senioritie, and referring all causes of difficulty to
the judgment of the sea of Constantinople, which was new Rome. Con. 9. and
Con. 16.

62 That Justinian was content to permit to the Pope of the Elder Rome to be
Primus Sacerdotum, according to the definition of the Canons, it proves not
his pretended supreme authority over all other men, but only that he was
first in Order. For he himself deposed two Popes Syluerius, and Vigilius. And
where Master Sander interprets the definitions of the Cannon, to be all the
four first counsels, he ouerreacheth too much, for the Pope could never prove
his primacie by the Council of Nice, although he forged a decree thereof as is
showed before.

63 It is true, that Phocas the traitor and murderer of his M. Mauritius
usurping the Empire, for a great sum of money received of Boniface the
third, determined the controversy between Constantinople and Rome, giving
Rome the title of Antichrist, which from such a holy beginning it claims and
usurps unto this day. But if the Sea of Rome, had been the head of all
churches by the word of God, what need had the Bishop of Rome to buy it of
Phocas, but only to show himself the successor of Simon Magus, not of Simon
Peter?

64 As it is true, that God used the peace and authority of the Roman Empire,
to spread abroad the doctrine of the Gospel, so is it altogether untrue, that
Constantine resigned the city of Rome, to Syluester the Bishop thereof,
because he builded another imperial city in the East to keep those parts of
the Empire in peace and subjection. For it is well known, that many hundredth
years after Constantine the great, his successors inioyed the city and
palaces of Rome, until they were defaced by the Goths, and yet afterward the
city was restored to Iustinianus the Emperor out of the hands of ye Goths
by Bellisarius and Narses. And whereas M. Sander says that never any Emperor
of the West had his seat at Rome after Constantinus, he shows either his
great impudence, or ignorance in histories. For although some of them occupied
in wars kept at Milliane, Treueres or other cities, yet is it utterly false,
that there was never any Emperor suffered to make his ordinary mansion place
at Rome. For Honorius, and Valentinianus Junior, dwelt at Rome, before the
subversion of it by the Goths, and many other, even unto Augustus. After which
time, Italy being oppressed with barbarous nations, was no place for the
Emperors safety to dwell in. In which mean time, the Pope grew to such
greatness, that he made challenge not only to the city, but even to the
Empire it self, taking upon himself Antichrist, to remove it from the East
unto the West, which was in deed a great miracle, but such a miracle as was
more meet for Antichriste to make, then the successor of Peter.

65 It is true that Rome has lost no pre-eminence by the departure of the
Emperor, for as Chrysostom shows in 2. These. Antichrist was to succeed the
Emperor in the seat of the Empire being made void, and to usurp all
authority both of God and men: pretending the seat of Peter, but being in
deed the seat of the beast: Apoca. 13. and of the Whore of Babylon, Apo. 17.
as both Augustine and Hieronym do often times confess. Augu. De Ciuit. Dei.
lib. 18. cap. 2. and 22. Hie. Algas. 9.11. In Esai. lib. 13. cap. 47.

66 Although it be confessed by us that the prerogative of the first place was
granted to the bishops of Rome in many metings and councels, yet is it not
granted that it was so always, nor in all general councels. And therefore
this our confession proves not the Pope to be such a star, candell, or
light, as M. Sanders does imagine. Nor that he should be head of the
church, because he was first in place, no more then an archbishop is head of
the church of his province, because he is first in place, although his church
be compared to the members of a body. For all particular churches make but one
body, whereof Christ is the only head, for it were a monstrous body that
should have two heads, and therefore it is truly said in the council of
Basil, Papa non est caput principale, nec ministeriale vniuersalis ecclesiae.
The Pope is neither the principal, nor the ministerial head of the
universal church. And therefore as it is said in the same place, the Pope
never had any prerogative but by concession or permission of councels. Now make
what you can M. Sander of our confession and your own popish councels.

67 It is a faint proof, that the church of Rome is the head, rote and mother
of all churches, because Ambrose and Hierome called the faith of the church of
Rome the Catholic faith, at such time as it was true and Catholic in deed.
As if a man should say, the faith of the church of England, is all one with
the Catholic faith, therefore the church of England is the head, root and
mother to all churches. Likewise that the Vandales which were barbarous people,
and Arrians, calls the Catholics Romans, differing from them in nation, as
much as in religion.

68 The fathers never believed that the Roman church cannot err in the
profession of their faith. For Cyprian lib 4. Epist. 3. ad Romanos, etc.
Falsehood can have no access to the Romans, means not (as M.S. says) such
Romans as tarry in the unity of S. Peter's chair: but of such as continue in
the faith which S. Paul praised: therefore he says, Ad Romanos, quorum
fides, etc. The Romans whose faith was praised by the Apostles. Again he
speaks not of erringe in profession of faith, but of falsehood in winking at
Scismatikes, which sought for a refuge in S. Peter's Chair, the principal
church, being justly banished out of other Churches. And that Cyprian thought
not, that the Church of Rome cannot err in profession of faith, it is most
manifest by this, that if he had bin so persuaded, he would not have contrary
to the judgment of the church of Rome, decreed with his fellow bishops, to
adnihilate the sacraments ministered by heretics. As for the decretall epistle
of Lucius, we reject it, as a counterfeit with all the rest of that rabble, in
which these ancient bishops of Rome are feign to write so barbarously, as no
Carter did speak Latin in their time when they lived, and always extol the
dignity of that See of Rome, as though in these great persecutions, they had
nothing else to talk of, but their prerogatives and privileges. The
testimonies of Leo which he cites, savor of a Roman stomach, drawing as
near to the Antichristian pride, as the man was to the time which wrote them.
Barnarde was but a late writer, when Antichrist was in the top of his pride,
and therefore his judgment argues the corruption of his time. Finally when so
many Popes have bin condemned for heretics, what impuda^cie is to say ye Pope
or See of Rome cannot err*

69 To prove that the Emperors acknowledged the church of Rome to be the head
of all churches, he cites Justinian which was almost 660. years after Christ.
Cod. de summa trini^. lege. 4. writing to Pope Ioannes: Sanctitas vestra capu^
est omnium sanctarum ecclesiarum. Your holiness is head of all holy churches: I
will not quarrel with him that he cites the words otherwise then they are
read in yt Epist. by which it seemed he saw not ye book himself: but I answer
yt this epistle is a mere counterfeit and forged evidence being not found in
the ancient coppies, and therefore has no gloss of age upon it, as it is
testified by Gregorius Haloander in a marginall note upon the same Epistle. No
marvel if a false title be defended with a forged evidence. For if no men had
admonished us of yt forgery, yet the very style unlike Justinians writing in
other places, argues a later inuenter then either that Ioannes, or Justinian.

Likewise he cites the saying of Eugenius, not long before bishop of Carthage,
which called the Church of Rome the head of all Churches, and yet he reposed
not all his confidence in the bishop of Romes authority: but said he
would write to his brethren the other bishops, that they might come to
demonstrate the true faith against the Arrians, especially to the bishop of the
Church of Rome, which is the head of all the Churches, meaning the principal
Church, Vict. lib. 2.

70 Thirdly he cites the words of the bishop of Patara, intreatinge the
Emperor Justinian for Syluerius bishop of Rome, whom he had banished. There
is not one king, as Syluerius is Pope over the church of yt whole world. This
bishop being 550. years after Christ, and a suter also, is not sufficient to
make the Bishop of Rome so great a king. And whereas Master Sander says,
that the Emperor yielded to his saying, and repented and willed him to be
restored, and therefore charge M. Jewel with impudency for alleging the
example of Justinian banishing Syluerius, and Vigilius, to prove that he had
somewhat to do in the church of Rome, affirming that he might as well
allege the homicide and adultery of David, to prove that he had somewhat to
do with an other man's wife: the truth is, M. Sanders forgeth a matter
contrary to al histories, which affirm that Syluerius dyed in banishment. And
how unlike it is, that Iustinianus repented of the banishinge of Syluerius,
upon the words of the bishop of Patara, in respect yt he was Pope over the
church of the whole world, appears by this, that he afterward banished
Vigilius his next successor in the same sea. The words of Liberatus whom M.S.
cites cap. 22. be these: Quem audiens imperator reuocari. Roman^ Syluerium
iussit, etc. Whom when the Emperor heard, he commanded that Syluerius should
be called again to Rome, and that judgment should be made of these letters,
so that if it were proved that they were written by him, the bishop might
remain in any city, and if they were proved to be false, he should be
restored to his own See. These words do manifestly show, that Justinian
repented him not of banishing the Pope, as a thing unlawful for him to do,
but only that whereas it was alleged in the Popes behalf, that the letters
of treason were forged, which he was charged to have written to the Emperors
enemies, Justinian was content, that his cause might come to a new judgment,
and if he were found clear, to be restored, if not, to continue in
banishment. To conclude the sayings of Gregory bishop of Rome, in defense of
his own dignity, are of small credit. And yet they are a great deal more
modest, then the proud decrees of his successors. For he challenges the
hearing of such controversies only, as arise in those dioces, which have no
Metropolitan or Patriarche of their own to resort unto, to determine them.
And again, I cannot tell what bishop is not subject to the Apostolic See, if
any fault be found in them, otherwise all the bishops are equal, lib. 11.
Ep. 58. lib. 7. Ep. 64.

70 The fame, glory, and authority of the ancient church of Rome, is a shame
and dishonor to the present popish church of Rome. Because it keeps not
now, but has altogether rejected the doctrine delivered by the Apostles, that
Irenus commended in his time, libr. 3. Cap. 3. nor holds that rule or belief
of the Apostles undefiled, which Ambrose praised in his time, Ep. 81.

71 This land of Britain received the faith of Christ, as Gildas a Britain, a
more ancient and certain writer, then Ado M. Sanders author, in the time of
ye reign of Tiberius 160. before Eleutherius was Bishop of Rome, by the
preaching of the Apostles and Evangelists, as some write of Saint Paul, some
of Saint Simon of Cana, some of Saint Philip, some of Joseph of Aramathia.
Neither did Eleutherius send Fugatius and Damianus by him self, or as of
authority, but being required by Lucius or Lever Maure, one of the little
Kings of some shiere of Britain, as Ninnius a Britain does testify. For
that Lucius was King of all Britain, it is proved false by all the Roman
histories, which testify that the Emperor was then sovereign of Britain,
under whom ruled certain petie Kings in some parts not thoroughly conquered.

72 Beda an English Saxon, more like to know matters of this land, then
Prosper a forreyne writer, affirms that the Britains against the Pellagians
heretics, desired aid of the Bishops of France, who by a Synod there
gathered, sent Germanus and Lupus two Bishops to confute the Pelagians, without
any sending to Rome, or from Coelestinus Bishop of Rome, lib. 1. Cap. 17.
Likewise the second time at the request of the Clergy of Britain, Germanus
returns with Seuerus to root out the heresy of the Pellagians.

73 The zeal of Gregory the first is to be commended, that he sent Augustine
to convert the Saxons to the faith of Christ, although the superstitions which
he brought in with the Christian faith, cannot be defended. The diligence of
Augustine in teaching according to his knowledge, deserves praise, yet can it
not make him an Apostle, because an Apostle has his calling immediately of God,
Gal. 1. If we report his pride and cruelty as we find in our histories
written by Papists, let the world judge, whether we or they do him injury.

74 From Vitellianus the Pope, was Theodorus a Grecian sent to be Archbishop
of Caunterburie, rather to retain the country under the usurped authority of
the Romish bishop, then to instruct them in matters perteining to the faith.
For the Pope him self was afraid of him, that being a Grcian, he should
teach any thing contrary to the Romish religion, Beda. lib. 4. Cap. 1.

75 King Henry the eight found his dominions subject to the tyranny of the
Pope of Rome, which upon good ground and authority of the scriptures, he
banished out of his realm, what cause soever papists do surmise, or to speak
plainly, notwithstanding the injurious and contumelious dealing of the Pope
about his deuorse from his first unlawful marriage gave him occasion to enquire
and find out what weak foundation the usurped power of the Sea of Rome was
builded upon.

76 King Henry departed not out of the society of the church of Rome, only
for the vices of the men thereof, but for their false and Antichristian
heresies which they obstinately maintained, and joined him self to the true,
ancient, and universal Church of Christ, when he departed out of that false
new set up, schismatic, and particular Synagogue of Rome, as Saint
Augustine went from the Manichees to the Catholic church. And as King Henry
the eight knew whence he went, so knew he also whither he went, even from
Rome with seven hills, to Jerusalem which is above, and is the mother of us
all.

77 He that goes out of an heretical church, as King Henry did, must go to
the Catholic church of Christ, as he did, without making any new church, or
being without a church. I know not the age of Master Sander, but if he be
not much above forty years old, he was borne and baptized as many other
Papists were, in that which he calls a new church, or no church, which
how he will answer, let him and them advise, which hold it necessary,
that a man must tarry in that church, in which he is baptized.

78 King Henry the eight was not without a church, but in the church of
England, a member of the Catholic church of Christ: neither did he call him
the supreme head of the church of England, before that title was given him by
the Popish Clergy in their submission, after they were cast in the praemunire:
Edw. Hall.

79 That he received not fully the true doctrine of Christ, as he banished the
false usurped power of ye Pope, is to be imputed to the traiterous practices
of his dissembling Clergy, which although they durst not withstand him in
mainteining the Popes authority, yet they labored all that they could, to
retain the Popes doctrine, in as many points as they might: hereof came the
law of the six articles, which maintained the sacrifice of the Mass,
transubstantiation, communion in one kind, and such other heresies.
Nevertheless, the authority of Antichrist, much Idolatry, and superstition,
and false doctrine was abolished, Justification by faith in Christ was
preached, the scripture was read in the vulgar tongue, which was a beginning of
a reformation, and returning unto the true church of Christ, and not a setting
up of a new church: Except Master Sander will say, that those Kings of
Judah, which reformed some part of religion, and yet left the hill altares and
other abuses, did set up a new church, because they made not a perfect
reformation. Finally, where he says, that King Henry adjoined himself to no
company of faithful men in earth, which had from Christ's time lived after
that profession of faith which he allowed, proves not, that he set up a new
church. For he joined to the Catholic church, in so many points of true
doctrine as he acknowledged, from which the Popish church was departed,
although he was not rightly instructed in all.

80 The church of England in King Henry's time, was a true church, although
all the doctrine which was then maintained by public authority (through the
subtle practices of popish hypocrites) was not true. And the church of England
at this day, is the same that it was then, but now by public authority
embraceing all true doctrine, which by the true members of the church in King
Henry's days was maintained, and withstoode by hypocrites or other, not yet
rightly instructed.

81 The church unto which King Henry went, and brought the realm, when he
departed from Rome, was the same church, which began at Jerusalem, and so
increased into all nations, and continues in the world for ever, though not
among all nations.

82 King Henry went out of the Antichristian church of Rome into the Catholic
church of Christ, embracing some part of the doctrine thereof, therefore he
needed no reconciliation to the Romish church, but a more perfect information
of the church of Christ.

83 In King Edwardes time, the reformation began and hindered in his fathers
time, was perfected and accomplished for all points of Christian doctrine,
neither was there any reconciliation used to the church of Rome, but the
Church of England by public authority, perfectly united to the Catholic
Church of Christ joining in profession of faith, with the best reformed
Christian churches in the world.

84 The abolishing of foreign power, hindered not the joining in faith and
doctrine, with all the Churches of God, that were without the realm of
England. The propitiatory sacrifices of the Mass, was in King Edwardes time
abolished by public authority out of the Church of England, as it was in
King Henry's time abhorred of all true members of the Church, that were then
rightly instructed, as much as the supremacy of the Pope.

85 The power of being the sons of God, the power of preaching and forgiving
of sins in the Church of Christ, is no foreign power, neither was any such
power ever excluded, but the false and usurped tyranny of Antichrist of Rome.

86 We believe and profess a Catholic or universal Church of Christ,
whereof we are members, and therefore we detest the heretical, schismatic,
and particular Church of Rome.

87 The Church of England under King Edward, did profess her self to be a
member of the most ancient, Catholic, and Apostolic Church of Christ,
which is the pillar of truth, to be judged by the word of GOD, which is the
truth it self: John. 17. being not so ignorant, but that she could
distinguish the word of GOD, from the Church of GOD, as the law of GOD from
the household of GOD, which is governed by that law: And not as Master Sanders
similitude is, as the statutes of England differ from the men of England, which
make them, but the Church makes not the word of God, but contrariwise, the
word of God makes the Church.

88 It is not necessary to show a company of men in a peculiar place, as
Geneua or any such like, for them that will join them selves with the
Catholic Church of all the world, although it were easy to name diverse
companies of men in several places, which continued in the true Church out of
the Church of Rome, both in France and Italy, beside Bohemia, which long
before was returned out of the Popish Church, into the Church of Christ: and
all the East Churches, which never joined with the Church of Rome.

89 The Churches of Zurich and Saxony be members of the Catholic Church of
Christ, which is fifteen hundredth years old and upward, although the same
Churches were gathered and returned in those places, within these three score
years.

90 There needed no embassages to go to and fro, to the Churches of God beyond
the seas, for reconciliation, because there was no debate between the Church
of England and them. Although for conference and advise in reformation, no
doubt but there were mutual messages between them. The union and communion of
our Church, with other particular Churches of God throughout the world, is
spiritual, made by the working of the holy Ghost, and not by embassages, or
orders taken by men. But the same is declared and showed by the confession of
our faith, fully agreeing in all necessary Articles with them.

91 The public protestations and confessions of our faith, do show our
reconciliation and conjunction with the Catholic Church of Christ, without
that it is needful for us, to exhibit any bills of submission to any
singular persons, as has been used in cases of particular discipline, as in
reconciliation of Vrsarius and Valens to Julius of Rome: Maximus, Vrbanus, and
other, to Cyprian of Carthage.

92 The realm did never submit it self to Luther, Zuinglius, or Calvin, but
to Christ and his Church. As for offering of bills of submission to foreign
Bishops, it is no part of Christian discipline. But if it were a matter of any
substance, all the Clergy of England gave their subscription to the Archbishop
of Canturburie and other Bishops, for the departure out of the Popish Church,
into the Church of England. That we received not the error of Luther
concerning the real presence, it shows we depend not upon any man, further
then his doctrine is true and agreeable to the word of God.

93 Calvin and Zuinglius, although they received some light of understanding
by the ministry of Luther, yet came they not from him, but were stirred up of
God as he was.

94 The realm in King Edwards time, never purposed to submit them selves to
Calvin: who although he misliked the title of supreme head, in that sense
which Steven Gardener maintained it at Ratisbone, as though it gave unto the
King an absolute authority to do what he would in the Church: yet in that
sense that it was received of King Edward, and understood of all godly men,
that is, to be the highest Magistrate in the Church, as well for the ordering
of Ecclesiastical as civil matters, he never did condemn it.

95 King Edward retaining that title in the godly sense above rehearsed, the
Church of England notwithstanding was united to the Catholic Church of
Christ, throughout the world.

96 When Queen Marie came to the Crown, she found the realm a member of the
Catholic Church of Christ, which she forsook, and sought to bring it in
bondage again to the Antichristian See of Rome: which by means of a Legacy
from the Pope brought by Cardinal Poole, (long before attainted for treason
against his Prince and country) was by an act of Parleament yielded unto.
Although GOD reserved more then seven thousand, that never bowed their knee to
Baal of Rome, whereof many were cruelly put to death, and suffered martyrdom,
the rest were persecuted, and by the protection of God escaped out of that
bloody and fiery persecution.

97 The seat of Peter could not be planted at Rome in the days of Claudius the
Emperor, because that in the tenth or eleventh year of his Empire, Peter was
at Antioch reproved by Paul, Gala. 2. The last year, or the first of Nero, S.
Paul writ his Epistle to the Romans, from Corinth, where he tarried almost
two years, in which Epistle he sending salutation to six and twenty singular
persons, beside diverse families, would not have omitted to salute Peter, if he
had been there. But admit that Peter had a seat at Rome, yet the Papacy has
not continued from that time, but since the days of Boniface the third, which
was more then ^00. years after Christ. Neither has the faith of the Sea of
Rome continued without change (as M. Sanders says) these 1500. years, but is
altogether in a manner changed from the faith of Peter, and of the Apostolic
Church, therefore Queen Marie bringing the realm to that Church, did not
reconcile it to the true Church of Christ, but restored it to the slavery of
the Antichristian tyranny.

98 Seeing the realm is now again returned to the embracing of the doctrine
of the Gospel, set forth in the holy scriptures, taught in the Primitive
Church, many hundredth years after Christ, continued in all times, though
under persecution of Antichrist, and now openly and publicly professed of
many nations, it is a member of the true Catholic Church of Christ, whereof
Christ only is the head, and communicates with the Church of Christ of all
nations, in all points of true religion, necessary to salvation, and
therefore is no seismaticall Church, but a Catholic and Apostolic Church.

99 The Catholic Church of Christ, whereof the Church of England is a part,
is an invisible Church, and therefore an Article of our faith, which is of
things invisible Heb. 10. and no Church under a bushel. But Jerusalem that is
in heaven is the mother of us all: Gala. 4. Contrariwise, the Popish Church
which is visible, is the Church of Infidels, and Rome which is upon earth, is
the mother of all Antichristians.

100 The preaching of Gods word is the ground of faith* the celebrating of the
sacraments, is the confirmation of the same, these exercises have always
been in the true Church of God, when they be not hindered by persecution.

101 The Gospel of Christ has been preached unto all nations. And the Church
has had Pastors and teachers from Christ's time unto Luthers age. Master
Sander asks where they were, through all nations? As though it were
necessary, they should be in every nation at all times. Popery when it was
at the largest, had not teachers in all nations. For many continue in barbarous
Gentilisme, beside Mahometisme which has filled ye greatest part of the
world. The Church of Christ is scattered in many nations, and has had, and
now also has, many Kings that walk in the light thereof. And at this time
more then the Popish Church has.

102 The true Church in England is honored and nourished, by the Kings, whom
she honors as supreme governors, heads, or rulers thereof. And although
Ecclesiastical persons, pay subsidies unto their princes, yet are not their
Princes, and their Courtiers nourished by the goods of the Church, as Master
Sander most slanderously reports, otherwise then it is meet, that subjects
should contribute to the maintenance of the state of the Prince, and their own
defense.

103 The word of God written is in deed honorable and true, and contains
all that doctrine, by which the Church of God was governed, two thousand years
before any word of the Bible was written, when by reason of that long life of
the Patriarchs, the tradition might be certain. The Gospel also was preached
by the Apostles, before any of the four Gospels was penned, but yet agreeable
to the scriptures of the old Testament, and is the same that is written and
none other: which written word of God, is able to make the man of God perfect,
and is delivered unto the Church of Christ, as a most certain rule to
follow, that it might not be deceived by uncertain traditions and inventions
of man, in steeede of the doctrine of God.

104 The Popish Church has not kept the word of God faithfully, but in a
corrupt and false Latin translation. The certeintie therefore of the scriptures
was not received from them, but from the Jews, concerning ye old Testament in
Hebrew, and from the Grcians, concerning ye new Testament in Greek. Although
the very common Latin translation of the Bible, is sufficient to convince ye
Popish Church of horrible heresies, and blasphemies.

105 To refourme the Church according to the doctrine of the holy scripture,
and the example of the Primitive Church, is not like as if one reading of the
old laws of England in an other Island, would say it were England, and that
the country which is so called is departed from old England. For change of
Laws, cannot change places and regions, but departing from the truth of Gods
word, is a departing from the Church of Christ, and the returning to that
truth is a returning to the Church of Christ, notwithstanding Master Sanders
wise similitude. The Prophets in deed Esaie, Jeremy, etc. by the law of
Moses, showed the errors of the Church of Jerusalem, and by it sought the
reformation thereof. But they renounced not the lawful government of the high
Priest, because it was established by the law, whereas the tyrannical
usurpation of the Pope, is contrary to the law of Christ, and therefore is
most justly renounced.

106 It is granted that the Church of Rome was once a principal part of the
Church of Christ. But the successions of Popes since Popes were, has not
continued so without interruption, as the successions of the high Priests at
Jerusalem, by means of so many Schisms and Antipapes, and translation of the Sea from Rome to Auinion with so many, and so long variations of the Sea. And
the succession of Christians except in a few, has utterly failed, as Esaie
says of Jerusalem, how is the faithful city become an harlot? Esaie. 1.

107 It is granted that of old time, the Roman faith was accounted the
catholic faith, while it was so in deed, even as the Britanne faith, the
French faith, the Germane faith, was likewise. But that which he infers is
utterly denied: namely, that the Pope and his city have continued in the
profession of that faith to this day. For the contrary being proved, it is
not only the evil manners of the Pope, and that city that have moved us to
depart from the Church, but the false religion thereof. Although it is nothing
like, that where such a sink of all abominations is, and has been openly
and generally seen as well in the Popes, as in the people of his city, there
should be a true and sincere faith, and religion, which brings forth wicked
and ungodly fruits.

108 The glory of Christ's Church and kingdom, is not like to the kingdom
and glory of an earthly Empire, but contrary to it: namely, it is spiritual
and not carnal, inward and not outward, in appearance of weakness, poverty,
and foolishness, and not of strength, riches, and wisdom. 1. Cor. 1.

109 The ways to see and hear the Church of God, is to hear the word of
God, whereof comes faith, by the eyes whereof the Church of God is seen, and
not by bodily eyes to be painted out, lo here, lo there, for the kingdom of
God is within us: Luc. 17. verse. 21.

110 Notwithstanding any thing repeated in this article, contained in several
articles before,
19.20.64.18.22.24.25.26.31.46.27.41.42.56.43.45.48.36.39.67.65.68.20. the
Popish Church is the Church of Antichrist, and therefore we have justly
departed from it to the Church of Christ.

111 In the Church of Christ is the word of God, the sacraments, forgiveness
of sins, the holy Ghost, the communion of Saints and Christ himself, which
is the only head and savior thereof. But whether the Papists hold this
Church or we, let them prove, as S. Augustine urges the Donatistes, by none of
these fond and carnal reasons, but only by the authority of the scriptures,
De vnitate Eccles. Cap. 16.

112 The rest of the preface is consumed in dissuading ye Papists of England
from dissembling their profession of Papistrie, and exhorting them to make open
confession thereof, which next unto their conversion, I wish as much as M.
Sander, that if they may not be converted to become true Christians and good
subjects, they might be known as they are for open heretics, enemies of
their Prince and Realm.

Sander.
A TREATISE OF IMAGES OF Christ, and of his Saints, and that it is unlawful
to break them, and lawful to honor them, etc.

THE FIRST CHAPTER.
THe Argument of the treatise following. In which he notes especially The
story of the spoil of Images in the low countries: The diversity of sects
there: The holy Bible burnt: Hermannus a preacher captain of the spoil.

THE defense of idolatry, which he takes in hand, being so abominable to
be heard among Christians, Fulk.
after he has first sought to dasell men's eyes with the vain glitering glory
of the Romish Church, now he goes about to tickle their ears, with a
plausible tale of some disorderly doings, in breaking of Images in the low
countries. As though the inconsiderate zeal of a few image breakers, or
perhaps the licentious riot of some pilfering spoylers, being either Papists
or of no religion that were mixed with them, were sufficient to excuse such
horrible Idolatry, as the Papists daily commit, and M. Sander is not ashamed
to defend. He pretends as though his purpose were no more, but to answer an
objection of I cannot tell what Protestants, nor he him self is able to name
any of credit, which affirmed, that the casting down of idolatry in the low
countries, and liberty of preaching ye gospel procured by a few naked and base
men, against an armed Prince, and so many wealthy persons as were enemies to
it, must come of the mighty hand of God, and that it was a great miracle.
Which thing might well and truly be said, without allowing of any thing,
that was done beside order.

For there is no doubt, but God directed all things to his glory, although men
sought not the same by lawful and ordinary means. It was no miracle says M.
Sander, because they were not resisted in such places where the spoil was
made. But so much the greater was the miracle, that in so many places, the
hearts of the magistrates with the people were so daunted, that they durst
make no resistance.

The story as M. Sander reports it, is, that the Lords of the low
countries, dissenting from king Philip about the Spanish inquisition, the king
like to be assaulted by the Turks in Naples, and Malta, resort was made to a
certain preacher, not called by any authority, in the woods and fields
near to Antwerpe. The first quarrel he picketh, is to the preachers calling,
which in such times as religion is in a manner overthrown and defaced by
Idolatry, as now by the papists, cannot be but extraordinary, and yet
lawful, as having authority of God, and approbation of Gods Church, moved
with chariti^ to call men out of the blindness of Idolatry, into the light of
the Gospel. This I say, as if he had not bin called thither to preach by the
Church of God, which was in persecution in those places, which is an ordinary
and a most lawful calling. The second fault he finds, is of their preaching
in the woods and fields, which has not been used in a Christian country,
but in time of war. As though he has not read that in Africa, when the
Arrians which are as good Christians as the papists, persecuted the true
Catholics, and drove them out of the cities, they were constrained to meet in
such places, as they could, in woods, or fields, or desert corners.

That there were sects among them, it was to be lamented, and yet not to be
marueiled, for there must be even heresies among you, says the Apostle,
that they which are tried may be made manifest: 1. Corinthians. 11. verse 19.

That the feast of the Assumption was chosen, wherein they began the spoil, I
hope it was of no hatred to the Virgin Mary, whom they honor with such honor
as is due to her, and called her blessed, because God has chosen her to be a
mother of Christ, although they allow not the new co^ception of Christ's body
under form of bread, by the popish priests, compared in dignity by papists
unto the blessed Virgin (as I remember) in five points. M. Sander is angry
that the new preachers hate that feast of the Assumption of Mary, and yet
keep holy the day of the death of S. Paul and S. Thomas. They hate it,
because of the popish fable of the Assumption of the body of the virgin
living, which yet M. Sander is ashamed of, and calls it the day of her
death. The other feasts which they keep, they keep not in ye honor of men,
but to the honor of God, they use the days in which ye people is accustomed
to be assembled, as things indifferent, which except it be in cases of offense
giving, may well be used.

The watch word given by a boy, who striking the Image said, Marye thou
must come down, is a vain matter, and yet much more probably to be defended,
then the prayers of the Idolaters made to that deaf Idol. Blessed Lady help
me, etc. Pater noster qui es in coelis, etc. After the watch word followed
the spoil of all Idols, and monuments of Idolatry, the magistrates
forbidding in vain. I said before the disordered doing of private men cannot
be defended, although where M.S. charge them with stealinge and caryinge
away, I am persuaded he slaundereth them, as men of as good credit as he do
testify, except some pilfering thieves thrust in amongst them, who as the
report goes, being apprehended, were justly punished.

The manner of their utter defacing of al tables, and all that belonged to them,
which Master Sander so much misliked, if it had not wa^ted lawful authority,
had been very commendable, yea even the pissing upon the foul Idol of the
altar, might have been defended by the example of Iehu, which turned the temple
of Baall, into a lakes, if it had been done by the commandment of a zealous
Magistrate. For M.S. most impudently does belly us, when he says, that by our
doctrine, their Mass cake is a mystical figure of Christ's body, when it is
rather a foul stinking and abominable Idol.

If any Library was destroyed by them, with the bibles, doctors works, and maps
of countries, it was very evil and barbarously done of them, and yet I am sure
they burned no book of holy scriptures, knowing them to be such, as the
papists do, not by tumult of a few ignorant persons, but by consultation and
deliberation of the wisest of them, knowing them to be the holy scriptures, and
wilfully defacing them, not more with flames of fire, then vilainous and
despightful words. It is well known yt D. Cole the papist, being visitor in
Cambridge, when a Bible was brought to him to be defaced, called it bible babble.

They defaced the Friars kitchen stuff, spoiled and carried away their vitailes
and stuff, it was more then may be defended, and I think more then was true,
and especially that they should bring strumpets into the Abbeyes to provoke
the young Monks and Friars to lust, which was needless, for their chastity is
well enough known.

But lest the fault should be laid upon a disordered multitude without a head,
M.S. says, they had one Hermanus a preacher to their captain, which had bin a
thief, and had lost one of his ears, if his report be true, he was like to be
captain of such a band. As for ye prayer of the Nuns yt stopped his mouth, yt
he was able to say no more to them, let them believe it, that think papists
cannot lie. There might be cause why Hermanus would give over his persuasions,
when he saw them obstinate, though his mouth were not stopped with their
prayer. To conclude, although the defacing and destroying of Idolatry be good,
yet may it not be attempted without authority and order, under pretense of
zeal, and therefore this fact of the low country men is not by any wise man
defended, howsoever their zeal may be praised, or ye work of god in their
inconsiderate doings may be considered.

Sander.
THE II. CHAP.
The state of the question concerning the adoration of holy Images, where also
a reason is given of the order which is taken in the book following.

In this chapter, he moves four questions, 1. whether Images may be made,
Fulke.
2. whether any Images may be worshipped, 3. whether it be expedient that
any should be worshipped, 4 with what kind of worship Images may be
worshipped. To the first he answers that Images may be made. To the second,
that these Images only may be worshipped, in respect of Christian religion,
which bring us in mind either that there is a God, or that there are three
persons of the Trinity, or which represent Christ, or his holy Angels and
Saints, by which he allows the making and worshippinge of the Images of god,
or of the trinity, beside ye images of Christ, men, and Angels.

To the third, he answers that it is expedient that Images should be
worshipped. To the fourth, he defends it for more probable, that the same
degree of honor is not due to the Image of Christ, of our Lady, or of other
saints, which is due to Christ, our Lady, and other saints themselves, but
there is a certain proper honor due to holy Images, which may be called a
worship or honor due to a good remembrance or monument. These be his own
words, by which he shows himself contrary to other Papists, that defend
that Images are to be worshipped with the same honor that is due to the
things whereof they are Images. As that the Image of God is to be worshipped,
even with the same honor that is due to God himself.

But going over his questions again, he says, it is granted for the most
part of all men, that Images may be made so they be not abused, which is
utterly false, for no Christian man will grant, that it is lawful in any
respect to make any Image of God, that is, to transform the glory of the
immortal God into the image of a mortal man, or to make that monstrous image
of the Trinity, with three faces or three bodies: of an old man, a young man,
and a dove. Romans 1. verse. 23. The second and third, he says are denied by
the Caluenistes and Lutherans. In the fourth, there has been controversy
among the Popish Catholics, some thinking the honor dew to the thing it self
(by reason that the image is all one with ye thing, when it exercises the act
of an image) might be given to the image thereof. But other be of another mind.
Beside this controversy among the Papists themselves confessed about the
honor of God, which is one of the chiefest points of Christian religion, note
that the former sort make dombe and dead images, to exercise an act, which is a
gross and monstrous absurdity. But of all those four questions, M. Sanders
promises to entreat: first to prove the making of images lawful and
commendable: 2. the worshipping of them to be lawful and commendable, as the
signs of honorable verities for the verities sake, which is all one, as if you
would say, we must worship falsities for love of verities, for between
verity and falsitie there is no mean, the creature in steed of the creator,
Romans 1. verse. 25. But how absurdly does he confound images with the signs of
all kinds? Or what kind of argument is this? John Baptist confessed him self
unworthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoe, therefore he would worship
his shoe or we must worship his image. Or these, a man embraces a servant or
messenger sent from his friend, kisseth a ring that comes from him, loves
to hear of his name, esteems his picture, therefore we must embrase, kiss,
love, and esteem images of God, etc. which he has not sent unto us, but
expressly forbidden us to make or have in any use of religion. But yt he
should not be mistaken, in saying, images ought to be honored, he does not
as a learned man should do, make a lawful division or distinction of honor,
but like a blind or crafty Sophister, he makes a confusion and iumbling of
diverse names and kinds of honor, to trouble the understanding of a simple
reader, as of honor due to God, to Saints, to our prince, to his liuetenant,
to our parents, friends, fellows, superiors, and to holy remembrance, and one
of these kinds of honor he will prove due to images, and not that which is
due to God alone. As though all honor of religion, were not dew only to God,
Mat. 4. verse. 10. and honor of charity, were not to be directed by Gods law,
by which, honor of images is expressly forbidden. But with M. Sander the
difference of honor comes from the mind, and therefore falling down before
an image. Kissing, etc. if he think it not to be God, nor any reasonable
creature, but an image of Christ. etc. is no idolatry. As if God had not by
express words forbidden, the falling down before images, yea, although the
mind know they be false idols. For else how are they commended, which have
not bowed their knees to Baal, nor kissed him with their mouth, among so many
idolaters and dissemblers? But Abraham (says M. Sander) adored the people of
the land, yet was he no idolater. As though he could not put a difference
between civil worship and religious: yea, he gives a rule how to avoid
idolatry: Give God thy heart (says he) and after be secure, that ye honor
which is given in any respect be for Gods sake, and all is well. By this
reason, we may worship not only all idols, but we may make idols of all Gods
creatures, and worship them for Gods sake, as the Egyptians did Oxen,
crocodiles, cattes, apes and onions, for they be al good monuments and
remembrances of God their creator, and better then any forged idol. To avoid
which absurdity, it were good not only to look that you worship not any thing
for Gods sake, but to be sure, what God has commanded you to worship, and
that to honor with such honor also as he has appointed. So shall you worship
God aright, and honor his ministers ecclesiastical or civil, his friends,
and your brethren, and whatsoever else is worthy of any honor. But Master
Sander to avoid the offense that might be taken by the terms of adoration,
worshipping, honoring, etc. protests that he allows only that honoring
of images, when the party in the faith of one God, and one mediator Jesus
Christ, does direct his honor by the image to the truth represented, which
faith and intention does deliver him quite from all spice of idolatry. But how
false this determination of M. Sanders is, we see evidently by the history of
the golden Calfe, which Aaron and the people worshipped, even according to his
faith and intention, namely, they worshipped the God which brought them forth
of the land of Egypt by that image, even Iehoua, that made heaven and earth,
Exodus 32. verse. 4. and 5. Again, what manner of faith this is, which is not
only not grounded upon the word of God, but also clean contrary to it,
children that learn their Cathechisme can sufficiently understand. In the end
of this Chapter M. Sander practices a figure of popish rethorike, which is,
after great bragges and promises of proof, to occupy the reader with some by
matters, before the performance taken in hand, partly that his understanding
should not be so quick, as when his mind is newly kindled with desire of the
sight of such things as he promised, and partly yt being half wearied with
other needelesse discourses, he should not be so attentive to consider the
force of his reasons. Therefore he promises first to answer the objections of
ye adversaries, and yet because that argument is not so fit for his purpose,
he turns it over also, until he have for disputations sake, feigned the
honoring of images unlawful, and yet proved yt the image breakers in the low
countries did not well.

THE III. CHAPTER.
That although the images of Christ and of his saints had been falsely
worshipped, yet the Churches were unjustly spoiled, and the images unjustly
thrown down, and consequently that the doers of it must needs be the
ministers of the devil. Also he notes, the reason of breaking the Brazen
serpent. The keepers of church goods are Idolaters. The foundation of the new
gospel in the low countries is shameful. The inconstancy of the
Protestants doctrine. Sander.


Fulk.
It is confessed, and therefore needs no proof, that the act of breaking the
popish Idols in the low countries, if it wanted the authority of the
Magistrate, was unlawful, and yet it follows not, that the doer^ were the
ministers of the devil. For they that offend of inconsiderate zeal, are not by
and by the ministers of the devil. The people that would have made Christ a
King, Ioh. 6. attempted a thing unlawful for them to do, yet were they not
for that, the ministers of the devil. The evil was of the devil, the persons
for the most part sought to serve God, or else M. Sander how will you defend
them that commit idolatry upon good intent, in worshipping of an
unconsecrated host, or in worshipping the devil in the likeness of Angels?
But to come to your reasons. The abuses of the images (you say) might have been
taken away, and the images let alone, and that in deed was the judgment of
Gregory, ad Seren. lib. 7. Ep. 109. but his authority against the manifest
word of God, which forbids all images in any use of religion, is of small
weight with us: Ex. 20. The example of King Ezechias breaking the brazen
serpent is unfitly alleged, to defend the breaking of images by private
persons: but the two last reasons that M. Sander alleges of the breaking
thereof, are to be considered: the one that the brazen serpent was a figure,
rather then an image, the other, yt it was worshipped as the truth it self.
That it was both a figure and an image, he might have said truly, but so to
make it a figure, yt he denies it to be an image, is gross impudency: for
first it was an image of a serpent, before it was a figure of Christ. And then
it follows hereof, yt if such an image as was lawfully made and was a figure
of Christ, by lawful authority was broken, when it was abused: how much more
images that were never lawfully made, and also have been abused to idolatry,
as all the famous images in Popery have been, ought by like authority to be
utterly defaced and destroyed?

To the second reason, that the people did worship the brazen serpent as God,
it is nothing credible, although they gave unto it the honor due unto God. For
that Ezechias called it Nechushtan, which is a lump of brass, it showed that
God is not to be worshipped in any material image, it proves not what opinion
the people had of it. M. San. says, the Papists worship not the metal of
their images, but they use them as occasions to put them in remembrance of them
whose images they are. It were an hard point for him to prove, that the
Israelits did worship the brass of the serpent, but rather that image of the
serpent, as a holy relic, by which their forefathers had deliverance from the
stinging of fiery serpents. But to the matter, it is needless for him to cite
out of Augustine, that it is not lawful to break Idols, but for them that
have authority, and less to prove that they which stale silver crosses and
challices etc. if any such were, (as I think he slaundereth them) did evil.
But he will prove that keepers of Church goods be Idolaters, because they be
covetous. He may so prove a greater number of obstinate Papists Idolaters, who
both keep Church goods in their houses, and the very Churches or Abbeys,
which he makes all one, for their houses. And yet Augustine whom he cites,
allows the converting of idolatrous treasures to common uses, as was the
giving of Abbeys by common consent of the realm into the Kings hand, of whom
diverse enjoy them as bought or given. If any man unjustly got into his
possession any such stuff of covetousness, I for my part will not excuse him of
idolatry, nor Sander of treason for cursing ye Prince, which is enriched by
Abbey lands lawfully given, under color of giving offense. But the foundation
of the new Gospel is shameful, because the Protestants contemn this act of
spoiling, and yet their preachers and Doctors were the captains of the
spoil. In the first Chapter, where he told us the story, he could name but
one preacher, and him an infamous person, and yet perhaps he slandereth him in
all yt he says against him. Now he seems as though all the preachers and
Doctors were captains of this disorder, which is an impudent and shameless
lie: as yt which follows is a malicious and foolish slander, yt the
inconstancy of the protestants is such, as there is no ground or assurance of
our faith, because there be diverse opinions in some matters, yt are no articles
of faith, or because Papists may feign inconstancy in their doctrine, where
there is none at al. For albeit that some have thought, yt men must not be
enforced to profession of religion, and one or two have written against ye
regiment of women, as a French Papist also has done in his Emblemes: yet
generally we hold, yt heretics are to be punished, and all men compelled to
serve God truly, and none suffered to commit idolatry: likewise we hold the
regiment of women lawful, as well in the highest estate of a Queen, as in
inferior degrees of a mother or a mistress. We always teach obedience unto ye
Prince. And it is the Pope that armeth subjects against their Prince,
discharging them of their allegiance, as in the rebellion of the North. The
doings of France and Scotland, are by public instruments testified unto ye
world, by the Princes them selves, that they were good and lawful, and not
done against them, but in their service and obedience. For miracles and
Doctors, we never taught diversely of them, but always, that they were to be
embraced according to the truth, which they are brought to confirm, which
truth must be tried only by the authority of scriptures, neither by
miracles, nor Doctors. And because he touches by name the miracle of Master
Lane of Westchester, although we make no great account of it, as a miracle,
which might be a natural cure, yet it is more unlike to be a fable, and more
like to be a true miracle, then that which Master Bristowe alleges of
Margeret Iesop with the short leg. The decrees of the Pope, though he be
Antichrist, are sufficient to beat down the papists, which hold that he can
not err, the like I say of the gloses and late writers of their own, to whom
we owe no obedience, as they profess their faith to be governed by them. And
seeing of custom some be good and some be bad, why may we not receive the good
and refuse the bad without M. San. frumpe, Let old customs prevail quoth M.
Jewel. The old Latin translation of the Bible is in many places corrupt, but
never to be preferred before the original of the Greek and Hebrew, although
it may be cited where it differs against the Papists, which receive it as
only true. Old writers have called the holy table an altar, and the Communion,
a sacrifice or Mass, yet follows it not, that Popish altars and Popish Mass
may not be condemned. But what slanders are these, the body of Christ is the
sign of his body, and the sign of the cross, is the body it self crucified,
who ever heard these monsters proceed out of our mouths? Again, The communion
is taught to be but holy bread. Priests and Bishops need have no temporal
possessions, except they themselves be Priests and Bishops. Priests and
Bishops are equal by Gods law, therefore Popish Priests, which be the devils
Priests, must be equal with Christian Bishops, which for government sake are
preferred before Christian Ministers.

Finally, if the Papists burn our malicious and false translations of the
Bible, they are said to burn the holy Bible of Jesus Christ. If the
Protestants burn the Hebrew, Greek, Latin, and Duch text, as they did in ye
Low countries, they are commended as holy workers in ye Lords vine. No M.
Sander, thy malicious ears never heard that, which thy slanderous pen has set
down, that any man was of us commended, for burning any text of the Bible: and
if by disorder, and through ignorance, any texts were burned, yet thou feignest
too impudently, in saying, they burned the Duch text. And whereas thou would
excuse the purposed malicious burning of English Bibles, by the falsenesse of
their translations, beside that thou speak absurdly in all learned men's
ears, who know the truth of them by conference of them with the original
toungs, yet this bewrays your malice against the word of God, that having so
long complained of our false translations, never a papist of you all will take
the pains to translate ye Bible truly, that ye people might be rightly
instructed in Gods word by your true translation, if you feared their
perverting, by our false translation.

CAP. 4. or as the error of his Printer has made it, CAP. 3. and so
continues in that error to the end, which I note, because there should be no
varying in the conference of his book and mine answer.
Sander.
The petegreu of such as heretofore have destroyed the altars, the temples, the
chalices of God, or the images of Christ and of his Saints: with answer to
certain objections which might seem to make for image breakers. Also he
notes a notable story of honor done to Church plate in the ancient time.

Fulk.
This blaser of the Popes arms, pretending to draw a petegreu of such as have
destroyed altars, temples, etc. rehearses a beadroll of Infidells and
heretics, which have defaced the true religion of God, which pertains
nothing to them that by lawful authority deface and destroy the monuments of
Popish Idolatry, having an express commandment of God so to do. You shall
overthrow their altars, and break down their pillars, ye shall cut down
their groves, and burn their graven images with fire, Deu. 7. v. 5. But this
(he says) pertains not unto us to execute, except we had conquered an
heathen nation, that worshipped Jupiter and Juno: Mars and Minerua etc. By what
commandment then did Ezechias, Josias, and all the godly Kings destroy and
deface the monuments of Idolatry in the land of Judah, which was no heathen
nation, but the most peculiar people of God? By what authority did they
destroy the hill altars or high places, in which the people did offer sacrifice
only to God? 1. Reg. 3. Finally, by what precept did Ezechias break down the
brazen serpent, which was a figure of Christ infinitely more excellent, then all the images of the Papists, because yt had a godly beginning, whereas theirs
have a wicked beginning and a worse continuance and abuse? This commandment
therefore serves against al Idolatry, whether it be committed of people yt are
heathnish, or of such as having so^ sacraments of God, are degenerated into
false religion and Idolatry. Wherefore the examples yt M. S. alleges, beside
yt some of them are very violently drawn to image breakers, do nothing touch
them that deface false religion, but such as destroy true religion. The
Philistines were punished for looking upon the arc, Vzza for touching it upon
a good intent, Jeroboam for forsaking the temple of Solomon, and setting up two
profane Temples with Idols in them (which M. Sander omitteth,) and making
priests of the vilest of the people. This last prank says he, is practiced, in
Anwerpe. How so M.S? New temples are erected. Why sir, is it lawful to have
but one temple as then at Jerusalem? New ministers are made in Schism. I
trust they be not so vile rascals, as the multitude of your Popish hedge
priests. But where be the idols in the new temples of Anwerpe, that were in
Ieroboams Temple?

But let us hear the rest of his examples. The servants of Iessabel destroyed
the altars of God in the days of Elias: It is very true: And Elias with the
godly people destroyed the altars of Baal, and slew his Priests. Nabuchodonosor
burned the Temple of Solomon: he did wickedly: Balthazar abused the holy
vessels, he smarted for it. But Iehu destroyed the religion of Baall, and the
ornaments thereof, and he is commended, so be all the godly Kings for
destroying of idolatry: 2. Reg. 10.18.23.

In Malachie God reproves the Priests for offering the blind and lame, and the
polluted bread. Manasses ye priest set up a false Temple in mount Garizim,
Antiochus Epaphanes defiled the temple of God, Pompeius entered into the
sanctuary. All these did wickedly, but they that with Lawful authority
deface, and destroy idolatry, do that which is right in the sight of the
Lord: 2. Reg. 18. and 23.

Christ honored the Temple with his presence, yet he chased out the abusers
thereof: Luc. 19. Joan 2. etc.

The Christians in Tertullians time, used crossing of their forheades, to show
them selves Christians, but no worshipping of any cross, as the Papists do,
yet came that estimation of the cross from the Valentinian heretics.
Irenaeus, Lib. 1. Ca. 1. An. 150.

The Nouatians kept conuenticles from the Catholics, such are the assemblies of
the Papists, separated from the Church of God, though they be never so many
in number, as the Arrians in the East and in Africa were.

The Manichees did hate the Image of Christ, whom they denied to be a very
man, testified in the 2. Council of Nice, which was almost 800. years after
Christ, when Images were made and honored, yet M. Sander notes it Anno Dom.
280. when in the Church of God were no Images of Christ. But among the
heretics Gnostici was there images of Christ, which they honored, An. 129.
Ire. Lib. 1. Cap. 24.

Dioclesian and Maximian commanded the Churches of Christians to be destroyed,
and the Bibles to be burned, so did the Papists at Orleans, and Anwerpe, to
the Churches, and in all places where they come for the Bibles burning. Yet the
good man, charge the protestants at Anwerpe in S. Frances monastery, for
burning the Bible.

When Georgius an Arrian Bishop was brought into Alexandria by force, there was
great sedition and spoil of Church goods, there has been as great sedition
and spoil in bringing in of Catholic Bishops of Rome and greater also, as
many hystories do witness, and the Papists will not deny, so many Schisms
have been about election of their Popes.

But nearer to the matter, Julian the Apostata with the paganes pulled down
the image of Christ, that was set up in the street of Caesarea Philippi in
remembrance of the miracle done upon the woman that was healed of her issue of
blood, not in the Church to be worshipped. Well: he showed his malice, but he
did no hurt to Christian religion. This example hurts not them that lawfully
pull down, and deface Images in the Church of Christ: for Epiphanius before
Julian, did so at Anablatha, Epiph. epi. 34. But Iulianus did object unto the
Christians, that they did worship the wood of the cross, when they painted
Images thereof, on their foreheades, and before their houses. Hereof M. Sander
gathers, that the Christians had a graven image of Christ him self even
from his own time, in Paneade, or Caesarea Philippi, as images of the cross
before their houses: for the image of Christ, Eusebius testifies, it was set
up by the Heathen men, and not by Christians, Lib. 7. Cap. 18. Although it is
not like, that it was set up in Christ's time, when it is manifest by Josephus,
that the Jews could not abide so much as the image of the Emperor, or of his
standerd the Eagle to be set up among them. The images of the crosses set
before their doors, declare they had not them, and much less any other of
Christ and his saints in Churches, which Julian would not have omitted, to
prove them wood worshippers and idolaters. Cyrillus in deed defends these
signs of crosses as better memorials of Christ, and of his virtues, then ye
Images of ye Gentiles, yet he defends not setting up of crosses, or any
images in Churches, and creeping to them, which is the filthy idolatry of the
Papists.

Julian the uncle of this Apostata, did sit upon the vessels used at the
communion, in despite of our religion, and was justly plagued therefore.
Eustachius ye heretic kept his conuenticles in private places, he would not be
ruled by his Bishop. The protestants keep open assemblies, when they are not
hindered by persecution, and are ordered by the Bishops and Elders of their
Church, though they will not be obedient to the Heretical Bishops of the
Popish Church. The same Eustachius condemned the marriage of Priests, as the
Papists do. Ep. Con. Gangr. Vigilantius justly reproved the Christians for
superstitious estimation of relics, which Hieronyme could not honestly defend
for all his quarrelling.

To conclude, Chrysostom complayneth of the injury done to him, his church,
and the sacraments, by barbarous soldiers: Optatus of the like by the
Donatistes, Victor by the Arrians, all these and an hundredth more that might be
brought of like examples, being acts of Infidels, and Heretics against true
religion, do not prove, but the commandment of God must be executed, against
false religion, by them who have authority of God so to do.

But now he comes to answer our objections, and first the example of
Epiphanius a godly bishop of Cyprus whose words I will first set down, as
they are contained in an epistle of his, to John Bishop of Jerusalem. Praeterea
quod audini, etc. Moreover whereas I heard that some men did murmur against me,
because that when we went together to the holy place, which is called Bethel,
that there I might make a gathering with you after the Ecclesiastical manner:
and was come to the village, which is called Anablatha, and had seen there as
I passed by a candle burning, and had inquired what place it was, and had
learned that it was a Church, and came into pray: I found there a vale hanging
at the door of the said Church, steyned and painted, and having the image as
it were of Christ or of some Saint, for I do not well remember whose Image it
was. Therefore when I saw this thing, that the Image of a man did hang in the
Church of Christ, contrary to the authority of the scriptures, I rent it, and
gave council to the keepers of that place, that they should rather wrappe some
dead poor man in it and carry him to burial in it. And they contrariwise
murmured and said, if he would have rent it, it had been meet that he should
have given us another veil, and have changed it. Which when I heard, I
promised that I would give them one, and send it shortly. Now there was some
stay in the mean time, while I seek to send them a very good veil in steed
of yt. For I thought one should have been sent me out of Cypres. But now I have
sent such a one as I could get. And I pray you yt you will command the elders
of yt place, to receive this vale, which we have sent by this bearer. And to
charge them that here after no such vayles be hanged up in the Church of
Christ, which are against our religion. For it becomes your honesty, to have
such carfulness to take away scrupulositie, which is unworthy of the Church
of Christ, and the people which i^ committed to you.

These be the words of Epiphanius in his Epistle translated by S. Hierom. For
answer to this, first he will not affirm whether yt Epiphanius ye bishop of
Cypres wrote this Epistle, or some other of that name, because Damascen that
impudent corrupter of antiquity, when he can not answer the Epistle, he
moves such suspicion in his Apology for the worshipping of Images. But let
Hierome himself testify the matter, Contra errores Joan Hierosol. ad
Pampathiam, in the end of the Epistle. Secondly he answers that
notwithstanding the judgment of Epiphanius, it is not against the authority
of the scriptures to have Images in the churches, for then should not
Theodorus the martyr, have had his martyrdom painted on the walls, as
Gregorius Nyssenus witnesses. In deed Gregorius Nyssenus, which lived
somewhat after Epiphanius, speaking of the ornaments of the Church, affirms
that there was the history of the martyr painted on the wall, but so far from
any spice of adoration, that the same was also expressed upon the pauement
which men did tread upon. Like as for ornamente, there were graven also in
wood the Images of beasts. These were the beginnings and as it were the first
budding up of Idolatry in the church, yet gainesaide by godly men, and
forbidden in the council of Eliberis.

Another reason he has, of those simple men's authority, that hang up the
Image, and their murmuring, which was not for putting down the Image, but for
that he gave them not another vail or curtain first. That it was not his
private opinion, it appears in this, that he writes so confidently thereof
to the bishop of Jerusalem, in whose dyocesse Anablatha was, and who was
present when the said Image was defaced.

But if he had thought (says M. Sander) the having of Images to be an
heresy, he would have noted it in his book of Fourscore and more heresies,
where he notes no such opinion of having Images in the Church for heretical.

This balde reason he learned out of the council of Nice 2. act. 4. of one
Epiphanius which takes upon him to reiecte and control the authority of this
ancient Epiphanius of Cypres. But how falsely, they have affirmed this of him,
you may see in diverse places of Epiphanius book against heresies. First lib.
1. Tom. 1. he shows the punishment of God against Tharra an Image maker,
which over lived his son Aran, which no man (as he says) did before him.
Secondly, lib. 1. Tom. 2. he shows that Simon Magus the father of heretics,
made Images of him self and his harlot Helena to be worshipped: and that
Carpocrats the heretik made the Images of Jesus, and of S. Peter, and did cense
them and worship them. Also Her. 27. he says, Gnostici and Carpocratitae, etc.
The Gnostikes and Carpocratites, have Images painted in colors, some also of
gold and silver and other matter, which they say be the Images of Jesus, and
that these Images of Jesus were made when he lived among men under Pontius
Pilate. Again lib. 2. T. 1. her. 55. he shows yt there were some in Arabia,
Robas and Edom, which worshipped the Image of Moses. And Centra Cullyridianos,
her. 79. which worshipped the Images of ye blessed virgin Marye, he says: Vnde
non est, etc. How is not this desire of making Images a devilish attempt?
Prtextu enim Iustiti, for the devil alwais entering into the mind of men under
pretense of righteousness, deifying the mortal nature in ye eres of men, by
variety of arts, has set forth stocks or statues, bearing ye Image of men. And
they truly which are worshipped by the^ are dead, but they bring in their
Images to be worshipped, which never lived, for they cannot be dead which never
lived. Finally Lib. Autorato. prima enim scortatio est excogitatio
simulachrorum inquit scriptura. The inuenting of Images was ye first whordome
says the scripture.

By these places judge how true it is which Damascen writes, that his own
church was decked with Images. But yet M.S. has another shift of desca^t, yt
the cause of re^ding this vail might be, for avoiding of offense of ye weak
Jews, and Paga^s, lately converted in yt place. As though Epiphanius does not
plainly declare ye cause to have bin, for yt it was co^trari to ye scriptures.
The like cause he would have to be of the decree of the council of Eliberis in
Spain: Placuit pict^ras in ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut
adoratur in, arietibut depingatur. It is decreed yt there ought to be no
pictures in ye Church, lest yt which is worshipped and adored, should be
painted on ye walls. But the Canon it self shows a reason why they would
have no pictures in ye churches, lest God who^ only they worshipped and adored
might be painted on the walls, which were an abominable absurdity, yet has
been practiced and i^ defended, men be so prone to Idolatry. But M.S.
gathers that seeing there might be no pictures in churches, ergo they might
be in private houses, and if they be lawful to be in private houses, much more
they might be permitted in churches. A proper ringworm, a doctor like argument,
by which I may conclude as follows. There may be no shoppes in churches, ergo
they may be in private houses, and if they may be permitted ^n private houses,
much more in churches. But yet he has an other answer. This fact of Epiphanius
was a private zeal, which is not to be followed contrary to ye decree of ye
catholic church: but I reply, it was a godly zeal, because it was ruled by ye
commandment of God and ye holy scripture, against which no church has
authority to decree. But the last answer is as good as cake and pudding, which
yet he thinks worthy of a note in the margent. Images could not be broken
before they were set up, therefore the setters up of Images are ancienter and
nearer ye Apostles time then the pullers down. That is out of question Even so
heresies could not be confuted before they were invented, therefore the
inuenters of heresies, are ancienter and nearer the Apostles times then the
confuters. Note ye papists for your learning or else note that this note of
Master Sander is not worthy the notinge. But he proceeds and will prove
(as he says) that as there were some Images in Churches in the time of
Epiphanius, so straight after his time, they were common in all churches: but
this straightway was almost 200. years after Epiphanius, An. 493
as he cites out of Nicephorus, of one Xenias who, he says, was the first
that spoke against worshipping of Images, which how false it is, al men that
have read the works of ye ancient writers do know sufficiently. The next
breaker of Images, he would have to be Serenus bishop of Marsiles, An. 596.
who wa^ reproved by Pope Gregory, which wrote unto him, that he should not
have broken the Images, but prohibited the people from worshipping of them:
Lib. 7. Epist. 169. But M. Sander will avoid that ^rohibition, by the
distinction of adoration, that they should not be worshipped as God: because
Gregory says, lib. 7. epist. 53. Scio quod, etc. I know that you desire not
the Image of our Savior, to this purpose, to worship it as God. By which
words he means, that all worship is due unto God, and that by worshipping
an Image, it is made a false God.

But it follows in the same Epistle (says M. Sander) which proves that
Gregory acknowledged some worship due to Images. Nos non, quasi ante
Diuinitatem, ante imaginem proster nimur, etc. We fall not down before an
Image, as before ye godhead, but we worship him whom by the Image we remember
to have been borne, or to have suffered, and also to sit in the throne. But
these words import no such matter, but rather the contrary, except M. Sander
can prove, that it is all one to fall down before an Image, and to fall down
unto an Image. Although he seems to say, that they falled not down at all
before any Image, but only used them for their remembrance.

M. Sander continuing his petegrue, shows that Philippicus the Emperor being
a monothelite, anno. 710. threw down the Images of the fathers of the six
general councels that were set in the Church porche of Sophia: belike he was
afraid they would come shortly into the Church. Pope Constantine caused the
like pictures to be set up in the Church porche of Saint Peter at Rome. And
what of this? Forsooth he was an heretic that threw down images. So was
Pope Honorius condemned for a monotholite archeheretike in the seventh general
council, that maintained images. After him An. 730. Leo, persuaded by two
Jews, says the late idolatrous writers, threw down the images at
Constantinople: and anno 740. Constantine his son, a wicked man, and an
heretic followed him. But under Irene and Constantine anno 796. by the second
council of Nice, images were restored and their worship established. Of these
stories of pulling down and setting up of images, M. Sander notes, that the
mainteiners of images passed their adversaries in four things. The first, that
they were quietly set up, and broken down with tumult, so were many heresies
by the subtle serpent quietly settled, which without great tumult could not be
rooted out, as ye Arrian heresy, for example. But that images were used from
the Apostles, and Christ him self, he promises to show afterward. The
second, whereas they were set up in diverse countries, they were pulled down
only in Greece: a wise matter, whereas idols were worshipped in ye days of
Ezechias, throughout all the world, they were pulled down only in Iewrie.
And yet against this idolatrous council of Nice Carolus Magnus Emperor of ye
West writ a book, which is yet extant. The third prerogative, the idolaters
have had two general councels of their side, the idol breakers none: and yet
he confesses they had one at Ephesus, another at Constantinople, but he
says, they had them by stealth, that is marvel, when they were gathered by
the Emperors, as all other general councels were. And many of them (says he)
recanted after: so did they of Nice when the Emperors which followed
immediately after the Nicen council, threw down the images, as their
predecessors had done. Finally, where as he alleges the sixte council of
Constantinople for images, there is not one word in all that council to
defend them, but a counterfect Canon foysted in by the idolatrous council of
Nice, which they say was made four or five years after, under Justinian to
cloak their forgerie.

The fourth, yt notwithstanding so many Emperors resisting, yet images at
length prevailed among ye Greeks, which have them at this day painted, and as
he says, do reverence them, but he says falsely, if he mean they worship
them, as the Papists do theirs: and they are only painted on walls or tables,
not carved or graven, lest they should be worshipped. They continue still also
enemies to the Church of Rome, if continuance be any matter to justify their
doings. But now he concludes how vain a thing it is to oppose Epiphanius
which was but one man, and a few heretical Emperors against all the rest of
the fathers, and the general councels. As though because he has cited only
Epiphanius, there were none of the fathers against images but he, beside that
he skippeth over the Eliberin council cited by him self. But what fathers and
councels have been against images, I shall have better occasion to show
hereafter. Now he proceeds in his peuish pelf: there were heretics called
Bogomili anno 1180. which condemned the worshipping of images. All is not good
that heretics condemn: the Arrians condemned the Manichees: the Pellagians
condemned the Arrians. There was never any heresy but allowed some good
things* and condemned some evil things. Next he adioyneth Anno Do. 1160. the
Waldensies, whom he calls beggars of Lions, yet Pauperes signifies not
beggars, but poor men, which were true Christians, and condemned not only
idolatry, but also all Papistrie. The Sarazens also justly condemn the
Papists for Idolaters, whose idols being so contrary to the manifest
commandment of God, were a great occasion to make so many nations to forsake
Christianity, and for the Mahometists to continue in their wicked and false
religion. Last of all he comes to Wickelefe, Hus. Luther, etc. and them of
the low countries, whom especially he charge with sacrilege. But to omit
their fact which I have often showed cannot be defended if it wanted lawful
authority, all the stories that he brings, or can bring of godly princes,
and other persons erecting altars, churches, colleges, etc. and furnishing
true religion with all ornaments meet for the same, are nothing to the
purpose to defend the temples of idols, with their idols and altars, and other
their trumperie from destruction by godly and lawful authority. At length he
alleges the decrees of Arcadius, Honorius, Theodosius, and Valentinianus,
which allows the erecting of their own images, and of all notable men, as
Judges, Magistrates, etc. which when it was a civil honor used among the
Romans, and nothing at all touched religion, I marvel with what face he can
allege it, for setting up of images in churches to be worshipped, and yet
that honoring of the Emperors images is condemned by Saint Jerome in Daniell,
lib. 1. Cap. 3. Likewise, that they decreede, that such as fledd to the
Emperors image, should be safe from violence, which was only a civil policy,
to bring the majesty of the Emperor in estimation with the common people, and
therefore it follows not yt much less they would have commanded the image
of Christ to have been pulled down, which could not be set up, but to the
dishonor of Christ, because he has forbidden it: And therefore they made a
decree, that wheresoever it was set up, it should be taken down. M. Sander
says, that M. Jewel alleging this edict, does translate tolli to be taken
down, which signifies to be taken up, as though the decree had been of
crosses on the ground to be taken up lest they should be trodden upon, but
when M. Sander has said his pleasure, tolli signifies to be taken clean
away. And although in Justinian Ti. 11. lib. 1. the sign of our savior
Christ is forbidden to be graven or painted on the ground in flint or marble:
yet it follows not, but the edict cited by the bishop of Sarum, may be
understood of taking away all images, wheresoever they were.

The conclusion of the Chapter is, that he finds nothing on Master Jewels
side, but Infidels, Jews, heretics, Idolaters, or else he makes many lies
upon Christian Princes, as though the law of God were nothing, but Paganism,
Epiphanius were an heretic, the fathers of the council of Eliberis were
rennagates or Jews, the edictes of the Christian Emperors, were restreined by
Master Sanders gloss, because an image was made by the woman that was healed
(says he) but Eusebius says by the Gentiles, lib. 7. Cap. 16. and the
Gospel reports that she had consumed all her goods upon Physicians, and
therefore was not able to set up such a pillar and two such images of brass,
one of Christ, the other of her self, as those were reported to be. From
which day forward (says he) all Catholic fathers and Councels, and
Christians, made and reverenced holy images as it shall appear afterward. Of
all the loud lies that ever I heard, this may go for the whetstone. What
shall appear afterward, we shall consider afterward. But in the mean time,
remember his lie sufficiently confuted, even by such testimonies as he
himself has alleged, by way of objection the Epistle of Epiphanius, and the
council of Eliberis.

Sander.
THE V. OR IIII. CHAP.
That the word of God forbids not generally the making of all kind of
images, and in what sense images are forbidden to be made.

Fulke.
That the word of God forbids not the making of all images generally, it is
a matter out of controversy with us, although the Jews and Mahometistes think
the contrary. But seeing making of images is by the second commandment
expressly forbidden, we may clearly perceive, what images are forbidden to
be made, if we consider that this is a precept of the first table, which
concerns religion.

Therefore, by it were are forbidden to make to our selves any manner of images
for any use of religion. M. Sander says: that Jews were only forbidden to
make them as strange Gods, for when the Lord had said, Thou shall have no
strange Gods: imediatly showing what are strange Gods, he says, thou shall
make no graven images. Beside that, this interpretation is a confusion of two
commandments in one, the former showing the matter or substance of Gods
honor, the other the essential form thereof to be spiritual, it is proved
false by these reasons: diverse nations worshipped living creatures which were
no images, as Cattes, Oxen, Crocodiles, Serpents, Apes, as Gods, therefore the
interpretation of strange Gods can not be images. The Israelites worshipped the
true God Iehoua, which brought them out of the land of Egypt, in the image of
a Calfe, Exo. 3^. So did the Israelites under Jeroboam: and even those Gentiles
that did worship images with godly honor, they did worship the^ but as images
of the Gods them selves, whom they confessed to dwell in heaven, earth, the
sea, or hell, except some ignorant persons among them, even as among the
Papists the like have been, that did think the very Idols to be Saints, and
were moved thereto, by the falsehood of the Popish Priests, which would make
their eyes to gogle and water, their lips to stir, their noses to bleed;
their faces to sweat, even as by pricking their finger they made their Mass
cakes to bleed. The Gentiles also, though they worshipped many Gods, yet they
honored one Jupiter above all the rest of the inferior Gods, whom they
worshipped but even as the Papists worship the Saints. And to that one God
they did attribute as great praise, as the Papists do to the highest God. The
Poet Horace says, Quire^ hominum ac Deorum, Qui mare and terras variisque
mundum, Temperat horis: Vnde nil maius generatur ipso, Nec viget quicquam
simile aut secundum: Proximos illi tamen occupanit Pallas honores. It is he
which governs the affairs of men and Gods, which rules the Sea and the
land, and the whole world with diverse seasons. So that nothing is brought
forth greater then he, neither is there any thing like him or second unto
him. Yet Pallas receives the next honor unto him. Compare this confession of
the Heathen Poet, with that the Papists teach of the worship of GOD and our
Lady, and see how like they be.

But to return to Master Sanders interpretations, he makes a second
restraint, upon these words, Thou shall not make to thy self, that is, by
thine own private judgment, but such images as I shall appoint to be made,
thou may have. This restraint is right, and according to the meaning of the
word of GOD. For by this are excepted the brazen serpent, the Cherubims, and
what so ever beside GOD commanded to be made, and had in any use of religion.
As for the images of the Lions about Salomons throne, the Oxen that bare up the sea of brass, the Pomgranets, Date trees, and other flowers made for the
ornament of the temple, were in no use of religion, and without all danger of
worshipping, therefore not prohibited by this commandment, no more then the
images of beasts, fishes, birds, trees, in books of Philosophy, or the
painting of stories in clothes or galleries, etc.

But whereas Master Sander in this restriction, enlarges the commandment of
God to be understood, not only that which is delivered by the special and
certain messingers of God, Moses, the Prophets, and the Apostles, but also
adds their successors, of whose calling we have no warrant of GOD, I may not
therein agree with him. For he quoteth for successors of the Apostles,
Paulinus, Gregory, and the second Council of Nice, yea, Eusebius, Basil,
Ambrose, Augustine, Chrysostom, which all erred from the Apostolic doctrine
in some points, although none of the five last named, allowed the having of
images in Churches. Eusebius Li. 7. cap. 18. speaks of an image in the
streat, made by the Gentiles. Basil, Hom. in 40. Martyrs: of images of men of
war painted for imitation, but not in the Church. Chrysostomes Liturgy was
written in the days of the Emperor Alexius, six or seven hundredth years
after Chrysostomes death. Ambrose in vita Geruasij, is a mere forgerie, for
the right Ambrose, De suga saeculi cap. 5. Eccles^^ manes idas, and vanas
nescit simulachrorum figuras. The Church knows no improfitable forms and
vain figures of images. Augustine De consensu Eu. cap. 10. the place by him
quoted, condemns them that sought Christ in painted walls, of Gregory
Nyssen we have spoken in the Chapter before, the other whom he cites,
Paulinus and Gregory of Rome, we refuse as erroneous, and the second Nicen
assembly as Idolatrous.

But M. Sanders proceeds to defend the makers of images, whom the scripture
accurseth, saying, that it means either makers of idols, or else makers of
wanton images, or at least, such as make them for an evil end and purpose.
Concerning the first, he finds fault with the English translation, which
every where almost, turns idols into images. As though the Hebrew words,
which the English translation expresses, had that ridiculous distinction of
idols and images, yea, as though the very vulgar Latin translation Psalm 113.
which he quoteth, calls them not Simulachra images, the makers whereof, are
accursed. Concerning the second, it is plain the Psalmist speaks not of
wanton images, but of such as were worshipped of the Heathen. And to the
third, I grant it means them that make them to an evil end and purpose, as
all Popish image makers do, which make them to the end they might be set up in
Churches, to be worshipped, contrary to Gods commandment.

But the last reason for the defense of image making, would serve to perce a
marble stone, with the subtlety thereof, and yet when all is done, has as
much reason in it, as the blocks which it defends. Man's natural
understanding is, by conceiving images, made and brought unto it by the
external and inward senses, therefore it is lawful to make carved images. We
may conceive in our mind an image of Christ nailed on the cross, therefore we
may make it of wood or stone, and worship it.

O subtle argument. But sir, you grant the making of Idols to be forbidden,
but those conceived images of the mind are called Idols by them, that teach
you that they be such conceptions of things: therefore this argument a paribus,
will serve you to defend Idols as well as images. Yet one question or two
about this diffuse argument I would demand. Does God forbid by the second
commandment natural, or artificial images? If artificial, then they have
no comparison with natural images.

Again sir, are our seeing and hearing from whom these images you speak of
first do come, by your Philosophy actions or passions? If they be passions,
how are they compared with making of graven images, which are actions?
Finally, where he says, this prohibition was not immutable, but temporal to
that people, he passes all bounds of reason and common understanding, as by
the judgment of God is become like unto those Idols whom he defends. For
having granted before that Idolatry was forbidden by this precept, now he
restrains the forbidding of idolatry, only to the Jews of that time, as
though it were lawful for Christians, who more straightly then the Jews, must
worship God in spirit and truth John. 4. and are commanded to keep them
selves pure from Idols. 1. John 5.

Sander.
THE VI. OR V. CHAP.
That the word of God only forbids Latria which is Gods own honor, to be
given to artificial images, leaving it to the law of nature, and to the
governors of his Church, what other honor may be given to holy images. Also
the place of Exodus, Thou shall not adore images, is expounded, and that
Christ by his incarnation takes away all idolatry that Master Jewel
vainly reproves. Doctor Harding condemns his own conscience, and is
proved a wrangler. The difference in honor between Latria and Doulia.

As M.S. says, images are forbidden to be worshipped, as they are forbidden to
be made, so say I, Fulk.
but with a far differing understanding. They may not be made to any use of
religion, so they may not be worshipped with any religious worship, which
apperteineth to God. For our religion is a service of God only. And where he
says as Images might be made by the authority of Moses, or of the governors
of Gods people, so they were not to be taken for Gods: so they may be likewise
worshipped by the authority of Gods church, this only prouiso being made, that
Gods own honor be not given unto them. I answer that as neither Moses, nor
any governor, had authority to make any images in any use of religion, other
then God commanded, no more has the Church any authority to allow any
worshipping of them which she has none authority by God to make, but an
express commandment forbidding both the making and the worshipping of them,
in the first table of the law, which concerns only religion. Now we have
said both, let us consider M. Sanders reasons. First he says, God forbidding
his own honor to be given to images, left it to the law of nature, and to
the governors of his Church, what honor images should have. Concerning the
law of nature, he says, that God perceived that when images of honorable
personages are made, honor was due unto them. What law of nature is this M.
Sander, that is distinct from the law of God? Or what nature is that, whose
law allows the worshipping of images? In deed the corruption of man's nature,
is to worship falshode in steed of truth, but the law of nature has no such
rule, being al one with the law of God, as nature is nothing else but the
ordinance of God. And where find you one title in the law, that God has
leaft it to the governors of his Church to appoint a worship meet for images?
Word you have none, letter you have none, nor prick of a letter sounding that
way. But you have collections.

First of the signification of Latria, as though God had written his Law in
Greek, and not in Hebrew: and yet Latria, according to the Graecians, has no
such restraint to signify the service of God only, but every service of men
also, and is all one that Doulia, and so used of Greek writers, excep^ we will
say that Doulia, which you will have to be given to images, is a more slavish
and servile worship, then that which you would have us to give to God.

But you will help your distinction, with the confusion of the commandementes,
because God says in the 1. precept, Thou shall have none other Gods but me,
and then says immediately, Thou shall not make nor worworship images, but
these co^mandementes are distinct or else you shall never make ten. And
whereas you allege, that he says immediately after: I the Lord thy God, am a
jealous God, that makes clean against you. For by those words, the Lord
declares that he can no more abide the use of images in his religion, then a
jealous man can abide, any tokens of an adulterer to be about his wife,
therefore idolatry in the scriptures is often called fornication. So the
circumstances help you nothing, but is altogether against you. But what an
horrible monster of idolatry is this, that after you have once confessed, that
Gods incomprehensible nature cannot be represented by any artificial image,
you affirm that Christ by his incarnation has taken away idolatry, that we
should not lack some corporal truth, wherein we might worship the Divine
substance? Whereas Christ himself tells us, that now the time is come, that
God shall not be worshipped as before in bodily service at Jerusalem, or in the
mountain, but in spirit and truth, Joan. 4. The image of Christ you say is
a similitude of an honorable truth, whereas no idol does represent a truth.
A worshipful truth, I promise you. Christ you say was man, but I say he is
both God and man, a person consisting of those two natures. Your image
represents only a person consisting of one nature, but such a one is not
Christ, therefore your image represents a falshoode, and is by your own
distinction an Idol.

For the Divine nature you confess cannot be represented by an artificial
image. Again, what an image is it of his humanity? It can not express his
soul, but his body only. Last of all, why is it an image rather of Christ,
then of an other man: Seeing in lineamentes and proportion of body, it has no
more similitude unto Christ's body, then to an other man's? But that it pleased
the caruer to say, it is an image of Christ. O honorable blocks and stones.

But Philo the Jew was cited for a favorer of this interpretation, that
images are none otherwise forbidden to be made or worshipped, then to be made
or worshipped as GODS. How vain the authority of a Jew is for a Christian
man to lean unto, I shall not need to say, especially when it is well known,
that the Jews also not considering in whether table this commandment is
placed, understand by it, that all images generally are forbidden. And Philo
says nothing to help him. For first in Decal. he says: when God had spoken
of his own substance and honor, order would that he should tell how his holy
name was to be worshipped. And again De eo quis haer. rer. Divine. Vt solus
Deus, etc. That God only might be truly worshipped. What can be reasonably
gathered of these words but that al honor is due to God, and therefore none to
idols, which are forbidden to be made.

If Philo a Jew, will not serve, Augustine a Christian is alleged who Super
Exodus 9.71. allowing that division of the ten commandementes, by which three
only are said to apperteine to God, says: Et reuera, etc. And truly that
which is said. Thou shall have none other Gods but me, is more perfectly
expounded, when forged things are forbidden to be worshipped. First for the
division of the commandments, Aug. is not constant with him self. For In
Quaesti. Nou. and Vet. Test. Quest. 7. he writes thus. Non sint tibi Dij alij
praeter me: primum verbum hoc est: Es subiecit secundum: Non facies tibi vllam
similitudineu^* Thou shall have none other Gods but me: this is the first word
or commandment: and he adds the second: Thou shall not make to thy self any
similitude. By which it is manifest yt to worship images, is not all one with
having other Gods. But M. Sander will answer our objection, that God forbids
all honor of images, thou shall not fall down to them nor worship them.
Adoration says he is a doubtful word. For Abraham adored the people of the
land Genesis 23. Very true, but with a civil worship, whereof we speak not
now. He made obeysans to them, or as we say, he made courtesy to them. And
the Angel refused to be adored, saying adore God. Therefore there is an
adoration proper to God, for Angels sometime have been adored. Nay M. Sander,
therefore all religious worship pertains to God. For S. John was not so
mad to worship the Angel as God, but as the messenger of God, with a
religious, and not a civil worship. And when you say Angels have been
adored, as Genesis 18. and Iudicum 13. I answer in both places, they were adored
with civil worship supposed by Abraham, and Manohah to be honorable men, and
not to be Angels. But when you cite Augustine to fortify your distinction of
Latria, and Doulia, you hurt your cause by his judgment, more then you further
it by his authority. For whereas he in Exodus 94. says that Latria is due to
God as he is God, Doulia is due to God, as he is our Lord, it follows, yt
that worship, which is called Doulia, as well as that which is called Latria,
is due only to God, who is our only Lord, and will not give his glory to
graven Images: Es. 42.8. 1. Cor. 8.6.

Theodoret saying: that God calls his people from the worshipping of devils,
even as Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10. shows that worshipping of images is the
worshipping of devils. And whereas Master Sander says, it can not possibly be
said, that Christ's images is dedicated to the devil, I say plainly with
Theodoret and Paul, it is dedicated to the devil, when it is worshipped.

For the Images of the Gentiles were not by the intent of the makers and
worshippers dedicated to devils, but to God and godly men and women: but when
they were honored with religious honor, which appertains only to God, the
spirit of God says, they were dedicated to devils. And even the same reason is
of the Image of christ, of the Trinity, of Peter, or any other, honored with
religious worship. Thus Augustine and Theodoret cited by him, are both
against him. Well, yet he will disprove the comparison that M. Jewel makes
between Gods words, and M. Hardings.

Jewel. God says, thou shall make to thy self no graven Images. M. Hardinge
says, thou shall make to thy self graven Images. But M. Sander says,
neither God nor M. Harding say so, that is, they do not mean so: for God
expounding his meaning, added, thou shall not adore them, nor give them the
honor due to God above: therefore M. Jewel did evil to divide Gods saying,
and by that division, he is sure that he has condemned his own conscience.
So that by M. Sanders interpretation to make Images, and to adore them, is all
one. But M. Jewel, seeinge them to be distinct matters, to make and to
worship, without condemning his conscience, did speak first of making, and
then of worshippinge of Images. And although M. Sander, be either so blind, or
so wilful, that he cannot see, or will not acknowledge, the distinction of the
two tables of the Law, the matter of one being religion, the other charity,
yet M. Jewel did well enough consider, that the Queens Majesty's Image graven
in her coin, and such like pictures, as nothing at all concerned religion, nor
nothing at all forbidden, were made by a commandment of the first table.

Now follows another comparison. Jewel. God says, thou shall not fall down
to them, nor worship them. M. Harding says, thou shall fall down to them,
and worship them. But M. Sander answers, that M. Harding defends, that
another degree of honor incomparably inferior to that which is due to God,
may be given to images, and not that which is due to God. Well, then is M. Hard.
and Sander to, contrary to other papists as great doctors as they. But yet M.
Jewels comparison does stand. For God forbids al worship of Images, Master
Hard. aloweth some worship of Images. Again, how will you distinguish the
falling down to God, from falling down to Images. And therefore M. Jewel is no
wrangler: for mean Harding what he can mean, his saying and meaning is
contradiction, to the saying and meaning of God. But you will aff^rme (says M.
Sander) that al manner of honor is forbidden to be given to any kind of Image.
You have against you ye opinion of the law of nature, the word of God, the
judgment of the ancient fathers, ye decrees of general councels, the practice
of ye whole church, as hereafter shall be declared. Verily M. Sander if you can
bring al these authorities to uphold the worshipping of Images, you shall do
more then any man was ever able to do before you, but hitherto you have brought
nothing worth the hearing. But in the mean time, you will prove that there are
two kinds of honor, the one due to God alone, the other to his creatures and
so to Images. But you must prove, yt there be two kinds of religious honor, or
else you prove nothing for your purpose. For civil honor will not help you one
jot for worshipping of Images, except you be of that mind as Boniface a
gentleman about Stamford was, that would salute ye sacrament of the altar with
courtesy and these words. God give you good morrow good Lord. And what have you
to prove this your distinction? Nothing in the world, but a saying of
Augustine, lib. 10. cap. 1. De ciuit. Dei. that Latria by a certain consent of
ecclesiastical writers, has been taken for that service which is due to God:
and that there is another service due to men, according to which the Apostle
commands servants to be subject to their masters, which has another name in
Greek. This other name is Doulia whereof S. Paul says in another place. Serve
ye one another, by charity. I pray you M. Sander, if you be not turned into
such an Image, (whole worship you defend) tell me simply whether ye difference
of these honors be not as great as the distinction of the two tables, religion
and charity? but how prove you that Doulia which is here taken for a civil
worship, may be applied to Images, whom you honor with a religious
worship? Yes mary, say you, by this it is proved, that we may serve Saint
Paul, In deed if you had lived when Saint Paul lived, it had been your
duty to have honored him with civil honor, or service of love, but now he
is dead, I say plainly, you ought not to serve him, nor worship him, with any
religious honor. So says Augustine, De vera religione cap. 55. Non sit nobis
religio cultus hominum mortuorum. Let it not be our religion, the worshipping
of dead men: and again, Honoramus eos charitate non seruitute. We honor them
with love, not with service. Lo Master Sander, here is your Doulia or
seruitus, denied to Saints that are dead.

The foundation of your argument being thus overthrown, we will suppose it
does stand, that Saint Paul is still to be served, how prove you that we
must worship his Image? Forsothe we must think any thing that is his, to
be above us, at least in signification, for S. Paul's own excessive honor.
In deed Master Sander you do well to call it an excessive honor. But by this
reason, I must much more worship all Gods creatures.

For if I must think any thing of Saint Paul's to be above me, and to
worship it, then much more must I think any thing of Gods to be above me,
and consequently I must worship it. Now the vilest creature in the world,
yea, the devil himself is more properly a thing of Gods, then an Image is a
thing of Saint Paul's, therefore I must think every one of Gods creatures
to be above me, and worship it for his sake. O blockishe blindness of
Idolatrous papists.

But it vexes you that Master Jewel calls your worshippinge of Images
Idolodoulia, because you will not have it Idololatria, for the Images of Christ
and S. Paul you say be no Idols, because Idols are instruments to serve
and honor the devil withal. Verily such be your Images of Christ and Saint
Paul, though not by your intention, yet by the holy ghostes determination.

Last of al, M. Jewel himself is proved to be a seruer of Images, if not with
Latria, yet with Doulia Papae. A strange matter: but how is it proved so to
be? Marye sir, he confesses himself to honor the sacrament of Christ's
Supper, which he teaches to be an Image of Christ's body and blood, but he
will not give Gods own honor to bread and wine, therefore it follows
inuincibly, that M. Jewel serves, that is to say, he honors some Image. Ha
ha he, M. Sander has a pleasant wit, if he be in jest: but if he in
earnest, as I am afraid he is, I will say no more but that he is a wrangler.
If M. Jewel say the sacrament is an Image, does he speak properly or
figuratively? If figuratively, then the honoring of that which is not an Image
properly, proves not, that he honors that which is an Image properly.
Again, when he speaks of honoring does he mean adoration, worshipping,
kneeling to the sacrament, which he condemns: or else reverent esteeming of
the mysteries of Christ? what has this to do with falling down to stocks
and stones? Finally do we serve all things that we honor (for M Sander
makes them all one) if we do, then men must serve their wives whom they must
honor, and men serve the weak parts of their body, which they honor most.
These be the invincible arguments for defense of Idolatry.

Sander.
THE VII. CHAP.
What an artificial Image is. Of the natural and artificial Image. And how
some honor may be given to artificial Images. Also the objection answered
concerning that the Image of Christ is no living Image. Concerning the Image of
the blessed Trinity. The abstracting of the image from the matter, and the
joining of the same with the truth. Master Jewel denies that the cognisances
of the cross, are images.

This Chapter contains a metaphysicall discourse of images, natural and
artificial. Fulke.
The effect whereof is this, that the nature of a thing cannot be expressed in
an artificial image, but by a natural image only, as the soon is the image
of his father, expressing his fathers nature. But an artificial image is the
only image of the person, or rather of the personal shape of him, that it
represents. And this being confessed, he says it is an easy matter to
answer the argument that is made, to prove the image of Christ to be a living
image, because his Godhead cannot be represented in an image. For that image
represents such external shape of Christ, as he had in deed. But if he
have not forgotten him self, he said before, that an artificial image is an
image only of the person or rather the personal shape of him whom it
represents. But neither the person, nor yet the personal shape of Christ is
represented by such an image, therefore it is a lying image. For the external
shape of Christ's body is not the personal shape of Christ. For as Christ's
person differs from the person of every other man, so his image must differ
from the person of every other man, or else it is a false image by Master
Sanders own grounds. But Master Sander says, that as by his manhood the
faithful were ledd to his divine nature when he lived, so by his image we
are ledd to his human shape, from thence to his humanity, and so upward to
his divine nature. Here is an handsome ladder, but that the steps stand too
far a sunder for any man to clymbe by it. For I deny that his disciples were
ledd by his manhod to understand or believe his Godhead, but only by faith
through his holy spirit inwardly, and outwardly by his doctrine and the works
of his Godhead. Yet says he, if we paint as much as his Apostles saw, it is
no lying sight.

What need we paint that which we may more lively see in our selves, and in
any other living man, then in a dead image, namely the outward shape of a man?

After this, he gathers conclusions: first, that it is neither possible nor
lawful to make an image, which may express the nature of God, of Angels, or
of any other creature. Secondly it is possible and lawful to make the image
representing the personal property of any known creature. This is true in
the second table of the law, but not in the first. Thirdly: The blessed
Trinity and infinite persons of Angels cannot properly* be expressed by any
artificial image. If this be true of the image of the Trinity, why do you
Papists suffer and defend such horrible idols and monsters of a man with
three faces, or with three bodies to express the blessed Trinity? If Angels
cannot be represented by image, and if three persons be infinite, how does
your Idolatrous council of Nice the second, not only determine that their
images may be made, but also that they have bodies, and be circumscriptible?
Action. 5. But you will not long hold this conclusion.

Furthermore, I would know what divinity, yea, or Phylosophie this is, that
you say, the persons of Angels are infinite? I thought there had been nothing
actually infinite, but God only, and that all creatures are definite, though
they be spiritual, invisible, and incircumscriptible. But to let you go with
that inconsiderate term, and not to urge it so far, as to make you an
vpholder of ten thousands of Gods, your conclusion is, that visions which
were of bodily forms may as well be painted as preached, whether they were of
the Trinity or of Angels, as the three Angels that appeared to Abraham in the
shape of men. The vision of Daniel 7. of the son of man, that came to him was
ancient of days. The history of the father speaking to Christ* and the
holy Ghost appearing in the shape of a Dove. Admit that these visions may be
painted* for so much as was seen, yet must they be painted as those visions
only, and not otherwise: for if God to show the distinction of the persons in
Trinity, has appeared in the shape of three men, yet is it not lawful to
paint the Trinity so, and although the father in a vision appeared like an
old man, and the holy Ghost like a Dove, yet is it not lawful to paint God
the father so always, nor the holy Ghost, much less to make such monsters
as never appeared in any vision. And therefore God him self warned the people
to remember that he did not appear to them in the mounteyne, when he gave the
law, in any form or shape, because they should not be deceived to make an
image thereafter to represent him withal Deuteronom. 4. verse. 15.

Also Saint Paul preaching to the Athenienses, says, that seeing we are the
generation of God, we ought not to think, that the Godhead is like to gold,
silver, or stone, graven by art, and the invention of man. Act. 17. verse. 29.

And if you should paint the story of the baptism of Christ, how would you
paint the person of the father, which appeared not in any shape, but only a
voice from him was heard? But knowing yt you have to do with wranglers, you
say you would have no image of ye Trinity, but only to show that there be
three several persons in one godhead, and this you think S. Augustine de fide
and symbolo would bear. Ca. 7. but you shall hear his words. Non ideo tamen
quasi humana forma circumscriptu^ etc. Yet must we not therefore think, that
God yt father is circumscribed as it were with an humane shape, yt when we
think of him, a right side or a left side should come into our mind, or even
yt which is said, that the father does sit, we must not think to be done with
bowing of his legs, yt we fall not into that sacrilege wherewith the Apostle
curses them that have changed the glory of the incorruptible God, into the
similitude of a corrupble man. For it is extreme wickedness, yt a Christian man
should place such an image for God in ye temple, much more is it wicked in his
heart where ye temple of God is in deed, if it be cleansed from earthly desire
and error.

This saying of Augustine would suffice any sober man to see, what is his
judgment, for such images of God, or the Trinity, which yet Master Sander,
though not simply, yet in some respect will defend. And the Angels (he says)
may be painted or graven with wings, as they were made in the tabernacle, or as
they appeared to the Prophets and the Apostles. And so you may paint the devils
in such shape as they have appeared to men, but what is this to make images of
them for any use of religion, which God has forbidden?

But now follows another metaphysicall abstraction of the image which is an
accident, from the matter or substance thereof, being stone, wodde, etc. which
is a hard lesson for the common people to learn, and when it is learned, it is
not worth a straw, for any help of religion. The gross image of stone being
made thus a subtle and fantastical image by abstraction, is joined with the
truth, when the fantasy considers whose image it is, and then it is not
possible, but that it must partake some part of the honor of that whereof it
is a sign, being an honorable thing. To pass over this fond abstracting and
joining, which is a toy to mock with an ape, I will come to the conclusion of
honor dew to the sign. I pray you Master Sander, what impossibility is
this, that you talk of us? Must every sign of an honorable thing needs
partake some of the honor dew to the thing? The print of a man's foot in the
snow, is the sign of a man that has trod there, which is an honorable
thing, and perhaps was a King, is this sign worthy of any honor due to a
King? Yea, the Kings picture is on his coin or else where to be seen, is that
picture worthy of any part of the Kings honor? You said before, you would
not have any part of Gods honor given to his image, and how agrees that
saying with this your principle, it is not possible, but every sign of an
honorable thing, must partake some of the honor which is in it?

But you will show us the order, how the image comes to be partaker of
honor, but it were more necessary, you should show us the reason why it
should have honor, then the order how it comes. But let us see the order.
The painting of Christ's death moves the eye, the eye aduertiseth our
common-sense, our common sense informs our fantasy, reason draws out of
fantasy this deep consideration yt this image is true, and profitable to
salvation, and worthy of all honor. This may well be an idolaters reason, but
surely a Christian man faith is instructed by hearing, and not by seeing,
blessed are they (says Christ) which have believed and not seen. Joan. 20 A
Christian man learneth of the Lord by his Prophet Abacuc, Cap. 2. verse. 18. and
19. that a graven image is profitable for nothing, that it is a teacher of
lies, and curses him that says, an image shall teach him: and much more him
that shall say, it is worthy of all honor. By which saying you may see the
impudency of idolaters, which though at the first they seem modest in giving
but an other kind of honor to images, and not that which is given to God,
afterward they come to give images some of that honor which is due to God, and
last of all without all shame, to pronounce that an image of Christ's death is
worthy of all honor. And this must needs be (says he) except Master Jewel
will say this image is not good, yea, no doubt but he would say, such an image
as Master Sander counts worthy of all honor, is abominable.

M. Sander would have ended this Chapter with this wholesome doctrine, but that
M. Jewel after long disputation, concludes that the cognisaunces of the
cross, are bars laid a cross, and no images, which seems strange to him,
because he took an image to be the resemblance of any thing quick or dead. I
had thought such a metaphysicall disputer of images, would have added the
intention of the image maker, to express such a thing necessary to make it an
image of that thing, for else as the tale goes, he may have a great number of
crosses on a thread bare coat of some man, that has never a cross in his
purse. But if by the intent of ye makers, such crosses in flagges, banners,
targets, and coins, were made to the resemblance of Christ's cross, yet are
they no images forbidden, because they be not in any use of religion, and
therefore this is a foolish quarrel, not worth ten strawes laid a cross.

Sander.
THE VIII. OR VII. CHAP.
What an idol is, and that our images be neither idols, nor be used like
idols. Also the difference between an idol and an image. Whereof idolatry
took his name. How the Gentiles did abus^ their images. The objection is
answered concerning the abuses about the images of Christians.

Fulk.
An idol says S. Paul, is nothing in the world, and I say not that an idol
is any thing. 1. Cor. 8. and 10. by which words he means, that an image made
to represent God, although it be in matter wood, stone, gold, silver, yet in
use and signification it is nothing, but a vain fantasy of men brains,
because there is but one God which has no shape or figure, and there is no
profitable use in images devised by men unto salvation, as S. Augustine says,
Lib. 18. contra Fa^st. Man. So Ambrose says, in 1. Cor. 10, Simulachrum vero
nihil est, quia image videtur re^ morta^ae: An idol or feigned image, is in
deed nothing, because it seems to be an image of a dead thing. These places
cited by M. Sander, favor not his distinction, for both Augustine and Ambrose
indifferently call the same an idol, and an image. But Origin and Theodoret in
deed make this difrence; that an idol is of that thing that is not at all,
nor ever was seen in the world, as a picture of a man with a dogs head, an
image is of that thing that is or was, as an image of Cicero, of any other man
that lives. But that this distinction is false, it appears by the Cherubims,
which being heads without bodies, and wings annexed to them, have no
resembrance to any thing that ever was seen in the world, yet are they called
images even of the Papists the^ selves, and not idols. Now he would prove that
the images of the Gentiles were of things that never were, and therefore to be
idols, and the Popish images be of Christ, Peter, and Paul, etc. which were,
therefore they be similitudes, but no idols. But what helps this distinction
of the name, although it were received, when God by his commandment forbad the
making and honoring of the one, as much as the other? So yt this difference is
as much able to defend Popish images, as when a law is made against robbers
and thieves, a thief would labor tooth and nail, to show the difference of
robbery and theft, and then having proved him self to be no robber, would
conclude he were no thief. Yet seeing M. San. has taken pains to gather the
difference between heathenish idols and Popish images in ten points, I will
consider them in yt order. Some idols were feigned monsters, all Popish images
have that essential truth in the world which they represent. This reddition is
false, for ye image of the Trinity, like a man with three faces or three
bodies, has no essential truth. Likewise the image of a child entering into
the mouth of the Virgin Marie, in the story of the Annunciation painted in
diverse places, and namely in the cloister or walking place of Alsoule College
in Oxenford, where I have seen it, is an heretical falsehood. And to omit the
images of a thousand feigned miracles, as S. Francis preaching to the Geese,
etc. The image of S. Christopher the Giant, of S. George with his monstrous
dragon, of S. Sunday, of S. Vncoulber a she Saint with a beard, and such like,
prove that al Popish images have not that essential truth which they
represent.

2 All their idols were without truth concerning to faith and religion, al
Popish images contain such a truth as belongs to Christ's faith and
religion. Beside the answer before confuteth this excuse the commandment of
God being against all similitudes in religion, proves it utterly false and
abominable.

3 Sacrifice was offered to their idolles, whereof it was called idolatry, and
they idolaters, but no sacrifice is offered to Popish idols, but to God alone,
I say, they offered no sacrifice to the stocks, but to the Gods whose images
they were. So do your Papists, offer up the sacrifice of prayer and
thanksgiving, the only sacrifice of Christians, as Justinius says, Decal. cum
Tryph. and pay your vows to your images, and to the Saints whose images you
say they be, therefore by your own definition you are idolaters.

4 Their idols belonged oftentimes to very wicked men* Popish images always to
be blessed Saints. You shall have much to do to prove Francis, Dominike,
Dunstane, Becket, and such like whose images you worship, to be blessed
Saints. Where also I note that Francis is painted with the print of Christ's
five wounds, which is an horrible blasphemy.

5 Some of the Gentiles professed them selves to adore ye wood or stone, you
neither profess nor teach any such thing, but the contrary. To admit so many
thousands of ignorant people, as honored the very wood and stones of your
images, even you your selves allow this verse, Lignunque crucis venorabile
adorant. They adore the venerable wood of the cross, and in the next Chapter
you allow the pieces of a brazen image worthy of some honor.

6 Some of the Gentiles thought some privy godhead or power to be contained in
their images, you teach they be only representations. So did they, but what
mean some of you, to take so long pilgrimages to Walsingham, Ipswich, Boston,
yea to Campostella in Spain, and to Peter and Paul at Rome, if you thought not
some power to be in those images, more then in the images of the same persons
at home?

7 The wisest of the Gentiles (say you) adored by their images, insensible
creatures, and by them false Gods: you adore by your images no unreasonable
creature, but only blessed souls, and one God. First I say, you misreport the
wisest of ye Gentiles, for they defended their idolatry, by saying they
worshipped in those images diuer^ Gods, not meaning yt they were so, but yt
they worshipped diverse virtues of one God, as in Minerua the wisdom of God, in
Mars the strength of God, in Ceres the liberality of God, etc. Augu. In Psalm.
96. Sed existit nescio quis disputator, etc. But there is a certain disputer I
wot not who, which thought himself to be learned and says: I do not worship
that stone, nor that image, which is without sense: for your prophet could not
know that they have eyes and see not, and to be ignorant that that image has
no life, yt yet neither sees with eyes, nor hears with ears. Therefore I
do not worship that, but I adore that which I see, and serve him whom I see
not. Who is he? The God which being invisible is president of that image. By
this means yielding a reason of their images, they seem to themselves to be
eloquent, because they worship not idols, and worship devils. They answer, we
worship not evil spirits, but even the Angels whom you so call do we
worship, the virtues of the great God, and the ministers of the great God. I
would you would worship them, you should easily learn, of them not to worship
them. Thus Augustine, in which saying, beside that he shows what defense the
Heathen had for their idolatry, he shows that the true worship of Angels is
not to worship them by images or otherwise, but only to learn of them not to
worship them, but God alone. But how can M. Sander say they adore no
unreasonable creature by their images, when they adore the image of the cross,
which was both an unreasonable an insensible creature? And how does he worship
one God more then this Heathen man, whose feigned excuse S. Augustine reports?

8 The devils ruled the images of the Gentiles, giving oracles out of them,
etc. but the faith of Papists which endeavoring to keep Gods commandementes,
do set up images to a good end, so beautifieth their work and worship, that it
is not possible for the devil to abuse them. If we believe that the devil gave
oracle out of the Heathnish idols, and not rather that they were feigned by the
subtlety of men: we may likewise think, that the devil gave answers out of
Popish images, which are likewise said to have spoken, as that Roode in
Dunstones time to decide the controversy for marriage of Priests, and many
other feigned in the Books of Popish miracles. Secondly, where heard the
Papists out of Gods words, this faith of setting up Images? Thirdly how do
they endeavor to keep Gods commandment in setting up of idols, when they
break a manifest commandment of God, which forbids images to be
worshipped?

9 The devils coueted to maintain their idols. The same covet to overthrow
Popish images. No verily, they love Popish images, by which God is dishonored,
as well as they did love Heathenish images. As for ye tale of the devils
persuading Julian the Apostata to break ye image of Christ at Paneade, which
is not like to have continued unto his days, if we receive it, which was
written by no writer of his time, nor an hundredth years after, it proves no
hatred that ye devil had of images, but of Christ, and might be a subtle
practice of his to bring the Christians with fond emulation to esteem such a
thing more then it was worthy because their enemy has defaced it.

10 Their idols were dedicated to an Heathenish purpose, Popish images to a
virtuous intent. But how can that be a virtuous intent, which is contrary to
Gods commandment?

Last of all he will answer our objection, that Popish images have been
abused in making their eyes to move, and their lips to wagge, etc. First he
says, these were but abuses of particular men, where ye Bishop was a sleep,
but not allowed in the Church, yea, the Gospel has been abused. Gods curse
light of that comparison, which matcheth images with the Gospel. But were al
Bishops high and low in your Church so sound a sleep, that not one could see
these horrible abuses to punish them? For what one example can be brought, of
any one among so many, that has been punished by the Papists, for such
detestable abuse? Secondly he answers, these abuses are committed by men not
yet everlastingly condemned, and not by devils, which have their torments
increased, when they aproch to such holy things as they have no power of. As
though wicked men could work such things, but by the devils procurement, who
will no more be afraid to abuse an image, then to persuade a man to abuse it,
which deserves both one punishment. Thirdly if such practisers of abuse lived
in Luthers time, they commonly became runnagates, with the first, if any such
have repented and confesses their wicked facts, it is to your shame, M. Sa.
and not to ours, for they were yours, when they did such things. To conclude,
I wish the Reader to consider, how vain and foolish the whole scope of this
Chapter of M. Sanders book is, to show the difference of idols and images in
the second commandment, when God wrote not the same in Greek, out of which
tongue this supposed difference is derived, but in Hebrew: and even the common
Latin translation, which the Papists do follow, calls that which the
Greeks term (...) an idol, by ye name of Sculptile a graven image: and when
he has made his difference as far a sunder as he can, all images are as well
forbidden in that commandment, as idols in any service of God or use of
religion.

THE IX. OR VIII. CHAP.
That it is no idolatry to give convenient worship to some creatures, and
whether images be creatures or no. Also in one argument of M. Jewels 4. great
faults are found, that a creature may be set up to be honored. That an image
is rather a workmanship then a creature. That the Kings garment on his back
is honored. Sander.


M. Harding had confessed, that images by a consequent might be worshipped, The
Bish. of Sarum said, Fulk.
An image is a creature and no God. And to honor a creature in that sort (as
it is set up to the end to be worshipped although not specially to that end) is
idolatry, therefore by Master Hardings own confession, images are set up to
be used to idolatry. This is the argument, that has four as great faults in
it, as there be knots in a rush. The first fault is, that he puts Idolum in
steed of Imago. The second that he puts Doulia in steed of L^triae. The
third fault is, that he presupposes, that we may set up no creature to the
intent that it may be any ways honored. The last fault, that he affirms an
image to be a creature. The first and second faults are falsely found, for he
names neither Idolu^, nor Latria, but this compound word idolatry, and
makes this proposition. To honor a creature in that forte, etc. is idolatry.
Meaning whether the creature be an image, or no image, As to worship the Sun,
or ye Moon is idolatry which be creatures, and so termed by all learned men,
and even by the Papists themselves, which call the worshipping of an
unconsecrated host, idolatry. The third fault is also a forged quarrel, for
he does not presuppose, that we may set up no creature to be worshipped, but
he says, to honor a creature in that sort, that is, with religious worship
as it is set up to be worshipped is idolatry. And therefore M. Sanders
imagination of a king set up in his throne, to be honored, of certain men
that had rebelled against him, is foolish and ridiculous. For the Bishop in
his proposition, speaks of religious worship which is proper only to God,
and not of civil honor. The fourth fault also, is a fond quarrelling, or
rather an ungodly denying of an image to be a creature. For by this means, he
makes a third thing existent in ye world. that is neither God the creator,
nor a creature, but he says it is a manufacture, and not a creature, like as
he said before, that their worshipping of Images is not idolatry but image
douly, that is serving of images, which is all one as if a man would say, a
horse is a beast, therefore it is not a substance. So he may deny a man to be a
creature because he is a geniture, that is a thing begotten. But perhaps he
will allow all things made of God or nature to be creatures, but nothing made
of man, so yt a table, or chair, a sword, etc. are no creatures, because they
are made with men's hands. What then will he call a tree, that is graffed with
men's hands, and grows by nature also? Those he high points of Divinity I
promise you.

But to ye purpose, there is neither substance nor form of any thing in the
world but it is a creature, therefore both in respect of the matter and
fashion, an Image is a creature, except you will say with the Master of the
sentences. Lib. 3. did. 37. that the form of an Image in that it is set up to
be worshipped, is no creature, but a peruersion of a creature, as all sin is.
And least you should take exceptions to my tra^slating of Idolum for an Image,
he speaks of the form of a man in Idolo, which is no feigned thing, but a
thing of truth.

But to cut of all this vain babbling, that an Image is no creature, the
Apostle S. Paul speaking of the Images of the Gentiles, by which they turned
the glory of God into the similitude of ye Image of a mortal man etc. calls
Images creaturs, And they served the creature more then the Creator, which is
to be blessed for ever. Romans 1. verse. 23. and 25.

But he faineth an objection of M. Iewelles, that an Image is less then a
creature, and therefore it deserves less honor then a creature: Whereas M.
Jewel said, an Image is a creature. But he answers his own objection, that
because an Image is able to stir us up to a virtuous and good remembrance, and
to provoke us to virtue, it is worthy of greater honor then a creature. As
though we ought not by any immediate creature of god, to be stirred up to good
remembraunces, and provoked to virtue, rather then by an unprofitable, dead,
and dumb Image. And who will grant him, that an Image is able to stir us up
to goodness, or to provoke us to virtue, when an Image, (as the scripture
says) is good for nothing. Abacuc. 2. But admit that men by the sight of an
Image, take occasion of good remembrance, the Image in this case is no agent,
and therefore worthy of no honor. A man seeinge the gallows, which is a
sign of execution of Justice, is moved to remember Justice, which is a good
remembrance, and is thereby provoked to abstain from vice and to live
virtuously, is the gallows therefore worthy of honor? I think not, because
the gallows is no agent or doer in those good things, but only the mind of
man that takes occasion of that he sees. No more does an image, and
therefore no more worthy of honor. But Augustine says, De verb. Dom. Ser. 58
Si quis nostrum, etc. If any of us should find the kings purple or crown
lying a side, would he go about to worship them? But when the king has them
on him, he runs in danger of death, if any man contemn to worship them
together with the king. So says M.S. the Image is to be honored in respect of
the truth, whose similitude it bears. A wise similitude. First he compares
civil worship with religious worship, as he does every where. Secondly that
which is reverenced necessarily, because it is annexed with an honorable
thing, with yt which is not annexed, for God may be worshipped without images,
the king cannot be worshipped with out his robes reserving humane and natural
honestye. Thirdly, that which is accidentally worshipped, as the kings crown,
his purple, etc. Because the king wearinge them is worshipped, is alleged to
prove that a proper worship is due to images, distinct from the worship due to
the pattern or sampler. But of religious worship, Augustine says: Nihil omnino
colendum est, totumque abijciendum quicquid mortalibus ^culis cernitur,
quicquid vllus sensus attingit. Nothing is to be worshipped at all, and all
that is to be cast away, whatsoever is seen with mortal eyes, what soever any
sense does atteine. And to take away all cauilling, he adds in his
Retractatio^s, quicquid mortalis corporis vllus sensus attingit* est enim
sensus and mensis. Whatsoever any sense of the mortal body does atteine, for
there is a sense of the mind, lib. Retr. 1. cap. I. Likewise that the signs
are to be worshipped, for that they signify, he says it is a madness, in
ps. 101. Talis est enim dementia hominum quasi adorandum aliquid dicatur, cum
decitur, Sol-Christum significa^. Adora ergo and petram quia Christum
significat. Such is the madness of men, as though it were said that any such
thing were to be worshipped when it is said: The sun signifies Christ,
then worship a rock also because the rock signifies Christ. Last of all,
M. Sander ^aith, supposinge an image to be less then a creature, the baser it
is, the less danger there is that it should be worshipped as God, as
Chrysostom says, therefore men are called in scripture the sons and Images
of God, and not Angels, because there is less danger in worshipping men for
their baseness, tha^ Angels for their excellency. But he might conclude, the
base^ Images are, the more horrible sin is the worshippinge of them. For the
baseness of men has not kept them from being worshipped with religious
honor, neither has the vileness of Images defended them from being honored
with Gods honor. For the corruption and inclination of man's nature unto
Idolatry is so great, that nothing is so vile or ridiculous, but it has been
honored as God. And therefore Augustine truly says in ps. 113, Ducit enim
and affectu quodam infirmo rapit infirma corda mortalium formae similitudo, et
membrorum imitata compago. For the similitude of shape, and the counterfetted
composition of lymmes, does lead, and with a certain weak and sick
affection does rauishe the weak hearts of mortal men. Again, Quis autem
ador^^, vel orat intuen^ ^imulachrum, qui non sic afficitur vt ab eo se
exandiri putet, ac ab eo sibi praestari quod desiderat speret? For who does
worship or pray, beholdinge an Image, which is not so affected, that he
thinks he is heard of it, and hops that shall be performed by it which
he desires. Examine your popish worshippinge of Images by this saying of
Augustine: Master Sander, and either say he speaks untruly, or confess
that your Image-Douly is no better then Idolatry. But Augustine proceeds,
aunsweringe the objection, that they are turned to be dead stocks, without
sense. Plus valent simulachra ad curnandam infelicen^ an^mam, quod as habent,
quod oculos habent, nar^s habent, manus habent, pedes habent, quam ad
corrigandam, qood non loquentur, non videbunt, non audient, non ^dorabunt, non
contrectabunt, non ambulabunt. Images prevail more to bow down or make
crooked the unhappy soul, because they have a mouth, they have eyes, they
have a nose, they have hands, and they have feet: then to refourme it, or
make it straight, that they shall not speak, they shall not see, they shall
not hear, they shall not smell, they shall not handle, they shall not walk.
Go your ways now M. Sander, and say that there is no danger, lest Images
should be abused to rob God of his honor, because of the baseness of their
form which is less then a creature, and they be as it pleases you to call
them manufactures.

Sander.
THE X. OR IX. CHAP.
Master Iewelles iugling is detected concerning the antiquity and invention of
images, and specially his manifest corrupting of Eusebius in that argument.
Also an image set up in the honor of Christ above fifteen hundredth years
past. The images of Peter and Paul were seen of Eusebius. M. Jewel
falsifieth Eusebius by leaving out, adding to false la^^ing and false
englishing. The virginity of Nunner. The chair of S. James had in reverence in
the premitiue church. The pieces of Christ's image which Iulianus the
runnagate brake, were preserved of the Christians above 12. hundredth years past.

Fulk.
Although God commanded the two Cherubes to be made and let in the Tabernacle,
yet the invention of Images is not to be ascribed to God, for as Epiphanius
testifies, There the father of Abraham being a worshipper of false gods, was
a maker of Images long before. And because you trifle M. Sander, with your
distinction of Idols and Images, telling M. Jewel they are Idol^^ or wanton
pictures, and not the Images of holy men, whereof the book of Wisdom, S.
Cyprian, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, Lactantius, and S. Athanatius do speak,
when they say the invention of Idols or Images came of the devil: may it
please your learned wisdom to understand, that Epiphanius speakinge of the
Images of the blessed "virgin Mary, whom you call your Lady says: Vnde non est
simulachrisicum hoc studium and diabolicus conatus? How is not this desire of
making images also a deuillishe purpose? prtextu enim iustitiae semper subient
hominum mentem diabolus, mortalem naturam in hominum oculis deificans, stanias
humanas imaginis pre se ferentei per artium varietate^ expressit. Et mortus
quidem sunt qui adorantur, ipsi vero imagines quae nunque v^xerun^, neque enim
mortuae esse possunt quae nunque vixerunt adorandas introducunt. Cont.
Collyridianos H. 79. For the devil always entering into the mind of men under
color of righteousness, deifiing the mortal nature in the eyes of men, has
expressed by variety of arts, images representing the similitude of men. And
they truly which are worshipped are dead, but they bring in to be worshipped
Images, which never lived, for they cannot be dead which never lived. The
judgment of other fathers shall be added in places convenient. But where as you
cavil that every image is not an idol, because the son of God is the image
of God, whom we would not call an Idol, you show your frowardness rather,
then defend your distinction. For although in the nature of the word (...)
there be no such difference but it may be called truly an image, yet the
horrible abuse of images to the dishonor of God, has caused, that of Godly
writers it is taken in the evil part, whereas the word is indifferent. Even
as (...) being ye same that (...), which is a King, which through cruelty of
Kings, came to be an odious name of a tyrant. So the names of Papa which
sometime signified a bishop, and Missa the communion, for the wickedness of
the Pope of Rome, and of the Popish Mass, are now abhorred of all true
Christians. As for the images which Christ sent to Augarus or Algarus, and the
Veronica of Rome, with the images made by Nicodemus, S. Luke, and showed by
Siluester to Constantinus, testified by Damascen, the counterfeit Athanatius,
Theodorus, the second Council of Nice, Nicephorus and Metaphrastes, they are
good stuff for Legenda aurea, and as M. Sanders will not stay in them, because
he knows in his conscience they be forged fables, so I will let them pass
also, and stand upon the credit of their authors.

But now we come to ye famous image of the woman which had the bloody issue,
and of Christ set up on high before her door, on a pillar, with an herb that
grew under it, which when it touched the hemme of the garment of the image of
Christ, it healed all diseases.

This M. Jewel will not call a fable (says he) but he himself adds fables to
that which is written of Eusebius, as first, that it was set up by the woman,
which is unlike, that a poor woman which (as the Gospel teaches) had wasted
all her goods upon physicians Mark. 5. could be able to set up such a costly
image of Brass upon a pillar. Secondly, it is not like, she would have set
up her own image. Thirdly Eusebius says it was set up by other men. And
therefore the report of Theophylact which lived a thousand years after, is of
small credit. Secondly he says that Eusebius saw this image, which is not to
be proved by any word he speaks, although he says that he had seen other
images of Christ, of Peter and of Paul. But now to examine these
falsifications pretended. First he charge the bishop with false Latining and
worse Englishing of this greek following, (...). The bishopps latin is: Hoc
mirum est veteres Ethnicos beneficio affectos a seruatore nostro, ista fecisse,
his english this: It is no marvel that the Heathens receiving such benifites
of our Savior, did these things. Here says he (...), Olim, in times past,
is left out in the latin, which is false, for it is included in the word
veteres. In deed in the english by the printers fault it is omitted. M. Sander
would justify the bold and false translation of Ruffinus, which turns
these words (...), qui ex Gentilibus crediderant: Such of the Gentiles as had
believed. Where he manifestly adds the word crediderant which is not in
Eusebius.

Wherein you may see the equity of Master Sanders, which finds fault with
Master Jewel for leaving out that which he does not omit, and justifies
Ruffinus which does openly add to the text. But for all his trifling about
words, he shows him self ignorant of the phrase: for when he has
wrangled as much as he can, the Latin of the Greek, word for word is this:
Nec mirum est eos ex Gentibus qui olim beneficio affecti sunt a seruatore
nostro ista fecisse. And it is no marvel that those of the Gentiles which of
old time were benefited by our Savior Christ, have done these things.

Now Master Sander like a falsifier, rendeth these words asunder, and will
have all that matter to stand in these words: (...) which he says must
needs signify those which in times past had been Gentiles, but after had
believed, which words if he wring until the blood come forth, yet can he
not make such a signification of them. For if Eusebius had meant so, he would
have added (...), or (...), or some words of like effect. Secondly, he would
rather have said (...) then (...), those that sometime were Gentiles, then
those that of old time were Gentiles, but that in the word (...), of old
time, he had relation unto the time of Christ. Thirdly as master Sander
himself afterward striving for the Aduerbe (...), vnchaungeablye, to be
joined with the Participle shows himself a good Grammarian: So here dividing
the Aduerbe (...), from the Participle (...), and joining it with nothing,
shows himself to be a malicious wrangler, and a shameless falsifier.

Now where he says, it is not like to be true, that Christ bestowed any
great cure upon those, who should have tarryed still Heathens, because he
more willingly cured the soul then the body: I answer, the chief end of
his cures, was not for the private benefit of them that were cured, but to
show himself to all men, to be the son of God, the true physician of body
and soul. But M. Sander replieth, though some were unkind, as the 9. Lepers
Luke. 17. yea, some were careless of him, as the man that had lain 38. years
in the porche, and the blind man, until he instucted them by his word, John.
5. and 9. yet those which did set up images in his honor, were not unkind. I
answer, they thought to satisfye them selves with a vain, superstitious, and
heathenishe kind of remuneration.

Thirdly he says, with Theophylact a late writer, that this woman which was
faithful did set up this image, but that I have proved before to be neither
true, nor like to be true.

But this is not all Master Jewels falshod (says he) for he says
moreover: Nam and Apostolorum Pauli and Petri, and ipsius Christi imagines
coloribus ductas and seruatas vidimus. For we have seen the images of Paul
and Peter, and of Christ drawn in colors and preserved. Here first beside
the lack of eius, his, which he confesses to be of no importance, he misseth
(...) et, which he will needs have to signify also. What quarrelling merchant
is this? here is et thrice, yet none of them will serve his turn, because the
first is not translated, also, that it might be thought that Eusebius had
seen the former image of brass. But seeing et is twice put, once before
Apostolorum, and then before ipsius Christi, by judgment of all English
Grammarians it may truly be translated thus: For we have seen the images
drawn in colors and preserved, both of his Apostles Paul and Peter, and also
of Christ him self. Again, (...) may be translated even of his Apostles Paul
and Peter.

What Empire has Master Sander in Grammar, that (...) may signifye nothing but
also: when it has three significations beside, and, both, even. But it
pleases Master Sander, that Eusebius which lived about three hundredth years
after Christ, saw painted images of Christ himself and of his Apostles, yea,
but in the hands of Heathen men, or men of Heathenish superstition, or else
perhaps among the Gnostikes and Carpocratites heretics. For what one word of
commendation does he bestow upon them? He saw them in deed, but if they had
been profitable for Christianity, why did he not make the like, or cause them
to be made in his church of Caesarea? What cause have you hitherto (M. Sander)
to cry out, O the deceit of M. Jewel? seeing for any thing you have showed, it
is true which he says: The Phaeniciens being Heathens, made these images in
the honor of Christ, and of his Apostles, only of their heathenish and vain
superstition. But you will show a further falshoode in M. Jewel, and that
still in one story, for he proceeds: Et credibile est, priscos illos homines
nondum relicta auita superstition^* adhunc modum consueuisse colere illos
ethnica consuetudine tanquam seruatores. And it may well be thought, that men
in old times being not yet removed from the superstition of their fathers,
used after this sort to worship them by an heathenish custom as their
saviors. That M. Jewel meant no fraud in, this translation, it is manifest by
that which M. Sander confesses, that he set the Greek words by the side of
his book, which are these, (...). that is, as it is like, that those ancient
men vnchangably after this manner were accustomed to honor them as Saviors by
an heathenish custom used among them. This I have translated word for word,
and what difference is there in sense from M. Jewels translation, but that
nothing of his can please M. San. for first he makes one quarrel, yt (...)
signifies vnchangably, or without change, which M. Jewel has turned, not yet
being removed from the superstition of their fathers. But Ruffinus also
translateth it, ex gentili consuetudine indifferenter, of an heathenish custom
indifferently, and M. San. himself afterward confesses, that it is an
heathenish custom to honor men with setting up their images. And if it was
superstitious in the heathen, therefore it was superstitious in these
Christians which followed the heathenish custom, (...) without any change.
Secondly he says, (...), is spightfully Englished, their saviors. And why so,
I pray you* What other thing does the word signify, but a Savior of whole or
part, of body or soul. Except you will say, that among the Heathen, Castor and
Pollux were called (...) in the plural number, but it was for that they were
supposed to be saviors or preseruers of Mariners, which declares in what
sense Eusebius says, these men worshipped them without change, by an
heathenish custom (...) even as they worship saviors for example, such and
so as they called Castor and Pollux. I will not therefore stick with you, but
that those men of whom Eusebius speaks in this last sentence, were such as
professed some l^ue of Christ and Christianity, but yet after an heathenish
manner. Alexander the Emperor worshipped the image of Christ in his Chapel
among his other idols. Carpocrates the heretic made the images of Jesus and
Paul, Homer and Pythagoras, and did cense them with incense, and worship them.
Epiph. lib. 1. Tom. 2. in prefat. The Gnostike heretics had even such images
of Christ painted in colors as Eusebius speaks of, even as they had the
images of Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle. Epher. 27. which heretics answer
directly to the words of Eusebius, that they made and worshipped the images of
Christ and his Apostles, without change, even as they made the images of
Heathen men, whom they had in estimation. Again, S. August. De moribus
Ecclesiae Catholicae cap. 34. speaks of such worshippers of relics and
pictures even in his time, which yet the Catholic Church did not allow.
Nolite mihi colligere professores nominis Christiani, neque professionis suae
vim aut scientes aut exhibentes. Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel
in ipsa vera religione superstitiosi sunt vel ita libidinibus dediti, vt obliti
sint quid promisserint Deo. Noui multos esse sepulchrorum and picturarum
adoratores: noui multos esse qui luxuriosissime super mortuos bibant, and
epulas (...) laueribus exhibentes, super sepultos seipsos sepeliant, and
voracitates ebrietatesque suas deputent religioni. Gather not me together such
professors of ye Christian name, as either know, not or show not the virtue
of their profession. Seek not up the multitude of unskillful men, which even
in true religion it self are superstitious, or else so given to filthy
lusts, that they have forgotten what they have promised to God. I know there
be many worshippers of tombs and pictures: I know there be many which most
riotously drink over the dead, and making banquets for the dead bodies, bury
them selves upon the buried bodies, and account their gluttonies and
drunkenness to be religion. Such Christians they might be, of whom Eusebius
speaks. But M. San. confessing this manner of honoring by images, to be an
heathenish custom, does also affirm, that it was a laudable custom, saying,
that it was but pusillanimitie, and scrupulositie in the Jews, that they durst
make no images. So that to obey the commandment of God, is counted of him for
a vice, and it is a great virtue of magnanimity, to be bold to do that which
God has forbidden. But what reason has he? Forsooth, all things that the
heathens used, were not evil. Sacrifice was not evil, though the heathen did
offer sacrifice to devils. Virginity of Nuns, for so it pleases him to
translate Sanctiomonialium in Augustine, although there were no Popish names in
his time, is not evil, because the heathen had their vestall Virgins. So that
by his Logike, there is one reason of things good and lawful, if they be well
used, as sacrifice and virginity, and things simply forbidden, as making and
worshipping of images in religion.

But now we are come to S. James Chapter, which not heathen men, but the
brethren at Jerusalem, and as Ruffinus translateth it, the Bishops in
succession did preserve and had in estimation, his words following imediately
after the sentence last entreated of, are these. (...).

For the brethren there by succession having in estimation the Chair of James
the Apostle that is kept unto this time (which James was the first that
received ye charge of the Church of Jerusalem of our Savior him self, and of
the Apostles, whom also the holy scriptures do show to have been called the
brother of Christ) do evidently show unto all men, in what manner both those
that were in the old time, and those that be even till our days, have
maintained, and yet do maintain a worthy reverence and worship of holy men
for their godliness sake. Here M. Sander scoffeth, rayleth, braggeth, and all
about the Moon shine in the water. Know you not Master Jewel (says he) that
this word (...), For, gives a reason of that which went before? What was
that? That old men tarrying in superstition, did set up images, whereof the
reason follows, because the brethren at Jerusalem do honor the chair of S.
James. Then he cries out, O cursed lying spirit, etc. At length he concludes,
that it is manifest, that Eusebius allows and stoutly defends the honor
that is given to Saints by their images and relics. See what a stout champion
Master Sander will make Eusebius to be for images and relics. But to return
to your (...), for, Master Sander, is there no remendie but either images must
be allowed, or this connection be foolish? May (...), for, give a reason of
nothing but as you will have it? Why may it not rather give a reason? why he
counts that an heathenish custom of honoring Christ and his Apostles by
making their images, because the faithful brethren at Jerusalem, even from
the time of Saint James, not making an image of him, but keeping his chair,
that he used to sit in, as a monument, declare evidently, what manner of
reverence has been given by true Christians from the beginning to this day,
unto holy me^? that is, to have them in remembrance without superstition and
idolatry, but not by making of their images. For except this Antithesis be
understood, it were in deed a folish connection, and as evil an argument, to
prove that they which made images of Christ and his apostles after ye heathnish
custom, did well, because the Christians at Jerusalem kept the chair of S.
James, and had it in estimation. So that the matter being well considered the
conjunction is wiser then Master S. can understand for all his outcries and
amplifications.

To that which the Bishop says this image being in the street, proves not
the setting up of Images in the Church, he answers, there were other
images which Eusebius saw, and where should he see them, but in the Church
in Constantine his time? I have showed before where he might see them, among
the Heathens and Heretics. And that he saw none in the Church, appears in
the Panaegynt ad Paulin. Tyr. Epu^, Lib. 10. Cap. 4. where a godly Church is
described in every small part and ornament of it, yet no image at all spoken
of, which should not have been omitted if it had been seen there, especially
being such necessary ornaments of Churches as the Papists account them.

But Iulianus ye runnagate (says he) out of the tripertite history. Lib. 6.
Cap. 41. brake that Image, and the Christians afterward gathered up the pieces
and laid them in a Church. If this be not giving of honor to Christ's
images, he cannot tell what is honoring of Images. Yes M. Sander, to set
candels before them, to kneel to them, to pray to them, to kiss them, to
offer to them, to make vows to them, to ascribe health to them, etc. These are
honoring of images used of Papists, other manner of honoring then those
Christians are said to have used. For if it be credible, that the pieces of
brass lay in the street until Iulianus was dead, that they might be gathered
up of the Christians, and were not molten to none other use by the Paganes, yet
why did not the Christians rather melt them and make them a new image, then lay
them up in the Church? But M. Jewel is charged to speak if he dare, what he
would do, if he chanced to come into the same Church, where the image of
Christ were kept, whether he would follow Iulianus in breaking it, rather then
the Christians in reserving it.

He is now at rest with God, having fought a good fight, fulfilled his course,
and kept the faith, waiting for the crown of righteousness which shall be given
him by God the righteous judge in that day, so that he can make M. Sander none
answer, but thus I think he would have resolved his question, when he lived in
this world. He would neither follow the spightfull malice of Julian, nor the
superstitious emulation of those Christians, but do with it as it became a
Christian man according to Gods commandment, and his calling. And for my
part, M. Sander I dare speak unto you what I think. I am one which esteem
monuments, as much as any one poor man of my degree. In so much yt a wise man
perhaps might say unto me. Insanis veteres statuas Damasippus emende. And
therefore if I had in my private possession such images of Christ, Peter and
Paul, as Eusebius did see, and that I were assured they were the true
counterfets of their bodies or countenances as those which he did see were
supposed to be. I would so esteem them, as I do the Images of Caesar,
Pompeius, Tulla, and such like, and peradventure for the rareness, much more,
but not a pin the more in respect of religion. For I do so honor ancient
images, that I make as great account of a piece of Nero, or Heliogabalus, as I
do of Constantius, and Theodosius. But if I had authority of a Church, in which
were an image of pure gold representing the whole stature, countenance, and
apparel of Christ as he walked upon the earth, which were abused to idolatry,
as your Popish images have been, and are in some places unto this day, I would
rather break it in pieces by the example of Ezechias, and cast it into the
deep sea, then either I would suffer idolatry to be committed unto it, or
preserve it to be a snare to them that lived after me to run a whoring after
it. But as for your evil favored blocks and stones, which have none other
shape or name but such as the idol of the workemans brain has given them, and
being set up to be worshipped, I would no more esteem them, then the mire in
the street, or that which is more vile, although you cry until you be
hoarse, they are the holy images of Christ, of the blessed Trinity, of Saint
Peter, and S. Paul. For to a Christian man they are abomination.

THE XI. or X. CHAP.
That by the law of nature, honor is due to the images and monuments of
honorable personages. And by what means that may be known. Also that the law
of nature stands always immutable, how the law of nature may be known. Seven
causes of honoring artificial images. God preferred images before only sounds
of words. The art of making images is good. All nations honored Images that
were worthy of honor. The image breakers are ashamed to confess that they
break Christ's images. The doctrine of the Catholics concerning Images.
Master Jewels contrary doctrine to the same. Sander.


The holy Ghost by Saint Paul, Fulk.
has well given us warning: saying: Take heed that no man spoil you through
philosophy, and vain deceit, according to the tradition of men, and not
according to Jesus Christ. Col. 2. ver. 8. and by the same sentence he has
also taught us, how we should esteem all that doctrine that is commended unto
us without the word of God, under what glorious and plausible title so ever,
namely for vain deceitfulness. By which rule when we examine this Chapter of
Master Sanders book, swelling with such a proud title, of the Law of
nature, we do plainly perceive, that it is nothing else but a deceiptful
vanity: with vain sound of words and frivolous reasons, to go about to
make us think, that God has written one law in nature, and a clean contrary
to that, in his word and holy scriptures.

The honoring of images in case of religion, being expressly forbidden by
the law of God written, and the same an hundredth times repeated by the
Prophets and Apostles, is the eternal will of God, and has nothing in nature
uncorrupted, which is the ordinance of God contrary unto it. And therefore I
marvel what nature is, in Master Sanders judgment, whose law he defends
to be never changed, although God has ruled his people in diverse manners,
sometime by inspiration, sometime by outward voice, custom and tradition,
sometime by written letter of the Law, last of all by writing his own law of
grace and spirit in their hearts. I pass over that he calls the last, Gods
own law, as though the rest were but borrowed, but what is that unchangeable
law of nature, but Gods eternal law: if that be not changed by the law
written in letters, then surely the law of nature abhors worshipping of
images in religion, which the law written forbids. Thus his first
exposition overthrows all the purpose of his Chapter. Now to the second. He
has two special grounds to help us to find out what the law of nature is
in any case. The one is the judgment of right and sound reason, the other is
ye practice of all nations. But where shall we find sound reason in any
natural man? When the light shines in darkness and the darkness
comprehends it not Joan. 1. and the natural man understands not those
things that be of the spirit of God. 1. Cor. 2. ver. 14. and where shall we
find the practice of all nations according to the law of nature, when they
have all declined and gone astray, there is not one that does good, no not one.
To. 3. Psalm. 13. Wherefore there are other two most certain infallible rules,
whereby the law of nature in any case may be found out and known, namely the
word of God, and the spirit of God, which give mutual testimony one to the
other, the word and spirit of God being contrary to the worshipping of
Images: The Lord saying in the first table of religion, Thou shall not fall
down to them nor worship them: it is manifest, that worshipping of images, is
contrary to the Law of nature. So that you see the foundation of this
building already subverted, by which you may conjecture, how long it is
possible for the house to stand after it.

For what soever he iangleth of the internal conceptions of the mind,
improperly and metaphorically called images, and comparing artificial images
unto them, it is nothing else, but vain deceiptfulnesse to be contemned and
hissed out, not only of all Christian Churches of every faithful man, but
also out of all schools of Divinity, by all them that are learned as well in
the scriptures of God, as in human phylosophie. But that you may see what
soundness there is in his doctrine, thus he weaueth his copwebbe. One tells
him that Christ died only to save man from everlasting pains: he hearing and
believing this, straight conceiueth Christ dying for him, and is moved to love
him. Secondly he is much delighted with the Image which he conceived in his
mind of Christ dying for him, and loves that also. Thirdly, he loves and
honors him that told him this matter, as a bringer of good tydinges. So
here be three kinds of honor, the chief to Christ the thing it self, the
second to the inward conception or Image of him in his mind, the last is to
the reporter.

And here you have a pattern of popish profane divinity, for here is no love
nor honor due to the spirit of God, who only must open his heart, to receive
such tidings profitably: nor to the word of God, which must be the warrant of
this tydinges to be true: nor to faith, which applying these tydinges to his
own salvation, is the root of all virtuous obedience, love, honor and
thankfulness in him. But even as he considers of any profane report, so
does he consider of this glad tidings of the gospel and not otherwise. But to
proceed of this wise distribution of three fold honor, he infers seven
causes of honoring artificial Images. The first is, that it bears the
office of a reporter, and therefore it must needs have a reward of honor. A
slow messenger, and a dumb reporter, which can neither go of this errande,
nor tell his tale. But what skilleth it (says Master Sander) whether I learn
by hearing or by seeing? For Basil says, yt both eloquent orators and
cunninge paynters, the one with their tongue, the other with their pensil, have
set forth valiant acts done in war, and stirred up many to fortitude. Hom. in
40. martyr. But it skilleth us to learn by hearing of Gods word, because faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. verse. 17. and they are blessed which believe
without seeing, Ioh. 20. verse. 29. Howsoever it skilleth papists, and howsoever
all other things except religion and faith may be learned. As for ye reporter
of the glad tidings of ye gospel, he is in deed worthy of honor, if he do his
message truly, willingly and diligently, but it is honor of the second table
and not of the first, that pertains to him. And except there be in him love
to God and his neighbor, he is worthy of no honor, although he do the message.
Therefore if the Image were as a reporter* he could have but honor of the
second table, which is of charity and not of religion. But seeing there is in
an image neither love, will, diligence, truth, for which causes a reporter is
loved and cherished, neither is an image cause of any thing, there is no love
honor or worship due unto it.

The second cause of honoring artificial images is, for that it does speedily,
and most conveniently inform our inward imagination, and therefore is more to
be honored, the^ any orator. For the eye being the principal sense, is most
ready to instruct the mind, and therefore a painted image is a more easy and
lively way to enstruct us, then any orator. In deed if faith were a register of
visible things, as it is of invisible things, Heb. 11. verse. 1.7. the sense of
seeing, were a more easy, speedy and convenient way of instructing, then by
hearing, but yet images were no more to be honored, then the sound of words is
now to be worshipped, when we hear the gospel preached. But God (says he)
has joined visible signs to his word, as in the proclaiming of the law, yea
sir, but God showed not there the image of any thing, to teach them thereby,
but expressly forbad the use of them, in his religion and service. But if God
gave visible words, as he does his sacraments, it is not therefore lawful
for men to make images, as visible teachers, which God has forefended. There
is therefore hitherto no natural cause of the honoring of images.

The third cause of honoring of Images, is, because they be naturally knit
and joined to the truth, concerning their shape and representation: as the
reporter, if he be an Ethnike or Jew, he is joined to Christ in moral
honesty and natural love of truth: if he be baptized, much more as a member
of Christ: if he be a bishop, etc. as a minister of Gods word: if he be a
Prophet, by a more special grace: if an Apostle, as one nerest to Christ: if
it be Christ himself, as the chief and God himself. So Images as they be
nearer to Christ, they are more to be honored, and Christ's Image most of all,
which speaks always (and yet says never a word) to them that have
spiritual ears of understanding: Nay carnal eyes of blinded and hardened
hearts. But this difference he makes, the former reporters deserve honor,
being reasonable creatures, freely and voluntarily reportinge the truth, but
letters and Images deserve no honor, and yet it is due to them, which is a
strange matter: a due without desert, yea necessarily due to them in respect
of that whose image it bears. But admit that the image were a true
reporter, as he is nothing but a false and dumb stock without any action, yet
seeinge he compares an image to the written letters of the gospel, which be
figures of that truth which is represented and learned by them, I pray you
what honor is due to the written letters of the Bible, more then to the
written letters of any other book, and yet they are necessary for the
preservation of the doctrine thereof, yea they are true and natural figures of
the sense that is contained in the book, if no man be so mad, as to put of
his cap to those letters, or to that book, or to set it up to kneel to it, to
sense it, etc?

What monstrous madness is it, to defend the worshippinge of Images, which
if they were granted to be lawful means to bring men to spiritual
knowledge, yet were they nothing comparable to the written letter and sillables
of the scriptures?

The fourth cause of honoring of Images is, that all nations have honored
them in respect of their virtue whose Images they are.

I have showed before in a word, that this proves it not to be a law of
nature, that Images are to be honored, because all nations have been ignorant
of God, have committed Idolatry, have committed whoredom, etc. And although
the art of making of Images be good, yet it proves not that all Images may be
made, or any worshipped. The art of making swords is good, yet it neither
proves that all swords are well used, nor that any is to be worshipped. But
Master Sander says, seeinge that all nations have made and worshipped Images,
it is against the law of all nations, and of nature, to forbid the worship
of them. For he would better like of that law, which forbadde Images of Christ
to be made, then of that which forbids them to be worshipped, which he
calls a filthy decree, and yet it was a decree of Pope Gregory the first to
the bishop of Massilia, as we have showed before.

But concerning the example of all nations, thus I answer briefly, what
Images they made out of religion, and how they worshipped them, it touches our
controversy nothing in the world. But such as they made and worshipped in
religion were abominable Idols, and contrary to the law of nature. For
Saint Paul in the first to the Romans, and in the 17. of the Acts,
reproves the Gentiles for making and worshipping of Images by the law of
nature.

But whereas he says the Jews worshipped the Images of the Cherubins which
Solomon had made to garnish the walls of the temple, with the figures of palm
trees, and other flowers, quoting, 3. Reg. 6. and 2. Par. 3. he is a most
impudent and shameful liar. For there is no word in those chapters, nor in all
the Bible sounding that way.

Neither does Hieronyme ad Marcellam say, they worshipped the holy place, but
they reverenced it in respect of the great mystery thereof, as they did the
temple it self. For all reverent estimation of a thing, is not honoring or
worshipping of it, as Master Sander always dreameth.

Of the image in Pauende, made (as he says (by the woman, and preserved by
Christians until the days of Julian, we have said enough in the Chapter
next before this. Hitherto the wicked custom of all nations, contrary to the
word of God, proves not the worshipping of images to be necessarily good by
the law of nature.

The fifth cause is, that the relation of honor is so necessarily between the
image and the thing meant to be honored by it, that if the image be not
honored, the thing cannot be honored thereby. Nay by your leave Master
Sander, the relation of honor is between them that meant to give honor, and
the thing meant to be honored, inter honorantem and honoran^^^ and not
between the image and the thing meant to be honored by an image, so that if
the image be not honored, his foolish meaning is disapointed, that meant to
honor a thing by an image. But admit it were as you say, what inconvenience is
in the conclusion? If the image be not honored, the thing cannot be honored
by the image. For if the thing be worthy honor, it needs not the vain
honor of an image. But you say, it is the law of nature and right reason,
that if an image be made of an honorable personage, it may also be honored,
that is, honorably regarded and esteemed, according to the virtue of the man
more or less. As if it be the image of Cato, you think his worldly wisdom
well worthy of an image, but you will not think it to be an holy image, as you
think the image of Christ or his mother to be, But if you think the image of
a holy person to be a holy image, why do you not by the same reason think
the image of Cato a wise man to be a wise image? and the image of Socrates a
virtuous man to be a virtuous image, and the image of Cicero an eloquent man
to be an eloquent image, if the images of these men be not wise, virtuous,
nor eloquent, no more be the images of Christ, his mother, or his Apostles,
divine, holy or honorable. And if it be the law of nature that the image of an
honorable person should be made and honored as his virtue is more or less,
then by the contrary, the image of a wicked man should be made and dishonored
as his wickedness is more or less. So that as we must have a religion of
images of good men made and honored to stir us unto virtue, so we must have
a religion of making and dishonouring the images of wicked men to diswade us
from wickedness. If this later be a fond immagination: so undoubtedly is the
former.

The sixth cause is because the name of Christ is communicated to his image, for
it is called Christ, so the honor due to his name is in the same degree to be
communicated to his image also. For the name of God is to be blessed, and the
name of his saints shall live in honor for ever. Yea sir, but as ye name of
Christ is falsely, wickedly, and blasphemously communicated to a dead image,
so is his honor falsely, wickedly and blasphemously communicated to the same.

And where as he says, we are ashamed to confess that we break the images
of Christ, he lies falsely and impudently. For if we saw the true images of
the countenance of Christ abused to idolatry, we would no more doubt or
fear to break them, then Ezechias did to break the Brazen serpent, which was
a figure of Christ, and commanded by God himself to be made. But as for
their ridiculous images, which are no more the images of Christ, then of Judas
Iscarioth, but that it please^h them to call them so, we may justly deny them
to be the images of Christ, which have no proper resemblance unto his body,
more then to any other man.

The last reason is, that if it be a contumelye to the Prince to have his image
broken, and an honor to have it regarded, the like must needs come to pass
in Christ. And here M. Jewel is bidden to break if he dare the Image of the
Queens majesty, or the arms of the realm, or any noble man's banner. But if
the prince had as precisely forbidden any image of her to be made, and
commanded the same to be broken if it were made, as Christ has forbidden
images to be made and honored in any religious worship, and commanded such as
were so made and worshipped to be broken, Master Jewel durst execute his
princes commandment. And master Sander shows himself a wise man to compare
a thing permitted, with a thing forbidden, a thing of one nature that is civil,
with a thing of an other nature that is religious. And these be the seven wise
reasons of one man, not so wise as the seven wise men of Greece. But yet to
knitte up the matter, we must have a comparison of the doctrine of the
Catholics with master Jewels doctrine concerning images.

1 Christ is as worthy to have an image as any noble man.

To this master Jewel must answer, this is no good faith, therefore this is
his doctrine, Christ is less honorable then Julius Caesar. A witty
conclusion, Christ refuses a vain heathenish honor and forbidden by God,
therefore he is less honorable then Julius Caesar: Nay master Sander the
honor of Christ and Julius Csar are not meet to be matched together, the
one the son of GOD, the other a dampened spirit.

2 Christ's image, is set up in the Church that we might remember him, love
him, and follow him. This end being good makes the act of setting up the
Image good. Master Jewel must say it is not well done to set up such
remembrance and to honor it. And so I warrant you he says because God has
forbidden it, for if your reason be good, the good end makes the act to be
good, the act of them that killed the Apostles was good, because they thought
to do God good service therein, as our savior Christ him self witnesses,
Joan. 16. verse. 2.

Sander.
3 Item, we adore Christ so perfectly, that we suffer not so much as his
image to be vnhonoured: Master Jewel must say, Christ is not worthy of so
much honor, that for his sake his image should be honored of us, but in deed
he would say, as Saint Augustine says to them which affirmed they honored the
Angels for Gods sake. I would you would honor Christ as he has appointed
you, then should you learn not to honor images for his sake, which he
abhors.

Sander.
4 Item, we believe it to be a contumely done to Christ, if his image be
broken: Master Jewel must say: It is well done to break Christ's images. Yea,
such images as are worshipped to the contumely of Christ, and in contempt of
his law.

5 Item, it is a contumely to a Prince, to break his image. Sander.
Master Jewel must say, it is no contumely to a Prince to have his image
broken. But why must he say so? what has he to do with Princes images, or
arms, which are matters of civil honor? If you make the comparison to
Christ's image, it is a foolish tautologie, for you said the same immediately
before, and the comparison is unfit between God and man, where the one
forbidding, the other allowing: between divine, religious, spiritual, and
true worship, and civil, worldly, vain, and transitory honor. Therefore,
though Princes arms and images may be set up to the advancement of their
worldly honor, yet the glory of Christ and his worship requires no such
things, but utterly forbids them.

Sander.
THE XII. or XI. CHAP.
It is proved out of the word of God, that the images of honorable things
ought to be honored. Also that M. Jewel understands not the places of
scripture alleged by the fathers of the 7. general council. What proportion is
between a saint and his image. Jacob adoring the top of Iosephes rod, showed
that a creature without sense may be adored for his sake which has reason and
virtue. The sign of the cross shall appear at the day of judgment, to the
confusion of those which have now thrown it down.

Pope Adrian writing to the Emperor concerning the second Nicen Council, Fulk.
Con. Nic. 2. Act. 2.
alleges for the making and honoring of images, that saying of Genesis: God
made man according to his own image and similitude: which he expounds to
consist in free will, and in calling all creatures by their proper names. M.
Jewel not understanding how these places of scripture cited in that Council,
ought to be applied to making and honoring of images, mocketh at all those
Fathers learning etc. And so he might right well, being a company of unlearned
asses and flattering parasites, who to currie favor with that idolatrous
Empress Irene, abused the scriptures most shamefully and absurdly, to the
maintenance of the making and worshipping of images. But Master Sander has
chosen a few of those places, thinking to wring out some fore matter of them,
leaving out the rest (which he was ashamed to name) for breuities sake. And
first he brings in the authority of Damascene, a worshipful Doctor, above
seven hundredth years past, which brings many of the same places for the same
purpose, making a comparison between him and Master Jewel, and both their
books. Well, let the judgment be among learned men. But Damascene. De Ortho.
fid. cap. 17. frames an argument thus. GOD made man to his own image. For
whose cause therefore do we worship one an other, but because we are made
after the image of GOD? Alleging Basil, which faith, The honor of the image
is transferred into the honor of the pattern.

Cyrillus likewise reasons in Cat. 12. The wooden image of an earthly King
is honored, how much more the reasonable image of GOD. But these reasons,
that serve for the honoring and reuerencing of man, which is Gods true image,
for Gods sake serve nothing in the world for honoring of false images
artificial, which contain nothing in them of that which is to be worshipped
or honored in the pattern. And therefore Master Jewel may well mock such a
bald reason, as has no good consequence in it. Man being the true image of
God, made by God him self, and having in him a true similitude of those things
which are honorable in God, as wisdom, holiness, righteousness, etc. is to
be honored for Gods sake: therefore a stock which is a false or counterfeit
image of Christ made by a cursed man, and has no true resemblance in it of
those things that are honorable in Christ, is to be honored for Christ's sake.
For what wit, sense, or shame has he, that makes such an argument? But (says
he) we must mark the proportion between the image and the thing whereof it is
an image, to see the weight of this reason. But what proportion is there
between truth and falsehood? even such there is between man the image of God,
and a block the image of man. But it bears man's shape, and also his name
(says he) but it bears it falsely say I. For man's shape is not a dead or
insensible shape, no more then a dead carcass is a man, and much less it
deserves the name of a man. Yet continuing this proportion, he says: Among
all men, none is so truly honorable, as those who continued to the end of
their life according to that image of GOD whereunto they were first made, such
are all the Saints. Setting the question of images aside, see how he
honors the Saints with the dishonor of the redemption of Christ, which was
needless to them, if they continued in the image of God, in which they were
first made. The Apostle witnesses, that by Christ we are restored unto the
image of God, from whom by sin we are fallen Coll. 3. ver. 10. For to say,
that any man has continued according to the image of God to his lives end, is
to say that he never sinned.

Furthermore he says, their images are made in ye faith of Gods church. A
wholesome faith, which is contrary to Gods word, yea, he concludes there is no
doubt, but by the force of Gods word we are bound to honor Saints images,
because they are made according to the shape of them in that behalf as they
were most like unto God. First, where is yt word of God (M. San) by whose
force we are bound? You seem to be an anthropomorphite, when you say that
Saints images are made according to the shape of them in that behalf, as they
were most like unto God. For the images of Saints, when they are best made, are
made but according to the shape of their bodies. And were the Saints most like
to God in ye shape of their bodies? O brutish heretic! But let us see an
other conclusion in this Popish proportion. Our Ladies image approaches nearer
to her in nature, then she does approach to God, therefore her image must be
more honored for her sake, then she her self for Gods sake. By ye former
proposition we must learn, that ye man which made our Ladies image is able to
make a truer image the^ God, who made our Lady to his image. For to compare
the substances of the images, is nothing to the purpose, to show ye excellency
of the images, as you your self (M. San.) in your Metaphysicall abstractions
have taught us. For an image of stone being like to a man, is a better image
then one of gold being not like to him. I say a better image, and not a better
matter. And will you now compare the matter of our Ladies image (for so you call
her) as liker in nature to her substance, then her substance is to God, to
prove her image in it more to be honored, then the image of God in her? Truly
if you be so insensible, that you see not that grosnesse of this falshod, I am
ashamed in respect of that University which gave you the title of a Doctor,
not worthy with these arguments to step out of ye schools of ye sophisters.
Last of al you reason thus, the image of God in us may be dimned and darkened,
insomuch yt men have been worshipped, as Gods, but our Ladies artificial image
being only known or called by the name of her shape and image, can never be
principally worshipped as our Lady her self. You play the sophister too
foolishly, for no more can a man so long as he is known and called by the
name of the image and similitude of God, b^ principally worshipped as God him
self. But that name forgotten, man has been worshipped as God, so has the
image of our Lady bearing the name of our Lady, been worshipped, as her
self, or rather as GOd him self, neither has the insensiblenesse of images,
defended them from danger of being worshipped as God.

An other testimony of scripture yt Pope Adrian cites, is Genesis 28. of the
stone which Jacob set up right, for a monument or standing image (says M.
San.) and powered oil upon it, and called the name of the place Bethel, that
is, the house of God. Therefore we may set up images, and honor them: a
substantial reason. For make as mystical interpretations as you can, of the
stone to signify Christ, and the oil ye spiritual unction of the holy
Ghost: yet was it no image, but a sign or monument erected in remembrance of
the vision, by a special instinct of Gods spirit, which when the Israelites
would draw into an example of wilworship, erecting a temple there, and setting
up an image thereon, the place was called of the Prophets Bethauen, that is,
the house of vanity, and not Bethel, the house of God. O see the 4.5. and. 10.
Chapter.

And whereas Augustine notes, that although he called the stone, Quest. in
Her. 8.
Gods house, yet he worshipped not the stone, neither sacrificed to the stone,
nor called it God: You think to escape by aunswering, that no more do you
adore images of stone with godly honor, or with any honor for the stones
sake. But Augustine denies yt he resorted afterward to it, yt he adored the
stone with any honor at al, or in any respect, or that he did any thing like to
idolatry, but you adore the image of Christ and call it Christ, and go a
pilgrimage to it, therefore Jacobs example can not shroud you from idolatry.
For although the annoynting of the stone were a consecration of it to be a holy
monument by a special direction of Gods spirit, yet it follows not, that it
was any adoration of the stone, or that every man may set up, and annoint
stones after that manner, which has no such warrant of Gods word or his
spirit. And that God chose one place above another for his honor, it proves
not, that men may choose one stock above another to make an idol thereof or
an image to worship, as you had rather call it.

The third text of scripture is, that Jacob adored the top of Joseph's rod,
or scepter: Heb. 11. Which Sedulius says did mystically betoken the kingdom
of Christ, to be honored in the end of the world, as he adored the rod or
scepter of his son. Yet is there here no image honored. Nay here is not the
top of Iosephe^ scepter honored out of the scripture. For the Hebrew text
is, He worshipped toward the bedshead. Gene. 47. verse. 31. And the Greek text.
Heb. 11. (...), and he worshipped toward the end of his staff, or leaning
upon the end of his staff, So that neither in the Hebrew, nor Greek, there
is any worshipping of the staff or scepter of Joseph.

The 4. text of scripture: God appearing to Moses bad him pull off his shoes,
for the place where he stood was holy ground. The presence of God made the
ground-holie. What then? Therefore, an image appointed to bring us to the
remembrance of holy things may be holy and honored. I deny the argument,
where is the presence of God in the image, to make it holy?

The 5. David honored the Arc and daunced before it. The Arc was a holy
sacrament ordained by God, therefore has he nothing to do with images
forbidden of God.

The 6. God commands the brazen serpent to be made Nu. 21. Show the like
special commandment to dispense with the general law. Thou shall not make
to thy self any graven image, for the making of your Popish image and the day
is yours.

The 7. the tribes of Ruben, and Gad, and ye half tribe of Manasses, made an
image of an altar. Ios. 22. Nay they made an altar in deed for a memorial, and
yet their fact was not co^me^dable, though it was in some sort excusable.

The 8. God commanded two cherubims to be made over the mercy seat Exodus 25.
those were graven Angels (says M. Sander) of the highest degree in heaven save
one. O vain presumptuous hypocrite, that will take upon him to know the
degrees of Angels, which the scripture has never revealed. To this I answer
as to the brazen serpent, show the word of God dispensing with the general
law for any images in religion. The rending of the veil a sunder, shows us
not the images of Cherubims, as on the Arc he says, much less other new
Images which were never there, but the glory of Christ with uncovered face,
while we our selves are transformed into the same image. 2. Cor. 3. ver. 18.

The 9. the temple was an image of Christ's body, therefore the Jews had an
image of Christ openly set up before their eyes. The temple was a figure of
Christ's body, so was every sacrifice that was offered, but no image.

The 10. the Temple was honored by the Jews, yea, and Daniel prayed toward
Jerusalem when the Temple was destroyed, you might as well say, they honored
Jerusalem. No doubt but the temple was reverently esteemed of the godly, as a
place erected by Gods commandment, which seeing images do lack, there
passes no consequence from the honoring of the Temple, to the honoring of
images.

The 11. ye law had a shadow of good things to come, and not the self image of
things He. 10. therefore if the dumb shadows of the law were to be worshipped,
much more the expressed image of his body, of those who will perform that in
the new Testament, which was prefigured in the law? Who can bear these
blasphemies? Did the shadows of the law prefigure the worshipping of images,
or our redemption by Christ? Are your dombe stocks and stones that self
image or pattern of those shadows which the Apostle speaks of, or was
Christ himself? O brazen forehead and blasphemous mouth!

The 12. Gods honor is given to the flesh of Christ in respect of the unity
in person with the Godhead, therefore the image may be honored in an other
respect. But every respect (thou blundering idolater) cannot make a cause of
honor, but only the unity in person, which seeing it is not in thy blocks
with the pattern, thine argument proves nothing.

The 13. the image of Caesar in his coin, proves, that it may be given to
Csar, so does every image lead us to that truth whereof it is an image. No
Master Sander, the image of Caesar on his coin proves that the Jews were
subject to Caesar, and therefore tribute was due unto him. So your argument
has no deduction from Caesar's image.

The 14. the sign of the cross is to be worshipped, for Amelech was
overthrown by that sign, which Moses made when he prayed with his hands
lifted up and spread abroad. Exodus 17. Therefore we may and must honor the
sign of the cross, in what matter or stuff so ever it be made. Vanity of
vanities, and nothing but vanity, where is there any one title in that
Chapter, of the sign of a cross, yea or of the spreading of his hands
abroad which should make a cross, with his lifting up?

The 15. the sign of Thau, that is to say of the cross, was marked in the
forehead of such as hated idolatry. Ezech. 9. and they were not slain
corporally, no more shall they be slain everlastingly which now embrace it. An
easy way to escape everlasting death. But where find you that the sign of
Thau was the sign of the cross? Or that the print of the letter Thau was set
on their forheades? For this word Thau is as much to say, as a mark or sign,
and not a special figure or mark, although the vulgar translation does not
translate it, but sets it in the Hebrew word as he found it.

The 16. the sign of the son of man shall appear at the day of judgment
Mat. 24. which is the sign of the cross. How prove you that Master Sander?
Or if you could prove it, what is that to worshipping of images* You say it
shall be to the confusion of them which have thrown down that sign, but you
only say it, and then we force not. Yea say you, a thousand times, what say I,
a thousand? Everlastingly accursed is he that hates or destroys any one jot
belonging to Christ, be it never so far distant from his holy flesh and
person. Then how many times accursed are they, that have destroyed so many
bibles, in which was not ten thousand iots belonging to Christ, but his whole
doctrine perfectly contained?

The 17. the people Act. 5. coueted to lie only within the compass of S.
Peter's shadow, the woman desired to touch but the hemme of Christ's garment.
Why, because any thing of his is worthy of estimation? Verily the image of
Christ is somewhat of his, or else it were not his image. No verily M. San. the
image of Christ is nothing of his truly, but falsely, nothing to his honor,
but to his dishonor. The enemies of Christ are none of his, and yet we say
these be his enemies. But you say: if a man had that faith, as to believe, that
if he might touch, or only see his image, he should be safe, I see no reason
why that faith may not make him safe. O blind beast, or rather block that
see no reason, why that faith which was never heard out of Gods word, should
not save a man. But the heretics you say tie all things to his person, and
nothing to his other instruments. The word of God teaches us to tie al things
to Christ, and to acknowledge none other instruments, then he has provided
and appointed for us. For images be the instruments of the Devil, and not of
Christ to work by.

The last. All that ever Isai Cap. 2. Jeremy, Cap. 50. Ezechiel Cap. 30.
Micheas, Cap. 1. Sophonias, Cap. 2. Zachary, Cap. 13. or King David In Psalm.
9. say of the destruction of Idols in ye time of grace, is vterly void and of
none effect, if it be not lawful to worship, or adore images. Do you not marvel
what is ye reason of this monstrous assertion? Verily even as monstrous a lie,
yt the whole Church of Christ in all Temples, and Chapels, always and
especially since the time of Constantine the great, has set up and used
reverently the Images of Christ and of his Saints. What answer shall I make to
this? Let him have the whetstone as big as a mountain.

THE XIII. OR XII. CHAP.
That the sign of the healthful cross was honored in the first six hundred
years, and of those two gross ignoraunces in M. Jewel, thinking the sign of
the cross not to be an image, or that to have the sign of the cross, in
great regard for Christ's sake, is not to worship the same sign, and
consequently to worship an Image. Also the material word of Christ's cross is
holy, as a sign and as a relic. A miracle wrought by the wood of Christ's
cross. The bishop of Jerusalem brought forth the cross to be adored every
Easter. The Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian made a law in the honor of
the cross. By M. Jewels confession the sign of the cross was had in great
regard among the Christians. S. Stephens image painted and hanged before his
sepulcher with a cross on his shoulder. Probianus was accounted no perfect
Christian, because he would not adore the holy cross of Christ. M. Jewel is
convinced by words of his own alleging. The writers of hymns. S. Chrysostom
did set forth some parcel of Christ's cross to be adored and kissed. Sander.


Master Sander tells us that when he speaks of the worshipping of the
cross, Fulke.
he means either the material cross whereon Christ suffered, or else the
sign and image thereof. The material cross, he says is not only holy, as ye
sign of him yt died on it, but also as sanctified with the blood of Christ. As
though the blood of Christ was a sanctification unto an insensible block of
wood. It was the altar whereon the sacrifice of our redemption was offered.
Although it be sometimes so called improperly, because it seemed so in the eyes
of men, yet our Savior Christ himself, was both the priest and the sacrifice,
the temple and ye altar of our redemption, whereof Augustine says, De fide ad
Petrum Dia. ca. 2. Iste igitur est, qui in se vno totum exhibuit quod esse
necessarium ad redemptionis nostrae sciebat effectum, idem scilicet sacerdos
and. sacrificium, idem Deus and templum. This is he that in himself only
exhibited all whatsoever he knew to be necessary for the effect of our
redemption, the same being both the priest and the sacrifice, the same beeinge
God and his temple. But a temple he could not be, except an altar were within
him, and not without him. Christ is therefore the holy altar, and not the
cursed cross. But he adds that it is an holy relic and not only an Image,
If there were so great holiness in that material cross, it is marvel none
of the Apostles made any acounte of it, nor any of the faithful, not Joseph
and Nicodemus, which with much less suite might have obtained it of Pilate,
then the body of Jesus. Nor the church by the space of three hundredth years,
until the time that Helena is said to have found it with the two crosses of
the two thieves: which I take to be but a fable and an imposture of some that
after Helena was dead, forged a cross and nails, affirminge that they were
found by Helena.

For it sounds like no truth, that Eusebius which knew the same Helena the
mother of Constantine the great, and writes of her devotion and of her doings
in the holy land, would have omitted such a noble invention of the cross,
with so many miracles about the same, either in his story, or in the life of
Constantine.

I know there is a short note of it in his Chronicles, but that seems to be
added by some other since his time, which he would not have omitted to declare
at large in his story, where he sets out in many words, matter of much
less importance then that supposed invention was. Again they that in latter
times write of it, as Ambrose, Ruffinus, Socrates, Theodoretus, and Sosomenus
seem to have received that matter only of report and of no written monument,
for scarce one of them agrees with another. For to omit how incredible it
is, that the Jews would have buried that cross to keep it from the
Christians; which they more safely might have burned. Wherefore should they
bury with it the two other crosses of the thieves? And admit there were
such holiness in Christ's cross, that it could not corrupt, yet how were
not the other two crosses rotten in three hundredth years lyinge in the earth?

But admitting that story to be true (as I promise you, it is no article of my
belief) what means M. Sander to say the material cross is not only an
Image, by which he means that it is an Image? whereof I pray you should it
be an Image? Will you now confound the thing with the image thereof, as you
do offer the Image with the thing? ^f that material cross were an image,
then the images thereof be images of an Image, which is nothing of it self,
and then by your own rule they be Idols. But you say it was an instrument of
our redemption and therefore holy. If that be a good reason, Pilate, Annas,
Cayphas, Judas, the soldiers which crucified Christ, were holy, for they were
instruments of our redemption. But Ambrose, De obitu Theodosi^; calls it the
standerde of salvation, the word of truth, yea life it self.

I pray you give Ambrose in his eloquente oration leave to use rethoricall
figures of amplification, and let him expound him self in the same. Habeat
Helena quae legate, vnde crucem domini recognoscat; inuenit ergo titulum, regem
adorauit non lignum vtique, quia hic gentilis est error and vanitas impiorum,
sed adorauit illum qui pependit in lig^o. Let Helena have somewhat that she
may read, whereby she may know the lords cross. Therefore she found the
title, she worshipped the king, not the wood verilye, for this is an
heathnishe error, and a vanity of ungodly men, but she worshipped him that
has hanged on the wood.

Thus Ambrose although he credited this invention, yet he affirms it is an
heathnishe error, and a vanitye of wicked men to woorshippe the tree that
Christ dyed on, much more the sign or Image thereof, seeing al worship
belongs to God. But Master Sander replyeth, that he says, Non insolentia
ista sed pietas est, cum defertur sacrae redemptioni: this is no insolency but
godliness, when honor is given to the holy redemption. Speakinge of honor
due to the wood in respect^ that it belongs to Christ. But Ambrose speaks
not one word of honor due to the wood of the cross, but defends the
estimation of the cross of Christ, which i^ our redemption. For speaking of
the nail which Helena caused to be forged into the diadem of her son the
Emperor, he says: Sapienter Helen egis quae crucem in capite regum leuauit,
and locauit, vt crux Christi in regibus adoretur. Non insolentia ista, etc.
Helena did wisely, that lifted up the cross in the head of kings and so
placed it, that the cross of Christ might be worshipped in the kings. This is
no insolency, etc. as above. So that he speaks not of the wood of the
cross, but of the iron of the nail.

Beside we see a great difference between the reverent offering of a thing,
and the honoring or worshipping thereof, which yet Master Sander every where
confounds. But Ambrose speaks further in the person of the Jews. Ecce and
clauus in honor est. Behold even the nail is in estimation, and that which
we knocked in to death, is a remedy of health, and with a certain invisible
power tormenteth the devils: Kings are bowed to the iron of his feet. Here
says Master Sander, we have the adoration of iron. Is this like that Ambrose,
who before condemned the adoration of the wood for an heathnish error, does
now commend the bowinge to iron? why Master Sander, do you not confess, that
the Jews spoke this and not Ambrose, or Ambrose spoke this in the person of
the Jews? And who knows not in such fictions of persons speaking, the Orator
must frame his talk as they, whom he supposes to speak are like to say. The
Jews then in sport do say, kings bow down to a piece of iron: meaning to the
Emperor, in whose creste this iron nail was, is it then the judgment of
Ambrose to allow the bowing to iron in any respect? O vain and frivolous
arguments of the Papists, that must borrowe their authority of the complaint
of the perfidious Jews. But you may know what honor was done to ye iron, yt
as ye one nail was placed in an honorable place, namely in the Emperors
Diadem, so an other was placed in his horse mouth, for so says Ambrose De vno
clauo frenos fieri precepis: she commanded his bridle to be made of one nail.
This was no great honoring of that holy iron, to put it to be champed and
slaboured in an horse mouth, although Ambrose make a mystery of it. And the
third nail other writers say, was cast into the Sea to stay a tempest. All
three being thus bestowed by ancient testimony, ye Papists have fourteen
more in diverse places of France, Italy and Germany, beside ye fifteenth that
was showed at Paul's cross by master Jewel since the Queens reign.

But Ruffinus calls it blessed. And Cyrillus healthful, and precious,
because it leads us to the memory of Christ's death. So would an image of
Judas Iscarioth do. It was the best reason those ancient writers had to
defend that supersticious estimation, which they had of the sign of the
cross.

As for the report of Paulinus, that the same cross had a Church and a
secreate place made at Jerusalem where it might be honorably reserved, which
ye Bishop brought forth at Easter to be worshipped of the people, if it be
true, yet proves it not the worshipping of images, for the cross was no image.

But that it is not like that any church was erected to the Cross, Saint
Augustine shows, that it was counted sacrilege in his time to make a Church
unto any creature. Contra. Maximin. lib. 1. titu. 11. Nonne si Templum alicui
sa^cto angelo excelentissimo de signis and lapidibus faceremus
anathematizaremur a veritate Christi, and ab ecclesia dei, quoniam creaturae
exhiberemus eam seruitutem, quae vni tantum deb^^^r deo? si ergo sacrilegi
essemus faciendo templum cuicunque creaturae, quomodo non est Deus verus, cui
non templum facimus, sed nos ipsi templum sumus? If we made a temple unto any
holy and most excellent Angel of wood and stones, should we not be accursed
from the truth of Christ, and from the Church of God, because we should give
that service to a creature which is due only to God? If therefore we should
be sacrilegious in making a temple to any creature whatsoever, how is not he a
true God, to whom we make no temple, but we our selves are his temple? Except
M. Sander will say the cross was no creature, we must say with Augustine, it
ought to have no temple. What superstition and Idolatry has done, is not the
question, but what should be done and what is well done, is all the controversy.

The feasts of the invention of the cross which he makes of 1200. years
old, and the exaltation of nine hundredth, (beside that the antiquity of the
inuenting is not proved,) yet argue not any worship of the cross, more then
the feasts of the Apostles and martirs. which were kept only in remembrance
of them, and not to adore or worship them.

That master Jewel grants the sign of the cross to have been had in
great regard among the Christians, what helps it your cause, seeing he
allows not the superstitious abuse thereof? But you say, if it be a thing
used in the whole primitive Church, it must not be called a supersticious
abuse, for master Jewel has submitted himself to the first six hundredth
years. A man may easily perceive, with what conscience master Sander
handeleth this cause, yt so impude^tly affirms so manifest an untruth: For
who ever heard master Jewel submit himself to the first six hundredth years
in all matters of controversy? Where did he ever take upon him to discharge
the first six hundredth years of all error and supersticion? Although for
certain questions uttered in his sermon, he made challeng of 600. years, yet
did he never allow of all things that were done or taught in the church for
600. years. But I pray you let us see how substancially M. Sander proves the
sign of the cross to have been in estimation with ye whole primitive church.

His first author is Tertulian, almost 200. years from Christ. And from him
he desce^deth to Cyprian, Basil, Augustine, Chrysostom, etc. Tertulian
shows only the sining of men's foreheades therewith, whethersoeuer they went.
The later age brought in that sign into baptism, confirmation, the Lords
supper, and almost in to every ceremony. So superstition crepeth like a
ringworme, at the first as a tolerable indifferent matter, then as a holy
thing, next as a necessary thing, and last of all into open and gross
Idolatry, as in the times following those six hundredth years.

But before all those whom M. Sander names, Irenaeus lib. 1. testifies that
the Vale^tiniane heretics brought the sign of the cross in great estimation,
calling it Oron confirmatiuam crucem the limit and term of all things, and the
confirming cross, abusing even the same testimonies of scripture for the
proof thereof, which the Papists do, and namely master Sander in this
Chapter. Paulum autem apostolum and ipsum reminisci huius crucis dicunt: Verbum
crucis etc. Mihi autem non eueniat gloriari nisi in cruce Christi: And they say
that even Paul the Apostle himself does remember this cross: The word of
the cross etc. GOD forbid that I should boast in any thing, but in ye cross
of Christ. Seeing therefore so ancient a writer as Ireneus, testifies, that
the first estimation thereof came from so horrible heritikes, howsoever the
later ages have abused it, it cannot be proved a thing used in the whole
primitive church, that it might be no supersticious abuse.

Next to this he cites Chrysostom Or. 1. De adorat. cru^is. that not only
the Cross it self whereon Christ dyed, but also the sign and shape of it,
ought to be worshipped and adored.

And again he cites afterward in this Chapter either ye same or such an
other. Hom. de adoratione crucis. But in all Chrisostomes works there is no
book, oration, homily, sermon or treatise of any such title. There be in ye
second tome two homilies de cruce and latrone, and a third de cruce dominica,
but in none of them is any such words as he cites, eius figuram and effigiem
coledam adorandamque: or any thing to such purpose. Wherefore I can not
otherwise think, but this is some blind forgerie under the name of
Chrysostom, which is not extant in all his authentical writings.

But Chrysostom in deed calls the cross whereon Christ dyed, which was so
much esteemed, and whereof every man desired to have a piece, enclosed it in
gold, hanged it about their necks etc. lignum condemnationis the wood of
condemnation: and the sign thereof so much used and esteemed Simbolum mortis
the sign of death: in demost, ad gent. quod Chr. sit Deus. But M. Sander will
prove the worshipping of the sign of the cross by law, if it will not stand
with divinity he cites Cod. Just. tit. 11. tom l. Vnica. but it is Cod.
Just. lib. 1. tit. 8. le nemini licere etc. The Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinianus made a law in these words: Cum sit nobis cura diligens per omnia
superni numinda religionem tueri: signum Saluatoris Christi nemini licere vel
in solo, vel in silice, vel in marmoribus (humi positis) insculpere, vel
pingere, sed quocunque reperitur tolli, granissima paena mulctandis* si qui
contrarium statutis nostris tentauerint, specialiter imperamus. Where as we
have diligent care to defend the religion of the highest God in all things,
we specially command that it shall be lawful for no man to grave or paint the
sign of our savior Christ either in ye ground, or in flint, or marble stones
(lying on ye ground) but whersouer it is found (to be taken away) under a most
grievous forfet to be paid of the^ yt attempt yt which is contrary to our
statuts. Cod. Just. Ti. 11. vnica. This was a kind of honoring the sign of
the Cross (says he) when it was forbidden to be graven on the ground, least
it should be dishonored, if it were trodden on, even as Helena, S. Ambrose
witnessing feared to tread upon the cross of Christ, which he calls the
sacrament of salvation. Of Helena we heard before yt she worshipped not the
cross, how much soever she made thereof.

And if this law were to be understood as M. San. would have it, yet here is
no worshipping of the cross spoken of. But touching the understanding of this
law, M. Jewel is reproved, first in citing it out of Petrus Crinitus, who
leaves out these words, humi positis, lying on the ground, which Justinians
Code adds, then in false translation, whereof he will speak afterward. But
concerning the first, for as much as Petrus Crinitus was a learned man, about
that time when books began to be printed, before this controversy of images
was moved, his report is more to be credited then the Printers press, for the
ancient reading of this law, how so ever M. Sander fondly compares him with
Justinian corrupted. Moreover, to prove this corruption probable, those words
humi positis, are altogether superfluous, for when he had said before in solo
on the ground* what need he add afterward lying on the ground? Also the
disjunctive, vel, or, set before these words in solo, (which M. Sander has
clean left out in his translation) does sufficiently declare, that the
Emperors meaning was, to prohibit all grauing and painting of the sign of
Christ, whether it were of the cross or of the image of Christ, either on the
ground, or else where, because it is against the religion of the high God, to
make any images or signs of him to any purpose. As for the danger of treading
upon the sign of the cross, is not in any one word of this law touched.
Neither was it a thing regarded in the deepest dungeon of Popery, for crosses
and images of Christ and of the Trinity, are yet to be seen of their making,
upon a great number of grave stones in England to this day, which argue, that
either the Papists did against this law, or else that this law had no such
meaning as M. Sander feigneth it to have.

But M. Jewel confesses, that the sign of the cross was had in great regard
among the Christians, for that most worthy price that was offered upon it: and
yet he confesses not, that either they worshipped the sign of the cross, or
that their regard was no greater the^ it ought to have been. For if any such
regard had been due to the sign of the cross by Gods ordinance, the Apostles
that delivered to us all the counsel of God, would not have omited it in their
writings. Ephesians. 20. verse. 20. and 27. And M. Sander him self, after he has
iangled a while confusely, of regarding and worshipping, at length confesses,
that every regard is not commonly taken for a worshipping, but some is, as the
covetous man's regarding of money. So that his argument and his conclusion is
nothing else, but a sophistical conversion of particulars, which nothing
touches the matter in controversy: Some worshipping is a regarding, therefore
some regarding is worshipping. Both these are true, and yet the regarding of
the sign of the cross, is not thereby proved a worshipping thereof. And yet
he is not ashamed to proceed, as though he had proved all regarding to be
worshipping. For he says, If M. Jewel had a piece of that cross that
Christ dyed on, he would prefer it before gold and silver etc. and this
regard should be a worshipping or honoring of it. I believe if M. Jewel had a
piece that had been worshipped, he would have burned it, and so would I. And
yet if I had but a pibble stone, that came out of the land of promise, I would
keep it, and make much of it, so would I do of the cross, if it were free
from idolatry, but I would worship the one, no more then the other. How long
will this sophistical Doctor walk under a cloud of ambiguitie of words? Let
him either prove such honoring and worshipping as the Papists use unto ye
cross or sign thereof (which is the thing we impugn) to have been used in the
eldest Primitive Church, or else let him strive about terms and words among
sophisters and children. But if M. Jewel should take the cross for no better
then a common piece of wood, he should (says he) be blasphemous against the
death of Christ. O grievous accusation. Ezechias took the brazen Serpent for
no better then a piece of brass, which was a figure of Christ, and yet he was
not blasphemous against the death of Christ. But hear his reason, Christ
vouchsafed to segregate it from other wood, to make it the instrument of his
passion. Where find you that Christ did choose his cross? I think it was
rather appointed to him by the Jews, then provided by him self: if you say, he
did segregate it in his secret determination, I answer, yt so he did segregate
Judas, Annas, Caiphas, Pilate, the Jews and soldiers, to be instruments of
his passion. And yet none of them therefore to be regarded or worshipped,
except of those detestable heretics that think they were profitable
instruments of our redemption. But O holy swords and axes of tyrants, and
tormentours, that were embrued with the blood of the Martyrs, O holy fire that
burned them, O holy water that drowned them, O holy gallows and ropes that
hanged them! For why should not these also have their regard and worship
according to the proportion of their deserts, whose eternal felicity they were
instruments to procure?

Yet once again M. Jewel is challenged, for denying the cognisances of the
cross, in flags, banners, or targets, to be images. Also the letter that
Ezechiel saw in vision, the cross that Constantine saw in the air, the
marks in men's garments, and the mystical letters in the temple of Serapis.
First touching the mark which Ezechiel saw, it is not described of what figure
it was, only that a mark was set, for Tau, signifies a mark, and not only
the name of a letter, which in that time perhaps it had not, and so did S.
Cyprian read it, Contra Demetrianum, transi mediam Jerusalem and notabis signum
super frontes virorum. Go through the midst of Jerusalem, and thou shall
mark a sign upon the foreheads of the men. The sign that Constantine saw,
was the character of the name of Christ, in two letters X and P after this
manner, as both Eusebius. witnesses, and his coins yet remaining do show. Eu. de
vit. Con. lib. 1. and therefore no cross nor sign thereof. The marks that have
appeared in men's garments, perhaps were imagined rather the^ images, as
children imagine dragons, and Gryphons in the clouds. The mystical letters in
ye temple of the idol Serapis, could have no relation to the cross of Christ,
which ye idolaters knew not. Therefore ye folly of those ecclesiastical
writers is bewraied, yt thought christianity much helped by such heathenish and
superstitious fantasies: as for the rest, I answer as M. Jewel, that they are
but bars laid one over an other, and no images. Yet M. San. maruelleth what
blind ignorance this is, so to say. But to make the matter more plain on his
side, he makes the shape of Christ hanging with his arms abroad, all one
with these signs or characters aforesaid, which is no blind ignorance, but
wilful abusing of his readers, without all shame or shape of honesty. And yet,
he will baffull us with a doutie definition of an image (as he says out of
Gregory Nazianzen) that every similitude, likeness, or shape of one thing
taken out according to the samplar of an other thing, is an image, and then he
runs out into his old common place of inward imaginations. But I pray you
sir, who ever in those days or in ours, saw the cross that Christ dyed on, to
make an image thereof according to the samplar? If none, but ye painter or
grauer has imagined it, then is it an image of an imagination, which is the
samplar thereof, and not of the cross of Christ, and so it is counterfeit, and
consequently by your own distinction an idol. And in very deed, so many diverse
figures and forms thereof as we see to be made, argue that there is no certain
truth known unto men, of what form or figure it was: for some make it
headless, thus some draw one bar through the other thus some draw this
bar at the upper end, some through the midst, some make circles, some
squares, some triangles at the four ends, some make them blunt, some make
them sharp, etc. some make the cross ragged, some even, so that there is no
certentie, and if al these be images of Christ's cross, it skilleth not what
proportion be kept in making of images according to the pattern. Hitherto
therefore M. San. fond argument to prove worshipping of images by M. Jewels
confession, has no force to enter into any reasonable man's credit, because
he has neither proved these signs of the cross to be images, nor such
regard as M. Jewel confesses, to have been a worshipping of them, in that
sense that the controversy is between us for worshipping of images.

But whearas master Jewel says, the same crosses were not set up in any
Temple, master Sander confesses not the same, but other such as they were,
for proof whereof he cites a new found old Doctor called Euodius Bishop of
Vzal in Affrike, writing about S. August. time, a book of the miracles of S.
Stephen, in which he says, S. Stephens image was painted with a cross on his
shoulder etc: this old Doctor was first painted at Louan anno, 1564. but he
comes too late, to claim his antiquity after so many hundred years, in
which neither he nor his writing was ever hard off.

That the people were taught to kneel down to crosses, which Master Jewel
denies, he proves by the example of Probianus, Lib. 2. Cap. 19.
of whom Sozomenus in ye tripartite history does write: That being sometimes a
pagane, but afterward made a christian, he did in some part follow the
doctrine of the Christians. But he would not adore the cause of all our health,
that is, the most holy cross. He being of this mind, the divine power
apeared to him, and showed him the sign of the cross set on the altar of
that church. And did manifestly declare that since Christ was crucified, all
things that were done for the utility of mankind, had not been done by any
means without ye virtue of the reverend cross, neither of holy Angels nor of
godly men.

Here says master Sander, it is evident, that the sign of the cross was set
upon ye alter of S. Michaels church in Constantinople. Yea sir in that vision
if it were true. But it is small evidence to prove that it stood in the
church in deed. For if it had stood on the alter in such honorable
estimation, Probianus would not have contemned it before. But where you say, he
was compted no perfect Christian, because he would not adore the holy cross of
Christ: you walk still under your cloud of ambiguitie. For how prove you that
ye adoration here spoken of, is yt kneeling to the cross, which the Bishop
denies to have been taught? it seems that Probianus newly converted from
paganism, had not yet that honorable estimation of the reprochefull sign of
the cross, which the Christians of that time had. But whereas M. Jewel
vpbraideth them with that blasphemous prayer, which they make to the cross,
kneeling on their knees, O crux aue, spes vnica, Alhaile O cross, our only
hope, M. Sander says, those words do so convince his blasphemous doctrine,
that he shall never be able to avoid the argument, which is grounded upon
them. You have need M. Sa. to set a good face on those words, even of the same
metal that your cross to whom you speak is oftentimes made. But what
Herculian argument I pray you do you bring forth? Forsooth S. Paul used the
same phrase, when he said, God forbid that I should glory but only in the
cross of Christ. But good sir, S. Paul speaks neither to ye wodden cross,
nor of the sign thereof, but of the death of Christ. And you would make men
believe, that you do so. Namely, that you say not those words to the cross,
but to Christ crucified. Thus you would cover your shame with impudency. But
you cannot so escape: for Thomas Aquinas a great Saint and Doctor of your
Church. 3. Sen. di. 9.91. ar. 2 q. 4. affirms that the cross of Christ is to
be worshipped with the some Latria or Divine worship, that Christ crucified
is to be worshipped, and that even unto the cross you speak, when you say all
hayle O cross, our only hope.

And if you will say this was but one Doctors opinion, yet the very words of
that hymn and the rubrike thereof, shall convince you, that you speak to the
cross, and not to Christ Beata cuius brachijs preci^on pependit sculi, flatera
facta est corpori, prdamque tulit Tartari. Blessed is that cross on whose
arms the price of the world did hang, it was made a beam to weigh his body,
and took the pray away from hell. Immediately after these words the rubrike
bids the quire turn to the altar where the cross stands, as M. Sander
says, and then follow these words. All hayle O cross our only hope, in this
time of passion, increase rightehusnesse to godly men, and give pardon to
guilty persons, By these it is plain, that this prayer is made to the cross,
and not to Christ, neither is it any thing like to the phrase which S. Paul
uses, of glorying in the cross of Christ. And that Master Sander need not
to make the matter so strange of their speaking to the cross: this hymn sung
on the exaltation day and so often repeated in Anthemes and Versicles, does
sufficiently declare, Crux fidelis inter omnes arbor vna nobilis, nulla silua
talem prosert fro^de, flore, germine, dulce lignum, dulces clauos, dulce pondus
sustinens, Sola digna tu fuisti far precium saeculi, atque portum preparare
nauta mundo naufrago, quem facer cruor perunxit fusus agni Corpore. O faithful
cross the only noble tree among all, no grove brings forth such a tree in
leaf, in flower, in budde, bearing that sweet wodde, those sweet nails, that
sweet weight. Thou only have been worthy to bear the price of the world,
and being a mariner to prepare a haven for the world that made shipwreck,
which the holy blood shed out of the lambs body has anointed. What
insensible blocks are they that prate thus to, and of an insensible stock?

But to justify the former blasphemous hymn, Master Sander will prove that
it was made of old time, either of Hilarie, Ambrose, Fortunatus, Sedulius,
Prudentius, or Gregory, or else he cannot tell of whom, or when. But what is
his reason trow you? Marie, because it does concern the holy time of Lent,
and is received not only in England, but also in Italy, France, and Spain.
O invincible reasons, it was not for naught that he bragged, that Master
Jewel should never be able to avoid the argument, that is grounded on these
words.

The last writer cited for the worship of the cross is Chrysostom Hom. de
adorat cruc. saying, Hodiernus dies pre^iosae crucis venerationi constitutus
est. This day is appointed to the worshipping of the precious cross. Admodum
beati ij qui castis labijs sanctoque ore eam vt amplexantur, exeunt. Very
blessed are they that go forth with chaste lips and holy mouth to kiss it.

But what a mockery is this, that those words which this author speaks
allegorically of the spiritual cross, yt is to say, of the death and
redemption of Christ (which no man doubts, but with all honor it is to be
embraced) should be drawn to a wooden image of I cannot tell what cross, to be
worshipped, licked and kissed. For it follows immediately Re enim vera illud
domini verbum implent: Si quis me sequi velit seipsum abneges, tollatquecrucem
suam et me sequatur. For they do in very deed fulfill that saying of our
Lord: if any man will follow me, let him deny him self, and take up his cross
and follow me. And expounding what cross he means, he says: An vt lignum
vnusquis quae nostrum ferat? certe non. Que enim hc virtus est? Sed vt ad
pericula instructi simus, and sanguine^ in animis nostris suum ferentes, ad
cdem et mortem quotidie parati ita omnia faciamus vt si ad vesperum nos
victuros esse non speraremus. What, does he command every on of us to bear a
piece of wood? No surely. For what virtue is that? but that we should be
furnished against dangers, and carrying about his blood in our minds, we should
be ready to be slain and to die and so do all things as if we hoped not to
live until the evening. Chrysostom also in many other places speaks
magnifically of the cross but then he means the death and passion of CHRIST,
he commends also the figure of the cross, but yet with out any adoration of
it: of the cross he says in epist. ad Colloss. Hom. 3. Deo reconciliauit per
seipsum, per mortem, per crucem. Pape quomodo illa rursus commiscuit, etenim ne
putares vnum esse, neque crucem aliquid esse iuxta seipsam, per seipsum dicit.
He has reconciled us to God, by him self, by his death, by his cross: good
lord how he has again joined these together, for that thou should not
think that they are one, nor that the cross is any thing by it self, he
says by himself. The sign of the cross he calls ye sign of death, to put
the people in remembrance not only of ye death of Christ, but also of their own
suffering and patience. So far he was of from setting up the sign of the
cross to be adored or kneeled unto, that gross idolatry had not prevailed in
his time, nor long after.

THE XIIII. OR XIII. CHAP.
That other holy images both might be adored profitably, and without Jewish
bondage by S. Augustines own doctrine, Sander.
and also were adored within the first six hundredth years after Christ, with
a defense of S. Chrisostomes liturgy against M. Jewel. Also that the general
doctrine of S. Augustine concerning figures is applied to Images. Images were
made without all scruple in the primitive Church. Bowing to the image of Christ
in S. Chrisostoms ^ime. His liturgy is defended. Seuerus painted the images of
S. Martine and Paulinus in a holy place. S. Gregory lay prostrate before an
holy Image.

Saint Augustine is cited, De doct. Christian. lib. 3. cap. 9. Qui aut operatur
aut veneratur, etc. Fulke.
He that works or reuerenceth (M. Sander translateth worshippeth) a
profitable sign, instituted by gods authority, whose strength and
signification he understands, does not reverence (or worship) that which
he sees and passes away, but rather that thing, whereunto all such things
are to be referred. First I note the corruption of Master Sanders translation,
that turns Veneratur worshippeth, after the popish meaning. For God did
never institute any sign to be worshipped, in that sense which Master Sander
defends worshippinge of Images. But all signs instituted of God are to be
reverently esteemed and regarded, as baptism, which we do reverently esteem,
and yet we worship not either the water, or the action of baptizing.

Secondly we have to consider, how Master Sander can prove images to be
profitable signs instituted by gods authority. They be profitable (says he)
because they bring us in remembrance of good things. I deny this argument,
because nothing is profitable in religion but that which is instituted by God,
for otherwise we might bring the gallows into the Church, which brings us
in remembrance of Gods Justice, etc. as I have showed before. Likewise the
Prophet Abacuc utterly denies Images to be profitable: Cap. 2. verse. 18. But
let us see how he proves popish images to be instituted by Gods authority
which is al in all, for if that be proved we will not doubt of the
profitablenesse of them. First he alleges the imitation of nature, and of
nations, the institution of some images in the law of Moses, last of all, the
tradition left to his Church freely to make images of good things.

The former reasons are answered before in their proper chapters, namely the
law of nature and nations, cap. 11. the making of some images in Moses law,
cap 12. also the example of practice of this supposed tradition out of Eusebius
cap. 10. And they are all three wiped away with the express commandment of
God in his law of religion: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image,
or the likeness of any thing, etc. Nevertheless let us see how by tradition
left to the Church, images are proved to be instituted by God. We read
(says he) in S. Augustine as well of the Ethnikes, as of the Christians.
There is first one falsehood, for Augustine in the place by him cited speaks
only of Ethnikes. De consen. Euang. lib. 1. cap. 10. which because they had
seen Christ's image pictured with Peter and Paul, imagined that Christ had
written books to Peter and Paul. Secondly he cites the words thus. Pluribus
locis simul Petrum et Paulum cu^ Christo pictos viderunt, quiae merita Petri
and Pauli etiam propter cundem passionis diem celebrius ac solemniter Roma
commendat. They saw in very many places Peter and Paul painted together with
Christ, because Rome does set forth the merits of Peter and Paul the more
famously and solemnly, even for that they suffered both upon one day. In this
allegation, he adds words that are not in Augustine. Although not contrary
to his meaning, yet showing thereby that he borrowed this place, as many of
our English papists do commonly, of some other man's noting, rather then of
his own reading. But the greatest fault of all is, that he does deceiptfully
suppress the words following immediately, which declare how profitable Saint
Augustine esteemed the doctrine of Images to be. His whole sentence is this:
Credo quod pluribus locis simul eos cum illo pictos viderunt, quia merita Petri
and Pauli etiam propter cundem passionis diem celebrius and solemniter Roma
commendat. Sic omnino errare meruerunt, qui Christum and Apostolos eius, non in
sanctis codicibus sed in pictis parietibus quaesierunt. I believe that they
have seen them painted with him in many places, because Rome does more
notably and solemnly set forth the worthiness of Peter and Paul, even
because of the same day of their suffering. So they were altogether worthy to
be deceived, which have sought Christ and his Apostles not in the holy books,
but in painted walls.

Now see with what honesty, Master Sander has alleged this place of
Augustine to prove that images are of Gods institution. But you will say
perhaps, this place does prove, that Images of Christ and his Apostles
were then made by Christians, I grant, but not in the Churches, for then the
Ethnikes could not have seen them, because they were never suffered to enter
into the Churches of the Christians.

But Gregory Nyssen in his Oration De Theod. martyr. laud. testyfieth, that
the paynter had set forth the whole story of Theodorus the martyr in his
Church. And yet the Image of the martyr was none otherwise painted, then the
fierce and cruel forms of the tyrauntes, neither otherwise on the walls,
then on the pauemente. For he says, Capillorum item concinnator, historiae par
opu^ in pauimento quod pedibus calcatur, effecit.

Also the pauier has made the like work of history upon the pauemente,
which is trodden under feet.

These devises of painters and pauiers Master Sander is feign to take hold of,
in steed of the holy scriptures and aunciente writers. But if he say that
Gregorius does also allow these, I answer as ornaments of the Church, not
as matter of Gods religion and worship, which yet he should rather have
defaced with Epiphanius, then suffered or allowed for inconuenienc^ that followed.

This report of Gregory shows the error of that time, rather then proves
images to be instituted by God. That Paulinus caused images to be painted on
the Church walls, as it is confessed to be done, so it is denied to be well
done. The like I say of the images painted in Saint Martins Church in Towers in
France, witnessed by Gregorius Turonensis, although it was long after the time
of Paulinus, in which Satan began to lay the platform for his Idolatry,
which afterward he brought into the world. And these be all the arguments,
that he has to prove that images are profitable signs instituted by Gods
authority. Except he mean the text of Paul to the Galat. 5. to be an
argument, which he cites to prove that we are made free in Christ, both to
know our signs and images to be images and signs, and also to know whereof
they are signs, which the Jews (says he) did not. So that the liberty of
Christ is by M. Sanders doctrine, not from a yoke of bondage and servitude unto
ceremonies, but from ignorance and want of knowledge of the use of them. And
whereas by the law we are utterly discharged of Images, this man's freedom is
to bind us to the service of Images. O blasphemous and absurd doctrine!
Again, how falsely does he affirm yt the godly Jews knew not whereunto
their signs were referred, as though Messiah was not preached to them by those
signs. Likewise as untruly he says, that the signs of the Gentiles ended in
the only honor of the creature, and not of God, when they did never honor
any creature, but their final end was thereby to honor God, and not a
creature.

Again, what beastly doctrine is this, that he affirms yt ye signs of ye
Jews are not utterly abolished, but changed into ye sacraments directly
instituted by Christ, but also into signs made with faithful men's hands, as
Altars, vestments, Chalices, lights and images, whereby he makes Christian
liberty but a change from one bondage into an other, and yet worse then that
of the Jews, because they were subject to the yoke of God, we must be under
the yoke of men's institutions and traditions.

But he proceeds and will prove that images may be profitably and freely
worshipped, and that in practice it was so done within the first six hundredth
years, by the testimony of Chrysostom, Paulinus, and Gregory.

Chrysostom is alleged in his Liturgy, where it is said that the priest
turning to the image of Christ, between the two doors, bowing his head,
says a prayer.

But because this liturgy is proved to be false, and counterfeit by master
Jewel, for that therein is contained a prayer for Pope Nicholas which lived
not 500. years after Chrysostom, and for the Emperor Alexius which lived
near 700. years after Chrysostom, master Sander takes upon him the
defense of it to be written by Chrysostom, which was written seven hundredth
years after his death. His first reason is, that it bears his name, which is
a good reason to prove all forgeries to be true writings. Secondly other
Grecians which have written since that time, do make mention of it, as Proclus,
Cabaselas Methenencis, and M. Ephesius. But of these, some only make mention
that Chrysostom did write a liturgy, they do not justify that this which is
now seen is that, the other being of late days, are not to be credited.
Thirdly he says yt Greek church does allow it for Chrisostomes, as yt latin
does those Psalms Quicunque vult to be written by Athanasius, and Te deum by
Ambrose and Augustine. And yet the best learned in these days, cannot be
persuaded of those authors although the Psalms be good and Godly. Fourthly he
would feign disprove M. Jewels reason, touching those prayers for Pope
Nicolas and the Emperor Alexius, saying that in all public service and forms
of prayers there are certain common places, which must be left void for names
according to the times and persons.

But these places are not left void, but filled with the names of the princes
and prelates of that time, in which it was first written, as the public service
in king Henry's days, in king Edwardes time, yea prayers made in Queen Mary's
time, and in Queen Elizabeth's time, do prove and show in what time they were
first made. But in some copyes (says he) the places are left void. He must
prove those copies to be auncienter then the time of Alexius, or else they
help not his cause. But seeing there is no copy that has any other names but
these, it is manifest that this liturgy was first composed in the days of the
Emperor Alexius, and Pope Nicholas. And where as master Sander uses many
words and reasons to prove, that this Pope Nicholas was not Bishop of Rome,
as master Jewel says, but Patriarch of Constantinople in the reign of
Alexius, I yield unto him: for thereby it is more certain yt this liturgy
was made in ye time of Alexius, then if it had been Nicholas of Rome, which
was near 200. years before Alexius. Last of all where as Claudius de Sanctis
that brauling Sorbonist, would prove by conferring it with diverse places
taken out of Chrisostomes own works, the said liturgy to be his, he has
labored in vain. For as it may be granted, that diverse things in this
liturgy are taken out of that, which perhaps Chrysostom did write, yet it
follows not that the whole form thereof is his, but that the same was
corrupted and altered, with additions and detractions in the days of Alexius,
and especially in this matter of the images, which I prove by two reasons.
First among so many counterfeit and falsified authorities as were alleged out
of old writers in the idolatours counsel of Nice the second for the use and
worship of images, this liturgy was never alleged, though other testimony of
Chrysostom was cited which could not have been omitted seeing nothing is so
notorius as the public service of the Church. Whereby it is manifest that the
liturgy which went under the name of Chrysostom in that time, had in it no
mention of images or the worshipping of them.

My second reason is, that Chrysostom himself in his own undoubted
writings, coumpteth the art of painting to be altogether superfluous, and such
as might well be spared out of the world, which he would not have done, if he
had appointed in the public service of the Church, the use of an image as
necessary or profitable. For thus he writes in Math Hom. 50. Neque pingendi
ariem aut nunimulariam, arts ego nominarim, quippe cum nihil conserant
necessariarum rerum, quibus vita nostra continetur. Neither would I call the
art of painting or of exchaunging monyes by the name of arts, seeing that they
yield nothing off those necessary things, in which our life is contained.

Now as concerning the image of S. Martine painted in the Baptistery by
Seuerus, and allowed by Paulinus bishop of Nola, I have answered before, that
his error proves not Gods institution. But whereas he cites his verse to
prove the worshipping of images, he does him wrong. Martinum veneranda viri
testatur imago. The reverend image of the man does show forth Martin: for
pocres have ever had license of all figures in their verses, wherefore he does
none otherwise call the image reverend, or to be reverenced, then Virgill
calls the image of his father Anchises troubled: Admonet in somnis and
turbida terret imago: Meaning not that the image, but that Anchises was
troubled, so does Paulinus mean that S. Martine, and not his image was to be
reverenced.

Finally where as master Jewel says that Gregory speaks not one word of
the adoration of images, master Sander obiecteth this saying lib. 7. Ep. 53.
Non quasi ante diuinitatem, ante illam imaginem prosternimur: which he
englisheth thus, we ly prostrate before ye image, not as before god. And then
he triumphs like a crow in a gutter, saying, is not lying flat down before
an image, one word spoken of adoration of images? yea, it is clear yt it was
the use in Saint Gregory's time, to lie prostrate or to fall down before holy
images. What say you master Sander will you abide by it? Have you either
forgotten the grammar you taught us before of joining the aduerbe with the
verb, or think you that we have learned so little either grammar or logike,
that we cannot see a difference between a proposition affirmative and
negative? If a boy should construe Gregory's latin as you have englished it,
he were worthy of a dosen strips, though he had gone to gra^mer school but
two or three years. Non quasi ante diuinitate^, ante illam imagine^
prosternimur. We fall not down before that image as before ye divinity: thus
would I english it and conster it if it were for my life. And that which you
make affirmative, I must make negative, for I have learned five or six and
twenty year ago, that it is a negative proposition, when the principal
Verb is denied. But perhaps you will gather that though he fell not down
before an image, as before God, yet he fell down before it, as before an image.

How certain this collection is, you may see by an hundredth examples if you
list to consider them. If I say, Non quasi ante diuinitatem, ante diabolum
prosternimur: would you translate it we fall down before the devil, but not
as before God, or rather thus, we fall not down before the devil as we do
before God.

Non quasi panem, lapides commedimus, would you turn it thus? we eat stones,
but not as bread: or rather we eat not stones as we eat bread.

Non quasi ante regem, ante mendicum prosternimur, would you translate it
thus? we fall down before a beggar but not as before a king, or else we fall
not down before a beggar as before a King. Such examples might be multiplied
infinitely, by which you may see, what pith there is in master Sanders
argument, to prove that Saint Gregory lay prostrate before an image, where as
contrariwise he denies it, and makes such prostration and falling down with
affection of religion to be dew only to GOD, even as the Angel infinitely
more excellent then all the images that ever were made, refusing that honor
offered to him by Saint John, willed him to give it to God. (...), fall down
to God. Apoc. 22.9.

THE XV. or XIIII. CHAP.
That the seventh general council was a true council, and ought to be obeyed,
and Master Jewels slanders be answered concerning the same. Where also it is
briefly showed, that miracles might and have been wrought by holy images. Also
Master Jewels vain arguments against the seventh general council, and Irene
the Empress, that Master Jewel commits three faults about five Latin
words, that the shadow of Peter was accounted of virtue and power to heal
men. That they were and are in possession of honoring images, who defended the
honoring of them. The cause why the seventh general council was called. The
seventh general council is conferred with the first. What Bishops recanted in
the seventh council. Sander.


The Bishop of Salisburie rejecting the authority of this Council of Nice the
second, says, Fulk.
it was holden well near eight hundredth years after Christ, and therefore was
out of the compass of those six hundred years, of which he made his
challenge. Master Sander answers, it was seven hundredth years before
Master Jewel, as though the controversy were of antiquity of the men, and
not of the doctrine.

The Bishop said, it would require a long treatise, to open the whole folly
and fondness of that Council. M. Sander answers, it is more like, that M.
Jewel is a fond fool, then 350. Bishops of such wit, virtue, and learning: as
though their multitude could prove their wit, virtue, and learning, when their
words and deeds plainly declare their folly, ignorance, and ungodliness.

The B. said, Irene the Empress which gathered this Council, was a wicked
woman. M. Sander citing diverse writers to and fro in the end concludes, that
by repentance she was made a good woman, and her zeal toward holy images did
make her the better, so he brings that for an argument, which is the matter
in controversy.

The Bishop said. She was the kings daughter of Tartaria, an Heathen borne. So
was Constantine the great, says M. Sander, yet was she Christened before she
procured that Council, whereas he doubts whether Master Jewel think that
Constantine was baptized, when he gathered and confirmed the first Council of
Nice. The Bishop does not for that cause only reject the second Council at
Nice, because Irene was an Heathen borne, but thereby shows, that she
sauoured of Gentilitie, in being earnest to set forward idolatry. And whereas
Master Sander doubts, whether Master Jewel think Constantine were
baptized before he gathered the Council, he need not at al, seeing Eusebius
which knew Constantine very well, affirms that he was not baptized, but even
imediatly before his death. Contrary to that fond fable, which among other is
avouched by Pope Adrian in this Council, that Constantine was cured of a
leapresie, and baptized by Siluester Bishop of Rome. And whereas he thinks it
a dangerous matter, to take the authorizing of that Council from Siluester,
and to ascribe it to one that was not baptized, there is no peril at all in
it, for Constantine did then believe in Christ, and was certainly determined to
be baptized in Jordan, if he had not been prevented by death. Yea, although he
had been an Heathen man, seeing he gave no sentence, but assented to the
sentence of the Bishops, it had been none inconvenience at all.

The Bishop said. She caused that Council to be summoned in despite of the
Council of Constantinople, that had decreed against images. Master Sander,
although he confess there was such a Council, yet because the whole process
of the acts thereof is not extant, being defaced by the idolaters, he
quarelleth that it was an obscure Council, and asks by what Emperor it was
gathered: as though it were not testified that it was gathered by Leo the
third, but it lacked (says he) the Bishop of Romes authority, and therefore
was no general Council, so did the Chalcedonense, and the sixth of
Constantinople in some parts, and yet it went forward with the decree, which
had been in vain if the Romish Bishop had a negative voice in all Councels.

The Bishop said. She took her own son Constantinus and pulled out his
eyes. The Council is not therefore naught, says Master Sander. But she is
thereby proved to be a cruel woman, which was the Bishops meaning.

The Bishop says, She did it only, because he would not consent to the
idolatrous having of images. Master Sander denies this, but proof he
brings none, saving that he shows there was an other cause why she might
do it, namely because he deposed her of her government, wherein he did
well, after the example of Asa, which is commended in the scripture, for that
he did put down his mother Maachah from her estate, because she had made an
idol in a grove, and destroyed her idolles, and burned them by the brook
Elledron. 1. Reg. 15. verse. 13. But Master Sander will defend her title of
succession, because she was elder then her son, and to be honored of him. O
cunning Lawyer, that will make the wife inheritour to her husband, and that in
the Empire before her son begotten by her husband, which had the Empire by
descent. Concerning the diuorcement of Constantinus from his first wife Marie,
and marrying of an other, as I know not the cause, so I will not take upon me
the defense.

The Bishop said: the Bishops and Doctors of that Council manifestly
corrupted the Scriptures. Master Sander says, it is not so, as he has
proved in part, what he has proved you may read in the twefth Chapter: but
because he is so impudent to defend those corruptions and deprauations, I will
set down some of them. Theodosius Amorij cites this text for images, What
things so eueer are written, they are written for our learning.

Ioannes Legate of ye East cites this, Show me thy face, for" it is
beautiful. Theodorus alleges this saying, God is marvelous in his Saints.
An other, to prove that images must be set on the altar, uses this text. No
man lights a candle and puts it under a bushel etc. An other this text to
prove images necessary to know God by them. As we have heard, so we have
seen, in the city of our God. These are not the one half of those beastly
applications of the scripture used in that blasphemous Council, but these are
sufficient to show, what learned bewclearks they were in the holy word of God,
and the interpretation thereof.

The B. said, They falsified the holy Fathers without shame. Master Sander
says nothing, but that he does belie them. What shall we say of the
falsifying of Basil in Oratione 40. Martyrs: for the worshipping of images,
which Oration is extant, and no such matter found in it? Shall we believe the
forged Oration in the name of Athanasius, of the image of Christ in Beritus,
which being stricken by a Jew, blood issued out of the side of it? How
impudently do they deny the authority and writings of Epiphanius,
Amphilochius, Theodotus, Eusebius, which were brought against the irreligious
use and honoring of images, by the Councels of Constantinople and Ephesus,
slaundering also Eusebius of Arrianisme.

The B. said, They said Imago melior est quam oration. An image is better then
a prayer. Here are three faults found in citing five words. Great faults I
warrant you. The first, he writes they said: which one only Bishop did say,
but in ye end of that fourth action all the Bishops and Legates subscribed and
allowed all that had been said in defense of images, and no man reclamed,
therefore he might well write: they said. The second fault is, he said not
melior est imago, but mayor est imago, greater i^ an image, for a thing may be
greater which is not better. This is no great fault, but an oversight, and the
sense is not altered, for in this case he means by greater, better.

The third fault that he translateth Oration for prayer, which signifies an
oration or speech. Yet does it signify a prayer also. But if the circumstance
of this place would have it to be taken for speech or an oration, or sermon,
the absurdity is nothing less to say, there is greater force to teach in an
image, then in a sermon, oration, or speech.

But seeing you find so many faults in the citing of that saying to excuse it
from absurdity, I pray you see if you can find as many in this, which I cite,
spoken by Ioannes the Monk, Priest and deputy or vicar of the East, to defend
it from blasphemy. Nisi fuissent necessariae imagines, eas propter
stabilitionem factorum non fuissent osculati, vt etiam meo iuditio cum sanctis
Euangelijs and veneranda cruce aequivaleant. Except images had been necessary,
he would not have kissed them for the establishing of deeds, so that in my
judgment they are of equal worthiness with the holy Gospels and the reverend
cross. Act. 4.

The B. said: And again whosoever will not adore the godly images, accursed be
he. This M. Sander confesses to be written in deed, and to be true, saving
that he cauilleth at the translation of Diuinas imagines, into godly images,
which he says should be divine images. But how likes he the saying of
Constantine Bishop of Constantia in Cypres? which affirms that he will
worship images with that honor which is due to the blessed Trinity, and
accurseth him that, refuses with the Manichees and Marcionites, unto which
sentence all the rest agree. Where is now the distinction of Doulia and Latria,
when they will worship the image of Christ, with the same honor that is due to
the Trinity? What says he to the zeal of Ihon the deputy of the East, which
affirms that it is better to admit all stews of whores and brothels into
the city, then to deny the worshipping of images? If these be not beastly and
blasphemous absurdities, worse then childish sayings, which he can not abide
the Bishop to term them, let the world judge.

Hitherto M. Sander has made no defense for this idolatrous rablement, which
he calls the seventh general council. But he will answer all the Bishops
arguments against it with these 4. reasons. First he says, there is no
impiety or falshoode approved or decreed in that council. A substantial
reason, which concludes upon that which is in controversy. But yet to lay
open his shameless impudency, I will prove that to have been decreed and
approved in that council, which he him self will not deny to be impiety and
falsehood. Action. 5. We read thus, out of the book of one Ihon Bishop of
Thessalonica. De Angelis, and Archangelis and eorum potestatibus, quibus and
nostras animas adiungo, ipsa Catholica Ecclesia sic sentis, esse quidem
intelligibiles sed non omnino corporis expertes and inuisibiles, vt vos
gentiles dicitis, verum tenui corpore preditos, and aereo sieve igneo, vt
scriptum est: Qui facit Angelos suos spiritus, and ministros eius, ignem
vrentem, etc. Of Angels and Archangels and of their powers, unto which also I
adioyne our souls, the Catholic Church does so think, that they are in
deed intelligible, but not altogether void of body and invisible as you
Gentiles say, but that they have a thin body and that either of air or of
fire, as it is written: which makes his Agels spirits, and his ministers a
burning fire, etc.

Hereupon Thorasius the Patriarch said: Ostendit autem pater quod and Angelos
pingere oporteat, qua^do circumscribi possunt, and vt and homines apparnerunt.
Sacra synodus dixit, etia^ Domine. This father has showed that we ought to
paint the Angels also, seeing they may be circu^scribed, and have appeared as
men. The holy synod said, Yea forsooth my Lord. Here is an open falsehood
decreed and approved that Angels and souls of men have bodies of air or fire
and be circumscriptible. But if M. Sander will stand in the defense of it,
because it is so decreed by this general council: at least let him hear the
greatest council for multitude, that is read of, namely. The Laterane Cap. 1.
Vnus est Deus indiuisus in essentia and discretus in personis, creator omnium,
etc: is ab initio temporis vtramque de nihilo condidit creaturam, corporalem
and spiritualem, Angelicam scilices and mundanam. Dinde humanam quasi co^munem
ex spiritu and corpore constituta^. There is one God undivided in essence, and
distinct in persons, the creator of all things, etc. He in the beginning of
time created both the creatures of nothing, the bodily creature and the
spiritual, namely the Angels and the world. Afterward the humane creature as
common, consisting both of a spirit and of a body. Now let M. Sander advise
himself, whether he will justify the Nicene council with condemning the
Laterane, for their decrees be directly contrary one to ye other. For impiety
beside that which we have already showed, John deputy of the East to whom all the synod agreed uttered these words out of Sophionius. Praestat iurantem
peierare, quam plane iuramentum in destructionem venerandarum imaginum seruare.
It is beter for him that swears to be forsworn, then in deed to keep his oath
to the destruction of reverend images. If this also may be excused from
impiety, what say you to that conclusion? Gaudeant and exultant qui Christi
habentes imaginem, sacrificium illi offerunt. Let them rejoice and be glad
which having the image of Christ do offer sacrifice to it. In this conclusion,
sacrifice which is the honor properly due to GOD alone even by the Papists
confession, is given to an image. If none of al these be impiety, yet to
condemn the Pope of Rome for an heretic, (I answer with M. Sander) is
counted great impiety, and a pernicious error. But Honorius sometime Pope of
Rome, was in this council condemned for an heretic Action. 6. To. 2. and
Action. 7. in the definition.

His second reason in defense of this council is, that every word uttered by
any father, is not the determination of the whole council, no more then the
voice of every burgess, is an act of Parleament. This granted, we have showed
the consent of the synod to most of the speeches we have recited which makes
a full determination.

His third reason is, that the scriptures are better applied for honoring of
images, then they are impugned by Master Jewel, as he has partly showed.
What he has showed, and how well he has applied them, we have seen already.

His fourth reason is, that the miracles there told are not against the faith,
and therefore not to be derided, but credited. If all that be against the
faith, which is against the word of God, those miracles that are brought to
confirm the worshipping of images, must needs be against the faith. That I
speak not of so many dreams, as be there alleged to prove the same. But M.
Sander thinks images might as well work miracles, as the shadow of Peter did
heal diseases, Saint Paul's girdle or napkins did heal diseases, and drive
out devils. But Peter him self confesses, that not he himself, much less
his shadow, or any virtue in him did heal diseases, but only Jesus Christ.
Ye men of Israel says he, why marvel you at this, or why look ye upon us, as
though by our own power and godliness we had made this man to walk? If Peter's
own person may not be looked unto to have any praise of the miracle, much
less his shadow, or Paul's girdle and napkins, and least of all his image:
for God used those as means by which he wrought, but their images he never
used. Again, no man was so mad to worship Peter's shadow, or Paul's napkins,
or Elizaeus staff, for that he has up also, although it wrought no miracle.
As for the herb which was reported to grow under ye image in Paneade, it
took no virtue of the image, if any such herb were, but of God. Although in
that point, Eusebius as I think was more credulous then a wise man should have been, to write such a strange matter upon report, which he might have seen
himself, within a few days journey.

After these general answers, he promises to bring a most evident reason, why
every man ought to believe and obey the same general council, under pain of
everlasting damnation. And what is that I pray you? Forsooth, they that
defended honoring of images, were in possession of honoring of images,
because it had been impossible that images had been overthrown, if they had
not been first set up and honored. A lawlike reason in deed.

Why Master Sander, will you defend a possession without a title. The setting
up and worshipping of Images, when it first entered into the Church, was but a
Disseisure of the true and spiritual worship of God, and therefore by diverse
assizes holden at Constantinople and Ephesus was dispossessed, and the true
worship of God restored, until this packed Jury of Nice, put her out of
possession again. And where you reject the councels of Constantinople and
Ephesus, as private conuenticles, as holden in the dark, and hating the light,
because the whole process of their calling and acts, is by your false
Idolatrous Council of Nice defaced, you show your self both void of reason
and honesty. Of reason, because many councels were held, and things in them
decreed and observed, although the records of them are not to be found at
large. Of honesty, because you would take advantage of your own wrong, who
have burned the records, and then urge your adversary to show them.

You say they followed in this council the use of their forefathers. The
council of Constantinople also followed the use of their elder fathers, whose
writings they alleged against images. As Epiphanius: Estote memores dilecti
filij ne in ecclesiam imagines inferatis, nec in sanctorum cmiterijs eas
statuite, sed perpetuo circumferte deum in cordibus vestris. Quia etiam nec in
domo communi tolerentur. Non enim fas est Christianum per oculos suspensum
teneri, sed per occupationem mentis. Be mindful beloved children, that you
bring no images into the Church, neither set ye them up in the burial places
of the saints, but always carye about God in your hearts. But neither in a
common house let them be tolerated. For it is not lawful for a Christian man
to be held in suspense by the eyes, but by occupying of the mind.

Again they cited Chrisostomes, saying. Nos perscripta sanctorum fruimur
presentia, non sane corporum ipsorum, sed animarum imagines habentes. Non quae
ab ipsis dicta sunt, animorum illorum imagines sunt. We enjoy the presence of
the saints by their writings, verilye not having the images of their bodies,
but of their minds. For those things which are said by them, are the images
of their minds.

Likewise they cited the saying of Amphilochus sometime bishop of Iconium.
Non enim nobis sanctorum corporales vultus in tabulis, coloribus effigiare
curae est, quoniam hijs opus non habemus, sed politice illorum virtutum memores
esse debemus. We have no regard to counterfeit the corporal faces of the
saints in tables with colors, because we have no need of them, but we ought
to be wisely mindful of their virtues.

Moreover they rehearsed the saying of Theodotus bishop of Ancyn. Sanctorum
formas and species ex materialibus coloribus formari minime decorum putamus:
horum cutem virtutes quae per scripta traditae sunt, veluti viuas quasdam
imagines reficere subinde oportet. Ex hijs enim ad similem imitationem and
zelum peruenire possumus. Dicant enim nobis qui illas erigunt, quaenam vtilitas
ex illis ad se redit? an quod qualiscunque recordatio eos habeat ex tali specie
and contemplatione? sed manifestum est, quod vana sit eiuscemodi cogitatio, and
diabolicae deceptionis inuentum. We think it nothing at al seemly, that the
forms and shapes of the saints should be fashioned in material colors:
but their virtues which are delivered by their writings as certain living
images, we ought often times to renew. For by them we may come to the like
imitation and zeal. For let those which set up images tell us, what profit
comes unto them by them? is it that a certain remembrance come to them by
such shape and sight? But it is manifest, that such cogitation is vain, and an
invention of diuelishe deceipte. What shall here rehearse the testimony of
Eusebius, who when the Empress Constantia required to have an image of Christ,
answered that no such images were to be made? with many other sayings of Basil,
Gregory, Athanasius, and other, cited in that Council, which M.S. makes so
obscure, as though they had met by candle light, and whispered in corners,
that they durst not be a known of. But if it deserved not the credit of a
council, what needed Irene to have gathered this worshipful council of Nice
against it? And where M.S. for further allowance of it, says it was confirmed
and registered for a known lawful general council throughout al christendom, he
speaks out of al compass of the truth. For the Emperor Charles the great
would not receive it, but write, or at the leastwise commanded Albinus or
Alcuinus his teacher to write a book against it in his name, which book is
yet extant. How it was received in Britain, Matheus Westminster. testifies in these
words. Eodem anno Carolus rex Francorum, etc.

The same year Charles the king of France sent a synodall book into Britane,
in which many things were found contrary to the true faith, and especially
this, that it was defined by the consent of almost all the doctors of the East,
that images ought to be worshipped, which doctrine the Catholic Church does
altogether accurse. Against which Albinus wrote an Epistle, being marueilously
well indighted by the authority of holy scriptures, and the fame brought unto
the French king, with that synodall book in the presence of the bishops and
noble men.

These things considered, the conference that he makes between this council
and the first held at the same place, is chyldishe and ridiculous, for though
they were both held in one place, called by Emperors or Popes, equal in
number, disputation in both, 4. Patriarks in both, custom observed, the decree
put in execution, etc. yet they disagreed in that which is the only authority
of councels. The first decreed according to the word of God, the later clean
contrary to it. The first confirmed the Catholic faith which always was held,
the later a new heresy of Idolatry, of which the Church was clear more
then six hundredth years. And therefore what soever he talks of the
authority of general councels is vain and wicked, for a general council of
Angels is not to be believed against the holy scriptures, and what is more
plain in the scriptures, then the forbidding of Idolatry and worshippinge of
Images?

The great prerogative that Master Sander finds in this council, that so
many bishops recanted in it, as in none other, is a fond matter to authorize
it. Rather it shows what turn coats they were, which changed as every
prince was affected.

Finally the number of names, that he rehearses of them that believed, as this
council decreed, makes it not of sufficient credit, beside that he is not
able to prove it of many, whom he names, as Beda, Theophylacte, Euthymius,
etc. It were an easy matter to prove as many mo of more antiquity, which
believed the contrary. As Clemens Alexandrinus, Origines, Irenaeus, Justinius,
Cyprianus, Lactantius, Epiphanius, Arnobius, Tertulianus, Augustinus,
Chrysostomus, Hieronymus, Ambrosus, Athanasius, Basilius, Gregorius Naza.
Eusebius, Osius and 18. bishops with him in the council of Eliberis.
Theodosus and 21. bishops with him in the council of Laodicea. Aurelius and
71. bishops with him in the council of Carth. 5. Amphylochius Iconiensis,
Theodorus, Ancyramus, Serenus Massiliensis, Claudius Taurinensis, Albinus,
Carolus magnus, yea Gregory 1, of Rome, and Jonas of Orleance against the
worshipping of Images. If I would descend to later times as Master Sander
does, I might add a great number more, as Waldo, Masilus, Henricus de Gandauo,
John Wiclef, John Hus, Hierome of Praga, and many other. So that there
remains in record four to one, that M. Sander can name for the use and
worshippinge of images, against either one or both. And the greatest part more
ancient then the second council of Nice, which he would maintain by
rehearsing so many names of men that allowed it, the most part were since it
was holden, and scarce two or three before it was held.

THE XVI. OR XV. CHAP.
That M. Jewel himself brings such reasons for worshipping bread and wine
in the sacrament of the Alter, because he says; they are the image of Christ's
body and blood, as may right well serve for the worshipping of all holy
images. It is proved by master Jewels own words, that the image of an holy
thing may be worshipped, with what intent an image it made. Master Jewel has
filthy and dishonest images in his own book. Sander.


This Chapter contains nothing else but a shameless cauilling and quarrelling
upon master Jewels words, Fulke.
with little wit, less learning, and least of all of honesty.

The bishop writes thus: The old fathers in their writings commonly call the
sacrament a representation, a remembrance, a memory, an image, a likeness, a
samplar, a token, a sign, a figure. And in an other place he writes thus:
Neither do we only adore Christ as very God, but also worship and reverence
ye sacrament and holy mystery of Christ's body. Here upon master Sander
reasons thus. If the sacrament being an image, a sign etc, of Christ's body
and not his own body, may be worshipped and reverenced, therefore it does
follow, that an image of an holy thing being absent, as of Christ or saint
Laurence, may be worshipped of the new Gospellers. Who will say the Papists
lack learning, that make such witty arguments? An image or sign instituted
by God may be reverenced, therefore an image forbidden by God may be honored.
That which is vnproperlye called an image may be worshipped, ergo that which is
properly called so, may be worshipped. Christ is the image of his father, Christ
is God, therefore every image is God. A sign or sacrament of Christ's
institution ought to be reverently esteemed, therefore a stock or a stone in
fashion of an image, ought to be senced, kneeled too, kissed, prayed to etc.

But master Jewel proceeds further saying, we worship the word of God
according to this counsel of Anastasius. Dominica verbae attente audiant and
fideliter adorent.

Let them diligently hear and faithfully worship the word of God. Briefly we
worship other things in such religious wise unto Christ belonging. Of these
words, Master Sander argues thus. But Christ's own image belongs to him,
in a religious wise instructing the eye, the more worthy sense, better then the
word does the ear, therefore Christ's image is to be worshipped by the force
of master Jewels doctrine. I deny that your image belongs to Christ, which he
abhors, or that faith is to be instructed by the eye, but only by the
hearing of the word. Romans 10.

Further master Jewel says, doubtless it is our duty to adore the body of
Christ in the word of God, in the Sacrament of baptism, in the mysteries of
Christ's body and blood, and wheresoever we see any step or token of it.
Hereof master Sander resoneth thus, a step is only a token of the foot, an
image of the whole bodily shape, a step must be adored, ergo, much more an
image. I deny that an image is any step of the body of Christ, but a false,
lying, and deceiptfull counterfeit: beside that it is a wise reason that is
drawn from a Metaphore, to a proper speech.

Moreover master Jewel says in an other place: the sacraments in this sort
are the flesh of Christ, and are so understood and believed, and adored. But
the whole honor rests not in them, but is passed over from them, to the
things that be signified.

Here says master Sander, he gives to the sacraments the honor due to an
image, and as he worshipeth the sacrament without danger of idolatry, so do
we honor holy images without fear of committing idolatry. A sound
conclusion. The sacraments are to be reverenced, as signs ordained of God to
represent the body of Christ without idolatry, therefore images forbidden by
God, may be worshipped without danger of idolatry.

And yet again master Jewel says: The very names of the old fathers are
worthy of much honor. M. Sander adds, ye names of ye old godly fathers are
attributed to the images. For the images of S. Augustine and S. Hierome are
called S. Austen and Ieronime, therefore their images are by M. Jewels own
confession, worthy of much honor. Shall I say a doctor has framed this
argument, or a goose has hissed it? In effect it is this, the old doctors
names are falsely attributed to images, therefore the images are to be honored.
But (says he) these names be not given them by chance, but of purpose. Verily
of such purpose, as the Poet Horace says of the image of Priapus.

Olim truncu^ eram ficulnus, inutile lignum,
Cum faber incertus scamnum faceretne, Priapum,
Maluit esse deum.
Sometime I was a stock of a figtree, an unprofitable piece of wood, when the
carpenter being doubtful whether he should make of me a stool, or Priapus,
chose rather that I should be a God.

Again he says, these names are not given them without cause for the lyknesse
of the shape, that is in them. A worthy cause if there were any liknesse in
Saint Augustines image more to him, then to any other man.

But leaving master Jewels words, we must come to his deeds. What shall we
say, if even in that reply against Harding touching graven images, master
Jewel has oftentimes graven images, yea besides Gorgons and antiques heads,
which are Idolles? There is a filthy image of a desperate naked boy, set
forth in such sort, that an honest man would go backwarde, and cover it with
his cloak. I am sorry the printer has troubled your chaste eyes with such a
picture, but why is master Jewel charged with the printers, or grauers fault?
Forsooth you say, he had the oversight and correction of his book,
paraduenture you are deceived. But what if he had, how prove you that this
picture was pressed when that leaf came to correction? for commonly such
superfluous vinites (I trow they call them) be not set to, until they press
the whole leaf.

But what if it were pressed, and he not regarded it? you say if it had been
the picture of the Crucifixe, he would have espied it at the first, and caused
the printer to have corrected it. Peradventure he would not have regarded it,
perhaps he should not have espied it. But seeing you are such a narrow vewer
of such idle pictures master Sander, I marvel you could not see a dronkerd
bibbing in the first letter of your own book of images, nor even such an
impudent naked boy as you speak of in the first letter of your Epistle before
your book of the rock of the church, and the same again in the rock of the
church. Now see whereto your lewd hipocriticall outcries do tend: O the
judgments of God, is it so heinous a matter in master Jewel which took no
heed to such toys, and yet M. Sander so exact a reformer of all abuses, in
images, cannot avoid it in his own books?

Turpe est doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

It is a shame for a teacher when the crime returns upon his own head.

Sander
THE XVII. OR XVI. CHAP.
Whether it be profitable or no, to have Images set up in Churches and to
permit them to be worshipped. Also that master Jewel has Englished tolli, to
be taken down, where as it signifies to be taken up. Images are not so much
permitted to Christians for their weakness as for their strength. The
commodities that come to us by images.

This discourse is needelesse to them that deny any setting up or worshipping
of images in churches to be lawful. Fulk.
Neither has Master Sander one text of scripture, or any one sentence of any
one doctor to prove it profitable, to permit images to be worshipped. But
first he sets down the judgment of M. Jewel in these words.

The best remedy in this behalf and most agreeable with Gods word, is
utterly to abolish the cause of ye evil. So Ezechias brake in pieces the brazen
Serpent, Epiphanius rent in sunder the painted-vaile, Theodosius commanded the
image of our savior to be taken down, where so ever it should be found.

This sentence of M. Jewels he will confute. And first concerning the examples
of Ezechias and Epiphanius, he will not say one word more, then he has said
before cap. 3. and cap. 4. Saving that he affirms Ezechias brake down but
one image that was abused, and left the Cherubims, the altar, and the temple,
which were obscure images of Christ. And therefore he thinks, if some one image
of theirs, that has chanced to be abused, were broken by this example, yet all
the rest should stand. But if it please his wisdom to read the history
better, he shall find that Ezechias destroyed all images that were forbidden of
God. As for the Cherubims were made by Gods appointment, the altar and the
temple were no images. Finally, what image is there in the Popish Church, but
it has been abused to gross idolatry?

To the law of Theodosius he says, it is both misreported and miss
Englished. Misreported, because the Emperor meant such honor to the cross,
that he would not have it lie on the ground, whereof how true or likely it is,
we have spoken before in the 13. Chapter, whither also M. Sander refers us.

It is miss Englished (he says) in translating tolli to be taken down, which
signifies to be taken up. I have answered before, that tolli signifies
generally to be taken away, without respect of up or down. And yet because M.
Sander and his fellow Papists, think they have taken Master Jewel in such
a great fault for Englishing tolli to be taken down, they show I can not tell
whether more spightfull malice, or gross ignorance, or ridiculous
captiousnesse. For tolli does signify as well to be taken down as to be taken
up. For else how shall we English these words in the nineteen of Saint John's
Gospel? Rogauerunt Pilatum vt frangerentur eorum crura and tollerentur. They
desired Pilate, that their legs might be broken, and that they might be
taken down. Likewise Joseph desired Pilate Vt tolleres corpus Jesus, that he
might take down the body of Jesus.

But the 73. Canon of the sixth Council of Constantinople, does confirm this
interpretation of M. Sander, as he supposes, and the reading of this law in
Iustinian^ Code. Which Canon, because he not only choppeth into three pieces,
but also displaceth every one of them, omitting that which shows the true
sense of the Canon, I will set it down word for word as it is. Cum crux
viuifica illud salutare nobis ostenderit, nos omne studium adhibere oportet, vt
^iper quam ab antiquo lapsu saluari sumus, cum qui par est honorem hebeamus.
Vnde and mente and sermon and sensu, adoratione^ ei tribuentes, crucis figuras
quae and nonnullis, in solo ac pauimento fuent, c^^nino deleri iubemus. N^
incedentium conculcatione victoriae nobis tropeaeuns iniuria afficiatur. Qui
secus secerit excommunic^^i decernimus. For as much as the quickening cross
has showed unto us that saving health, it behooves us to use all diligence,
that to it by which we are saved from the old fall, we give that honor which
is due. Wherefore giving reverence unto it both in mind, in word, and in
sense, we command that the figures of the cross, which of some men are made
in the ground and pauement, be utterly put out or taken away, least the trophee
of our victory by treading upon of them that walk about, be iniuried. He that
shall do otherwise, we decree that he be excommunicated.

Concerning the authority of this 73. Canon, first I must say the truth, that
it was not made by the sixth Council, which either made but nine Canons or none
at all. The second Council of Nice liking some of these 102. Canons says,
they met again four or five year after, in the time of Justinian, and made
these Canons. But how so ever it was, it was not of that Council, nor of that
authority, but of a later time, when imagerie began to be more esteemed.
Now to the purpose. I say this Canon does not help the understanding of that
ancient law, which was made almost three hundredth years before, to be meant
of crosses on the ground only, which needed not to have been forbidden in this
Canon, if the former law of Theodosius, and afterward registered by Justinian,
had been made only against crosses on the ground, but the execution of that
law might have been required. Now touching the sense of this Canon, it is
this: they did so much honor the death of Christ, which they call the
quickening cross, that they would not have the figure of the wooden cross to
be trodden under foot. This was their judgment about 700. years after Christ.
The later age was more superstitious, and brake out into open idolatry.

And whereas M. Sander cauelleth at M. Jewels translation of Signum saluatoris,
for the image of our Savior, which says he, is the sign of the cross, he
affects too great a tyranny in the Latin tongue, that will have no man's
translation stand but his own. I am sure signum is often taken for an image,
and in this place none but a froward quareller would take it otherwise, and for
the sign of the cross there is no probable conjecture, that it should be so
taken in this place.

He misliketh not the order taken by the Council of Mentz, that images abused
should be altered or taken away: but he will have the question general,
whether it be expedient to permit images to be honored or no, in which
question the danger of idolatry must be compared with the profit of images,
the danger he counts small, the profit great. And considering the question
at this day, he counts there is no danger at all, neither was there ever
any great danger, and this he will prove by nine reasons.

The first, the new Gospellers have prevailed so much with their doctrine of
images, that it is not lightly possible they should be honored too much. The
devil yet confesses, that the doctrine of the Gospel, has chased away
idolatry in most places, I would to GOD it had in all.

The 2. in the most Popish times the people seeing the Sextan sweep copwebs
from the images, and putting the cross so homely under his cloak, might see a
great difference between the reverence given to images, and the honor given,
and due to the sacrament of the altar. As though the Priest also, did not
sometimes carry the Pixe in his bosom, with the consecrated cake in it, and
sometime they might as well see him burn his breaden Gods, as the Sextan
sweeping copwebs from the golden idols, and yet none of these were ever able
to keep the people from idolatry.

3 It is less evil to suffer some one to do amiss, then to falsify the
whole law, and right it self. And here again he opposes the law of
idolatrous nations against the law of God, which forbids worshipping of any
image or similitude of any thing.

4 When the faith and intent of him that worshippeth the image is good, as to
worship one God and his Saints, what so ever is done with this mind (so that
sacrifice be not made to images) it can be no idolatry. What faith is that,
which is contrary to Gods commandment? And what call you sacrifice, if
prayers, thanksgiving, and praises be none, which are offered by the people to
images? namely to our Lady of Walsingham, of Ipswich, etc. which can be none
other but those idols that be set up in those places, we have also showed
before, that the Council of Nice 2. will have sacrifice offered to the image of
Christ.

5 Christians must not be considered as weak and frail like the Jews and
Paynims, but strong and full of knowledge, according to the prophesies and
promises: They shall all know me etc. Iere. 31. and he does them wrong that
judges Gods people prove to idolatry, for images were forbidden the Jews,
but as the libell of diuorcement was winked at in them. O monstrous impudency
that makes one of the ten commandments, that has such a severe threatening
annexed unto it, that the Lord will punish the transgressors of it unto the
third and fourth g^^eration, like a permission of that, whereof there was no
commandment! But what so ever was promised of the knowledge and faith of
Christ, perteyneth not to all that unworthily bear the name of Christ, but
only to perfect and well instructed Christians.

6 If the people be weak and apt to idolatry, yet it is the best way to keep
them from it, to suffer them to have, and honor conveniently the images of
honorable persons, as God permitted the Jews to offer* Oxen, Calves, etc.
because they would needs offer some external sacrifice. As though God learned
of them to make his laws of sacrifices, or if that had been the best way, he
would not rather have permitted images, then forbidden them.

7 Because the people have not so many sacrifices as the Jews, therefore it is
good they have the remembrances of the martyrs in images, which sacrificed
their own bodies. It is great marvel the Apostles could not find such a
profitable supply of the Jewish sacrifices, by images, but only the sacrifice
of Christ's death, and the spiritual sacrifices of our selves, which if we
offer diligently, we shall find matter enough to keep us exercised, that we
need not spend our time in gaping upon idols.

8 Images are not so much permitted to Christians for their weakness, as for
their strength, that they may now have them and worship them without committing
spiritual fornication, as in times past: for to have none, is pusil lanimity.
In deed it is a Popish magnanimity to contemn the commandment of God, and it
were belike no danger of fornication, to have a whore to kiss her, to lie
with her, for Popish Christians are strong enough.

9 The text of John. 4. that the true worshippers must worship God in spirit
and verity, must not be applied against worshipping of God by images, but
against idols and bondage of praying after one corporal fashion, for godly
images lead us to spiritual devotion. The Devil they do. But if they did,
yet not more then the ceremonies of the old law; the abolishing of which our
Savior Christ in that sentence does promise: not to set upon a spiritual
worship in spirit and truth, (but as Master Sander would bear us in hand,)
to change the shadows and ceremonies from such as were instituted by God, to
as many other ordained by men, and moreover to worshipping by images, which
before was altogether forbidden. Note also that he calls them godly images,
which term he reproved in Master Jewel. As for the Votaries he carpeth,
which can abide to see their concubynes after their vow of chastetie, and yet
cannot abide to see popish images, let them answer for themselves if any such
keep harlots, as for them that are married, they shall better defend their
marrying, out of the scriptures, then ye Popish Votaries their filthy and
abominable lives, under the hypocritical title of chastity.

Now follows 12. commodities yt come by images.

1 We learn something by them that we knew not before. The Prophet Abacuc
faith, an image can teach nothing but lies. Cap. 2. verse. 18.

2 They bring us in remembrance of the things that we know. Theodotus of
Ancira says, such cogitation is vain, and the deceitful invention of the
devil.

3 They bring us in remembrance, not as by reading, and repeating, but by the
most speedy twinkling of an eye. But faith without the which it is impossible
to please God, comes by hearing of Gods word. Romans 8.

4 By seeing and knowing we are provoked to become like them whose images we
worship. Nay rather we are made like them whom we worship, that is, without,
sense and understanding. Psalm. 115.

5 We are confirmed in our faith, perceiving those things that are painted, be
so true, that they are every where set forth and honored. Pictoribus atque
poetis quidlibet audendi semper fuit aequa potestas. Because Painters and Poets
have always had liberty to setforth what they list. Let this be a
confirmation of Popish faith: it shall be none of mine.

6 We are kept well occupied and delivered from occasion to imagine idle things
of our own fantasy, which might cause idolatry. If they be well occupied,
that worship God contrary to his commandment, according to their own idle
fantasy.

7 We tarry more willingly in the house of God which is so adorned with godly
histories. The same reason Durande alleges for hanging of Oistriches eggs
in the churches. David desired to dwell in the house of the Lord al ye days of
his life, when there was never an image in it.

8 We consider the company of heaven, how marvelous it is, for as the holy of
holies which did signify heaven, was decked with the images of Angels, (he
means the Cherubims) so must our Churches be decked with images of Angels and
Saints, to be a figure of everlasting glory. By the same reason I will prove
that ye people must never come into the Church, for the people never came into
the holy of holies, but the Priest only, and that but once a year. And seeing
Christ is entered into heaven indeed, there must be no more figures of heaven,
whereof actual possession is all ready taken.

9 We pray to Christ and the Saints at the sight of their images. You call upon
them in whom you do not believe, and therefore you are Infidels and idolaters,
or if you believe in men you are accursed of God. Cursed be he that puts his
trust in man. Ier. 17. verse. 5.

10 We honor God in his saints, and in the signs and monumentes of them. You
worship you know not what, but as you list, which is will worship, condemned
by God. Col. 3. verse. 23.

11 We glorify God in that we are so free and strong in our faith, that we
need not to be kept from convenient worshipping of lawdable images, as the
weak Jews were. Nay you impudently and most arrogantly contemn GOD, and his
law, and most blasphemously affirm, that GOD kept the Jews from convenient
worshipping of lawdable images, which have so many commodities, or else you
lie most damnablye.

12 We profess the truth of the Gospel, and of the law of nature, which
requires convenient honor to be given to the images of honorable personages.
Because you profess another Gospel, then that we have received out of the
word of God, if Nicholas Sander were as great as Michael the archangell, Gods
great curse light on him. Anathema to a new Manachee, that makes the truth of
the Gospel and the law of nature, contrary to the truth of the law of God
given by Moses. Yea Anathema, Maranatha be he that defends that to be good,
which God so manifestly condemns for abominable. You have heard what
authorities he brings to prove the honoring and worshipping of images
convenient, Videlicet never a one. Now shall you hear some sentences of the
ancient writers to the contrary.

Augustine Ad Deogratias Epi. 49. Et idola quidem omne sensu carere quis
dubitat? Veruntamen cum his locantur sedibus honorabili sublimitate, vt a
precantibus atque immolantibus attendantur, ipsa similitudine animatorum
membrorum atque sensuum, quamuis insensata atque exanima, afficiunt infirmos
animos, vt viuere ac spirare videantur, accedente praesertim veneratione
multitudinis, quae tantus eis Dei cultus impenditur. And who doubts but that
idolles are void of all sense? Yet when they are set up in those places,
in honorable height, so that they be looked upon by them that pray and
sacrifice, by the very similitude of the members and senses of living
creatures, although they be insensible and without life, they affecte the weak
minds of men, so that they seem to live and breathe, especially when the
worshipping of the multitude comes to them, by which so great honor of God is
bestowed upon them.

The same Augustine in Leuit. Qu. 68. writes thus. Nam quid isto praecepto
absolutius, non mentiemini. Sic enim dictum est quomodo non facies tibi idolum:
quod factum non potest aliquando iuctum esse, and quomodo dictum est non
maechaberis. For what can be more absolute then this commandment: You shall
not lie. For it is even so said as that: Thou shall not make to thy self any
graue^ image, which fact can never be righteous, and even as it is said, Thou
shall not commit adultery. If M. Sander cavil at the word Idol, yet the
commandment is general, for all images and similitudes to be made by man's
devise, as he himself confesses. Therefore it is as, lawful to have images
in religion, as to lie, or to commit adultery, by Saint Augustines judgment.
Other places of Augustine in psalm. 96. and 113. which I have cited before, I
omit. Yet this one short sentence I will add, to show how far S.
Augustins judgment was from M. Sanders assertion, that in worshippinge of
images is small or no danger of idolatry at all, in psalm. 113.

Quis autem adorat vel orat intuens simulachrum, qui non sic affuitur, vt ab eo
se exaudiri putet, ac ab eo sibi prestari quod desiderat, speret. For who does
worship or pray beholding an image, which is not so affected, that he
thinks himself to be heard of it, and hops that that thing shall be
performed of it, which he desires.

Hierome in Ezechiell lib. 4. cap. 16. has these words. Nos autem vnum
habemus virum, and vnam veneramur imaginem, quae est imago inuisibilis and
omnipotentis Dei. We (says he of the Christians) have but one husband, and
worship but one image, which is the image of the invisible and Almighty God.
Meaning Christ, and speakinge against the image worshippers and spiritual
fornicators of the Gentiles, Jews and heretics.

Likewise upon Daniel, lib. 1. cap. 3. Sieve statua^ vt Symmachus, sue imaginem
auream vt caeteri transtulerunt, voluerimus legere, cultores Dei eam adorare
non debent. Ergo Iudices and principes saeculi, qui imperatorum statuas adorant
and imagines: hoc se facere intelligant, quod tres pueri facere nolentes
placuerint Deo. Et notanda proprietas, Deos coli, imaginem adorari dicunt, quod
vtrunque seruis Dei non conuenit. Whether we will read it, a standing image as
Symmachus, or a golden image as the rest have translated, the worshippers of
God ought not to adore it. Therefore the Judges and Princes of the world,
which worship the statues and images of the Emperors, let them understand that
they do that which the three children would not do, and pleased God. And that
the property of speech is to be marked, they call the worshippinge of the
image, the worshippinge of God: both which is unmeet for the servants of
God. If Hierome will not allow the worshipping of the Emperors Image, which
is but civil, much less the worshippinge of the image of Christ or his
saints, which is religious. Chrysostom. in Math. Hom. 51. counts it a mere
mockery of God and the saints, to set up their image in gold or silver, and to
suffer the true images and their members to dye for famine or cold, as they
do in all places where Idols are hanged with chains and brooches. Quid porro
si frigore congeluum hominem aspiceres, nec vestem aliquam ei preparares? si
aureas statuas ad laude^ eius erigeres nonne contemnere videreris? What if thou
should see a man frozen with cold, and did not prepare him any garment?
but did set up golden images to his praise, should thou not seem to
despise him? And ye God rejects al such honor as is imagined to be done to
him by images or other inventions of men, he says, Qui honoratur, eo maxim
honor laetatur quem ipse vult, non quem optamus. He which is honored,
delights chiefly in that honor which he himself will have, not which we
wish to him.

"Ambrose Ep. 31. derideth them Qui Deum loquntur simulachrum adorant, which
speak of God, and worship an image.

In Romans cap. 9. he says that Christ would not suffer him self to be
worshipped, but that he is God. Nec Dominus vbique se adorari pateretur, nisi
quia Deus.

After the council of Eliberis that forbad all pictures in the Church, the
council of Carth. 5. willed such altars as were set up in the country, and
high ways: as memories of the martyrs, should be abolished and overthrown,
although they were pretended to be set up by revelations or visions: would
they then have permitted images in memory of the martyrs? When also they
decreed to entreat the Emperor that all relics and monumentes of idolatry
might be destroyed.

CHAP. XVIII. OR XVII.
Whether the same degree of honor be due to the Images of Christ, or of his
Saints, which is due to Christ and to the Saints themselves. Three things are
to be considered in an artificial image. M. Jewels forging is detected. Doulia
only comes to Christ by his image. M. Jewel alleges words out of a book
which is forged. The Church honors not the image for his own sake. Sande^


M.S. confesses this point to be in controversy between the Catholics
themselves. Fulk.
But yet he says it is a question of phylosophie rather then of divinity,
which ye church has not determined. As though the church had any thing to do
to determine questions of phylosophie: or as though a question about the true
worship of God, were not a question of divinity. His sophistical reasons on
both sides are superfluous to repeat, seeinge we take neither of both parts,
but deny that any kind of religious honor is to be given to images, yet
briefly I will run over the contents of the chapter. Three things (he
says) are to be considered in an artificial image, the matter, the form, and
the representation. The two former deserve no honor in religion, but the
representation only. The image as a representation, is considered either as a
part from the truth, and then it has a less honor the^ the truth, or else
together with the truth, and then it must have all one honor with the truth.

And then he makes the question this, whether as his mind is in one instant
moved and carried by the mean of ye image to the remembrance of the truth, so
the honor of both be all one or no? But if he were in ye schools at Cambridge,
the boys would tell him, that there can be no mouinge in one instant, because
in every moouinge there must be the mark from whence, and the mark
whereunto the moouinge is. Nevertheless he answers this question, with a
doughtie distinction, that the honor given to the image, and to Christ, is
either the same in number, or the same in kind or degree. And his opinion is,
that it is the same in number, but not in degree. And of this answer he
makes the seventh general council auctor, Action, 4. Where Johannes
vicegerent of the East, says, Non sunt duae adorationes sed vna adoratio
imaginis and primi exe^plaris cuius est imago. There are not two adorations,
but one adoration of the image, and of the first examplar whereof it is an
image. And here he raileth against M. Jewel, for falsifying and forging in
translating duae adorationes: two sorts of worshipping and exemplifyinge his
doctrine by Latria and Doulia whereof Johannes meant not, but the contrary is
taught before in the same Action. How impudent and shameless the cavil of
Master Sander is, I have showed before, when I rehearsed how Constantius
bishop of Constantia in Cypres, affirms that he would give the same honor
to images, that he did to the holy trinity that gives life, unto whom all the
rest did assent. So that M. Sanders opinion is contrary to the determination of
the council. For he holds that not Latria, but Doulia only comes to Christ
by his images. By which opinion, you see how greatly Christ is promoted, that
in steed of Latria, a Divine honor, which they confess to be due to him, he
must be content with the lower degree of honor by his image, because the image
can receive nor carry no greater. But if the image be neither a receiver, nor a
carier, Christ must lose all his honor, as he does indeed, which is that way
offered. Yet (says Master Sander) does not his image any more hinder his
honor, then Saint Paul does. For when I honor S. Paul for Christ's sake, no
greater honor then Doulia comes to Christ Verily Master Sander, how it is
when you honor S. Paul, I know not, but when I honor him for Christ's sake,
I honor not him, but Christ with Divine honor, as the only author of those
gifts of his spirit, by which he is preferred before other men. And where
you say M. Jewel alleges words out of a book of Carolus Magnus, written
against that Idolatrous synod of Nice, which is forged, you speak not more
peremtorily then falsely and perniciously. For what reason have you to prove
that book to be forged: forsooth, you ask how could Carolus Magnus write
such a book, which built so many churches and monasteries? As though Churches
and monasteries could not be builded but by an idolater. Yea, which so
diligently obeyed the B. of Rome which crowned him. As though the bishop of
Rome crowned him Emperor, to be his slave and an Idolater, who left so many
relics at Aquisgraine and a little image of our Lady with other Jewels:
Paraduenture as truly as the image of Diana came to the Ephesians from
Jupiter. Who caused the French men to conform themselves in their Church song
to the Romans. But where find you that he caused them to conform themselves
in image worshipping to the Grecians? Finally a book of such small credit that
neither the library whence it was taken, nor town where it is printed, nor
the man who printed it, is named. These be weighty reasons to discredit ye
book, as though it were necessary that every book must come out of a
library, some have been preserved in private studies, some have been closed up
in walls. The place and name of the printer is not expressed, for that it is
like to have be printed, where it might not be suffered to be sold. But ye
very style argues it is not forged in our time and I have before it a
testimony of Mattheus West-monasteriensis which was written about 200. years
ago, that such a book was written against that council by Albinus or
Alcuinus, and presented to the French King Carolus, whose name it bears, not
perhaps written by him, but by his commandment and authority published.

After this he discourses upon Thomas of Aquines opinion, which holds that
divine honor which they call datria, is due to the image of Christ, which if it
be an error, (says master Sander;) it is an error in Phisophie, which to
affirm is a most shameless absurdity. Last of all he concludes against S.
Thomas that a less degree of honor is dew to images, then to ye pattern:
affirming that ye church honoreth not ye image for his own sake, for no man is
taught to believe in images, or to call them his gods, or to do sacrifice to
them. What say you M. Sander, who teaches pilgrimage to images, does not your
church? And how can they pray to the^, if they do not believe in them? Who
teaches them to call an image Christ, that is their lord and God, but even you
which defend images to be honored by the names that they have of ye things
whereof they be images. Therefore when you call an image Christ, you call it
God, and Lord, savior, and redeemer. The image of the Trinity, what call you
it but the trinity? Fie upon this horrible idolatry which is defended with
such a sleueles excuse, that you honor not the image for his own sake, no
more did the Gentiles their images. Chrisostom in Homi. 18. in Ep. ad Ephesians.
writes thus of them, Cum illi dicimus quod simulachru^ adoret, non inquit
simulacrum, sed Venerem sed Martem. Et cum rogamui quae est ista Venus? Qui
grauiores inter eos sunt, respondent, voluptas. and quis est Mars? Animus
masculus and vehemens. When we say unto him that he worshippeth an image. No
says he, not the image but Venus or Mars. And when we ask, what is this
Venus? the grauer sort among them answer, pleasure. And who is Mars? A
manlike and valiant courage. Augustine in Psalm. 96. which place I have cited
before shows that the Gentiles affirmed, yt they worshipped not the images
for their own sake, but for ye divine powers which they did represent, even
the same which the Christians called Angels. So yt the Papists are all one with
ye Gentiles in their excuse, as they agree with them in Idolatry, and
worshipping of images.

FINIS. God be praised.
A REFVTATION OF MAITER JOHN RASTELS CONFVTATION AS HE CALLS IT OF master
Jewels sermon. by W. Fulk.
To the Preface.
TO give the Reader a taste of such sincerity, Fulk.
as he must look for in all M. Rastels book of confutation, he shows in
his preface, where speaking of three manners of aunswering, he declares ye same
by an example taken out of the bishops sermon: that sole receiving is not to be
suffered among Christians, where as the bishop has no such position in all
his sermon, but that private mass was not used for the space of six hundredth
years after Christ. Thus admonishing the Reader that master Rastell as his
grand captain M. doctor Harding, not able to find any thing either in
scripture, or antiquity, for the maintenance of their ordinary private Mass,
does fly to extraordinary uses and unlawful vsages of sole receiving, being
all such, as either some necessity might seem to excuse, or as all the Papists
themselves do confess to have been abuses, I leave his leude preface, and
hasten to the book it self.

A refutation of master Rastels confutation.
SECTIO PRIMA. In which he speaks of the council of Nice and of unwritten
verities. Rastell.

TO pass over the two first leafes of his book and half the third, Fulk.
in which is much vain babbling but no point of confutatio^, in the second face
of the third leaf, he begins to pick his just quarrel at the sentence set
before the bishops printed sermon, which is this. Let old customs prevail.
It greueth M. Rastel and his fellows, which persuade the ignorant people that
our relygion is all nouelty, that M Jewel should make any such claim unto
antiquity. And first therefore he will know whether ye scriptures do not
co^teine al things necessary to salvation? Yes verily, and Gods curse light on
him, that teaches the contrary. Then he will know, where we find this
saying in scriptures, or if it be not in the scripture of god, why we will use a
sentence of ye counsel of Nice, which was but a congregation of men's Verily if
we found not ye matter of this sentence in Gods word, we durst not avouch it
to be true that was uttered by men, being applied to any point of doctrine. But
we find the same doctrine in the sixth of Jeremy, where the Lord says, Stand
in the ways, and behold, and ask for the old way, which is the good way,
and walk therein, and you shall find rest for your souls. Now this saying
of the council of Nice, let old customs prevail, being the same in effect
and meaning, though somewhat differing in sound of words, we embrace it as
the word of God, and the holy scripture, which we do not restrain unto the
letters and sillables, but unto the plain and manifest sense and understanding
of them. The second quarrel he picketh to the placing of this sentence before
the bishops sermon, because it is uttered by the Council of Nice in a
particular case concerning ye jurisdiction of the bishops of Alexandria and
Antioch, and therefore cannot serve for a general sentence. For all old
customs (says he) must not be preferred before new customs, example of
washing of feet, and abstaining from eating of blood, which were old
customs. But if the council meant, that old customs should prevail against
new writings, then all books of Luther and such like are stricken through
which one foine. Wherefore he concludes that the council meant, that old
customs should prevail, against the pretensed alleging of the very
scripture it self, and new doctrine of men. And so this sentence does at once
overthrow all master Jewels religion. But having compared this sentence to the
text of scripture, by which the true meaning thereof may appear, I will not
stand about this trifling cauils. Concerning our judgment of antiquity this it
is. We will not admit whatsoever is old, but only ye religion which is eldest of
al, which has god for ye author, ye Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles for
the witnesses, and all learning, doctrine, and religion, which is under the age
of these years, we reject as new, false, and devilish. As for customs,
ceremonies, and manners, which are subject to mutation, we receive them, or
refuse them, as they be approuable or disprouable by the said old ancient and
Catholic doctrine. And because M. Rastel has not only touched the sixth Canon
of the Council of Nice, where this sentence is written, but also charged M.
Jewel with overthrow of his religion thereby, I must let the reader
understand, that he suppresseth one point thereof, that utterly overthrows ye
pillar of all Popish religion, and that is, the Popes supremacy. For yt Canon
makes the Bishop of Alexandria, equal in jurisdiction to the Bishop of Rome.
For the reason of the jurisdiction confirmed unto the Bishops of Alexandria is
this. Quia and vrbia Rom Episcop^ parilis mos est. Because the Bishop of the
city of Rome has the like or equal custom of jurisdiction. But M. Rastell
will prove by the story of Arrius, that the Council meant by that sentence,
that it is only tradition, custom, and manners, which kills the hearts of
heretics, and defends the Catholic Church: and not the authority of the
Scriptures. Because Arrius was such a proud heretic, that he despised all
the interpretations of the ancient Fathers that were before his time, as
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria writes of him. Yea, he is not ashamed to say,
that although the Fathers of that Council had scriptures against Arrius, yet
their chief stay was not in yt scriptures, but in the received tradition. But
this is a most impudent lie, for although the consent of Catholic writers of
all ages, with the word of God, is not to be contemned, yet the only authority
in determining of controversies of faith, in all Councels, is and ought to be
by the authority of the holy scriptures. The Apostles themselves in the
Council of Jerusalem, decided the controversy of circumcision by the
scriptures. Act. 15. A worthy pattern for all godly Councels to follow.
Constantine also in the Council of Nice, charged the Bishops there assembled by
his commandment, to determine the matter by the authority of the holy
scriptures. Euangelici enim and Apostolici libri, necnon antiquorum Prophetarum
oracula plane instruunt nos (inqui:) sensu numinis. Proinde hostici posua
discordia sumamus ex dictis diuini spiritus explicatione^. The books of the
Gospels, and the Apostles, and also the Oracles of the ancient Prophets do
plainly instruct us (says he) in the understanding of God. Therefore laying
away hateful discord, let us take explications out of the sayings of the holy
Ghost. Therdor. lib. cap. 7. By this charge it is manifest, how truly M.
Rastel faith, that the decree of (...) or equality of ye Son in substance
with the Father, was made only by tradition, and not by the authority of the
scriptures. For the Council examining by scriptures the tradition and received
opinion of the Fathers, and finding it agreeable to them, did confirm the
same. And whereas the Arrians quarrelled that this word (...) was not found in
the scriptures, and therefore would refuse it, it helps nothing M. Rastels
unwritten verities, for the truth of (...) is proved by an hundredth textes of
scriptures, as the truth of the Trinity is, although neither of both words are
found in the scriptures. We quarrel not as those heretics did, and M. Rastel
a Popish heritique does, of letters, syllables, words, and sounds, but we stand
upon the sense, meaning, understanding, and doctrine which we affirm to be
perfectly contained in scripture, what so ever is necessary to salvation, as
S. Paul says: Al scripture inspired of God, is profitable to teach, to
improve, to correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may
be absolute, being made perfect to al good works. 2. Tim. 3.

And therefore old customs being referred unto the custom of the Church of
God, in the time of the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and Doctors, that
followed the same unity of Gods words, is the thing we desire might prevail
in all our controversies of religion: and so the sentence is well enough placed,
if Momus could let any thing alone.

SECTIO. 2. From the second face of the 12. leaf to the first face of the 19.
leaf. Rastel.

When any order given by God is broken or abused, Fulke.
(says the Bishop) the best redress thereof, is to restore it again into the
state that it was first in the beginning. M. Rastel says, the Bishop can not
tell where of he speaks. For whereas he affirmed, that S. Paul had appointed
an order touching the ministration of the sacraments unto the Corinthians, M.
Rastell will not simply grant that this order was appointed by God, although
S. Paul himself say, he received it of christ, which he delivered to the^. For
this difference he makes. That an order given by God must be observed without
exception, and yet he adds an exception of revelation, and especial license
from God. But what so ever order S. Paul did give, (he says) is subject unto
the Church, to remove or pull up, as it shall please her. Thus the blasphemous
dog barketh against ye spirit of God. But I trust al sober Christian minds will
rather believe S. Paul then Rastel, who says of such orders as were given by
him. 1. Cor. 14. If any man seem to be a prophet, or spiritual, let him know
ye things yt I write to you, yt they be the commandments of God. But now M.
Ra. will take upon him to teach us ye order given, yt Paul speaks of, namely,
That ye Christians had certain charitable suppers, called (...), after which as
August. says, and before which as Chrysostom. says, they did use to receive ye
sacrament. Note here yt M. Rast. which will have old customs tried by ye
fathers, brings in here two Doctors, one contrary to ye other. To ye
purpose. This order was taken away by contention and disdain of ye rich
against ye poor, and therefore Paul purposed to bring them again to yt order
of sitting, and eating their supper altogether, yt rich with the pore, by
saying: That which I received of the Lord, I delivered to you. And not to
reform any abuse of ye sacrament, by reducing it to the first institution.
This judgment of M. Rastell is partly by him proved, by the authority of
Theophylact, but chiefly it stands upon his own authority, without further
reason. Howbeit, it is manifest by ye scripture, that Paul reproved that
mingling of profane suppers, with the Lords supper, appointing their private
houses for their bodily refreshings of eating and drinking. Have you not houses
(says he) to eat and drink in? By which saying it is manifest, he would have
no eating and drinking in the Church (as M. Rastell dreameth) but only the
eating and drinking of the Lords supper. And therefore that abuse of mingling
their bodily suppers, with the spiritual supper of the Lord whereof came so
many abuses, and especial the seuering and sundering of the congregation into
diverse parts, which ought to have received altogether, he labors to
reform, by bringing it to the first institution of the Lord him self. But M.
Rast. following his own dream, asks what there was in the institution, for
sitting together or a sunder: for eating at Church, or at home? Yes forsooth:
Christ did institute his supper to be a food of the soul, and not of the
body, and therefore to be celebrated in the congregation, and in common, as the
salvation is common, and not to be mingled with profane banquets of belly
cheer, for which private houses and companies are meet, and not the Church of
God. And whereas M. Rastel charge M. Jewel with not understanding this place
which he alleges, namely (therefore when you come together to eat, tarry one
for an other:) which he says pertains no more to ye institution of the
sacrament, then a pot full of plumbs does to the highway to London, he shows
all his wit and honesty at once. For he denies that any thing that Saint
Paul there rehearses, namely these words, take, eat, this is my body etc.
is the institution of the sacrament, or the original pattern of reforming the
Corinthians disorder, because time, place, vesture, number of communicants, and
such other accidental and variable circumstances, be not therein expressed. So
that by his divinity, either ye institution of the sacrament is not at all
contained in ye scriptures, or else there is an other first pattern to reform
abuses by, then this yt is set down in the scriptures. I would marvel at these
monstrous assertions, but that I see, ye obstinate Papists cannot otherwise
defend their Popish Mass, except they denied ye institution of the sacrament
and pattern of reformation, to be contained in the scriptures. But if it be
granted (says M. Rast.) which is to far absurd, that S. Paul did reduce
the Corinthians to the first original and institution, Why do not rich men
now bring meat to the Church, and receive the sacrament after they have filled
their bellies? Forsooth because Christ instituted no such manner of suppers.
And why (says he) do you not wash one another feet, having a commandment
so to do? But if this commandment be literally to be understood, why do
you Papists break it? If it be not, why do you require that of us, which you
confess is not required, to be done of any? Humility is commanded whereof
our Savior Christ gave us example in that fact, and that God grant we may
observe: the outward ceremony he commanded not to be observed of any, but
that which was signified thereby* And whereas Master Rastell compares the
receiving of both kinds by the lay people, with that ceremony of washing of
feet, to make it seem that the iustitution of Christ might be altered in the
one, as well as in the other, he declares what reverence or estimation he has
of the institution of Christ. For as that ceremony of washing of feet is and
may be altogether omitted (as he fantasieth by the authority of the Church) so
not only one kind of the sacrament, but both kinds also may be likewise taken
away, both from the people and the priest, if it please the Church of Rome. If
he deny the conclusion, what has he gained by the argument of that example?
Or what has he proved against this our assertion, that nothing is to believed
without the express word of God contained in the scriptures?

SECTIO. 3. From the first face of the 19. leaf to the second of the 23.
leaf. Of the disagreement of the Gospellers. Rastel.

Whereas the Bishop had said, that the light of the Gospel is now so mightily
and so far spread abroad, that it was to be hoped, no man would lightly
miss his way as before in time of darkness, and perish wilfully: it
offends M. Rastel, that he should boast of this glorious light of the Gospel,
which he a most obstinate blind man will not vouchsafe to see. Likewise that
he calls the heresy of Papistrie, the darkness of the time before. And he
would know where this glorious light of the Gospel is to be seen? Concerning
the light of Popery, because the Kingdom of the beast by Gods judgment is
darkened in these parts of the world, Apoc. 15.
where he is known to sit, which makes M. Rastel and his accomplices to gnaw
the tongues for anger, he is feign to demonstrate the light a far off beyond
the reach of any man's eyes sight, among the new found lands, and the wild
Indians, converted (as he says) not by the Protestants, but by Popish monks
and Friars. Although it were easy to prove, that protestants also have
planted some Churches in those new found lands, as in Gallia Antartica, but
what folly were it to boast of that? How far and wide the Gospel is spread in
Europe, he that is so blind that he will not see, who can make him acknowledge
it? Even Italy and Spain, have yielded great numbers of Martyrs and
confessors. Al other regions of Europe in a manner at this day have either
utterly banished Papistry, or at lest by publik authority given liberty to ye
Gospel: as England, Ireland, Scotland, Flanders, Holland, France, Germany,
Denmark, Bohemia, Polonia, Hungaria, Suetia, Gothia, etc. But M. R. seeing he
cannot show his Popish light abroad, he will show it in corners of men's
hearts, because (as he supposes) there is never a city, in which there is not
some Papists, and therefore he will conclude, that the Gospel is not mightily
and far spread abroad. By which reason he may prove, that it never was; nor
shall be mightily spread abroad; for ever there have been, and shall be enemies
that will not embrace it. Another reason he would seem to bring of six diverse
kinds of Gospellers, whereas therere is but one Gospel, which is a fond and
malicious cavil, for I can bring more then 16. kinds of Papists, which differ
in some opinions and ceremonies, whereas al ye difference he can assign amongst
them that be truly accounted professors of the Gospel, is either in one
article of the sacrament, or else in outward rites and ceremonies, which cannot
exclude any of them from the possession of ye Gospel, so long as they al agree
in the doctrine of eternal salvation. He urges us as Tertullian did ye
Marcionistes and heretics of his time, to show ye beginnings of our Churches,
which we do daily, when we approve our doctrine to be grounded upon the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, bringing in no new Gospel as those
heretics did, whereof they could not deduce the beginning from ye Apostles and
Evangelists of Christ. And whereas he says we have no one undoubted true
judge, teacher, or faith, because we read Luther, and the Doctors old and new
with judgment, yt is, because we build not our faith upon any one man, as they
do upon their proud Pope, but upon Christ and his eternal word. I answer we
have a most certain faith grounded upon the teaching of a most holy master,
even ye spirit of Christ in his word, who is a most undoubted judge, both for
wisdom and authority to determine all controversies. Whereas the Papists
building altogether upon men, have no undoubted judge, teacher, or faith, not
only because al men are liers and unconstant by corrupt nature, but also
because they cannot agree among themselves, whether ye Pope or the council is
ye superior judge, teacher, or rule of faith. But M. Ra. as ye rest of ye
Papists do, gloryeth much yt we have received ye gospel from ye Pope, whose
judgment in exposition thereof, we should as well receive, as we acknowledge his
fidelity in keeping it without corruption. But we utterly deny, that we have
received the Gospel from the Pope, but rather from the Greek Church, neither
do we acknowledge any fidelity of the Pope in keeping of the Gospel, whom we
accuse of shameful corrupting ye Latin text thereof, and as for burning of the
Books, either he could not, ye same being dispersed into so many copies, or he
needed not, when he persuaded al men yt the Gospel had none other sense, but
that it pleased him to frame unto it. Finally when Pope Leo the tenth accounted
ye Gospel nothing else but a fable of Christ, which brought them so great
honor and wealth, as who sees not either how reverently the Pope preserved the
Gospel, or for what cause he kept it vndestroied. Finally M. Rastels profane
jesting of riding post to heaven, declares himself to be a right Papist, that
is to say an Atheist, which makes a scorn of religion, and of the hope of the
life to come, even as the same Pope Leo said at his death, that this one thing
he should gain by dying, that he should be resolved concerning the question
of the immortality of the soul. Wherein all the learned men in the world
before could not satisfy him. Last of all what an impudent liar Master
Rastell is, you may plainly perceive, when he charge the Bishop with this
confession: That these nine hundredth years and more, none did ever take this
way which he does follow. For although the Bishop made his challenge of six
hundredth years after Christ* yet did he never confess that in the nine
hundredth years following; none did ever retain or embrace the Gospel which
he teaches, when God be praised, there was a number even in the most blindest
times that saw the light thereof, although they were few, and persecuted by
Antichriste.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 4. From the second face of the 23. leaf, to the first of the 38.
leaf. In which he takes upon him to prove that the English communion and
service does not follow Christ and his Apostles, in taking into their hand^,
and blessing the cup and the challice, nor the primitive Church in praying
toward the East, mingling water with the wine, sign of the cross, altars,
incense, tapern, praying to Saints, and praying for the dead.
Fulke.
The ^. in his sermon affirmed (as R. says) 1. The holy communion to be
restored to ye use and form of the primitive Church. 2. To ye same order yt was
delivered and appointed by Christ, 3. and after practiced by the Apostles, 4.
and continued by the holy doctors and fathers, by the space of five or six
hundredth years, throughout all the catholic Church of Christ, 5. without
exception or any sufficient example to be showed to the contrary. Al these
Master Rast. says be lies, which is his short answer. And I could answer
as shortly, that then they be lies of Master Rastells forging. For the bishop
affirmed no such thing of the ceremonial form of our Communion, but of the
doctrine thereof. But let us see his answer at large.

He would know how this Communion of ours does agree with that, which Christ
delivered, and the^ rehearses ye institution of Christ, beginning at the
eating of ye Pascall Lamb, and the washing of his disciples feet, as though
either of these perteined to the sacrament, and forsoothe we must tell him, how
many things more, and how many things less, our order in ye communion book
has. And first what scripture we have for the linen clothe: for the priests
standing on the North side of the table, for our prayers, confessions,
collects, and other ceremonies, and seeing we have no scripture for these, the
Communion is not restored to the order appointed by Christ. I answer, that
forasmuch as those matters perteine to order and decency, we have scripture
sufficient to authorize them, although as I said before, the bishop speaks
not of the ceremonial form of ministration, but of the substance and
doctrine, which is the essential form of the Communion: concerning which we
have neither more nor less, then Christ used and delivered.

Yet (says Master Rast.) we have many points less then was done by Christ at
his last supper. First he will not press us with yt question, why we do not
Communicate after supper, which peradventure yet some does with the sick, as a
thing not unlawful, nor tied to any time, but by the general rule of order
and decency: but he demands, why we take not the bread into our hands,
before we consecrate it, as Christ did? A profounde question. As though we do
not both take it, break it, receive it, and deliver it with our hands, as
Christ did. Or as though Christ appointed at what moment we should touch it, or
that M. Rastel is able to say, that Christ spoke nothing of his institution
before he touched the bread: or as though we did not use ordinarily before we
make the exhortation unto the Communion, to take the bread and break it, and
with the cup to set it before us, and not to let it stand at the end of the
table, as he belyeth us, as though we were ashamed to follow Christ.

The second thing that we have less then Christ did (as he says) is
blessinge of the bread, which is utterly false, for we bless it as Christ
did, not with the sign of the cross as ye would have us, but with
thanksgiuinge and prayer, as the Evangelists do testify that Christ did,
and as the primitive and Apostolic Church did practice. And therefore Justinius
marty^ speaking of the sanctified or blessed nourishment of the sacrament,
calls it (...) that nourishement for which thanks is given by the word of
prayer, received of him. And touching the reverend gestures used by Christ at
his supper, as we doubt nothing, but that he used them always, so can M.
Rastell with all his prating prove none other, then the Evangelists have set
down. And therefore for his loking on the bread, separating it from the rest
of the bread on the table, blessing it by some special sign, as the sign of
ye cross, etc. when he can prove out of the scriptures, we shall be content
to refourme our Communion according to those supposed gestures. In the mean
time, notwithstanding his ruffian like raylinge, our order of celebration, has
all things instituted and delivered by Christ, to be observed in the reverent
ministration of this most holy sacrament.

The second lie he charge Master Jewel with all is, that he says we have
the same order, that was practi^ed by the Apostles, where as we read of none
order practiced by them. For Acts the 2. we read (says he) that they did
break bread in houses. And yet it may be doubted whether that was the
communion, and acts 13. says he when the Apostles had fasted and sacrificed,
they sent forth Paul and Barnabas. But where find you that translation,
Master Rastell, that they sacrificed? will you now forsake your own Latin
translation? Ministrantibus illis Domino, when they ministered unto the Lord,
and so wilfully run into the curse of the Tridentine council? or will you
appeal to the Greek text (...), which word signifies any public Ministry
by the judgment of all learned Graetians, and Erasmus himself, whom you
follow in this translation, though you count him an heretic, and forsake your
Catholic translation, confirmed by general Councelles? Well, then I see that
papists iangle of general councels and catholic interpretations unto other,
but they themselves will be holden of none, any longer then they list. But to
the matter, he says that S. Paul 1. Cor. 11. testifies of the verity of the
sacrament, but not of the order, referringe that to his own coming. As though
he does not manifestly reform a disorder, or as though other things which he
says he would set in order at his coming. could be taken for the same
things that he wrote of in his Epistle. But what of all this? we observe the
same essential order that the Apostles practiced by Christ's institution, which
S. Paul in that place reduced, and otherwise ye bishop neither said nor meant,
therefore ye foul lies come only out of M. Rastelles foul mouth and
slanderous pen.

From whence come five other lies that follow, namely, ye the order of the
communion restored, has bin continued by ye holy doctors and fathers, as in
the beginning of this Section: whereto he adds, to make ye fifth lie, yt the
bishop says, some refuse ye communion, where there be many refusers: in deed a
few is too many, but if there were a thousand times so many, they are truly
said some, so long as they be not all.

Communion agrees not with the primitive Church, and old fathers. First he
brings in Iustine, Athanasius, Basil, and Agustine, to show that they used
to pray to the East, as though that were any part of the Communion.

And he will know of us wherefore we appoint the priest to stand on ye
Northside. Verily eue^ for the same reason, that the primitive Church did
choose to pray toward the East. Namely to avoid the superstition of the
Jews, that prayed toward the West, as we do to avoid the superstition of the
papists that use to pray toward the East, otherwise all quarters of heaven, of
their own nature, are indifferent for us, to turn our selves unto in our
prayers, either public or private.

The second exception is, of mingling of water with the wine, which is also a
point nothing material, as their own school doctors do confess, the
usage of this he proves by a counterfett decree of Alexander bishop (...)
^ome, by Cyprian, and the third council of Carthage: saving that he belyeth
Cyprian, who in deed reprooueth them that ministered with water alone, but not
such as ministered with wine alone, although he think it convenient that water
should be mixed with the wine. But all his reasoninge is for wine, and not for
water, against water alone, and not against wine alone.

Wherefore the use of water being not of Christ's institution, as many other
things practiced of the fathers at the first as indifferent, or profitable
ceremonies, being ouergrowne after with superstition and opinion of necessity,
our Church has done very well to curse them of, and leave nothing but the
pure institution of Christ.

The third exception is of the sign of the cross, which he says, ought to be
used in ye communion, and yt he proves by the counterfeit liturgies ascribed to
S. James and S. Basil, he cites also Tertulian, to prove that men used to
make that sign on their foreheads customably at every action, which they did,
to show themselves to be Christian^ against the Heathens. Likewise he cites
the sayings of Chrysostom and Augustine, to prove that they used the sign of
the cross at the celebration of the communion, which is not denied, yet cannot
he prove, that the use of that sign is necessary to the ministration: and the
first that we read of, that had it in estimation, were ye Valentinian
heretics Ireneus lib. 1. Cap. 1. By fond emulation of whom, the Catholics
also began to usurp the same sign. Therefore our communion which lacks that
sign, lacks nothing that is either necessary or profitable, or (considering
the abuse of it) meet to be retained.

The fourth exception is of Altars, which we have not, neither in deed had the
primitive church, but tables made of bords, which although they called altars,
as they did also call them tables, yet were they neither in form, nor matter
like those which the Papists have, as I have showed at large in the answer to
M. Hesk. lib. 3. Cap. 31. whither I remit the reader. As for master Rastels
proof out of that saying of the Apostle to the Hebrews: we have an Altar of
which they may not eat, which communicate with Idols: declares what a well
exercised man in the scriptures he is for neither be ye words of the apostle
Heb. 12. as he does falsify them, neither does he speak of any material
altar, but of our spiritual Altar Christ. The words be these we have an Altar
of which it is not lawful for the^ to eat, which serve in the tabernacle. His
next proof is for hallowing of aultars, and oil, and of ye priests blessing,
out of the provincial council of Agatha, which he cites Cap. 14. in steed of
10. which was a new decree made by 35. Bishops in France, almost five
hundredth years after. Christ, and therefore not Catholic, either for time or
place. The saying of Opratus which he cites last, you shall find at large in
the answer unto Hesknis before named.

The fifth exception is of incense, which he proves by a prayer of the
counterfeit mass of S. James, which yet may be otherwise taken figuratively.
Also by a saying of Dennys, who was not known in the church five hundredth
years after Christ for a writer, neither of Eusebius, Iero^e, nor Gennadius.
Last of al by a saying of Ambrose lib. 1. in cap. 1. Luc. I would to god that
while we ince^se the aultars and bring sacrifice thither, the Angels should
stand by us. By which word^ he means nothing else but prayers, which are
figuratively, both in the psalms and in the revelation called incense or
sacrifice. Wherefore popish sensing is not of such antiquity as he pretends.

The sixth exception is of lights and tapers, used in the primitive Church,
which is false, except it were in the night season, to give them light. For
profes he cites a counterfeit sermon of Augustine de tempore, which for all
that speaks but of oil and wax for the use of the night. Neither is the
verse of Paulinus otherwise to be understood, Of the Aultars bright, that
were round ydight, with lamps thick set and light. Finally where he cites
Hierom against Vigilantius, excusing the superstition of some women, that
lighted candles at day time, partly by their devotion, partly by the example
of the East Churches, which only at the reading of the gospel used to light
their candels in sign of joy, you shall see by his own words in the same
place, that neither it was the custom of the latin church to ^ett light
candels on the aultars, neither did he allow them that used so to do, Caereas
autem non clara luce accendimus sicut fustra calumniaris, sed and noctis
tenebras hoc solatio temperemus, and vigilemus ad lumen, no tecum caeci
dormiamus in tenebris. Quod si aliqui propter imperitiam vel simplicitatem
saecularium hominum, vel certe religiosarum faeminarum de quibus vere dicere
possumus, confiteor zelum Dei habens sed non secu^dum scientiam, hoc pro honor
martyrum faciunt, quid inde perdis? We do not light wax ca^dels in ye brod day
light as thou do slander us in vain, but that we may temper the darkness of
the night with this comfort, and may watch by a light, least we should sleep
with thee in the dark like blind men. And if any lay men, or perhaps devout
we men, through ignorance or simplicitye do so for the honor of the Martyrs,
of whom we may truly say: I confess they have a zeal but not according to
knowledge, what leesest thou thereby? By these words you may see how this
custom came up, namelye of superstition and ignorance, by Hieromes own
confession, although he was more ready to excuse it, then to reform it, as
his duty had been.

After some railing against our gross, unreasonable, and unnatural heresies
(as he calls them,) he returns to two other exceptions, the one of prayers
made to saints, used at the communion, the other of prayer for the dead. For
proof of the first, he cites the liturgies falsely entitled to Basil and
Chrisostom, which the world knows are of a much later stamp, the one being
unknown to Gregory Nazianzen, that wrote Basils life, and commended his
acts, the other praying for Pope Nicholas and the Emperor Alexius, which
were six hundredth years after Chrysostom was dead.

After these he cites the authorities of Chrysostom and Augustine, that
mention was made of the saints and martires at the celebration of the
communion in their time, which we confess, and so there is in our
ministration, but no prayer was in their time offered unto them, more then is
now: as even that place of Augustine which he cites, sufficiently does
prove. De ciuit dei lib. 22. Cap. 10. although he cite it falsely and by
patches. Suo loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a sacerdote qui sacrificat
inuocantur? they are named in their order and place, yet are they not called
upon by the priest that sacrifices: and what can be more plain against
invocation of saints, then this testimony of Augustine? But he cites
another place of Augustine, Contra Faust. Manich. lib. 20. cap. 2, where he
says, the Christians did solemnelye frequent the memories of the martyrs, both
to stir up themselves to a following of them, and also to be made companions
of their merits, and to be helped by their prayers. This was Augustines
judgment in deed, but yet in the same place, he denies that any Aultars were
set up unto them, or that any prayers were ever offered unto them. Quis enim
Antistitum etc. for what bishop standing at the altar in the places of ye
holy Martyrs, ever said? We offer unto thee O Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian.

As for prayer for the dead, we confess it was used at the communion in the
time of Chrysostom and Augustine, but not as any part of the communion, or as
the institution of Christ, or the practice of the Church for two hundredth
years after Christ, but only as a superstitious error, crept into the Church
and not espied, while the fathers were busily occupied in fighting against
monstrous heresies of greater importance. Wherefore these exceptions
notwithstanding, our celebration of the Communion has the whole institution of
Christ, the practice of the Apostles, and the observation of the primitive
Church for five or six hundredth years, so far as it agrees with the said
institution and practice, which was in all substantial and essential parts,
although the later age had added diverse superfluous and supersticious vsages:
and otherwise we boast not of the conformity of our ministration, with the
ancient obseruaton, as master Rastel, like a malicious cauiller, does charge
the Bishop, I cannot say whether more lewdely then folishly.

Rastell.
SECTIO. 5. From the first face of the 38. leaf to the 2 face of the 41. leaf.
Fulk.
The Bishop said there is no ordinance or mystery so good* but through folly
or frowardnes of men, it may be abused: and after reherseth many abuses of ye
sacrament. M. Rastel says, if he can take him tardie but in one, he must be
guilty of all. A wise man I promise you, I have taken him tardye already in
falsifying the scripture and Saint Augustine, yet will I not deny, but that
some thing he says is true. But let us see how he takes him tard^e. The
abuse of baptizing dead men was condemned in the third Council of Carthage,
and the sixth Canon. But (says Master Rastell) in the seventeen Canon of that
Council, strange women are forbidden to dwell with the Clergy, whereas now
(says he) they do not only receive them to their servants, but also to
their bedfellowes. And I pray you sir, have not some Popish Priests such
servants and bedfellowes also? Of servants he will not deny, but bedfellowes if
they have, he will say they have them not as wives, but as Concubines: So that
belike it is better to have Concubines then wives. Nevertheless, the Canon
which forbids strange women, forbids not their wives, as it is most
manifest, nor yet their sons wives, to dwell with any of the Clergy, whereby
you see he is taken tardie in his own trip. It seems he never read the
Council, or else he is a most impudent reporter of that he reads: As for the
27. Canon that he cites in steed of yt 24. of water to be mixed with wine, I
say he falsifieth the Council, saying that it commands water and wine both
to be used in the sacrifice, the words be these: Vt in sacramentis corporis and
sanguinis domini, nihil amplius offeratur quam ipse Dominus tradidit, hoc est
panis and vinum, aqua mixtum. Nec amplius in sacrificijs offeratur quam de vuis
and frumentis. That in the sacraments of the body and blood of our Lord,
nothing more be offered then our Lord himself delivered, that is, bread and
wine mixed with water. And let nothing more be offered in the sacrifices, but
that which comes of grapes and of corn. This last clause then excludes
water as any necessary part. But yet he will press us with the 36. Can which
forbids a Priest to consecrate the Chrisme, and licenseth him to consecrate
virgins. And we (as he says) have taken away oil, consecration, and virgins.
In deed in such matters of ceremonies and external discipline, we do not deny,
but that we vary from the^, and upon good grounds: otherwise we are not bound
to the determination of any Councels, but as they agree with Gods word. But
seeing ye Papists glory, that al their doctrine, ceremonies, and discipline,
are of Catholic or universal antiquity and consent, we may justly press
them, with every Canon of any ancient Council, which they affirm can not
err. Namely with the 26. Can. of this present Council, which forbids, that
the Bishop of Rome or any other Bishop of any principal See, should be called
Princes of the Priests, or the highest Priest, or by any like title: but only,
the Bishop of the principal See. I might allege many other Canons, wherein
order is taken for the modest behavior of the sons and daughters of Bishops,
which proves their marriages lawful, but for shortness I pass them over.
Another abuse the Bishop notes, that in the time of Tertullian, and Cyprians
time, the people took the sacrament home with them. This M. Rast. denies to
have been an abuse, and here he craketh of his equality with M. Jewel (how
wisely let other judge) that his nay is as good as the Bishops ye. The matter
therefore rests upon proof, whereof we shall consider in the next section.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 6. From the second face of the 40. leaf to the first face of the 42.
leaf.
Fulk.
The Bishop alleged the example of a woman out of Cyprian, which opening her
chest with unworthy hands, in which was the holy thing of the Lord, by fire
breaking out, she was terrified that she durst not touch it. This miracle
(says M. Ra.) proves none abuse in keeping the sacrament, but her fault in
presuming to touch it with unworthy hands. But why may it not serve to prove
both, seeing Christ gave not his sacrament to be locked up in Chestes, but to
be received? Take, eat (says he:) but neither the breach of Christ's
commandment, nor of the end of his institution can persuade M. Ra. to
acknowledge it to be an abuse, because he imagines, that carrying home of the
sacrament, may justify their reservation thereof for adoration, yea and the
communion under one kind, whereas it neither justifies the one, nor proves the
other. For that they (though abusiuely) kept it in corners to receive, ca^^ot
serve to justify the popish manner of hanging it over ye altar, or carrying it
abroad in procession to be worshipped. And there is no color in the world to
make us think, that they carried not as well of the sanctified wine, as of the
sanctified bread, home to their houses. But it is a sport to see, yt he would
prove it to be the body of Christ, by the fire that came out of the chest. The
same Cyprian shows an other miracle of an unworthy receiver, in whose hand
the sacrament was turned into ashes, will he say the body of Christ was turned
into ashes also? But to be short, he would know what Doctor or Council we
can show, to prove this carrying home of the sacrament to be an abuse. For
Doctor he shall have Origin in Leu. cap. 7. Hom. 5. Nam and Dominus panem quem
discipulis dabat, and dicebat eis accipite and manducate, no^ distulit, nec
seruari iussit in crastinum. For our Lord differred not yt bread which he gave
to his disciples, and said unto them, take ye, and eat ye, neither bad he yt it
should be kept until the next day. For council he shall have Caesar Augustanum.
Eucharistiae gratiam si quis probatur acceptam non consumpsisse in Ecclesia,
anathema sit in perpetuum. If any man be proved, not to have spent in the
church, the gift of the Eucharistie which he has taken, let him be accursed
for ever. Finally, if it be no abuse, why do not the Papists suffer it to be
done? specially of their Popish brethren whom they take to live in
persecution, under princes that profess the Gospel of Christ.

An other abuse the Bishop rehearses within Saint Cyprian and Saint Augustines
time, the Communion was given to young babes, contrary to the commandment of
the holy Ghost. Let a man examine him self, and so let him eat etc. whereas
infantes are not able to examine them selves. This will not Master Rastell
acknowledge to be an abuse, neither that, a reason of the abolishing thereof,
but only the bare authority of the Church, which belike has abolished a good
custom. But he faith, infants might as well communicate as be baptized,
wherein he plays the Anabaptist, requiring instruction before baptism,
which the scripture does not in the children of the faithful, as it does
examination i^ the communicants. Again he says, they may as well communicate
in the faith of the Church, as they may be baptized in the faith of their
Godfathers. But I answer, they are baptized in ye faith which their Godfathers
confess, and not in that faith which they believe, for perhaps they may be
hypocrites, and so void of faith, or heretics, and hold a false faith. But
seeing Christ said, Drink ye all of this, he will know why infants may not
also drink, and if they may not drink, then by all, are meant none, but all that were present, that is, all Priests. But I answer, drink ye all of this,
is said to all them, to whom, take ye, eat ye, etc. is said, that is, to all
that are able to understand the mystery, or else none might take and eat,
but all Priests, because only Priests (as they say) were present, which yet
they are not able to prove. As for his comparing of the sacrament with
spicebread and cakebread, sauoureth of a mind that inwardly derideth all
religion, though outwardly he pretend never so much Popish holiness.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 7. From the first face of the 42. leaf to the first face of the 43.
leaf.
Fulke.
The Bishop rehearses, that Marcus an heretic and Necromanser, (as Irenaeus
writes) made that by enchantment, there should appear very blood in the
chalice. Hereof Rastel gathers, that the people believed blood to be there,
and so he served their faith and devotion by his enchauntment, but that is
utterly false, for he would have deceived the people, to make them think that
he had the blood of Christ, whereas the Ministers of the Catholic Church had
but wine. He counterfeted also a multiplying of the same wine by his sorcerie,
and all to get credit to his heresy, and not to serve the faith as M. Rastel
untruly and unlearnedly affirms, but to overthrow the faith of the people
of God.

SECTIO. 8. From the first face of the 43. leaf to the first face of the 45.
leaf. Rastel.

The Bishop rehearses other abuses of the sacrament, Fulk.
as that some hang it before their breast for a protection, some take the
sacrament for a purgation against slander, S. Benet ministered the communion to
a woman that was dead. M. Rastell confesses the sacrament may be abused by
Coniurers and other, but he will not grant that S. Benet did amiss, because
he was a Saint, as though Saints could not do amiss. And he counts it no
reason, against S. Benets fact, that Christ gave not the sacrament to dead
folk, for that he says is no reason: because Christ forbad no communion, that
three be not present, neither badde the chalice to be filled when all is supped
up, nor bad us kneel and say, we do not presume to come to this thy table, nor
carry home the cantels of bread that are left. But notwithstanding his fond
quarrelling whatsoever apperteineth to the decent and reverent ministration of
the communion, Christ commanded, though not every particular thing by name.
And Master Rastell shows himself to be an ignorant Ass, that compares
substances and accidents, the essential causes and variable circumstances
together, whereas the one must have the express word of God, or else it can
have no being, the other for the manner of the being, has general rules to
order it by, but no particulars expressed.

But Master Rastell, will not condemn the fact of Benet, because Saint
Augustine dare not condemn the fact of those virgins that drowned themselves
contrary to the commandment, Thou shall not kill, because they might have an
extraordinary spirit, as Sampson had, and because S. Ambrose commends the
fact of his brother Satyrus, one that was not baptized, and therefore might not
receive the sacrament, which hanged it about his neck in a tempest and
escaped. All these notwithstanding, if he will not admit that Saint Benet did
evil in breaking the commandment of Christ, yet let him hear what the Church
decreed in the 3. council of Carthage, the 6. Canon. Placuit vt corporibus
defunctorum Eucharistia non detur, Dictum est enim a Domino, accipite and
edite. Cadauera autem nec accipere possunt nec edere. It is decreed that the
sacrament of the Eucharistie be not given to the bodies of them that are dead.
For it is said by our Lord. Take ye, and eat ye. But dead carcases can
neither take nor eat. The council uses the same reason that the bishop
does, but M. Rastel, wiser then the council, says that it is no good reason.

Rastel
SECTIO. 9. From the first face of the 46. leaf to the second face of the 47.
leaf.
Fulk
The Bishop affirms, that Albertus Pighius, one of the greatest pillars of the
Popish part, finds fault with the Mass. M. Rastel denying him to be a great
pillar, (perhaps thinking himself to be as great) confesses that booth he and
other do so, but that it is not in the body of the Mass, but in the garments,
and he says they show the better conscience to confess the truth, whereas
protestants will acknowledge no faults one by an other, which is a shameless
ly. But what conscience the whole Popish Church has, hereby it may be seen,
that seeing there be faults in the Mass, so long ago espied, yet not one of
them is by the Pope and his clergy reformed.

Rastel
SECTIO. 10. From the second face of the 47. leaf, to the second face of the
48. leaf.
Fulk
That the Bishop in his sermon refuses to speak of transubstantiation, real
presence, or sacrifice, and chooses to speak of the communion in both kinds,
of the Canon of the Mass, and of the private Mass, Master Rastel says it
is a timorous bragging, and vain glorious weakness. But how well he has
quit himself in those cases that Master Rastell imagines he was afraid to
deal with, his learned writings do more sufficiently declare, to his true
praise, then Master Rastels railing surmises are able to obscure. And those
things being taken from the Mass, which he chooses to speak of, would make
the Mass a poor sacrifice, and smally to be regarded.

SECTIO. 11. From the second face of the 48. leaf, unto the first face of the
58. leaf, Wherein he speaks of service in the mother tongue. Rastel

The Bishop reproves the use of the unknown tongue in the Mass, by the
authority of S. Paul, Fulk
that will have all things in the Church done to edifying, and that prayers and
thanks given in the Church be such, as the people to them may answer, Amen.

Master Rastell quarreleth that this fault is common to the Mass, with
Euensong, and Mattins, therefore it is no proper fault of the Mass. A proper
reason: railing and lying are no peculiar faults to Master Rastel, but common
to him with Master Harding, Master Sanders, Master Alen, and an hundredth
more, therefore he does Master Rastel wrong that reproves him of railing and
lying. But before he answer the Bishops objections, he will make no less then
five objections him self against him, out of the same place of Saint Paul,
wherein he triumphs.

1 Why all the Psalter of David is read in the English Church, when all the
Psalms be not understood of all English men? Forsooth sir there is no Psalm,
but something may be understood of every English man that has capacity of
understanding, and the rest, that they may learn to understand them.

2 How many people be there that understand not the easiest Chapter of the
Gospel, much less the Prophets and Psalms? But sir they are often read that
they may the better be understood, or at least so much of them, as is
necessary for them to know for their salvation.

3 Where singing is used, how can they understand any thing? Such singing as
takes away understanding is forbidden in our Church, both by the book and by
iniunction.

4 How can a thousand people understand him that has a small voice, or
Cornishe men, or Northern men, a fine Londoners speech? etc. The Bishop should
have care to provide a man, as well for voice, as for other qualities, able to
edify the people, and such nations of the Queens obedience as understand not
the English tongue, have their prayers in their own tongue, which he says,
he had forgotten, I think he says as it is, for a liar should have a good
remembrance.

5 He says we have one Chapter for the better learned of the Parish, another
for the poorer, which is a flam five of his own devising. Yet he says, there
would be no end of confusion, if nothing should be read in the congregation,
but that which should be understood of all that are present: as though he were
wiser then the holy Ghost, which in express words has so commanded, that
al may learn, that all may be comforted, meaning all the congregation, not a
man of a strange language coming in chaunceably or curiously, being none of
that flock.

But what answer has he to Saint Paul? even a most shameful shifte and
impudent lie. Namely, that Saint Paul speaks only of preaching, which he
grants must be in the vulgar tongue, and the Gospel and Pistle he could be
content should be also, if it pleased the Popes holiness. But Saint Paul
names expressly, not only preaching, but also praying, giving of thanks,
and singing of Psalms or Hymns. But he obiecteth that Saint Paul says, he
that speaks with tongues edifieth himself, and he that gives thanks in a
strange tongue, does give thanks well: It is true, if his prayer and speech
be godly and private, but in the congregation, the Apostle by no means
allows any man to use a strange tongue. Yes says M. Rast. if there be an
interpreter. In deed S. Paul speaks of them which had a miraculous gift of
strange tongues, which might be used to set forth Gods glory, so that there
were an interpreter, that the Church might be profited, otherwise he would
have Gods gift to be silent in the Church. To be short, M. Rast. affirms
preaching it self to be so unnecessary, that pictures may not only supplye
the want thereof, but also are necessary for the faithful people, and more
profitable then a most eloquent and learned sermon of M. Jewel himself. Who
would reason any longer with such an insensible Idol? which by ye just
judgment of God, is made like unto those Images which he worshippeth, and in
whom he puts his trust.

SECTIO. 12. in the 58. leaf. Rastel

The bishop alleges S. Augustine, which says, Fulk
that in our prayers we must not chirpe like birds, but sing like men. To
this he makes none answer, but that we must learn to understand the English
which we read, or else we are chirpers, as though English men could understand
no more of English, then of Latin.

SECTIO. 13. From the first face of the 56. leaf to the 2. face of 59. leaf.
Rastel

The bishop cites a law of Justinian, that the priest should speak with
an audible voice, Fulk
that the people might say Amen, therefore the people should understand what
the minister says: M. Rastel answers to this nothing, but yt the people
do, and may say Amen, though they understand him not, so long as there is no
mistrust in the persons faith and honesty. So that belike, if the priest be a
knave, no man should say Amen to his mass. Good stuff I warrant you. But in
that the people said Amen to the priests words of consecration, he will prove
like a luftie logician, which finds no reason, but much rethorike in yt
bishops sermon, yt they did exclude al figuration, and signification of his
body. We will reason no longer, M.R. has gotten the day, and that with maine
logike. And as for the second abuse, of not receiving in both kinds, if it
were any abuse, it is the fault (he says) of the bishops and priests, and not
of the mass, which consecrateth in both kinds. But seeing receiving is made
one of the parts of the mass, receiving in one kind only, is an abuse of the
mass it self. I know he will answer, the priest receives in both kinds. In
deed if the sacrament had been instituted for priests only, the answer had
been somewhat, but if the blood of Christ pertain to more then priests,
surely the sacrament of his blood should not be denied to any, for whom he
shed his blood.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 14. From the second face of the 59. leaf, to the second face of 61.
leaf.
Fulk.
The bishop said, the Canon of the mass for many causes is a very vain
thing, and so uncertain, that no man can redily tell on whom to father it.
Notwithstanding the bishop says for many causes, yet Master Rastell takes
exceptions to his argument, as though for the uncertainty of the author only,
it should be refused: comparing it most leudely with certain books of holy
scripture, the indighters of which, although they be not known, yet the only
author is both known, and acknowledged to be the holy Ghost. But Pope Innocent
the third, says, it came from the Apostles, other say from Gregory the first,
and other from Gregory the third. But that it came neither from the Apostles,
nor from Gregory the first, even that place which M.Ra. cites out of Greg.
lib. 7. ep. 63. does prove sufficiently. For there Greg. reproves the order of
the liturgy or canon used in his time, because the Lords prayer by that order,
was not said over the sacrament, as well as ye prayer of Scholasticus. But M.R.
will have Scholasticus to signify a scholar or disciple of Christ, and not to
be a proper name, which is altogether untrue and unlikely, for if Greg. had
thought any Apostle or disciple of Christ to have bin ye auctor of it, he would
never have taken upon him to reprove it, and seeing he thought it expedient yt
the lords prayer should be said over ye sacrament, which is not used in the
popish canon, it follows also that Gregory the first, was not the author of
the popish canon. And so it is not proved to have been made within the
compass of six hundredth years after Christ.

SECTIO. 15. From the second face of the 61. leaf, to the first face of the
63. leaf Rastel

Here he charge the bishop with a shameful lie, Fulke.
for saying that the priest in the canon desires God to bless Christ his
body, denying any such thing to be in ye Latin canon, but confesses yt the
Graecians use such words, and excuses the^, by vehemence of desire, whereas
those words do prove, yt the authors of those liturgies believed not ye bread
to be turned into the body of Christ, which they would never have prayed yt God
should bless, upon any vehemence of desire, to confess ye body of Christ to
have need of sanctification. But to return to ye Latin canon, I pray you M.R.
what be these Dona sancta and sacrificia, those gifts and holy sacrifices which
he desires God to bless, ye bread and wine? what holiness is in the^ before
they be consecrated? So for all your loud lying clamors, the canon is not
constant with it self, or your heresy of transsubstantiation agrees not with
the canon. Also yt M. of the sentence, lib. 4. did. 13. plainly affirms yt
your mass is called Missa, because the Angel ye is prayed for, is sent to
consecrate the body of Christ, which prayer is said after the priests
consecration.

SECTIO. 16. From the first face of the 63. leaf to the second face of the 64.
leaf in the which he speaks of the sacrifice of the mass. Rastel

He would know what blasphemy it is for the priest to offer Christ to his
father in a propitiatory sacrifice. Verily so great blasphemy, as none can
lightly be greater. First because it takes away the eternal and vnsuccessible
priesthood of Christ. Secondly, because it makes the priest more excellent
then Christ. For every sacrifice is excepted for the dignity of him which
offers it, so the sacrifice of Christ, which by his eternal spirit offered
up himself, was acceptable unto God. Heb. 9. But M.R. being forsaken of the
scripture, flies to ye sayings of the doctors, that not only the priest, but
all ye Church offers Christ, nevertheless the old fathers even by saying so,
declare that they mean not to set up a propitiatory sacrifice, but only to
celebrate a remembrance of the only, and singular sacrifice of Christ.
Chrysostom. ad Heb. cap. 10. Hom. 17. Hoc autem quod facimus etc. But this that
we do, is done in remembrance of that which was done. For do this (says he) in
remembrance of me. We make not another sacrifice as the high priest, but the
same always, but rather we work the remembrance of that sacrifice. And
August Contra Faust. Man. lib. 20. cap. 18. Vnde iam Christiani, etc. Whereupon
now the Christians do celebrate ye memory of the same sacrifice once finished,
by holy oblation and participation of the body and blood of Christ. Contra
aduersari^^ lag. and proph. cap. 18. He calls the death of Christ, Vnum,
singular, and solum verum sacrificium, the one singular, and only true
sacrifice. These places with many other, are sufficient to expound what they
mean, when in any other place figuratively and improperly. they call the
celebration of the communion, an oblation or sacrifice of the body and blood
of Christ. It is great lewdness and deceiptfulnes to urge the terms used by
the doctors, and to refuse their meaning sufficiently expressed in diverse
places of their writings.

Rastel
SECTIO. 17. in the 64. leaf.
Fulk
Whereas the bishop says, it is Christ which presents ^s, and makes us a
sweet oblation in the sight of his father, M. Rastell denies that it follows
not, that the priest offers not Christ: because Saint Augustine says de
ciuit dei lib. 10. cap. 20. that as the church is offered by Christ, so Christ
is offered by the Church. But that which Augustine makes here common to all the
Church, master Rastel restreineth to his popish priests. And although
Augustine in the same place expound himself sufficiently when he says; the
daily sacrifice of the church is a sacrament of the oblation of Christ, yet in
Cap. 5. of the same book he speaks most plainly: Sacrificium ergo visibile
inuisibilis sacrificij sacramentum, id est, sacrum signum est: Therefore the
visible sacrifice, is a sacrament, that is to say, an holy sign of the
invisible sacrifie. What can be said more plainly concerning his meaning by
the term of sacrifice?

SECTIO. 18. From the first face of the 65. leaf to the end of the 67. leaf.
Rastel

The blasphemous prayers of the Popish Canon, which desires God to accept the
body of his son, Fulk.
as he did accept the sacrifice of Abel and of Melchisedech, he excuses by
vehemence of devotion, and by ye unworthiness of ye offerer, as though either of
both should be ye cause, why Christ's body should not be acceptable of it self.
Last of all, he flies to ye example of the figurative speeches used by the
holy ghost in the Psalms and canticles, as where God is said to sleep, to
awake as giant refreshed from his wine, yea and to the rethoricall figures used
by men, as he says by Bernard, Bonauentur, Gregory, and in ye hymmes of the
church, which he matcheth unfitly with ye holy scriptures. But how will he make
this prayer a figurative speech, that it may be excused by any such example?
For seeing he will admit no figure in the word, body or oblation, the other
words are plain without figure, God to accept the sacrifice of Abel etc.

Rastle.
SECTIO. 19. From the 68. leaf, to the second face of the 69. leaf.
Fulk.
The foolish prayer of the Canon, that an Angel should carry away the body of
Christ, he defends to be meant after a spiritual manner, and caueleth of the
bishops translating of perferri to be carried away, which signifies to be
carried up, which is a toy to mock an Ape, for neither does the bishop talk of
Angels backs, and such other bables as M. Rastel deliteth to prate of, but of
the fond absurdity of the Papists, which imagine the ministry of Angels
necessary for the carrying of Christ's body, (or as he says excusing the
matter) for ye acceptacio^ of their sacrifice. But in very deed, this prayer
being taken out of the old liturgies, wherein they desired not the sacrament,
but their sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving to be presented to God by the
ministry of Angels, is so absurd, when it is applied to the transubstantiated
body, that it can have no reasonable sense, as it had in the liturgy cited by
S. Ambrose and other old liturgies, where the like prayer is made for their
sacrifice, but they believed not their sacrifice to be the very natural body of
Christ, as the Papists say they do.

Rastle.
SECTIO. 20. in the 69 leaf.
Where the bishop gives over, to speak further of the Canon, Fulk.
master Rastel says, it was because he had no matter against it, but his own
misunderstanding. But what matter he had, and how well he has maintained it,
his aunsweres to master Harding sufficiently declare.

Rastell.
SECTIO. 21. in the 70. leaf.
Against adoration of the sacrament, he says we have no arguments at al, Fulk.
but such as may serve for overthrow of all orders in the Church. In deed
these arguments may well and worthily serve to overthrow all plants, not
planted by Christ. For why may not one hatchet serve to cut down an hundredth
fruitless and hurtful trees?

SECTIO. 22. in the same leaf to the second face of the 71. leaf. Rastel

That Christ gave no commandment of adoration, Fulk.
he says, it is no sufficient reason, first because we must not condemn all
voluntary service of God, which is without his commandment. Then belike S.
Paul was not well advised, when he condemned (...); that is, voluntary
worship of God without his commandment Coll. 2. verse. 23. And where as he
cauilleth of them yt worshipped our savior Christ in ye flesh, I answer, as
many as acknowledged him to be ye son of god, knew they had an express
commandment to worship him. The rest reverenced him as the prophet of God. And
whereas he says like a protestant, that an argument of authority negative, is
naught and protestant like, I answer an argument of man's authority negative
is naught, but an argument of Gods authority negative, I am content it be
counted protestant like, in as much as God has expressly forbidden, what so
ever he has not commanded in his worship. Deuter. 12. verse. 32. Contrariwise
to reason from the authority of men negatiuely, is Papistlike, and the best
argument they have for many things, as if they be asked why say they not mass
in english? they will answer, because the Church has not commanded them. Why
do you not give the communion to Infants? Master Rastel says in this book,
because the Church does not command it. Why does not the priest wear his
chisible and other vestments at even song? Because the church has not
commanded it. But master Rastel says, Christ having said the sacrament to be
his body, needed not to command the same to be worshippid, no more then the
king when he speaks to the Lords in the dark, needs to bid the^ put of
their caps. A dark example for such an obscure argument. But when will he
prove, that Christ is the same in the sacrament, that the king is in the dark?
for remove the dark, and the king is seen, but take away the accidents of
bread and wine by your own school^ doctrine, and where is the body of Christ?

Rastle.
SECTIO. 23. From the second face of the 71. leaf, to the 2. face of the 72.
leaf.
He decideth the argument taken out of the authority of saint Paul
negatiuely, Fulk.
who declares the whole institution of Christ, and never willed adoration to
be used to the sacrament. And asks whether S. Paul command us to stand,
kneel, lie, or fit, to tumble, lean upon breast, or elbowes: I answer
whatsoever of these gestures is decent and orderly he has appointed, the other
he has forbidden. And yet the protestants logike, which he does so
delicately contemn, is not so simple to make no diference between matters of
substance, and matters of circumstance, as he by his Popish sophistry does
confound.

Rastle.
SECTIO. 24. From the second face of the 72. leaf to the second face of the 74.
leaf wherein he begins to speak of adoration of the sacrament.
Where the bishop says that the old doctors never make mention of adoration
of the sacrament, Fulk.
master Rastell says, the argument is both naught and lying. Naught, because
it may be they used it although they never spoke of it, and lying, because he
says they do speak of it. But to answer the naughtiness of the argument, I
say master Rastell is both a naughty and lying gatherer of the bishops
argument, dismembring that which he joins together thus. Christ, his
Apostels, and the primitive church, never made mention of adoration of ye
sacrament, therefore is not to be used. And concerning the lying supposed, I
answer, that no ancient doctor speaks one word of adoration of the
sacrament as the very son of GOD, but either of adoration of Christ in
heaven, or of worshipping and adoring, that is, reverently handling and
honoring of the mysteries of Christ, and no more of this sacrament, then of
the other, namely baptism. For answer to the places he cites out of
Chrysostom, Ambrose, Augustine, I will refer the reader to mine answer,
unto the 45.46. and 47. Chapters of the second book of Heskins parleament,
where this question is handled more at large. Saving that which he cites out
of Hom. 83. out of Chrysostom. that we are fed with that thing which the Angels
do honor, which we confess to be the body of Christ after a spiritual manner,
yet pertains it nothing to adoration of the sacrament. And much less that he
cites ex Orat. in Philon. That as we entertain God here, so he will receive us
there with much glory. Where he speaks of honoring God, and not adoring the
sacrament.

SECTIO. 25. in the 74. leaf. Rastel.

The Bishop aunswering a place of Augustine says, Fulk.
we must worship Christ where we eat him, but we eat him in heaven by faith,
therefore we must worship him there. M. Rastel says we eat him on earth also,
but proof he brings none greater then his own saying, either of reason or
authority.

SECTIO. 26. From the end of the 74. leaf to the first face of the 79. leaf.
Rastel.

The Bishop proves we must seek Christ in heaven, Fulk.
by these reasons. We must lift up our hearts, we must seek those things
which are above in heaven, where Christ is, and not the things yt are upon
earth, where Christ is not. C^ll. 3. And our conversation is in heaven, from
whence we look for our Savior, etc. Phil. 3. M. Rastel says, the conclusion
is inferred madly and miserably, because these textes do no more disprove
Christ's body to be on earth really, then they prove our bodies to be in
heaven really, as in this short example, our conversation is in heaven: and yet
Paul was on earth in body, when he said this: O wise and happy concluder!
but blind and blockish interpretour, which reasons, as though the word
Conversation in Saint Paul's saying, did signify presence or being, whereas it
signifies franches or liberty (...) our franches, freedom, or conversation is
in heaven. Where is now your madd and miserable conclusion?

The Bishops arguments therefore on these places stand firm and immovable,
that Christ is not on earth in body, but in heaven, where we must seek him,
not climbing with ladders, (as it pleases Master Rastel to scoff in so grave
matters, but ascending by faith, and affection set on heavenly and spiritual
things. As for his exposition of Sursian corda, how wholesome it is, you may
gather by this one note, that in the very beginning* he says, that the body of
Christ is not only lying on the altar, and carried in men's hands, but also
broken and divided. The places he cites out of Saint Augustine for adoration,
be answered in mine answer to Master Heskins before mentioned.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 27.
The Bishop says, that adoration of the sacrament is a new devise of Pope
Honorius, Fulke.
of three hundredth years ago, and after him Vibanus the fourth made an
holiday of Corpus Christi, etc. Master Rastel is angry, that three hundredth
years should be counted a little while ago, when it is not three score years
since Luther sprang up. But if Luther have taught any doctrine that was not
received in the Church a thousand and five hundredth years ago, we are content
it be accounted new, but whatsoever may be proved to have been taught 1500.
years ago, must needs be old, though Luther be new, and in comparison of
that age. Honorius and Vrbanus are but young children. But remitting the
antiquity, Master Rastell will stand for the verity; because the Popes
lacked no counsel. Neither by your doctrine needed they any. 2. The
Universities were not without great scholars. Such as those blind and
heretical times affoorded. 3. Religious houses and orders were not destroyed.
Yea, they swarmed with Locustes to maintain the kingdom of Absaddon. 4. The
holy Ghost in true Catholics was invincible. Yea, but there were few true
Catholics in those days. 5. The wicked spirit in heretics would have been
venterous. Yea, the Pope, the Archheretique of the world was venterous enough,
when he set up such idolatry. 6. A good man with the danger of his life,
would have spoken the truth. So did many good men, which cost them their
lives. 7. An heretic for fame would not have passed upon death: what need an
heretic fear death, when heresy was so generally received, that the true
Catholics were condemned and burned for heretics, by the name of Albigenses,
Waldenses, Pauperes de Lugduno, and such like, which from time to time were
persecuted, imprisoned, and burned, for refusing and disalowing such idolatry,
and false worshipping.

These be the worshipful reasons he has to prove the verity of this bread
worship, which after he has dilated more at large, he comes at length to
admiration of the service of Corpus Christi day, made by Thomas Aquinas, which
he thinkeh to be so excellent, that the very sound and sense of the Anthemnes,
Respondes, and Versicles, declare whence they proceeded. And I am of the same
opinion, for the comparing of such things to the sacrament, as pertain
nothing unto it, declares, that such comparison came from the spirit of man,
and not from the spirit of God. As where it is said, 3. Reg 19. That Helias
saw a cake of bread at his head etc. And Job complains of the cruelty of
his servants, that would have eaten his flesh. Job. 31.

And as for the holiday, though it were instituted but of late years, yet he
takes it sufficient to prove the adoration necessary, which could not be
seen in the Church twelve hundredth years before, or else that holiday should
have been set up long before.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 28.
Fulk.
The Bishop said, that for the space of twelve hundredth years after Christ,
this worshipping of the sacrament was never known nor practiced in any place.
M. Rastel after his courteous manner says, he lies, for he has alleged S.
Ambrose and S. Augustine before, to prove that the sacrament is to be
worshipped: and now cites Therdoret, Euthymius, Emissenus, James, Basil, and
Chrysostom in their Liturgies for the same purpose. But the answer is easy
to be made, none of all these speak of that worshipping or adoration of the
sacrament which Pope Honorius commanded, but of honoring, reuerencing,
worshipping, or adoring of the sacrament as divine mysteries, which honoring,
worshipping, or adoring, we all confess to be due to the blessed sacraments,
not only to the Lords supper, but also to the sacrament of baptism. For none
of all these writers believed the carnal presence of Christ in the sacrament,
which the Papists hold. Saint Augustine denies the sacrament to be that body
which was crucified, in Psalm. 98. Saint Ambrose calls the sacrament the
figure of the body and blood of Christ. De sacra. lib. 4. cap. 5.

Theodorete (whose saying he cites) being flatly against transubstantiation,
as you may read more at large in mine answer to Heskins Lib. 3. cap. 56.
calls in the same Dialogue the sacrament, the tokens or signs of the body of
Christ. And in his first Dialogue, he says: The tokens which are seen, he
has honored with the name of his body and blood, not changing their nature,
but adding grace to their nature. His discourse at large is set down in mine
answer to Hes. li. 3. ca. 52. Euthymius in 6. Joan. says, that ye words of
Christ must be understood spiritually, and the sacraments must be considred with
inward ^ye, ^as mysteries.

The very words of Emissenus which M. Rastel cites, express his mind to be
of a spiritual presence. Behold with thy faith, says he, honor and wonder
at the holy body and blood of Christ. The very name of the gift which is used
in the liturgy falsely ascribed to Saint James, declares that the Author of
that liturgy did not believe it to be the natural body of Christ, but a
gift or token in remembrance thereof. The prayer which is made in those
liturgies falsely ascribed to Chrysostom and Basil, at the lifting of the
sacrament, proves that they did not believe the bread to be changed into the
body of Christ, after the words of consecration. For then they would not have
prayed, that God would give to them the body and blood of his son, and by
them to the people, if they had them present before. And whereas they all
cried, Sancta sanctis, holy things belong to holy men, it was not to call the
people to worship the sacrament, which they lifted a little, but not over
their heads to be seen, but to charge them that were not baptized to depart,
and to prepare the rest to the worthy receiving of the sacrament. Master
Rastell so great a Chrysippus and Aristotle of Logike, nevertheless uses
these arguments to prove adoration. But leaving these, he asks if any within
that compass of 1200. years believed the sacrament to be the very body of
Christ: and if that be granted, whether the very body and blood of Christ be
not to be worshipped, and then brings in Damascen, and Lanfrancus. Of the
former it may be doubted, but very grossly he writes, the other was an enemy
of Berengarius, 200. years before Honorius the Author of this adoration. I
answer breefely, although the carnal presence was received two or three
hundredth years before Pope Honorius, yet there can no adoration be proved, for
at this day the Lutheranes admit the carnal presence, yet they abhor
adoration, saying the very body of Christ is present to be eaten, but not to
be worshipped.

Rastell
SECTIO. 29. From the first face of the 89. leaf to the 93. leaf.
Fulk
The Bishop said, that the schoolmen perceiving the danger of idolatry that
was unto the ignorant people, in worshipping the cake if it were not
consecrated, gave warning to the people to worship it under this condition, if
it were consecrated. M. Ra. like a Doctor determiner, cutteth of all the reasons
of the schoolmen, and says they were not the best learned, that so decide the
controversy. For there is no danger at all unto the people, so long as their
intent is to worship God and the body of Christ. Example also he brings,
that if a man honor him which is not his father, in steed of his father,
because all the parish says he is his father, he does not amiss. In deed,
if that man do the duty of a father to his supposed son, I think the
error is not greatly hurtefull to him that honors him as his Father. Again
says Master Rastell, suppose that one were so like thine own Father (which
is possible enough) that it could not be discerned, which of the two were thy
true father, thou werest not to be blamed, if thou honor the one in steed of
the other. I answer, suppose it were so, which is unlikely enough, I would
think he were an unadvised child, which would not inquire which of the two
were his true father, before he chose to honor either of them. But Master
Rastel asks, if he should honor no father, because he could not discern the
one from the other. And I likewise ask him whether he should honor two men
for his father, or two fathers in steed of one, because he knows nor which
is his right Father. Finally, I would ask such a not profound learned Master
of Art, as Rastel is, but such a simple fellow as Master Rastell talks
withal in this discourse, whether an unconsecrated cake be as like the body
of Christ, as one man may be to an other? I ween he would say no. But then M.
Rastel would take the tale out of his mouth, and reply that an unconsecrated
cake, and a consecrated, be as like as any two men can be. But then I would
ask him, whether any thing wherein they may be counted like, is either the
thing or the cause, or the sign and mark of the thing that is worshipped? If
not, his two cases are as like to these of the sacrament, as an aple is like to
an oyster.

SECTIO. 30. From the first face of the 93. leaf. to the first face of the 98.
leaf. Rastel.

Three leaves and an half of this section are spent in a fond quarrel of
Master Rastels picking, Fulk.
that the Bishop should ascribe that opinion to Dunce and Durande, which is not
theirs, but proper to Thomas of Aquine, against which they reason. But for all
his impudent and shameless railing and charging the Bishop with lying, it is
Rastel himself which is the liar and the slaunderer, for that which the
Bishop speaks generally of the schoolmen, he draws maliciously unto
Dunce and Durande. Thomas holds that transubstantiation is necessary, or
else the Church should commit idolatry in falling down before bread. Dunce
holds that if there were no transubstantiation granted, yet the presence
might well stand, and the adoration to, as Master Rastel says, but he takes
part with Thomas. But if the reason of Thomas be good for the presence of the
bread, because it is a creature, why not also for the accidents of bread which
are creatures also*

To the saying of Augustine In sermo ad Infantes, That which you see on the
table is bread, Master Rastel says, it is a reason of Tinkers, Taylers, and
Cobblers, (O learned Clearke) and not of learned Scholars, to say it is bread,
because it is called bread. But learned Master Rastel, Saint Augustine does
not say it is called bread, but he says it is bread, and moreover he makes
their senses Judges thereof, Quid-etiam oculi vestri renunciant. Which also
your eyes do tell you. And that your learned pen has set down out of
Prosper, which is not to be found in Augustines works, yet makes it nothing
against the remaining of bread, but only says, that under the visible kinds
of bread and wine, we honor the body and blood of Christ.

To the saying of Gelasius, that the substance and nature of bread and wine
does not cease to be, he answers that Gelasius does expound him self
straight after, where he says: But they remain in the property of their
nature, as though nothing remained, but whitensse, thickness, etc. O impudent
falsifier. Is substance and properties of nature all one? Again I ask what
are they that remain in their property of nature, but the bread and wine?
Finally the very argument which he uses against Eutiches most plainly
confuteth Rastell, for a most shameful and shameless peruerter of this
Doctors meaning, for he concludes, that as the substance of bread and wine
remain in the sacrament, so the body in Christ, after the assumption of the
Divine nature.

The like beastly racking he uses of the words of Theodoret, which uses the
same argument against the Eutichians.

But in the end he says, it must not be considered what one or two have said,
but what the whole consent of the Church is, and if it were granted that
Gelasius and Theodoret denied transubstantiation, yet they granting the
carnal presence, it were a small matter, and nothing at all against the
Catholics, which hold of the general council of Laterane. What say you
learned M. Rastel: is it not to be regarded, nor makes it any thing against
you, what Gelasius the Bishop of Rome has written, which you hold can not
err? But where he says, that they both grant the carnal presence, I must
send the Reader to mine answer unto the 60. Chapter of the 3. book of Hesk.
Parlea. for Gelasius, and to the 52. and 56. chapters of the same book, for
Theodoret. How unlearnedly he affirms Cyprians error of rebaptization to be
no heresy, because the church had not determined the contrary, I pass over,
when on the one side the bishop of Rome was against it, on the other side a
whole council in Africa was for it.

SECTIO. 31. in the 98. leaf. Rastell

The bishop showed out of the school men, Fulk
that if a man worship the accidents of bread, Idolatry may be done to the
sacrament. M. Rastell says, not to the sacrament, but to the accidents. But do
not you papists call the accidents, the sacrament? else what difference make
you between sacramentum and rem sacramenti, in S. Augustine, the sacrament and
the thing of the sacrament? Again he says, the fault were not in the
institution of Christ, but in the silence of the priest and simplicity of the
people, that were no better taught. As though Christ did ever institute the
sacrament to be worshipped after any manner of Latri^ or Doulia, of which he
reasons brutishly with putting such cases, if a man should have worshipped
the only face of Christ as God, which no man would ever have done, or his
garment, which had been idolatry whosoever had done it.

SECTIO. 32. From the 99. leaf to the 103. leaf. Rastell

Whereas the bishop lamenteth the miserable case of the people which are
brought into idolatry* Fulk
with these blind distinctions, M. Rast. deriding his needless and folish
pity, lamenteth the state of the world, when such things as are concluded in
schools, should be opened in pulpets, as though there were one doctrine of God
for the schools, and another for the pulpets. Yet he thinks it not meet to
teach the distinctions of the three persons in trinity, but only to believe
as the Church does believed, as well in the trinity as in all other articles,
and namely in this of the sacrament.

Which position of his, if it may stand, there needs none other creed to be
preached, but only this short curtall creed: believe as the church believes,
and you cannot do amiss.

But in time of popish tyranny, you would not have bin satisfied, if a man
examined of his faith in the sacrament, had answered, I believe as the church
teaches, or I believe it to be the body of Christ, as Christ said it, and
meant it to be his body: but then you must grope him in flesh, blood, and
bones, as he was borne of the virgin Mary, etc. Whether he believe the
substance of bread to remain after the words of consecration spoken by the
priest, etc. Well, howsoever it be, all learning rests in the breast of
reverend M. Rast. M, of art and student in divinity, who can with one breath
condemn all the pedlers, and pelting craftesmens arguments, devised in
alehouses or shops, and after recited in the protestants schools: as this,
Christ is ascended in body in to heaven, and there sits until the end of
the world, therefore he is absent from the earth in body, and consequently is
not in the sacrament, an unlearned argument (says M. Ra.) as this, can a
priest make God? but learned sir, who taught ye people to call that which the
priest makes, their maker? or what, or which of all the reverend rabbis of
popery, did reprove the people for so speaking? Again can one body be in
more places then one at one time? An argument of ignoraunte people. O
unlearned Augustine, which has defined, that the body of Christ can be but
in one place at one time, in Joan. cap. 7. Tr. 30. If a mouse eat the hos^ does
he ease Christ's body? A peltinge craftesmans argument.

What M. Rast. are you so arrogant in opinion of your own learning, that you
will condemn all the schoolmen for pedlers and tynkers, that have moved,
argued, and decided this question, and a hundredth like unto it? came this
question from protestants, or from your own popish schools? and not from the
schools only, but even the instructions that have been written for every
simple curate, as Manupulus curatorum etc. But if a learned man expert in
liberal sciences (says M. Rast. a great Master of liberal arts) should use
this argument of the necessity of Christ's body to be in on place: the^ it were
time to prove the contrary. How I pray you? Because of the nature of a
substance which occupies no place. Is this the philosophy of Louaine? No
marvel if Ramus reprove Aristotle in Logike, when Rastell will set not him
only, but all the philosophers that ever were, and nature it self to schole,
and tell them that it is the nature of a substance to occupy no place, which
is as much to say, as to be no where, and as Augustine says, that which is
no where, is nothing at all, and so by Master Rastels profound physical
philosophy, it is the nature of a substance, which al other men affirm to
contain all things, to be nothing at all.

But for a further resolution, he says, Christ is in the sacrament, not as
in a place locally, but as under form of bread substantially. For before he
has defined a substance to be in no place: I would he could hold him at
this definition of Christ's presence. If I should reason with him of the nine
manners of inesse, or being in a thing, and ask him after which of them
Christ is in the sacrament, perhaps he would reject that distribution, as
sophistical and unworthy of his learned answer?

But Christ (says he) is in the Sacrament, not as in place locally, then
say I, a man poyntinge to the pyxe hanginge over the altar, in which the
consecrated cake is, must say, if he say truly, Christ is not there,
likewise poyntinge to the same holden up at the sacringe, carried in
procession, or wheresoever he sees it, must likewise believe and say,
Christ is not there.

For I am sure he being a Master in all the seven liberal Arts, is not so
ignorant in grammar, but he will confess this word, there, to be an aduerb of
place: not so forgetful of logike, but that he remembers what the Predicament
Vbi means. And to say the truth, if the papists could be content with such
modest terms as the scripture teaches, that the body of Christ is received
of the faithful in the sacrament after a wonderful and mystical manner, there
needed neither these fond questions, nor any so bitter contention about the
sacrament of unity. But that they will make an idol of the Lords supper, and
a bayte to satisfy their ambition, covetousness* and licentiousness, by the
sale of their masses, and applying of their merits: these gross and monstrous
absurdities had never been defended. The contentions of the school doctors
he forces not upon, so long as the Church agrees. But can your church agree
(M. Rast.) when the doctors thereof dissent? If any difference of opinion be
between Luther and Zuinglius, you cry out of our dissension. If your Church
may agree within it self, notwithstanding ye infinite brawlings between the
Thomists, and Scotists, Albertists, Occanists, about small matters (as you say,)
because all those agree in the chiefest points of popery: I pray you let
there be unity in our church, notwithstan-the teachers vary in some matters,
not of greatest moment, agreeing in all necessary articles of Christian
religion. And if Holcot lie, in saying a man may merit by worshipping the
devil, and yet be a popish catholic, Let Luther err in defending the carnal
presence, and yet be good christian catholic. And if your church be not
chargeable with Holcots lie, why should our church bear the blame of Luthers
error?

As for your excuse of Holcots lie, by the school distinction of a thing done
materially and formally, wherein you show a high point of learning, with your
example of worshippinge of Luther being a devil in form of a doctor: I say it
is wholesome divinity, to justify all superstition, Mahometrie and Idolatry
in the world, not only to be excusable, but also to be meritorious.

SECTIO. 33. From the first face of the 103. leaf to the 104. leaf. Rastle.

Where the Bishop said, he was unwilling to spend time in discovering the
mysteries of Popish learning, Fulk.
but that the importunity of Papists boasting (as though all learning were on
their side) enforces him: Master Rastell more like a parasite to provoke his
popish readers to laugh, then a man either of wisdom or honesty, scoffeth
and rayleth on him, calling him a bench wistler, rather the^ a preacher. But of
both their learnings let the world judge.

SECTIO. 34. From the 104. leaf to the 111. in which he takes on him to
defend the vanity of Popish arguments used by papists under color of
similitudes and allusions. Rastell

The Bishop discovers this reason of Pope Innocent the third, God made two
lights, Fulk
the Sun and the Moon, therefore the Pope is so much above the Emperor, as
the Sun is above the Moon, Master Rastell being angry at this discovery,
says it is no mystery nor argument of strength, yet was it used by the Popes
holiness which cannot err. But the Church has stronger arguments for proof of
this conclusion. First says Master Rastell that there be two states,
spiritual and temperall it is proved by other reasons, and the first reason he
uses to prove the state spiritual, is much like that of the Popes which he
excuses, Psalm. 44* and In steed of thy fathers there are sons borne unto
thee (meaning says he the Apostles, and bishopps, and their successors) them
shall thou appoint princes, and rulers over all the whole earth. As though none
were the sons of the Church, but the Apostles, Bishops, and their
successors, and as though the Prophet spoke of temperall rule in this life,
and not of a spiritual kingdom and inheritance of all the world, which is
common to all the faithful after this life.

But to omit that which is not in controversy of two states in the world,
and the excellencye in spiritual things, of the ministry of the Church
above the office of princes, yet who will either grant that the ministry is
simply superior to the King or Emperor so that the ministers are not his
subjects, or that the Pope in any respect ought to have any dignity as a
minister of the gospel, which he disdaineth to preach?

Another defense of this pontifical argument, is, that it was a sweet and
mystical allusion in his familiare letters to the Emperor: In deed great
familyaritie he had with the Emperors of his time, with whom he was in
continual discord. Last of all like a blasphemous Dog he compares it with
the argument used by S. Paul for the covering of women's heads, taken of
nature it self, which though it will not satisfy a contentious person whom
nothing will satisfy, yet is it sufficient and strong enough to prove what
natural comlynesse requires in that case, where as this of the Pope has no
shadow of reason in it. For all the rest of those arguments rehearsed by the
Bishop, he makes that general reason, that their Church has no custom to
contend for them, yet have they a custom to burn men for refusing such
things, as they are not able to contend in argument to defend. And as for
shaven crowns, and purple sandales, holy water, or praying in one tongue, he
says, they were never taken for secreat mysteries in the Church, and if the
scriptures applied to them do not prove them, they take no harm, for by like
they are good enough without the scriptures. Saving that the saying of
Ezechiell Chap. 36. I will sprinkle you with clean water, he sees not, but
that it may be applied to holy water, though it be meant of baptism, because
holy water puts us in mind of our baptism. Where find you that meaning of
holy water in all the exorcising or coniuring thereof? A poor shift God wott
to defend a beggarly ceremony.

As for Ecce duo gladij hic, to prove that the Pope has power of both
swords, he defends it to be good and sufficient. First, because Christ
had power of both, although he used but one. But what has the Pope to do
with Christ? Forsooth he made Peter his lieutenaunt and ruler of all
Christians, when he had him feed his sheep and lambs, Even as good a reason
as Ecce duo gladij hic.

But what has the Pope to do with Peter, if Peter had been such a one?
Forsooth, because he sits at Rome. So did Nero, and was Pontifex Maximus to
as good as the Pope. But Barnarde uses the same text so. What if Barnarde was
disposed to jest with the Pope in his own interpretations? or if he were in
earnest, can Barnarde make that good which is stark naught?

Last of all, the shameless and blasphemous beast, is not afraid to compare
this argument with the allegory used by the holy Ghost, Gal. 4. of the two
wives in Abraham's house, that were figures of two Testaments, which the Apostle
used not to prove, but to declare and show plainly, as it were by example,
that which he had before most substantially proved.

SECTIO. 35. From the second face of the III. leaf, to the second face of
the 118. leaf. Rastell

The arguments where on the mass is builded, Fulk
being so absurd as even his brazen face blusheth to allow, he answers,
the things proved by these arguments are but the heir and nails of the
mass, and not the substantial parts thereof, and yet those parts are good
enough without those arguments, namely by tradition. For the Corporal was of
lynen before the argument of Christ's burial cloth was made for it, Chalices
were of goulde and silver, before the text, Babylon is a cup of goulde, was
alleged for them. And facer^ signifies to sacrifice, though Virgils verse
had never been written, Cum faciam vitula. For in the Judges, Manoah said to
the Angel faciamus tibi haedum de capris, we may offer to thee a kidde of the
Goats: O subtle Master Rastell. Where learned you first that Manoah spoke
latin? Secondlye that he would offer sacrifice to a man, and not rather make
ready a kidde to be eaten of him, whom he thought to have been a man? for
it follows immediately in the text that Manoah knew not that he was an
Angel of GOD, least you should imagine that Manoah had been a Papist, and
would have offered a sacrifice to an Angel. But yet to cover his shame with
impudence, he says he will be yet bolder, and apply whatsoever he finds
in the scripture to maintain Popish ceremonies, he cares not how fitlye,
Theologia Mistica, he says he woteth well non est argumentis apta. Mystical
Divinity is not fit to make arguments of. But GOD keep our faith from
grounding upon such divinity, as will neither satisfy our conscience, nor
convince the errors of other.

Last of all, least he should pass over this place without a blasphemy,
he compares these balde reasons of Siluester and Durande, with the argument
that Saint Paul makes. 1. Cor. 9. upon this text of the law, Thou shall not
bind up the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn: therefore GOD which
provides that beasts laboring should not want their food* much more would
have the minister of the Gospel rewarded for his travel. Which is a most
pithie argument, from the less to the more, as every learned man and godly
will acknoweledge.

SECTIO. 36. From the second face of the 118. leaf to the 127. leaf, in which
he treats of the private Mass. Rastel

Whereas the Bishop proves the private Mass to be contrary to the
institution of Christ, Fulk
which ordained a communion. First M. Rastell will not understand what is meant
by this word, private Mass, for all Masses (he says) are common, which if it
be true, to use his own examples of an open household and a common of pasture,
they be fools that will pay any money for them. Afterward understanding a
private Mass to be when no man receives with the Priest, he asks whether
the Mass said on Easter day be good, because there be a number of
communicants, or whether any other Mass be good, at which be many yt receive
with ye Priest? I answer him, those Masses in yt point are less evil then the
private Masses, in which there is no communion, because they err not in that
one point, although they are abominable in many other. But now let us hear
how M. Rast. looks the Doctors in the faces, which were cited by the Bishop
against private Mass, as he promises to do. First to Clemens and Dionysius
he answers nothing, but cauilleth at the Bishops manner of citing them, not
for writings of such antiquity as they are said to be, but yet sufficient to
choke the Papists which boast of their authority. And trifleth of the oil,
salt, singing, and in Dionysius which ceremonies as we have not in our Church,
no more have the Papists in such order as he rehearses the^. To Iustine
likewise he answers nothing, but cauilleth of the water used to be mixed
with the wine in his time, which was no ceremony, but a custom of sobriety:
and of sending the communion to them that were absent, which we used not,
neither is he able to prove that they used to send it, as the communion, but as
alms rather, of the great plenty of bread and wine that was accustomed to be
offered. And if it were proved to be the communion, it makes more strongly
against the private Mass, that they would suffer none that were absent not to
communicate, much less would they suffer them which were present, not to
receive with the minister. The sayings of Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Leo, he
passes over with confession, that the people in their days used to receive
with the Priest commonly, but he denies they did so always. Which he weeneth
to prove, by that Chrysostom says, they did offer daily, and Ambrose says,
that in Greece they were accustomed to receive but once a year. And he
thinks it were absurd, that there should be but one Communion in a year in
Greece. But he is much deceived, for Saint Chrysostom as he confesses,
speaks of often receiving, ad Ephe. Hom. 3. and would have all that received
not to depart, even as the Canons of the Apostles, and Gregory in his
Dialogues do show. And although many of the people were negligent in coming
to the Lords table, yet was there no private Mass, because yt in those great
Churches, there were always a great number of the Clergy, which received with
the Bishop, upon pain of excommunication.

To the prayers of the Mass, which being in the plural number suppose a
number present* and a number of communicants, he says, they argue the
antiquity of the Mass to be above six hundredth years after Christ: which
is not so: in deed they argue the form of those prayers to be ancienter then
the private Mass, and more they argue not. But they may be used (says Master
Raster) because at every Mass be more present, then any bodily eye can see. O
absurd Ass, that so arrogantly braggeth of learning, and so proudly despises
so learned a Fathers arguments. Admit, that in steed of legions of devils that
be present at every Mass, whose service it is, there were so many legions of
Angels present as he fantasieth: does the Priest saying Oremus, Let us pray,
speak to the Angels that are present to pray with him yea, why not? will some
froward Papist say. But to whom speaks he when he turns about and says,
Orate pro me fratres and sorores, pray for me brethren and sisters. Be there
he Angels and she Angels also? And when he prays that the oblation which
they have offered be salvation to all that have received it, does he mean
that the Angels have taken their rytes of the Priest, though none of the people
be present, but perhaps one sorry boy that helps him to say Mass? But the
Priest (he says) is no private person, but a common officer, even as when he
baptizeth. But is he such a Magistrate to altar and change the institution
and ordinance of GOD? Baptism may be ministered to one alone according to the
institution thereof, but the Communion which is a feast of the Church, ought
not to be kept without a number of guestes. To all the rest of the authorities
cited by the Bishop out of the Canons of the Apostles, the decree of Calixtus,
the Dialogues of Gregory, he says they prove nothing, but that the people
used to communicate, and there be diverse things in those writings, which we
do not observe, as though we have bound our selves to the observing of men's
decrees as the Papists have. But what so ever they have agreeable to the word
of GOD we observe and willingly, although he slander our Church to suffer
them to be present at the Communion, which do not communicate, which is a most
impudent and shameless lie: and yet easily to be borne in comparison of their
blasphemies, which he barketh out against the Priesthood of our Savior
Christ, saying, the order of Melchisedech should have an end, if their
stinking Mass were omitted, and that their Priests must daily enter into
Sancta sanctorum. O Antichristian Helhoundes, that challenge unto your selves
the peculiar Priesthood of Christ, who only is a Priest for ever after the
order of Melchisedech, and has no successors in his Priesthood. Heb. 7.

O blasphemous dogs, that will have your hedge Priests to enter into Sancta
sanctorum the most holy places every day, whither Christ has once for all
entered, and found eternal redemption. Heb. 6.

And these blasphemies he had rather defend, then give over the blasphemy of
the private Mass, which with neither learning, modesty, nor conscience, he or
any of all the rout of them is able to defend, either as lawful or as ancient.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 37. in the 127. leaf.
Fulk.
To the challenge which the Bishop made against the private Mass, he answers
nothing, but that they have no private Mass, for all Masses are one common
mass, trifling upon the term, when he can not say one word to the matter.

Rastel
SECTIO. 38. From the second face of the 127. leaf, to the 131. leaf, in which
he treats of receiving the communion in both kinds.
Fulke.
To the Bishops challenge, that the Communion was never ministered in one kind
to any man in the space of 600. years after Christ's: he answers first, that
if it were not, yet their Church is out of danger, because it is a matter
indifferent for the Lay people to receive in one kind, or in both, alleging
for proof a saying of Luther, written before he was thoroughly converted from
Papistrie. Secondly, he will prove that it was received under one kind, first
because in Luke. 24. and Act. 20. there is no mention but of bread. Ergo,
Christ and Paul gave them the communion in one kind, a good consequent. By
the same I may prove, that Christ and Paul received them selves but bread,
because there is no mention of wine. And yet the Papists hold it necessary,
that the Priest which ministers, should of necessity receive in both kinds.
And whereas he is ashamed of this negative consequence, he charge us with
like reasoning, out of some place of Augustine, or Irenaeus, etc. Whereas he
slandreth us falsely, except it be upon such an affirmative as excludes all
other things.

With like impudence he says, we do not deny, but that in Tertullians time
the sacrament in one kind was carried home to their houses, which we do
utterly deny, neither is he ever able to prove. As false it is, that he says
in Cyprians time it was carried to men's houses in one kind, for Cyprian says
no such thing, nor any word sounding to such end. And concerning the custom
of sending the sacrament to Bishops that were strangers, which came to Rome,
cited by Irenaeus Ad victor, whereby he would prove it was sent under one
kind, because wine would soon wax sower, I say he understands not what the
custom was, but imagines that the sacrament was sent a thousand mile of to
those Bishops, whereas it was only from the Table to the places where they did
sit in the Church, or at the worste, to their lodging where they soiourned
at Rome. But passing over as he does, all reports of carrying and sending the
sacrament, which proves nothing at all the communion in one kind, for both
might as well be carried and sent as one, he comes to a fragment of an
Epistle of Basilius Ad Caesariam Pratriciam, which also he falsifieth in
translation, as the rest of the Papists, Harding, and Heskins do. For where
he says, that such as led a solitary life in the wilderness, where no
Priest is, keeping the communion at home, receive of themselves, Communionem
domi servants a seipsis communicant, meaning they received one of an other,
which he translateth, They communicate by themselves, Gathering that a priest
may as well receive by himself in the church, as the people at home, which
does not follow, although neither of both be well done. And here again he will
have no wine for fear of savoring, whereas their is no dout, but such strong
wine as grows in those countries, will be preserved as long from savoring, as
the bread from moulding. Like is ye example of Serapion being at the point of
death to whom the priest being sick also, sent by a boy the sacrament. Upon
which example he urges reservation, which though it be not necessary, yet is
it not the matter in controversy, secondly the communion in one kind, which is
false, for he sent both and willed him to dippe the bread in the wine which he
sent, and not in any thing else, as M. Rastell says, which were an absurdity,
that the body of Christ should be dipped in profane licour, or sent by a
boy, either if the Priest had been so persuaded of it, as Rastel would bear us
in hand, yt all old fathers were. That he received alone, proves no private
Mass nor allows sole receiving as ordinary, which was done in a case of
extreme necessity in one which was excommunicated, and could not depart this
life, before he had received the sacrament.

The last example is the superstitious fact of Satyrus the brother of Ambrose,
which being not baptized, obtained the sacrament of ye Christians yt were in a
ship with him in danger of shipwreck, which because he might not receive, he
caused it to be wrapped, in Orario a linen garment, which Master Rastell
calls a stole, and wrapped that linen garment about his neck, and without
other help escaped by swimming. Here M. Rastel thinks he has great
advantage. First that the Christians had the sacrament out of the Church. As
though the ship might not be their Church for that time, to minister the
communion in the time of that great danger. Secondly that it was in one kind,
except we can devise how to wrap wine in a stole. No M. Rastel, this proves
not that the Christians received in one kind, though they had wrapped one
kind in the stole (as you call it) for Satyrus, as yet no Christian. But why
might they not either soake the bread in wine, as some did in those days, or
else dippe a corner of that linen cloth as some also used to do, and wrappe
it up in that great linen garment? And the words of Ambrose Fusum in viscera
powered into his bowels would not agree to dry bread. Last of all, whereas you
say it was no fantastical figurative memory which saved him from danger, I
agree with you: but it was not the sacrament that he carried, whatsoever you
will call it, but his faith (as S. Ambrose says,) that preserved him.

And how soever it was, the example of an unbaptized man's weak and
superstitious doing, does ye but small honesty, to confirm your common
private Mass, sole receiving, opinion of carnal presence, or what so ever
beside you can gather out of it.

SECTIO. 39. From the 132. leaf to the second face of the 135. leaf of
service in a strange tongue. Rastel.

To the Bishops challenge, that common prayer was not in a strange tongue
within the compass of 600. years after Christ, he has nothing in the world.
Fulk.
But only affirms that Augustine the Monk brought Latin service into
England which the people understood not, which both is somewhat without the
compass, and also only said of him without proof or likelyhoode. He says,
he made not a new English service or Kentish rather, but used the Roman
fashion and language. Be it granted that he brought in the Latin service, yet
how proves he, that the people did not at that time for the most part,
understand the Latin tongue? Seeing he could preach to them only in Latin,
being a Roman, and they also that came with him understood no part of the
English tongue, as our stories do testify. And that he planted not the Roman
service, it may appear by the answer of Gregory to his third demand of
the diversity of the Roman Church, and the French Church, in which answer
he binds him not to the Roman Church, but wills him to choose out of all
Churches, what he thinks most convenient and profitable for the English
Church. And seeing the Scriptures and diverse Homelyes, and Prayers remain
still in the Saxon or old English tongue, I do not see but he might have made a
new English service, although by reason of so many mutations and troubles as
happened in this land by means of civil and externe wars, and in the mean
time Antichrist daily more and more incroching, the same might grow out of
use, and latin only be retained, which perhaps at the first was but usual
unto monasteries or clerks. But how soever it was, this is an invincible
argument that Augustine planted not the Roman service in this land, because
there were so many diversities of customs as there were diverse Bishops sees,
and al they differing from the use of the Roman church.

But having none authority, he has reasons perhaps to defend latin service.
First latin service is as meet for Englishmen, as English service is for
Welshme^, wherewith he says we find no fault, wherein he lies. For the
Welshmen that understand not english, have their common prayer in their Welshe
tongue.

The second reason he uses that Saint Paul did write in greek to the
Romans, ergo the service must be in latin to Englishmen. He says himself
there be many differences between an epistle and a common form of prayers,
which is very true. But will he prove thereby, that the Romans had their
common prayers in greek? The cause why the Apostle did write in greek, was
because he wrote not only to the Romans, but to the whole church unto which
the greek tongue was more familiar then the latin, and was of many
understood in Rome. And also because the holy Ghost ^ad consecrated the
Greek^ tongue, being the principal tongue of the gentiles, unto the writings
of the new Testament, avoiding to use the Latin tongue, even to the Romans,
for the mystery of the name of Antichriste Latinos contained in the number of
the beasts name 666. as Irenaeus does testify. His third reason is, that
there be many things to be said in public prayer, which ought to be said
in secret, therefore an unknown tongue is best to utter them. His antecedent
he proves not out of scripture or any ancient authentical writer, but out of
the liturgies falsely ascribed to Saint Basil, and Saint Chrysostom, and yet
the argument has no consequence in the world, for then those prayers in the
Latin service to the Romans, should be in an unknown tongue, and all the
rest in a known tongue to every nation.

Finally, where he says, there needs no diversity of service according to
the diversity of languages, he speaks directly contrary to the decree of
the council of Laterane, cap. 9. which commanded the bishops to provide,
that the sacraments and other divine service, should be ministered to all people
in their diocese, according to the diversity of their languages and customs.
By which it is proved, that service in an unknown tongue is neither so
ancient as it is pretended, nor yet so allowed in all times, but that even a
popish council has decreed against it.

SECTIO. 40. From the second face of the 135. leaf, to the 139. leaf, in
which he speaks of the title of the universal bishop. Rastle

To the bishops challenge, that the bishop of Rome was not called an
universal bishop, Fulk.
or head of the universal Church, he answers that the title was due,
although it was not used, and after his accostomable manner cauilleth of the
word universal, whereas the bishop does sufficiently expound himself, by
addinge, or head of the universal Church, which he takes in hand to prove,
giving over the former title of universal. First by a lousy counterfett
Epistle most falsely ascribed to Anacletus, which he cites to be the second,
but it is in the third, in which the unlearned ass that counterfeted that
Epistle, interprets the name of Peter given him by Christ, which was Cephas*
to signify a head and beginning, whereas by the Gospel we learn that Cephas
was a stone, as Peter is, if the knowledge of the Syrian tongue should fail
us.

His second authority is out of Cyprian. Lib. 3. ep. 11. The words of
certain scismatikes that took part with Nouatus against Cornelius bishop of
Rome, and upon their repentance beeinge in Africa, were received into the
Church. These men confessed that they did acknowledge Cornelius to be a
bishop of the most holy Catholic Church, whereas before they refused him,
and claue to Nouatus, a false bishop of Rome not lawfully ordained: like as
afterward they acknowledge, that there should be but one bishop of a
Catholic Church, meaning in one city, for else they should have denied
Cyprian, and all other bishops of the world to be bishops sauinge only
Cornelius the bishop of Rome, whereas Cornelius being lawfully called to be
bishop of Rome, they had taken part with Nouatus, which would be a bishop by
intrusion. He cites also Cyprian lib. 1. ep. 3. heresies have risen of none
other cause, but that the priest of God is not obeyed, and that there is not
one priest of God in the Church for a time. and one judge in steed of Christ
thought upon: which Cypriane speaks not of one priest, to be as judge of all
the Church, but of one in every Church, and namely he speaks of himself,
complaininge that he was contemned by a leude heretic and scismatike, called
Felicissimus with his accomplices.

His third author is Ambrose in 1. Tim. 3. which although it be denied to be
the work of Ambrose, but rather set forth of some man of much later time in
the name of Ambrose, to get more credit unto his writing, yet receyuinge it as
Ambrose, what says he? Forsoothe that Damasus was a governor of the Church
of Christ, which is the house of God: which he says in none other sense,
then S. Paul enstructed Timothy to behave himself in the house of God, which
is the Church of the living God, not meaning to make him supreme head of all
the Church of Christ, no more did Ambrose mean to make Damasus, then bishop of
Rome.

His fourth author is Cyrillus, whom he cites in Lib. Thesau. a
counterfette place, not to be found in all the works of Cyrillus, by whom
so ever it was forged.

His last author is Gregory. Libro 4. Epistola 32. who says that although
the charge of all the Church was committed to Peter as chief of the Apostles,
yet he was not called an universal bishop

I confess the charge of all the Church was committed to Peter, which was not
bishop of one Church, but an Apostle sent unto the whole world, as all the
rest of the Apostles were. But that proves not the supremacy of the bishop
of Rome, who if he were a right bishop, yet were he no Apostle, and so has
nothing to do with the charge and commission of an Apostle.

He names also Saint Augustine which in diverse places calls Rome Sedem
Apostolicam, a seat Apostolic, which is nothing else (says Master
Rastell) but that place which may plant and pull up, set and let, and
has his power over the whole world. But where learned he this deffinition of
a seat Apostolic?

O impudent and arrogaunt disputer! All Churches that were planted and honored
with the presence of the Apostles, were called Apostolic seats, yet did they
never claim, neither would Rastell give unto them that which he makes to be
the deffinition of a seat Apostolic. As for Augustine, does often call Rome,
Babylon the seat of Antichrist, De ciuit. Dei, lib. 16. cap. 17. and lib. 18.
cap. 2. and 22.

SECTIO. 41. From the 139. leaf to the 144. leaf, in which he speaks of the
real and corporal presence of Christ's body in the sacrament. Rastle

The bisho^ says the people were not taught yt Christ's body is really,
substantially, corporally, carnally, Fulk.
or naturally in the sacrament. Master Rastell says, although these terms be
not found, yet that which is signified by them is found. For thus he uses in
every matter to trifle about terms, as though the bishop did strive for words
and sylables, and not for the matter. And he would have the bishop to bring out
of any antiquity, that the people were taught to believe, that the body of
Christ is only figuratively, sacramentally, significatiuely, tropically,
imaginatiuely in the sacrament, to the denial of all presence and reallitie, as
though a sacramental presence were not a presence and a real presence also, if
by real you mean that which is in deed, and not counterfeted, though it be
not after a gross and carnal manner.

For that Christ is present, and truly received in his sacraments, we do
gladly confess, which is all that any aunciente writers speaks of his
presence, Hierome, Isychius, Cyrillus, Origin, Augustine or Chrysostom: whose
names he cites, or any other within 600. yers after Christ. But to maintein
that gross and corporal manner of presence or receiving, which the papists
do now hold, there is none of the old writers that says any thing to the
purpose. As for Damascen is far out of the compass, a corrupt writer, and yet
more gross in terms, then his judgment was, as it were easy to prove, if
his authority were of any weight.

But Master Rastel asks if these words be not plain enough. This is my body
which shall be delivered for you, Luke 22. He makes them somewhat plainer by
changing the pretertence into the future, for Luke reports the words: which
is given for you. I again ask him whether these words be not as plain.
This cup is the New Testament in my blood, which is shed for you? We
doubt not but that it is the sacrament of his true and natural body, for we
make not two bodies of Christ as the papists do, a natural body, and a
spiritual body, which true and natural body of Christ being in heaven, is
given unto us in those holy mysteries after a wonderful and unspeakable
manner, not carnally nor corporally, but spiritually and diuinelye. And where
as Master Rastell cites a long saying of Cyrillus against an Arrian, which
denied, lib. 10. ca. 15 in Joan.
that we have any corporal conjunction with Christ, and proves the same by
the strength and power of the mystical benediction, which makes Christ to
dwell corporally in us, it is nothing in the world to his corporal and
carnal manner of presence. For we also do grant, that the power of the
mistical benediction is such, as makes Christ to dwell corporally in ye
faithful, which is nothing else (as he does immediately expound himself,)
but yt they are made members of Christ's body and members one of another,
which is not after any carnal or natural manner, but after an heavenly and
divine manner of union. For the same Cyril does affirm yt Christ giving ye
sacrament to his disciples gave the^ fragme^ta panis pieces of bread. By which
is the plain he meant not to teach any transubstantiation of the bread into
the natural body of Christ.

This place of Cyrill is set down at large in mine answer to Hesk. lib. 2.
Cap. 14. And where as he says, we do weaken the hope of the resurrection of
our flesh, by denying the carnal manner of presence of Christ's body in the
sacrament, I say it is utterly false, and the contrary is true, that the
Popish heretics do weaken the hope of resurrection in all them that have not
received the sacrament, when they feign such a presence of Christ's body in the
sacrament, as cannot be received without the sacrament.

SECTIO. 42. From the 144. leaf to the end of the 145. leaf. Rastell.

To ye Bishops challenge, that ye body of Christ cannot be in a thousand
places or more at one time, Fulk.
he answers, it needed not to be proved, because reason must give place to
faith, and one principle proved of Christ's presence, draws all the rest
after it, and thirdly because Christ's body is not locally present in the
sacrament, but in one place only. Finally he cites a long saying of
Chrysostom in Ep. ad Heb. Hom. 17. reasoning how Christ is offered every day,
but the whole discourse is clean contrary to Master Rastels purpose, and
especially the first sentence and the last, expounds how Christ was offered,
not really, but as in a remembrance. Do we not offer every day? We offer in
deed, but as men which make a remembrance of his death, these words show
what kind of oblation it was, that they did make, namelye a celebration of the
memorial of his death, and not a propitiatory sacrifice of Christ's body,
carnally present.

The last words are these, We offer not another sacrifice as the bishops did,
but always that same, or rather we make the remembrance of that sacrifice.
This correction shows, that it was not properly a sacrifice which they
offered.

Finally there is not one word in that discourse, but it is directly against
the sacrifice of the Mass.

Rastle.
SECTIO. 43. From the 145. leaf. to the 149. leaf.
Fulk.
To nine parts of the bishops challenge he answers nothing, but refuses
for their particularitie to answer to them. First, that the Priest did not
hold the sacrament over his head. Secondlye, that the people did not worship
it with Godly honor. Thirdly, that it was not then hanged under a Canopye.
Fourthly, that after consecration there remains nothing but accidences of
bread and wine. Fifthly, that ye priest divided not the sacrament in three
parts and received them all himself alone Sixthly, that whosoever had said the
sacrament is a figure, a pledge, a token or a remembrance of Christ's body,
had not therefore ben judged for an heretic. Seventhly, that it was not
lawefull to say 30. or twenty etc. Masses in one Church in one day. Eighthly,
that images were not set up to be worshipped. Ninthly, that the lay people were
not forbidden to read the word of God in their own tongue. Master Rastell
says, this is an unlearned and pelting kind of reasoning, but he proves it
by unlearned and pelting examples: as it is not read that Christ did cry from
his mothers breast, or did wear a peticoate, hose, or shoes, or went on his
mothers errande, etc.

As though any of these things were articles of our belief, as some of those
are among the Papists, or as though it perteined any thing to know such
matters, as the Papists pretend their matters necessary not only to be
known, but also practiced. Finally he would persuade his popish friends that
these things need not to be proved to be of such antiquity, because the
Church has received them. Then let him and his fellows be a shamed and cry
creake, which were wont to boaste of fifteen hundredth years antiquity, for
all their doctrine and ceremonies, the consent of all ages, the traditions of
the Apostles and such like: where now they are cut short of the first six
hundredth years, and being urged to show their antiquity, can say nothing,
but that it is not needful.

SECTIO. 44. in the 149. leaf. Rastell.

To the Bishops challenge that the words of consecration by no authority of
councelles or Doctors, Fulk.
ought to be pronounced closelye: He confesses the matter, but he can prove
(or else he lies) that there must be an head in the Church, which as well
in this matter, as in all other must be obeyed. How well he can prove it, is
tried in the forty Section.

The rest of the challenges he gives over, being desirous to be at an end
with them, as I cannot blame him.

Rastle.
SECTIO. 45. From the end of the 149. leaf to the 152. leaf, in which he
would prove that priests have authority to offer Christ.
Fulk.
He takes upon him to show, that the priest has authority to offer up
Christ unto his father. But good lord whether more blasphemously, then
ignorantly and unlearnedly. For first, he cites the saying of ye Apostel Heb.
5. Every high Priest taken of men is appointed for men, in those things that
perteine to God, to offer up gifts and sacrifices for sins, which the Apostle
speaks expreslye of the priests of the old law, and proves the excellency
of Christ above them.

Secondly admitting he should speak of Pristes of the new Testament, which
is false, he says their sacrifice must be after ye order of Melchisedech, as
it is written, thou art a priest for ever after ye order of Melchisedech: of
which order Christ is a priest, in respect of Popish priests that be now a
days; or else Gods oath should be broken. Surely I merueile at ye great
clemency of god which stops not such blasphemous mouths with thunderbolts.
that make the eternal priesthood of Christ, which he has without
succession, to depend upon their greasy order, which has not been but of
late erected, neither shall continue for ever, where as our savior Christ
world without end shall be both a king and a priest, which is the order of
Melchisedech, and consists nothing at all in offering of bread and wine, as
is manifest by the Apostle to the Hebrews, who shows in what respect Christ
is a priest after ye order of Melchisedech.

As impudent as this is blasphemous, is his next argument yt by very express
commandment of Christ in his last supper, they must offer him up: saying, Do
this in rememberance of me. As though Christ which never sacrificed himself
but once, and that on the cross, had at his supper offered himself to his
father in sacrifice,

As for the testimonies of the Fathers which he cites, are easily answered,
that they spoke of sacrificing Christ figuratively and improperly, as some of
them confess, namely Chrysostom, whom he cites, ad Heb. Hom. 17. which
when he had demanded, saying, Do we not offer Christ daily? he answers,
yes, but rather we celebrate the remembrance of his sacrifice: the other which
he cites out of Dionyse, has no word of offering Christ; although Dionyse be
no writer within the compass of six hundredth years: Neither do these words
of the Liturgy entitled to S. Basil, which he rehearses, speak more then of
an unbloody sacrifice, which is the sacrifice of thanksgiving, although the
Liturgy is not of such antiquity and credit, as it is pretended. And of as
little is that, he cites out of Ambrose in Psalm. 38. which no man learned of
sound and indifferent judgment, will receive for the work of S. Ambrose. Such
false principles must lean upon counterfeit Doctors.

SECTIO. 46. From the 152. leaf to the 154. leaf, in which he takes in hand
^o shape a general answer to the particular questions which M. Jewel
moves. Rastel.

Having proved nothing hitherto but him self to be a lying merchant, Fulke.
a blasphemous and unlearned defender of the sacrifice of the Mass, to all the
rest of the questions of Indiuiduum vaegum merit ex opere operato, applying of
the sacrifice of the Mass, accidents remaining, the case of the mouse eating
the sacrament etc. He answers that these terms for any thing he knows,
were never used within the compass of 600. years, but the matters were
believed, and that he will prove by consent of learned men, and the voice of
the Church since those 600. years. This is in deed as he says, merrily but
falsely to the Bishop, in the beginning of his book, which way to Croyden^ a
poke full of plumbs, the Bishop asks proof within in 600. years of Christ,
and M. Rastell will bring proof without those 600. years, the Bishop
requires antiquity whereof the Papists have so impudently bragged, and
Rastel will bring forth novelty. But he has a proper similitude, to show
that these Articles, though they were not known to the ancient Church, for
600. years after Christ, yet are they not to be refused, no more then the
fruits of Autumn, because they appeared not on the trees in April, are to be
rejected. Thus you see by this delicate similitude he denies the Church of
Christ, his Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors, Pastors and
teachers, for 600. years together to have been a season fruitful of matters
of truth, having nothing but green ornaments and gay flowers, promising the
wholesome fruits of Popery, that have appeared and waxed ripe in the latter
time of the Church, as in the Harvest or month of September. If this
similitude can be defended without contumely of Christ and the Primitive
Church, let all the Papists clap their hands at it, and say. O learned M. Rast.
that with so short an answer, has satisfied all M. Jewels demands. But he
will choke the Bishop and us all with the last question: Where is it read
(says he) within 600. years after Christ, that our blessed Lady was preached
or named the mother of mercy, the handmaiden of the Trinity, the spouse of the
holy Ghost, the Queen of heaven, the Empress of hell? and yet if you believe
in deed that she is the mother of God, all these Articles do follow, like as
the rest of that verity which says, this is my body. It is well that M.
Rastell confesses these titles never to have been given to the Virgin Marie,
neither by Christ, nor by his Apostles, nor by any in all ye Church for 600.
years after Christ. Now sir, I will answer your question. I do as constantly
believe with my heart, and more effectually then I can express with words,
that the holy and blessed Virgin Marie is the mother of hers and our Savior
Jesus Christ, the son of God, very God and very man. Yet all those titles
which you confess to be neither read in any antiquity of 600. ye^res after
Christ, I abhor and protest to be wicked, idolatrous, and blasphemous. And
whereas you say that common sense teaches, that a Kings mother is a Queen, and
not of no place you trow, which is tried false by common experience, for King
Dauid^ mother was no Queen, I trow, nor five hundredth more that have been in
the world since his time, I answer: yet if it were granted in earthly
Princes, it follows not in the King of heaven. For by the like reason and
more probable, I might argue, the mother of a man is a woman therefore the
mother of God is a Goddess, from which blasphemy Saint Bonauenture a Popish
Saint, is of no force, if he do not far exceed it, when he says to the
Virgin Marie. Iure matris impera filio, and again, Coge Deum etc. By the
authority of a mother command thy son, and compel God to be merciful to
sinners. etc.

SECTIO. 47. in the 154. leaf. Rastel.

The Bishop declares the vanity of the Papists answer, which is, that no
Mass is private, Fulke.
because that every Priest communicates with all Priests that say Mass: for
that by this reason, there should be no excommunication, whereas the party
excommunated would say, he would communicate with the Priest that says Mass
in Calicute. Master Rastel says, he that is excommunicate from one Church is
excommunicated from al Churches, therefore he that is in the Communion, does
communicate with all Priests. But he understands not the Bishops argument,
or at least, he will not understand it. For the sophistry of the Popish
argument rests in the ambiguitie of this word, Communicate, which signifies
to receive the Lords supper at one time and in one place, with others of their
Church, which the Papists take for receiving generally, so that ye Priest in
Louaine receiving at his Mass alone communicates with ye Priest yt likewise
receives at his Mass alone in Calicut. Now if this receiving were a sufficient
communion, a Priest being excommunicated in Louane, so yt no Priest would suffer
him to receive with him at his Mass, if he would contemn their
excommunication, might say Mass him self, and say, yt although none of you
Louane Priests will communicate with me, yet I will communicate with the Priest
that this day says Mass in Calicut, yea, I will communicate with you in spite
of your heart, for I will be at mass as soon as you, and then will I receive
at my Mass, when you receive at your Mass, and so by our own principle
whereby we defend our private Masses to be communions, I will communicate with
you whether you will or no, yea, I can not choose but communicate with you, if
I say Mass when you do. And if you will say to me that I ought not to say
Mass being excommunicate, I tell you, you can not excommunicate me, so long as
I can say Mass. For though you count me excommunicate, yet you know by our
own divinity, that if I do say Mass, notwithstanding your censure, I do
consecrate as well as the proudest of you: and after I have consecrated, I will
receive, and then I communicate, and so your excommunication is no
excommunication at all.

Rastel.
SECTIO. 48. in the 155. leaf.
Fulk.
Whereas the Bishop said, that the Mass had nether her name nor her parts,
until four hundredth years after Christ, he answers, that she had the
essential and necessary parts, but not the garnishing and decking parts. So
that by his own confession, it was a namelesse and naked Mass which they had
in the church for four hundredth years after Christ's. So that ye later times
with him were always more wise and more religious, then the former, new
devises better then old customs. And where then is there the proud challenge
of antiquity, universality, consent, Apostolic tradition? And if the Church
might be without the Popish Mass so long after Christ, why should they teach,
that now it is so necessary, as there ought to be none other form of
communion used in the Church of God, but it?

SECTIO. 49. Rastel.

M. Rastel protesting once or twice that he was weary, Fulke.
will now conclude with only confuting these conclusions of M. Jewels
comparison. S. James Mass had Christ's institution, they in their Mass have
well near nothing else but man's invention. To disprove this he says, the
epistle and Gospel, the collets of the Sunday, the Hymn of the Angel, ye
confession of faith, the saying of Agnus Dei, etc. are translated out of their
Mass into our communion, therefore we take them for part of Christ's
institution. I answer we take them as Christ's institution, and not as
commended by the Mass, and yet are they no part of the communion, though they
be used in our liturgy, some before, and some after the communion.

Secondly he would seem to confute the Bishops saying, that Saint James Mass
had Christ's institution, because if we had thought so in deed, we would have
translated it into English, and so have used it in steed of the Popish Mass,
and then it would have seemed more superstitious, and full of ceremonies then
the Popish Mass. And so he rehearses a number of superstitious ceremonies,
gestures, and prayers that are in it. I answer, the Bishop said truly as he
thought, that the liturgy falsely ascribed to Saint James, has Christ's
institution concerning the Lord Supper, notwithstanding it be full fraught with
idle ceremonies, and some superstitious and erroneous prayers, whereas the
Popish Mass has clean ouerturned the institution of Christ, touching the
end of the Lords supper, reteyning well near nothing of Christ's
institution, except you will say it has bread and wine, which it most horribly
abuses to the profanation of Christ's death, and most filthy idolatry.

Finally, the salvation of the virgin Marie which was then alive, although it
were more mere to be used to her person being alive, then after she was
departed out of this world) the prayer made for them that lived in
monasteries, the term of consubstantiall not heard of in the Church before
the Nicene council, and many other arguments do sufficiently prove, that the
said liturgy was not written by Saint James the Apostle, nor by any that
lived many hundredth years after him to the judgments of al men that have
either knowledge to discern truth from falshoode, or conscience to
acknowledge that which they can not choose but know. And even Bartholomew
Garanza a Papist, that gathered the abridgement of councels, affirms that the
liturgy which Saint James used, is not extant at this day. O Lord bring into
the way of truth all such as err of simplicity, and be not merciful to
those that sin of malicious wickedness.

After this clearkly confutation, follows a counterfeit challenge (as he
pretends) to show the Bishops folly, but in deed to show his own folly,
and the weakness of his cause, which he learned not, (as he says) of Solomon,
to answer a fool according to his folly, but of Menalcas one of Virgils
sheepheardes, in his third Eglogue, which when he could not answer the ridle
propounded unto him by his adversary, he puts for than other as hard as he
thinks: Dic quibus in terris, etc.

His first section contains 21. articles, whereof the greatest part are not
held at all by any of us, therefore there is no cause why we should prove
them, the rest be matters of mere indifferency, which may be used or left
undone without any hurt of our religion, and some perhaps may be proved (which
he little thinks of) to his shame.

Of the first sort are these 1. that there was no dry communion, and we say
there ought to be none, although the Papists make a dry communion, when they
rob the people of the cup of the Lords blood. The third that Bishops did
not swear by their honor: we affirm they ought not to swear, nor yet by
God, as I heard Boner swear, being conuented before the Bishop of Winchester
his Chauncelour, and a great number of persons being present.

The 4. that bagpipers, horscoursers, gailers, alebasters, were not admitted
into the Clergy without sufficient trial. We affirm they ought not, nor yet
any of the scullerie or black guard, as some yet living were made Priests in
Queen Mary's time.

The 6. that no Bishop not content with prisoning his adversaries, call upon
Princes to put them to cruel death. We hold that no Bishop should imprison
his adversary, much less procure his death, but if the challenge had been of
Gods adversaries, I would have answered otherwise. For if in 600. years none
of Gods adversaries was, or ought to have been put to death, by procurement of
Bishops, by what ground of antiquity do Popish Bishops procure so many to be
put to death, yea murder them selves in their prisons and inquisitions, under
pretense, that they be Gods adversaries?

The 17. that no Bishop did gather benevolence of his Clergy to marry his
daughter, etc. We answer, this no way concerns religion, no more then
putting of the ring on the woman's left hand, which is the 18. or calling the
people by ringing of a bell which is the 21. Now concerning the rest, as the
second, that there should be no celebration of the Lords supper except there
be a good number to communicate, three or four at the least, etc. is proved by
the Canons of the Apostles, that Excommunicate all Christians that be present,
and do not communicate Can. 9. Also the first Epistle of Anacletus (which is
good authority against a Papist) forbids the priest or Bishop to sacrifice
alone, and commands all the ministers that are present, to receive with him
in pain of excommunication. And appoints what number shall be present. of
deacons, namely on solemn days seven, on other days five or three, beside
Subdeacons and other ministers. These decrees do prove, that there should be no
celebration of the Lords supper, but when there be a good number to
communicate.

Concerning the 5. of distinction of Bishops or Priest^ in apparel from the
laity, which yet we hold to be a thing of his own nature indifferent.
Celestinus Bish. of Rome says in an Epistle to the Bishops of France Epi. 2.
Discern^ndi a plebe vel cteris sumus doctrina non vest, conuersatione non
habitu, mentis puritate non cultu. We must be discerned from the common people,
or other men by doctrine, not by garment, by conversation not by apparel, by
pureness of mind, not by attire.

To the 7. that the communion table was remoueable and carried too an fro, it
is proved by Augustine, who In quest. vet. and Non test. ques. 101. says, it
was the office of the Deacons of Rome, as well as of all other Churches, to
carry the altar and the vessels thereof, and although he call it an altar in
this place and many other, yet does he in as many places call it a table, and
in his Epistle to Bonifacius Ep. 50. it appears, that it was made of boordes
and not of stones.

To the 8. for saying communion on good Friday, although perhaps it might be
proved by those fathers of the primitive Church, that kept their feast of
Easter after the manner of the Jews, which was the 14. day of the month,
which some times did fall upon that Friday which is called good Friday, yet
being no matte^ of religion, there is no cause why we should be bound to prove
it.

The like I say to the 9. of singing of Gloria in excelsis after the communion,
and to the 11. of saying the Creed of Athanasius upon principal holy days.

Concerning the 10. that the sacrament was ministered in the loaf bread usually
to be eaten at the table, it is proved by S. Cyprian In sermon de Caena Dom.
which says of that bread wherewith they did minister, Panis iste communis in
carnem and sanguinem mutatus, procurat vitam and incraementum corpor^bus, etc.
This common bread being changed into our flesh and blood, procures life and
increase to our bodies.

Also by S. Ambrose Li. 4. Cap. 2. de sacram. Who rehearses ye objection of
the ignorant, saying. Tu forte dicis, meus panis est vsitatus, etc. Thou
perhaps wilt say, my bread is common and usual bread. Also by Gregory, which
in his dialogues reports that two Coronae loaves of bread, were given to one
that was thought to be a poor man in reward of his service in a bathe, but he
being a guest, willed that the same should be offered in sacrifice for him.

To the 12. for the ministers wearing of a Cope or surplesse, which hold it to
be no part of religion, and that the communion has been ministered in common
apparel, we will go no further then our Savior Christ himself, Ioh. 13. and
there is no question, but his Apostles and the primitive Church many hundredth
years followed his example.

To the 13 that the words of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11. should be red at the
ministration, rather the^ of S. Mathewe, Mark, or Luke, it is a matter of
mere indifferency, and yet better ordered, then your popish canon, which
rehearses the words after none of all four.

To the 14. that they used a common cup at the Communion, is proved also by
scripture, that our savior Christ ministered in the same cup, which he and his
company had used at supper.

To the 15. that the curses of Gods law, should be redd upon Ashwednesday, we
hold it not as a thing necessary, but an order of indifferency, until a
better discipline be restored.

To ye 16. concerning procession about the fields, we use none but a
perambulation, which is a matter of mere civil policy.

To the 19. whether Saint Peter were ever at Rome or no, it is no article of
our belief, but we are able to prove by scripture, that he neither was there
as bishop, nor so long as the common opinion is.

To the 20. that the minister in time of necessity has given the communion to
one alone, is proved by the example of Seraphion, used of the Papist^, but
unfitly to defend your private mass, to whom being at the point of death, the
communion was sent by the priest, who at the same time also was so sick that
he could not come himself, Eusebius libros 6. capitulo 44. and yet that
communicatinge which we allow, is but granted to the infirmity of such as
cannot be persuaded to forbear the sacrament, not as a thing simply allowed.

If any one man alive, could prove any one of these articles by Scriptures,
doctors or councelles, he promises to subscribe, what I have proved, let
the Reader judge. After this follow twenty nine articles more.

The 22. that the bishop of Rome was not called Antichriste the cause was,
that until after six hundredth year, the bishop of Rome was not
Antichriste. But that Antichriste should be a Roman, it is proved by
Irenaeus, Libro 5. and that Rome should be the Sea of Antichriste Saint
Augustine testifies, De ciuitate Dei, libro 16. capitulo 17. calling Rome
Western Babylon, and libro 18. capitulo 2. calling Rome second Babylon, etc.

Also Hierome ad Marcellam, judges Rome to be Babylon, spoken of in the
Apocalypse, and in praefati. in Didymum, he calls Rome Babylon, and the
purple whore, and Algasiae Quest. 11. and many places else.

Gregory also affirms, that who so would be called universal bishop,
was the forerunner of Antichriste, which was John of Constantinople, also he
prophesies that Antichrists revelation was at hand, and that an army of
priests should wait upon him, which was fulfilled in his next successor
save one, namely Bonifacius the third, which was the first Pope of Rome, that
was called universal bishop, and was Antichriste him self, as John of
Constantinople was his forerunner about the year of our Lord, ^10.

To the 23. that no consecration was required to the sacrament, but the virtue
of the peoples faith, is not holden of us, and therefore we are not to prove
it.

To the 24. that the residue of the sacramental bread, which was not received
by any old custom of the Church of Constantinople was given to young children
that went to school, is proved by Euagrius, libr. 4. cap. 36. whether to
spredde their butter, as he requires is to show, or to eat it with cheese,
or flesh, etc. I cannot say. Also I find in Concilio Matisconensi. 2. Can.
6. that what so ever remained after the ministration, should be given to young
children by the priest (not spread in deed with butter) but sprinkled with wine.

To the 25. that no man was conuented for affirminge the carnal manner of
presence of Christ's body in the sacrament, I answer, it was because there
was no man found which held that gross heresy all that space of 600 years
after Christ.

To the 26. that it was lawful to have but one communion in one Church in one
day, I answer it was a custom of the Church before Leo the first, as
appears in his 79. Epistle, who appointed that when the Communion would not
serve all that came to the Church, there might be another celebrated, and
that so often in one day, as the people filled the Church: and otherwise we
say not of one Communion in a day.

To the 27. that an Image of Christ, or of a Saint was defaced and judged
unlawful to be in the Church of Christian men, is proved by the Epistle of
Epiphanius, who reports that he him self did read such a one painted on a
veil at Anablatha, which Epistle was translated out of Greek by S. Hierome,
and is in the 2. Tome of his works.

The 28. of Bishops settinge up their own, their wives, or their childrens
pictures, in their parlours and chambers, is a vain matter, not touching
religion any thing at all.

The 29, that Christ delivered his body to many more then his twelve Apostles,
is no article of faith, neither greatly material, whether he did or did not,
yet it is most probable, that seeing he did eat the old sacrament of the
Pascall lamb with the whole household that were his disciples, he did unto
them also give the new sacrament of his body and blood.

The 30. that Judas Machabaeus in offeringe for the dead, added to the law, it
is manifest by the scripture, because there is no such oblation appointed by
the law. And yet his oblation helps not the papists, because those for whom
he offered, dyed in mortal sin, being defiled with Idolatry as the story
does report.

To the 31. and 32. that a bishop did marry after he was a bishop, or
married the second or third wife, the first being dead, it is not unlike,
seeinge the scripture requires no more abstinence from marriage in a bishop,
then in any other man. Clemens as Eusebius testifies, lib. 3. cap. 30. says,
Petrus and Philippus liberis procreandia operam dederunt. Peter the Apostle,
and Philippe did beget children. Socrates lib. 5. cap. 22 says, Multi illorum
episcopatus te^pore etiam liberos ex legitimis vxoribus sustulerint. Many of
them, even in the time that they were bishops, begat children of their lawful
wives. As for M. Rastell terms of harlot and fyery passion, etc. I omit to
speak of, as more meet for such a ruffian like railer, then worthy of any
answer. The council of Gangra in their Epistle to the bishops of Armenia,
report it, as one of the heresies of the Eustachians, that priests which have
contracted matrimony should be despised, and the sacraments ministered by them
should not be received. Praesbiteros qui matrimonia contraxerunt, sperni debere
dicunt. Which words prove that bishops married as well as priests. The same
council Can. 4. accurseth them that make a difference between a married
priest and another, in respect of his marriage.

To the 33. that preachers moved not young men and women not to be ashamed of
lust, I say, it is no part of our doctrine, but a lewd slander imputed to
Luther most unjustly, who speaks of the desire of marriage and not otherwise.

To the 34. that every man should read the scriptures and not give ear to
man's traditions it is the very counsel and words of Basil in his short
definitions, quest. 65. Chrysostom does often exhort al lay men to read the
Bible, in a great number of places.

To the 35 that Lent and Friday should be fasted for polycie, and not for
devotion, we do not hold, but that abstinence of flesh should be used at such
times, which is a matter of mere policy, as for abstinence of flesh for
religions sake, was condemned in the counsel of Gangra. And Montanus the
heretic was the first that made laws of fasting. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 18.

To the 36. that Palm sunday was solemnised without bearing of bows, it is
proved at the least for three hundredth years after Christ, in which time all
stories testify, that the Church was for the most part under persecution, and
had no such processions about the streates, but rather kept them in secret
corners, ye like I say for candels on Candelmas day, which could not be borne
within 600. years of Christ, because Pope Sergius was the first that
appointed them to be borne, which was seven hundredth years after Christ. As
for Mass on Christmasse day, I answer the same, the Mass was not all made
within 600. years, if he speak of the popish Mass: if he speak of the
communion, it is a thing indifferent whether it be celebrated that day or no.

To the 37. although the celebration of the nativity of John baptist, be but a
variable and indifferent ceremony, yet may it be proved by many ancient
homilyes, that it was kept within the compass of 600, years. As for the feast
of the nativity of the blessed Virgin Marye, or of her assumption, that they
were not celebrated within that time, it is manifest, because they were not
instituted many hundredth years after. As Durande confesses the feast of the
nativity, not to have been kept of old time. And touching the assumption, the
very lessons read in the popish mattyns on that day do affirm, that many
doubted of her assumption, lect. 3. and also affirm, yt she dyed and was
buried, and that her sepulcher was showed in the vale of Iosophat. lect. 2.

To 38. they that pray to God to be defended by the ministry of Angels,
whether it be upon the feast of S. Michaell, or any other day, have the
authority of ye scripture, which declares that they be ministering spirits
appointed for the defense of them that shall be saved. Psa. 34 Heb. 1. Neither do
they seek help at any other creatures hands but of God, only by the
mediation of Christ, who desire God for Christ's sake to help them by such
spiritual or bodily ministers, or means, as he has appointed. For they
worship God, and not the Angels, they pray to God, and not to Angles.

To the 39. for using the sign of the cross in baptism and not in the
communion, I answer, we count it not needful either in the one sacrament, or
in the other.

To the 40. of throwing down Aultars erected unto Christ, I answer:
Ezechias is commended in scripture, for throwing down the hill aultars erected
unto GOD, and in which the people did offer sacrifice only to the Lord,
because they were not erected according to Gods commaundent, and yet was not
he accounted an heretic. 2. Regum. 18. Much less are they to be called
heretics, that throw down the Popish aultars which were set up against the
only Altar and sacrifice of Christ and his passion, to the most blasphemous
defacing of the same.

To ye 41. yt any bishop was married on Ash wednesday, it is a foolish demand
to require the proof, but that i^ was lawful for a bishop to mary any day in
the year, it is proved by ye authority of scriptures, which exclude no day as
unlawful to mary in.

To the 42. that no man did write that the government of women was monstrous,
we grant, neither do we hold this article though some one man have witten it.

To the 43. that est, in these words, hoc est corpus meum, is to be taken for
significat, it is proved by Tertullian, who expounds hoc est corpus meum, id
est, figura corporis (...).

This is my body, yt is to say, this is a figure of my body contra Marc li 4.
S. Ambrose: ipse clamat dominus Jesus, hoc est corpus meum. Ante bedectionem
verborum caelestium alia speci^s nominatur, post consecrationem, corpus Christi
significatur* Our Lord Jesus himself says alowd: This is my body. Before the
blessing of the heavenly words, it is called another kind, after
consecration, the body of Christ is signified. Deijs qui myster. init.
Chrysostom says of the sanctified vessels, in quibus non est verum corpus
Christi sed mysterium corporis Christi continetur. In which the very body of
Christ is not, but the mystery of the body of Christ is contained* in Mat.
Hom. 11. Augustine says: Nam ex eo quod scrip^um est, sanguinem pecoris
animam eius esse, praeter id ^uod supra dixi, non ad me pertinere quid agatur
de pecoris anima, possum etiam interpretari prceptum illud in signo positum
esse, non enim Dominus dubitauit dicere hoc est corpus meum, cum signum daret
corporis sui. For as concerning that which is written, that blood is the life of
the beast, beside that which I said before, that it pertains not to me what
is done with the life of a beast, I may also interpret that commandment to
consist in a sign. For our Lord doubted not to say, This is my body, when
he did give a sign of his body, cont^ Adamantum. In this same Augustine
shows that these words hoc est corpus meum, are to be taken in the same
sense, that these words sanguis est anima pecoris, where est, is manifestly
taken for significat by his judgment, and there is no one article wherein we
differ from the Papists, that has more plentiful confirmation in the
doctors of our doctrine therein, then this of the carnal presence of Christ
in the sacrament.

To the 44. that the lay people communicating did take the cup one at
another hand, it appears by the words of Basil in Ep. ad Caesar. Patri. for
of those that dwelled in the wilderness, where no Priest was, (says he,) a
seipsis communicant they receive of themselves, or one of another. And in
Alexandria, and Egypt every one of the people has the communion in his house,
and receive it there at home. Et in ecclesia sacerdo^ dat partem, and accipit
eam is qui suscipit cu^ omni liberate, and ipsam admou^t ori propria (...).
Idem igitur est virtute, sine vnam partem quis acc^piet a sacerdote sine plures
parts simul. And even in the Church the Priest gives one part, and he which
receueth it, takes it with all liberty, and puts it to his mouth with his
own hand. Therefore it is the same in virtue, whether a man take one part of
the Priest, or more parts together. Also it appears by the 6. Council of
Constantinople, Can. ^8. that before that time Lay men in presence of the
Bishop, Elder, or Deacon, did divide ye divine mysteries among the^ selves,
which until then was not forbidden. Our Savior Christ also having once
delivered the cup, did not take it into his hands so often as every one of his
disciples did drink, but willed them to divide it among them selves. Luc. 22.

To the 45. that a controversy of religion being decided by the Bishop of
Rome, the contrary part was not taken for heresy, nor the mainteiners thereof
for heretics, is proved by the controversy of rebaptising them that were
baptized by heretics, which when Cornelius and Stephanus Bishops of Rome had
decided, yet was not the contrary opinion taken for heresy, nor Saint Cyprian
and all the bishops of Africa which agreed upon it in a council at Carthage,
counted for heretics: a matter notoriously known to all them that read
Cyprians works, or Eusebius. lib. 7. Cap. 3. which utterly overthrows the popes
authority.

To the 46. that any executed for felony, was put in the calendar for a Martyr,
is a thing needelesse to prove, yet the penitent thief which being crucified
with Christ, was executed justly for his offenses, is of good writers counted a
Martyr. So might one hanged for felony, and at his death repenting and
detesting Papistrie.

To the 47. that such as refused to renounce the Bishop of Romes authority
were excommunicated, it appears by the Council of Carthage. 3. Cap. 26.
which forbad that the Bishop of Rome or any other Bishop of the principal See,
should be called the highest Priest, or the prince of Priests, or by any such
title. Also the Council Mileuitanum does excommunicate all them that appealed
to the Bishop of Rome or any other out of Aphrica. Cap. 22. Yea he yt thought
such appellations lawful, was excommunicated, by which it appears, yt though
there be no express mention of an oath, yet an oath in that case upon good
ground might be tendered.

To prove that a Friar of 60. years age being made Bishop did marry a woman of
19. years of age within six hundredth years after Christ, which is the eight
and fortith article, it is impossible, because there was not any friar in the
world 1200. years after Christ.

To prove that any Bishop preached, that it is all one to pray in a dunghill
and in a Church, which is the 49. article, is no assertion of ours neither of
any man I think in the world.

To the ^0. that such as were no heretics, refused to subscribe to a general
council gathered by the Bishop of Rome, is proved before by saint Cyprian and
the Bishops of Aphrica of his time, also by Saint Augustine and the bishopps of
Aphrica in his time, which refused to subscribe to the Bishops of Rome,
Zosimus, Bonifacius, and Celestinus pretending ye council of Nice for their
authority, in receiving appeals, but when the true Copyes were brought from
Alexandria and Constantinople, they were found falsifiers of the Nicen Council.
Concilio Aphricano* cap 101. and 105.

After all these iollie questions he confesses, he should do us wrong to
require the probation of these articles, because many of them contain
indifferent ceremonies, in many he sticks upon such terms, as he thinks
are not found in the ancient Fathers, in some he presses us with particular
words, leaving the general principle, and in some with private men's opinions:
he might have added in some, with his own impudent lies and forgeries, which
none of us do hold, and such he would make the Bishop^ challenge to be, but
the world has sufficiently seen the contrary proved, that most of the
matters contained in that challenge, be of the greatest mysteries of Popery,
whereas these of M.Ra. witless and shameless devising, for the most part are
not maintained at all in manner and form as he propounds them, and such as
be material, are sufficiently proved. But now that he has played the fool
as he confesses all this while, he promises to play the wise man in
propounding matters of weight and substance, in which you shall see, that even
as before he charge us to prove many things which we do not hold, and
therefore he plays not ye wise man, but the crafty merchant, to make the
ignorant believe that we maintain, that we are not able to justify.

He divides his challenge into four parts,

the first has three Articles.
To the first, that it is unlawful to make a vow to God of chastity,
obedience, or poverty. I answer, it is unlawful to make a vow of that which
is not in a man's power to perform, as is the vow of Virginity, which is a
gift not given to all, as our savior Christ testifies. Matt. 19. Also
Conciliu^ Arasicanu^ 2. decreed. ca. 11. De obligatione votoru^. Nemo quicquam
Domino recte vouerit, nisi ab ipso acceperit, sicut legitur. Quae de manu tua
accepimus damus tibi. Of the bond of vows. No man shall rightly vow any
thing to the Lord, except he have received it of him, as it is read. Such
things as we have received of thy hand, we give to thee. That breakers of such
vows were esteemed above others as singular witnesses of the liberty of the
Gospel, is no part of our assertion. But that their meaning is honest, is
proved by Leo B. of Rome Ep. 90. speaking of a Monk: Vnde qui relicta
singularitatis professione ad militiam vel ad nuptial d^uolutus est, publicae
paenitentiae satisfactione purgandus est, quia etsi innocens militia and
honestum potest esse coni^gium, electionem tamen meliorem deseruisse,
transgressio est. Wherefore he which has forsaken the profession of sole life,
and fallen to warfare or marriage, must be purged by satisfaction of open
repentance, because that although his warfare may be harmless, and his
marriage honest, yet it is a transgression to have forsaken his better choice.

To the second, that it was abominable to make any sacrifice to God, beside
the sacrifice of thanksgiving in words, and the figures for his benefits,
with remembrance of his passion, etc. I prove by the authority of Justinius,
which affirms, that these were the only sacrifices delivered unto the
Christians, therefore it was abominable to use any other. His words are in
his Dialogue with Tryphon against the Jews, (...). For I my self do affirm,
yt prayers and thankesgiuings made by worthy persons, are ye only perfect and
acceptable sacrifices to God. For these are the only sacrifices yt Christians
have received to make, to be put in mind by their dry and moist nourishment,
of the passion which God the son of God is recorded to have suffered for
them. Here note, that he calls the sacrament dry and moist nourishment.

To the third, that there was no Priesthood according to the order of
Melchisedech, but only the Priesthood of our Savior Christ, it is manifest
by the 110. Psalm, that the Priesthood pertains to him that sits at the
right hand of God, even to the Lord Jesus Christ: also by the Apostle to the
Hebrews 5. and 7. Chapter: in which it is said that he has that Priesthood,
(...), that is, so peculiar to him, as it passes not by succession: Neither
was there ever any greater blasphemy, then that every Popish Priest should be
a Priest after the order of Melchisedech, to offer Christ to his Father.

And that Priests have not a singular sacrifice to offer for the sins of the
people, is proved by S. Augustine ^ Contra aduersar leg and prophe. who calls
ye death of Christ, V^um singular, and solum verum sacrificium, that one,
singular, and only true sacrifice, in which the blood of Christ was shed for
us. But the Papists call their blasphemous sacrifice, an unbloody sacrifice,
therefore they have not any singular sacrifice for the sins of the people.

The second part contains 12. Articles in which he falsely charge Calvin in
his institutions with diverse Articles, which neither he nor any of us do hold.
The first, that the sacrament of baptism instituted by Christ, is no better
then the circumcision of the old law, is proved by Saint Augustine, which
says, in Joan. Tr. 26. speaking of the sacraments of the old law, that they
were in fignis diuersa in re quae significatur, paria, diverse in signs, equal
in the thing signified.

The second, that baptism is a sign only of our profession, and that our
sins are not truly forgiven in it, is no doctrine of ours, but of the
Anabaptists, mightily confuted by Calvin, whom he slaundereth to hold it.

The 3. that confirmation ought to be a sacrament is an invention of man
plain, for that it is not taught in the scriptures to be an institution of
Christ. Irenus testifies, that the anointing with sweet oil came first of
the Valentinian heretics. Lib. 1. cap. 18. Also in S. Hieromes time, the
Priests made the oil of Chrisme, and laid on their hands, and not the
Bishop only. In Sophon. cap. 3* For a Bishop did nothing more then a Priest,
but only in ordeining of ministers Hier. Euagrio. Whereupon it follows, that
the Popish confirmation was not then a sacrament, which they hold can be
ministered of none, but of a Bishop.

The fourth, that Christ delivered in his last supper a figure only of his body
to be eaten of his Apostles, is none of our assertions, for we affirm that he
delivered bread and wine, not as a figure only, but as his very body and
blood spiritually to be eaten and dronken.

The 5. that the power of forgiving and reteyning sins which Christ gave to
his Apostles, is nothing else but a comforting or fearing of men's consciences
by the promises or menaces of the scripture, etc. is not affirmed of us, but
that Christ has given power to his ministers to assure the penitent of
forgiveness in his name, to pronounce his judgment to the unrepentant: so that
man follows the sentence of God, and not God of man.

To the ^. that to confess a man's sins to the priest, is a vain and
superstitious travel, is proved by Chrysostom In Psalmo. 50. Non dico vt
confitearis conseruo tuo vt exprobret, dicito Deo, qui curat ea. I bid thee
not confess thy sins to thy fellow servant, that he may vpbraide thee,
tell them to God which heals them. That to seek to make up a full and perfect
satisfaction by fasting, praying, almesdeedes, etc. is injurious to the passion
and merits of Christ, is proved by that saying of S. John. The blood of Jesus
Christ does purge us from all sins, and if we confess our sins he is
faithful and righteous, that he will forgive our sins and purge us from all
unrighteousness. 1. Joan. 1.

The 7. that the knowledge of the scriptures is a sufficient license for a man
to be a public teacher in the Church, we deny: likewise, that there is no
difference between the ministry of the Church and the people, although
that to speak properly of the term priesthood, all true Christians are alike
Priests to God, as it is most manifest. 1. Pet. 2. verse. 5. and Apoc. 1. verse
6.

To the 8. That Christian Princes had the auhoritie of supreme head over the
church in yt sense, which it is given to our sovereign, is proved by
Constantine, Theodosius, Martianus etc. who called the general councels, made
laws for establishment of religion, punished Bishops and other of the
Clergy offenders, and not only the Emperors, but also many other Kings of
Spain and France, who had the like authority in their Dominions, as
appears in all histories, and in the acts of the councels general and
provincial.

The 9. that faith only justifies after one be baptized and sanctified, is
proved by Basil in an Homily of humility Hom. 51. speaking of a man baptized
and sanctified: Haec enim est perfecta ac integra gloriatio in Deo, quando
neque ob iustitiam suam quis se iacta^, sed nouit quidem seipsum vere iusti^i
indigum esse, sola autem fide in Christum iustificatum. For this is a full and
perfect rejoicing in God, when a man does not boast himself of his
righteousness, but knows him self truly to be void of true righteousness,
and to be justified by only faith in Christ.

The 10. that all the justice and holiness of good men is but an imputative
justice etc. is not said of us which affirm, that faith only is imputed for
righteousness and not the holiness or justice of any man. But we affirm that
all the works of men, be they never so holy and righteous, are imperfect, and
therefore deserve not the reward of Justice promised in the law to the
perfect obseruers thereof, and to none other.

The 11. yt the keeping of 40. dais fast, had no commandment from Christ or
his Apostles, it is manifest by Eusebius, which affirms that Montanus the
heretic was the first that prescribed laws of fasting. Lib. 5. Cap. 16. also
he reports yt there was no certeintie of the time of fasting before Easter,
for some fasted one day, some two days, some more, some compting their day 40.
hours of day and night. Lib. 5. Cap. 20. And Augustine plainly says, Quibus
autem diebus non oportet ieiunare, and quibus oporteat, prcepto Domini vel
Apostolorum non inuenio definitum. What days we ought not to fast, or what
days we ought to fast. I find it not defined by the commandment of our Lord,
or of his Apostles. As for ye abstinence from flesh in Lent for civil
policies sake, because it touches not religion, we need show no proof of it.

To the 12. that aneiling of Christians, has been abhorred of Christians, it is
hard to prove, because yt Popish aneiling by the Priests with oil consecrated
by the Bishop, was not in use in that time. The first that is read to use such
like aneiling about 400. years atfer Christ was Innocentius who appointed that
al christian men under his obedience should use oil as witnesses Sigebertus.
But Durand and other writers, ascribe the institution of this extreme unction
to Felix the fourth, who lived about 514. years after Christ, so that until
that time, this Popish sacrament was not known in the Church. And as for
reservation of the sacrament of the altar forbidden, I shall need no better
authority for M. Rastel, then the counterfeit epistle of Clemens Bishop of Rome
Epi. 2. Tanta in altario Holocausta offerantur quanta populo sufficere debent.
Quod si remanserint, in crastinum non reseruentur, sed cum timore and tremore
clericorum diligentia consumantur. Let so many hosts be offered in the altar,
as may serve the people. But if any remain, let them not be reserved until the
next day, but with fear and trembling spent out by the diligence of the
Clearks. And for other men yt can discern truth from forgerie, the testimony
of Euagrius, Li. 4. ca. 36. may serve, which reports an old custom of ye
church of Constantinople, to send for children yt went to school to spend
whatsoever remained of the sacrament after ye communion.

The third part contains four articles.
To the first, that calling upon Saints in heaven was accounted then
blasphemy, is proved by S. Augu. which so accounted calling upon Angels or any
other creature. Conf. Li. 11. Cap. 42. Quem inuenirem qui me reconciliaret
tibi? an eundum mihi fuit ad Angelos? qua prece? Quibus sacramentis? Whom
should I find that might reconcile me unto thee? Should I have gone to ye
Angels? With what prayers? With what sacraments? And yet I confess some seeds
of that error were scattered in his time. But before his time Epiphanius
rehearses it among the heresies of the Caiani, that they did call upon angels
Tom. 3. Haeres. 38. and calling upon dead men he compteth it an heresy of the
Heracleonites Hae. 36. And Contra Collyridianos he utterly condemns al
worshipping either of dead Saints, or any else, or the virgin Marie, as them
that rob God of his honor, for what greater honor can we do unto God then
to call upon him in all our afflictions* Psalm. 50. And David says: Whom have I
in the heaven but thee: and I have desired none in the earth with thee. Psalm.
73.

To the second, that the setting up of images of Christ in Churches was
counted idolatry, it is manifest by Epiphanius, who as he testifies in his
epistle unto John bishop of Jerusalem, did rend a veil in which such an image
was painted: Cum ergo hoc vidissem, in Ecclesia Christi contra authoritatem
scripturarum hominis pendere imaginem, scidi illud, etc. When I had seen this
thing, that in the Church of Christ, contrary to the authority of
scriptures, an image of a man did hang, I rent it in pieces, etc. As for ye
sign of the cross I have showed before out of Irenaeus, that the Valentinian
heretics were the first that had it in estimation, although afterward it grew
to be esteemed of good Christians, by a corrupt emulation.

To the 3. that visiting of Saints tombs, and kissing their relics after the
Popish manner, was thought to be a superstitious vanity, is proved by the
Epistle of the Smyrnenses to the Phylomilienses Eusebius. Lib. 4. Cap. 16. Wherein
they show, that the Gentiles and Jews thought best to burn the body of
Policarpus, least the Christians should leave Christ and begin to worship him,
and therefore they watched the Christians, least they should, take his body
out of the fire, Ignorantes nos nec vnquam etc. being ignorant (say they) that
we can never forsake Christ, which suffered for all them that shall be saved of
the world, nor worship any other. For him truly we adore as the son of God,
but the Martyrs we love worthily as the Disciples and followers of our Lord,
for their invincible love toward their King and Master, of who^ we wish our
selfs to be made companions and Disciples. Therefore when the Centurian saw
the contention of the Jews, they burned his body as their manner is being laid
in the midst, and so at the length we got his bones, more precious then
precious stones, and better tried then gold, and buried the^ where it was meet,
where also as near as may be, being assembled, the Lord shall grant us with
joy and gladdenesse to celebrate his Martyrs birth day* both to the
remembrance of them that have fought already, and for the exercise and
preparation of them that shall fight hereafter.

Such reverent burning therefore of their dead corpses, and laying up of their
relics, as is of love and not of superstition, we condemn not. But such as
ye papists used of their relics, they learned of the heretics Osseni which
as Epiphanius writes, took the spittle and other fylthines of the bodies of
Marthys and Marthana, whom they took for saints, and used them for help of
diseases, as the papists did with ye snottie napkins of Thomas Becket, such a
saint as they were. And yt they should not object, yt some have done as they
do, S. Augustine De moribus eccles. Cath. lib. 1. cap 34. Thus writes. Nolite
mihi colligere professores nominis Christiani, neque professionis suae vim aut
scientet aut exhibentes. Nolite consectari turbas imperitorum, qui vel in ipsa
vera religione superstitiosi sunt, vel ita libidinibus dediti, et obliti sint
quid promiserint Deo. Noui multos esse sepulchrorum vt picturarum adoratores.
Gather not unto me such professors of the name of Christ for example, as
neither know nor show forth the virtue of their profession. Seek not up the
multitudes of unskillful persons, which either in true religion it self are
superstitious, or else so given to their lusts, that they have forgotten what
they have promised to God. I know there be many worshippers of tombs and
pictures, etc.

To the 4. that miracles worked at their chappelles or memory (among the
heretics as the papists be) were attributed at the first tydinges of them
unto the diuilles subtlety, is proved by S. Augustine, who speaking of
miracles wrought at such places, says De vnitate ecclesiae cap. 1^.
Remoueantur ista, vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fa^lacium
spirituum, aut enim non sunt vera quae dicuntur, aut si (...) atiqua mirafacta
sunt, magis cauere debemus. Away with these miracles, which are either the
forgeries of lying men, or the wonders of deceiving spirits, for either chose
things that are reported be not true, or if any miracles of the heretic are
wrought, we ought so much the more to take heed of you.

The fourth part contains 3. articles.
To the first, that to pray for the souls departed, was thought repugnant to
the scriptures, is proved by this reason, for that although it be an ancient
error, yet was it not used of the Church almost for 200. years after Christ,
and the first that we read of in any authentical writer that makes mention
of prayer for the dead, was Tertulian, when he was an heretic, which learned
it of Martianus who laid the first foundation of purgatory, as appears in
his book De anima cap de infe^is.

To the second, that to offer sacrifice and give alms for their souls
health, was accounted impiety, I answer as to the first, upon which it
depends. Origenes in Job. lib. 3. says that the Christians did celebrate
the day of death, Vtpote omnium dolorum depositionem, as the layinge aside of
all pain. Likewise that they did keep the memory of their friends departed,
as well reioysinge in their rest, as prayinge for the like godly endinge in
faith.

Also they called together the people with the Clergy, and especially the
poor to their burial feasts, vt fiat festiuitas nostra in memoriam requiei
defunctis animabus, quarum memoriam celebramus, nobis autem efficiatur in
odorem suauitatis in conspectu aeterni Dei, that our feastiuitie may be made
in remembrance of the rest, which is unto the souls of them that are
departed, whose memory we celebrate and to our selves into a sauoure of sweet
smellinge in the sight of the eternal God. This was the judgment of the
Greek Church in his time, of such assemblies, prayers, and alms, as was
used at the buryall of the dead, or in remembrance of them.

To the third, that the last wills of founders of alms houses, Colleges,
and monasteries, were broken concerning their temporal goods, and legacies,
and that no part thereof did come to their own blood and family, concerning
alms houses and Colleges of learning, it need not be proved, for they are
maintained by our doctrine.

Concerning Monasteries there were none then, but of such as lived with their
own labors. Nevertheless if any legacy of any founder were to mainetayne
Idolatry and false religion, as there were many of the Paganes which were
founders of Idolatrous temples and Colleges, like to the popish monasteries,
it is certain that either they were destroyed, or else converted to better
uses.

Now if Master Rastell think it to be necessary, that their legacies should
be restored to their own blood and family, upon the dissolution of such
houses, he might do well to persuade a number of popish gentlemen in
England that enjoy abbeies and their lands, to make such restitution, and
when he has brought to pass that all which they have is so restored, we
will begin likewise to exhort godly gentlemen to do the like, or rather to
apply some part of them to the maintenance of learning and religion, and to
the sustentation of the poor.

After Master Rastell has earnestlye required the answer of these
questions, which have been so often answered in special treatises, (I mean
so many of them as we maintain) with promise of submission if they be
proved, he desires license to rehearse the saying of Tertulian in his book De
praescriptionibus aduersus haereticos, which is such (as he says) that even
religion must agree to it, if with any reason it will be credited.

But in deed it is such, as while Tertulian followed too much, he fell from
the Catholic Church to be an heretic. The sum of that saying which M. Rast.
has shamefully gesded, and falsely translated, so that it seems he has not
red it in Tertulians book, but in some man's notes, that has joined together
as it were cantles or patches of Tertulians saying: the effect (I say) is
this. That because some heretics of his time received not all the scriptures,
and those which they did receive, they received not whole, but by additions and
detractions, corruptions and wrong expositions, they perverted them to their
purpose, his judgment was, that against such heretics, the trial was not to
be made by scriptures, by which the victory should either be none, or
uncertain, or not sure: and therefore in as much as they were not agreed what
was scripture, and how great was the authority thereof, he thought that the
order of disputinge required, that these questions should first be decided.
Unto whom the Christian faith pertains: whose are the scriptures: of whom:
and by whom: and when: and to whom the learning is delivered, by which men are
made Christians.

For where it shall appear, that the truth of the Christian learning and
faith is, there shall be the truth of the scriptures and of the expositions, and
of all Christian traditions. This is the judgment of Tertulian, But seeinge we
receive all the scriptures Canonical, without addition or detraction, yea and
for the principal articles of our religion, wherein we differ from the
papists, we receive the exposition of the most ancient writers, both of the
Greek and Latin Church: not bringinge in any new doctrine, but requiring
that the old doctrine may be restored, this rule of Tertulian does not
concern us. Yet are we able to answer to all his demaundes without any
taryinge, and so as it shall satisfy Tertulian or any man that understands
him. We say that Christian faith pertains to true Christians, and that the
scriptures are theirs also.

We say also, that the learning by which men are made Christians, was delivered
of Christ, by his Apostles, and Evangelists, in the time of the reign of
Tiberius the Emperor, first unto the Jews, and after unto the Gentiles,
making one universal Chruch dispersed over the whole world. And the truth of
this Christian learning and faith thus and then delivered, we do hold and
maintain, therefore by Tertullians rule, the truth of ye scriptures and
expositions and all Christian traditions are with us, and the rather because it
cannot be proved that we hold any one article of belief, but the same is
contained in ye manifest words of the scriptures, by which only it may be
tried, what learning Christ delivered to his Apostles, and they to the
churches. For seeing the memory of man cannot ascend unto so many hundredth
years, the certain remembrance must be had out of Records of writings, and
for so much as no writings are either so ancient, or so credible as ye holy
scriptures, the trial must be only by ye scriptures, notwithstanding
Tertullians opinion, as Augustine teaches in many places of his writings
against the Donatistes.

After this discourse upon Tertullian, he adds six articles more, falsely
pretending that they are the demaundes of Tertullian, but altering them into
the manner of a challenge, where as I have both set forth and answered
Tertullians demaundes, according to his own words and meaning.

The first is, if we can prove by any sufficient and likely argument that we
have any true Christian faith at all among us, for faith (says he) cleaves
unto authority which they can never show for themselves etc: In deed such
faith as cleaves unto men's authority, we have none, but such as cleaves
unto the word of God: as saint Paul says, faith comes by hearing of the
word of God, which is only true Christian faith, we have the whole faith of
Christians, as we do daily prove, not only by the authority of scriptures,
but also by the testimony of ancient writers agreeable to the same. And
because he is so impudent to deny that we have any true Christian faith at all,
I demand of him, why he does not then rebaptise those that are baptized of
us, seeing he is persuaded, that neither the minister nor the godfathers, (whose
faith according to their doctrine, makes much for baptism) have any true
Christian faith at all?

The second, that the scriptures are delivered unto us, that we be the right
keepers of them, is proved by this argument, that we be the church of God unto
whom the scriptures and the custody of them pertains. That we are the
church of God we prove by this argument, that we believe and teach all that and
nothing else but yt, which God by his holy scriptures has appointed to be
believed and taught for Christian faith.

The third, we know from whom we have received the gospel, not from ye
Papists. Namely from ye doctrine of god and his holy spirit, from such
ministers as were stirred up of God and lightened with his spirit according to
the scriptures, and from the books of the Greeks and Hebrews, and not of the
papists.

The fourth, we know by what successors the gospel came unto us from God the
author of it, even from the prophets and Apostles, Evangelists, pastors and
teachers of the church of all ages, flourishing in sight of the world until
the coming and tyrany of Antichrist had overwhelmed all the world with
darkness, by whom they were persecuted and driven into corners, according to
the prophecy of Christ in the Apocalipse cap. 12. but yet so as they always
continued and testified the truth, oftentimes openly protesting against
Antichrist, until now at the length the time being come in which Antichrist
must be consumed, they are again brought into the sight of the world, and the
kingdom of Antichrist is made obscure, ignominious, and contemptible.

The fifth. we know at what time the Gospel was first delivered unto the
Church of the gentiles, namely in the reign of Tiberius, in whose time Christ
suffered, since which time it has always continued, and shall do to the end
of the world.

To the sixth. wherein he requires us to show the foundation of some Church,
house, communion table, or book etc. by which it may be gathered that a true
apostolic religion was within the 600. years as void of ornaments,
ceremonies, reverence, distinction of places and dignities, sacraments and
solemnities perteining to sacraments as ours is. I answer, our religion has
all sacraments, ornaments, ceremonies, distinction, solemnities, reverence,
necessary unto eternal life, and therefore to show a monument of a religion
void of these, it pertains not to us. Beside that it is a foolish and
unreasonable demand, for us to show any such monument remaining above 900.
years, when by so often invasion of enemies and mutation of states, as has
fallen in the world, other monuments could not remain, but learned writings
out of which we have often proved our religion to be the same, that was in the
most ancient and purest times of those 600. years after Christ.

In the conclusion Master Rastell protests, until the answer be devised,
that he will continue in that faith which Augustine ye Monk received of
Gregory ye great, and he of Pelagius, and Pelagius of Benedictus, and so
reherseth ye Bishops names of Rome unto Peter who received his doctrine of
Christ: which is nothing else but a popish brag. For neither is he nor all the rablement of them able to prove, that Christ delivered to Peter, or Peter
to Clemens a great number of articles of doctrine, that Augustine delivered to
the Saxons, neither that he and his fellow Papists, do hold all that doctrine
and faith, which Augustine received of Gregory, and Gregory of Pelagius etc.
ascending to ye heighest. For a great number of errors and corruptions have
since that time crept into the Church, that neither Augustine nor Gregory ever
heard off.

FINIS.
Faults escaped. The first number signifies the page, the last the number of
the lines.
Page 6 line 17 me to l. me but to 9 38 title l. little 57 28 conceive l.
concur 68 28 quo l. quem 73 8 continue l. contain 90 13 are l. not 114 33
vbique l. vtique 115 30 Hierome l. Hereupon 145 1 divinity l. dignity 171 22
l. adunatione^ 25 adunation 1847 l. Guitmu^dus 202 3 saint l. sent 237 23
which l. with us 254 37 that l. if 271 25 l. by which 277 19 Catatholia l.
Catathetico 287 9 as grossly l. a grosselye 29 8 18 Covvel. rave 19 Caulfes l.
ravve 367 35 Enconijs l Encaenijs 430 38 could not have l. could have 434 21
twentieth l. thirtieth 439 28 Arrius l. Aerius 443 29 holy l. high 463 14
this l. his 28 less l. better 32 vituspatiu^ l. vitas patru^ 484 37 decree l.
dear 502 15 body l. blood 512 10 our l. an 522 6 petat l. potat 538 13 their
l. the 542 21 ancestri l. authority 35 justification l. instruction 343 27
pope l. people 546 9 Sina l. Syria 54 9 Euasius l. Euagrius 35 opportunity l.
importunity 556 36 Augustus l. Augustulus 557 3 self l. like 570 30
variations l. vacations 574 32 tables l. idols 589 9 Papathium l. Pammachium
590 13 Peter l. Paul 31 autorato l. ancorato 605 31 nor l. were and were l.
to be 610 17 three l. their 34 l. him that 616 18 admit l. omit 617 27 an l.
and an 625 30 algarus Abgarus 631 23 names l. nuns 29 Chapter l. Chair 632
14 emende l. emendo 24 Constantius l. consta^tinus 637 36 this l. his 6417
pavende l. paneade 653 11 word l. vvood 656 21 offering l. esteming 665 8
painted l. printed 621 27 capillorum l. lapillorum and 32 l. I here 700 10
Marianatha l. Maran-atha 707 32 just l. first 708 28 which l. with 720 1 l.
but that our communion 736 7 excepted l. accepted 746 31 such a not l. not such
a 746 34 yet l. yea 761 3 and 33 savoring l. sovvering 775 11 is of no force l.
is not far of 779 8 readdid call 181 5 guest l. ghost 783 4 any l. an 7 is l.
us 30 read l. rende 790 33 meaning l. marriage 797 18 vt l. et 798 10 Martianus
l. Montanus.


