THE BOY OF BILSON: OR, A TRVE DISCOVERY OF THE LATE NOTORIOVS IMPOSTVRES OF
CERTAIN ROMISH Priests in their pretended Exorcisme, or expulsion of the
Devil out of a young Boy, named WILLIAM PERRY, son of THOMAS PERRY of
Bilson, in the County of Stafford, Yeoman.

Upon which occasion, hereunto is premitted A brief Theological Discourse, by
way of Caution, for the more easy discerning of such Romish spirits; and
judging of their false pretenses, both in this and the like Practices.

2. These. 2.10, 11. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved. For this cause God shall send them strong delusion, that they
should believe a lie.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for William Barret. 1622.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
BEing acquainted with the mind and purpose of the Author of this ensuing
Treatise, and having thereunto added those other Pieces (unto which I am no
stranger,) to make the Narration complete, as concerning the Boy of Bilson: I
thought it my duty, after much solicitation, to communicate the whole in
print; and so to make it iuris publici. And this (as I thought) these very
times did exact. For now the Popish Priests have so cauterized their
consciences, and rubbed their foreheads, as that they take delight, and blush
not, daily to forge and coin most monstrous Witness (among many others) their
fresh Master-lye, touching the supposed Apostasy of the late L. Bishop of
London.
untruths; all to support their drooping and dropping Cause. Since therefore
their appetites are so well whetted and set on edge (by what Perhaps the same
that one of them hanged about the Boys neck. vid. page 63.
Stone we may easily guess, it being their due reward,) as that they make no
bones of whatsoever is set before them; to stay their stomachs a while, let
them be chewing this bit, (which otherwise they shall not now eschew,) Vt quam
falsa dicendo and scrthendo voluptatem ceperint, eandem vera legendo and
audiendo amittant.

Here then (good Reader) in the first place thou have a Treatise professedly
written for a Discovery of, and a Caution against the enueagling proiects of
Romish Priests, chiefly in that one particular, viz. their pretended Priestly
Exorcizing and expolling of Devils out of bodies possessed. By which thou may
judge, whether these Mirabularies deserve not the reputation of the varest
Mountebanks of these times. Next follows, A faithful Relation (for so they
name it) made by these Priests, touching their proceedings with the Boy: which
they did purposely write and disperse, Vide page 45.
To the end (as they profess) that all indifferent minds may magnify and
praise Almighty God, that has left such power to men, etc. such (for sooth) as
they had, in Exorcizing and coniuring the Devil within that Boy, being their
supposed desperate Demoniack. Which glorious work of theirs when these Roman
Aruspices shall, at their next enteruiew, recognize, cie.
Mirabor si non riserint. And that so much the rather, after they have perused
the Remain of this Book, in which the Event and success of the whole
business is truly related; and their formidable Mormo proved no other then an
Apish Cobalus. Whereby it will also come to pass that these Catholic
Gentlemen (for so they style themselves, albeit by their See their descriptions
in this Book. page 63.64. etc.
outward garb one would rather suspect the^ for Serning-men and attendants on
such persons, ne quid grauius) shall be so clearly convinced of palpable
Quacksaluing, as that a very mean Herald, knowing the house they come of, may
blazon their Arms; and so expose the^ unto shame and laughter.

But I will not intertaine thee (gentle Reader) with any longer parle in the
entrance, after that I shall put thee in mind of that sound advise, which an
Heathen Philosopher long since prescribed (but never so necessary as now, when
Popish impostures are so rife,) viz. (...) Ipicharmus.
Which may be thus englished; Be wise, and be not hasty to believe. which
precious Amulet I commend unto thee, and All of us to the rich mercy of our
most gracious God.

Ryc. Baddeley.

THE GENERAL HEADS of this Book.
I. A Discourse, by way of Caution, concerning Popish Exorcizing of unclean
spirits. Page 1 II. A Relation made by certain Romish Priests, and by one of
them dispersed; wherein they magnify the power of their Exorcisme over the
devil, in the Boy of Bilson. Page 41 III. A description of the admirable guile
and cunning of that Boy, in counterfeiting himself possessed of the devil.
Page 55 IV. The means and manner used by the R. Reverend Father in God THOMAS
Lo. Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, for discovering his dissimulation. Page
56 V. The two examinations of the Boy, taken before the said Reverend Father;
together with his plain and direct Confession of the whole Complot and
Practice. Page 61, 69 VI. The Success and event of all, showed in the Boys
(first) private, and (after) public Acknowledgement made before the whole
County, in the Summer-Assizes held at Stafford this present year 1621. Page 72
Faults escaped in some Copies.
Page 14. lin. 2. read, will you so. p. 25. l. 11. r. the third point. p. 28.
l. 14. r. Adiuration. p. 33. l. 6. r. to prove. Besides, mend the numbers of
the Pages, in the letters E. H. I.

A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING Popish Exorcizing.
A Miracle being (as Divine learning does teach) a Work of Omnipotency, far
exceeding all natural power of any Creature, is the broad Seal of Almighty
God, for the confirmation of Truth: which whosoever shall dare to counterfeit,
must needs be guilty of no less then high Treason against the supreme
Majesty. Necessarily therefore will it concern, as in special those that
take upon them the Office of working Miracles in these times, to fear and
tremble at such dangerous impiety; so also in general every Christian and
religious Soul to beware, that he be not circumvented by any forgerie in this
kind, and thereby drawn to admire and esteem, as the finger of God, the lewd
and ridiculous iuglings of wretched men. For which end I have adventured to set
down certain Aduertisements, whereby others may be reasonably directed how
to discover and avoid such kind of Popish delusions.

The first Advertisement; Against a false Proposition of the Romanists, who
make the use of Miracles to be a perpetual and necessary note of the
Catholic Church.
THe Proposition much insisted upon and pressed by Bellarmine, Coster,
Valentian, and other Jesuits, is, that the use of Miracles is a necessary,
perpetual, and prositable Character and Note of the true Church of Christ,
as well in these Times as it was in the Days of the Apostles. This we are
warranted to call a false Proposition. First, because that Gift cannot be
called perpetual, which ceased by little and little; Chrysostom. Aug.
insomuch that Saint Chrysostom and Saint Augustine, could say of their own
times (which bordered near upon the Days of the Primitive Church) that diverse
kind of Apostolical Miracles were then ceased. How much less therefore can
this Power be expected in these latter Times, of which the Romanists own
Bishop (who Rued in the days of King Henry the eight, and whom they have
magnified with the Title of a Martyr, that is, a Witness of the Truth) did
avouch, saying, Ich. Roffens. Episcop. cor. Luth. de Capt. Bab. c. 10.
The promise of God touching Miracles, God would not have to be perpetual in
his Church.

Secondly, if they were necessary (especially) for the confirmation of the
Doctrines of Faith, as the Romish Priests do in their Exorcismes profess;
then would not S. Gregory, the first and greatest Pope of that name, have held
them necessary only for the first begetting, breeding, and nourcing of the
Church: Greg. hom. 49. in Euang.
Even as (says he) the watering of plants is necessary, when they are first
planted, which, after they be come to growth, will be of no use. Which sentence
of S. Gregory, did peradventure draw the like Assertion from the quill of the
Jesuit Delrio, Delrio Ics. Disq. Mag. Tem. 2. l. 4.
saying (although somewhat mincing it) For the establishing of the Faith, there
is now little necessity of Miracles, or none at all. But more thorrowly their
said Bishop, who holds them not necessary, but for the time of the birth and
breeding of the Church. Roffens. sup.
Whereunto (to forbear any further search after Witnesses) their Jesuit Acosta
accords; Acosta Ies. de salut. Iudor. l. 2. c. (...)
There being a difference (says he) between the primitive Times and these
Days wherein we live, for what need we any confirmation by Miracles? So he.

Thirdly, touching the profitablenesse of Miratles in the latter Ages of the
World, Saint Chrysostom durst say, that it is more profitable to want them;
Chrysostom. as he is alleged by Acosta. ibid. c. 2.
it being a matter of greater worthiness to believe without them. Yea, their
own Preacher, entering into this contemplation, taught publicly, Stella in
Lue. 11
that Miracles now would be rather an hindrance unto Faith. And I cannot
believe he spoke without book, seeing that our Savior Christ (as Saint
Augustine observes) has given us a caution, Aug. Tract. 13. in loh. 3.
against these Miraclemongers, Mar. 13.5.
willing us to take heed that we be not deceived. Whereof their Jesuit will
give us some reason, even, Acosta Ies. de temp. nouiss. l. 2. c. 19.
Because that in the time of Antichrist it will be hard to discern true
Miracles from false. Where then shall a Christian cast Anchor in so great
danger of seducement by Antichristian Miracles? the true answer to this will
give us full satisfaction; and this we have confessed by the mouth of the same
Jesuit, as absolutely as any Protestant can profess. Acosla ibid. l. 1. cap.
10.
Our strongest hold (says he) must be the holy Scriptures, which are of more
strength than any Miracles: nor can the Servant of Christ have a stronger Fort
against the power of Antichrist. Which Tenet, concerning the security of
Christians by Scriptures, was anciently held before the days of Antichrist, as
we read in the ancient Author of the work, passing under the name of S.
Chrysostom: Hom. 49. in Matthew.
True Christians (says he) were discerned in former times by Miracles, but
now by Scriptures. This is the Fort which will defend us, and therefore we
above all things ought to defend it.

The second Advertisement; Showing the false Assumption of the Romanists, in
challenging to themselves the power of Miracles, as a perpetual gift
peculiarly belonging to their Roman Church.
ALthough the Jesuit Turselline talks and boasts of many marvelous
Miracles, daily done in Italy, Hist. Domus Lauret.
Which (as he says) are no less glorious than those miracles in the days of
old: yet doubt we not to call this Assumption a merely vain presumption. For
if we require them to show us in their Church the power of Prophecy, they
might take (I think) a Lantern to seek thorowout all Italy, and not find any
one whom they can point out to be professedly a Prophet. If we inquire after
the gift of Tongues, to speak strange languages, where can they show this?
Miracles (says the Apostle) are for unbelievers, or Infidels: 1. Cor. 14.22.
and no Miracle more necessary for the conversion of Infidels in the Indies
than to be able to speak the languages of those Nations, because Faith comes
by hearing, Romans 10.17. 1. Cor. 14.
and hearing of a known language. Yet we know that the Priests, who daily
labor for the conversion of those Infidels, confess that they are glad to
labor and study Months and Years, to learn the languages of those
Countries.

But, to speak more generally, How can this be said to be a perpetual Badge
of the Roman Church, whereof a famous Bishop (living but about fourscore
years since) being posed by Luther, to show in all Europe where there was any
that could profess himself endowed with that Gift; answered plainly, Roffens.
in Luth. de Capt. Babyl. cap. 11.
and without any Parable (speaking of the power of Miracles) Cuius (says he)
effectum nunc nullum cernimus: Whereof we see no effect in our days.

When we further insist, and ask, concerning this great sign of the
ordinary work of Miracles, where this Star does appear? surely, not at
their Jerusalem, the City of Rome; nor yet in Europe, their Jury, for they
send us to seek it in the newfound World, in the conversion of Pagans;
professing (as it may seem) and that justly with their Espencaeus, Espen. in
2. Tim. 3
that Miracles are no where necessary, but among Infidels. Here then, if any
where, we are to seek it, to wit, in the Indies; where behold Bellarmine, and
their other Magi do see it rising (as it were) in the East Indies, and setting
in the West Indies. No question therefore, but we are like to find it in those
Indies; that which is their ordinary Assumption.

For confutation whereof we need not to travel so far, to try this; two
famous Jesuits, who have been most conversant there, and taken (as is said)
most pains for the converting of Infidels to the Faith of Christ, come unto us
by their Books, and tell us, the one, that this Assumption is false, the
other, though avouched by them, yet not saying that it is true. For of the East
Indies, their Jesuit Acosta says asseuerantly; Acosta Ics. de salute Indor. l.
4.
Prodigia nulla facimus, signa nulla edimus: We work no Wonders, we show no
Miracles. In the West Indies, who more resident than their Jesuit Xauier, whom
they report to have been their Thaumaturgus, Ballar. l. 4. de Not is Eccles.
c. 14.
and to have bealed lame, dumb, deaf, blind, yea and to have raised the dead
to life. Notwithstanding, when we consult with Francis Xauier himself, in his
Volume of Epislles, directed unto the Fathers of his own Society, unto
Cardinals, and others of best esteem; he makes no mention there of these
miraculous works. Which we doubt not but he would have done, if any such Acts
had been wrought. For we may not think that Jesuits would profess more
modesty, in this kind, than the holy Apostles of Christ, who, to the glory of
God, and comfort of his Church, did profess to reveal and report (speaking of
their Miracles) Magnalia Dei; The wondrous works of God. Act. 2.11.
Therefore we take this his not verifying the report of his Miracles, so
commonly suggested, and so greedily intertayned by others, to amount to no
less than the denial of them to be true.

Let me add unto Francis Xauier their Francis de Victoria, Professor of
Divinity in Spain, Fra. de Vict. Relect. 5. sect. 2.
who discussing this great point, whether that the Doctrine of Christ were so
sufficiently revealed unto the Infidels of these times, by Word, or Miracles,
that they, which would not be converted, mightiustly be condemned of so
unpardonable obstinacy, as to deserve to be persecuted by Sword; after his
deliberate and earnest search to satisfy himself and others in this,
answers (concerning Miracles) Signa nulla audio: I hear of no Miracles.

The third Advertisement; Showing that it has been a custom among Romish
Priests, willingly to deceive the people by counterfeit Acts and Reports.
HOw shall this be news to Any, who has been acquainted with some of their
own Authors? One confessing, Lyrain Dam.
that People are deceived by false miracles, devised by Priests, and such as
adhere unto them. A second, Melchior Canus loc. Theol.
remembering (as he himself says) with grief some Historians, abusing the
credulity of the people, by relating the miracles of Saints. A third
inueighing against the prodigality of some vain Reports of false miracles. A
fourth, Eras. ante lib. Consess. Aug.
and also a fifth partly scorning, Agrippa de Vanit. scient. Viucs in Aug. de
Ciuit. Dei, l. 22. c. 8.
and partly abborring their fabulous relations, and vain forgeries of
Miracles. These confessions may setue for the present.

We need not be inquisitiue into Examples fetcth from other Countries,
concerning the iuggling tricks of the Friars of former times, which have been
detected to their shame; nor yet of a late Histoire admirable de la possession
and conversion d'vne Penitente, seduite par un Magicien, etc. conduite a la S.
Baume poury estre exorcizee, l'An 1610. soubz l'autorite du R.P. F. Sebaslien
Michaelis, Prieur de covent Royal de la S. Magdaleine a S. Maximin, etc. A la
Reyne Regente, Paris 1613. auec privilege du Roy. It was translated into
English, according to the original Copy, by W.B. and printed, Anno 1613.
which Edition is here after observed. Printed, Anno Domini 1603.
Admirable History (as they call it) of notable Exorcismes, performed at Saint
Baume in France, which will hereafter bewray it self by its own
contradictions: because our own half Isle, even little England, will be found
to abound as much with variety of false Miracles, as Afric with Monsters.
For here has been seen a Maid with a miraculous Apron, casting little
flashes of lightning in the dark (for this also was a work of darkness) and
easily done by an artificial tincture of Sulphur. Not long after (which the
World gazed at) they produced the Image of Garnet the Jesuit in a straw:
wherein there was nothing more wonderful, than that any should account it
miraculous, it being (by the confession, upon oath, of such Recusants as had
kept it) no more like Garnets face than any other man's; and so little exceeding
the power of man (therefore no Miracle,) as that a young youth addicted to the
art of limbing did then draw (and that more perfectly) a number of such like,
in the husks of ears of Wheat, in one day.

The Book entitled, A Declaration of egregious Impostures practiced by Romish
Priests, sets forth whole Pageants of counterfeit Exorcismes; one upon Sara
Williams, another upon her sister, Friswood Williams, a third upon Anne Smith,
a fourth upon Richard Main Gentleman, a fifth upon one Marwood, the servant of
that Babington, who was executed for treason. The Priests, who are reckoned as
Agents in these feats, are named to have been Master Dibdaile, Master
Sherwood, Master Cornelius, Master Stamp, Master Edmonds, alias Weston, Master
Dryland, Master Terrill, Master Tallice, Master Ballard, with others; and in
conclusion, all miraculous Exorcists, by the confessions (upon oath) of four
of the parties themselves that were exoreized: albeit it was proved to be
nothing but deceitful cunning, and plain cosenage.

Although these and the like pranks have been often hissed of the Stage, for
stale and gross forgeries, yet notwithstanding have they adventured to publish
that, which they call A faithful Relation of their proceedings, in exorcizing
the Boy of Bilson, See this Relation whole, in the end of this Treatise.
as possessed of the Devil. Which Relation who so reads, shall think that
he has seen a Comedy, wherein the Actors, which present themselves, are
these; A crafty old man, teaching the feats and pranks of counterfeiting a
person Demoniacall and possessed of the Devil; the next, a most docible,
subtle, and expert young Boy, far more dextrous in the Practique part, than
his Master was in the Theorie; after him appear three Romish Priests, the
Authors of seducement, conjuring their only imaginary Devils, which they
brought with them; and lastly, a Chorus of credulous people easily seduced, not
so much by the fubtletie of those Priests, as by their own sottishness; which
will hereafter be better manifested.

The fourth Advertisement; Showing, that Romish Priests baue thought it lawful
for them, to delude men by forged Miracles, and feined Relations or Reports,
under some religious pretenses.
IF in practice of unlawful things they were not persuaded that they may do
them lawfully, there might be some hope that they would at length be brought
to detest their dissimulations: but now that they varnish their godless
forgeries with the color of Godly intentions, how can we ever expect that they
will renounce their custom of lying? And that it is so, in some Romish
Priests, their own Canus will witness, where he inueigheth against some, eanus
loc. Theol. l. 11. c. 6.
Qui pietatis loco duxerunt mendacia pro religione fingere, that is; Who hold
it a point of godliness to lie for the advantage of Religion. As also Erasmus,
complaining of others who endeavor to excite men to their Religion, Eras in
censura ante lib. Confess. Aug.
Fabulisvanis, and fictis miraculis, that is, By vain fables, and feigned
miracles. Yea, and their Agrippa puts this in the Catalogue of vain
sciences, and not without indignation; Qui pie nonnihil admentientes supponunt
reliquias, fabricant miracula, confingunt terribiles fabulas, Agripsa de van.
scient. c. 97.
that is, Who by the mixture of some godly lies devise supposititious relics,
forge miracles, and feign fearful fables. The like complaint made their Viues
against their devout lies. Viues in Aug. de Ciuit. Dei l. 22.


We may justly recount among these the Romish Doctrine of Indulgences, which
(since the Council of Trent) is by Pope Pius Quartus added unto the Roman
Creed; Pius Quarlus in forma Inramene.
albeit, at the time of their first invention, they were judged by men learned
and professed in the Roman Religion, to be no better than piae frauds, that
is, Godly deceits. As Greg. de Valent. reports. Tract de Indu'g. cap. 2.
And what shall we say of their History called the Legend, graced with no
less a Title than Aurea, Golden; which it was lawful to translate into any
language, that it might lie open unto all people, for their instruction in the
fundamental points of Popery, when as yet the written Word of God, and the
saving Gospel of Jesus Christ, was purposely shut and locked up in a strange
tongue? Notwithstanding, it cannot be denied, if we believe their own Doctors,
that there is not a more absurd book than it: Espen. in Tim. Digress. 1.
Or thus, Royard praef. ante, Hom. de festo Sanct.
By the fables and fooleries whereof the Truth it self is overthrown: Or
thus, Wherein there are more Monsters than Miracles. Canus loc. Theol. l. 11.
c. 6.


And the counterfeit Miracles, by Exorcismes, wrought by Priests in France and
England, have (as their own Relations do manifest) a double intention, to
wit, of gayning estimation unto the Priests, and belief unto that which they
call their Catholic Cause. Nor may any object, that such forgeries are
wrought by some obscure men, of small judgment, or less conscience; for these
are Priests who have their mission, and commission from Rome, being sent (as
they say) to suffer persecution for the Roman Cause: for the which some of
them are in the Catalogue of their Martyrs, as namely, Dibday, Ballard,
Harrington; who, with the other Priests, in acting these parts, were of the
same Faith with their fellow Priest Thomson, Declar. of Impost.
who held those their practizes to be good, and the credulity thereunto Godly.

The fifth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of their former Presumption: and
proving, that no pretext of good intention, or purpose whatsoever, can justify
any lying wonder, or yet any false Report thereaf.
WE have seen what masks these deceiuable Miraculists do put on, not only
for covering, but even also countenancing their own deceitfulness, to wit,
their pretense of Devotion, Religion, Godliness: in all which there is a good
intent, which is to them the soul of such actions. Surely, if this kind of
dealing were lawful, then might it be used, especially for the gayning of men's
souls, for the credit of the Messengers of God, and his Christ, or for the
supreme end of all, which is the glory of God.

But none of these so gracious and glorious pretenses can excuse them. First,
not the gayning of men's souls, Wisd. 1.11.
because it is written, The mouth that lies slays the soul. Now Charity,
by Gods Law, begins at a man's self; and can it then consort with Charity,
that, for the saving of another, any man may murder himself? And secondly,
neither will it suffer to intend the credit of Gods Ministers, and the
establishing of their message of Faith, because this must needs be not only
damnable in it self, but also damageable to the Faith both of the Preachers
and Hearers. The first the Apostle proves, by reproving them that should say
of the Apostles, that they taught men to do evil, Romans 3.8.
that good might come thereof: of which Calumniators he concludes, saying,
Whose damnation is just. And if it be damnable to say that of any unjustly,
then is it twice damnable for any to do evil that good may come thereof.
Concerning the second, the same Apostle is as direct. 1. Cor. 15.14.
If we (says he) preaching Christ to be risen from the dead, Christ be proved
not to be risen, then is our preaching in vain, as being false witnesses; and
then is also your faith in vain. Noting, that the preaching, and consequently
writing of falsehood does gain nothing but loss of credit to the Preacher,
and engender infidelity in him that was a believer: which are due wages, the
one of wilful lying, the other of light credulity. Nor yet will it prevail,
that for the honor of Christ, whose attribute is Truth, Ioh. 14.6. I^. 8.44.
they practice to deceive by a Lie, the right cognizance of the Devil, who is
a Lier from the beginning: for what society then can there be betwixt Christ
and Satan?

Lastly, the end of all goods ends, the glory of God, cannot privilege any
man's lie. The friends of Job disputed against him, though ignorantly, thinking
him to be an Hypocrite; and their whole scope was to magnify the justice of
God upon him: but Job, holding nothing to be more dishonorable to God than to
plead for him by a lie, stands at defiance with them that sought to plead
after that manner; answering, with detestation of that Error, Job 13.7.
Will you spwickedly for God, and talk deceitfully for him? will you accept
his person? will you yet contend for God? do you so mock him? shall not his
excellency make you afraid? What refutation can be more emphaticall, or yet
more just? for it is written, Heb. 6.18.
It is impossible for God to lie; and as impossible must we think it for God
to approve or justify any lie, how much less wilful lying? What then are
they to forfeit, who stamp a fained pretense, as it were a false face upon a
Miracle, the act of Gods omnipotency, which should therefore have engraven on
it Truth, the first attribute of the Godhead, the perfect Image of the God of
Caesar (that is) that it be a true Miracle?

The sixth Advertisement; Discovering their doctrine of Mental Reservation,
which we may justly suspect to be the art of concealing their deceits,
whenever they abuse men by their false reports,
THeir Mental Reservation is (as they define it) a mixed Proposition, part in
speech, and part in mind: as when a Priest, being in any danger to be
discovered, is examined whether he be a Romish Priest? who notwithstanding
does answer; I am no Romish Priest, (retayning in his mind this clause) To
tell it unto you; (or) that you may know, or the like: and the latter clause of
the mind (say they) makes the words, I am no Priest, (otherwise false in
themselves) to be true, as it were one Proposition. And thus they think to
avoid the guilt of a lie.

This Sophistry did Master Garnet teach in writing, and practiced it
egregiously in the Tower: and this Master Parsons did vehemently defend, which
other Priests used as a Gygas Ring, to become invisible to men; that no
Examiner could epsy any of their Priest-hoods.

If they think it lawful thus cunningly to equivocate, for the preservation
of their own bodies, and the bodies of others, will they not judge it
necessary, for the gaining of men's souls, trow we? What credit then shall we
give unto such reports, which they shall falsely invent, to draw men unto their
Religion, by saying (as they have most falsely done) such a Protestant Bishop
died in the Romish faith; or such a Boy was exorcized and dispossessed of the
Devil, by the help of a Romish Priest? Or such a vision of our Lady appeared
unto me, telling me that I cannot take the Oath of Allegiance, without mortal
sin? To these men we object, Are you so unconscionable as to lie thus? They
readily will answer us, we lie not, for we did equivocate. As for example, He
died a Catholic, (reserving) for ought that you shall know: and the Boy was
dispossessed by a Priest (reserving) if dispossessed: And the blessed Virgin
appeared unto me, (reserving) but only in my conceit. This being the professed
guile and deceit of these kind of men, we have just cause not to believe them.

The seventh Advertisement; Showing that Mental reservation is no better than
lewd lying.
THis trick of Mental reservation has been sufficiently proved to be not
only a lie, but even the black Art of lying. As for example; If a Jesuit,
being asked whether he be the true Subject of the King of Great Britain,
shall answer, contrary to their meaning, I am, (but reserving in his mind
this negative particle) not; can this make one Proposition? Is it not rather a
Contradiction, and consequently a flat lie? Let Truth it self speak, Mat.
5.37. James 5.12.
Let your yea be yea (says Christ,) and your nay be nay: wherein as rash
swearing is forbidden, so is true speaking commanded. Now I suppose that none
can deny but, I am, is yea, and, I am not, is nay; and consequently that
their, I am, is alewde lie. And that indeed all such Reseruations (as cannot be
qualified with some circumstance of speech, which unto the intelligent hearer
can no way import that he is no Priest) are undoubtedly a lie, has been
euinced from the testimonies of the learned men of their own Schools, in a
Treatise purposely not long since writ upon that subject.

Only I add for this present, that this Art of Mental Reservation
transcendeth all the wit, not only of Heathen men, but even the practice of
Devils in their Equivocations. For the Heathen, in saying, Cic. Offic.
Iurauilingua, mentem iniuratam gere, were so far from execusing this from a
lie, that they called it false; only they thought it (but erroneously) lawful
for them to lie in such case of necessity; when they had to deal with Pirates
and Outlawes. But it never entered into the Moral or Logical apprehensions of
these great Masters of Learning, to conceive otherwise of such Romish secret
Notions, than as of very lies.

The Devils, we know, did Equivocate in their Oracles, but only by a verbal
Equivocation, consisting of an ambiguitie of words of double and doubtful
signification: wherein although there were deceit, yet was it not by a flat
lie, but by an indirect truth. For example, To speak to a man, denying that he
has any money, and to say, yes fellow, thou have a crown (meaning, the crown
of his head;) the verbal Equivocation is in the word, Crown, whereby the man
is deceived by the indirect, but yet true sense of the same word. Nevertheless
these (we confess) were called lying Oracles, not because of their verbal
Equivocations, but because thereby they did seduce men into Errors. But
Mental Reservation is such a Cacus' den as neither Man, or Devil by any
circumstance of speech can possibly spy out.

The eight Advertisement; Showing the means to discern false Miracles, ly
understanding the properties of those that are true.
THere are four obseruable properties of divine Miracles: I. is that the work
of the Miracle be done Transcendently, by exceeding all power of Nature or Art;
II. Presently, without delay; III. Perfectly, without defect; The IV. is in
respect of the form, Sincerely, void of idle Superstition. These are the true
Characters of divine working, by which if the Acts of Romish Priests be duly
examined, they will be found exorbitant in all.

The ninth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of such Romish practizes;
because they are not done by a transcendent power.
ALthough the power of false Miracles, prophesied of by our Savior Christ,
shall sometimes work such great wonders, as are able to deceive, Mar. 13.22.
if it were possible, the very Elect; so that we must confess (with their
own Jesuit) that False Miracles are sometimes so like unto true, that they
can hardly be discerned; Acofla Ies. de temp. nouiss. lib. 2.6.19. Bellar. l.
3. de Pant. c. 15.
which (as another of them acknowledges) The Devil works by secret, but
natural means, yet such as deceive the sight and judgments of men:
Notwithstanding many others are done only by either natural, or else
artificial workings. As namely all that are not done either presently or
perfectly, as shall be showed. But be it that the works done by these Priests,
could seem to be done as perfectly as they would have them, yet can they
savor of nothing but man's craft.

To instance but only in that one thing, wherein (as it seems) they jointly
glory, Bellar. Bozius, and the Admirable Hist.
which is the adoration done by brute beasts, as namely by a Mule, a cade
Lamb, and a Mastiffe Dog, unto the Host in the Sacrament. Why have you
never seen Apes and Babions so disciplined, as to kneel down, and make
courtsie? Did not Banks teach his Horse the like feats; When to acquit
himself of the suspicion of dealing with the Devil, he made his Horse Morocco
to kneel down before a Crucifix in France?

Come we nearer to our Exorcists, and see their doings, and we find (by the
confessions of their own Patients) that if there be any disease, as suppose
the Mother, then they call this a Devil; and if there be none, yet through
violent and intemperate working by their hallowed fumes and sulphurous odours,
which they use in their Exorcismes, they make a Devil, that is, some disease;
and after, by suffering their supposed Demoniack to take a little rest, O then
behold a Miracle! forsooth, they have stilled the Devil. I should but take
pains fot repentance to busy my self, or my Reader with ripping up the
frivolous Wonders, which they have registered, touching the power of expelling
of Devils. If any man's appetite serve him for these iunkets, let him read
their Legend, touching such Maruels, and he may soon satisfy, yea, and
surfeit himself.

The tenth Advertisement; Showing (for the better discerning of false Miracles)
the II. and III. Properties, which is, to be done Presently and Perfectly.
THe second, which is Presently, their own Bishop Abulensis has observed;
Abulen. in Mat. 8. q. 15.
Nullum miraculum successiue esse factum, sed statim, quando Christus illud
fieri voluit: that Christ wrought no Miracle by piece-meale, but out of hand,
so soon as he would have it done, Mark. 8.24, 25.
What can be objected against this, but only the cure of him that was blind,
whom Christ made first to see, and after to see perfectly? To this the same
Bishop answers most fitly, that This may be said to have been done
presently, A'nden. ibid.
because suddenly, and as soon as he would have it done.

The third, to do it Perfectly, is as well acknowledged to be a proper
character of a true Miracle, whereby divine Miracles are distinguished from
those that are Deuillish: Anastas Cochelet. Palaest honor. cap. 31. D^lrio Ies.
disq. Mag. l. 1. c. 3.
and that When they that are cured relapse into their former diseases, it is a
certain sign that it is not the gift of God, whose works are perfect. Now
let us weigh the Priests practizes in these scales, and their works will be
found too light, as not being done Presently: for these Exorcists labor
always upon their parties possessed, as Physicians do upon their Patients,
consuming months in practizing their Art, before they can seem to have
finished their cure. So it fell out with the Exorcists at Saint Baume in
France, at Denham in Bucking hamshire, at Hackney near London, and at Bilson
in Staffordshire.

Then that they are not so Perfectly helped, See hereafter.
does appear by the Exorcists often boasting, how they drive the Devil (as
though it were a running gowtish spirit, flitting from one joint to another)
sometime into the Tongue, sometime into the Toe, and sometime into places, for
modesty not to be named. Wherein they play with the Devil only as idle
fellows do with their Apes, making them skip from one place to another; when
as the power of divine Exorcisme was instantly and absolutely to expel the
Devil, but not to dally and sport with him in his hold of possession.

The eleventh Advertisement; Showing the last note of false Miracles, by want
of the fourth property of true works, to wit, religious Sincerity without
Superstition.
AGainst this they err both in their manner, instruments, and end of working.
The manner is by using some set form of words.

The twelfth Advertisement; Showing their Superstition by their forms.
THat is worth our observation, which has fallen from the pen of their own
Jesuit, namely, De'lrio Ies. disq. Magic. in quest. var. de morb. sanand.
that Holy men of former times [non sunt vsi formis conceptis, etc.] did not
use any set forms of words, but sometime one manner, and sometime another,
such as the Spirit of God did suggest unto them: nor did God grant unto them
the gifts of healing under the condition of using any form of speech. Which is
no more than that which their Espencaeus will have us to observe in the
practice of Christ and of his Disciples. Christ (says he) used not any
peculiar Ceremonies, Espen. in Tim. Digress. l. 1. c. 15.
but simply commanding the Devil, by his invisible power did drive him out.
Neither yet do we read that the Apostles of Christ did use any set form, or
ceremony. If we shall bring the practices of their Priests to be tried by
this test, we shall find that their formal Exorcismes differ but little from
Magical Incantations. For (to omit others) our Exorcists at Bilson did
profess at their first coming to the Boy that they could do nothing, See
hereafter.
for dispossessing of the Devil out of him, before that they had obtained a
Book called Thesaurus Exorcismorum, which (said they) is now at London. Do
you not now see the distance betwixt the Spirit and the power of the Priest to
be as much as from Bilson to London, that is, an hundred miles at least? are
these Exorcists? And although we know that the Devil is a great Scholar, yet
did ever the manner of Exorcising anciently consist in Booke-formes? is not
this gross Superstition? So likewise are their other Circumstantiall Acts, of
almost, stifling their Patients with sulphurous Fumes; buffetting them with
their Priestly stoles; besprinkling them with pale fuls of Holy Water, and
Herbs; yea, and (whereof notwithstanding some have not been ashamed to boast
off, as worthy of the dignity of a Miraculist) Daemonem podicis crepitu, aut
recentis stercoris foetore depellere: See in their Cosmus Philiarch. de offic.
sacerd. lib. 3. cap. 11.
that is, The repelling of the Devil with the blast of such a wind, and the
stench of such an herb which I shame to english. Which if it were possible for
a man to believe, yet might they consider the vanity of these fooleries; and
understand that the Devil, that nimble Antique, does but dally with them,
passing and repassing as Boys do in their sports, when and how he lists:
as was discerned in a young Monk obsessed of the Devil, Gerard. Nazareth. apud
Zuinger. theat. hum. vit. lib. 4. in Tit. de Daemoniacis.
which Devil endured the application of Holy Water and other hallowed things,
but yet refused to depart from the party obsessed until such time as this
Nouice was soundly lasht with a Whip; whereupon the Devil gave place, and then
he was delivered.

The thirteenth Advertisement; Showing their second point of Superstition, in
respect of the ordinary instruments of working, which in these latter times
are Images.
THe Patriarch Tharasius in that latter Synod of Nice (which was the great
Patroness of the worship of Images, but after contradicted by the Council of
Frankford) did confess in the presence of all the Bishops there assembled,
that No Miracles were then wrought by Images among Christians, Surius Tom. 3.
Conc. Act. 4.
for their belief. But he that shall now travel through either Romish
Countries,' or Books shall be stored with any Miracles, of whatsoever sort,
(put them all together) more than those which are done by the Images of the
blessed Virgin, as at Lorretto, at Hales, at Sichem; where with the Books of
Tursellinus, Lipsius, and Costerus are so fraught.

But because their Patriark durst say in so great and general a presence of
Bishops and Divines, that no Miracles were wrought by Images, except among
Infidels, what can any collect from thence but either that Images were not so
miraculous in those former times, when notwithstanding, ifeuer, (that being the
time wherein they most of all contended for the worship of Images) they were to
be exspected: or else that the people of these times, which are so addicted to
such Miracles, are more Infidels. How soever it must needs savor of much
Superstition that the vulgar people (as appears by the complaint of their
own Authors) Adoring Images most idolatrously, should be nourished in their
Idolatrous fancies by the pretended Miracles wrought by Images. In all which
maruels nothing seems more marvelous then the fascination of men, in
beeleeuing them.

This place required that I should speak of their diverse Ceremonies in their
Exorcismes, to show their numerall Crossings, Relics of false Saints, their
Holy Water, which they consecrate both to drive away Devils, and to purge
venial sins; besides other forms of their practice, which are altogether
superstitious, if not also sacrilegious. For (to instance in the last) what
greater sacrilege can there be, than to assume power to ordain any element,
for conferring of a spiritual grace of remission of sins? What is this else
than to institute a Sacrament, an act properly and soly belonging to the
authority of him, who is the Creator of souls? But these things being
obuious unto all men, I took hereby occasion to insert the former observation,
concerning Images, albeit without Exorcismes.

The fourteenth Advertisement; Showing the second point of their Superstition,
by their impious and abominable Consultation with Devils in their Exorcismes,
for resolution in points of Religion.
COncerning this I will first manifest that they usually practice it; and
secondly, propound their Reasons for so doing, and confute them.

That they use to consult with Devils about doctrinall points in Religion.
LEt any man read the Books, or hear the Relations of the Romish Exorcists
of these latter times, and he shall find that there is nothing more ordinary
with them than their familiar conference with the Devil, touching questions of
Religion. Cotton the Jesuit his Interrogatories put to the Deuell to resolve
off, concerning Purgatory for his Catholics, and Hell for us Protestants, with
many other curious questions, are more than notorious. The Priests at Denham in
their Adiurations were frequent, by which they sought to satisfy their
Adherents about the truth of the Immaculate Conoeption of the Virgin Mary, See
the Declaration of Impostures, etc.
of Pope Gregory XIII. his being a Saint in Heaven, of the Sacrament of the
Altar, and Christ's bodily presence therein. The Jesuit Tursellin contendeth by
all the strength of his wit to give satisfaction to his Reader, Tursellin.
Hist. Dom. Laeuret.
concerning the truth of the miraculous Transmigration of the blessed Virgins
house from Jury to Loretto in Italy. Idem Epist. dedic ante Hist. Iustus
Baronius Epist.
Which one house of the Virgin excels (as they say) all others that ever
were dedicated unto her. Whereunto there is daily concourse from all Nations of
the World, especially from France, Spain, the Indies, and most remote parts by
Kings, Princes, and other people. yet was not the truth of this History so
absolute in all points until an horrible Devil, Tursellin. quo supia.
called Arcto^ was consulted with, who affirmed that That house was the very
same place, wherein the Angel Gaebriel saluted the blessed Virgin.

Our Romish Priests at Bilson are desirous that their Disciples should know
(which is their maine question) whether the Protestants or Romanists are more
safe in their Religion: to this purpose they advise with their faithful Doctor
the Devil, and set the resolution down in that which they call A faithful
Relation, (and that to use their marginall phrase) as a Markable thing. See
hereafter Page 51.
I (says the Priest) commanded the Devil to show how he would one dying out
of the Roman Church: which he did by violent pulling and biting of the
clothes. Then I would know of him how he did use Luther, Calvin and John Fox,
which he did after the same manner, but in afiercer sort. Then I asked what
power he had over a Roman Catholic dying out of mortal sin? He then
thrust down his head trembling, and did no more. In all which they
sufficiently manifest that their profession is upon such like doubts, to take
their resolution from the Devil.

But of all stories of this kind that (I think) was ever committed to Print,
that which was published in France is most famous: and so the Romanists will
have us to know, intituling it an Admirable History of their Exorcismes, and
dedicating it to the then Queen Regent. Wherein they bring in, for proof of
many Articles of their Roman faith, a Devil named Verrine, constrained (as
they say) by the power of God to say and swear by the living God, that Christ
is in the Chalice after Consecration; bload, and bones, Admir. Hist. page 52.
and 98.
as when he was crueified upon the Gross. And so he proceeds in that
Book, preaching both (...) orall and Theological points of Religion unto ^^e
end; and all to this end that the hearts of people might receive satisfaction
by the Devils Sermons. Where also F. Michaelis the Exorcist himself, in the
Epistle to the Reader before the Book, further says, and professes as
follows. We are in good hope that this History will be no less useful and
profitable in France, than that was of Laon, printed Anno 1566. which greatly
confirmed the Catholic faith, and converted many Heretics, who heard the
Devils say many times in an high voice, that these Her etikes were his friends
and confederates. So that we cannot but see that it is their profession to
receive assurance of their faith from the Devil; which may be yet more
evident unto us, in as much as that they do reason for the justifying of
themselves in so doing, which is the next point.

The fifteenth Advertisement; Showing the falsitie of their Reasons, for their
consulting with Devils, by their Exorcismes, in questions of Religion.
THe Adinration, which they defend to be so powerful, is of two sorts, the
one is of an absolute command, the secondis of stipulation or obligation, by a
formal Oath.

The Adiuration by absolute command they contend to prove first by the example
of Christ against the Devil; the next by the example of the Devil against
Christ. The second they labor to make good by virtue of the band of a formal
Oath. My part and office will be to confute them in all, as well particularly
as generally.

The particular Confutation of their first Reason, whereby they use to prove
the lawfulness of consulting with Devils, by the manner of Adiuration; which
they collect from the example of Christ against the Devil.
THe first foundation, which they lay for this, is that the Devil is
constrained by the power of God to speak truth: and therefore they may
interrogate the Devil, and receive from him an assurance of the same truths.
This power of God the Admirable French History does obsorue in their Devil
Verrine, whom first they acknowledge to have been sent immediately from God,
by whose power he was compelled to instruct men in the truth, to confound
Beelzebub, and other Devils: and, as if there had been difference of religion
among the Devils in hell, and that this Verrine (yet by constrant) had been a
Catholic Devil, he confirms to the world many points of Romish faith;
insomuch that the Priests and Exorcists do put an Eoce upon him, saying,
Behold a miracle unheard off, that a Devil should convert souls! Admir.
Epist. page 7.
We may rather say, Behold souls Christian never read of before, that would be
couerted by the Devil!

But to the matter. Their first ground they take from the confession of the
Devil, when he acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God. Matthew. 8.29. Mark.
5.7. Luke 8.28.


We easily grant, that Christ could as easily compel the devil to speak
truth, as he could ask him the question concerning any truth; and that
therefore the devil could no more conceal that his Confession, concerning the
Godhead of Christ, acknowledging him to be the Son of God, than he could
deny his name to be Legion. But this being granted, that Christ could so
constrain the Devils, yet what can the Priests collect from hence? Their
first collection is, that Christ did enforce the devil to make this
Confession. But Saint Chrysostom will deny this, See this after.
saying, That Christ was so far from desiring this Confession of the devil,
that he did abhor the Confessor, and presently inioyne him silence. Their
second collection from hence is this; Admir. Hist
If (say they) Christ did extort truth from the devil, Why not we? Which if
it were spoken of them universally, as if they had absolutely the same power in
Miracles, that Christ had, it were an inference very blasphemous; because as
all divinity does teach, Christ had in him, potestatem excellentiae (that is)
divine power to the full, as the Sun has light; and all others have it but
deriuatiuely from Christ, as is the light of the Moon. But to understand these
men in their more moderate sense, that whatsoever concerns the authority of
commanding or countermanding devils, they may presume to have received it from
Christ, yet is it most false; because Christ went out of his own accord into
the Wilderness to combat with the devil: will you therefore say, Why not we
likewise? Does not the Lords Prayer teach you not to follow, but to fly
temptations? To come nearer to you. Christ, at the time of his questioning the
devil, concerning his name, (whereof you have spoken) had in himself a power
of dispensation and permission to suffer the Devils (they requesting as much)
to go into the Hogs of the Gadarens, and to carry them headlong into the
Sea; an Act of his own omnipotent Justice. Dire you assume this power unto
your selves, of permitting the devil, if he should ask you, to enter into
other men's Oxen, or Hogs, upon the firm presumption of Why not we?

Furthermore, to show you why not you, Christ had the wisdom of discerning of
spirits, to know what spirit he had to deal with, and that infallibly: but the
devil, how easily may he deceive you or others, when transforming himself into
an Angel of light, 2. Cor. 11.14.
and pretending himself an Author of truth, he shall become but a Messenger
of lies; whereof the Jesuit Del'rio, and other Authors can satisfy you by
manifold Examples. Disq. Mag.
Lastly (to pose you a little) tell us, when did ever Christ interogate the
devil concerning any doctrine of truth, either Theological or Moral points
of Faith, or precepts of life? The only question he asked him was, What is thy
name? and the devil answered, Legion, Mark. 5.7. Luke 8.30.
for we are many; even troops of devils. Which Christ did to manifest the
power of his God hend against the whole hoaft of infernal powers. You
therefore that thus arrogate his power should rather imitate his wisdom, who
never conferred with the devil touching any doctrinall or dogmaticall truth.

The sixteenth Advertisement. Showing the falsebood of their second Reason, for
the proofa of their power of Adiuration, to constrain the Devil to speak
truth, taken from the Devils adiuring of Christ; with the particular
confuration thereof.
THey set this down for an undoubted Maxim, that the Devils must necessarily
speak truth, Whenever the Exorcist shall exact an oath of the Devils, Admir.
Hist. page 131.
compalling them to swear, according to the meaning of God and his Church.
They do not deny (neither do we charge them with it) that the Devil, when
be speaks of himself, is a liar, and the father of lies: but only say,
that being adjured to tell the truth, he is then compelled to speak truth.
Epistle to the Reader, before the History.
Their proof is thus grounded. The Devil said unto Christ, Mark. s. [I charge
thee by God, that thou do not torment us, but suffer us to enter into the herd
of Swine:] Wherein (...) may observe (says he) a remarkable point, that Christ
being adjured by the name of God, although it was done by the Devil, yet
condescended to the Devils tequest. And thus they would persuade us, that by
virtue of this band of an Oath the Devil is tied infallibly to confess the
truth. And hence it is that these Priests in France, and they at Denhom, and at
Bilson, together with others, in then questioning with Devils, do rely
altogether upon the coaction of them by an Oath.

But, concerning the example which they have urged, of the Devils adiuring of
Christ in the name of God, it cannot but prove to be either an illogicall
argument, or else blasphemous. For we demand, whether the Devil, adiuring
Christ in the name of God, did constrain Christ to speak truth, or no? If
they say that he did not, then is it no small absurdity, to proone a
compulsarie charge of a Priest, against the Devil, by Christ's voluntary
answer to the Devil. But if they say, that the alliuration, used by the
Devil, had power to constrain Christ, by virtue of the name of God, to make
an answer, then is it altogether blasphemous, for what is it else, than to make
the Devil the Exorcizer of Christ? It had been well that these men, that thus
urge and press their power of Exorcization, had remembered that which is
recorded in the Acts 19. of the runnagate Exorcifts, the sons of Sceua a Jew,
when they took upon them to adjure evil spirits, saying, [(...),] We adjure
you by Jesus: but what? Acts 19.13. etc.
It follows, The Devils in the possessed party did violently fall upon those
Exorcists, and made them run away; then might they have learned rather to
reason thus, That if Exorcisme was not of power in it self by the name of
Jesus (who is God blessed for ever) to drive away the Devils; how then could
we say that it had power from the mouth of devils, in the name of God, to move
Christ Jesus himself? And infer thereupon, saying to themselves, Why do we
not now blush that we have argued so fondly?

The seventeenth Advertisement. Showing their second ground, taken from an
Oath, by virtue of the band of an Oath of Stipulation (the Priests imposing a
formal Oath upon the Devil,) and the falsehood thereof.
FOr in their Admirable French History the Exorcists say, Admir. Hist. page
186.
that the Devils, when they are constrained by the Name of God, and by the
authority of the Church to take an Oath, the Oath binds them. And as if, by
virtue of the same Oath, the Exorcists themselves were bound to believe the
Devil, they put the Devil to an Oath, Page 206.
saying, It was thought fit, that Vetrine the Devil should solemnly swear
upon the blessed Sacrament, for confirmation of that which he had above spoken.
But did ever the Devil take such an Oath? Page 95, (...) 239.
Yes (say they) he swear by the living God, that he was constrained to say the
truth; And, he moke a solemn Oath, with all the properties of an Oath.

The eighteenth Advertisement. Showing the falsehood of this piece of nice
learning, in imposing a formal Oath of Stipulation upon the Devil, and the
impiety thereof, the Devil being no way capable of a formal Oath.
THe word [(...), I exorcize,] in the use of Divines, Exorcizare dicuntur, hoc
est, per diuina Diabolum ad urande expellere. Aug. de beat. vita.
in Christian Schools, is not taken for the Imposition of a formal Oath upon
Devils, but an allegation of the powerful Name and authority of God, to
command the Devils; as we see not only in the example of the Apostles, but
even by the Acts of those deuellish Exorcists, Act. 19. saying unto the
spirits, Acts 19.13.
We adjure you by Jesus. Now the form of an Oath is of two kinds; and
accordingly the Band and Obligation is twofold. The first kind is a simple
Invocation of God, by calling him to witness; and thus the Devil swear,
saying, By the living God, etc. The second is a mixed Oath, by an oppignoration
and pledge; pawning some precious thing unto God: thus the Devil, they say,
did swear By the Sacrament, and by the Gospel. And we make no question but
the Devil was able to swear by God, and by the Gospel of Christ, thereby
seeming to seek Gods glory. For what cannot he swear to do, who can change
himself into the seeming shape of an Angel of light? But our only problem
is, whether the Devil be capable of the band of an Oath, or no? We think we
may swear he is not; neither of the band of an Oath, made only by Invocation
and Testification, in calling God to witness; nor yet of oppignoration and
pledge, which is a second and more solemn tie in an Oath.

For the band of an Oath of Invocation consists, between the Justice of God,
and man's conscience, Romans 2.15.
being bound by that law written in his heart, his conscience bearing witness,
and thoughts accusing or excusing him before God. This is the band of
conscience toward God, whereby the party swearing acknowledges himself
obliged to speak a truth, lest that he become gulitie of transgression
against God. Therefore to impose an Oath upon the Devil, is to suppose him
being a damnable Reprobate, whose property is to be most, maliciously
obstinate against God and godliness, to be capable of such a Conscience, which
is required in an Oath, and consequently a conscionable honest Devil.

The mixed Oath is not only the invocation of the supreme Judge and auenger,
in a general manner, but the addition also (for more specialtie and
solemnity) of some thing else, by way of pledge, which is called an Oath by
oppignoration; as if a Christian should in solemn protestation, swear by God
his Savior, and by the Sacrament, or by the holy Gospel: intending thereby
the engagement of his own portion of comfort and blessing by and in them; and
forfeiture thereof if he violate his Oath (as in all Oaths is employed a
voluntary Execration upon default) by loss of those precious benefits, which
he might otherwise enjoy in those pawnes and pledges. Now as for the Devils,
what interest can they have in the promises of Christ belonging to salvation
revealed in the Gospel of Christ, and sealed by his Sacraments, who are
forlorn of all interest in Christ himself, crying unto him and saying, Mark.
5.
What have we to do with thee, Jesus, thou Son of the highest God? etc. what
forfeiture can they fear of loosing their pledge, which they have irreuocably
lost, when they first apostated from God, and thereupon did eternally loose all
hope of happiness; being reserved (as the Apostle speaks) to the chains of
darkness, Jude v. 6.
for evermore?

Moreover, an Oath being that high part of religious service belonging unto
God, which he appropriateth to himself, saying, Thou shall serve the Lord and
swear by his name (where, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
in the LXX. it is (...); and (...), by the confession of the Romanists, is
proper only unto God himself, as a supreme part of his worship) let them, who
presume of such familiar conference with the Devil, consult with him upon this
question, whither he can be capable of the office of (...). Howbeit we think
it no less than a Diabolical profanation of the name of God to impose upon
those damned spirits the band of an Oath, whereof they cannot be any way
capable, to perform it truly and internally, by reason of the obstinacy of
their wills, and the desperateness of their state and condition. Thus far of
our particular confuration of their particular Reasons.

The nineteenth Advertisement; Showing the Confutation of their profession of
consulting with Devils in general, by manifesting the infatuation thereof.
LEt Romish Priests imagine what they please, of the power which they have over
the Devil, to compel him to speak truth; yet this we hold for a truth
infallible, that it was never permitted to any to advise with the Devil, about
questions of Religion, to receive any satisfaction from him, but directly the
contrary.

The twentieth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of their doctrine, for
consulting with Devils; first from the examples of Christ, and of his Disciples.
THe Priests, for the establishing of their authority, in Interrogating the
Devil in questions of Religion, and power of constraining him to answer the
truth, have pitched upon the confession of the devil, Mark. 5.7.
when he called Christ, The Son of God: And then, adiuring Christ not to
torment him: And after upon Christ's asking the devil his name. From whence
their collections are in effect these. First, Christ asked the devil a
question: Ergo, we may interrogate the devil. Secondly, The devil said, thou
art the Son of God: Ergo, he was constrained to speak a truth. Thirdly, The
devil adjured Christ, saying, I adjure thee; and Christ condescended: Ergo
their Adiuration of the devil does enforce him to speak truth: and
consequently they have license to demand questions of the devil, concerning
Religion; authority to adjure the devil, to answer; and power to enforce him
to answer nothing but truth. Whence it must follow that men may receive their
resolution, in Theological points of Religion, from the devils.

I marvel what Devil gave them these grounds of thus reasoning, sure I am
they have no foundation in the Gospel of Christ. For (to answer orderly)
first, the only question that ever Christ asked the devil was this, What is
thy name? never any, concerning any matter of doctrine; whereof we have showed
the reason before. Secondly, the devils Confession, that Christ is the Son of
God, was neither extorted, nor embraced by Christ, which we are now to prove.
Thirdly, the Adiuration, which the devil used to Christ, our Savior
condescended not unto, but repelled; for the devil said, I adjure thee that
thou torment me not. But why said he thus? it follows in the next words,
Because Christ had said to the devil, come out of the man: therefore the
devil adiuring Christ, that he himself might keep his possession, and
Christ notwithstanding expelling him out of his hold, it is evident that Christ
condescended not to the devils adiuration. Thus by way of Answer.

We are now to retort their Arguments, and to drive their weapon to their own
pates, by proving, from the example of Christ, that we are not to admit of any
colloquie with the Devil in Exorcismes, about matter of Christian Learning.
The first place is Mark. 1. Mark. 1.24, 25.
Where one devil confessed Christ to be the holy one of God; a blessed
confession, but, because a damned Confessor, instantly Jesus (as the Text
shows) did rebuke the devil, saying, hold thy peace, Mark. 3.11, 12.
and come out of the man. In Mark. 3. diverse impure spirits when they saw
Jesus, cried out and said, Thou art that Son of God. but what? it immediately
follows, And Jesus straightly charged them not to make him known. What may we
justly infer from all this? Espen. in Tim. digress. l. 1. c. 14.
I had rather your own Espencaeus should tell you. Christ would not suffer the
devil to speak, no not the truth; to teach us that we give not any credit at
all unto the devil, although it may be he speak a truth. Orig. hom. in Exodus
And to this end he produces the judgment of Origin, concluding from the same
Scriptures that We are not to interrogate devils, nor to entertain any
colloquie with evil Spirits, but to dispell them by Prayer and Fasting. We
find the same Father thus reproving and condemning the Heathen Inchanters.
Orig. in Number. c. 23. hom. 16.
God (says he) will not have us to be the disciples of devils; it is better
to be ignorant than to be taught by them: for this cause our Lord Jesus did
not vouchsafe to receive any testimony from the devil, but says to him, hold
thy peace thou foul spirit, and depart out of the man. We need no other
Comment upon these Texts than that which has been received from the golden
mouth of Chrysostom. Chrysostom. tom. 2. hom. 5. in Mar.
Christ says to the devil, Mar. 3. Hold thy peace, and come out of the man:
As if Christ had said (says he) I came not to seek my approbation from thy
testimony, but to cast thee out of my creature? no commendable commendation
can proceed out of the mouth of a Sinner: I need not the testimony of him,
whose torment I desire: let thy silence be my praise, hold thou therefore thy
peace, get thee out of the man; what do, thou in my House and Inn? etc. So
Saint Chrysostom, even so plainly, that for me to make any collections from
him were but to comment upon a Comment.

Yet may we not omit that when Christ (if ever) had conference with the Devil
in the Wilderness, Mat. 4.
the Devil was still the Opponent, and Christ never objected or interrogated,
but answered: to the first it is said, Christ answered, it is written, Man,
Ver. 4.
etc. to the second likewise Christ answered, It is written, Verse 7.
Thou shall not etc. and to the third Christ answered, Get thee hence Satan.
Wherefore, as Christ, Verse 10.
so every Christian may make answers to the devil, never seek answers from
him; and allow no use of Conference with him but that which may put him to
silence.

The Apostles of Christ were the Disciples of their Master, as well in practice
as knowledge, which we may observe in the example of Saint Paul. and Silas,
Acts 16. For Saint Paul (to use the words of Origin) imitating Christ, Orig.
hom. 16. ni Acts 16.
turning himself to the Spirit of divination, said, [I command thee in the
Name of Jesus Christ go out of her.] Wherein though some may peradventure ask
why Saint Paul should in such vehemency rebuke that Spirit; What, did the
devil speak any Blasphemy? [ The Woman (says the Text) having a Spirit of
divination followed Paul and them that were with him, and cried saying, These
men are the Servants of God most High, who show the way of salvation. Whence it
is manifest that Paul was not offended at any words of blasphemy, but that he
held it an indignity unto his preaching to receive any testimony from such a
spirit. So Origin. And indeed Saint Paul and Silas did not spend any time of
conference with that spirit, but instantly discharge their office of
Exorcizing, commanding the spirit to come out of the Maid, and he went out at
the same hour. An Act altogether repugnant to the practice of Romish Priests,
who professedly ask questions, compelling (as they say) the devils to testify
that which may best serve for the dignity of their Priesthood: whereas the
Apostle did not daigne, but rather abhor, and was grieved at this so specious
a testimony, that they were the Servants of the Highest. On the contrary,
these Priests do greatly glory in such Testimonies; as among others, the
French Priests rejoice to hear the devil Verrine auerre, Admir. hist. p. 133
saying, of them; You are Priests, it is no offense if a man neglect and turn
from an Angel of Heaven, and do honor and reverence unto you. Compare those
different examples, the one holding it an indignity, the other a dignity to
receine testimony of their offices from the devil; and the distance will
appear to be little less than between a Professor Apostolical and
Apostaticall.

The one and twentieth Advertisement; Showing the falsehood of the same
doctrine, concerning consultation with Devils in questions of Religion, by
testimonies of Fathers, and necessary Reasons.
WE have already heard the testimonies of Origin, and Chrysostom, concerning
this point; Thyraeus Ies. de locis infestie, part. 1. Maldon. Ies. Com. in
Matthew. Chrysostom hom. vlt. de Lazare. Tere. de anima. Athan. ad Antioch q. 11.
and 13 Theophy. in Mat. 8. Isidor. Etym. lib. 8. c. 9.
absence from our Adversary Papers will not suffer me to inquire exactly into
other Fathers: nor shall I greatly need it, especially seeing the Jesuits
themselves do acknowledge, that ancient Fathers, such as were Chrysostom,
Tertullian, Athanasius, Theophilact, Isidore, do all deny that the souls of
men departed do at any time appear (...), that is, in their own persons; but
that they who take their semblance upon them are very devils, who seek to
seduce us. And therefore these Fathers advise us not to have any business with
them, or to give any credit to their testimonies, but to content our selves
with direction from holy Scriptures. Which they should not have done, if that
those spirits might, by the power of Adiuration, be compelled to show that they
were devils; and that, being known, they would confess nothing but truth.

All which notwithstanding, the Romish Priests ordinarily seek to be informed
of them concerning Purgatory, Indulgences, worshipping of Images, and other
Mysteries of Romish Superstition; which Bellarmine and other Jesuits do
endeavor to confirm by Apparitions of the dead: when as (according to the
judgment of ancient Fathers) the soul that it conversant in holy Writ will
re-resolue, (...).
that though the Devil (as in the petition of Not to omit (which is elsewhere
forgotten) that the Boy of Bilson did feign himself to abhor, and to be
affected with this Petition as with the first verse of Saint John's Gospel.
Vide page 58. 59.
Deliver us from evil) may come into his Paternoster, yet that he shall never
enter into his Creed.

Not to stand any longer upon Antiquity, I would but desire any one Example of
any one Father, in the space of five hundred years after Christ; or History,
in the same compass of time, recording and approving any Conference with the
Devil, by way of Exorcisme, or otherwise for satisfaction of any Christian in
points of Religion. Let us at last reason the matter with these men.

The two and twentieth Advertisement, Showing the Reasons which may be produced
against this persuasion of the Devil; arising as well from the Cause it self,
as from the Events.
Reasons of the first kind.
Two reasons may suffice, if they be pregnant. The first thus. If such be the
power of Exercists, that they constrain the Devil in the Name of God; and by
the warrant of the Church, to confess any truth that shall be demanded of
them, by Adiuration; then should there need, for our satisfaction in matter of
Religion, no other Questionists then Exorcists; no other Catechists than
Devils; no other Tradition, Council, Scripture, or Gospel than the confession
of Devils; yea and then the Decrees of Popes, which are held as Oracles in that
Church, must now (for many of them have erred) give place to the testimonies of
Deutls.

I may not except their Council of Trent, Conc. Trid. Sessio 5. cap. 1.
which would not determine the question concerning the natural Conception of
the blessed Virgin, whether she were originally immaculate; for either great
was the ignorance of those Fathers, that could not; or else obstinacy, that
they would not set it down for an Article in their Roman Creed (as they have
done many other Articles, as far repugnant from truth) seeing that Verrine the
Devil, Admir. Hist. page 205.
by power of Exorcisme, was brought to swear upon the blessed Sacrament, and
did answer upon that Oath, that she was originally immaculate. Albeit Bernard,
Thomas Aquinas, Bonauenture, and many hundreds in the Romish Church would
herein have given the devil the lie. It had been good, before they had given
credit to this devil, to have sought some certain resolution, how to
reconcile the different revelations made to Saint Bridget and Saint Katherine,
concerning the same question: Katherine being told by revelation, that the
Conception of the blessed Virgin was immaculate; but Saint Bridget informed of
the contrary. And because such contradictions will admit no reconciliation, it
would become them to learn how to discern, whether these Revelations came
from the deaill, as from the lying Angel; whereof we think the devil Verrine
can be no competent Judge.

Secondly, you that question the devil, suffer your selves to be questioned
in a few words. If the devils be made (as you say) Messengers of divine truths,
by the power of your Exorcismes, why do you endeavor to expel them? Are they
but lying Oracles? Why do you then confer with them, and not presently
expel them?

Many other reasons might be added, to convince these Priests, by the deuil's
contradictions in their own stories, even then, when he was adjured to speak
truth: But to labor to prove, that the devil cannot lie when he list, and
that he will also, whenever he can, for a mischief, were to deny him to
be a devil, whose property is vel falsum, vel ad falsum dicere: either to
speak that which is false, or else to a false end. What a dangerous thing it
was in our first Mother, to entertain and maintain parle with the devil,
concerning our religious duty to God, all mankind feel by that woeful
experience of original corruption, which they must carry with them to their
graves, That which no Adversary shall ever be able to refute, is, that the
power of Exorcisme was given unto the Church of God for expulsion of the
devil, never for consultation with him, in matters of Conscience.

Thus have I endeavored to dispell this doctrine of conferring with devils, in
such cases, with the same zeal as I would wish to dispell the devil himself;
and hold it a good resolution not to believe those Priests, for direction, in
matters of Religion, who make the devil their ghostly Father. We choose
rather to conclude with the sentences of the holy Fathers of the Church; one
directing us how to avoid such fascinations, saying, Cyprian.
Non statim, etc. We ought not presently to admit, of such Acts as are done in
the Name of Christ, except they be done in the Truth of Christ: The other
detesting them, saying, August.
Remoueantur illa vel figmenta mendacium hominum, vel portenta fallacium
spirituum. Away with those works which are either the figments and devices of
lying men, or else the deceitful acts of prodigious spirits.

The 23. and last Advertisement Is to demonstrate the Romish falsehood, in
Exorcizing, by the Events: which is particularly exemplified in a discovery of
their Impostures, about the Boy of Bilson; not inferior unto any of the rest
of their prankes in this kind.
But before we come to lay down the naked truth of the matter, touching that
Boy, and how things stood de facto; let us first suffer the Romish Priests to
boast themselves a while of their miraculous power, in Exorcizing this Child;
whom for a while you must imagine be really bewitched and possessed of the
Devil: that afterward, by the the event, may be verified of these
Miraculists, that Scripture, which says, Phil. 3.19.
Whose glory is in their shame.

Hear we then the Priests speak.
(...) help the child was, if they had sought medicine still in Israel, and
not at Endor, and of Beelzebub.

First then to show how the Child grew thus to be tormented, as I have
understood it of his Parents, and have heard the Child confirm it himself.
The Boy returning homeward, from school, to Bilson in Staffordshire where he
dwelt, an old woman, unknown, met him, and taxed him, in that he did not give
her good time of the day, saying that he was a foul thing, and that it had
been better for him if he had saluted her. At which words the Boy felt a thing
to prick him to the very heart. How the Boy came first to be possessed.
In fine, the Boy came home, languished some days, and at length grew into
extreme fits, that two or three, (though he was a child of 12. years of age)
could hardly hold him. The Parents of the Child, seeing the extremity of the
fits, and the misery and imminent danger of death every hour the Child did lie
in, moved with tender compassion, sought help of Catholics, and with cap and
knee, by the means of some friends, did solicit a zealous Gentleman; who
overcome with their earnest suit, did use some prayers and lawful exorcismes
allowed by the Catholic Church, with whose prayers the Child was eased
something, and the force of the spiritual Enemy abated. The Gentleman
insisting to know how many was in him; to his thinking he said, Three. He
(good Gentleman) called away partly by the danger of the place, as also by his
urgent business, Two others meddied with him ere Jcame.
they sought and sent for a zealous Gentleman, whose zeal and virtues are
sufficiently known, yea and acknowledged by Gods enemies themselves. He moved
with compassion came thither, used his best prayers and means that at that
time he thought convenient; very much weakened the devils force, and quelled
the extreme fierceness of the fits. Yet he, within a day or so, withdrew
himself for the same cause; yet though absent in person, was most mindful of
his misery. In so much as he did negotiate with me, in that I had been present
many times in the like occasions, that I would see him, and make trial whether
he were possessed, or obsessed. I was very unwilling, yet overcome by his
entreaty, and the former motives, I promised him to do my best, and to see him
within the space of one month: yet so I disposed of my businesses, that I came
thither in the space of a week, about Thursday before Corpus Christi day,
where I did find the Gentleman that requested me to come: and finding that
they had used Sorceries of Witches, which made the Child offer violence to
himself, we would not meddle with him, till they had burned those Sorceries
applied to him, which they forthwith did fulfill. Whereupon we using the
reading of the Litanies, and the holy Gospels, together with the Exorcisme of
Saint Ambrose, when I came unto those words that showed the power that Saint
Peter had over Simon Magus, The devil could not seduce Saint Peter and Saint
Paul.
and Saint Paul on the Magician Bariesus, the Child would be so tormented,
that three or four could hardly hold him; which words took effect in manner
as often as they were used. The other Gentleman called away, I was left alone,
till it pleased God the Gentleman that had first meddled with him, by great
chance came thither. He and I both did our best, till Saturday about two of the
clock, at which time, urgent occasions, though diverse ways, called us away:
yet we left holy water, The virtue of holy water, and of holy oil.
also water properly against Witchcraft, and holy oil: the first having that
power, that it would make him speak, though dumb, and his tongue turned into
his throat; and the second that force, that being applied in a little quantity
unto his legs and arms most grievously contracted, that a strong man could
hardly unfold them, only with the force of the holy oil they would be
stretched forth as they were wont. We entreated them in our absence, to use
the holy waters and oil in his extremities, and that we absent, would assist
him the best that we could in our prayers; which they continued: on Saturday,
Sunday, and Monday, with extreme fits and heauings he brought up pinnes,
Strange things voyded.
wool, knotted thread, thrums, rosemary, walnut leaves, feathers, etc. the
which he still drinking of the blessed water, brought up: and when he could
not speak, he would make signs for that water, with the letting down of
which, presently he recovered his speech. Well, on Thursday, being Corpus
Christi day, about three or four of the clock I came again, found the Child
in great extremities, continually heauing up, and in this time he had brought
up 11. pinnes, and a knitting needle folded up in diverse folds. On Friday next,
he brought up the last pin. I told them that I was glad that he brought up
most of those things in my absence, that well they might see that really they
came from him, and that it was no collusion of us. On Saturday night finding
the Boy to my thinking somewhat obstinate; I, before the Parents, wished him
not to be deluded by the Enemy, but that if he spoke any thing within him, he
would impart it to us, that we might counsel him for the best. A great while
the Child would not hear us, yet at length he said, he would not tell us
before all the company. I asking then to whom he would tell it, he answered, to
your self, so the others would leave you: he gave me leave after to signify
unto his Parents, sisters, and brothers thus much: First, The Boy tells what the
devil and Witch say in him.
that the spirit bade him not to hearken to me in any case. Secondly, that the
Witch said, that she would make an end of him, and that she would bring in
othergates things into him, if it were not for me, whom she called a Roguish P.
Thirdly, she said I destroyed all her good things. Fourthly, she said, that
though I should help him, yet she would have a saying to his brothers and
sisters. Fifthly, he desired me to tarry with him until Monday, for when I
should leave him, he said he should be torn in pieces: whereupon I, according
to the prescript of the Thesaurus Exorcismorum, did bless fire, and did burn
those maleficialia, Sorceries, those filthy things that came from him; at smoke
of which, and the fire thereof being temperate only, and in a Chafing Dish,
and the smoke only of Frankincense, he would vehemently cry out that he was
killed, burned, and choked; though my own self, and diverse others were nearer
to all then himself. At length he seemed greatly to rejoice, and with great
eagerness drank up the smoke, saying that he saw his Enemies tormented. I
wished him then to pray for the Witch, and for her conversion from that wicked
life; The markable devotion of the Child.
which he did: then the Child did declare that now he was perfectly himself,
and desired that his books, pens, ink, clothes, yea that every thing he had
might be blessed; wishing his Parents, sisters, and brothers to bless
themselves, and to become Catholics; out of which faith, by Gods grace, he
said he would never live or dye. On Sunday also I exorcised him, but diverse
Puritans resorting to him, I could not have conueniency to come till toward
night. All which day he had many fits, and I coming to him, learned of him
that still while the Puritans were in place on Saturday, The force of ill
company.
as also at other times, he saw the devil assault him in form of a Black
bird. Well, I persisted in exorcising him, left him very well speaking and
merry, retired my self, having seen his meat and drink blessed. They then
after giving him a Syllibub, the sugar whereof being not blessed, he presently
at the taste thereof began grievously to be tormented. Yea, though he loved
flowers, The power of blessed things.
yet if unblessed, he would tear them in pieces, and distinguish them from
other; and vn^blessed Raisins he would say were too big for his mouth. I was
sent for, and I had not charged him long, but at each charge I did find the
devil very much to tremble: I hoping of Gods especial assistance at that
time, made the devil to swell in his mouth, in sign of his presence, and to
express first by sign, how many were in him: which he did, holding up three
fingers. I caused them then, one by one, to descend into the great toe of the
right foot, and at the entering thereof to shake it, and to stir the leg;
all which they did higher and higher, to signify how one was greater then
another: then I caused the Boy to speak, who did acknowledge that he would
live and dye a Catholic, wishing father, mother, and all his friends to serve
God: then I called up the chief Fiend, and did demand him to show himself,
who presently puts forth the Child's tongue, and swelled the end thereof. Then I
(all being Protestants, A markable thing.
saving one Catholic) commanded the devil to show by the sheet before him,
how he would use one dying out of the Roman Catholic Church? who very
unwillingly, yet at length obeyed, tossing, plucking, haling, and biting the
sheet, that it did make many to weep and cry forth. Then I commanded him to
show how he did use Luther, John Calvin, and John Fox; which unwillingly he
did perform after the same manner, but in a fiercer sort. Then I commanded him
to show what power he had on a good Catholic that dyed out of mortal sin?
he thrust down his arms, trembled, holding down his head, and did no more.
Hereupon the Parents were instant with me, presently and out of hand to help
the Child. I told them that I did not doubt but by the power of Gods Church (on
which I did only rely, and not on any personal virtue of mine own) to cast
them out presently. But I said, A conjecture why the Child might be possessed.
I did fear that the innocent Child was punished for the sins of his Parents,
which might be for their lack of belief; which is a sin great enough, since
without faith it is impossible to please God. Yet hereupon I said to his
mother, Good woman, will you promise me that you will become a Catholic, if
in your sight I cast out these devils in form of fire? she answered, that she
must consider of that: then said I, I am afraid this Child will not have help;
for, fearing the Child was punished for her lack of belief, I doubted that
the cause remaining, the effect also would remain. Hereupon the Child gave a
great shrieke, began to be vehemently tormented, grew obstinate, in so much
that I feared another devil was entered. I exorcized him also a long time: but
the devil with the Child's voice cried, The Lord in heaven, the Lord in heaven.
A long time I exorcized him, but still he was obstinate, crying out, Father,
mother, help me, help me, saying that I killed him: and when I gently struck
him on the head with a soft ribbon blessed, he yelled forth that I killed him,
cursing me, saying, A pox of God light on the P. saying moreover, I will never
be converted; to which word a Protestant then by, that had seen all, replied,
Thou will then do worse. Here I commanded the devil that spoke, The Child
being himself, denies all the devil had uttered by his tongue.
to show himself in the tongue, who coming forth as out of a trance, I asked
him gently, whether he had uttered any of these words? he utterly denied to
have spoken them, asking forgiveness, saying, that it was not he that spoke
them; and affirming, by Gods grace, that he would be constant in the Roman
Catholic faith till death. Then I called up the wicked spirit, took his oath,
that with trembling he tendered to be obedient in all to lawful Exorcists, and
not to hinder the eating, drinking, or sleeping of the Child. Then it being
almost three of the clock in the morning, I retired to bed: the next day,
being Monday, I came and told the Parents, that I had tarried there as long as
I had promised, and as long as I well durst for danger, and as my promise to
others would permit, but promised them to come again as soon as I could. The
father then offered me the Child to dispose of as I would. I told him I had no
convenient place for that purpose; but I said, that if he would not deal with
Witches and Sorcerers, The reason why J lest to come any more.
I would come as often as I could. The father said, he would seek of Witches,
or of any other for help. I being sorry to hear his bad resolution, told him
that I would not mingle God and the devil together: and then got his promise
that he would not use holy water and oil blessed, if they meddled with
Witches. Yet I hear, that he has not complyend with his promise, in
extremities of the Boys fits, having recourse to blessed things, saying, he
will course him with them. Well, the substance of all this I have here
written, at my coming away I declared before three Protestants, and the Child's
Parents, desiring them, that if I did not say truth in all things, that they
would challenge me therein. Then the Child being (...) a sounding fit,
anointing him with holy oil, (...) bring him unto himself, in so much that
with a staff he walked up and down; and since, he did eat, drink, sleep,
and walk, having only short fits, as I am faithfully informed, yea till
shortly after they entertained many Witches and Sorcerers; notwithstanding
whose help sought in vain, he is more grievously tormented then ever before.
Here before my departure, the Parents of the child offering me money and gold,
I refused it, thanking them, saying, If they would give me 20. pound, I would
not have one penny: Charging them that they should not endanger their own
souls, and the soul of the poor Boy, in seeking unlawful means. And thus
on Monday was fortnight I left him: and the truth of this I must say with S.
Paul, that God knows in all this I do not lie.

Thus desiring that all may succeed to Gods glory, the good of the Child, and
the confusion of all Sorceries and Charms, which in my heart and soul I
detest, I leave the Parents, Child, and thee, Christian Reader, to the mercy of
God.

July the first. 1620. Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed Nomini tuo da Gloriam.
Yours in charity, love, or in any good office, J. W.

This Relation was published by the Priests themselves, and delivered by one of
them, called Master Wheeler, into the hands of Master Thomas Nechils Gent. a
Recusant dwelling near the aforenamed town of Bilson: as appears by his
owner confession, upon oath, taken before the L. Bishop of Couentry and
Lichfield; and added in the end of this Book.

THE EGREGIOVS CVNNING OF THE BOY OF Bilson, in counterfeiting himself to be
bewitched, and possessed of the devil.
THis Boy, being about thirteen years old (but for wit and subtilty far
exceeding his age) was thought by diverse, to be possessed of the Devil and
bewitched, by reason of many strange fits, and much distemper, wherewith he
seemed to have been extremely affected. In those fits he appeared both deaf
and blind, writhing his mouth aside, continually groaning and panting, and
(although often pinched with men's fingers, pricked with needles, tickled also
on his sides, and once whipped with a rod, besides other the like extremities)
yet could he not be discerned by either shrieking or shrinking, to bewray the
least passion or feeling. Out of his fits he took (as might be thought) no
sustenance which he could digest, but together with it, did void and cast out
of his mouth, rags, thread, straw, crooked pinnes, etc. Both in, and out of his
fits, his belly (by wilful and continual abstinence defrauding his own guts)
was almost as flat as his back, besides, his throat was swollen and hard, his
tongue stiff and rolled up toward the roof of his mouth, in so much that he
seemed always dumb, save that he would speak once in a fortnight or three
weeks, and that but in very few words.

Two things there were which gave most just cause of presumption that he was
possessed and bewitched; one was, that he could still discern when that woman
(which was supposed to have bewitched him) was brought into any room where he
was, Ione Cock.
although she were very secretly conveyed thither, as was one time tried before
the grand Jury at Stafford: the second, that though he would abide other
passages of Scripture, yet he could not endure the repeating of that text, viz.
In the beginning was the Word, Ioh. 1.1.
etc. Ioh. 1. verse. 1. but instantly rolling his eyes, and shaking his head, as
one distracted, he would fall into his usual fits of groaning, panting,
distraction, etc. In which plight he continued many months, to the great
wonder and astonishment of thousands, who from diverse parts came to see him.
Thus much of his cunning.

The means of discovering his dissimulation.
AT the summer Assizes held at Stafford, Summer Assizes held at Stafford,
xviij. Iacobi R. 1620.
the tenth of August, Anno Dom. 1620. the aforementioned woman, supposed to
have been the Witch, was brought to her trial, before the R. Worshipful Sir
Peter Warberton, and Sir John Dauies Knights, then his Majesty's Justices of
Assize for that County: before whom appeared some slender circumstances, which
were vulgarly esteemed strong proofs of Witchcraft; but after some speech,
manifesting the idleness of such fantastical delufions, the woman was freed
by the Inquest. At what time the Judges were pleased to commit the care and (if
it might so be) the cure of the Boy unto the L. Bishop of Couentry and
Lichfield, then, and there present.

When he had been with him at the Castle of Eccleshall, about a month (much of
which time his Lo. was necessarily absent from home) although diverse symptoms
gave just cause to suspect that he did but counterfeit; as namely, the easy
and equal beating of his pulse in his strongest fits, his quiet rest and
sleep, commonly the whole night long, his clear complexion, and (which
plainly tells every beholder that his tongue lied in saying nothing) his
swallowing of whole morsels of bread without chewing, his spitting forth from
him as naturally and perfectly as ever he could do in his best health,
(neither of which could possibly be done with a tongue turned upwards, and
doubled toward his throat, as he would seem to have it,) besides, his
ordinary coming forth of his fits always with one kind of loud and large
tunable groan: yet notwithstanding his usual casting up of his meat, his much
fasting, and lanke belly, his patience, or (as it might rather seem)
senseless stupidity, in enduring those many prickings and violent extremities,
without any sign of feeling, did argue some bodily disease and infirmity.

Therefore it was, that no experiment was used on him, until that the
judgment of some well approved Physician might be had, to deliver in what
state his body then was: nevertheless, after a longsome expectation of such an
one, an occasion offered it self, which required and exacted a more speedy and
present trial.

The Father of the Boy (an honest Husbandman of sufficient ability, innocent
and ignorant of any practice in his child) came with an Aunt of his to see him:
when, being out of his fit, the Father earnestly demanded what might be
thought of his sons case, and whether he were possessed, or not? Whereto it
was purposely answered, that nothing seemed so marvelous, or so much to
betoken any such thing, as that at the hearing of those words of the holy
Gospel of Saint John, John 1.1.
[In the beginning was the Word, etc.] he still used to fall into his fits. For
further proof whereof, then presently in the Fathers hearing those words were
repeated; and accordingly upon the repetition thereof the Boy fell instantly
into his fit. Lo (quoth his Father then) do you see? what think you of this?
This (said the Bishop) do I like very well; for upon this must I begin to
work.

The same day in the afternoon (when word was brought that the Boy did speak)
diverse resorting unto him, the Bishop calling for a Greek Testament, said unto
him; Boy, it is either thou, or the devil, that abhorrest those words of the
Gospel: and if it be the devil, he (being so ancient a scholar as of almost
6000. years standing) knows and understands all languages in the world, so
that he cannot but know when I recite the same sentence in the Gospel out of
the Greek text: but if it be thy self, then art thou an execrable wretch, who
playest the devils part, in lothing that part of the Gospel of Christ, which
(above all other Scriptures) does express the admirable union of the Godhead
and manhood in one Christ and Savior; which union is the arch-pillar of man's
salvation. Wherefore look to thy self, for now thou art to be put unto
trial; and mark diligently whether it be that same Scripture which shall be
read unto thee; at the reading whereof thou do seem to be so much troubled
and tormented.

Then was read unto him, in Greek, the twelfth verse of the first Chapter of
Saint John's Gospel, [(...), etc.] which he supposing to be the first verse,
did accordingly, as he was formerly wont, fall into the passion of a trance.

This fit being quickly passed over, next was read unto him, in Greek, the
first verse, being indeed the aforesaid text [(...) etc.] yet he suspecting
that it was not the same text, was not any whit troubled therewith.

By this means was his notable fraud, in a manner, fully discovered, in so
much that he seemed to be greatly confounded here with: notwithstanding,
staring with his eyes, and casting his head on both sides the bed, whereon he
lay, that he might dissemble his dissimulation the better, he told the company
y he was troubled at the sight of 2. mice.

After this discovery, (to the end that (...) might be freed from further
trial, and be sent home again to his father) he complained of extreme
sickness, and by writing, as well as he could, did signify that he had a
great pain in his belly: and the morning following, making water in an
Vrinall, his water was as black as Ink; for there were some that writ very
legibly therewith. And in the like sort, two days following he seemed to make
water of the same color. Which that he might the more cunningly dissemble,
he, in the making thereof vehemently groned; and thereupon one coming into
the room to him, the Boy did show him his manner of making water, whereof a
little remain came then from him, of the same black tincture, which he
purposely had reserved within the skin, to make semblance that it so came
immediately from him.

But the third day following (which was the Lords day) by diligent
watchfulness, and other means which was used to observe him, he was espied
mixing Ink with his Urine, and nimbly conueying the Inkhome into a private
place. When being suddenly deprehended in this his conueyance, after an
earnest, but loving exhortation made unto him, this deaf began to hear, and
dumb to speak: and at the sight of his ungracious and godless practices, he
brast out into plentiful tears, confessing all, to his own shame, and Gods
glory. Which confession (before he had heard of the aforesaid Relation of the
Priests) he made the same day, in manner following.

THE FIRST EXAMINATION, AND CONFESSION OF THE BOY OF BILSON, NAmed William
Perry, taken before the Reverend Father in God, Thomas L. Bishop of Couentry
and Lichfield, at Eccleshall Castle, 8. October. 1620. touching his counterfeit
practices, etc.
BEing examined how long since, and of whom he had learned such tricks and
coozening devices? The Boy recollecting himself, answered as follows: In
Lent last (said he) there met me, not far from my fathers house, an old man,
who called himself Thomas (but his surname I cannot remember) having a gray
beard, russet apparel, and carrying a cradle of glasses or pots on his back,
who said unto me after this manner: Now, pretty Boy, where dwell thou? do
thou go to school? If thou will do as I shall teach thee, thou shall not
need to go to school; for (said he) I can teach thee such tricks and feats,
that the people that see thee, shall believe that thou art bewitched, and so
shall lament and pity thee. Whereupon I being willing not to come at school,
for fear of whipping, was desirous to learn such tricks. By and by this old
man began to teach me, first, how to groan and mourn; next, to roll and cast
up my eyes, so that nothing but the white of the eye should be seen, after
that, to wrest and turn my neck and head both ways toward my back, then to
gape hideously with my mouth, and grate with my teeth, to cling and draw in my
belly and guts, to stretch out my legs, and clutch my hands: after that, to put
crooked pinnes, rags, and such like baggage, into my mouth, that I might seem
to vomit them up. And although (said he) that some folk shall put thee to
pain, by pricking, and pinching thee, yet thou must endure all patiently.
After this sort he taught and learned me some six several times privately in
a Close, where none could see us.

And further, that old man made me believe, that a body possessed could not
endure to hear the first verse of the first Chapter of S. John's Gospel, John
1.1.
(viz. In the beginning was the Word, etc.) and that therefore whenever I
heard it, then I should fall into my fits. Besides, he willed me that I
should begin to do these feats, when it should next happen that I should be
ficke: and that then I should accuse some one body or other (whom I had heard
to be accounted a Witch) to have bewitched me. And thereupon afterward, of my
self, I did accuse one Ione Coxe, and was once minded to have made my picture
in clay, and to have conveyed it into her house, for the better proof of her
bewitching me.

Being examined how long after it was that he began to put these things into
practice, and upon what occasion? He answered; Not long after, (which was
about the Easter following) I began to be sick, and my father sought help for
me in diverse places: and then some Papists did persuade him to seek for help
at the hands of some Catholic Priests. But my mother did rather desire to
have some learned scholar or Divine that was no Papist. Yet at length, by their
persuasions, there was first brought unto me a Priest, I. Priest.
of an indifferent tall stature, with long black hair, in a greenish suit,
his doublet opened under the armepits with ribbons.

As soon as he came to me, he drew a stone out of his pocket, and hanged it
about my neck, saying some Latin prayers over me, putting also his finger
into my mouth: whereupon I seemed to come out of my fit. After that, he made
holy water, and witch-water, saying certain prayers over them, and putting
salt into the witch-water. Then he gave me a bottlefull of the one of those
waters, (but of which I do not remember) and willed me now and then to cast
some of it over my bed; and himself, with a little Isop, did besprinkle me
therewith also. Before he went away, he said certain other Latin words or
prayers over those waters, (which to my remembrance) did thus sound, Eggse
eggse atque famulo Dei Gulihelmo ante damnando, and more there of I cannot
remember.

The next morning (as I remember) this Priest came again, at which time
(because I lay in a lower room, where many people thronged in to see me) they
removed me into an upper room, more private and fitter for them to pray in,
where they continued and used the like means toward me, as they had done
before, betwixt a fortnight and three weeks space, during which time I
continued my wonted fits. Then at last, this Priest said that he could not
help me, because he wanted a book, which he sent for up to London: but
after that the book was brought, he then said yt he could not help me, without
the aid of another Priest, whom after that he brought with him. II. Priest.
He was a short big fat man, with blackish long curled hair, in a kind of
russet colored suite, with a sword by his side. As soon as he saw me, he
said, that by the help of God and our Lady, and the holy Saints of heaven, he
would either cast the Devil out of me that night, or else it should go hard.
And first, he drew out a little book of the bigness of a Pueriles, in which
he continued praying, til about 11. a clock. of the night, and casting
holy water on me.

Then both these Priests went away, but came again unto me in the morning, and
then they made as much holy water as a pale could hold. But in the end they
confessed that they could do me no good, without the help of a third Priest,
whom they did send for by a Weauer of our town.

About a week after came the third Priest, III. Priest.
being a reasonable tall old man, in a horsemans coat, with long head-haire:
before he came to our house, he did say to the man that fetched him (as I did
hear) that if the spirits came to me, then I was obsest; but if they were
within me, then I was possessed. The big fat Priest came in with this last
Priest, and first he put his finger into my mouth, and said, that I was
bewitched at the tongues end: wherefore he bade me drink three or four draughts
of holy water, which I did: he taught me also to pray to the Virgin Mary, and
to my good Angel, and to all the Saints in heaven to help me. Then he washed
my head, feet, and belly with the same water, saying now and then to me, Thou
art now somewhat better, Boy? and I would say, Yes, a little better.

About the same time, my father coming one day home before supper, he asked
me what I had seen in my fits? and I told him that a thing came to me in the
likeness of a Blackbird. And now the Priest that came last unto me, went out
of town, these three Priests having bin with me about three weeks, but could
do me no good.

About a week after, II. Priest.
came the big fat Priest again, and held on his former course, saying, that
by. Gods grace he would help me. About which time he made a Sermon to
certain Catholics which were with me, having a white Surplesse on him, with
a stole (as I remember they called it) about his neck: his Text was, My flesh
is bread indeed, and my blood is drink indeed. After his Sermon, he prayed
with me as he had used to do: and then made another paleful of holy water,
wishing them to boil certain herbs in water, to wash me withal; as Time,
Isop, and such like.

Upon the Sunday following, people came in so thick to see me, that the Priest
durst not preach; and he intended to be gone the next day.

His fashion was, to bless and cross all the meat which both themselves and I
did eat: so that when my mother once gave me some of a Syllabub, which the
Pr. had not crossed in the same manner, he told them that there was a Puritan
spirit entered into it.

These three Priests dealt with me at sundry times, that I should confess my
sins unto them: which I did sometimes, when I listed to speak, but that was
but now and then. They wished me also to turn to their religion, and that
then I should have help.

Upon that Sunday night before that this fat Priest was to go away, he said,
that by the help of the blessed Virgin, and the Angels and Saints in heaven,
he would cast the Devil out of me.

A little after, he began to ask certain questions of the spirit within me;
as first, what should become of the Puritans when they dyed? and he told me,
that if they went to hell, then the spirit should tug and shake the
bed-clothes: which I did do after the same manner he bade me. Next, he asked
what should become of the Roman Catholics, and if they should go to heaven?
that then, in sign thereof, I should lift up my hands, which I did also.

Then the Priest said, Come out of thy fits, Will, in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: whereupon I seemed to come out of a
fit, and then he prayed by me, and said, that he would cast three devils out
of me that night. And so he hanged about my neck, and put under mine arm a
fine stole, wrought with great siuer letters: and with the one end thereof,
being very hard, he did beat me about the head and face, until to my
thinking he made me black and blue; chafing and rubbing my neck with that
stole, which was so rough, that it made my neck very sore: and still he spoke
to the spirits within me, thus; Come out, you Rogues, you Villains, I charge
you by God and the blessed Virgin, and by all the Angels and Saints in heaven,
that you suffer the Boy to eat, and sleep: and withal, he stamped with his
feet, as he spoke those words.

Then he told my father that he would throw out those three spirits one after
another, so that they should plainly see them come forth. And if he should do
so, he asked my mother whether she would become a Catholic, or no? She
answered him that she would consider of it. Then, said he, will I also consider
whether I will help your son, or no.

But yet the Priest continued as he had begun, and said unto me, If there be
three Devils in thee, then give three knocks, in sign thereof; and so I did:
but at the biggest Devil he willed me to give the greatest thumpe, which I
did at the last. And still the Priest did beat me with his stoale, and so
continued with me til about three of the clock in the morning: during which
time, certain Papists were sent to pray with me, bringing hallowed candles
with the^.

At the same time, the Priest took such Viz Crooked pins, rags, straw, etc.
and such things as the Boy could sinde and steal, into his mouth; as he did
once halse a knittingneedle.
things as I had seemed to vomit, and burning them with Frankincense, he took
an old rusty sword, and said a Latin prayer, resembling it to the sword
wherewith Peter did cut off Malchus his ear: he also did beat the same things
with an hammer, betokening that hammer which nailed Christ to the Cross.

The morning being come, the Priest was to be gone, and then my father said
unto him, Sir, I see you can do my Child no good, and therefore I must seek
for some other help. Yes (said the Priest) you will go seek for help at
witches to ease his body, but you care not for damning his soul. But yet
before he went away, he did hallow more water, and then he departed.

And here the Boy was suffered to pawse, and repose himself, by reason of his
weakness; and was not then further examined till the next time.

THE SECOND EXAMINATION, AND ANSWER of the said William Perry, made unto
certain other questions, which (upon just and special presumptions) were
propounded unto him by the Reverend Father in God, THOMAS, Lord B. of Couentry
and Lichsield, taken at Eccleshall Castle, the 13. day of October. Anno Dom. 1620.
FIrst, it was demanded of him, Thomas) persuaded him that at length he should
be cured by some Popish Priest; whether he meant not accordingly in the end to
seem to be dispossessed by some, or one such of them?

He answers, yes; and further, that thereupon he meant to become a Papist.

Secondly, being asked, that if he did mean so, Exorcismes, and seem to be
dispossessed by their means?

He answers, because that much people did resort unto him, and brought him
many good things; as also for that he was not willing to go to school again:
yet that in the end his meaning was to be helped by them.

Thirdly,

He answers, that he had; for (says he) the Devil had It was his own word.
steeled my heart, so that I cared not to hang my self; and had purposed to
do so one night, but that I was watched, and hindered.

Fourthly, Recusant? He answers, that he was moved by Thomas the old man, to
lay it on some woman so suspected: but that only of himself, without the
persuasion of any other, he named this Ione Cock.
woman; because she was a woman ill thought of, and suspected for such like
things.

Being here put in mind of the desire, and resolve with himself to make an end
of his former course, and counterfeit practices; and seem to be dispossessed
by such prayers?

He answers, that it was indeed in his mind to do so, because he had then
wearied himself with dissembling so long, and was also in fear to be
discovered and found out.

And albeit this was easily discerned to have bin his resolution, yet (as was
at that time told him) it became not the Professors of truth to imitate the
Popish Priests in such cases, who falsely arrogated to themselves such an
Apostolical power, by Exorcizing to expel Devils, although it might (in man's
opinion) much work for the glorifying of God, edifying of Christian people in
our Church, and also for the converting of Romish Recusants unto our true
Religion; because this ought to be the profession of Christians, to seek to
glorify Him only by truth, who will be worshipped in spirit and truth.

And here was an end made of examining the Boy any further.

Examinat'. coram praefat'. Rdo Patre dictis diebus, anno, and loco; Praesente
Ryc. Baddeley, Notario Publico.



THE BOY OF BILSON, his private and public Acknowledgement, etc.
NOw after those Popish Bilson in Staffordshire, is a Chappelrie within the
peculiar Jurisdiction of Wooluerhampto^, where sacrilegious impiely has
produced such effects, that it is much insected with Popery, and insested with
Popish Priests, whose ordinary Rendeuouz it is. No marvel therefore if they
made choice thereof, as the fillest nest wherein to lay and exclude their addle
and supposititious eggs of politic impostures and godly deceits. But this
Cockatrice was crushed in in the shell, and their viperous disseine thereby
deseated.
Priests were departed, and had left the Boy (as before is confessed, and set
down) his Father sought for further help by the means of Witches, (but as
wickedly, so all in vain) until such time as he was brought from the town of
Bilson aforesaid, unto Lichfield, before Doctor Master Chancellor of the
Dioces; where he continued until he was carried to the Assizes at Stafford,
and there by the Judges referred and left unto the aboue-named Reverend Father
in God, the I. Bishop of the Diocese; who after a very short time sent to
Bilson for him, and after his arrival did deal with him, as formerly in this
discourse has been related.

Since which time, the Boy, upon laying to his charge the heinousness of that
his offense, as being blasphemous, in respect of Christ, whose words in the
Gospel he fained himselse to abhor; and devilish, in respect of the Devil,
whose person he would seem to be possessed of; and also murtherous, in
respect of the poor Woman, whom he willingly occasioned to be brought (as
much as in him lay) to the point of death: He has earnestly bewailed these his
sins, and (as after his first Examination) by prayer coneiued by himself, to
such purpose, craved forgiveness at Gods hand for the same.

So having continued at Eccleshall Castle aforesaid, until he was perfectly
recovered of his former weakness, and benumbed limbs, and that his Parents
were willing to dispose of him otherways, he was finally brought again to
the last Summer-Assizes held at Stafford, the 26. of July, Summer Assizes held
at Stafford, 19. Iacobi R. 1621.
Anno 1621. where before Sir Peter Warburton, and Sir Humfrey Winch Knights,
his Majesty's Justices of Assize, and the face of the County and Country there
assembled, the Boy craved pardon first of Almighty God, then desired the Woman
there also present, to forgive him; and lastly, requested the whole Country,
whom he had so notoriously and wickedly scandalized, to admit of that his so
hearty Confession, for their satisfaction.

And thus it pleased God to open the eyes of this Boy (that I may so say) luto,
with the clay of the Romish Priests lewd impostures; and sputo, with the
spittle of his own infamy, to see his errors, and to glorify the God of truth.

Gloriasoli Deo.

THE EXAMINATION AND ANSWER OF THOMAS NECHILS of Nechils, in the County of
Stafford, Gentleman (a Recusant) taken upon oath before the R. Reverend Father
in God THOMAS L. Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield, at Eccleshall Castle, the
17. of October. Anno 1620. touching the aforementioned Relation of the Priests,
of their proceedings with the Boy of Bilson.
BEing examined whether he knew a written discourse then showed unto him,
touching the Boy of Bilson, entitled and beginning thus; A faithful Relation
of the proceedings of etc. and ending in these words, Yours in charity, love,
or any good office? He answers, that he does very well know, and remember
the same.

Being examined how he came first by that discourse, or Relation, and from
whom he had it? He answers, that it was delivered unto him by a Gentleman,
whom he met iourneying on the way toward Lichfield, whose name was Master
Wheeler, as he told this Examinate. And, being further demanded, he says that
he was as a man of a reasonable stature, round faced, about fifty years old,
and of a blackish complexion.

Being examined what further discourse did at that time pass betwixt them two,
touching the said Boy, called William Perry? He answers that the said Master
Wheeler then told this Examinate, that he would acquaint him with the whole
business, concerning that Boy: whereupon he gave this Examinate a copy of
the aforementioned discourse or Relation (having two copies at the same time about
him) and willed this Examinate to get it copied out, and to give one copy
thereof unto one Philip Higgins of Westbromage Yeoman (as he this Examinate
remembers.) And further, that the said Master Wheeler said unto this Examinate,
that was no matter who should see it.

Being further examined what the said Master Wheeler did at the same time
acquaint this Examinate with, touching himself? He confesses that he told
him how that he did often use to resort unto the French Ambassador: that he
did know the Bishop of Couentry and Lichfield; and further, that he was known
to the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Tho. Nechils.

Examinat'. coram praefat'. Rdo Patre dictis die, anno, and loco; Praesente
Ryc. Baddeley Notario Publ.


