A Comparison of the English and Spanish Nation: Composed by a French Gentleman
against those of the League in France, which went about to persuade the king
to break his alliance with England, and to confirm it with Spain. By
occasion whereof, the nature of both Nations is lively decyphered.

Faithfully translated, out of French, by R. A.



LONDON Printed by John Wolf. 1589.

To the Right worshipful, worthy, and virtuous Gentleman, Sir William Hatton
Knight, all happiness.
THis comparison of England with Spain, framed (as it should seem) by some
learned French gentleman experienced in the estate of both Countries, but
jealous (as he says) of the honor of his own; and (as appears) especially
desirous of the prosperity, and preservation thereof; may serve unto us for a
perfect pattern, and a lively example how far the love of truth is to be
preferred above al other respects: yea even above the duty due unto our
country, which ought notwithstanding to be in greater estimation amongst us,
then any reverent respect of Parents; or affection toward friends,
kinsfolks, or allies; or whatsoever else we hold dearest unto us. Which love
of truth in this author seems to have been joined with so zealous a care of
the welfare of his Country, that like a skillful and wise Chirurgian, he
choseth rather to rip up old sores, which peradventure may seem to be healed
outwardly; then to draw over them fair scars, suffering them to rankle and
fester inwardly. For even as a good Phisician careful to cure his patients
malady, and desirous of his health and recovery, does not minister pleasant
potions, if they be unprofitable to his purpose; but rather wholesome
restauratiues, though peradventure somewhat yrkesome: So the author of this
treatise, especially careful and desirous of the good and flourishing estate
of his troubled and afflicted Country, (which he learnedly proves to consist
not wholly, though chiefly; in her self: but to depend much on her alliance,
with such of her neighbor Nations, as may most advantage or endamage her) to
effect his persuasion for her benefit and preservation, brings such proofs
as (being but such as their own Histories afford) may seem partial praises
of our Country, and purposed disgraces of his own. Which roundnesse, and
integrity of his made me at the request of some friends, that understood not
well the French to translate it into English: which I undertook so much the
rather, because it contains the memorable, and valiant deeds of our renowned
Ancestors, in that noble Realm of France; together with a rehearsal of the
Spanish braueries: that the view of the one, and remembrance of the other, may
stir up that courage which ought still to remain in our English hearts; that
we do not degenerate from our noble Progenitors, but with an earnest emulation
follow those happy footsteps of our famous forefathers: and learn to despise
those magnificent Dom Diegos and Spanish Caualieros, whose doughtiest deeds
are bragges and boastinges, and themselves (for the most part) shadows without
substance: whose affected Monarchy, is like to prove a confounded Anarchie.

This translation (how simple soever) I offer to your courteous acceptaunce,
not that any ways you need it, or that in ought it may pleasure you, or stand
you in steed; who by your own industrious endeavors, and continued travails
in foreign Countries, have so abundantly made you profit both in the French,
and in other languages and knowledge: but because I willingly embrace
whatsoever small opportunity of expressing my grateful affection toward you,
for those manifold benefits, which, by your good means, and care had
heretofore of my well doing, I have received.

Moreover, your benefits, not only extended toward me, but heaped so
largely on my name and nearest friends, by our Right honorable good L. and
Patron, may by good right challenge at our hands whatsoever any travail,
industry, and endeavor of ours may bring forth to the extolling of that
honorable name, unto the which amongst the rest, I desire to be accounted as
one that is most entirely and affectionatly devoted. Thus craving your
courteous acceptance, with the continuance of your favorable affection; I
desire the almighty, (who has hitherto so highly favored your forward
enterprises) continually to prosper your virtuous proceedinges: both to the
common benefit, and your particular advancement.

Yours, humbly affectionate, Robert Ashley.

The Translator to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I was constrained by some friends, to break of a work of
some greater importance and larger discourse, to undertake the translation of
this brief and pithie treatise. Ere I had fully finished it, there came into
my hands another translation thereof, done by an Italian, and printed under the
title of A Politic Discourse most excellent for the time present. On sight
whereof though I had perfected mine, I purposed to suppress it, or at least to
reserve it to my self, and such friends as seemed to like it.

But some being not satisfied with this former translation, done by a stranger,
and in some places (as they thought) estraunged from our English phrase, were
desirous of my copy; which (being but one) could not well content so many. By
occasion whereof: I was willing to publish it, seeking their satisfaction. And
the rather was I thereto induce, because I found the treatise to be so well
liked, that the former copies were for the most part already distracted.

The former title of a Politic Discourse, because it seemed too General, I
have changed into A comparison between England and Spain, which seems more
nearly, and particularly to express the substance of the treatise.

The pains which the other has taken (howsoever some mislike) I do not
condemn; neither would I wish him to be discontented, that he being a
stranger to both countries, cannot satisfy all, in both languages; for he
which is borne in the one, and brought up in both, is not able to perform it.
But though he miss of his mark, yet think well of his endeavors: and where I
want of perfection, there I crave the like construction.

Some errors in printing have escaped us: but such as the discrete Reader may
correct with judgment.

A Comparison of the English and Spanish Nation.
SYlla (a Roman Captain) going about to induce Bocchus to that marchandice
which he practiced of Iugurth, Salustius in Iugutha.
grounds his persuasion chiefly on this maxim: That never man had friends
enough. A thing which common and ordinary experience has made us so palpably
to feel, and to see so evidently, that whosoever should gainsay or impugn
this sentence, should show him self void of judgment, and of common sense.
And therefore it is that in our French tongue the common proverb says (that who
so has a good neighbor, has a good morrow.) thereby giving us to understand,
that he which maintains himself in good estate with his neighbors, has
taken the best course that might be for his particular affairs.

For as there can be no greater corsie to a man, than to see himself pinched
by those of whom he expect comfort and case in adversity: so neither can there
be any greater contentment, than to see himself so comforted and cherished of
his neighbors that they are unto him so many witnesses of his good behavior
amongst them. Which being well weighed of such learned men as by their writings
have traced out unto us the way to virtue, Hesiodus in his book of works and
days.
they have made so high account of the regard belonging to good neighbors,
that for certain respects they have preferred it before the duty due to
kinsfolk and allies. Cicero 1. offic.
That worthy and wise captain Themistocles, did once declare that he had well
comprehended this conclusion: for intending to sell an heritage of his as dear
as he might, he caused him that cried it, to say and proclaim aloud (to the
end to enhaunce the price thereof) that it was situated and stood amongst good
neighbors. Now if in private matters the respect of neighborhood be so much
to be had in recommendation amongst us, how much more I pray you, in managing
and guiding of an estate. What man is there so ignorant, in the affairs of the
world, which knows not that the neighborhood of the Bulgarians, occasioning
the Turks entry and descent into Greece, opened the way unto them to make
themselves masters of whatsoever they hold at this day in Europe?

The like may be said in respect of Italy: for the affairs of the Venetians,
Florentines, Geneuois and Neapolitans, have bin troubled, disturbed and
disordered only by the malice of a neighbor of theirs, even Jews Sforce,
usurper of the estate of Milaine: who to appease his particular passions made
no conscience of disturbing the common quiet which Italy had so long enjoyed by
the prudence of Laurence de Medicis: and exposing of his country for a pray to
the arms and violence of the French.

Contrariwise, if we look near into the estate of things past, we shall
find that many of the greatest houses in Germany have by the prudent policy
and hearty affection of their neighbors ben preserved from the overthrow
which was threatened by the common calamity. In the time of our fathers, even
the year 1504 Phillip Conte Palatine fell at variance with the Emperor
Maximilian, and the issue thereof being no more prosperous, than the enterprise
was righteous, he was banished the Empire and driven to great perplexity. But
Frederike duke of Saxony, his neighbor a wise prince and of great
understanding did so mildly handle this matter that all the tempest was changed
into a sweet and pleasant calm. Wherein notwithstanding, I am of opinion, that
princes can not pretend any advantage above Aristocratie and popular estates.
Every one knows how that about forty years since Charles duke of Sauoy
invaded Geneua, the possession and lordship whereof he had left unto his
successors, if the men of Friburgh fellow burgesses and allies to those of
Geneua had not made him open his jaws, and let go the pray which he had
between his teeth.

I allege these familiar examples, of fresh date, because I would not stay too
long on those of ancient time, and namely of the common wealth of Athens, whose
practice was always to relieve their distressed neighbors, being beaten or
overthrown by any evil encounter. Whereof the reestablishme^t of Thebes, will
serve for sufficient testimony, as long as man's life shall enjoy that good
hap to be lightened by the lamp of learning. These then are pertinent reasons
to make us understand how carefully kingdoms and estates are to be
underpropped by the friendship and faithfulness of their neighbors. But as this
point is of great importance, so it requires a profound and mature
consideration: for men which are not so cleeresighted nor practiced in the
affairs of this world, are so much the easier deceived, as a vain appearance
can deck and set forth it self with a show of sound commodity.

And to manifest this matter by example, and by deduction of a particular deed
to make way to the decision of a generality, I will speak of that which more
nearly concerns the ordering of our own affairs. There is none be he never
so void of understanding, but sees and plainly perceives the poor and
miserable estate, whereunto France loosing her ancient brightness is brought
at this day by the cruelty and continuance of civil wars. Every one
confesses that she wants a restoratiue to relieve her of so pernicious a
recidiue; notwithstanding, they agree not all in one concerning the confection
and ingredients proper and sortable to such a restoratiue. True it is that they
who by dealing in affairs and managing of matters, have aduantaged themselves
in experience, do come thus far forth: that following the rule of good
Phisicians, the malady must be cured by his contrary; and seeing that the
sickness of France comes only of unquietness, that nothing can be more available
to the restoring of her former health, then a good and assured quietness: which
advice in my judgment, is better grounded on reason, then clearly discussed.
In confirmation whereof, when there is question of the quiet of our country, he
were too much out of the way that would bound it within the circuit of France,
not caring greatly in what estate she be with her neighbors, so that her
inhabitants live in peace one with an other, and the flame of civil wars be
extinguished.

But although I readily confess that the matter being once reduced into terms
of calling into one of the two inconveniences, there is no foreign war how
difficult or dangerous soever it be, but we ought to undertake, if thereby we
may warrant our country from a civil war: yet so is it that the entire
prosperity of an estate is founded on the exemption of both inconveniences:
except we think our age to be specially privileged, that we may have war
without the necessary appendances thereof which are misery and poverty. They
then which endeavor to procure the good and quiet of France, ought to aim at
this mark, that not only al coals of civil combustion may be quenched, but
also that she maintain her self in good estate with her neighbors: and
especially with those whose alliance is most commodious and most assured unto
her: which in my judgment is a point no less necessary then difficult to
decide, by reason of the diversity of their passions, who prefer their private
profit before the common commodity. So it is that if unto the deduction of
this doubt, we bring no other passion, but an ardent affection toward the
truth and a zealous love of our country, we shall soon decide this
difficulty. And I do not think when every thing is cast and accounted, whether
you consider it in gross, or else have particular respect to the time present,
that there is any of our neighbors, whose alliance can be so commodious and
auaylable unto us as that of England. On the contrary I am of opinion, that he
which in state matters would entreat of popular errors could not choose a more
ample argument, then to show that such as ordinarily call the English ancient
enemies to the estate and crown of France, thinking thereby to be accounted
learned amongst the ignorant, discover themselves to be utterly ignorant
amongst the learned. And for so much as diverse Courtiers, whom I have heard
discoursing on this argument have come to this conclusion, that they prefer the
alliance of Spain before any other whatsoever, having regard (as they say) to
the safety and welfare of France, I purpose to dispute this question, which in
my judgment has no better foundation, then a partialized affection, or else
too little knowledge of the affairs of this world. I hope then by lively
reasons to enforce, that the alliance of England is much more expedient for
us, then that of Spain, and by the same means to clear the general
controversy, and to make known that there is no people in the world whose
alliance is so commodious and so necessary unto us, as that of the English
nation. And to lay some foundation for my opinion, I say that when there is
question of making alliance with some nation, there is principal regard to be
had of two things: the one that those whose alliance we prefer, have more
ways and means to help us: the other that they have also more means to harm
us, being once become our enemies. And I pray you what people is there in the
world, that has iuster occasion to love us, then the English, which are allied
unto us in blood, conformable in manners, and brotherly given to the self same
virtuous inclinations? which I mean nor only of those who^ at this day we
call English but also of the ancient Britains, the remainder of whom we see at
this day in the country of Wales, who though they agree in manners, fashions,
customs, and vsages; Caesar lib. 1 de bello Gallico.
yet in language they differ from the other inhabitants of England. Caesar who
first amongst the Roman Captains discovered and had knowledge of the estate
of this I Will: teaches us that one part of the Britains, that is, they which
dwell next the sea, have taken their original of the Belgae: the same author
has also left us in writing, Caesar lib. 2. de bello Gallico.
that in his time the king of the Switzers named Diuitiacus, did rule also over
great Britain. And therefore is it no marvel if the Britains (especially
those that inhabit about Kent) were agreeable in humanity and manner of living
with the French. And indeed, if we judge by that which we find in writing,
nothing can be said more brotherly then these two Nations.

That I may not busy my self too much in sifting out particulars, I will
speak only of the Druides, which in ancient time bare rule in both Nations.

These Druydes were Poets and Priests, as in ancient time was Hesiodus in
Greece. Most certain it is that the first among the Grecians, who have adorned
their country with the knowledge of learning, comprehended all their doctrine
in verse; as Homerus, Plutarchus in Theseo. Plato in Lysida. Cic. 2. de natura
deorum.
Hesiodus, Orpheus, Musaeus, Linus, Empedocles, Parmenides, and Pitheus, of
whom Plutarch makes mention. And therefore it is that Plato has attributed so
much unto Poets, calling them fathers and fountains of wisdom. These Druydes
were also Mathematicians and Philosophers, which make me, that I can not
comprehend whereupon Citero should think, when he compared the Britains with
the Scythians, in respect of their ignorance of the Mathematikes.

If he relied on the testimony of his friend Trebatius, every one knows him
to be a witness as may be gathered even out of the works of Cieero, Qui calat
hum libentius, quam celum contemplabatur. But it seems that Cieero, a person
otherwise of exquisite judgment, would needs versie the saying of Thales of
Milesia, who being asked how far truth was different from falsehood,
answered, as far as the eyes from the ears. So may we say in respect of
that which (...) are now to entreat of, that we acknowledge eyes in Caesar, and
ears in Cicero. But howsoever it be, either that the Britains received the
knowledge of good letters from the Gauls, or the Gauls from the Britains, so
it is, that the young men of France, for farther advancement in their studies,
transported into Britain, to the Druydes of that country, of whom they
learned the most hidden secrets of Philosophy and of the Mathematical
sciences. If we report our selves to what Caesar has written hereof, the
Philosophy and doctrine of the Druydes had his first beginning in great
Britain: which opinion I willingly embrace: howbeit, that rare and excellent
personage, Ramus de moribus veterum Gallorum.
Petrus Ramus seems in a work of his to hold the contrary. No marvel then,
if so learned a Nation, and so well nurtured in good letters, has been
endewed with so singular humanity sortable to their knowledge, and such as
whereof our ancient Gauls have gathered the principal fruit. In so much that
Caesar intending a descent into Britain, Caesar lib. de bello Gallico.
alleges for his purpose an other pretense, but that the Gauls had been
succored by the Brytains in all their quarrels which they had against the
Romans. But if any one think that those people which since the time of Caesar,
have made themselves masters of Gaul and of Britain, namely the English and
the French, have not had so firm friendship, but rather less occasions of
loving one another, he deceiues himself as much as he that is ignorant, how
great is the force of that friendship which is founded on natural alliance,
the memory whereof can not be blotted out, neither by tract of time, nor
distance of place. The Citizens of Sais in Egypt said that their City was
founded by the Goddess Minerua, Plato in Timaeo.
as did also the Athenians of theirs: In contemplation of which alliance as
Plato witnesses, the Grecians in general, and specially the Athenians were
welcomed and well entertained at Sais. It rests now to consider how
straightly the French are united to the English, and what demonstration of
friendship they have made from time to time the one to the other. Neither is it
sufficient to say that they have had great and long wars together, even in
the memory of our great grandfathers, for by the same reason should we banish
amity from amongst all Nations of the earth. By the same reason should we
conclude that there could be no friendship amongst the French themselves,
who even of late days, have furnished a stage in their own country with the
bloudiest tragedy that ever was heard of. And touching the wars between the
English and French; I hope hereafter to show in due place, that so far off
is it that this consideration should bring any alteration of friendship or
amity between them and us, that contrariwise it ought to enforce at our
hands some increase of good will in their behalf. For God having given them
so great advantages over us, as every knows, it is hard to say whether this
noble nation have showen themselves more valiant in fight, then mild and gentle
after the victory. To less purpose yet serve those unseemly speeches, which
may be heard in the streets as well of France as England, as among the rest
these tetmes, Cullion, and French dog, which is the rethoricke of Pedlers,
Tinkers, Cobblers, Rogues and such kind of people, not the language of honest
and civil persons, such as we purpose to entreat of in this discourse: laying
aside then al such baggage and tromperie, let us speak of the natural amity
which is between these two Nations.

In the time of the Emperors Martian and Valentinian, about the year of
Christ, 449. Witigerne king of great Britain, desirous to repulse the Picts
and Scots, called to his aid the Angles or English, who dwelt then between the
Vites and Saxons: And indeed the Welchmen at this day call the Englishmen
Sasses, as who would say, Saxons: which has been ensured me of some learned
men of that country. It resulteth then of this discourse that the English are
come out of Germany, as the French are also according to our Histories. And
howbeit that in respect of the French Nation, I durst not affirm that they are
descended of the Saxons: yet so it is that the house of our kings, which at
this day swayes the scepter in France, draws his stock from thence, as is
best known to them who are best seen in Histories. For Windekind a Saxon of
the line of that great Windekinde subdued by Charlemayne, came into France to
succor Charles the balde, being then much molested by the Normans. This young
Windekind had a son called Robert, who so fortunately followed the footsteps
of his father, that Charles the bald made him general of the army which he
sent against the Normans: who at that time foraged the country of France. This
Robert was slain in battle, leaving a son called Otho, who by consent of
the Emperor Arnold, had the government of France, during the minority of
Charles the simple. Whence he got him not so much reputation, as in that he
was father to Hugh the great, Earl of Paris. But Hugh Capet son of this Hugh
the great, exceeded in glory and splendour all the forenamed, as well in that
he was chief of the absolute estate of France, as in that he left a Royal
posterity behind him, which swayes the scepter divided into two houses,
namely Valoys and Bourbon.

So may we conclude, that if the French and English may not be called by the
term of Charondas (...), Arist. lib. 1. cap. 1. polit.
that is, living together, or according to Epimenides (...), that is, partakers
of the same smoke, or as they say, brought up together at board and at bed, yet
may they by good right be termed (...), that is, descending from the self same
extraction.

And although this alliance be of it self sufficiently cleared by the
Historiographers, yet is it better confirmed by the conformity of manners of
these two Nations, and the good comportmentes of the one toward the other.
Arist. Ethic. lib. 4. cap. 3
The Englishman as also the French is generous, and by consequent as Aristotle
teaches far from dissimulation, hating or loving openly, rather led by truth
then by opinion, loving the effect better then the appearance, free in speech,
loving his liberty, and easily forgetting injuries: moreover, he is liberal,
civil, courteous, and gentle: of all virtuous qualities, I think that in them
are to be found as many clear and evident testimonies as there are places that
speak of their exploites in unpassionate Historiographers. For in respect of
civility what better witness can we have then Philip de Commines, Comines
cap. 34.
who himself had experience thereof in behalf of the lord of Vaucler. I
should speak of a thing but too well known throughout all the world, if I
should spend many words in discoursing of their magnificence and liberality.
Certainly if that be true which Herodian writes of barbarous men, Herodian. in
Commodo*
namely that they are naturally greedy of money, Englishmen are sufficiently
discharged of the blame of barbarousnes: howsoever some ignorant, or passionate
writers, have endeavored to stayne them therewith. But to what purpose is it to
stand long on this point, seeing the experience, and testimony of noble and
famous personages does openly ratify my saying? That good Vidame of Chartres
of famous memory (who for that himself was one of the most liberal Lo, of
our time, might best speak of liberality) said openly that if there were any
Nation in Christendom more liberal and courteous toward strangers, then the
English, he would be reckoned amongst those which talk rashly of things which
they know not. He which has succeeded him as well in his virtues as his
heritage, protests often that he dares not to speak of the humanity,
liberality and courtesy of the English Nation, fearing to begin a discourse,
the entry whereof were found much easier then the issue. Odet Cardinal of
Chastilion, had ordinarily this saying in his mouth: that courtesy had once
imparked her self in France, but that now she was passed over the sea.

This discourse would demand longer deduction, but I am a Frenchman and jealous
of the honor of my country. Plutarch writes that the great Rethoritian Molon,
having on a day heard Cicero declaiming in Greek, Plutarch in the life of
Cicero.
said lamenting, that he deplored the estate of Greece, whose richest ornament
(meaning eloquence) Cicero carried away with him. For my part, though I am no
less affectionate toward the English Nation then commands the desert of their
virtues, yet so is it that I am sorry to see them so richly arrayed with our
spoils. In so much that England may by good right be accounted at this day the
very Sanctuary of all civility, kindness and courtesy: the testimonies
whereof may be seen not only toward their friends, and in time of peace, but
even in time of war, and toward their enemies. Of many examples I will
choose one so notable, as I know not whether the like be to be found in the
Greek or Latin Historiographers. Amongst all the battles which were ever
fought in France, that of Poytiers is worthy the remembrance, not only for the
inestimable loss of the vanquished, but much more for the courtesy and
generositie of the vanquisher. For the Nobility of France was there hewn in
pieces, many Princes and great Lords made prisoners, and namely king John
himself fell into the hands of the Prince of Wales, who had him afterward
into England where hereceiued so good and gracious intertainement of king
Edward father to the Prince of Wales, that being on his faith and hostages
returned into France, to give order for his affairs, after he had thoroughly
considered the intertainement that was made him, he sauoured and liked so well
of the English courtesy, that he esteemed it more honorable to die near so
noble a Prince, then to live as king of the greatest and mightiest kingdom in
Christendom. Porus an Indian king, being taken by Alexander, and being asked
of him how he desired to be dealt with at his hands, I am (says he) a king,
let me be used Royally, as belongs to a king. Alexander being farther instant
on him to know what he demanded more: this word Royally (says he) comprehends
all, which made that Alexander esteemed highly of him afterward, and
intertayned him according to his demand. But this courtesy of king Edward
ought to be esteemed so much greater then that of Alexander, as Porus took no
arms against him, but constrained for his own lawful defense: and
contrariwise, king John would not accept such honest conditions of peace, as
were offered him by the Prince of Wales, although the Cardinal of Perigort,
being sent by Pope Innocent labored to bring him to some composition. But he
being over mastered by his choler, was overcome by a handful of people, and
lost a battle the nineteenth of September, 1356. which can not so well be
compared unto any as to that memorable exployt at Cannas, which was like to
have overthrown the whole estate of the Roman common wealth. And although
civil wars are ordinarily managed with a courage so much the more inuenomed,
as the alliance is straighter between country men: yet so it is (if we
credit Histories) that there is not in all the world any Nation found, which
in this respect has remained in such and so long a possession of moderation,
and clemency, as the English. Comines who has been as much or more
acquainted with the affairs of England, Comines cap. 112.
as any Frenchman of his time, says that the custom of the country is in
civil wars, to come straight to battle, and that the chief of that side, to
which the victory enclines, causes to be proclaimed aloud, Save the people.
That I would to God we had used the like moderation in our civil wars, we
should then at this day have fifty thousand more witnesses of our dissension,
the shedding of whose blood prouokes the anger of God against our country of
France. But because that being occasioned as well by natural affinity, as by
conformity of manners, to love a people, is not a thing of it self deserving
any great commendation without endeavor to make demonstration thereof: the
order of our discourse requires to have this article sifted yet somewhat nearer,
to the end that such as call the Englishmen ancient enemies to the crown of
France, may learn either to speak better, or else to hold their peace,
whenever there is question of any such matter. I say then that the effects
of amity have bin always reciprocal beweene these two Nations. For laying
aside that which I alleged out of Caesar, that the Britains had always
succored the Gauls in all their wars. I will take testimonies of fresher
memory, of a hundred or six score years past.

In the time of king Jews the eleventh, Charles Duke of Burgundy, desirous to
clip the wings of his mortal enemy Jews of France, called to help him
Edward king of England, his brother in law, to whom there needed not much
speech to make him pass over into France, whereunto he wanted no pretense.
There was then great likelihood, that if the duke of Burgundy had well known
how to use his prosperity, he had either quite overthrown, or at least
wonderfully shaken the whole estate of France. But king Jews being a Prince
much better furnished of wisdom, then of courage, considering to what exigent
his affairs were brought, procured or rather cunningly practiced a treaty of
peace with king Edward at Piquignie. One may well say that at that time the
mildness of king Edward, served in steed of a strong and mighty bulwark
unto France, against the surious and impetous effortes of the Burgonian.

Charles the eight, the son and successor of Jews was favored of heaven,
so far forth as to have occasion to acknowledge this courtesy toward the
English Nation: who was as ready to embrace such an occasion as it was happily
offered him. Edward of whom we last spoke being deceased, his brother Richard
duke of Gloucester, by evil practices and unlawful means, invested himself
with the crown of England, defrauding his Nephews of their inheritance. If
the means of inuesting himself with so great an estate were strange and
exorbitant, his behavior and comportment therein was yet more strange. Such
and so miserable was then the estate of poor England that he escaped best
cheap, who went away with the loss of his goods, estate, and dignities.
Diverse of good calling and account, to save themselves out of this shower,
retired into France. The Noblest and of greatest name amongst them was the
Earl of Richmond, who having a while soiourned in Britanie, finally resolved
himself to recover with his own good, the liberty of his country. This new
Thrasibulus, wanted neither friends nor partakers: for he had succor of king
Charles the eight, with whom he passed over into England, where having given
battle with happy success, he had for guerdon of his prowess, the estate
and crown, which has ever since remained on the head of his successors. I
would not stand so much on the courtesy of England, were it not that in our
time even within these sixty years the effects thereof had been so good, and
so manifest on our behalf, that it were blockishnesse in us to be ignorant
thereof, and great looseness if we did not acknowledge it.

Since the battle of Poytiers, France received not so great an overthrow, as
at Pauie, where king Francis was taken prisoner. The Emperor Charles being yet
a young Prince, and boiling with ambition, after so fair a victory, entered
into marvelous hopes, and held himself assured that within few years, the
universal Monarchy of Europe would be the interpretation of his Plus oultre.
And indeed there is great likehood that the forces of France being so mated,
See the history of Bellay.
he might if not wholly, yet in part have seen the accomplishment of his
desseignes, had not God (beholding out country with his pitiful eye) stirred
up the heart of Henry the eight king of England, to stay the course of the
Emperor striking with full sails through the midst of his victory. An act
deserving so much the more admiration as king Henry had no other occasion to
do it, but an Heroical virtue, with the which his courage being once
enkindled, he choose rather to appropriate unto himself the sole honor of
releiuing an afflicted neighbor, then to be copartner with the vanquisher in
the spoil and pray. In so much that we may well say, that king Henry the 8.
next unto God has been the author of our deliverance, and that the Lion has
plucked us out of the Eagle his claws. And we must not think that he sought
herein either his own private profit or particular safety. For touching
profit, besides that which the event has made known, the protestation which
he made by his king at arms, defying the Emperor does show sufficiently that
he had no other end but honor and virtuous exploytes, Theocritus in (...) Prolo.
which in ancient time, as says Theocritus, have gotten the title of Heroes,
to great and renowned personages. And in respect of security, the Emperor
being as the^ affectionate toward his uncle king Henry, for greater
confirmation of amity, a marriage was entreated of between him and the Lady
Marie, eldest daughter to king Henry.

Insomuch that all things accounted, the English had then no cause to be
afraid of the Emperor. Moreover, the Emperor could not enterprise any thing
on the estate of France without parting stakes with the English, for their old
pretense unto Guyen and Normandy.

This matter deserves longer discourse, but I study after brevity, that I
may speak somewhat of king Edward the sixth, the son of king Henry. This
Prince was so full of virtue and the fear of God, that he may be good right be
called the Josias of the new Testament, and the Paragon of Princes Christian.
But laying aside his rare virtues, whereof the best speakers can speak but too
compendiously, I will only touch that which nearest concerns our subject.

This Prince by the counsel of the late duke of Northumber land carried so
entire, and sincere an affection to our king Henry the second, that if God
had lent him longer life, there had been a league made between these two
kings and duke Maurice of Saxony. In such sort that there is great likelihood
that an alliance made between three such mighty Princes, had then brought the
Emperor Charles to take that part which afterward he took, that is, to
retire himself into Castile, to the Monastery of Saint Just. I speak not of
his humanity used toward our poor Frenchmen, fled into England for refuge
in a time, when to make p^ofession of a Christian life in France, was but to
expose themselves to the death. This obligation is common to us with almost all
the Nations of Europe, whose exile has been honored with the assistance and
comfort of this most holy and happy king Edward. Happy (say I) not only in
respect of him self, but for that he has also in his sister the Queen
Elizabeth so perfect a portraiture, and so right a resemblance of his most
Christian and Heroical virtues. Which causes that all such as throughout
Europe are endued with sound judgment, do wish of all things in the world,
either to be the subjects of such a Princess, or at least to live under the
subjection of such a Prince as might most resemble her. But I dare not
undertake to set forth the praises of Queen Elizabeth, in respect that if I
should omit any one of her rare virtues, my discourse would not be well taken
of the better sort: and to go about to discourse of the^ by particulars, were
never to have done. Taking then a shorter course, I will only say that she has
made demonstration of her good will toward France, as often times as the
estate of our affairs has presented her any occasion. Above all, she has
always showed her self affectionate to the intertayning of peace with us,
being induced thereunto as well by her own clear insight and wise forecast,
as also by the mature and sage counsel of the right virtuous and noble Lords
Sir William Cecill; yet at this day Lord Treasurer of England, and Sir Nicholas
Bacon, of worthy memory, sometimes Lord Keeper of her Majesty's great Seal;
personages endued with so high and eminent wisdom, and so happily qualified
in all kinds of virtue, that he shall well deserve a place amongst the best
speakers that shall duly set forth their praises to posterity. For my part I
magnify that most merciful God which has so well married good hap to the
virtue of these two English Nestors, Callimachus in hymno Iouis,
that in them may be seen the accomplishment of that prayer so much celebrated
by Callimachus.

(...)
(...),
(...).
O blessed father be thou blessed,
Give virtue, giving store:
Goods without virtue do no good,
with virtue evermore.
And virtue feeble feels her force
if so she live in want,
Then blessed father virtue give
and let not store be scant.
It remains now to speak of a like demonstration of amity toward us, and
yet in a case much unlike. France has not in it any greater ornament, then the
City of Paris, nor the City of Paris then the exercise of learning, which has
been there continued, ever since the time of Charlemaine: that is to say,
since the year 792. even till this day with such reputation, that in the time
of our fathers, to have studied at Paris, and to be well learned, were two
diverse terms signifying one and the self same thing. But if this benefit be
great, (as it can not be otherwise accounted saving of such as want judgment)
we can not acknowledge to have received it of any but the English Nation,
except we will in depriving the^ of their deserved praise, bereave our selves
also of being reputed a people that loves roundnesse and integrity. For
Charles the great was induced to this so happy an enterprise, by the counsel
of Flaccus Albinus an Englishman, seconded by two Scotishmen, the one named
Ioannes Milrosius, the other Claudius Clemens.

But even as evil counsel, by a just judgment of God falls ordinarily to the
prejudice of him that gives it; contrariwise the author of good and holy
counsel, is he who willingly tastes the first fruits thereof: So the
Englishmen have reaped the fruit of that good and wholesome counsel of
Albinus, and his companions in that the University of Oxford is a branch of
that of Paris. But because we see men to be so much the more inclined to
things unto the which they are drawn for the conservation of that which does
nearest concern them: I say that the safety of England touches us so
nearly, and our safegarde so nearly the English, that one of the two Nations,
being distressed by a stranger, the other may make reckoning that they are not
long to enjoy any great quietness. It is known that as soon as Caesar had
set on foot the Roman power in France, he thought he had not well played his
part, until he went to remove household into England. The histories have so
cleared this article, that it were but superfluity of speech to extend our
selves any farther in deduction thereof.

I would now that some one of our masters of the Court, who are so
affectionate and make so great account of the alliance of Spain would show me
the like motives and grounds of their opinion. But I assure my self, that they
will not put themselves to the pains of proouing any natural affinity
between the French and Spanish, unless they fetch it from the Ark of Noah: or
else make reckoning of that which the Poets tell touching the beautiful
Bebrix. Which nevertheless were an argument as feeble as far from the purpose
as is known to such as are seen in the knowledge of antiquity and specially
of Poetical fictions.

But being now entered into this discourse, it will not be impertinent to
speak of the original of our Spaniardes at this day. For eue^ as waters which
run out of sulphur springs, have always a taste of brimstone, so men carry
always imprinted in their manners, the virtuous or vicious quality of their
ancestors. So that having known the original of the Spaniardes, it will be a
good opening to the discourses ensuing. About the year of Christ 717. Julian
Count of Biscay being extreemely grieved, and exceeding desirous to be revenged
of the outrage done unto him by Rodericke king of the Goths, who had defloured
his daughter, called and drew unto him the Moors for his succor, under the
conduct of their king Muza Maramamolin. Under this pretense (so safe a thing is
it to bring in foreign forces) the Moors made themselves masters of all
Spain, except Biscay and Austerlande: their captains having afterward
parted this conquered country amongst the^, became so many petty kings in
Spain. Since that time the Saracens have been mingled farther amongst them.
But if we will fetch the matter yet farther about (that is) from Caesar's time,
we shall find that without speaking of the Romans, who commanded almost over
all Europe, the Goths, the Vandales, the Moors, the Saracens, have ruled over
Spain. Therefore if of good right the Goths and Vandales, are counted cruel,
the Moors perfidious and reuengefull, the Saracens proud, and villainous in
their manner of living. I pray you what humanity, what faith, what courtesy,
what modesty, and civility, may we think to find amongst this scumme of
Barbarians? But to the end it be not thought that I rest rather on
presumptions, then on proofs and sound arguments, I am content that this
article be cleared by conference of their manners with ours, that is, of their
vices with our virtues, of their vile viliacquerie, with our generositie. In
brief, such is this comparison that if some Rhethoritian would employ his
eloquence in framing of a long and lively Antithesis, he could not in the world
find a subject more sortable to his purpose, then the comparing of our
conditions with those of this mongrell generation.

And to the end that none may think that I speak without book, to begin
with the blazon of their brauest colors, I will produce a witness, who will
make them blush for shame, though they be so brasenfaced, that they blush not
by their wills. If I should but say, that the witness whom I purpose to
produce, is a Senator of Venice, yet had I sufficiently qualified him to make
him get credence of wise and discreet persons. But I will say moreover, that
he is an ancient Senator, and so well seen in the affairs of this world, that
for a man to conform himself after his imitation, is nothing else at this day
amongst the Venetians, but to aspire to an immortal renown, by a most wise
conduct of matters of estate. It is (to be short) that excellent and renowned
personage Andrea Griti, who discoursing in the Senate of Venice, of the humors
of this Spanish generation: behold what good testimony he gives of their
integrity. Guichardino. lib. 15
The Spanish Nation (says he) is unfaithful, ravenous, and insatiable above
all other Nations. And where is (I pray you) that place of the world, where
those infamous Harpyes have once set footing without defiling of it with the
footsteps of their abominable vices?

But because that in matter of proof, the testimony of one alone is of no
great weight. I will yet produce an other witness which is Francis Guichardin,
an Historian so accomplished, as the naming only of his gifts and
perfections, would desire and deserve a whole History. Behold what testimony
he gives of the Spanish integrity. The Spanish Nation (says he, giving his
judgment of these venerable Padres) is covetous and crafty, Guichardino. lib,
16.
and when they have means to discover themselves, such as indeed they are,
most insolent and outrageous. Geryon king of Spain (if we give credit to
Poetical fables) had three bodies: and although it be a Poetical fiction, yet
will it not be found so strange of him that will thoroughly consider the nature
and disposition of the Spaniarde, in whom may be seen together incorporated, a
crafty Fox, a ravenous Wolf, and a raging Tygre. And let that be spoken in
respect of the least insupportable of that Nation. For he which shall nearly
look into those of greatest account amongst them, that is, such as are more
wicked and abominable, then the vulgar sort, he shall find in every one of
them the Cube: yea oftentimes the very Sursolide of this ternarie monster. He
shall find (I say) an unclean and filthy swine, a theeuish howlet, a proud
peacocke: and for an accomplishment of all their ornaments, he shall find a
legion of devils, making trade of lying, coosening and deceauing the world.

Briareus (as Homer says) had a hundred hands: Homer^ Iliad^.^.
he which shall think that a Spaniard has less when it comes to catching,
let him receive, be it but for a day or two, some Dom Diego into his house, and
if he change not his opinion, I will be content to confess, that the Spaniarde
has changed his custom. I say if pilferie and theft be rather to be esteemed
customarie, then natural in this Nation. And if any doubt of their sufficiency
in this respect, the estate of the low countries will so manifest it unto him,
that he will soon be brought to confess that the Bohemians and Egyptians, are
but young prentises of the Spaniard in appropriating other men's goods to
themselves. And he should do the^ great injury, who should think that with time
they had not made themselves more cunning in their craft, specially these later
years, during which a great many of these gallant spirits have served their
apprentiship under Dom Ferdinando of Toledo, so soueraign a master in this
faculty, Virg. Eglog. 1.
that to go about to compare unto him an Autolicus, or a Verres, were to fall
into the error of the shepherd Tytirus, comparing small things unto great.

But me thinks it were reasonable to hide the imperfections of this great
Captain, in contemplation of such excellent parts as are in him. For by the
saying of his disciples, and vpholders, he is secret, wise, and of great
understanding. As touching his taciturnitie, I doubt not at all but that he is
very secret. Neither is there any thing, specially in his particular, and
domestical actions, but may by him and his with more honesty be concealed
than uttered. Touching his great wisdom and forecast, he has given such and
so many testimonies thereof in the conduct of Flanders affairs, that if the
Sun should as often eclipse in heaven, as wisdom has in his head, during
that time there, we might well think that we were on that days eve, which
shall bring an end to all things of this world. At the least, it is notorious,
that his wit so far failed him, as that he knew not how to hide those theftes
and robberies which he had committed on the poor people (for the thing is too
well known) but those pillinges and peculations, which he made on the
treasours of his master, I know well that his creatures disguising the deed,
say that he remained in arrerages. But laying aside these colors of Castillan
Rhetoric, I say roundly, that our French tongue is so bare, that it has no
other term fit enough to specify the good dealing of the Duke of Alua, but
theft and robbery. And therefore if at this day he practice as well in Spain
with the lute, as he has done with the harp in Flanders, king Phillip may
well send back his Seuerino into Italy. But howsoever it be, the king his
master has reprehended his avarice, but yet not with rigor, having respect
peradventure to the order of the fleece, which I dare well say; he has no
better reason to bear, then because he first fleeced, and then devoured as a
ravening Wolf, the innocent sheep of a good shepherd. For we must not think
that he and the rest of that Spanish rascal, spared any more the blood, then
the purses of the poor people of the low countries: for they had commandment
so to do. And their Prince was not with anything so much moved, as in that they
did not handle the^ yet more extreemely. That soon may thou O new Pharao,
by thy miserable death make an end of the waylings of so many desolate persons.

But if any one think that the courages of the Spaniards have been so
inuenomed against those of the low countries, for the different of Religion, he
shows that he is as little acquainted with their natural disposition, as with
the state of their affairs. It is about a hundred years since they discovered
a new world, under the conduct of Christopher Columbus, who in my judgment
would never have undertaken this voyage, if he had thought that the men whom
he brought thither, as if they were charmed by the cup of Circe, should
straightwaies be transformed into Lions, Panthers, Tigres, and other savage
beasts. The Indians and Americans are poor barbarous, and simple ones: such
as by good conversation, and godly persuasions, might easily be won unto
Christ, which way the Frenchmen have since that time both wisely and happily
followed. But in truth we may well say that this new Indian and American world
has not been so much unknown in times past: as the new and enormous
cruelties, which these devils incarnate coming out of Spain, do there put in
practice.

O Turks, O Scithians, O Tartarians, rejoice ye now, sithence at this day
there is found in Christendom a Nation, which by their wicked and detestable
deeds, go about to bury that hatred which is borne to your barbarous cruelty.
But I dwell too long on so tragical a subject, which notwithstanding I do with
as great grief as with just occasion. Laying aside then such an argument as is
sufficient to make Democritus weep, let us speak of two articles, either of
which is such as he had need to be possessed with an humor more then
Heracliticall, that hearing and considering them nearly could abstain from
laughter. It is of their civility and modesty.

Touching the first, if any have had that good hap never to have been
conversant with Spaniards, and would notwithstanding be informed according to
the truth of their Gothish civility, he can not see a more lively
portraiture, nor a draught drawn by the hand of a happier Appelles, then
Terence, in the description which he makes of harlots in his Eunuch, in these
terms: Quae dum foris sunt, nihil videtur mundius, nec magis compositum
quicquam, nec magis elegans. And a little after he adds: Harum videre est
ingluuiem, sordes, inopiam, quam inhonestae solae sint domi, atque auidae cibi:
quo pacto ex iure hesterno panem atrum vorent.

I would say more, were it not for displeasing of the delicate sort: and we
have here set the Spaniardes on stage like good Apothecaries, to furnish our
selves with laughter at their charges. And I pray you what man is there so
melancholy, that could forbear laughter, seeing a burden-bearer, a cobbler, or
a carter, to call himself Caualiero: or else to see a Caualiero of Spain,
going thorough the fields, to carry the fragmentes of his dinner in a budget,
and to play a thousand other peasauntly parts, which the carriers, cobblers,
and carters of our country would disdain once to have thought on. The
Mathematicians teach, that in the operations of Algebra, the most equal is
often reduced unto less. The speeches of the Spaniardes do much resemble this
divine Algebricall mystery: In so much that ordinarily these great and
magnificent titles of a grand Caualiero, having ten thousand ducats of
reuenewe; make as much being taken at their true rate and value, as an
unthrift, a rascal and a runnagate, having scarce thirty Maluedies in his
purse, to pay for patching of his pantofles. So that one may well say to those
magnificent Dom Diegos, Plutarchus in Phocione.
as sometimes said a great personage of Athens, your discourse is like to the
Cipres tree, which being great and high brings forth no fruit.

To be short, he that would see a lively picture of an Attalus, a Suffenus, or
a Thraso, without troubling himself too much in turning over Martial,
Catullus, and Terence: let him only consider the stern looks, and stately
speeches of a Spaniarde. And although these tarcelets of Saracens be qualified,
as I have said, yet have they with blows of pistolets so blinded the eyes of
some of our Courtiers, that they are not ashamed to maintain, that we are
much bound to these honest creatures. For my part I confess I am not so sharp
witted, as to see the foundation of this obligation, except they will take it
in the same sense that Antiochus did, (...)
saying that he was much beholden to the Romans, who having shortened his
authority and power, had eased him of a huge and heavy burden. Even so are
we indebted to the Spaniards, in that they have eased us of such travails as
the estates of Flanders, Naples, and Millayne, might have brought unto us. And
moreover to entreat yet farther of their good affection toward us, is not
this a testimony of their cordial Spanish amity, which they used in times
past to our ancestors, (according to their cruel nature) that having won the
battle of our men, they slew afterward all the prisoners they had in their
hands, as Froysard Look Froysard.
witnesses? Would any man crave a clearer interpretation of that which
heretofore I alleged out of Guychardine, that this Nation is most insolent,
when they have found their advantage to discover themselves as they are, that
is, to take off the mask of their hypocrisy. It is also a fair testimony of
their courtesy toward us, that contrary to their promised faith, they
massacred our men in Florida, about twenty years since. I had almost
forgotten to produce one notable effect of their courtesy toward us, that
is, the imprisonment of king Francis, which himself took the more grievously
(as Guichardine reports) because the remembrance of the English courtesy
toward king John was deeply engraven in his memory. What testimony of
amity toward us is that which the Spaniardes will allege? shall it not be
the succor which king Henry of Castile gave in the time of king Charles the
fifth: Se Froysard
and the victory which he won before Rochell of the Earl of Pembrocke? As
if he himself had not reaped the principal fruit of this victory, or as if
such an assistance had not been the chief rampire of his own estate.

But as the English are conformable unto us in so many things as I have
heretofore alleged, so they have that also common with our misery, that they
have tried to their cost the most dangerous amity of the Spaniards. For
Phillip king of Spain, and then also king of England, having purposed to
possess himself of Callis, gave occasion to the French to do that with the
Lions clawe, which the Spaniarde had thought to have done with the Fox his
tooth: otherwise the French would never have resolved themselves on so
hazardous an enterprise as the siege of Callis.

To make short, one may well say, that the Nation of the world which is most
affectioned toward the commonweal of France, is that which least resembles
the Spanish, which so much the more boldly I conclude, as I hold my self
assured that none will pain himself so much as to prove that they have been
helpefull unto us, either in the knowledge of good letters, or in government of
our manners. For what lightning unto learning can be expected of a Nation which
during this happy age has scarcely brought forth five or six learned men.
Thence I think it is, that the Spaniards (as great trauaylers as they are)
never durst go so far as to the Hiperboreans, fearing belike, least they yet
kept their ancient custom, that is, Pindarus ode. x. Pith.
sacrifycing of Asses. For government of manners, we may well say, that as the
Philosopher Polyanus, being once wedded to the dotages of Epicurus, forgot all
the knowledge which he had of Geometry, Cicero in Lucullo.
so by the acquaintance of Spaniards, we have almost forgotten that virtue
which we were best acquainted with, that is, courtesy and humanity.

And to what purpose I pray you, should that Nation be so affectionate unto
us, who has so little interest in our overthrow? nay rather which has
always, and especially within these hundred years, founded their advancement
on our destruction. I abridge this discourse of purpose, to entreat of an
article of more importance, that is, the means which both the one and the other
has to help and to hinder us. I will speak first concerning traficke, and
after touching matter of arms.

All such as have knowledge both of England and Spain, will agree unto me,
that England is much better stored of people then Spain. I speak not in
respect of proportion, but absolutely (although England be by a great deal the
lesser) which proceeds only of the temperature of the place. For although
France be one of the temperatest regions that are, yet so is it that Caesar
says expressly, speaking of England, Loca sunt temperatiora quam in Gallia.
This abundance of people is a certain argument of the fertility of the place.
Pindarus in some place calls Sicilie (...), that is, abundant in sheep,
Pindarus ode 1. Olym. Pind. od. 1. Nem.
and expounding himself, in an other place he calls it (...), that is, fat
or fertile. If the argument of this so learned Poet be well couched, we may
well conclude, the fertility of England, by the great abundance not only of
sheep, but in general, of cattle which is in it. Here (it may be) some will
allege the saying of Cicero in his oration entitled De Aruspicum responsis.
Cicero in Lucullo.
For behold with what words he speaks. Quam volumus, licet ipsi nos amemus:
tamen nec numero Hispanos, nec rob^re Gallos, nec calliditate Paenos, nec
artibus Graecos, nec denique hoc ipso huius gentis ac terrae natiuo sensu
Itales ipsos ac Latinos, sed pietate, ac religione omnes gentes ac nattones
superauimus.

But in this place it is easy to see that Cicero had rather ears, then eyes,
as well as heretofore speaking of Astrology. And that in this discourse, he
would play the part of an other Mirmecides, Plinius li. 7. Cap. 21.
making a great ado about a small matter. But to what purpose is it to stand
much on this article, since the traffic of the one and the other country,
may easily clear it. We have out of England, Wool, Tin, Fish, and many
other things in great quantity. In exchange whereof we furnish them with
wine, salt, woad, and diverse other things, which is the cause that Rochell,
Bourdeaux, and generally all the coast of Normandy, Britain, and Guienne, is
brought into great perplexity, when the traficke cease with England.

Out of Spain, I confess, we have very good Horses for service, although they
come but by stealth. Which I do nevertheless against my will, because that
confessing this article, I am constrained to accuse the negligence and sloth of
our Frenchmen. For if we would maintain such races of horses and mares as are
seen at Lauedan, our traficke with Spain should be accounted of mere
charity: for as much as we should help the^ very much, without being helped or
eased by them. For the merchandise of a few perfumed gloves, and such other
small baggage, deserves not to be accounted of. And for their behoose they are
constrained to borrowe of us, (by reason of the dryness and barrenness of
their country) that which is most necessary for the life of man, which is
corn. As for wine, they have sufficient. There remains the traficke of wool,
of kersyes, and clothes both woollen and linen, which comes not to the third
part of that which our Marchantes have out of England. Neither will it serve
to say that he may have store of corn out of such places, as he holds in
Italy, as out of Naples, Sicily, and Millaine. For they which husband the
matter after this manner, do not consider that this were but robbing of Peter
to pay Paul. Sicily is fruitful I grant, but it behooves that Malta and
the Goze, be sustained by her fruitfulness, except they will in abandoning of
them, expose themselves for a pray to the Turk. Moreover a great part of the
commodities of Sicile, are employed on the maintenance of Italy. But in respect
of Millaine, and of Lombardie, the Spaniarde finds such difficulty of
carriage, that he can not well help himself with the commodities thereof,
except the sauce cost him much dearer than the fish is worth. Touching Naples,
Apulia, and Calabria, as they are less fruitful, so also the Spaniard can be
less helped by them. The like may be said in respect of the low countries.

Some peradventure will find it strange, that I stand so much on the
infertilitie of Spain, seeing that the great means which this Nation has to
help us with, make a more then suffieient counterpoise, for this default.
Here must I needs employ that Quolibet, which the Judges of Rome were wont
to use, when they found themselves perplexed for the decision of some matter of
importance, that is to say, Non liquet. But this perplexity of mine, is so
much the less, as it may easily be removed by comparing of the means as well
of England as of Spain. If we will measure these means by the number of
soldiers which the one and the other Nation is able to set forth: experience,
(that is History) pleads manifestly for the English. And, that so it is;
king Edward, of whom we have spoken before, brought to the aid of the Duke of
Burgundy, by the testimony of Comines, fifteen hundred men well mounted, the
most of them on barbed horses, and richly furnished. Also fifteen thousand
Archers on horsbacke. In our time king Henry making descent into Picardie,
Guichardine lib. 12
to join him self with the Emperor Maximilian the first, at the camp of
Terouane, had five thousand horse, and more then forty thousand footmen,
whereof five and twenty thousand were English, and fifteen thousand
Lansquenets. The Emperor Charles, and his son king Phillip have been the
Princes, who have commanded most absolutely over Spain: yet neither the one
nor the other have in their wars made greater leauie, then eight thousand
natural Spaniardes, and almost all footmen. For in respect of horsemanship,
the Spaniarde somewhat resembles the sword-fish, which has a blade, and can
not help himself therewith. The same may be said of the Spaniardes, who have
very good horses which serve their turn better to traficke with their
friends, than to fight and repulse the enemy. But because that the memory of
late accidents may serve much to the deciding of this difficulty, I will here
allege so clear and evident a testimony, as that whosoever makes reckoning
of Spanish forces, shall have nothing for ground of his opinion, but either a
light belief, or an opinatiue conceit. During the reign of king Francis the
second, when the great ones of France were at discord amongst themselves, king
Phillip wrote a letter to the king, which was read in the privy Counsel: I
can not well say in what language it was written, but the contents seemed to
smell of the Spanish phrase. For he protested that whenever any sturres
happen in France, he would help the king his brother, with an army of
fifty thousand men. Shortly after occasion was offered of effectuating that
which he had so solemnly protested. For France was torn with a tempest of
civil war: And although our miseries made almost as many fountains of
tears to issue forth, as there are towns in France; yet gave they unto the
king of Spain occasion to rejoice, in furnishing him with means, to
accomplish his promise. Let us see then how well he acquired himself. He was
requested to send succor unto the King his brother, being desirous to
restablish the Romish religion in her former estate. He, because he would not
be thought to be backewarde, either in zeal to his religion, or amity
toward his brother, assembled certain troops of those prudent and religious
persons, whose ordinary practice, is in the straightes of the mountains
Pirenees, to take gold without waying it, and silver without telling it.
Neither yet to the number of fifty thousand as he promised, but of two
thousand only. In sort that it was easy for good Arithmeticians to judge, that
this good Prince making such protestation as abouesaide, had calculated his
means by the rule of false position. Touching the behauiours of these brave
and valorous soldiers, to him that considered them nearly they seemed to
represent I know not what Image of the ancient times, Thucidide^ lib. 1
during which as Thucidides writes, robbery was not subject unto any reproach.
The respect of these goodly qualities, made the Roman Catholics to lament so
much the more the loss of these honest men. For they being encamped on the
river of Tard, those Amazons of Mountauban, in certain sailyes killed a great
number of them, without confession or repentance of any sin, saving of that
which is termed military temeritie, and oversight of war. But because that
in comparing diverse things together, the Geometrical proportion is to be
accepted above the Arithmeticall, he were not much out of the way, who would
judge rather by the valor and desert of both Nations in deeds of arms, then
by the number. For oftentimes a small number of men does overcome a great
army, and treades them under foot. I am exceeding sorry that I can not
produce any better testimonies of the English prowess, then those great and
notable victories which they have gotten over us. Yet so it is that our valiant
Successors wanting nothing less then courage and good will, in those
battles, the English can not vaunt themselves of any thing, more then that
they ouer-came most valiant enemies. So those Poets and Historiographers, who
have song of their prosperity, could not therewith but report our valiancie.
In brief, the virtue and prowess of our ancestors, deserved not to be
surmounted by any, but by such enemies as knew how to vanquish even victory it
self, that is to say, the furour and insolency of victorious arms. Let the
Carthagineans boast, as much as they list, of their happy success at Cannas:
yet he that should prefer it above the battle of Cressie, should show
himself either too much appassionate or too simply skilled in the knowledge of
histories. Out of which we may gather, that in the said renowned battle which
was fought in the year 1346. there were slain on our side eleven Princes,
four score Barons, a thousand and two hundred horsemen, and above thirty
thousand footmen. Also the battle of Poytiers (whereof I have spoken
heretofore) gave the like testimony as well of the English prowess in winning
of the victory, as of their courtesy and mildness in using of it moderately;
which makes me the more freely to speak of their virtue, and roundly to
confess that the small number on their side, have made their victories the more
notable and renowned.

It were against reason to request the Spaniardes, in this comparison, to
furnish us with the like examples of their prowess and valiancie, for they are
discharged of so doing by that rule of law which says, that none is bound to
the execution of things which are impossible. I should fear also of being
accounted a forger of Paradoxes, in saying that the Spaniardes are no warlike
Nation, if I had not so clear and evident proofs thereof, that to deny them
were but fast shutting of a man's eyes, that he might not see the sun shine at
noone day. And to seek out the depth of this matter, and to reason of effects
by their causes, I say that if nature have not changed her ordinary course of
working, the Spaniarde can not any ways be reputed amongst the warlike
Nations. Arist. lib. 7.
Those Nations which inhabit cold countries are (as Aristotle says) endued
with a more hautie and stout courage then others: cap. 7. politic.
but not so quick and sharp witted as other. And therefore they love more
their liberty, but are not so fit to bear rule over their neighbor Nations.
Contrariwise, the Nations of Asia are more quickspirited: but being of baser
courage, they yield their neck sooner unto the yoke of bondage. And
therefore, he concludes that the Greeks holding the midst between extreme
heat and extreme cold, are partakers of both complexions. But as his
proposition is founded on so good a consideration, that all men of
understanding will always yield unto it, so dare I to affirm, that in the
applying thereof, the love of truth gave place to the love of his country. For
the most Northern part of Greece is of forty four degrees, which is the
elevation of that quarter where Constantinople is situated, and also of the
mountains Pyrenees, which separate France from Spain. And therefore the five
and fortith degree which is the very bound of temperature, marking out the
midst of France, we may well say, that our country is more temperate then
Greece. But although England be as much or more northernly, then any part of
France; yet being on every side environed with the Ocean, the cold is nothing
so excessive there, as it is in France, which Caesar very well observed. And
therefore it is easy to conclude, that by reason of the situation of the
place, that the Englishmen are both warlike and wise, that is to say,
accomplished with whatsoever is necessary to a civil life. For the force of
body is no less requisite in execution, Pind. ode. 1.
than the dexterity and vigor of wit, Nem.
in devise and deliberation, as very well said the Poet Pindarus.

(...),
(...).
Though doughtie deeds are done by might,
With counsel grave the mind gives light.
And it is not sufficient to say as Commines does, that the Englishmen are very
choleric; a passion which of all others does most trouble a man's judgment,
especially when he is at point to resolve himself. For well it might be so in
the time of Comines, when Englishmen were not yet so well polished, as they
have bin since by the knowledge of good letters. But since that by the
liberality of king Edward we have seen two Athens in one England, that is to
wit, Oxford and Cambridge: it were hard to judge whether that so mighty a
realm, has been more plentiful in the fruits of the earth, then abundant
in fine, subtle, and most excellent wits, meet for the managing of matters of
estate. It is about three or four score years past, Machiauell in lib. de
principe.
that the Italian made the same reproach to the Frenchmen that Comines does to
the Englishmen: namely that they could not skill of matters of estate. But
since the time that king Francis replenished France with learned men, by means
of the professors which he caused to come from all parts of Paris, the
Italians should flatter themselves over much, if they thought that in conduct
of civil affairs, the Frenchmen were any whit behind them. Therefore it is
that Petrus Ramus (a man whose renown flies daily through out all the coasts
of the world) did so much enforce himself in his familiar talk, to extol the
liberality, and other excellent virtues of king Edward, and Queen Elizabeth,
that he thought he never had a matter worthy to work on with his wonderful
eloquence, except he were discoursing of the nature of a Princely and Heroical
virtue, whereof he represented a true and lively portraiture in the actions,
and behavior of these two Princes. But the desire which I have with the
means, to show that the Spaniarde is no warlike man, makes me to be somewhat
the shorter in discoursing of the wisdom of the Englishmen. I take that
reason which I alleged out of Aristotle to be sufficient to put back the
Spaniarde from that place which he pretendes to have amongst the warlike
Nations. Yet if any man choose rather to refer himself to experience then to
these Philosophical reasons, I have sufficient to content him, if he be a man
that will be contented with reason. I say then, that before this last hundred
years, the Spanish Nation was had in no reputation for feats of arms. And
for proof, I report me to the testimony of Histories. I say moreover, that
since that time look how often the Princes of Spain have placed the chiefest
strength of their armies, in bands of the Spanish Nation, they have always
received the overthrow. The battles of Rauenna, and Serizoles do sufficiently
prove my saying. On the contrary, if they have had any advantages over us, as
at Pauie, saint Quintins, and at Graueling, they ought to thank the Almaynes,
and Englishmen for it. I confess that under the conduct of the Emperor
Charles, they were brought to some order of discipline; which they do yet, and
shall continue as long as it shall please God to use them for the execution of
his just vengeance. For it is he that both gives and takes virtue to and from
men, when and as oftentimes as he himself lists, as the Poet Homer has very
well noted, saying: (...):
(...).
God virtue gives, God virtue takes from men,
As often as it pleases him, and when.


And although the Spaniardes surpass all other Nations in the world in vain
and foolish bragging, when they fall in question of their own prowess and
valiancie, yet do they labor to surmount themselves in this impudent boasting
when they once come to speak of their treasors and riches. And for as much as
this is the chief foundation of their imaginatiue greatness, I will stand
somewhat the longer on this point and will make it known, that if they had but
the third part of that riches which they imagine they have, they should be
three times richer then they are. The Egyptians reported in their Histories,
that in the Temple of Jupiter there was a pillar made of four Emerauds, having
every one of them forty cubits of length: whereat Theophrastus Theophrastus
(...).
iested pleasantly, and with great reason. Such like tales are found in the
Spanish Historiographers, concerning the I Will of Zipangrie, where these good
fellows would feign make us to believe, that flies carry double pike staves.
Touching the treasures of Peru, to make us understand that their reports are
made by imitation of Lucians true tales, they seem not to have forgotten
anything untold, saving that in the Cabinet of Atapaliba, they found a whole
hundred of Diamonds, every one of them as big at least, as an Ostriches egg.
But laying aside these lies which can not be believed of any but of such as
believe the real verity of Ovid his Metamorphosis. Let us consider that these
riches come not into the king of Spain his coffers, like grass in a medowe,
that is to say, without any cost, but on the contrary, that the carriage cost
him dear. Let us consider farther, that other Nations, and especially the
Frenchmen have learned the way to Peru, who fearing perhaps least the
Spaniardes might perish in the sea by being ouer-laden, do diverse times of
mere charity, and good will yield them so much succor as to take some part
of their burden into their own ships. Yea so courteous and friendly be our
Frenchmen, that they constrain the Spaniardes whether they will or no, to
receive the effects and testimonies of this their charitable courtesy.
Besides all this, the Indians begin to wax shrewd lads, and to make no more so
much account of glasses, pins, and such other Spanish gifts: peradventure
because some body has made them taste this saying of Sophocles.

(...). Sophoc. in A^ace.
Though fair the gifts of foes may seem,
Unfriendly always do them deem.
And if other causes wanted, is it possible that the possession of a thing so
ill gotten should endure long? Do we think there is any Indian under the
subjection of the Spaniardes, which cries not ten thousand times a day in his
language this sentence of Aristophanes?

(...), Aristophanes in Plut.

(...).
Alas how hard a thing it is to serve against ones will,
a master that of wit, of sense, and reason can no ^kill.
Aristotle says, Arist. Metaphys. lib. 1. ca. ^
that a country is possessed and held by a Tyrant, in the same manner that
men's bodies are with an agew. How many sighs, and groans do we think that
the poor Americans, (being by such a fervent fever so long tormented) cast
forth, which mount up to the ears of him that holds the stern, of the
matters of this world? Do we think that the hand of God is shortened, Esaias. 33.
that he can not when he sees time, execute the threatenings which he has
uttered by the mouth of his Prophet against these murderers, robbers, and
wasters? Where is that state in the world, be in never so flourishing, that can
be exempted from decay and utter overthrow? What wisdom, what counsel, what
force is it that can warrant it out of the hand of the almighty and
everliving God? Euripides in Electra.
Mischief runs up and down (says Euripides) from house to house, in most
rich and exquisite words.

(...)
(...)
(...).
Mischief from house to house does go,
As wind which passes to and fro.
The same with greater reason may be said of Monarchies, in which we may see
from day to day the accomplishment of this threatening which is so wisely set
down by Hesiodus speaking of Jupiter.

(...)
(...). Hesiod. oper. and diebus.

He soon pulls down the mighty ones,
and poor from dust does raise:
He soon correctes the crooked ones,
and roots out wicked ways,
Which is then seen especially, when the sins as well of the Prince,
Vitellius lib. 4.
as of the people, enforce God to break his patience. The Mathematicians hold
that the augmentation of the greatness of things makes them seem to
approach near unto our sight, Theox. 129
though in very truth they approach not at all. But with the sins of men it
fares much otherwise, which being heaped one on the other, do approach and
present themselves before the sight of the living God, Caius li. 20 and vltimo.
D. de Noxal. Action.
who oftentimes punishes the people in the Prince, and the Prince in the
people; whose justice is not ruled by the same square that men's judgments are
directed: in the which (according to the Lawyers) Noxa caput sequitur, that is,
Penalty pursues the principal. Whereof we have a manifest and notable
example in Abimelech, Genesis. 20
the king of Gerar, who excusing himself unto Abraham, uses these words,
What have I done unto thee? and wherein have I offended thee, that thou have
brought on me, and on my kingdom this great sin? Now if Abimelech do call
adultery a great sin, how shall we call that which we can not better
describe, Suetonius.
then by the conformity thereof unto that example set down by Suetonius in
the life of Claudius, in the xxvi. chapter of his book. But if this speech be
thought by any to be over dark, I refer him to that which the Lawyer Paulus
has written lib. 39. under the title, Si quis D. de ritu nuptiarum; and he
shall plainly understand my meaning. But this is not all, for there are yet
in this behalf, other sorts of wickedness, as much or more abominable then
the other, which they think to keep secret, as if the saying of the Poet
Musaeus had not place as well in this age as in the other.

(...)
(...)
Often times we hear that sounded openly,
Which we thought had been done full secretly.
Now then, if we think Gods justice to be immutable, let us know and be well
assured that he will visit such and so execrable wickedness (which may with
more honesty then ease be concealed) and will at last (how long soever he
foreslowe it) make the Spaniards and their king to feel his vengeance.

A cruel Tyrant on whose wretched head,
The wrath of God to fall is ready spread.
To be short, the time will come ere long, and will not tarry, that this wicked
Nation which for these hundred years, has made a trade of pilling and praying
on others, shall be exposed for a pray unto other Nations. The time (I say)
draws near, when either the Indians, or else the king of Spain his
Lieutenants themselves, shall revolt from him, and become executors of God his
wrath, against the covetousness, and cruelty of their own Nation.

Now remains to be considered the third and last point of this discourse,
that is to wit, whether of these two Nations being become our enemy, has most
means to annoy us. This point may well be cleared by that which has been
discoursed in the former, touching the means which either of those Nations
has to succor us with all. Yet so it is notwithstanding, that if the
Englishmen should happen to set foot in France, and especially in Guyenne, it
would be as hard for us to stay a great part of the Nobility and Gentlemen
from taking their part, as to bury the remembrance of the good turns and
pleasures, which their houses have received heretofore at the hands of the
kings of England, especially considering that the Charters of the greatest
houses of Guyen, are as many testimonies, or rather as many authentical
records of the obligation wherein they are bound to the memory of the kings of
England: moreover, falling at ods with the English, every one knows that
they have good diches, large and deep, such as can not be drayned.

On the contrary part, according to the opinion of that great Captain the
Admiral Chastillon, it were no less easy then expedient for us to overcome
the Spaniards, if we warred upon them as we ought, that is to say, if cutting
off the river at the spring head, we would set upon them at home in their own
country of Spain, which is a land very easy to be entered into, being both
unfurnished of strong towns, and which cannot but hardly be succored from
Germany, whereas on the contrary part, our armies should be backed by the
countries of Languedocke, and Gascoyne, both of the^ well stored with victuals,
and men of war, so that in France that quarter may well be called at this day
the storehouse of Mars.

If I should add nothing else, yet notwithstanding the causes heretofore set
down being well considered, do sufficiently conclude of themselves, that to
prefer, or to match in equality the alliance of Spain, to that of England,
were openly to show our selves unnatural, and unkind to our allies. It were
(I say) to show our selves blockish, and unable to discern the nature that
matcheth iumpe with ours, from that which is clean contrary unto ours; and
manifestly to oppose our selves against the benefit, and welfare of our
country.

The Spaniardes (as we have said) are covetous, crafty, proud, and ravenous:
Shall we change then our frank liberality into a slavish, and insatiable
covetousness? shall we change the generositie of the Lion, into the subtlety
of the Fox? shall we become of gentle, and courteous; arrogant, and
disdainefull? and of mild and meek, cruel and ravenous? shall we so bereave
our selves of those virtues which have gotten us reputation through out the
whole world, as that there shall remain no more unto us of Frenchmen, but even
the bare name? And yet if we nearly consider the natural disposition of the
Spaniarde, that miserable exchange (whereof I now spoke) will be evermore
noted, as an evident and sure testimony of our over great facility in making
so great account of that Nation, who (resembling Iuie) has always made those
to feel the most pernicious effects of her most hurtful malice, which have
been most straightly allied unto her.

Now for as much as prayer is accounted the duty of an honest man toward his
country; I pray to God O France, that thy preservation and increase, may be a
continual mirror of his goodness and wisdom, which shines in the
government of great estates and kingdoms. And that to the same end, he
vouchsafe to open thy eyes, that thou may discern that poison mixed with
honey, by the which they go about to work thy ruin, and the utter overthrow
of thy honor and greatness.

FINIS.

