A THEOLOGICAL DISCOVRSE OF THE LAMB OF GOD AND HIS ENEMIES: Containing a
brief Commentary of Christian faith and felicity, together with a detection
of old and new Barbarism, now commonly called Martinisme.

Newly published, both to declare the unfeigned resolution of the writer in
these present controversies, and to exercise the faithful subject in godly
reverence and duetiful obedience.

Speak these things, and exhort, and rebuke with all authority, let no man
despise thee: says S. Paul to Titus c. 2. v. 15.

PATERE ET POTIRE.

SVRSVM



LONDON Imprinted by John Windet for W.P. Anno. 1590.

TO THE MOST NOBLE and virtuous Lord, the Lord Robard Deuoreux Earl of Essex.
RIght Honorable my very good Lord, your favorable affection has been ever so
evident and your bountiful hand alvvaies so open unto me, that I can never
willingly come unto you without some schollerly exercise or other. The
readiest at this instant, though perhaps not the fittest altogether is a
theological treatise or divinity Discourse upon the chief or rather only
point of christian Religion, which I here offer up, if percase your Lordship
will at the most favorably admit it into your study, or at least
affectionately allow it as one small part of my duty and thankfulness, for
which only cause I present it, not in any other respect, even upon former
premises heretofore since your Lordships being in Cambridge to this day, not
for any future consequents hereafter, the Book desires not your special
patronage, it is not vvorthie of so honorable a specialitie, neither may I
trouble your excellent Lordship with Theological peculiars and proprieties
further then as they belong generally to all noble and true Christians; In
defending and maintaining the religion of their God, and faith of their
country, as the principal ground and very root of all their own politic
defense and maintenance. Herein I remember the common voice of scholars and
soldiers, of citizens and yeomen, of gentlemen and their betters: That the
Noble Earl of Essex is behind none, but before the rest, ever ready and more
forward then the forwardest in Gods battles and his Princes quarrels with horse
and spear to overthrow and ouerrun Gods foes and her enemies, even in their
own gates, even in Portugale it self a gallant kingdom and the most
venturous place of such enemies, even at their most populous and royal city
Lysbon, approving his virtue, with as much and happily more felicity, absit
assentationis suspitio, neque enim soleo auribus verba dare, then ever
Alexander himself did his valiancy at the city Malla. (Q. Curtius l. 9.)
never unready with good words and magnificent deeds, to honor his Prince or
ennoble his country, when God and Right shall employ him; never unready to
help any man, no not any common man, no not with hazarding of his own person
in common sight which I trust is guarded with good angels and in truth no
hazarding, and now lately by vnhorsing himself he mercifully saved a poor
wounded soldier from the mouth of the sword, therein equal or somewhat
comparable with the foresaid great Alexander in right manly nature and
honorable disposition, that so graciously relieved and revived a silly frosen
soldier in his own chair at the fire; (Valor. Maximus l. 5. c. 1.) but
assuredly even beyond him adsit bonus candor bono lectori, in brooking the
rough sea water at Peniche near Noua Lisbona, more easily all day then he did
the gentle river Cydnus at Tarsus in Cilicia one half quarter of an hour. (Q.
Curtius l. 3.) When I remember these and such Honorable famous reports commonly
delivered of my vvorthie good Lord, among many other men of Superior quality,
I am right heartily glad, to see my lot in so fair a ground, as to owe duty
and thanks to that Noble good Earl, which is so courageous with his years
and knowledge and so courteous with his knowledge and years, which more
and more increases that most excellent opinion ever heretofore conceived of
him for moral and martial proceedings, which with prosperous and now
renowned virtue fretteth envy in pieces and never teareth himself; I pray
God He may alvvaies with all blessed increase be like himself, that for
action is naturally borne Al Heart of his Noble Father, for Instruction since
his death is artificially made All Studious of his careful Tutor, for higher
direction and counsel has made al notable choice, for joyful success will
assuredly prove All Happy by Gods divine assistaunce. But I must not seem
long without cause, less I become tedious without effect: Now therefore I
most humbly beseech my Noble good Lord, only to receive this little Pamflet for
an unfeigned remembrance and infallible proof of my continual duty and
thankfulness, desiring no further regard or revvard any way, then his Honor in
vvoonted favor shall think good, seeing It is old enough and best at leisure
to speak for it self, upon any contingent of confutation or disliking that
may ensue. With which duty I daily still and still recommend your virtuous
studies and valiant acts, to al good and admirable success, even beyond the
impeachment or compass of doubtful and deceitful fortune through the blessed
son of God, the blessed lamb of God, our blessed God, our blessed Savior, to
the full fruition of his grace evermore redounding in your vvoorthie and noble
mind.

Your Honors in all bounden duty R. H.

T.D. Hexasticon, sieve gratulatio in Theologicon R.H.

Cedite sectarum primates, cedite puri,
Harueius patriae seruiet atque Deo.
Non curat fatuos, no^ christomastigas audit
Non credit placitis principiisque nouis.
Perge, liber, certa ingenii praedictio recti,
Et patriae, and populo, principibusque place
Vnio gemmarum Regina.

Mat. c. 9. v. 37, 38. Luke c. 10. v. 2. The harvest is great but the laborers
are fevve, pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest that he would send more
laborers into his harvest.


A THEOLOGICAL Discourse of the Lamb of God, and his Enemies.
IF I should reason about the choice of a text, to examine which is most fit
for us: then at the first, this joyful and marvelous peace in our days
sets before mine eyes that sentence of Christ in the gospel by S. John c.
13. v. 35. By this all men shall know, that ye are my disciples, if ye have
love one to an other. And then this whole realm, which no doubt is in high
favor with God, for having fed so many zealous confessors and constant martyrs
of righteousness, as even some of our selves may remember, and the godly book
of Monumentes will ever witness, lays open unto me this saying of Christ in
the gospel after S. Matthew c. 10. v. 39. He that loses his life for my sake
shall save it. These and other good causes of like effect call for other
tenours and texts of Scripture. Yet, because peace by long quietness brings
security in our carnal natures and natural bodies, and security by
forgetfulness breeds a cold or cool faith within us, and cool faith by
continuance makes us stiff and half dead with sin, and altogether unfit to
be our own martirs in affection, or other men's in example; let us, beloved,
stir and raise up our fainting souls to a lively and zealous faith, let us
good Countrymen, quicken our senseles senses with good words and good works
as effects of good faith, that we be not stark dead in sin: and rather seek
the salvation both of our souls and senses, that lasts for ever, then the
delight and pleasure of either, that vanishes away like a smoke, that wastes
like a snaile, that withers like grass, and never continues in one stay.
Then where shall we seek this salvation, but in the book of life? and in
which part of that book is it sooner found, then in the gospel the law of
grace? and what guide or teacher in the gospel can show us a better pathway,
then Iohn-baptist, who was sent from God, as the forerunner of the Christ,
says S. Mark in his gospel, c. 1. v. 2.3. to tell us the way, the truth and
life, the eternal word Jesus Christ. For Jesus is the way, because his
doctrine and precept tells us the right and ready way to everlasting life:
Jesus is the truth, because without error he may always, and in truth must
always be followed in all our judgments and consultations, that we may walk
in the light, not in darkness: Jesus is the life of our lives, because without
him we are as dust in the wind, and straw in the fire, and by him we pass
through the greatest difficulties and even the very seas of all deadly dangers
and temptations; which S. John speaks by a metaphore, and metonimy of the
effect for the efficient, c. 14. v. 6: in him we pass safely from the first
day in the beginning of all, yea and before all measure of times, even unto
this day, as S. Augustine writes largely to Deogratias against Porphyrius in
his 49. Epistle. Wherefore in these and other respects, hear and read I
beseech you, beloved Christians, what the blessed and right honorable Prophet,
that most noble preacher Iohn-baptist has taught us of Jesus Christ in the
gospel according to S. John c. 1. v. 29.

The next day John sees Jesus coming to him, and says, Behold the Lamb of
God that takes away the sin of the world. This text is short, but sweet and
weighty, as the sun in heaven seems little, but is great and mighty in
operation: all bodies die without the sun, and all souls and bodies perish
without the effect of this Scripture. Philosophers think, that the sun and a
man makes a man, but divine philosophy will think and speak and conclude,
that this son of God, the sun and light of mankind, makes and saves and
crowns man with glory, in that he wipeth out and washes away the sin of
the world: the sun is the heart of heaven, the captain of the stars, the eye
of the world: this word is the heart of the Bible, the chief of al words, to
which our ears must give ear, and on which our eyes must always look. For
in this verse are contained, the laws of Moses and Israel with the prophecies
of all prophets both great and small, in that John calls Jesus the lamb of
God, and the fruit of the new Testament both in the Evangelists and Apostles
springs and grows from this ground, in that he is said, to take away the
sin of the world. Then was Simplicius but a hellish judge, to count the tales
of Egypt and the tables of Moses alike; and Galen was but a profane humorist,
and Lacuna his shadow little better, to mislike the creation of man, and
misreport the wonders of the red sea ignorantly: then are the Pelagians
perverse and miserable disputers, which deny and euacuate the baptism of
infants, because Christ alone washes and purges the^, like them which would
hinder the beginning of a thing, because it shall at last be made perfect, or
say, you must not use an instrument because there is a principal, or warm
your self at a fire, because the sun is the chiefest workemaster of heat and
warmnes. But to let pass all dilating and co^paratiue amplifications of words
and sentences, together with other necessary occasions of discourse: Mark,
beloved, what is here written with the finger of God and pen of the holy ghost,
the next day John sees Jesus coming to him, and says, and tell me, if ever
you heard a more loving, a more gracious and comfortable saying, behold the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world. O bountiful Jesus, o
sweet Savior, o merciful anointed of God the Father, what is man that thou
art so mindful of him, or the son of man, that thou so regardest him? our
bodies are brim full of sin and wickedness, as the stables of oxen and asses
ouerladen and ouercharged with dunge and filthiness: the goodness of our
souls is like a me^struous rag, as Esaias witnesses, c. 64. v. 6. whose word is
as an inviolable seal and a sure bond. What is then within us worthy of thy
love, o Christ? or what is without us worthy of thy liking, o son of David, o
son of God, o sun and light of heaven and earth? we look upon thee with
Iohn-baptist, o that we could always look upon thee; we see thee come to us,
as did Iohn-baptist, o never turn thy back upon us, but ever come to us and
stay with us ever; we rejoice in thy name, that thou art a lamb to us, and a
lion of Judah to the enemies, that thou dischargest the debts of the righteous
and leauest the wicked in the debtbooke, to be arrested and imprisoned, till
they have paid the uttermost farthing; we look on thee with ioyfulnesse, o
Jesus, as infants look upon a light, the wicked see thee with dazeled eyes, as
the Sodomites groped in the dark, Genesis c. 19. v. 11; we walk in thy
sun-light and are comforted, we are black and sunburnt with walking, we are
black, o Jesus, but lovely before thee, the wicked are parched with thy beams,
thy heat makes their heads to ache, their hearts to pant, their spirits to fail
them, that they may, as it were, call for butter out of a lordly dish, and
milk out of a bottle with Sisara, or some other delight which their sensual
souls long for, and afterward be nailed to the earth with the hammer of one
deceitful Iahel or other close enemy in their sleep and security, or come
to such like sudden and vile death. And this in effect is the general sum
and chief purpose of this text. Of the joyful estate of the godly by seeing
Christ, and, The woeful fall of the wicked by turning from him. Now to proceed
in the playner exposition of every portion and particularity of this verse, we
see in it both a brief History, and a blessed Doctrine. The History is, that
when John saw Jesus coming to him, he gave out among the people his judgment
of Christ Jesus the doctrine is his judgment, that Christ is the Lamb of God,
which takes away the sin of all men and women, of al maids and children, of
all babes and sucklings, which are all saved by grace, by mercy and imputation.
Concerning the parts of the history and narration, they are delivered in three
circumstances: the time when, the place where, the persons by whom, and to
whom, and of whom this sentence is given. The time is the next day after the
Inquisitors of the Pharisees had been questioning and arguing with
Iohn-baptist. The place is Bethabara beside Jordan, where John baptized. The
person which gave this holy verdict and ripe judgment is the Baptist, so named
of baptizing, who speaks to the people and his disciples which were at his
baptism, that they may learn how to think truly and speak uprightly of
Jesus Christ. As for the branches of the doctrine, it contains both the
humanity of Christ and his divinity: his humanity appears by the title and
appellation of a Lamb, which is visible and corporal: his divinity is
signified by the effect and office of this propitiatory and satisfactory
sacrifice for sin, which is an invisible and spiritual satisfaction
conceived only by faith and love. And of these two parts, the one
historical, the other doctrinall consists the real true matter and
essential substance of this text.

To return to the consideration of the time, some make it uncertain and
indefinite, and read thus: On a certain day, or thus, Another day, and because
they would seem to be sharply eyed and mistically conceited, they paraphraze
and gloze upon it in this order: John signifies gracious or penitent, as if he
were Ioanan, who in respect of his gracious repentance and repentant grace may
rightly be said, not to have seen the face of Christ the first day, but the
day following his sorrow is turned into comfort, and he looks up and sees
his saving health coming unto him, and then, the former day with them shall be
the old law, when Christ was absent, the next day must be the new Testament,
where Christ is both spiritually and corporally present. Thus it pleases those
verbal and tropological scholemen, Nicolaus Lyra, Hugo Cardinalis, Guilielmus
Minatensis, and the rest of that sect, to do what they list, without asking
leave of Gods word, the only and chief square and touchstone of all
Divinity. Alas what vain conceits and frivolous imaginations have been
grounded and builded upon such disguised allegories and tropologicall
constructions, so far fet and hardly extorted, as a man may sophistically
infer Quidlibet ex quolibet, or hypocritically intrude quid pro quo. God
knows, such fond, absurd and ridiculous allegorizing has been too highly
esteemed and egerly haunted in former times, but now in such light of the text,
such darkness of the gloss is at last worn out with the wisest and learned,
God be praised; such double taking of simple meaning, such allegorizing without
cause, such moralizing without effect, such tropologicall and scholasticall
daliance is worthily abolished. Histories are histories and must have an
historical interpretation, allegories are but tropes of Rhetoric and continued
metaphors, and must not be unnaturally forced or unsatiably conceived, but
only artificially and morally resolved, where they are artificially and
morally applied. Herein it shall be no audacitie in me, but lawful
mediocrity, to dissent from Hyperius a man about my age, when he writ his book
De Theologo, where he gives a superest of the use of allegories. L. 2. c. 32.
To allegorize when the text allegorizeth, least we speak vainly and from the
purpose, which he terms necessity that cannot be hindered, this no man of
judgment ever doubted, or when the doctrine cannot be profitable without
allegorizing, which is all one with the first, or not allowable in that example
which he cites. For when I read the history of Jacob the patriarch, how he
was deceived by his uncle Labans words, I learn to take heed, and make no
covenant without witnesses, writings, and seals, for more certainty; as God
himself did not only promise a blessing to Noah, but also gave him a token
and seal of a rainebow, a fit seal for so almighty a God, Genesis c. 9. v. 13.
and so he dealt with Abraham by word, by fire, and smoke. c. 15. v. 17. neither
dealt he otherwise with any other of his children at any time, but with his
word and his deed. How he took Lia for his bedfellow by night in steed of
Rachel, I learn not to admit the bride by dark but by light, seeing the object
is now come to sensible proof and past imagination, specially if I be in a
strange country as Jacob was, where all eyes are few enough; and as blind
Isaac would not trust his hearing so much as his feeling, c. 27. v. 21. so I
cannot believe my feeling so much as my seeing, specially in an object belonging
properly to the eye; How he served Laban seven years more for Rachel, I learn
not to forsake one whom I love in heart and honesty, so that by any honest
labor and travel I may fulfill my mind, seeing all pains are easy and
pleasant to a willing and loving mind; how by laying pilled rods with white
strakes in the watering places of the sheep, they brought forth young of party
colors, I note that in carnal mixture the senses are opened, and so the
conceits greater, and so the fancy stronger, and so forth, as Physicians note
the force of fancy in this physical text, neither is Grison or any caualliere
ignorant of this matter, which he and Porta noted in Jacobs life; neither will
I ever judge it, as Hyperius does, a text of deceit, of fond love, of
coueteousnes, without an allegory, seeing men may use their knowledge for their
benefit so far as God will bless it: and as for his philosophy Lia, and his
divinity Rachel, the comparisons agree not, I count him clean out of the way,
saving that he was then in a youthful way by his own report. Was not Lia
eldest? philosophy is not. Was not Rachel youngest? divinity is not* in which
respect the allegory falls down, seeing the law of God, and the law of Nature
are very Gemini of like eternity for beginning and ending: Philosophy in it
self is not bleare eyed, though her students be so, as Divinity her self is
clear eyed, though her professors are sometimes purblind, and herein he
fails of his similitude, seeing in like argument there is like consequence,
And he is but a blind Martin in Logic, that sophisticateth from a few to
all, from the second coniugate to the first: Jacob serves seven years for
Lia, and seven for Rachel; now shall a student take as great pains in
Philosophy as in Divinity? or shall he be sure of both after fourteen years
labor, whenas neither can be gotten in that time surely, so that a man may be
able to say, Habeo, (...), I am in full possession, no man can take my right
rightly from me? the octonarium of Ramus, and the sesquiamus of Freigius, and
the method of Thessalus may well encourage and help forward, but they cannot
furnish a man thoroughly, in so much as themselves come short of their
promises. Lia had one maid to attend upon her, but Philosophy must have
Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, these three general instruments of al learning
at the least: Rachel had but one waiting maid, whereas divinity must have al
arts and maids to serve her in her harvest and vintage, as Hyperius and all
doctors have decreed: Jacob despised Lia in comparison of Rachel, but no wise
divine can or will contemn the helps and furtheraunces of philosophy, that
deserve to be loved and regarded for there Ladies and service sake: God made
Lia fruitful and Rachel barren, but he never loved philosophy or blessed it
more then divinity, and of the two, in his vain, Rachel seems to be
philosophy rather then Lia: and when the impostures of the world and the flesh
which Hyperius calls Laban, shall at their pleasure have the bestowing of
philosophy and divinity, then will Haruey believe his word, that this History
has little or no use in it without an allegory.

Therefore let those subtle tropological commentators and such conceited
scrupulous interpreters say and essay what they will, let them please
themselves in there glozing and dreaming, we are to make neither more nor less
of a true narration then it is in truth. As for the uncertainty of time, here
is a certain time appointed, and the Greek word (...), and the Latin word
Postero die, and our English word are all one signification, unless perhaps
some Syriack tongue can do more for them, then Tremellius could, who
translateth it The next day, neither can the Carthusianisme of Dyonisius Rikel
amend him, a writer most learned, as learning was then accounted, says
Pantaleon.

For if we remember that the Evangelists are historians, and that the historian
ought always definitely to set down the certain times, if he speaks of
times, the certain days where he speaks of days, the certain years when
he speaks of years, to keep just reckonings in times and seasons, and
avoid confusion in Annals, in Diaries, in Chronologies, they cannot or dare
not say, that this holy history has straied aside, which has in it the
warrant of Gods spirit, or delivered that after the fashion and phrase of our
vulgar fables, On a time there was, once there was, and such rude stuff, which
is most artificially and regularly enrolled by the wisest artificer and doctor
in the whole world: for where is a better and more infallible register then the
book of God, the book of books, and therefore by a Synecdoche Generis pro
specie named, the Bible, more full of precepts the^ the turks Alcoran, more
certain for doctrine the^ the Jews Thalmud, more religious every way then
Abetilis of the Aethiopians or Preto-Ioanans, more divine then al libraries
besides? Therefore as the form of an history confuteth this deformed
interpretation, so the matter and substance of a history overthrows their
typical exposition* for one and the same history is not two histories, as
there is one truth, not two truths of one and the same thing, and in this word
of their making, the gracious and penitent sees at last with the eyes of his
mind his savior coming to him, is a general doctrine and note of all
mankind, and in this word of Gods writing, the next day John sees Jesus
coming to him, is a special history and sight of John alone* so that unless
al men's sight and one man's sight be al one, and but one, this exposition cannot
hold, as may otherwise appear by this instance and like comparison. If the
text says, Christ rides on the foale of an ass: Math. c. 21. v. 5. And these
profound clerks say, the godly Christian rides on humility; If the text
says, Paul shakes the viper from his hand, Act. c. 28. v. 5. and they say,
Gods children cast the vice of murder out of their hands, ca^ both these be
probable without a simile or a mitigatio^ of the metaphore and parable, seeing
that against al logical consequence either of divine or humane reason, they set
down that for text which is not in the text, and ad to Gods word, (a damnable
and presumptuous sin) and out of a particular report they gather an universal
against nature, out of a certain and necessary proposition, a contingent and
unnecessary, which is sometimes false against art, as the murdering of the
Egyptian by Moses can show for the one, Acts, c. 7. v. 24. and David's vaunting
himself in numbering his soldiers for the other. 2. Kings. c. 24. v. 2.10.
Then let us leave our own devices, as S. Jerome did his allegorized Abdias in
his ripe age, to bring other by his example from their fabulosities and
fooleries in weighty and sincere matters of religion, and content our selves
with the holy writ of God, neither mending nor patching that which is sound and
perfect, less our mending be marring, and we prove our selves more witty then
wise, nor pull or detract one title from it, as clippers and counterfaiters of
that inestimable coin, which in Gods church and among Gods people ought only
to be current. If the Evangelist writes, the next day, we must read, the next
day: if he says, John sees Jesus, we must say after him, John sees Jesus,
and neither make a day the years of all ages from the creation to the latter
day, nor change John and Jesus, which are personal and sensible men into
accidental and intelligible qualities of penitence and comfort, as it pleases
those glozing allegorizers and quod-libetaries to descant* for the example not
the thought of John can do us good; and God send grace, that his example here
may be sincerely delivered, attentively read, diligently practysed, and
constantly maintained both of all hearers and speakers in convenient time.

Is it not told us, that Iohn-baptist, notwithstanding the judicial
apprehension and straight examination of the Jews going and running immediately
the day before, utters boldly his demonstratiue profession of Christ? but why
does he hazard himself so confidently and courageously among such as went
about so suttelly and dangerously to entrap him? because he loved Gods message
more then he feared man's, a blessed and godly zeal. But the Jews will hate
him and bring him before their rulers: yet the love of God is above their
hatred, he is the rule and ruler of all rulers, a heavenly and undoubted
wisdom. But the Pharisees are learned me^ and will suspect him of vanity in
affecting singularity, and accuse him of secret sedition in perverting the
discipline of the state, and condemn him for an erroneous and counterfeit
messenger of the Messiah, who shall not, they say, come these many years? Yea
verily, they say no more then they think, and John will say unto them: he is
already come, and this is the promised Messiah which I commend unto you, even I
sent from the wilderness, as Esaias has told you, c. 40. v. 3. and I commend
him of conscience uprightly, not of any affection fondly and partially; in
regard of mine own duty and office, not of any worldly affectation, as you
carnally and worldly suppose; I will preach the law, whereof the Lord has
commanded me; Prepare the way of the Lord and make his paths straight. A
notable sign of true obedience and harmless simplicity. He is sure to pay
the best joint of his body, except he leave to sing this song* but neither
life, nor death, nor present power, nor any cause shall remove him from the love
of God, which he has in Christ Jesus. A resolution no less good, then
constant, and therefore reverently and religiously to be resolved of us,
according to Gods own truth, not according to man's fancy. Wherefore he
tells them yesterday, and to day, and to morrow, that Jesus Christ is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever, and that he must testify this of Christ,
to day, and the next day, and for ever, as he did yesterday: for the time of
his prophesying was almost at an end, and therefore he would plie his
business, while he might, which began in the 15. year of Tyberius Caesar,
when Christ began to be about thirty years old, and was finished ere the same
whole year was expired Luke c. 3. v. 1, 20, 23. So wonderfully grew the word
of God, that in so short a time increased so greatly.

And albeit the Baptist taught thus freely, and preached thus vehemently and
loudly like a crier in the desert, for that was his surname ab officio, yet he
did not willingly and wittingly thrust and throw himself into danger, as many
hot and unskillful harebraines use to do, and few or no wise godly men ever
did, except they were extraordinarily sent from God, as he here was, (for Elias
fled from Iezabel: 1. Kings c. 19. v. 3. and Obadias hid an hundred prophets of
the Lord. 3. Kings c. 18. v. 13. and Paul alone fled from Damascus, at a window
in a basket, through a wall: 1. Corinthians. c. 11. v. 33. then he and Barnabas
fled from Iconium to the regions round about Lycaonia: Acts c. 14. v. 6. and
Christ himself conveyed himself out of man's company; Luke c. 4 v. 30. for he
knew what was in man: and thus it becomes us all to be wise as Serpents, and
save our heads from the wounds of death: seeing that by Moses law certain
cities were appointed for refuge, to save innocent blood: Deuter. c. 19. v. 9,
10. and by Christ's own rule, when we are persecuted in one city, we must
fly into another: Math. c. 10. v, 23.) who being innocent as any dove, and as
it were let out of God's ark, to fly into the wide world, could not chooze,
but bring this Laurel branch, I mean, this divine sentence in his mouth, in
token of obedience and zeal, yea though it were the next day after his
straight examination, says Gualter, even in the heat and fury of that Jewish
tempest, when, after a sort, the raging waves of superstition and a deluge of
wilfulness had overflowed that blind country, and the surging billets of the
Pharisees had risen aloft, to ouerwhelme him* the proverb is well known,
Quisquis benigno nauigabit numine, Is vel saligno nauigabit vimine; who so
works in Gods name shall not miscary.

It is not the blindness and frowardnes of the Jews, it is not their rage or
outrage, it is not any imminent or present danger, any persecution, any
extremity, or execution, that can terrify John, or stop his mouth: a prophet
will be a prophet, an apostle will be an apostle, a good preacher and crier
will be a good preacher or crier, whatsoever peril seems to threaten him, or
howsoever the world frowneth upon him. John will be John, say the Scribes and
Pharisees what they will: the Baptist will be the Baptist, do hypocrites, do
worldly potentates, do tyrants what they will or can; zeal is not tongue tide
for fear; true devotion is not ouer-awed; right godliness respects and
dreadeth God more then man; it is not misled or disguized upon by occasion; no
heat of persecution can exceed or overcome the heat of zeal; he little
knows, what a prophetical, or evangelical, or christian spirit means,
that goes about to daunt or quail it for fear of punishment: faith is a
freewoman, no bondwoman; christian liberty is a brazen wall, an invincible
fort, an impregnable castle; fire in the bosom cannot be smothered, it will
burst out, it will show it self in the likeness: true zeal is the right fire
of the spirit, it cannot, it will not be concealed and smothered, it will out
in spite of all the tyrants in earth, yea in despite of all the devils in hell;
John has a prophetical eye to see, and John has a prophetical ear to
hear, and John, say or do the world what it lists, maugre the malice of the
world, will deliver and deliver boldly what he feeth and knows. Philosophers
could say, that danger and peril is the object of virtue, and Poets could
after their manner consecrate the palm and bay tree: I will not stand to
amplify or exaggerate the matter; the truest philosophy teaches the truest
virtue, and the truest virtue least dreadeth the greatest peril, and all
palms in the world will sooner yield then the palm of faith, planted and
ingraffed in a right christian heart, which sees and believes, as John sees
and believes, and therefore speaks and cries boldly, as John speaks and
cries, even the next day after trouble, even the day and hour before trouble,
even the day, and hour, and moment of most present trouble.

Then if the trumpet sounds alarm to day, we must to day display our
banners, and fight invincible under Christ's banner; if God calls us four
times in one day, as he called Samuel four times in one night. 1. Kings c. 3.
v. 8. we must arise every time, and go to our God, as he did to Ely, and say, I
am here, for thou call me. Bid us then speak thy truth this day O God; and
we will speak thy truth this day. Call us the next day to thee, o Lord, and
we will come to thee the next day* for if a Centurion says to his soldier,
go, the soldier goes, if he says to another come, the other comes, if he
bids his servant, do this, his servant does this, Math. c. 8. v. 9. or
else, he that hears and knows his captains will and neglects the charge,
shall be beaten with many stripes, Luke c. 12. v. 47. or abide the peremptory
discipline of Martial law, even present death: but thou art the general in
our armies, o king of heaven, thou art our chief captain, o God of Ingland;
bid us thy soldiers go, and we will go, God grant, we go and run the way of
life; bid us come, and we will come, I pray God, we come not out of the way;
command us thy servants to do any thing, and we will do any thing with all our
power, and give us after this Battle, which we daily maintain and wage against
the devil and his two great Bassaes, the world and the flesh: that hire and
those wages, that are provided and ready told out for all them, that fight a
good fight under thy Insigne for thy Church, yesterday in the field, to day in
the City, and to morrow in both, till they die to themselves and live to thee;
Esai cap. 40. verse. 10: o how happy, how right happy, how only happy are
they, which live with thee this day, and the next day, and for ever? Thus much
of the circumstance of time, contained in this word, The next day* the first
part of this history.

The second part is the circumstance of the Place, where the baptism of
Iohn-baptist was celebrated and published among the Jews: in which respect and
consideration I may reason thus: In matters of greatest importance and weight
the manner of historians is, to set down the place of the action and actor, to
make their histories credible, seeing all that is done, is done in some place:
but the baptism of John is a matter of greatest importance and weight: and
therefore the place of the baptism must be named: and so it is named in this
chapter, and called Bethabara in the verse going before. Yet Chrysostom in his
16. homily upon this gospel, turns both verses into one, as though it were
necessary to join the verse of the place with the verse of the speaker* but to
omit this grammatical point, of joining and parting verses, S. Jerome in his
translation, if that translation be truly fathered upon Jerome, miscalleth the
place Bethania* for Bethania is not beyond Jordan, as this place is said to be,
neither is there any other Bethany but one. Suidas inuenteth a new place
Thabara which is not seen in all that country* besides this one proof or
rather reproof P. Martyr adds another sure one, and concludes, that the
place of John's baptism was near unto Jordan, but Bethania far from that
river, yea and so much farther from the desert where John baptized. Then seeing
Bethania is but 15. furlongs, that is, two miles within one furlong southward
from Jerusalem, as is specified in this gospel. c. 8. v. 18. it cannot be the
desert of Iudaea, which is at the nearest by Stellaes map 80. furlongs, that
is, ten miles eastward from Jerusalem, where Iohn-baptist abode: seeing Bethany
is on the foreside of the river and Bethabara on the far side, the gloss
cannot put the one in the others room, unless it can put twelve miles into
one hem; seeing Bethany is the town of Martha and Mary, whether Christ went and
lodged, c. 11. v. 1. and Bethabara a plain field beyond Jordan, except we
turn a field into a town, we must read Bethabara not Bethania, and so does
Chrysostom read, so does Theophilactus read, and so does Origin read, so do
our best old and new doctors read. Wherefore avoiding that old error in
Chorography, we rightly name the place of John's baptism Bethabara which is
beyond Jordan. This place is the common highway and passage from Syria to
Palestina by ferry, and therefore a most populous and much frequented place,
says Gualter: this is the place, which the Israelites went through right over
Jericho with their puissant and triumphant captain Joshua, while the water of
Iordane was miraculously driven backward on the right hand and on the left, and
therefore a famous and wonderful place: Joshua c. 3. v. 16: this is the place,
where the inhabitants of mount Ephraim took the princes of the Madianites by
the appointment of Gedeon, both Oreb and Zeb, and therefore a victorious and
renowned place: Judges c. 7. v. 24, 25: a place both for the former excellency
and present use most fit for John's baptism, whereby we enter the highway to
heaven, in which we tread the path that leads us against our spiritual
enemies, and by which we overcome the kings of this world, and the chiefest in
the ways of the air.

These and other like causses might be prouidently foreseen of the Baptist*
besides these, he knew that he ought to teach his doctrine in the promised and
holy land. Luke c. 1. v. 16: that his discipline chiefly respected the Jews,
where Christ should come after him: that his cries should be most heard in the
desert of Iudaea: that the more he persuaded the Rabbis of Jerusalem, the more
his doctrine should prevail, and as it were take root among the people: that
the nearer he kept to that famous city in some open place, the further he was
from suspicion of corner opinions and scismaticall conueyance* for heresies
being in a sort inward maladies and cankers: 2. Timoth. c. 2. v. 17: go like a
sickness from house to house, from door to door: but true religion seeks no
starting holes, says S. Bernard, and wisdom stands without, in the high
street, in the entrings of the gates, in the tops of high places, says king
Solomon, and lifts up her voice in the plain of Bethabara. So God sends
his word, as he gives other his good benefits, the light of the firmament, the
dew of the element, the springs of the waters, the fruits and gifts of nature,
and the insitions or graftes of grace are universal and common to men, he
opens his hands and fills all things with plenty, says the kingly prophet:
Psalm. 145. v. 16: And as the Baptist preaches here in an open and great
auditory, so did other saints of God and ambassadors of the Almighty at other
times, both to resemble with their whole imitation the property of God, whose
cognizance they carried in their hearts, and to make this one good the better by
parting and dispensing it among a multitude, for in no place were the acts of
the twelve Apostles and the seven Deacons more seen, then in open synagoges
and on festival days: Acts c. 2. v. 6. c. 3. v. 6, 7. c. 4. v. 10. c. 5. v.
12. c. 7. v. 2. c. 8. v. 12. etc. the Prophets call the heaven and earth, not
one parcel or corner of heaven and earth, to hear their prophesies and
instructions: Esai c. 1. v. 2. Ierem, c. 6. v. 9. c. 22. v. 29. Michae. c. 1.
v. 2. And Jeremy again is commanded to cry in the ears of Jerusalem, to
awake them from their sleep of sin, that all the city may give ear; c. 2.
verse. 2. God speaking to Ezechiel, calls him son of man, as if in him he
spoke to all mankind, c. 2. v, 1, 3, 6, 8. etc. Oseas and Amos, and the rest
call all the Israelites, c. 4. v. 1. c. 3. v. 1. Jonas is sent to all Niniue,
c. 1. v. 2. other men of God call upon whole towns, whole provinces, all
nations at once. Joel c. 1. v. 2. Abdias v. 1. Nahum c. 1. v. 15. Sophony c. 2.
v. 1, 4, etc. Zachary c. 2. v. 7. God gives his law in the open face of mount
Sinai. Exodus cap. 19. v. 16. Christ when he taught the eight beatitudes went up
to a mountain. Math. c. 5. v. 1. a city that is set on a hill cannot be hid;
a candle must be set on a candlestick, to give light to all that are in the
house; ye are the light of the world; ye are the salt of the earth; let your
light shine before me^; hide not your talent in a napkin; lay not your treasure
up in the earth; all things are created for man's use; let Gods water run over
Gods land and stop not the fountains; deal thy goods among the needy; hoord
not up thy corn in time of need; he is my neighbor that does me good, though
he dwell in Samaria; love the godly for his virtue, and the wicked, to win him
to God that made him; while we live, let us do for all men; and this communion
we all acknowledge both evening and morning in our Creed and Lords prayer,
whereas in the one we believe the communion of saints, which is, with one mind
and agreement in mutual concord to serve God in hearing his word and receiving
his Sacraments, and in the other, when we call God our Father, and pray him to
forgive us our sins, to give us our daily bread, to deliver us from evil,
not to suffer us to be tempted, praying every one for the whole catholic
church of God, not each one for himself. For, if the ungodly join together to
strengthen themselves, much more ought the righteous to be one heart; and if the
Macedonians see before them a hill full of enemies, that seem big and terrible
a far of, they will be in a readiness for them all together, and though in
proof they find them to be but apes of Imaus, yet they will remember to go
together much more then those apes; and if Nabuchodonosor the king of confusion
willed his herald to cry aloud: be it known unto you, o people, nations, and
languages, nobles, princes, judges, dukes, counselors, receivers, officers,
and all the governors of the provinces, that when ye hear all the instruments
of music, ye fall down and worship the golden image in the plain of Dura.
Daniel c. 3. v. 1, 4. then shall the Baptist sent from the Emperor of the
world, to whom all the earth is as a pins point or moate in the sun, take
the voice of all waters, of all thunders, of all earthquakes, of all winds, of
all trumpets, of all voices, and speak to all the plain of Bethabara, to all
the hills of Canaan, to all the birds of Asia, to all the trees of Europe, to
all the beasts of Africa, to all the fishes of America, to all reasonable and
unreasonable men, to all godly Christians and ungodly Pagans: Attend all ye
countries, kingdoms and empires of the wide world, attend likewise ye
principalities caelestiall, that when ye hear the voice of Gods Ambassador
in the desert, or out of the desert, ye fall down prostrate upon your faces,
and with every inward and outward part of mind and body, reverence, magnify,
and adore this pure and undefiled Sacrament of Baptism, ordained of God, and
ministered first by me, and worship this Christ, the visible image of the
invisible God, which is able to save you, and ready to crown you in the day
of his great visitation. But confounded be all they, that worship and fall
down to carved or moulten images, and delight in vain Gods, worship him all
ye Gods. Delphos shall be as Sodom, and Dodona as Gomorra, the brains of
Chaldees shall become rotten, and all iugling of the East shall be forced to cry
out with Thamus the Egyptian pilot, Pan is dead, and Satan is dead, and the
lively gospel of Jesus is preached to the Jew and Gentile, to the bond and
free in this time of grace and peace.

This might be the voice of Iohn-baptist in the wilderness, and in effect this
was the message of Gods crier in Bethabara, whether any one may come, and pay
no money for coming in, where all may hear without loss of time, and get
endless and unspeakable treasure for going only for it, the way is plain,
the passage is not stopped, Bethabara is the joy and hope of sinners, it is a
common for all women's children to come to, for all childrens children to abide
in, and be fed with the bread of life which is better then Manna, and drink
the water of everlasting life. Then let all come from the North climats and the
South to be baptized, let all gather themselves together which dwell in the
East and the West, to be purified in Baptism, not only with the baptism of
John with water to repentance, but with Christ's baptism with the Holy Ghost
and with fire to immortality. So they shall revive that were dead in sin,
they shall be graffed into the true olive, which were wild branches, they
shall be freemen of God, that were bond-slaues of the devil, they shall be
endued with all goodness, which were imbrued with all naughtiness; so good is
our God that shuts no man out of doors which waits on him, so loving is
our Lord, which refuses none such as are ready with their oil of good works
and lamps of good faith burning in their hands and hearts prepared. 2. Peter c.
1. v. 5, 10.

Now, beloved, is any one of us unwilling to go, where we may go so easily and
so pleasantly? where we may abide so safely and happily? the dull ass, even
the ass which is so dull will run through thin and thick, through water and
fire, to save her young foales, says Pliny l. 8. c. 43. and shall not Gods
people and pupils be quicker in love then a dull ass to save their own lives
and souls? If John had baptized in the midst of the fiery and sulphurous lake
Asphaltites, or in the noisome dungeon of Panium, from whence the river Jordan
flows, as the latest Hydrographers have judged, Sabel. Ennead. 1. l. 2. and
Munster l. 5. Cosmogra. neither the heat of the one, nor the smell of the other
should have scared us at all: and shall we for shame not girde up our loins
and speed us apace to so open a place as Bethabara is? O come unto me all ye
that are black and red with sin, says the spirit of John, and I will purify
you, as Naaman was cleansed of his snow white leprosy with washing himself
obediently (after a proud pause) seven times in Jordan. 4. Kings c. 5. v. 14.
O Christ, we come to thee in our baptism, by thee we cast of our old skin
and old man in baptism, o son of God, even as Naaman washed of his foulenes in
Jordan, therein prefiguring our holy christning* therefore, as that river Ior
and that river Dan concur and join both together in Jordan, and make the
stream bigger, so we beseech thee that both the powers of our bodies and the
powers of our souls may by spiritual infusion of thy grace come together in
thy holy sacrament of baptism, and each of them help other in faith, the one
as instrume^tall, the other as principal, and increase it greatly in
abundance of godly works* and because such is our corruption, that we are all
over dead flesh and fainting spirit, give us in mercy that grace for thine own
names sake, as may not be hindered with the lusts of our fleshly natures, but
pass freely and flow plentifully in all our actions, as the river Jordan
runs through those miry lakes Samachonitis and Senezar, and yet remains
undefiled at Bethabara, though it mingled it self before with defiled waters,
(a parable of a regenerate man) it finds the laudable water again which was
missing for a time, it rises and runs from the corruption whereby it stayed
a time, and it breaks company with those infected fens, and never fears
the words of Solinus, of Sigonius, or any other controller any more, being now
a perfect convert in Bethabara, and now by Gods will not the worse for that
former ill company and neighborhood. O Lord our governor, how excellent and
wonderful are thy works in all the world? Psalm. 8. even the God of Israel, he
shall give power and strength unto his children; blessed be God. Psalm. 68. yea
if they walk through the valley of the shadow of death, and seem to die, as a
shadow looks like a body, yet will they fear no evil. Psalm. 23. for every
valley shall be exalted. Esai c. 40. v. 4. Much might be spoken comparatively
of this river, to the comfort of sinful and miserable men; but it is
sufficient here, to note in a word, that the fardest side of this river from
Jerusalem, is named a place beyond Jordan* so the Evangelist writes by a
prosopopoea in the person of one dwelling in Jerusalem, and in his own person
abiding at Ephesus, when he wrote this gospel, and accounting contrariwise the
bank of the river which is nighest the city before Jordan, because they of
Jerusalem and of the West countries went over and beyond Jordan to John's
baptism. Thus much of the circumstance of place, the second part of this
history.

The third part is the circumstance of the person here mentioned; and is either
judging and judged, or hearing and standing by the judgment is given by John,
it is given of Jesus, and received of the Jews, which stand about him* of John
it is written, he sees Jesus; of Jesus it is said, he comes to John; and of
John it is said, he said to his disciples, and the rest* so that the whole
assembly in Bethabara, and all other which heard his saying ever since that day
to this, or shall hear it to the worlds end, were, and are, and must be
auditors of the Baptist, and witnesses of his blessed word. In the sight or
object of John, as it is here set down, two considerations are worthy the
marking: one is, the phrase of speech, the other is, the certainty of the
history: for nothing is more certain in actions then that which is seen,
neither am I so sure of that which I know by another, as of that I know of my
self. Pluris est oculatus testis vnus quam auriti december, Qui audiunt audita
dicunt, qui vident plane sciunt, says Plautus in his Truculentus against those
braggers which will be credited by telling of warly acts that they never saw,
among them that are as wise as themselves; though Apuleius in the entrance of
his Florida would turn that sentence another way, and make one ear worth ten
eyes, in discerning a man's wit more by hearing him speak, then by seeing him
move, because Socrates said to one, Speak man, that I may see what thou art;
yet hear to the ear boroweth of the eye his word of knowledge and certainty,
and I warrant them both, they trusted their own experience more then other
men's; and with this certainty S. John approves his doctrine. 1. Epist. c. 1.
v. 1, 2, 3. and thus does S. Peter reason for himself. Acts c. 4. v. 20. and
thus in questioning de facto no better answer then, I saw it: so Dares Phrygius
a Trojan of Antenors faction is more credible then Homeronida made about 280.
years after the war: so that Autopsia of Dioscorides is more credited the^
Plinies great Acroamaticals: and Salust writes the more effectually of
Numidian wars between Iugurth and the Romans, because he had travailed the
country and viewed the places of their conflicts: and to omit Thucydides,
Caesar, and other which did the like, S. Jerome writes to Rogatian, that he
went to Jury and walked through it, that he might more easily perceive the Acts
of the Bible in a surer sort, according to that ancient rule; without eyes we
can have no Chorography, or Chronology, and without these two History is stone
blind being properly named of seeing, which the greeks call (...). The phrase
has it in an enallage or exchange of time, by putting the present time for the
time past, (for this was not written when John saw Jesus, but threscore years
afterward at the least) John sees, videt, (...); which propriety and idiome
has a great and lively grace in a history, while we suppose that to be in
present doing which is already done and past* it is a man's nature commonly, to
mark and perceive things presently object to our senses with more integrity
and less doubtfulnes, then either to remember things ouerpassed, or foresee
things to come, even as the functions and duties of the body are more easily
performed then the duties and offices of the mind. Thus it pleases the spirit,
to apply his phrase to our capacity in this text and many other, and chiefly
to descend in matters of knowledge and of faith, in attributing members and
affections and actions unto God, in describing the joys of heaven, and the
pains of hell, as all doctorall Fathers write, and as it appears in all art
and reason; less if he should ascend and speak proportionately to the
immeasurable proportion of his wisdom, we could no better understand his
own proper phrase, then these our eyes can look into the sun: as a good and
gracious prince will talk plainly and simply with his plain and simple
subjects, and a loving teacher perspicuously to his young scholars.

Concerning the use of the history, John first sees and then says what he
ought to say, To teach us, not to speak at adventure whatsoever comes to the
tongues end, but to tread and try our ground circumspectly, and do that we
ought in reason and right, not what we list in affection and daliance* let thy
eyelids direct thy ways before thee: Prouer. c. 4. v. 25. the wise man's eyes
are in his head, says the Preacher, c. 2. v. 14. Look with Iohn-baptist and
then speak with Iohn-baptist, unless you will spreaken you cannot tell what,
and be like those mighty new wits, that would be doctors of the law, and yet
understand not what they speak, neither whereof they affirm. 1. Timot. c. 1.
v. 7. but have erred from all law of religion and honesty, and are turned unto
vain iangling and even very piperly scurrility; like that cursed Cham, from
whom al wicked sects began, or worse then he toward their reverend Fathers and
spiritual Lords, delighting to see and lay that naked, which blessed Sem and
good Iaphet in all modesty desire to cover from their own and others eyes:
Genes. c. 9. v. 22, 23. Of which kind of creatures those inward cynaedi, S.
Paul warns al godly christians; and not unlike those loathsome mannermongers,
that count it finenesse to note filthiness, and thinking others senses worse
then their own, will not stick to say, look here, smell there, foh, feel or
see I pray, did you ever know the like? whereas they should say, smell not unto
it, look not on it, or rather not once note it; of which thankelesse
remembrancers and needless inquisitors their good master Galateo bids them
in the authority of his greyheaded courtiership not to take example, like
hogs that run from the herbs to a new muckhill, for fear of breeding
offense to no purpose: as I would be sorry to breed disliking in any elderly,
learned, well spoken man, be it Aretius probl. theol. de Matrimonio. or Bishop
Ponet. c. 6. of his Apolog. or other his friends, for naming the author that
here says well, and elsewhere perhaps amiss.

Then see and touch with Thomas the apostle, and then believe with Thomas the
apostle, who was so ready and resolute, to go and die with Christ his Lord;
John c. 11 v. 16. and yet too would provide to stand on a sure ground when time
was for all that resolution, and then became more incredulous and scrupulous
then other in his happy foresight, until he had a manifest answer in seeing
and touching, which might stop all Antichristian objections in latest times.
Many have desired, to see and touch Christ in the flesh, to see their
intelligible felicity in sensible proof, as namely S. Augustine did, like a
good hearty subject, that wishes to see the Prince of his country, of whom al
good men speak, and himself thinks most honorably: yet blessed are all such,
as speak, and believe, and have not seen; John c. 20. v. 29. the rather,
because they which report this unto the^, report no more then they have seen
and heard, Acts c. 4. v. 20. The Apostles eyes were the eyes of Christians, God
grant our eyes may be as clear and steady as their eyes were: their ears were
our ears, o that we could shut them from vanity and open them to verity, as
they did; that the word of Esai be not found in us; they shall see with their
eyes, and not perceive, they shall hear with their ears, and not understand,
c. 6. v. 9. but that first we may see him, and then like him, and then love
him, and then know him within and without, Intus and in cute, his deity and
humanity, and convey the image of his countenance into our hearts by the most
quick and hot spirit of his word and law, that our veins and marow, and so
consequently by them all other parts may be fired and inflamed with this light
of man, and Morning star, and Sun of the day, and loadstar always, even
Jesus Christ, and make us in color and nature like to himself, as one
neighbor grape takes color of another, God being the husbandman, and Christ
the vine, and Christians the branches, and their works the grapes, Vuaque
conspecta liuorem traxit ab vua, says Iuuenal. Satyra. 2. The ghostly and
bodily forefathers desired to see this day, and they lived and died in this
hope: Luke c. 10. v. 24. the prophets foresaw his coming, both Esai c. 2. and
7. and 9. and 11. and 35. and 42. and 49. and 53. and 60. and 65. and also
Jeremy c. 31. v. 33. c. 32. v. 40. c. 33. v. 20. and other: and they which go
before him, cry and say, Hosanna, thou son of David, blessed be he that
comes in the name of the Lord, hosanna, thou which art in the high heavens:
Mark. c. 11. v. 9, 10. and all such as are true in heart, shall be glad, and
say, Save us we beseech thee, O praise the Lord, Hosanna, Alleluia. Thus was
blind Bartimaeus glad, to hear him, by whom he might receive his sight, and by
and by he saw the light of heaven. Mark. c. 10. v. 49, 52. thus was Simeon glad
and willing to die, when he had seen this salvation and consolation of Israel,
which was prepared to be the glory of all people. Luke c. 2. v. 30. Thus the
angel of the Lord bad the sheephards go to Bethleem, and see their Savior, and
with him an army of heavenly soldiers that praised God and said, Glory to God
in heaven, and peace in earth, and goodwill toward men, so notably they were
stirred up and even ravished with this blessed sight, v. 12, 13. thus the
wisemen of the East, even where all men are of quick and winged wits as
Herodianus judges lib. 1. and most of all other, the wisemen selected from the
rest, with great wonder saw the star of Christ, which was never seen in
their Vranoscopies before, and went even from Persia to Bethleem, to see
himself more divine then the star, not caring for all those parasanges and
furlongs that were between their own country and Iudaea, but still and still
feeding upon their heavenly meditation, at last came unto him, and worshipped
him with joy and gladness, with their myters in their left hands, and their
presentiments of gold, of myrre, and of frankincense in their right, Myrrham
homo, rex aurum, suscipe thura deus, says Claudian in his Epigrams. O man take
myrrh, o king take gold, o God take incense. Math. c. 2. v. 2. Thus the famous
queen of Saba, and all the world in those days came from far countries to
hear the wisdom of Solomon. 1. Kings c. 10. v. 1, 2, 24. and behold a
greater then Solomon is now in Bethabara. Thus Jacob the son of Isaac saw a
ladder stand upon the earth, the top whereof did reach to heaven, and he called
that place the gate of heaven. Genesis c. 28. v. 12, 17. but we see not in a
vision, as he did, we see in the noone day the son of the hiest before us, we
see apparently the son of God before our eyes, Cuius aspectus decens, says
Solomon in his Song. c. 2. v. 14. and whose aspect is more happy, may England
say, then all the trines, and sextiles, and conjunctions, and fortunate aspects
of the beneuolent stars.

To be brief, in this one word, sees, is the fond and fantastical heresy of
Marchion with the heresy of Manes, manifestly ouerturned and condemned for
ever, of which two, Marchion thought Christ's body a fantastical one, that
is, like such bodies, as we seem to see in our sleep, which are but thoughts:
Epiphanius haer. 42. l. 1. tomo. 3. The other as fanatically imagined his body
to be aerie and ethereal: Haeresi. 66. l. 2. tomo. 2. But because his body was
visible flesh, and he did eat visibly, and hunger, and thirst, and suffer on
the cross sensibly, it is senseles madness, and mad imagination, to account it
cogitatiue or aerie, neither of which two can be seen with eyes of flesh.

Thus much of the first person Iohn-baptist who sees Jesus, and beholds him
joyfully, and is no less glad, to see^ his bodily presence now, then he was to
hear the voice of Mary Christ's mother, when he lept for joy extraordinarily
and moved strangely in Elisabeths womb long before. Luke c. 1. v. 41. a
wonderful and most rare work of almighty God, that an embryon of six months
old should express the affection and passion of joy, and leap for joy in his
mothers womb; not all the wisemen between Indus and Nilus could then match
this example with the like. But, as he then rejoiced like an infant in leaping,
so he now shows his gladness like a man in speaking; as before, mutus etiam
Christum loquebatur, says Brentius, so now, ignotus ignotum de facie monstrat
digito, says another upon that text* two most notable and excellent miracles
in Iohn-baptist, which never before, nor since that day were known by any
other* we cannot judge of him, whom we never saw, as he did; we must hope the
best in Christ Jesus, we must believe, and unfeignedly believe in him, and
look for the chiefest sight of sights, by his, and in his, and through his
means; the sight of his wonderful divinity, the sight of his glorious majesty,
the sight of his everlasting and most sovereign throne, the sight of his high
court in heaven, and the light of the highest heaven, a sight that makes us
contemn and refuse all other sights, a sight in comparison whereof all sights
besides are but vanities and follies, yea triumphs, amphitheaters, and
coronations, and all the pictures and dies of May and June, are but very gaies
and gugawes, but very dust and mist in our eyes. See to this sight, beloved
brethren, have an eye, have a daily eye to this sight, let other vain and
momentanie sights pass by as fast as they come by; look into heaven with S.
Steven, and look upon Christ Jesus sitting on his Fathers right hand with S.
Steven. Acts c. 7. v. 55, 56. and because his bodily presence cannot be had, we
must see him and behold him with our spiritual eyes most inte^tiuely and
speculatiuely, exceeding that Platonical Phro^tistes without comparison, by
looking on him with the eyes of true love, true faith, and true zeal, both now
and ever lifting up our hearts above all visibles in the earth and in the skies,
being carried upon the wings of prayer, of angels, of christian persuasion: and
then see how our God almighty sits most gloriously in unspeakable majesty
above the starrie heavens, and worship him accordingly; see how our Savior
almerciful in his most effectual divine eloquence pleads for us before the
tribunal seat of God, and worship him accordingly: see how innumerable and
infinite millions of Angels in all humility and reverence awaite and attend
upon him, and worship him accordingly, even with reverend fear of so holy a
temple and judgment place; see, how on every side seats are built up from the
beginning for the blessed children of God the father, and labor to enjoy one
of those happy seats in Gods kingdom: see, how all things beneath here tremble
and prostrate themselves before this throne of heaven, and desire day and
night, hours and minutes of hours, desire with fervent prayer and faithful
works of the spirit, pray in season and out of season, at all times, no time
amiss, that we may see and continually see the sanctification of Christ's name
in heaven, see his kingdom come in heaven, see his will done in heaven, as we
have seen these three in earth, and enjoy that kingdom of kingdoms, that
power of powers, that glory of glories for ever and ever.

The second person named here is Jesus, who comes from Galily the lower.
Math. c. 3. v. 13. from the city Nazareth, Mark. c. 1. v. 9. his own city.
Luke c. 2. v. 39. where he dwelt. Math. c. 2. v. 23. whereby he was called a
Nazarite of his friends in his life, and of his foes upon the cross. In which
respect without king Hyrams leave and Nathanaels too, we may rightly call it
Galily, by a fairer name then Cabul is, and say boldly, that all our good
without any question comes from Nazareth, and that all tongues of the
Phaenicians cannot make Galily sound displeasantly in christian ears. 3. Kings
c. 9. v. 13. Then whither is thy best prophet gone, o Nazareth? whither is thy
best beloved savior gone, o region of Galily? whither is thy mightiest prince
gone, o Zabulon, which can handle the pen of a writer? are not these things
noted and registered in thy book? He is gone by mount Tabor, he is gone over
the river Chison, and it is like he is passed by Sale^ into the tribe of Ruben
beyond Jordan, to go to the meek, to the poor in spirit, to the peacemaker in
the valley of Bethabara between Jordan and the river Arnen, the meek
Iohn-baptist, even the greatest and least among women's children. Arise Zabulon
and wait upon him, and thou Isachar prepare thy self and follow him, ye
Samaritans and Rubenites give your attendance, and all ye states of all cities
rejoice in the strength of your salvation, but specially let Benjamin and Judah
go forth and welcome him that is the perfection of your rulers and kings, make
have ye citizens of Jerusalem, and strew olive branches in the way, for all
virtues, all wisdom and happiness acco^panieth him: let little Zachee clime
up into the trees, and see him a far of, and let all christian souls rejoice
at his coming, as it were the cheerful rising of the warm bright sun
after a long stormy and dark winter night. The Atheists see him come, and bid
him stand back, the Papists see him come and turn their backs, all men see
him and they look aside, unless they be the little flock, for he comes, for
he comes to judge the world and his people with the truth. What? but comes
Jesus and says not one word to his people in so great a company? Yea verily,
he opens his mouth to speak all the way, his lips drop like honey combs,
milk and honey are under his tongue, his talk is comely, his pace stayed and
soft, his hands are spread abroad like the curtains of Solomon: and to the
weldisposed mind he says comfortably, I come to thee and bless thee, Exodus c.
20. v. 24. to the faithful heart he speaks mildly, Come and see the works of
the Lord, Psalm. 46. v. 8. to the elect people he cries out strongly, Behold
your redeemer comes, Esai c. 62. v. 11. to the poor Publicane and wretched
sinner he calls aloude, Come to me all that be weary and laden. Math. c. 11.
v. 28. and to all mankind he says generally, All that have any zeal, come
after me. 1. Macha. c. 2. v. 27. Then let us all, for we are all sinners, let
us answer him with one heart and voice, thy kingdom come, even so Lord Jesus
come quickly, come upon the wings of the wind betimes, that we may the longer
behold thee, come into thy garden, and gather myrrh with spice, and look to
thy vine: even so my God make no long tarrying, even so Lord Jesus come
speedily and tarry not. Behold he is coming, says John, I see him, and now he
is even come, see you to it, and behold, seeing I have preached him many a time,
and have now almost made an end of baptism* then why was this time chiefly
appointed for his coming? that John's judgment of him, whom he had not seen
before that day, the one dwelling with carpenters, as the pure sunshine is
otherwhile in a corner, the other in the wild desert, might not seem to
proceed of kindred or acquaintance, says Musculus, but from the integrity of
a sincere mind?

But, to what end and purpose should Christ come to John, whose work was the
baptism of repentance and remission sins? shall he come to be baptized, whose
pureness exceeded the purity of all Sacraments? though by doctrine he should not
come, and be taught, as it were his own book, yet by discipline he vouchsafed
to come to baptism in his manhood, as he allowed circumcision in his
childhood. Luke c. 2. v. 21. and upon this consideration the Baptist says unto
him; I had need to be baptized of thee, and come thou to me? but Jesus
answered, by the reason of permission, not of duty: suffer me now, for thus it
becomes us to fulfill all righteousness, and though it be not necessary, yet
is it requisite for me to be baptized, seeing this is one rule of divine
justice, and I must not break mine own rule: besides it is my fathers will,
that in this time of my humiliation with men I should be wholly like one of my
brethren, and because the Father and I are both one, his will and mine are both
one. For if John which came from God allows baptism, how can I the Son of
God disallow it? if I cannot mislike it, then is it verily a good and godly
institution* if it be good, what should hinder me from receiving it? and
therefore marvel not, if I come for baptism, else what might the people say?
Can he bid us do any thing, that himself can not do? shall we take that which
our teacher refuses? thus the people is slender and tender in faith, it is
moveable and remoueable, it makes every straw a block, it is offended with
smallest things, and that they may not conceive any thing amiss, I am come to
this baptism, and thus it is fit for me, to fulfill this righteousness. Math.
c. 3. v. 14.15. How can we hear these words of our Savior and not mark them
diligently for their truth? how can we mark them, and not examine them fully
for our instruction? how can we examine them, and not learn these lessons
duly for our actions, even lessons taken from Christ's own example, the surest
precept of all precepts, the true prince and prelate and president ever of all
examples? For, if Jesus who was John's good Lord and master, and John by his
own confession not worthy to vnlatch his shoe, disdained not the order of his
servant John, as afterward he humbled himself unto his Apostles, c. 13. v.
13. Where nevertheless he pronounces himself to be their Lord, not with
desire of glory and insolency, but of edifying and instructing them, says
Musculus (for the authority and reverence of Lordship is one furtherance to
persuasion) what a worthy Caveat is this for all christians, if they will
deserve the name of Christians? not to think scorn of taking good by any
Christians their inferiors* are inferiors not so wise as they? neither was
John so wise as Jesus very wisdom it self* are inferiors poorer then they
even? so was John poorer then Jesus* are inferiors less gracious then they?
this preeminence of favor and all other had Christ of John, and yet is he
content and willing to submit himself to the participation of John's baptism,
as princes receive the ministry of their ecclesiastical subjects, because it
is the appointment of God whereunto they likewise are subject with their
ministers. If Christ equal with God humbled himself thus unto his servant
John, what exceeding great humility must we use toward God almighty the great
Lord of all? when as both our duties bind us to his Statutes, and the least
neglect of them is a grievous hinderance and stumbling block to the weak
ones, to breed a misliking in us, or a suspicion in themselves. Thus it
seems good to our gracious and merciful Messiah, to teach us the ways wherein
we must walk, to set a lantern by our paths, and to guide our feet into the
way of peace and meekenes. God grant, this proverb may be heard in our
dwellings, such a savior, such saved, such a prince such people, as the Lord
Christ is, so are the servants of his family, that we may be like him in
charity, in faith, and humility* charity with truth, not with falsehood; faith
with the godly, not the wicked; humility with Gods chozen and anointed people,
not with the reprobate scorners and Mammonistes of the world. Sees no stones;
wash no nigroes; cast not pearl to beasts. So not only the prophets foresight
shall be verified in his coming, not only the Evangelists history will prove
him to be come, but the very expressed image and resemblance of his virtues and
graces in his scholars and professors will conclude, That he is come to keep
with us and keep us, to feed among us and feed us, never to forsake us in
this life, or in the life to come. Where then may the Jews sentence appear
but in the court of untruth? where ought it to abide but in the synagog of all
abominatio^? which of their faces can freely show it self without shame? what
Rabbin of their schools dare once put forth his head and say? that Christ is
not come* or if the stifnecked Jew, or other Jewish proselite will once say
thus much, to try us, let us pass by the reasons of Athanasius in his book
of the Incarnation, and such other treatises of like end and effect, and look
into the gospel of S. Matthew, the gospel of God, and from the 11. c. v. 5.
bring this infallible reason and proof against him: By whose power the blind
see, the lame go, the deaf hear, and other diseases are healed, and the
gospel it preached to the poor, he is the true Messiah; But by the powerful
words of Jesus the blind see, the lame go, the deaf hear, and other diseases
are healed, and the gospel is preached to the poor; Ergo, Jesus is the true
Messiah, neither can we justly look for any other. Concerning the proposition,
or prophecy of Esaias, c. 35. v. 5, 6. it must need be true in both parts,
because it came from God himself, as may evidently appear by the distance of
time between him and Christ. No man could tell before by any possible art of
men, what should come to pass 800. years after, unless he had withal been
supernaturally and incomprehensibly inflamed and informed by the divine
influence and breath of Gods holy spirit. As prognostical sciences may foresee,
and stand upon probable grounds and necessary too sometimes, so God can by his
omnipote^cy turn the adiuuant and mediat causes as he turns the waters in
the south, and has the hearts and thoughts of kings, and governance of all
things in his hand, to throw them at his pleasure on every side, yea and
overthrow them, when he thinks best, ever still holding his word upright and
making it infallible as himself. So that not all the impudent lies of Mecha,
Mahomets country, or of Medina Talnabi the place of his Sepulcher, not all the
magical feats of other men reckoned in Picus Mirandula, in Cardane and other
such, can once prevail against this argument, seeing that as some men in
physic have wrought some like cures, yet never any one performed them with a
word of his mouth only, as our Messiah did in most wonderful manner
incomparably, whereupon that old prouerbiall verse was rightly made: Christus
vim verbis, vim gemmis, vim dedit herbis,
Verbis maiorem, gemmis herbisque minorem.
Christ gave a power to the stone and the flower in works of physic, but his
almighty word is more powerable then all herbs and stones. And this is one of
the three corner stones of our building and faith* for that antichristian
fabulous report of Vespasians miraculous cure is but a dreaming devise in honor
of the idol Serapis, it is answered in it self, and even judged by the Autors
Suetonius own words, a very toy: vix fides, and ne auderet, and tentauit, by
the words of Tacitus, irrideri, and aspernari, and metuere, or a delusion of
Satan the fire of deceites, like that in Pharaos Magicians, Exodus c. 7. v. 11.
and that in the counterfette cranke at Saint Albons in Hartfordshire, deluding
many with feigned woonderments, til Humfrey the good Duke of Gloucester descryed
him; neither doubt I, but that Cythraeus Mone-alethia of Suetonius is most
false herein; and the rather, because Tacitus in his 20. lib. Annal. as forward
and more hot in Antichristianisme then Suetonius, tells the strange healing
of one man blind, and another withered of one hand, by Vespasian, but
Suetonius of a blind body and a lame of one leg; neither does his manu
aeger, and this debili crure agree better, or prevail more with an advised
Reader, for trusting their report, which besides disagreeth with it self in
the agent, not only in the patients, while Suetonius says nicely, how he
healed the leg with an only touch of his heel, calce contingere, but Tacitus
grossly, with stepping and treading upon it, pede and vestigio calcaretur, then
the witness of the two false Elders against Susanna, prevailed with Daniel and
the Israelites, when one Elder accused her of whordome committed in her garden
under a Lentiske tree, the other telling the same tale, answered, that she lay
with the young man under a Myrtle tree, and by dissenting from themselves, were
judged to die the death which was appointed for her, and were justly stoned.

To leave this common place of comparisons, the second proof and groundworke
may be squared and fastened in this sort: That the Prophets word foretells,
which is Gods own word, when it proves true, must be reverenced as the
truth: for God is only true, and in him is no manner or shadow of falshode. But
the Prophets word foretells which is Gods own word, that the Messiah shall
come within a time appointed, and this proves true: for Daniel c. 9. v. 25,
26. writes thus: After 69. weeks, that is, 483. years, the Messiah shall be
cut off; reckoning a week not of seven days, but of seven years, as it is
used in Genesis, c. 19. v. 27. and in Leuiticus more plainly, c. 25. v. 8. in
which time thus definitelie appointed, and shortly after, Christ came in the
flesh, and lived and died in the flesh, as is easily proved in this or the like
computation: from the second year of Darius Longimanus, when the kings
commandment went forth, to bring again the people, and to build Jerusalem,
Esdras c. 4. v. 24. Agge. c. 1. v. 1. to the beginning of Alexanders Monarchy
were 144. years, according to the account of Metasthenes the Persian: and from
the beginning of Alexanders reign to the incarnation of Christ were 309.
years, by the judgment of Josephus; and from Christ's incarnation to his
baptism, were about 30. years, c. 2. v. 23. of S. Luke. so in all, from the
prophecy of Daniel to Christ's baptism, are 483. years, after which time, for
by the text it must be after, not then, as some great Clerks have judged
amiss, Christ was cut off from his people, and suffered death upon the cross:
Therefore Christ's coming in a time appointed, must be reverenced for a truth;
and unless the Jews will obstinately and peruersly, both against their own
knowledge and conscience, resist the authority of truth in this agreement of
Daniels weeks and Christ's years, which is invincible, they must by force of
al reason be constrained, even against their selfe-willes, with shame and
confusion to confess and acknowledge, that their, and our, and the worlds
Messiah is come in the flesh. For who cannot see that this prophecy of Daniel
is most infallibly true in the effect, seeing Christ lived and died among men
in the compass of the years of this divine prophecy, in some sort prefigured
by Ieremias 70. years, c. 29. v. 10. After which time God promised delivery
to his people, and not unfitly resembled by our sunday called septuagesima,
which is about 70. days before the passion of Christ the true Easter Lamb,
after which passion we were delivered from bondage.

Besides these two apparent proofs there is a third, which for truth may go
with the first: and is grounded upon the foundation of Gods own word, Genes.
c. 49. v. 10. and spoken by Jacob to his sons upon his deathbed, where
wonderful words are heard otherwhile: When the Scepter shall be taken from
Judah, then the Shiloh comes, and brings all felicity in his name and acts:
But at Christ's coming the Scepter was taken from Judah, and given by the Lords
Romans to Herod a Proselite, who vexed them, and slew them most grievously 30.
years before his coming, abrogated their laws, made them woeful and miserable
captives, so that a man could not say, the Scepter of Judah, or the lawgeuer of
Iudaea: therefore Christ is that Shiloh, because the effects of the Jewish
thraldom, and the effects of Christ coming are so ioynty met together,
according to Jacobs prophecy. But this argument is allowable with the whole
number of the Jews, who in their shameful overthrow felt the assumption so
true, to their perpetual and endless grief, that they cannot deny the
proposition, from which it is derived and borrowed, or rather with which it is
so necessarily and inuiolably linked in this manner: The Jews overthrow and
Christ's presence must meet at one time; but here is their overthrow,
therefore here is Christ's presence. Why then do the Jews so furiously rage
together in battle? and why do the people of that Country imagine a false and
vain thing? Their Captain Akaba stands up, their great thalmudist Eutoliba
takes counsel against the Lord, and against his anointed* they choose to
themselves a new Messiah of their own minte and stamp, Cochab is the man's
name, and all the Jews must say unto Cochab, Thou art our star and Messiah;
they gather their strength together on every side, they muster their valiant
men, and sound lustily against the Romans: they undermine Traiane the Emperor
with the best militar deceits and inventions they have; one of his captains by
mishap fly before them; little poor Bethoron the town is vanquished by
force, and now they imagine all the world is little Bethoron, which is not
worthy to be called the sister of any City. God looks on them from heaven,
he beholds their blasphemous apostasy, and arrogant ostentation, he
repents him of his long suffering, and now he draws his two edged and two
handed sword out of the scabbard, he smites Akaba on the loins, he kills
Cochab with his Idolaters, and gives Adrian victory in battle. Bethoron is
recovered of the Romans, an hundred and threescore thousand Jews fall on the
right hand, and again, forty thousand able men of war are smitten on the
left hand, besides those great numbers which perished in Alexandria. Thus their
star Cochab was extinguished that shined so bright, their starry glory was no
better then a fiery meteore, and falling star* now themselves laughed at him
with heavy cheer, and agnominatiuely named him Cozab, which was a true right
name for so false and crooked a Savior, that became to the^-ward, and to
himself, a savor of death unto death. Expectaui Zadaka, says Esaias, c. 5. v.
2. and ecce zaaka: I looked for grapes, and gathered wild vine: you must not
read Cochab, but Cozab, says a Rabbine, both because his pretended miracles
were not admirable, and because he was slain as one of no value with the
multitude. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6. Eccle. hist. Luterus de Iudaes. So perish all
thine enemies, o God, and such as work against thy son the only Christ, to
set up nominall annointeds and no Saviors, shall come to a most vile and
shameful end: but guide thou the just, which believe in one son of God and
no more, that came once in the flesh, and will come again on Seraphins and
Cherubins, to judge both the quick and the dead. Even so Lord Jesus, come
quickly, and make us ready for thee, vigilant and careful to awake at thy
coming, circumspect and provident in every hour, to receive the bridegroom
into our houses, and keep him with us for ever and ever.

To conclude this matter, let us seal up these three proofs with that blessed
name the name Emmanuel, by which God would have us see and confess, that God
is among us, Deus nobiscum, among us in the earth, and among us in the flesh,
says Lactantius l. 4. c. 12. De vera sapientia. And thus much or thus little,
of the coming of Christ, who is the second person set down in this text. The
third person are the Jews and disciples of John, to whom he speaks for our
learning that come after, as all Scripture is written for our instruction* but
why speaks John of Jesus being present, when as it is the property of a
Prophet, to speak of future things? S. Chrysostom answers with this
distinction of preachers; Some tell of things to come, as did the prophets,
some of things already past, as did the Apostles, some of things present, which
is the middle time, as Iohn-baptist was between both, greater then a Prophet
and less then an Apostle* but why speaks John so little of Jesus and no
more? the same reverend Bishop answers, that he speaks much in a little
room, intending only by this word, to make the people harken unto Christ (no
better prologe to Christ's gospel) knowing for a certainty, that when they had
but once tasted of his sweet doctrine, they would never willingly let him or
his doctrine go* for albeit Christ was sufficient in himself, and needed not
that Iohn-baptist should testify of him and exalt his name; yet because the
Patriarks prophesied of a promised seed: Genesis c. 3. v. 15. and Moses had told
Israel of a great prophet which the Lord should send among them of their
brethren: Deuteronomy. c. 18. v. 15. and other prophets told him of a Christ and
Messiah to come: Psalm. 2. v. 2. Daniel c. 9. v. 25, 26. It was expedient, that
this promised seed, this great prophet, this Messiah being now come, should as
well at the last as the first be declared unto his people with the testimony
and word of Iohn-baptist the great* for, as Christ himself was the greatest
that ever came in the flesh, so was it necessary that his witness should be
the greatest, and what witness was ever greater then the Baptist, who was a
perfect pattern of a perfect witness? If you require authority in a witness,
there was never any mothers son greater then he. Math. c. 11. v. 11. if you
desire truth in a witness, he was a man sent from God, the only truth. John
c. 1. v. 5. c. 5. v. 33, 35. if you will have constancy in a witness, he is no
reed shaken of the wind. Math. c. 11. v. 7. if you look for knowledge in a
witness, he is the infallible prophet of the highest, and more. Math. c. 11. v.
9. Luke c. 1. v. 76. if you require gravity without vanity, he is covered with
a garment of camels hair, and girded with a leather girdle, he feeds on
Locusts and wild honey, and is not carried away by leuity or folly: Math. c. 3.
v. 4. This is the witness of Christ, says S. Ambrose, such a one is the
pattern of all witnesses, even Christ's chiefest witness S. Iohn-baptist. Not
all the patriarks, not all the prophets, not all the Sybils, not all the
witnesses of all men are more forcible or greater any way, then the only
testimony of the Baptist, so particularly and properly elected and sent from
God almighty for this only end and purpose. Then let not the Jews or other
John's auditors either look for a greater witness of Christ, or a truer truth
then this of Ionh, this one truth, unless they hope beyond all hope, to
correct the truth with falsehood and a lie, which can never stand upright: they
must not think to excuse themselves with had I wist, their wilful or
vnwilfull ignorance cannot keep them from blame and shame before God, seeing
he came apparently into the mids of his own, and his own received him not.
But, be they hot or key cold, be they careful or careless, be they Gods
friends or the Devils feends, be they one or other, or neither, or all, John
preaches to them all at once, and teaches one with another, excepting against
neither, and accepting of al as of one: he will graft this science of Christ
into the true olive, and if the body cannot nourish it, he will remove it into
the wild olive tree, he offers them the savor of life, the Savior of the
world, but if they refuse him he turns to the Gentiles: if the children of
the family will not eat their bread, give it to the poor that cry out for
hunger at the doors, if the true and next legitimate heir be dead, raise up
another heir by adoption; if the common directest path be stopped up, all is
plain ground and open way in the valley of Bethabara, and God is not tide to
any man, or to any way, unless he be his man and it be his way* for if once he
be Gods chosen servant and once in Gods book of life, if God shall once say,
Thou art my son and I will be a father to thee, then if every hair of his
head were a Cayn, and every pore of his body a Nymrod, though every drop of his
blood be an Ammon, and every blast of his spirit the seven spirits of Mary
Magdalene, his hairs shall be washed, his pores cleansed, his blood purged, his
spirit purified, and all his inward and outward man made a lively sacrifice of
a dead, a holy oblation of a defiled, an acceptable and gracious savor of a
putrified and noisome smell: and in a word to Gods children chiefly is this
doctrine appertaining which S. John delivers here, behold the Lamb of God
that takes away the sin of the world, to them specially is it spoken which
are written in Gods eternal Register, whose faith is ever lively, moving,
working, never idle. A foundation surely grounded is not easily removed, but a
building upon sand is soon ouerturned: that is bred in the bone will never out
of the body, but an outward malady is soon cured; a Jewish father makes a
Jewish son, as the scholar is taught so he believes, as the blind is led
so he walks; an own counts night as day, and the Jew loves his own
darkness more then the light of Christ, and the fault is not in the day, but
in the oule; when Gods holy spirit forsakes a man, he goes and wandreth he
cannot tell whether, but is compared to swine that tread upon pearls, to
beasts that perish; the Jew will be obstinate in his superstition and wilful
in his blindness, as the Ethiopian will ever be black, and the devil a liar
at every hand; a reprobate sense may be reproved, but never amended; a perverse
opinion will very hardly leave a perverse and crooked mind; superstitious
premises always draw after them superstitious conclusions; Jewish and
uncharitable presumptions make Jewish judgments; unkind and unchristian
thoughts beget unkind and unchristian censures; a preiudicate mind can never
determine rightly; a purposed inuectiue is commonly more affectionate then
reasonable; though a voice from heaven approve Christ, the Jewish voice in
earth will reprove him and his, by hook or by crook, probably or impudently,
even Martinlike; if the devil once set in his pawe, all the whole house will
smell of his rankenes; one morsel of leaven leueneth the whole lump of dowe,
then beware of the leaven of the Jewish Scribes and Pharisees, that write
unrighteousness and boast of leesings: Historians say, that the crow and the
ape suppose and presume, their yonglings are fair, and so perhaps they are in
their kind, but who else will say so besides the crow and the ape? Mercury in
his method imagines self-love to walk in a gallery beset and hanged with
seeing glasses, wherein she may view and vaunt her own pecock feathers.

I cannot stand now upon this common place, of wilful and Jewish obstinacy,
mixed with hautie and Jewish self-loue; the truest history and poesy in the
world, is the history and poesy of the Bible, that teaches the truest and
surest belief, and the truest belief never refuses the right sentence, or
hops for more truths then one; faith tempered with charity pearceth the
clouds, and love among brethren is a sweet smell in Gods nostrels; the love
of Jesus is more sweet then the love of all women, for he shall never repent
himself of his love that loves Jesus; he came to us as a friend, he dwelt with
us as a brother, he died for us as a mother in travel, he rose for us as a
God, he ascended for us as a Captain, a captain to lead and defend his
christian Soldiers, to load and oppress his Jewish enemies, and must
therefore be loved with the love of all friends, of all brothers, of al
children, of all creatures, of al servants and soldiers in the whole world,
from the first day to the last. There is but one world, but one sun, but one
king, and but one Messiah and Savior, greater then the world, cleerer then the
sun, stronger then king, great without fault, clear without spotte, strong
without change, the world of joy, the sun of righteousness, the king of peace:
let us go out of this world, and dwell in that world, walk in that light,
obey that king, but first follow the counsel of Iohn-baptist, and behold,
behold the lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world, and then dwell
with him, walk with him, and obey him. Thus for upon the first part of this
text, which is the history.

Now follows the doctrine, which the wicked hear and mark not, or if they
mark it, they soon forget it, if they remember the word, it takes no root in
their hearts, or if it be rooted, it rotteth and withers at the last, and
scarcely brings forth the least tokens of regeneration, but gives leaves
and no fruit, and is therefore cursed with Christ's own curse, as the Figtree
was cursed for bearing no figs, Mark. c. 11. ver. 13, 21. Who then must
chiefly wey and examine this sentence of Iohn-baptist? Let all those that
delight in their salvation behold this lamb of God with loving eye, and
constantly persuade themselves, that he takes away the sin of the world: let
all such as love their own lives, consider this sentence thoroughly and
deeply, from which al meditations and prayers are grown, and upon which all
the books and volumes of holy writers, and godly learned fathers, are builded
and written, for as al their works belong to the two testaments, the old and
the new, so the two testamentes are singularly belonging to this one sentence.
But to leave the longest and largest observations, it shall suffice to set
down a compendious, and if God will, a fruitful exposition.

Behold says the Baptist, behold with joy, awake and stir up your selves, and
behold; sleep not, nor slumber not, but behold; look not at a glaunce, to
look aside, but behold advisedly and steadfastly; behold not as men in a musing
or twylight behold a thing, and perceive it not; but have your hearts fixed in
knowledge with David, and both your eyes together fixed in hope with him that
sat at the gate of the Temple called Beautiful, and behold with a fixed eye
and fixed mind, with a loving eye and a loving mind, with a watchful eye and
a watchful mind, with a perceiving eye and a perceiving mind, the lamb of
God. They that have ears to hear, let them hear this word, and they that
have eyes to see, let them see this sight: you that have not seen him, behold
him much rather then a new star in heaven, then a new mountain rising out
of the earth, then any news which is most to be wished, and that you most
desire: you that have seen him behold him again and again, as the
wonderful, the incomparable, the incomprehensible miracle of al me^, as men
are the miracles of all other creatures, even the perfect God and the perfect
man, never seen before or since in any other, the creator in the creature
without circumscription, the mystery of God himself, not only of godliness* he
that once sees him will ever seek him, he that looks on him now will like
him ever after, you that here behold him well, will every where hold with him
and of him till you die and without end* mark him earnestly and forget him
not, look on him advisedly and remember this object while ye live, the very
perfection of spiritual optics, the true physic of the eyes, more clear
then any streaming fountain, more durable then any steel glass, more
pleasant then all great meadows and green plains* the night is passed, the
day appears, the sun is risen, the mist is gone, the air is bright, look
not about, but straight forth before you, and behold him. God has given you
eyes to serve him herein with true eyeseruice, and God has taken that gummy
glue and the scales from your eyes which came with looking on and after ill
sights, and God has here sent you a perpetual preserve, a special eyebright,
a general collyry for the eyes, and charge all that have eyes to behold him,
and all that will see to themselves to see him* take heed of all these unkind
and ungentle enemies that make war with the eye, and by too much heat or
dryness offend and consume it; the eye is a tender and gentle part, it cannot
abide extremities in any case, and herein somewhat a kind to the Lamb of God*
be learned therefore in such good things and simples, as are at peace with the
eye and by moisture or coolenes refresh and strengthen them* for the eyes are
like two Archbishops or two Consuls in the body, to ouersee all and rule every
member thereof, and herein somewhat a kind to the Lion* that we may be able to
look on the Lamb of God with love, and on the lion of Judah with faith, it
stands us in hand to be circumspect always in looking to our eyes as to the
chiefest of our senses, the better to be ready to behold the chiefest
antiquity and nouelty in this world* all things are made to serve God, but the
eyes are made so moveable and quick within, so sure and safe on every side
without, even to be quick in beholding and sure in marking this blessed object
the Lamb of God. You shall not see only a Lamb of God, for every child of
God is a lamb of God, but you shall see also the Lamb of God, the Lamb that
is more worth then the offerings of all lambs since the first creation, and
as I may truly call him, the Lamb of Lambs. For so the spirit of God by S.
John gives him this notable mark and emphaticall difference, and says,
(...), agnus ille, the Lamb* other lambs were lambs with their fellows, agni
cum agnis, (...), but Christ is (...), ipse agnus, the lamb alone, one lamb
for all, (...), this is he, to which all other offertory lambs had their
relation, and in which they had their consummation and Omega. Now no more
killing and offering of other lambs, Jesus Christ is the satisfactory lamb
once sacrifized to all, yet the lamb that was slain inuisibly from the
beginning, and is now offered visibly in the flesh, and for his passion called
a lamb, as Ignatius writes to the Philippians, not herein counterfaited,
though elfwhere suspected of pseudopigraphy* for as the lights of candels are
put out when the daylight is come, so ceremonies which are but candels in
respect of that light they represented are abolished at Christ's effectual
oblation of himself as of a lamb. Yet why is he rather called by the name of a
lamb, the^ of a calfe, or of a goat, or of an ox, or of other sacrifice
mentioned in Moses law? It must needs be that this name is given him, because
it is most meet and fit for him, and no other so significant to express his
nature and office* among all the figures, and types, and shadows of the old
Testament, the lamb did most nearly, and the Paschal lamb most properly
premonstrate and prefigure Jesus Christ* the lamb most nearly in these
comparatiue respects: the lambs wool covers our nakedness, Proverb. 27.
verse. 26. so Christ by his soft mercy hiddeth our shame: the Lambs flesh is
very nutritive, so Christ by his great power is the staff and bread of our
life: the lamb was offered every day both in the morning and in the evening;
Exodus c. 29. verse. 38, 39. so Christ is a daily and eternal sacrifice for our
sin: the lamb is simple, and simple and innocent without harm, not armed
with any natural munition or weapon that may hurt, like other beasts: so
Christ opened not his mouth before the shearer, says Esaias c. 53. v. 7. when he
was reviled he reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not says S.
Peter 1. Epistle, c. 2. v. 23. he was as gentle as a lamb, yea and no lamb can
be so harmless as Christ was* the pascall lamb more properly in this
similitude: that lamb was chosen without blemish, Exodus c. 12. v. 5. so was
Christ without all spots of sin* the blood of that lamb upon the door posts
made God pass over, and not smite the houses of the Israelites, so the blood
of Christ upon the cross, causes God not to condemn the godly with the
wicked, but to spare them* so that in these and such other like applications
John calls Jesus the lamb of God, sent from God to pacify Gods wrath and put
the godly out of fear. Herein appears the spiritual rhetoric and wisdom of
John in S. Chrysostomes judgment, in that he applied his speech to the small
capacity of the simple auditors, and used the ordinary means of all
persuasion* for as he told them before of Christ's power and honor, in
confessing himself unworthy to loozen his shoe, v. 27. that he might make them
stand in awe and fear of him (the best way to move some kind of natures,
which must be constrained and compelled by authority and shame, or else cannot
obey) so now he commends the goodness, the mildness, the meekness, and
merciful love of Jesus, to allure and draw the rest unto him by fair means;
and as the proudest Pharisee should reverence him for his glory, so the poorest
Publican would embrace him for his clemency* yet cannot the Paganes, or
enemies of Jesus take from this poor title any occasion of contemning him, and
disdayning his government, not any second Julian, or Lucian, or counterfeit
Martin, (for that true Martin Luther, and that truer Martin Bucer, and that
Saint Martin the Bishop, and that Martin Chemnisius, were learned and good men
of God, and full of zeal, they were set and planted against Baal, and Bell,
and Antichrist, by imitation of Elias, of Daniel, and the rest) can despise
this lamb of God, with confocations, and paltripolitanes, and pitomes, and
pistles, and such cacozelies: he is utterly deceived, he enterfires, and
ouerreaches too much. The Practice, or the Fox of popish prelates, and the
lives or lamb of Christian Prelates, are as far asunder as the tales of mort
Arthur and the books of Moses, as the golden legend of Iron Saints and the
Acts of the Apostles, as the scenes of Dauus and the Psalms of David, as the
writings of Martin and the works of an honest man that is sober toward the
world, and godly in respect of heaven, I say, no art, or mart of such
husie-bodies, mote-spiers, can justly neglect and abase this lamb of God,
because he is the lion of the Tribe of Judah, Revel. c. 5. v. 5. because he is
the ruler of the world, Esaias, c. 16. v. 1. because a thousand thousands of
Angels, and four and twenty Elders fall down before him sitting on the
Throne, and ascribe all wisdom, all riches, all strength, all blessings to him
for ever and ever. Revel. c. 5. v. 12, 13. yea even that famous and renowned
golden fleece of Jason, were it the Philosophers stone, or the treasures of
those cou^treies, or the goodliest art or thing in the world, is vile and
abject as dung in the presence of this eternal lamb, though those jolly
heathen galoping wits magnify it never so stoutly. And the least proximitie of
his bodily, much more of his ghostly virtue and savor, is more effectual and
sovereign against the heat of sin and flesh, then all Agnus castus of Galen
in the world, ministered in leaves, in decoction, in powder, or any way else, to
work an effect like the name. The calfe in Dan, and the calfe in Bethel has
been broaken, now Jesus is himself that fatted and prepared Calfe, which is
slain to make them good cheer that will repent and return to the Father* the
Memtiphical God the bull Apis which those calves imitated as some think, is
destroyed from Egypt, and the mighty prince of Nilus and his regions rejoices
in the blood of king David's offspring, and in the spirit of Peter and Paul, and
all Paynims idols and every other beast must give place and praise to this best
and living lamb of God: let the mountains leap like lambs, let the little
hills skip like young sheep, seeing God has sent so mighty and gentle a lamb
among us, which is a lion to the wicked and impenitent resisters, and a lamb
to the godly and humble souls.

Then what does this lamb, seeing he is so mighty and marvelous, and what good
comes to us by his goodness that he is so good? he is a lamb whose offering
is our justification, he takes away the sin of the world, and herein
consists our sanctification* in that he died for us, we are just and free
from the curse of law, in that he acquiteth us, we are holy and blameless in
Gods sight, whose eyelids try the children of men* he has taken our
weakness upon his shoulders and has sustained our grief, says Esai c. c.
53. v. 5. he has cast our sin into the bottom of the sea, says Michaeas,
c. 7. v. 19. He has himself borne in his body our transgressions on the tree,
says Peter 1. epistle. c. 2. v, 24. he is the full propitiation for our sin,
says John, 1. epistle c. 2. v. 12. he is our advocate to the father, our
mediator, our intercessor, in counselling us, in guiding us, in defending us,
he is ever and only to be loved, feared, obeyed: loved, because he has bought
our love so dearly: feared, because he may in equity forsake us: obeyed,
because none can direct us more safely.

Then what huge and monstrous sin was that, which the son of the immortal
God could only bear? what a vile and excessive, what a deadly and fierce,
what a damnable and heavy sin was it, which Jesus alone was able and none
other to take away? Adam might say, he takes away sin, Noah might say, he
takes away sin, al ages before Christ and since Christ might say with the
Baptist, tollit peccatum, that is, says Calvin fert and aufert, (...) and
(...), and Schoolmen confess, that he only does this, by forgiving us that
is past, by helping us against present sins, by bringing us to heaven where
sin has no place, and they should not deny, that tollit belongs to all
times, not only to the supper of Christ, or any one time, seeing in true faith
he was the lamb ever, as in true sense he was the lamb once* for every time
is present with God, and eternity is but to day with him, who begat his son
from everlasting, and yet said this day have I begotten thee. Psalm. 2. v. 7.
and tollit, not tollet, says Theophilus, Quasi semper hoc ipso faciente, as if
it were the nature of Christ, to purge sin, as of Helleborum to purge the
head: which natural history like all other is always written in the present
time: so Angelica preserves from the plague at all times, and Jesus takes
away sin at all times: so Herbagrace drives away venomous serpents, and
Jesus drives away devils: so Christ said of the future time as if it had then
bin present, I lay down my life: John c. 10. v. 15. And as every thing has
his definition in the present time, to signify a perpetuity of that property,
so this definitive word of the lamb of God is delivered and received by the
present time, as the inseparable effect and property of the lamb, always
abiding and always present, as is the present time* for Christ was an high
Priest, not after the order of Aaron, which was for a time, so long as he which
offered lived, but after the order of Melchisedech which continues a priest
for ever, without beginning, without end, offering himself in stead of a lamb,
having power to leave his life and take it; John c. 10. v. 18. Hebr. c. 7. v.
3, 23, 24. Wherefore our sins shall not bruise us and press us to death by
their importable weight, whilst Jesus eases us of that burden: an endless
comfort. Our sin cannot accuse us and condemn us to death as law requires,
because Jesus has cancelled the detbooke, disanulled the acts that Satan
objected, and given out a sufficient quittance and warrant for that payment: a
blessed penny, and no Saints, but Christ's penny, coined in the third heavens,
and beset with this posie or emblem, mercy, not merit.

Nevertheless, this caveat and exception must ever be ready in our hearts and
lips, to judge and confess, that sin remains in us, and is not taken away,
seeing we are a very lump of sin and heap of offense, but worthy to feel
the fire and hammer in Jeremy, ca. 23. the punishment and reward of sin is
taken away* the plagues appointed for sin are swept and carried out of the
way: and what is the plague or reward of sin, but everlasting death, but
perpetual torments in hell, but infinite woes and miseries in the bondage of
the devil, but continual affliction of the mind, but insufferable vexation
and anguish of the body, but most horrible confusion, and most lamentable
execution of body and soul for evermore.

Such is the fruit of our sins and transgressions, which we commit daily,
this punishment is due for the sin of the world, and worldly men, Romans c. 5.
v. 12. John. 1. Epist. c. 3. v. 8. etc. Can our ears hear this, beloved
Christians, and will not our hearts tremble? shall we see and not perceive;
hear and not regard; and be little better then dead senseless idols? you see
we are attainted and arraigned of high treason against God, our hands accuse us
of briberie, our arms of violence, our hearts of ungodly and profane
thoughts, our whole bodies of ill dealing with our neighbors; the brain and
eyes complain of wantonness, which wastes them; the veins and marowe cry out
upon idleness and gluttony, which rotte them; the whole world lays all
abuses and outrages to our charge, the abuses of all creatures, and the
outrages committed against our own friends, and our tongues that can only
speak and plead for us after long counsel and deep aduisement, confess,
and deny not, and with great sighs answer, guilty: the judge of judges,
even God himself pronounces this terrible sentence, and gives out this
dreadful dome against us: Seeing you have abused all things both living and
dead; in leaning to your own wills; in leaving my commandments; in making
your flesh quick, and your spirit dull; in fighting for the earth against
heaven; for vanity against verity; in esteeming humanity above divinity;
your ways above my ways; hypocrisy more then faithfulness; in holding my
religion, even my religion and service for a fashion, and your own pleasure
for a law; your moments for eternal joys; your mammets for Saints; your
portion and inheritance must be with the grandfather of these abuses, that old
Serpent, that helhound, that ramping lion, Beelzebub the gra^dfather of these
vices and abuses, with whom you have deserved to live and die without all help.

Now what shall we do in this case? to whom can we appeal when all the world
accuses us, and God himself condemns us? I will tell you to whom we must
appeal, and how: Thou art displeased, o Lord, thou art displeased with us, o
chastise us not in thy fury, neither cast us off in thy sore displeasure; be
merciful unto thy creatures, o God, and then we appeal to thee, be not angry
with us, o Lord, and so we will appeal to none but thee; we appeal from God
when he is offended, unto God when he is contented, o be well contented with thy
servants, o Lord. All the world is against us, but thy mercy is greater then
all the world, o thy mercy is sweet and infinite: thy servants, o God accuse
us, and behold, thy word is above thy servants: thy subjects and inferiors are
about to hurt us, but thy omnipotent superiority can ouerrule them: that which
they do, thy majesty can undo: that they bind, thy wisdom can loosen. And
though this bounty be too great for us, yet is it little in respect of thee:
let thy goodness, o Lord, be still our defense, thy mercy and loving kindness
in Jesus Christ thy dear son, our salvation, let thy left hand hold up our
heads, and thy right hand embrace us; embrace us the work of thy own hands, and
as thou did once make us of earth, like thee, so make us by restoring now thy
image and similitude in us, of prodigal sons and outcasts, partakers of thy
table, and heirs of thy kingdom; and because thy word has condemned us, holy
father, mighty judge, and pronounced us to be without all help, let thy
blessed son Jesus be our hope, whose virtue is beyond all help of man, and in
whom we have help, when we cannot help our selves; let him bail us, and
repriue us, and get us a pardon for our sins, that with our souls and bodies
jointly, and either of them severally we may serve him in holiness all the days
of our lives, and sing Psalms to thee, o thou most mighty according to thy
worship and renown. shall the dead praise thee, or tell of thy truth in the
night and in the dark? shall thy noble acts be known in the grave, and thy
mercy in the land where all things are forgotten? up Lord, and help us o king
of heaven when we call upon thee, which s^^itest hell upon the cheek bone,
and sauest Israel from his enemies* save us, o God, for thy mercy sake, o save
us and that right soon, for we are in our selves brought to great misery;
salvation only belongs to thy name, and thy blessing is upon thy people, but
we are thy people and the sheep of thy pasture, o preserve us from the snare
of the hunter and from the noisome pestilence, the snare once broken we shall
be delivered, and thousands shall fall on both sides, but it shall not come
nigh us, or if it come, it shall not hurt us, or if it hurt, thou art our
Physician to heal us, to assuage our ambustions, to pour oil into our
wounds, to bind up our maimed parts, and carry us to thy everlasting Inn, to
boorde and dwell with thee for ever. Why art thou then so heavy, o my soul,
and why art thou so disquieted within me? o put thy trust in the lamb of God,
that daily and hourly takes thy sin upon him, and carries it away, and
burieth it, where it can never revive and spring again. Jesus has redeemed us
neither with silver nor gold, but with his most precious blood and water once
offered upon the cross, and he brings us from the prison of sin* he can
do it by his power, and he may do it by the just claim and title and
interest he has in us* he can do it, because he is stronger then Satan the
prince of the night, who like a tyrant holds us in manacles and fetters, he
is stronger then this iaylor, stronger then his prison, stronger then his
bands, and can redeem us, and his will alone is greater then all treasure, to
pay all fees and ransoms whatsoever* and as he both can and will, so he may
redeem us, by the law of propriety, and the law of propinquity* for as by the
law of propriety ^ king may redeem his captiuated subjects, and a master his
servants: so may Christ redeem us which obey and serve him, o Jesus make us
thy true men: and as by the law of propinquity a father may ransom his son,
and one brother another; whether they be fathers or brothers by blood or
religion; so may Christ in the same respects of consanguinity and affection
ransom us, who by a loving protection is our father, and by his familiar
kindness our brother: o Jesus, feed all duties and loves in us.

Thus the first and principal causes of our delivery are just and lawful in
Christ, as the means and concurrent causes are allowable in our selves,
according to S. Chrysostomes collection, That our sins are taken away by
confessing them to God; Esaias c. 44. v. 21, 22. by forgiving injuries to men;
Math. c. 6. v. 14. by alms and liberality; Dan. c. 4. v. 24. by continual
prayer; Iam. c. 5. v. 16. by fasting and turning unto God; Joel. c. 2. v. 12,
18. Yet these are but apprehensiue and declaratiue causes of our justifying and
sanctifying, and Christ alone is the consummatiue and perfectiue cause of all,
as a learned writer distinguishes briefly and subtly, because he is
sufficient, and our goodness but straw without him, as Luther terms it, for
so I may best take that word Stramineam, which Bredenbachius casts so
fiercely in his teeth, Sententia de dissidijs Ecclesiae componendis, fol. 35.
and perhaps taught Campian to make his gloze. Seeing then we receive this great
and incomprehensible benefit by Christ, even the benefit of our delivery, what
kind of delivery is it which we enjoy? Is it a delivery by voluntary
manumission? not so, for neither the flesh, nor the devil are of that nature,
to surrender up any thing with a frank and willing mind, but they are
covetous, and must be constrained. Is it a delivery by exchange and
commutation? not so, for Christ will never leave or give any hostages to the
devil. Is it a delivery by a price and payment? so it is a delivery. But this
price is paid to God our king, not to Satan Gods Iaylor* you are bought with a
great price, says Paul, 1. Cor. c. 6. v. 20. with the precious blood of
Christ, says Peter, 1. Epistle, c. 1. v. 19. and without shedding of blood is
no remission, and without death no testament, being without force so long as he
that made it is alive. Heb. c. 9. v. 17, 22. Is it a delivery by force and
compulsion? so it is a delivery as when a strong man keeps a house, and a
stronger then he comes in, and takes what he will out of the house, Luke c.
11. v. 22.

Thus we were in the Lions mouth ready to be devoured, but Jesus brake the iaw
of the Lion asunder, as David saved his sheep, 1. Kings c. 17. v. 36. thus we
were bondme^, but now are we free me^, as Israel came out of Egypt, Exo. c. 12.
v. 41. thus we were woeful and miserable, but now are we joyful and blessed
in our salvation, as Joseph came from prison, Genesis c. 41. v. 14.38. Then, for
whose sake has he redeemed us but for his own? for if we live we are
Christ's, if we die we are Christ's: if we are his, then must we live after his
will, not our own will: if we are his, then must we serve none but him that
saved us: Be not the servants of men, says Paul, 1. Cor. c. 7. v. 23. if we
are his, it becomes us not to judge our brethren: who art thou, says the
Apostle, that condemnest another man's servant? he stands or falls to his
own master, not to thee, Romans c. 14. v. 4. So we are Christ's, for he has
bought us, not to reign over us, but that we should live under him: In that he
bought us, he showed his love: and in that he stayed so long ere he bought us,
he approved his wisdom. He came in good season, in the fullness of time,
says Paul, Galat. c. 4. v. 4. in the last days, says Esaias, c 2. v. 2. in the
latest times for our sakes, says Peter, 1. Epistle c. 4. ver. 20. for by that
time the greatness of sin which had so many years in growing, made plain
the corruption of man's nature, to make man humble* by that time the
immeasurable mercy of God appeared, which spared the livers of so many ages,
to make man thankful: by that time the faith of the godly was thoroughly
sharpened, and their hope at the highest point after so long a trial thereof, to
make man constant: by that time the disease of sin was so rank and
desperate, that man's knowledge and foresight being at an end, the glory and
majesty of God might more abundantly be seen, in curing such a malady, and
so vast a sin, to make men obedient* yet must we not be too busy in
searching out those things which God will have secret, but take heed of
climing too high, of wading too far, of too much diligence, lest we be
smitten as Vzzah was for touching God's ark, and die as Vzzah died for being
too bold, 2. Kings c. 6. v. 7. The secret things belong to the Lord our God,
says Moses Deuteronomy. c. 29. v. 29. and S. Paul teaches our extreme Quaestionists
a good non plus, whereof they shall never be ashamed, Romans c. 12. v. 3.

What need we any more determinations and conclusions upon this commendatorie
sentence of John, and effectiue property of Christ? If Jesus only takes away
sin, how can the Church say, I forgive sins, and give absolution, seeing
the Church is the expositor and messenger, not the Lady and correcter of the
scripture? she may bid us hope for remission of sins by faith in Christ, she
may warrant us, that if we repent and believe, our sins are forgeuen us, but
there lie her bounds, and that is all she can do, unless she dares arrogate
to herself the work of the holy spirit of God. I omit some conclusions
purposely: if Christ be a lamb, herein we acknowledge his humanity and bodily
substance, or else he cannot be called a lamb: and so does his incarnation,
his nativity, his growing, his eating, his drinking, his sleeping, his
weeping, his groaning, and other his actions and passions prove and conclude him
to be a man. The word was made flesh, says John, c. 1. v. 14. made, not by
confusion of substance, but by unity of person, not by conversion of the
Godhead into flesh, but by taking the manhood into God, for so his divinity
is joined to his humanity by an unspeakable conjunction, that both of them
keep and retain their own natures, yet in such manner, that of two natures is
made but one Christ, not two Christ's, one a God-christ, the other a
man-christ, as Nestorius thought, neither is his manhood extinguished by his
Godhead, as Eutychetes dreamed, but both Godhead and manhood make one Jesus.

Lastly, if Christ take away sin, herein we confess his divinity, seeing
none but God can forgive sin, and that we may know, that the lamb of God is
God, the Baptist preaches in the desert, that he takes away sin, and burieth
it. Wherefore if Christ were Man and God, then neither was his soul without
reason and sense, as Apollinaris judged without all judgment, neither was his
body without a spirit, as Eunomius defended most strangly and erroneously*
what may the Jews then think, that have such a one in the mids of them? how
much may they account themselves worthier then other, and superior to all
their neighbors, that have such a one only in their company? Be not high
minded, o ye Jews, says the Baptist, but fear and stand in awe of him, for
he not only takes away your sin, but the original sin of Adam your
forefather, the root and body of sin, the life and essence of sin, the
beginning and maintenance of sin, not this kind of sin, and that branch of
sin, and the sin of this and that nation, but sin it self, sin in
general, all sin with all appurtinances, with all differences, with all
properties, with all qualities, with all fruits and effects whatsoever, the
sin of the world; he is not only among you, but with all men that are
gathered together in his name, not vbiquitarily, but divinely, not corporally,
but spiritually, yea and as effectually with them, as in the land of Jury in
those days. The world was cursed by means of the first Adam, so it was
blessed by the second Adam, 1. Cor. c. 15. v. 22, 45. his disobedience was
amended with Christ's obedience, his arrogancy corrected by the simplicity of
Jesus, his lust subdued by Christ's love, and Christ Gods lamb destroys the
original and cause of sin, to destroy the effect even sin itself* for if the
blood of bulls, and goats, and the ashes of an heyfer. Leuit. c. 16. v. 14.
sprinkling them that are unclean sanctifies as touching the purifying of the
flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, which through the eternal
spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge our conscience from dead
works to serve the living God? Hebr. c. 9. v. 13, 14. Yet, let us beware, that
we tempt not the Holy Ghost, let us take heed of presumpteous sins, least
they get dominion over us; let us not say within our selves, go to, and cease
not to sin, because our sin shall not be laid upon us: for he that sins
willingly, and offends with his conscience wittingly, shall neither be
forgiven in this world, says Christ, nor in the world to come. Math. c. 12. v.
31, 32. make rather your light to give light to other men, and strive to enter
in the narrow way, that leads to heaven; watch with carfulness, and pray
with zeal, that you be not taken unawares: your best good, and good work in
it self is altogether unprofitable, and then the worst must needs be
abominable: glorify the immortal God in your mortal bodies, and make not the
house of God a house for sin to riot in: serve God daily for his blessings,
and praise him which gave you all that you have, for his goodness endures for
ever; he sent his prophets, to teach you his statutes, for his goodness endures
for ever; even Iohn-baptist his chosen servant, for his goodness endures for
ever; to tell us the glad tidings of his gospel, for his mercy is everlasting;
to show us the lamb of God, for his mercy is everlasting; which takes away the
sin of the world yesterday, to day, and for ever, for his goodness and mercy
endure for ever and ever. Now consider I pray you, now I beseech you consider,
and let us always consider the sum and effect of this most gracious and
sweet text. We were al, even every mothers son of us, even every son and
daughter of old Adam miserably plunged, most miserably plunged, and drowned
in the horrible gulf, and most woeful vggly pit of sin, which has also
plunged us, most miserably plunged and drowned us in the horrible gulf, and
most woeful vggly pit of hell, and so made us most miserable and damnable
creatures, even in the state of very desperate helhoundes and rakehels, to be
everlastingly afflicted and tormented in that unquenchable endless fire, where
is continual weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth world without end.
Behold the lamb of God, lo the blessed lamb of God, mark, mark, see, see,
now I beseech you, see this most happy and heavenly lamb of God, that takes
away this sin, that redeemeth us out of this pirte, that cleanses our filthy
and abominable corruption, that sanctifies us for a more holy place, that
storeth up everlasting joys and unspeakable beatitudes for us, that bestows
all felicity, and even heaven it self upon us, where himself is the lamb of
God, the son of God, God himself, our only glorious and omnipotent god, our
only savior and redeemer, our only final joy, and comfort, and felicity for
ever and ever, our only most sacred, most blessed, most triumphant lamb of
God, that takes away the sin of the world, and blesses the world world
without end, who is therefore blessed and glorified world without end. So ye
now see the right cause of the right effect, the right tree of the right
fruit, the right sun of the right light, the right savior and redeemer, and
Lord and master of his right people, the right lamb of God, that rightly and
righteouslie takes away the sin of the world, the sin of the wicked and
sinful world.

Behold then the right lamb of God, the right lamb of perfect divinity, the
right lamb of true Christianity, the right lamb of pure and sincere religion,
of pure and sincere faith, of pure and sincere hope and charity, the right
lamb of innocence, of integrity, of vprightnes, of very goodness and
godliness, of perfect and absolute virtue, the right lamb of true piety and
devotion toward God, of true charity and honesty toward men, of true love
toward God and man, the only lamb of the only sacred and blessed gospel: to
conclude, the right lamb of all our comfort in this world, of al our happiness
and felicity in the world to come, of all our sanctification, and salvation,
and blessedness both now and ever.

Behold the very right only lamb of God, the very right only lamb of heaven,
that leads us the very right only way to God and heaven: then what need, or
what use, nay what abuse of other counterfaited and disguysed lambs, of other
superstitious and idolatrous lambs, of other antichristian and diabolical
lambs? such as are commonly called Agnus Dei, but are in truth Agnus diaboli,
lambs of the Pope, lambs of Rome, lambs of the devil, lambs of hell, the very
creatures of the devils great vicar upon earth, the very impostures and
counterfets of the devils in hell, devises more hotly, then either wisely or
religiously used among us of late years in the Popish bootlesse and godles
business? Alas miserable vanity, alas poor folly, alas blind devotion, alas
heathenish idolatry, alas hellish blasphemy, call them what ye list, call them
Agnus Dei, call them indulgences, call them pardons, and as ye list, these are
no lambs of God, they are lambs of the devil, these take not away the sin of
the world, they foster and drown the world in sin, they hasten the world to
damnation, they carry the world headlong into hell, they are capital enemies and
arch-rebels to the lamb of God, to the blessed, and heavenly, and sweet lamb
of God, that takes away the sin of the world. Many like enemies, and many
like rebels there be to this lamb of God: all the sons and daughters of
sin, all the masters and apprentices of sin, all the teachers and scholars
of sin, all the trains and practices, and enormities of sin, all the
transgressions and ways of sin, whatsoever they be named, or howsoever they
be practiced against God or man, against the first or second table, all such
ways and means of sin, are secret and open enemies or rebels to this lamb
of God, that takes away sin, that abolisheth the sin of the world, that
notwithstanding so infinite many legions, and huge armies of so strong and
mighty enemies, of so obstinate and obdurate rebels, still and still takes
away the sin of the world.

Sin and sinful men may strive, but they strive against the stream: the
flesh and fleshly men may kick, but they kick against a brazen wall: the
world and worldly men may rebel, but they rebel against the Lord of Lords,
the King of Kings, the conqueror of conquerors, the almighty ouerthrower of all
rebels and rebellious attempts; the devil and devilish men may rage, but they
rage in vain, they rage against him that has power to master and tame all
the devils in hell with a word, that has already prevailed against hel-gates,
that has vanquished all the force, all the might and maine of Satan, that has
triumphed over sin, the flesh, the world, and the devil, and has gotten the
victory, the most glorious, the most blessed, the most happy and triumphant
victory over his enemies, over all his enemies, adversaries and foes of all
sorts.

Behold this lamb of God, this puissant, this mighty, this almighty lamb of
God, this only victorious and triumphant lamb of God, that maugre sin
takes away sin, maugre the world redeemeth the world, maugre all the spite of
Beelzebub and all the feends in hell restores his elect to their God, and
prepares them for heaven and heaven for them. O almighty goodness, and all
good mightiness, o wonderful and unspeakable mercy, o exceeding most heavenly
compassion, o most loving, most dear and tender, most bountiful and merciful
lamb of God, that take away the sin of the wicked world, that easest us of
this grievous and intolerable burden, that payest our huge debt and ransom,
that in exceeding singular pity did vouchsafe to suffer those most horrible
and unspeakable passions and agonies, that we in our own persons were
corporally and spiritually to abide as most wretched and damnable sinners; that
of so woeful and miserable creatures make us thine own brethren, sons of
God, fellow lambs of God, heirs of God, inheritors of his kingdom.

Behold this lamb of God, still and still behold this lamb of God, let us all
altogether, both now and ever, and always, and ever behold this blessed most
sweet lamb of God, unto whom we are so infinitely beholding, in that he has
generally taken away the sin of the world, in that he has particularly taken
away our sin, even the sin of you, and me, and of us all, who therefore
continually is evermore to be glorified of you and me, and of us all. O what an
ineffable heavenly act was this, o most divine incomprehensible mercy of
mercies, o the very greatest effect of God, the very greatest effect of man,
the very greatest divinity and humanity of God and man. Could we sufficiently,
could we in any measure of sufficiency consider our former most miserable, most
woeful, and most damnable state, and accordingly compare that most wretched
state with the most blessed state wherein we are now established by the
exceeding incomparable goodness of this most blessed lamb of God: Lord God,
what should our lives be, what would our selves be, but lively sacrifices and
oblations of continual most zealous praises, and duties, and thanks world
without end? with continual most hearty endeavor, to reform and frame
our-selues to his gracious will, for his everlasting glory? to whom we owe all
obedience, al glory, and al dutifulnes world without end, who therefore with the
father and the holy ghost, one almighty and only wise God, be continually more
and more praised and glorified with all praise and glory for ever and ever world
without end. Amen.

Parasceue autoris ex Augustini epistola 106. ad Paulinum: Quae enim potuerunt
magna and acuta ingenia cogitare, aut inopiae est tacendo vitare, aut
arrogantiae contemnendo praeterire.
I Have in that measure of Gods spirit and grace, which it pleased him of his
merciful goodness to bestow upon me, uttered so much out of this text
concerning the lamb of God, as I thought convenient and requisitiue for the
very plain, true, sincere, effectual, and christian explication or exposition
of the same. As I pray God, even God the lamb of God, make me ever more and
more able, out of the same scripture, and every like scripture still and still
to preach the lamb of God, the same blessed lamb of God, that takes away the
sin of the world. In the handling and declaring of which text, both for the
History and the doctrine with other circumstances thereunto appertaining, my
whole treatise hitherto has bin demonstratiue or declaratiue by way of
plainest confirmation and commendation. Now more fully to prosecute this
matter, I purpose by Gods help, to enter into a more schollerly discourse by
way of Confutation or Reprehension, as commonly in cases of doctrine and
discourse this inuectiue or elenchticall is to follow that other demonstratiue
or declaratiue manner of proceeding, as one great part of confirmation. I would
to God, many young youths, and some other had no more need of this kind of
confutation then I could wish, but seeing I fear me there is great need
thereof with some, I trust my good purpose will be the better liked of the
better sort, unto whom I wish my self near both to hear and see them, as
Lactantius did because he could not be one of them, c. 1. l. 3. aduersus
gentes; and I hope some of the rest, as it may please God to work, may reap
some good thereby, as I heartily pray to God, they may. S. John says, behold the
lamb of God, and so I still and still say, and so must al good christians and
every good christian ever and ever say, and not only say with the mouth, but
ever and ever think, even with the very heart, even in the very bowels of al
christian affection and zeal, behold the lamb of God, that was before the
world was, that was mistically and as it were in a holy reverend veil or
shadow prefigured in Moses. law, that was in abundance of divine spirit lively
and zealously foretold by the Prophets, that was certainly and effectually
preached by the Apostles, that is assuredly and infallibly described by the
Evangelists, that in the whole word of God, in the law and the gospel, in the
old and new Testament, ever has, and is, and ever shall be preached from
generation to generation, as the only true lamb of God, as the only true
savior of the world, as our only true mediator and redeemer, even Jesus the
righteous true God and true man, by whom, from whom, and in whom only we have
whatsoever good we have, otherwise without him remaining in the most wretched,
most woeful, and desperate state of utter damnation both of body and soul.
Therefore we that believe the law of God and the Prophets of God, the gospel of
Christ and the Apostles of Christ, the creation of the world and the salvation
of the world, as God forbid, but we should all believe, as it becomes the
people of God and all good christians to believe, we that believe the Canonical
scriptures and desire to be members of the Catholic church whereof Christ is
the head, must faithfully and unfeignedly acknowledge this lamb of God to be
very God himself, to be the promised Messiah and only Jesus, to be the only
son of God that takes away the sin of the world. We often repeat our
Belief, of the creation of the world by God the Father, of the salvation of
the world by God the son even the lamb of God, of the sanctification of the
world by God the holy ghost, one true everlasting and only wise God, who
reigns in all and above all for ever and ever* this we often say, and should
always think, as we are in all christian zeal, and with all perfect hatred to
abhor those that say or think the contrary.

Alas, a thousand errors, and heresies, and blasphemies, and idolatries, and
impieties, have overflowed the world, and wickedness has stretched out a long
arm on every side, from the East to the West, throughout the world and round
about the world: yet Christ still has numbered his elect, the great Shepherd
knows his sheep, there wants not a visible or invisible congregation of
the faithful, to make up Christ's militant Church: there are many true
Christian soldiers ever ready to fight under the Ensign and ancient of the
lamb of God, that never bowed the knee to Baal, that never committed any
heathenish or profane idolatry, that never were defiled or corrupted with the
filthiness of the whore of Babylon, that never either devoted themselves to
false gods, or denied the true living God, or said in their hearts with the
ungodly and godless fool, there is no God, that cry daily and howerly, and
ever sincerely and faithfully, Behold the lamb of God, o Lord Jesus come
quickly, thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven, thou art God, and there
is none other God but thou, a just and a saving God, as the Prophet Esaias says
c. 45. v. 21. O let us all cry thus, let us all set our selves against all that
write, or say, or think otherwise. Students read many things, even of God, and
of Christ, and otherwhiles against God and his Christ, as for God and his
Christ, here they must follow the direction of a godly judgment, here true
christianity must ouerrule false paganism, and desperate atheism, here the
spirit of God must confute and confound the spirit of the devil, the spirit
of Antichrist, the spirit of false Prophets, the spirit of deceitful
heretics, the spirit of worldly hypocrites, the spirit of blasphemous and
impious villains, that care neither for God nor the devil, that measure all
by present profit, or pleasure without any regard of posterity, and either
acknowledge no God, or else make the^ their gods that feed their own humor
most, or most advance their wicked purposes: Without this direction of Gods
spirit, and without this godly discretion and Christian judgment, to discern
between the truth of God, and the falshode of the devil, alas how soon may
students most of all other be misled and seduced by many writers of much
account among them, who had no sense or feeling of this lamb of God, or any
such christian doctrine, but in the abundance of their own carnal humor, and
in their gross worldly sense took upon them to judge of all matters, as well
spiritual as corporal, by the only direction of their natural reason, or
rather fantastical conceit, which otherwhile carried them headlong into all
error and blasphemy? I will pass over those old Atheists, Diagoras,
Protagoras, Democritus, Philosophers, Aristippus and Epicurus, Courtiers, the
288, sects of heathenish scholars, which S. Augustine mentions out of
Varro, l. 19, de Ciuitate Dei, many of the heathen Poets, both Greek and
Latin, and such like, whose godless and unchaste opinions are too common among
the common sort of Students. I would to God Aristotle's sensual natural
philosophy, in his 3. books de anima, of the immortality of the soul, which
that small abstract of Athenagoras does sufficiently overthrow, to omit
Aeneas, and other of greater labor herein; and his moral philosophy of man's
perfect felicity, l. 1. c. 10. Ethec. l. 10. c. 6, 7. were not sometime for
vain disputations sake, or I wot not how, more hotly maintained with leave
and liking, then were convenient in our christian schools and companies, seeing
such other matters of less importance have with the same Schoolistes been so
earnestly and egerly disalowed, but if Cassianus be judged of his angry
children, they will out vith their penkniues by and by, and have their
peniworths of him that was once over them; young unskillful physicians count
bodies sometimes past hope that have as much life in them as themselves with
all their inspectiues; the wild heart would not have arrested the sheep of debt
if the woolfe his enemy had not been judge; he that makes an error and the
report thereof both one, cannot recite it against another but he shall therein
be against himself; one ear and one tale can never do the judge honesty, and
how can he determine, which knows not the controversy? which hears but one
part? which makes suspicion a proof? he is extreemely partial that winketh
at a filthy life, and will not abide a homely word, as if a rhetorical rule
were more precious then a moral; neither Irenaeus, nor Epiphanius, nor other
old or young scholars are blasphemous for repeating the blasphemies of written
heresies; he that knew Alipius well, did not once think him guilty of theft
because he studied in the place, and by chance handled the hammer and other
tools that a robber left there, S. Augustine would not accuse him more in his
confessions to God, then those hasty fellows which took them out of his
hands, and handled those instruments more then he had done; he is strangely
wise, that fears shadows and yet takes his enemy by the hand; that
strayneth at a gnat and swalloweth a camel; that condemns an heresy in one
school and yet commends it in another; that thinks no man's gown whole
cloth but only his own, as Aristotle judged all writers erroneous beside
himself.

He was without doubt in some points an excellent philosopher, but sometimes
even his natural reason fails, and our common sense confuteth his common
sense* but the particulars of his questions and disputations, wherein he
transcendently exceeds other men are not very fit for this place. Come to
supernatural and divine matters, and alas what are his Metaphisicks, where he
makes any mention of god or gods, but either absurd Paganism or intolerable
Atheism. If we doubt hereof, let us search better, l. 12. metap. c. 7, 6, 8,
9, 10. and not fondly go about to excuse or salve the matter, by distinction
of a Philosophical truth, and a Theological truth, or by any like fruitless
suttilty and quiddity of the schools: there is but one perfection and truth of
one and the same matter, and that truth must be fet out of the divinity and
highest schools even into the philosophy and lower schools, wheresoever
heathenish philosophy is contrary or contradictory to Christ's divinity, as
Viues speaks more instantly, l. 5. cor. art. Beware, less any man spoil you
through philosophy and vain deceit, after the traditions of men, and after
the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, says S. Paul Colos. c. 2. v.
8. We must not be miscarried with the plausible name of Aristotle, or
Philosophy, no more then of Therapontigonus of Pyrgopolynices, or such, but
must christianly consider what becomes Christians to believe, and most
christianly defend that which may be warranted by good christianity, whereby in
our infancy we were incorporated into the church, and in our last end hereafter
shall be received into the triu^ph of heaven. Aristotle no doubt had a notable
and high reach in many controversies of common reason, notwithstanding his
errors of the number of spheres, the order of planets, the saltnes of the sea,
the cause of fountains, the time of the rainebow, the Salamanders quality, the
proportion of man's body, and other particulars noted by Viues, Greuinus,
Albertus, Bessarion, Bodinus, and the rest, but Christ knows, how far he was
from the true knowledge of a regenerate mind and a more perfect reason,
directed and reformed according to Gods own philosophy in the only fountain of
all truth concerning matters of belief and the very perfect truth it self* for
they which knew not God nor his word, that is the bread of life and
understanding and the water of wisdom, without which none can live says
Jesus, c. 15. v. 3. nor glorified him as God, became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was full of darkness, filling their
hungry scholars with swines meat in stead of the childrens bread, Luke c.
15. v. 16. as Gabriel Biel applies that text, in his initial oration against
philosophical curiosity and ignorance, and for christian profession, to his
prelections de canone missae; when they professed the^ selves wise they became
fools, says S. Paul that great Doctor, Romans c. 1. v. 21, 28. But no marvel
though before Christ's coming, the heathenish Philosophers having no
conference with the people of God, and preferring Athens before Jerusalem, and
the kingdom of Macedonia or Persia, before the kingdom of Israel, no marvel
though such Philosophers before Christ had no sense, or but very little feeling
of God and Christ, considering how many great Scholars, and famous writers,
even since the incarnation of our Savior Christ according to his humanity,
even since this Christian Philosopher S. John cried out, Behold the lamb of
God, have either blindly of ignorance, or spitefully of malice, or diuelishly
of impiety and wickedness, not only not acknowledged this lamb of God, or any
such salvation or redemption of the world by this lamb of God, but also
denied, and defaced, and blasphemed this most innocent, and most righteous
lamb of God. I let pass the rabble of Scribes and Pharisees, and Jewish
Rabbines, and other hypocrites, that not regarding Christ's unmatchable star,
or Gods irrefragable voice from heaven, either with hand or with heart did
conspire the bitter most intolerable passion of this most innocent lamb of
God, and so unjustly and unmercifully crucified the most merciful Savior of
the world. We are taught by S. Paul, not to take heed of any Jewish fables,
or commandementes of men turning from the truth, Tit. c. 1. v. 14. He that
reads of their Thalmud or doctrine, may soon see their blasphemies against
God, in fayning him every day to weep once, to be angry once, and then the
creste of the cock is white and pale: in accusing him of sin, when he made
the Moon less then the Sun: of a lie, when he calls the Sun a greater
light, and the Moon a less: against Christ, in supposing that the temple of
Jerusalem was not so rased and destroyed, but that three or four cubits were
untouched, and those stones left one upon another, where a Rabbine might sit,
and study the Thalmud: against heaven, by devising a hole in the North-parts,
which is unfinished, to try by way of challenge, if any can match Gods work,
and make it up. Whereupon certain new Buylders, with new wits, have set a
Chapel with the high end to the North, that their faces being turned that way
in prayers time, God at their humble suit may himself make up that hole after
so many years trial of other defective efficients. Now they said, all evil
comes from the North, because that part is open, which being stopped, the evil
may perhaps be stopped, and thus they builded. If our Emanuel like well of this
dedication, who may or dare call it mis-went, or mis-set? and what new founder
will not follow this pattern, by the counsel of that Quidam in Munster, he
that seeks riches, goes and looks toward the North, perhaps hereby to
obtain an increase of yearly revenues, by praying that way for daily bread, or
to be contrary unto Mahomet, whose face is toward the South, as other
Christians are contrary to the Jews in looking toward the East. O happy
times, and happy men, that revive Homer and Auerroes, and other renowned
Pagans, to make them builders and Architects in Christ's Church? we are too
common and vulgar now, but they are so peerless, that we may hope for new
arts, new manners, new worlds, to prevent articall hyperboreall harms, and
to win goods by the sons of Arcturus, whom perhaps they can guide by their
learning, and answer the question in Jobs book, cap. 38. v. 32. against the
Moon, in sending her to God her creator, to complain of the Sun, for keeping
the light from her at his certain times: against innocent Adam, by giving him
both natures of male and female in Paradise before Eve was made, and telling of
his ingendring with the beasts of the field: against Noa the Preacher of
righteousness, by reporting of the Crows ielosie toward him: to let pass many
such impudent fictions, unreasonable impieties, senseless things. But the
Jews credit is little worth with Christians, and themselves are weried and
tired with looking so long for a new Messiah, whereas they had the right lamb
of God among them, and most horribly slaughtered him without all pity or
mercy, even according to the spiritual visions, and divine predictions of the
Prophets, that every scripture might be fulfilled, and no jot of Gods word
pass unaccomplished, Act. c. 4. v. 28.

The first coming of this lamb in humility is as certainly past, as his
second coming in majesty and glory is not far of. God grant we be found
ready at the great coming of the great bridegroom, with the five wise virgins
that were so well provided with oil in their lamps. Math. c. 25. v. 7, 10. As
I have lightly passed over the light and vain Jews, so I hope I may also do
with the Turks, considering that the very name of Jew and Turk are alike
odious among good Christians. The Alcoran and Mahomets whole heap of learning
is not unknown to some students: where Mahomet is made a greater and a
mightier prophet then Christ, because he had a greater body and was girded with
a sword; where the lamb of the devil, or rather that woolfe of hell is
preferred before the lamb of God, because the beast wrought more wonders then
Jesus: where God is said, to be but one only single God in person, without any
wife and therefore without any son or daughter, or any such issue, because
God is not able in his extraordinary power to beget a body without ordinary
means: where diverse notable histories and special parts of the bible are
fabulously delivered and strangly corrupted, because otherwise they serve not
his purpose: where the finger of the devil has incountred the finger of God,
and the spirit of Beelzebub opposed it self against the spirit of Christ. This
horrible and abominable book, although it be read of some men, yet I trust,
there is not any christian, that makes any better account thereof then it
deserves, though Leo Nardus gather out of it a certain Confirmation of our
gospel in his tolerable unnecessary devise, being in truth the very book of
the devil, under pretense of worshipping the one only true God, whereas no man
comes to the father, but he whom the son leads and guides, as many texts
of scripture might be alleged to that purpose. John c. 14. v. 6. Math. c. 11.
v. 27. etc. In this book Sergius a false monk and a Nestorian heretic had
his hand, therein thinking to go beyond all Antichrists in oppugning and
defacing the divinity of Christ. Sabel. l. 6. Enne. 8. but I hope there shall
not greatly need any long confutation in this place, either of Mahometists, or
of Nestorians, or of any like heretics, that denied the deity of Christ; they
have been materially and thoroughly confuted by the best divines of al ages from
time to time, eue^ since the primitive church to this day, and these Sergianks
and Alcoranks cannot endure long, but they shall be stopped up as wels without
water: and they are carried about with a whirlewinde and tempest; and to them
the black darkness is reserved for ever. 2. Pet. c. 2. v. 17.

God be praised, this poison has not greatly at any time infected this church
of England or any special members thereof, but has always bin reckoned among
the most venomous scismes, the most horrible apostasies, and the most
abominable heresies of other erroneous churches: and little better account may
justly be made of Scaliger, that subtle master of late years, subtle as a
spinners web full of cunning and simply good for nothing, and therefore hated
of right wisdom which the heathen miscalled Pallas, as the moral physician
Petrarke writes; l. 1. dial. 7. who either in the pride of his name Julius
Caesar, or of his wit, or militarship, accounts the ministers of holy things
in all countries and places, like those Mahometicall impostors which deceived
the king of Moluccae with their Manucodiata a bird of paradise, for dreaming
and fayning many matters, thereby to lead the people into vain hope and
maintain their opinions or sects; Exercit. 228.5. And little better account
has been made of Josephus the writer of the Judicial history and himself a
Jewish priest, who reports of Jesus but as of another good wise man, or a
good prophet at the most, because he could say no more then he knew, or would
not seem to be wiser then his countrymen, from whom both the turkish and all
other ungracious violent doctrines had their beginning. l. 18. c. 4. antiq.
Some other places of christendom have been more touched and plagued with these
corrupt inventions of Iudaisme, Nestorianisme, Mahometisme, and such like
execrable apostasies and heresies, robbing Christ of his divinity, and
themselves of their salvation, in denying him to be the lamb of God. I pray
God, we may ever continue clear in the universities and cities, which are to
be the nurseries of true doctrine and seminaries of true religion* the tree of
apostasy and heresy must not only be hewn down, but plucked up by the very
roots, and burned in unquenchable fire. Math. c. 3. v. 10.

Certain ancient fathers in the primitive Church were troubled with confuting
the wicked ruffianly apostata Julian, Carrion says l. 3. who desperately
opposed himself with might and maine; with have among ye my masters the
Nazarites, during that short flourish of his empire (which vanished like a mist,
even as Athanasius had prophesied of him) against the holy one in Israel, the
blessed lamb of God, and not only fought against Christ with the tyrannical
arms of a bloody Emperor, but also with the sophistical weapons of a broken
rhetorician, ever ready as well to martyr the zealous confessor with the one, as
to confute the most zealous doctor with the other. But himself in the end was
stricken with an arrow wonderfully, as Achab was, and constrained to cry out in
a horrible and woeful agony, Vicisti galilaee, o galilean, thou have gotten
the victory, o Christ, I must needs confess my self overcome, and so he gave
up the black ghost, Theod. l. 3. c. 25. and certain fragments of his glorious
and blasphemous style are yet extant, sufficiently confuted as well by many
learned christians, as by that ancient Greek bishop Cyrillus, whose purposely
undertook that labor* tom. 3. the lip of truth shall be stable for ever,
Prouer. c. 12. v. 19. great is the truth, mighty is the truth, and it
prevails. 3. Esdr. c. 4. v. 41. The like tragical success in effect had
those other Emperors his companions, who went about to set up Apollonius
Tyanaeus against Christ, and to prefer his strange wo^derments before the
divine miracles of Christ, as if greater divinity had appeared in the magical
impostures of Apollonius the vain Pythagorist, then in the heavenly miracles
of Jesus whose name is wonderful, Esai c. 9. v. 6. according to that saying in
the gospel; false Christ's and false prophets shall arise, and shall show signs
and wonders, to deceive, if it were possible, even the elect, Matthew. c. 24. v.
24. whereas both themselves, those Antichristian Emperors, as Bullinger writes
of Tyrants tragedies, c. 20. and their great iugler or magician, or impostor,
or Philosopher, or whatsoever the devil he was, soon vanished into smoke, and
had an end answerable to their beginning, notwithstanding the manifest
applauses of sundry smoothing parasites toward the one, and the goodly fine
devises of some glosing Rhethoricians for the other: as the book of Eusebius
Caesariensis against that false Philalethes, shows plainly, and as Herodotus
and other Gentiles in the light of nature only can say, that no injustice has
ever been unpunished, (...), in Terpsichore, a voice in a vision by night sent
to Hipparehus a tyrant before his death.

I cannot here forget either Hierocles, or Philostratus, or Dion Prusensis, or
Libanus the Philosopher, or Lucian, or Eunapius, or the rest of that Greekish
conceited crew, who vainly and impiously whetted the edge of their fantastical
Rhetorike and Philosophy, against him that reigns in heaven, while they like
desperate helhou^ds most woefully gnash their teeth in hell: commending to such
natures the sentence of Aulus Gellius, l. 12. c. 11. taken from the mouth of
that grave and constant Philosopher Peregrinus surnamed Proteus, whom they so
lustely and bravely contemn. Not to sin upon hope of being hid, because no
corner is hid from God and time* where is the wise? where is the Scribe? where
is the disputer of this world? has not God made the wisdom of this world
foolishnes? but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a stumbling block,
and unto the Greeks foolishnes, but unto them that are called we preach
Christ, the power of God, and the wisdom of God, for the foolishness of God
is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger then men, 1. Cor. c.
1. v. 19, 20, 22, etc. Ah wretched Lucian, justly surnamed Atheos, thou
blasphemer and whelpe of Arrius, no jot inferior for impiety to Lucian the
Marcionist, that did in thy Peregrinus requite the most grievous, but most
happy passion of the blessed lamb of God, with so blasphemous a scoff, and so
damnable a phrase, as to call him, o devil as thou art, the crucified Sophister
and hanged impostor, whereas thy damned self now do with the Apology of
Mycillus about thy neck, and all other must hang in hell, that are tickled
with any such hellish Rhethoricke, or whet their delicate wits upon him, that
is able to bereave them of all wit, and can utterly confound them with the
least breath of his mouth.

Alas, what is Rhethoricke or Philosophy, or any good gift, either of tongues
or knowledge, of speech or reason, if they be abused and perverted to a bad
use? O man what have thou that thou have not received? If thou have received
it, why do thou boast and vaunt thy self, as if thou had not received it?
1. Cor. c. 4. v. 7. One writes of Lucian, that as trim a fellow, and as fine a
Rhethorician as he is, a student were better not read him at all, then read
him all, meaning that horrible outrageous part against Christ, named Alexander
Pseudomantis, like a very plaguesore in a living body, a perilous part for young
wits to deal withal, that be not fully catechized and christianized
aforehand. It is not unknown to some, how this devilish impe and scoffing
rakehell for a time became a Christian, but soon revolted, says Volaterranus,
and after his most execrable apostacy was wont to say, that all he gate by his
Christendom, was the addition of one syllable to his name, being before called
Lucius, but then christened Lucianus, like one made only to jest, a very
animal risibile, as Eunapius reckons of him, or rather, which turned the
grace of God into wantonness, ordained before to this condemnation, as says S.
Jude v. 4.

He might have at least sported without harm to himself and not have been
condemned by his own mouth; and to jest with a iester, if he had said, that
his baptism lifted him from ima, and gave him life, or the first syllable of
anima, it had not been very greatly amiss: but like enough the gentleman was
in such a kind of laughing melancholy, as a countryman was, against the great
archbishop of Collen, when he turned his raw dutch jest on the worst hand
very proudly and rudely in this sort; If the archbishop goes with such
harnessed men, because he sustaineth the person of a Duke, not only of a
Bishop, I pray, when the devils carry the Duke to hell, what shift will the
Bishop make? whereas he might have said with as much reason and more obedience,
for ought I see in Fulgosius and Duarenus the reporters hereof, when the good
angels shall carry the Bishop to the joys of heaven, what should the Duke be
afraid of his end? but then he had not been a right German clown; no more
had Lucian bin antichristian, which name he liked best in spite of all good
names, as Lactantius judges of him, l. 1. c. 9. de fall. celi. and in spite of
Traians and Plutarchs sober virtues, as Viues ce^sureth him, l. 2. de verit.
fidei. Lord God, what is man's wit without the grace of God? what is man's reason
and learning without the spirit of God? Achitophel may seem an oracle for the
time, but at the last for all his exceeding great wisdom he hanged himself.
2. Kings c. 17. v. 23. Lucian was but an ape to Achitophel, and therefore the
less marvel though he came to an apish death, and were rent in pieces of
dogs, as Suidas reports, like that cursed starched creature Iezabel. I
beseech God, rid universities, cities, courts, towns and countries of such
apes, which behave themselves in matters of religion, as if they were in a
tennis court or vawting school, without any reverence or regard, and either
give them more fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom, or less pride
in the flourish of their own wit, which is the end and overthrow of all
goodness. As Iannes and Iambres withstood Moses, so do these also resist the
truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith, but they shall
prevail no longer, for their madness shall be manifest unto all men, as also
theirs was. 2. Timo. c. 3. v. 8. Neither am I only to complain of Lucian, or
those other vain greekish wits, as of Iannes and Iambres, and such like, and
far above any such, but diverse learned Romans of much better note when they
lived, and ever since reputed very sensible, reasonable, wise men, cast
themselves headlong into the same damnable gulf of blasphemy and Atheism. If
any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be anathema, and had in
execration, yea let him be maranatha, and abhorred unto the death. 1. Cor. c.
16. v. 22. Lord God, what should I say to the two Plinies, the uncle and the
nephew, famous learned men, but alas most wretched souls to God? whereof the
one in his natural history, l. 7. not subtly or sophistically, like
Aristotle, or his Arabian and corrupt interpretour Auerroes, but flatly and
resolutely denies the immortality of the soul; the other, l. 10. reports
of Christ and the primitive christians of his age, as he lists, in the
abou^dance and liking of his own carnal conceit, measuring the soul by the
body, the line by the timber: these are fleshly, they are makers of sects,
they have not the spirit, and therefore they mislike the fruits hereof, as S.
Jude says, v. 19. I cannot deny but Cornelius Tacitus is a grave and wise
historian in many points, yet how lightly and foolishly, nay how wickedly and
impiously does he report of Christ and his professed followers? l. 15.
wherefore these are no more to be esteemed of us, either for their oratourship
or other learning, then Tertullus that orator, and Elymas that cunning man
were esteemed of the Apostles: Acts c. 13. v. 10. c. 24. v. 16.

The like censure I and all good Christians must give of Suetonius in the life
of Nero Claudius, of Symmachus in Prudentius works, of Celsus in the books of
Origene, and of too many other in that kind, who either reviled Christ in
abominable most hellish terms of a notable malefactor and seducer of the
people, in very truth no better then hungry ravenous dogs licking up the
vomit of the Pharisees, Mat. cap. 27. v. 62. or else acknowledged his only
humanity without any christian confession of his deity. Such is the fashion
of the world, and such is the guise of disguised malignant worldlings, to
rail on the person whom they may see, when they cannot disgrace his virtues
which they will not see; to respect the men that are of mean estate; without
regard of their stately and excellent gifts to use general reproves without
particular proofs, and rather be content to call him good then leave him out
of the Libell; to soar aloft and houer in the air like a spirit of the air,
and yet at length to lick dust, and seize upon flies and worms and meanest
things; to carry a great name, even a title of Legions, and yet to end but in
brutish and hoggish conquestes upon the worst and vilest matters. These
disloyalties and misdemeanors are too well known among some men, and I would
to God they were either less notorious, or more abhorred.

I confess many books are otherwise of very great importance and worthy the
reading, but Christ knows how much better it were quite to banish them the
Country, then that they should creep into the least credit with us in any
such matter of faith and religion; we must not judge of Angels by the devils
will, or learn of our enemies how to use our friends, we must have no
fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, of pride, of malice, of
blasphemy, but rather reprove them, as S. Paul teaches the Ephesians, c. 5,
v. 11, etc. Men void of the fear of Gods holy church, and given over to a
recklesse sense, seem they otherwhile to the world never so sensible, never so
reasonable, never so learned, never so wise, never so hardy, never so subtle,
both cast away themselves in the end, and do either little or no good, nay
exceeding much harm, without the good direction and reformation of a christian
spirit, which builds not upon flesh or blood, or upon any goodly show of
humane wit, reason, learning, experience or wisdom, but even upon that
corner stone, and upon that most sound and invincible rock, whereon Christ
builds his church, that is, a true confession of Christ with S. Peter, and a
faithful heholding of the lamb of God with S. John.

Other good parts, and other good gifts are good in their kind, at least as the
world counts good, and as good goes now a days, but alas, all other good
without this good is too bad. What avails it to have all the experience, all
the policy, all the learning, all the wisdom, all the wealth and
plausibilitie in the world? nay, what does it profit to win the whole
world, and to lose thine own soul? there runs an old prouerbiall
rithmicall verse among Scholars, notable for the sense, though otherwise not
so excellent: Hoc est nescire, sine Christo plurima scire;
Qui Christum been scit, satis est si caetera nescit.
The greatest knowledge without Christ is no better then blind ignorance: he
that well knows Christ, it makes the less matter if his knowledge be the
less otherwise. O it is Christian belief, Christian zeal, Christian
humility, that leads to heaven. Salvation comes not of thy self, or of
thy own wit, thou art damned in the first Adam, and must either remain
damned still, or be regenerate and saved in the second Adam Jesus Christ, the
propitiation of our sins, the immaculate lamb slain from the beginning, and
once offered on the altar of the cross for all, the very true right only lamb
of God, that takes away the sin of the earth: we may endeavor to sow, or to
plant, or to water, or to run, or to do any action, but it is God that
gives the increase and victory. God be merciful unto us, and give us more
and more of his mercy, that through his grace and spirit we may grow and
increase in his vineyard, still from better to better, to seek still the
final destruction of these foxes which destroy the vine, till we inherit that
kingdom, and enjoy that crown of glory that is prepared for him and his
Angels, for him and his elect, for him and al good Christians.

We see how thoroughly the devil has played his part, in opposing so many
great scholars and od wits in all ages against our savior* his craft and
malice has left no way unattempted whereby he may win the world unto him, he
continually goes and rangeth about like a roaring lion seeking whom he may
devour. 1. Peter c. 1. v. 8. O he is a wicked and a crafty devil, and is too
well learned, to spy his own advantage, and ever ready, to take the least
occasion of his gain by our loss, of his strength by our infirmity, of his
comfort by our miserable fall and perdition, of setting up his own kingdom by
striving to pull down the kingdom of Christ; he wants no devilish angels,
no ministers, no instruments to serve his turn, such as those leopards
soldiers, which troubled and guarded Ignatius, and the better he used them in
words, the worse and more insolent they were, as it is recorded in his epistle
to the Romans, he has kings and kaysers, counselors and nobles, secretaries
and writers, lawiers and divines, physicians and many hirelings at
commandment, the devilish world is too full of the devil, would to Christ,
he had less stroke among the professors of Christ. O generation of vipers* how
can ye speak good things, when ye yourselues are evil? for out of the
abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. Matthew. c. 12. v. 34. How can you
once think, that you have a true spirit, when neither Moses nor Paul can make
you, not to rail upon the fathers and judges of the land, nor to curse the
rulers of the people. Exodus c. 22. v. 28. Acts c. 23. v. 5. Yet you that be
true Christians lift up your heads, as Stoflerinus says in the year, 1524.
after that he foresaw the chaunges which were then like to come creeping or
rushing into the world. I had thought, not to have proceeded any further in the
rehearsal of more examples, but yet behold more wicked enemies of the lamb of
God* the men are too notorious and their writings are too famous. Italy, in old
times the true mirror of virtue and manhood, of late years has been noted,
to breed up infinite Atheists, such as Caesar Borgia was, that using or abusing
himself in his life to contemn religion, despised it on his deathbed, as
Sanazarius writes l. 2. epigr. or as Alexander the sixth, or as Leo the tenth,
either of the two as irreligious, as beastly and Neronious as Nero him self,
as the same excellent poet and knight, surnamed Sincerus for his honesty, and
Actius for his industry, has written: but of chiefest name those three
notable pernicious fellows, Pomponatius a great philosopher, Aretine a great
courtier or rather courtisan, the grandsire of all false and martinish
courtiership, and Machiauel a great politic. Pomponatius embracing the
poisonous doctrine of Aristotle and Pliny, openly disputed before the Pope,
and writ a Book against the immortality of the soul, with such force of
subtle reasons and philosophical persuasions, that he was thought to bring Leo
the tenth then reigning, into his profane and diabolical opinion, as Iouius an
humanitian bishop says; a good vicar of Christ, no doubt, and well grounded in
the doctrine of resurrection, which is able alone to confute and even
annihilate all such books and libels whatsoever, both for the divine and most
sovereign authority of the makers and authors thereof, and for the necessity
of the word it self, to maintain Gods promise and man's dominion over brute
beasts. Aretinus a man, or rather by moral metamorphose a beast of a most
viperous and hellish spirit, in all kind of diuelishe impiety Vnicus, and
otherwise not so, in which respect like enough neither Gesner nor Simler
judged him worthy to come into their libraries among other writers, although
some Italians his ungracious disciples have called him, divine Peter Aretine,
porter of Plutoes divinity, or much like Tullies divine wit of L. Lucullus, or
Ouids, God is in us, and Romish divinity, which may ever have a new stamp from
his holiness, and other such Rhethoricall and poetical lavish hyperbolees, he,
I say of all other, was the arrogantest rakehell, and rankest villen, saving
your reverence, that ever set pen to paper, like cursed Sodomites, jesting
and sporting at that which good men in natural modesty are ashamed to speak
of. Genesis cap. 19. verse. 4, 5.

His horrible most damnable book of three impostors, and his impudent infamous
Capricio, or Apology of Paedarastice prove him (...), a very incarnat devil
you may call it, and one Martin-marprelate of late has done such a kind of
work for very (...), and nothing else. But Aretine spoke ill of that heavenly
God he knew not, and perished through his own carnal corruption, as Peter the
true Apostle has deuined, as it were, of this outcast, 1. Epist. c. 2. v. 12.
whose delight and venerie was his death, as the tribe of Beniamites, not only
the city of Gomorrheans, gonorreans was destroyed for this sin, Judges c. 19.
when God had given him up unto vile affections, whereby he left the natural
use of women, he burned in lust toward men, and wrought filthiness with men,
Romans ca. 1. ver. 24, 27. a shame it is to name those things which are done of
such men in secret, Ephesians. c. 5. v. 12. Now God for his Christ's sake keep
all students, and all Christians from any such desperate mind, from such
monstrous and unprofitable singularity: and out upon al such Satanish books,
that are printed I think in the devils name, and go about even like hungry
bears, seeking whom they may devour, as it were in very extreme contempt of
the lamb of God, of the grace of God, of everlasting truth, of that most
blessed union and singularity of true faith.

Egyptians are a vain generation, and fitter to innouate matters then to
govern present things, says Q, Curtius l. 4. the pictures and patterns of our
frivolous Atheists and Reformers, both in this point very Gypsies. Yet
Machiauel not so ill as Aretine, yet Machiauel too ill, God knows* this
unchristian master of policy, raising up Nicolaites now of his stamp, as
Nicholas an Apostata did among the seven Deacons, is not afraid in a heathenish
and tyrannical spirit, l. 2. of warly art, in the person of Fabricio, to accuse
the gospel of Christ, and the humility of the lamb of God, for the decay of
the most flourishing and prosperous estate of the Roman Empire, which fell by
the own idleness and folly, as himself confesses l. 7. and as other estates
are ouerturned by it, the mother, and nurce, and wife of all evil, says my
honorable Lord of Essex to his Soldiers, a mother that bears none but
bondemen, a nurce that feeds none but dulpates, a wife that marieth none but
unthrifts. His discoursiue accusation is in many men's hands, and I would to God
the intended effect of the discourse were not in some men's hearts: howbeit, the
same is learnedly confuted, not only by a religious french protestant, whose
commentaries are extant, written ex professo, against Machiauel and his
antichristian grounds of government, but also by no vile Papist, much named
and read among students, I mean Osorius in his Nobilitate Christiana, l. 3.
where it is notably proved by many worthy, divine, and humane histories, that
christian humility and the profession of the lamb of God, is not any
hinderance to the right fortitude beseeming the people of God, but rather a
very great and principal furtherance of their valiant and invincible acts, in
fighting Gods own battles, and seeking not their own glory, but the kingdom
of David, the kingdom of Israel, the kingdom of Christ, even as David
himself fought most manfully for the establishing of that kingdom in the name
of the living God, ouercomming valiantly not only mighty champions and huge
Giants in that defense, but also vanquishing and subduing his other foes the
enemies of God in infinite numbers, before him, behind him, and round him, as
appears notably in the books of Kings, in the Chronicles, and in his own
Psalms.

And to omit the handling of militar virtues, it is most certain, that no man
is more careful to do his duty, then a christian conscience, no man more
hearty in doing it, then a christian faith, no man more trusty, then christian
charity, no man more conscionable, more faithful, more charitable then a true
christian man: and that secretary of hell, not only of Florence is forced to
confess in some places l. 1. disp. c. 11. upon Liuy, and elsewhere, but most
emphatically in his proeme to L. Philip Strozza, by vehement and zealous
interrogation; In whom ought there to be more fear of God, then in a warrior,
which every day committing himself to infinite perils, has most need of his
help? A right Italian sentence, a notable word, a fit preserve against the
other venims which this Spider gathered out of old philosophers and heathen
authors; for that is the wit and disposition of our reformatiue age, to gather
precepts from those things which our forefathers in their learning judged no
better then objections, and to study those matters for practice, which were
first taught them for their safety, by knowing and avoiding them, and to gather
common places of men's certain and supposed errors omitting their virtues and
commendations. But I cannot now stand to debate any such particular point or
several branch of Antichristianisme* he is already confuted sufficiently by
the general testimony of all good consciences, and by the universal hearty
consent of all godly and manly christians, as it may also please God, at his
gracious pleasure to work in many other not yet regenerate, that now account
too well of him. Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for whatsoever a man
sows that shall he also reap: for he that sows to the flesh, shall of the
flesh reap corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit
reap life everlasting. Gala. c. 6. v. 7, 8.

Gods works are great, and mighty, and wonderful, and exceeding admirable even
above the capacity of the wisest and profoundest mind in the world: yet are
his mercies above his works, and the depth of his mercies far more wonderful
then the height of his works. O merciful Lord, open the infinite fountains
and fludgates of thy unspeakable mercies, and touch the hearts of so many as
are not utterly obdurate and reprobate, with the finger of thy holy spirit,
even to the final reformation of the prodigal son, and joyful recovery of
the lost sheep, so far as it is possible for strayed sheep to have any
portion in the sheepefold of the lamb of God. Thy holy servants and prophets
assure us of the most happy condition and blessed estate of the kingdom of
Israel, the kingdom of David, the kingdom of Christ; o let thy kingdom come,
and let thy will be done in earth, as it is in heaven. As for such
uncircumcised Philistines, such blasphemous Goliahs, such rebellious
Achitophels, such unnatural Onans, such wicked and desperate Atheists, as I
have named, if any such remain upon the earth, as I fear me there are too
many, and happily some among Christians, and happily some among scholars,
sauouring too much of these ungracious scholars; Lord God, either speedily
reform the^ in the abundance of thy mercy, so far as they have not
committed that great unpardonable sin against the holy Ghost, or utterly
confound them with the iron rod of thy justice, and teach other by their
example to tremble at the mighty majesty of their Lord God. Let them feel the
force of the lio^ of the tribe of Judah, that would not see the goodness of the
lamb of God; let them taste the insufferable torments and horrors of damnation,
that refused to enjoy the most comfortable and blessed estate of salvation; thy
mighty stretched out arm is not weakened or shortened; teach them to fear
their God, either like good children, or like cursed creatures, dreading the
horrible punishment due to their horrible sins.

It has pleased God in all ages, by the mouth of his Prophets under the law,
and by the mouth of his Apostles under the gospel, to win infinite thousands
to unfeigned repentance, and to the faithful worship of the true God, as
manifestly appears, partly by the ancient histories and prophesies of the old
Bible, and partly by the gospel and Acts of the Apostles in the new Testament.
In the primitive Church the number of conuerts, and confessors, and zealous
Christians, and martirs was infinite: paganism, idolatry, blasphemy,
infidelity, and heresy gave place to christianity; the mighty power and
fiery operation of the holy ghost is exceeding wonderful; innumerable
multitudes were daily and continually gained to the church, as Augustine by the
zealous, and eloquent, and devout, and learned Sermons of S. Ambrose, was
reclaymed from his heathenish philosophy, and manichisme, and became a good
Christian, a zealous doctor, a godly Bishop, a reverend father, as his books
of confessions do testify, from the thirteenth and fourteenth chapters of the
fifth book, unto the end of that work.

I might declare the like conversion of infinite other, but his example is most
famous, and the matter it self most evident; the kingdom of darkness stouped
to the kingdom of light, Satan yielded to Christ, the world, the flesh, and
the devil were conquered by the lamb of God, and great hope appeared of the
very universal establishment, and catholic peace of the Israeticall kingdom.
But Satan cannot sleep long, he and his hellish angels must play their parts,
the malice of the devil lies in continual wait, to entrap and entangle the
soul of man. Satan is a cunning and strong adversary, and ever strives to
increase his Synagogue and route of infidels, of Atheists, of Giants, of
Heretics, of Apostataes, of Schismatiks, in every dangerous and pestiferous
kind, that iniquity might have the upper hand. Alas, his malice and craft
prevail too much, o God, when thou see thy gracious time, confound all his
pestilent craft and malice, good lamb of God, take away the sin of the
world, even this horrible and abominable sin of the wicked world: thy
goodness is above all the naughtiness of the world, we are not to limit or
restrain thy omnipotency, o good God, be merciful unto us wretched sinners,
even where our sins deserve hell fire, and utter damnation. The world is
wicked, the flesh is frail, the devil is busy, man is man, and man is
subject to all imperfections and vices, to all infirmities and sins, to all
lewdness and naughtines, even to that great and most horrible sin of
blasphemy, infidelity, and atheism, it is the only direction of thy grace
and holy Spirit according to thy word, that can keep us within the bounds of
good order, of good conscience, of good faith, of good christianity, of god
zeal toward the lamb of God: without which zeal what are we but the children
of wrath, the sons of iniquity, the impes of perdition, the members of
Satan, the ministers of Antichrist, very wretches and atheists? We are called
Christians, o make us true christians, o regenerate a new heart in us, a right
christian heart, wholly and sincerely devoted to the lamb of God.

The kings of France affect the style and title of most Christian, the kings of
Spain have been termed Catholici, our Kings and Queens of England have
lately been called Defenders of the faith: o good God, make al good kings, and
all good Queens throughout al christendom, and all their Subjects, most
Christian, Catholic, Defenders of the faith, and suffer not any, christian or
unchristian fool to say in his heart, there is no God, there is no such lamb
of God that takes away the sin of the world. But above all other, and beyond
all other, woe be unto thee Antichrist, thou great enemy of Christ, thou whore
of Babylon, thou abomination of desolation, thou holy father of infidelity
and reprobation, thou ungodly god of perdition and damnation, being the head of
all evils, not for time and influence, as Aquinas distinguishes, but for that
perfection of malice which is in thee by deuilish effects. Part. 3. Quaest. 8.
Artic. 8. Some think thee to be the Turk, as Melancthon in his common place
on the fourth commandment: some the Pope, as Chemnisius in his Examen: some
both, Draconites c. 8. Dan and Mayor upon the Epistles to the Thessalonians:
some neither, as they which counted Nero, or one of the tribe of Dan, or Luter
to be he. But god knows, the prophesies of Ierem. touching the fall of
Babylon in the 5. ca. throughout; and the prophecy of Daniel touching the king
of lust and self-will, c. 11. v. 36. c. 8. v. 23. and the revelation of S. John
touching the same fall, c. 17, 18, 19. and the description of the great whore,
the mother of the abominations of the earth drunken with the blood of the
saints and the blood of the martyrs of Jesus; together with that declaration of
Antichrists coming before the day of Christ set down by Saint Paul. 2.
Thessal. cap. 2. verse. 4, 8. and other like Textes are by the censure of the
soundest judgments, examining all circumstances and appendices of that Text
and that Revelation, most sensibly and visibly verified in the Sea of Rome, and
in the Pope the great bishop of that See, whose intolerable pride tyrannising
over all the kings and princes of christendom, and exalting himself above all
that is called God, is gone before, and whose ruinous shame follows after,
when it shall please God, inuincibly to establish the kingdom of Christ, Dan.
c. 2. v. 45. and utterly to overthrow and desolate this kingdom of Antichrist,
the man of sin, the son of perdition, the adversary of Christ, as God
sitting in the temple of God and bearing himself for God, as S. Paul writes
of him in the same epistle to the Thessalonians, Let any indifferent divine not
over partially and unreasonably transported with blind affection to that see,
uprightly and sincerely discuss the proper effects and accidents of
Antichrist, and I assuredly believe, he shall not find the like concurrence of
those actions and qualities in any other creature but in the Pope, whose
doctrine, discipline, and whole regiment is notoriously known, and whose
corrupt lives displaid to the world in that high degree of their intolerable
abomination even in the temple of God, reveal a very incarnat Antichrist,
whose ecclesiastical supremacy had nigh hand abolished all good
ecclesiastical doctrine and discipline.

But this common place of Antichrist, and the whole anatomy of his
ecclesiastical doctrine and discipline, requires a larger discourse, and may
minister plentiful matter, not of one treatise, but of many treatises, and
whole volumes, as already has done to many notable learned men and some
divines in England. I for this time am to leave Antichrist with those other
profane and devilish Atheists, accounting no better of him then of them, but
rather abhorring and detesting him in greater measure then any of them, or then
al they together, by how much he has been a great enemy to the lamb of
God, more then any other. I hasten to the rest, yet I beseech you mark what
the Prophet Esaias says against the idols of the devil, and for the lamb of
God, c. 46. v. 1. etc. Bell is fallen, Nebo is broken down, whose images were
a burden for the beasts and cattle, to ouerlade them, and to make them weary,
they are sunk down and fallen together, for they cannot ease them of their
burden, therefore must they go away into captivity.

So far against idolatry; then Christ the lamb of God speaks
prophetically, as it were in his own person, v. 3. Harken unto me ye house of
Jacob, and ye that remain of the house of Israel, who^ I have borne from your
mothers womb, and brought up from your nativity. It is I, even I, which shall
bear you unto your last age, I have made you, I will also nourish you, defend
you, and save you.

And seeing our last mention was of Antichrist, mark also I pray you, how the
same Prophet in the very next Chapter, or rather God by his Prophet, more
particularly and specially menaceth Babylon, that is, Rome, v. 1. But as for
thee thou daughter, thou damsel Babilo^, sit down in the dust, sit upon the
ground, there is no throne, o thou daughter of Chaldaea, for thou shall no more
be called tender and pleasant, thy filthiness shall be discovered, and thy
priuities shall be seen, for I will avenge me upon thee, and will show no mercy
unto thee as I do unto other. Our Redeemer is called the Lord of hosts, the
holy one of Israel, sit still, hold thy tongue, get thee into some dark
corner, o daughter of Chaldaea, for thou shall no more be called Lady of
kingdoms. I was so wrath with my people, that I punished mine inheritance, and
gave them into thy power, nevertheless, thou shewedst them no mercy, but even
the very aged of them did thou sore oppress with thy yoke, and thou
thoughtest thus, I shall be lady for ever, and besides all that, thou have not
regarded these things, nor remembered what was the end of the City Jerusalem.

Hear now therefore, thou delicate one, that sit so careless, and
speak thus in thy heart, I am alone, and without me there is none, I shall
never be widow, nor desolate again, yet both these things shall come unto thee
upon one day, namely, widowhood and desolation, they shall mightily fall upon
thee, and so forth, as consequently follows in the same chapter, to the same
effect, of much trouble, mischief, ruin, and a sudden utter destruction and
overthrow menaced against Babylon, for a time the Lady and Empress of the
world, that is, Rome. A notable caveat for Antichrist, that is, the Pope and
his adherents, if they would be so graciously wise to foresee and conceive
their own misery and destruction: but it is said in the very same chapter, v.
10. Thou have trusted in thy wickedness, and have said, no man sees me: but
thine own wisdom and cunning has deceived thee, and so forth.

And no doubt, even so it goes with all the members and impes of Antichrist in
what degree soever, that any way oppose themselves against Christ, or any way
blaspheme and deface the lamb of God, they may seem wise and cunning in their
own eyes, in their own stubburne wilful conceit, but extreme ruin, and
misery, and perdition, is the final reward of all such wisdom and cunning,
even in the mightiest Lords and Princes, and Emperors, and Popes of the
world. For every one that hears my word and does it not, says Christ
himself Math. c. 7. v. 26. shall be likened unto a foolish man that buylt his
house upon the sand, and the rain descended, and the floods came, and the
winds blew and bet upon that house, and it fell, and great was the fall of it.
Every one, says Christ, how great so ever he otherwise seems to the world,
even the great Turk, even the great Pope, even the greatest of all, amongst
the greatest of all. A foolish man, a foolish end; a proud man, a proud end; a
wicked man, wicked end; an ungodly and godless man, a wretched and horrible
end, full of all woe and utter destruction both of body and soul. Men cannot
gather grapes of thorns, nor figs of thistles, says S, Luke c. 6. v. 44.

Good brethren, let us actually and particularly apply this general doctrine
unto our selves, whereof otherwise we have no proper use, but a common
wandering thought, void of that singular fruit and effect which the word of
God is to work personally in every one that has his name registered in the
lambs book of life. Let us give diligent ear unto Christ's word, and follow
the same accordingly, least we be truly compared to that foolish buylder. Let
us harken unto him with the house of Jacob, and the remaynder of the house of
Israel, who has borne us from our mothers womb, and brought us up from our
nativity, who has nourished us, defended us, saved us, taken away our sins,
and made us blessed: for blessed is the man unto whom no sin is imputed. Let
us unfeignedly and faithfully embrace our redeemer the Lord of hosts, the holy
one of Israel, who has revealed, and shall reveal the filthy fornication of
Babylon, as he has confounded, and shall confound the outrageous pride of that
city, and advance his mount Sion above the mount of Esau, or the tower of
Babell. Upon mount Sion shall be deliverance, and it shall be holy, and the house
of Jacob shall possess their possessions, and the house of Jacob shall be a
fire, and the house of Joseph a flame, and the house of Esau as stubble, and
they shall kindle in the^, and devour them, there shall be no remna^t of the house
of Esau, for the Lord has spoken it, says Abdias, v. 17.

Let us remember, what S. John writes in his Revelation, c. 17. v. 14. etc.
Ten kings shall give their strength and power unto the beast, which ten kings
shall fight with the lamb, and the lamb shall overcome them al, for he is the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and they that are on his side are called, and
chosen, and faithful. Let us assure our selves, that he it is and none but he,
that can and will mightily deliver us from the forenamed mischief and
perdition threatened by the prophet Esaias and all the rest of the holy prophets.
Let us continually call to mind that godly and heavenly counsel of S. Paul,
Coloss. c. 3. v. 8. put ye of al wrath, all fiercenes, maliciousnes, blasphemy,
filthy communication out of your mouth, lie not one to another, seeing ye have
put of the old man with his works and have put on the new man, which is
renewed into knowledge after the image of him that made him, where is neither
Greek, nor Jew, circumcision, nor uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bond,
free, but Christ is all in all. O let us ever and ever meditate upon this and
such Christian instructions, o let us ever and ever practice them, and perform
them to the uttermost of our endeavor and power in Christ, in whom only we are
powerable to do his gracious pleasure, and to make our selves ready for our
inheritance in his most blessed kingdom. Let us daily and howrely look to our
selves, and pray for our selves, and pray for one another, that we be not led
into temtation, but delivered from evil, and namely from the forenamed
horrible evil of blasphemy, idolatry, infidelity, Paganism, Atheism, and
all such like devilish abomination, the very worst and most damnable effect of
Antichrist himself, of Beelzebub himself. Let us humbly and zealously pray
unto Christ, to make us like that wise man in the gospel after S. Matthew. c. 7.
v. 24. which built his house upon a rock, and the rain descended, and the
floods came, and the winds blew, and beat upon that house, and it fell not,
because it was grounded upon a rock, even the word of Christ, the voice of the
lamb, the gospel of salvation, true faith with true charity, good belief
with the effect of good works, as the good fruit of a good tree, according to
Christ's own preaching in his gospel, in the same chapter; v. 17, 18. Let us
study, not to be servants and scholars of infidels, but the sons of the
prophets, even such sons and disciples of the prophets, as Samuel taught at
his school or university at Naioth in Rama; 1. Kings c. 19. v. 20. and as the
two most wonderful prophets Elias and Elisaeus taught in their cities and
universities at Bethel and at Jericho. 4. Kings c. 2. v. 3, 5. and as such
other godly prophets taught in their several schools and towns, and namely
the most noble evangelical prophet Esaias, who is reported to succeed Elisaeus
in that most worthy prophetical function. Let us not believe every spirit, but
prove and discern the spirits, whether they be of God or not, for many false
prophets are gone out into the world; hereby shall ye know the spirit of God,
every spirit that confesses, that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is of
God, and every spirit which confesses not, that Jesus Christ is come in the
flesh, is not of God, and this is the spirit of Antichrist of whom ye have
heard, how that he should come, and even now already is he in the world, says
S. John 1. c. 4. v. 1, 2, 3. where he also adds this joyful comparison, v.
4. Little children ye are of God, and have overcome them that are not of God;
for greater is he that is in you then he that is in the world; they are of the
world, and therefore speak they of the world and the world hears them; we
are of God, he that knows God hears us; he that is not of God hears us
not; hereby know we the spirit of verity and the spirit of error* thus much
S. John in that place.

O let us still and still, more and more eschew and abandon this spirit of
error, this spirit of the world, this spirit of Antichrist, and ever embrace
and acknowledge the spirit of truth, the spirit of God, the spirit of Christ. O
let us for the love of God, for the love of Christ, for the love of our own
souls evermore seek the lamb of God, follow the lamb of God, behold and
embrace the lamb of God, look for the health of our bodies, the salvation of
our souls, the safeguard of both, not in, or from, or by any other, but only
in, and from, and by the only lamb of God, repose our whole belief, trust,
and felicity in the lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world, that
redeemeth and saves us wretched and wicked sinners of the world, that with his
own precious blood has paid the great ransom for the release of our
miserable bondage and captivity under the yoke of sin, and has suffered that
great insufferable passion due to us sinners, to bring us unto heaven, unto
God, unto himself sitting on the right hand of the father in all majesty,
power, and glory for ever and ever.

Thus you have a short confutation of those ungracious worldlings, that either
with wilful, or no better then beastly violence, or with witless and
desperate blasphemy, or with fond and obstinate self-loue, have proved
themselves the most indiscreet rulers, the most unskillful writers, the most
vile and ungodly sinful men that ever were called men, or ever lived in the
world. I mean first those ungodly antichristian hellish Aristotelists,
Auerroists Plinians, call them in word as they were in deed, men of more
subtilty then surety, which denying the immortality of the soul, accounting
it no better then heat and breath, moving and removing the body only, have
ignorantly and preiudicially denied the final cause of Christ's sorrowful
humiliation and glorious resurrection, which saved our souls from damnation
and death in the nethermost noisome deadly pit, the lake of torment, the prison
of misery and all thraldom world without end: and defending the eternity of
the world, judging it without beginning and without ending (which undoubtedly
was fashioned and finished in six days, as we surely prove by the Genesis of
Moses, the wonderful prophet of God, the wisest lawmaker in Israel, the
mightiest captain of arms, by the Hexaemerons of diverse both Greek and Latin
doctors and fathers, by our Apostolic belief most steadfastly builded on God
the father almighty, maker of heaven and earth, the sea, and all that is in
them, at whose last coming the earth shall melt away like wax, and the heavens
shall be folded up like a garment) have defaced with all their might the majesty
of Christ's ascension, and denied the eternity of his last dreadful judgment,
both which we reverence and magnify with all godly love and Christian zeal,
having visiblie and faithfully seen the one with the Apostles eyes, and
unfeignedly looking for the other with lively hearts, with spiritual hunger
and thirst, with desire to leave this mad and drunken world, to live infinitely
and reign with him in everlasting life.

Then I mean those hypocritical Pharisees, those impious Jews, and Jewish
confederats, succeeding the heathenish infidels and pagans in course and time
of years, but far before them in all wickedness and sin, in every notorious
iniquity and enormitie, that did treacherously and sophistically seek to
undermine Christ, and to take him in his words, that in the gall of bitterness
and bond of impiety, mocked and spitte at him, and most grievously and
unjustly disgraced him, in spite of heaven and earth, of angels and men, even
as God had appointed in his secret ordinance and wonderful providence before
the foundation of the world was laid: that in the pride and rage of Iudaisme,
in the height of anger and depth of malice, whipped him like an outcast the
son of God, crowned him with thorns like a mad bedlem the innocent lamb of
God, nay led and perced, and wounded him to death like a hurtful beast the
triumphant king of angels and men, and mighty Savior of the world.

But they soon felt the heavy intolerable hand of God for these so Jewish
and devilish abominations, and when their brazen faces would not blush, nor
their iron hearts relent, the very stones of the temple were riuen asunder,
the fair veil was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, those sensles
stones were more soft and pensive then the Jews, the dead carcases were more
tenderly and mercifully affected toward Christ crucified at his one and last
exclamation in one hour, then the elders of Jury were in all their life time,
which heard many heavenly admonitions, diverse happy promises, sundry blessings
and cursings, yet lived and died in their gainesayings, being at last
themselves as stones and carcasses rejected, thrown out, and trodden upon,
having their children and cities utterly destroyed, and their land laid wast,
and those mockings and spittings, that thorny crown and vinegar and gall,
those nails and that spear, and that cross, and all the rods and crosses
that were laid upon Christ, have ever since been laid upon them, being
esteemed the most odious abiects of all men, the very roges and runnegates of
the earth, against whom all men have set themselves, even as they oppose and
set themselves against all men like Ismaeites and Edomites, more vile in Gods
eyes then dunge and clay on the ground, and all good and godly Christians are
inuincibly confirmed in Christian faith by the shameful overthrow of those
Jewish and christians, which is come to pass according to the gospel of Jesus
Christ, for his kingdoms sake and our endless comfort and instruction, to him
therefore be praise for ever.

Then I mean the Turks and turkish religion, or rather heretical
superstition, that in steed of noble prophets on our side has but one fugitive
monk, and but the same one false monk on their part to defend it against our
so many learned and constant professors; that has no history for his defense
and in that respect condemns historians, that could never get any sober and
learned orator to maintain his cause, and therefore disaloweth the graces and
power of rhetoric; that cannot be defended by disputation, and therefore
forbids all disputations; that is forced against his own will and law, to
prefer Christ before Mahomet, our merciful king before his bloody captain;
for honest and honorable birth, for virtuous and wonderful acts, for blessed
and heavenly translation, himself being borne basely, and living vitiously,
and dying of lewd causes, more like a ruffian of the devil then a prophet of
God, as themselves confess unawares in their vain Alcoran and doltish bible.
His more then triple Dodecamechany, to the final ruin of that tyrannical
kingdom and satanicall jurisdiction in Turkey, and to the building up of Gods
house in new Sion, to the benefit of his householders, his children and
servant, if they could once be so christianly wise, to forgive* their own
quarrels and forget that is past, and ever hereafter serve God and please him
by fighting his battles, with a perfect love and unanimity among themselves,
with a perpetual hatred and magnanimity against such enemies, the soldiers of
the flesh, the sons of transgression, now more then half wearied with their
religion, and ever remaining in suspicion and jealousy one of another.

Now God for his own sake make them ever like Oreb and Zeb, and like to the
princes of Zeba and Salmana, the God of our fathers confound their huge armies
and militar powers, that they may fall upon their own swords, that their
arms of flesh may be broken, that all their beastly cruelties practiced
against good christians from Mahound to this present day may return upon
themselves, that they go hence and be no more seen, that their name may
perish from among the children of men, that we and all our posterity may sing
with the seventh Angel mentioned in the Revelation and with those great voices
in heaven: the kingdoms of this world are our Lords and his Christ's, and he
shall reign for evermore. c. 11. v. 15. but the Saracens shall not ouerrule
him, the Paganism of Sergius shall not devour the Christianisme of the
Apostles, seeing the gospel is dispensed in all parts of the earth, as much
and more then the Alcoran, howsoever Luter in a furious imitation of Micheas,
has rapt out the contrary, as if he desired rather the name of a Prophet
among the infidels, then of a friend to Christians.

Then I mean the blasphemous high-minded swelling Greeks, both Iulianists and
Lucianists, both Emperors and Scholars, both mighty and learned men, whose
naughty end has proved their beginning naught: whose own words of evident
treason against God, have judged and condemned them: who are in account among
godly wise men, as the poisonous flies, or as dead dogs: who have vanished like
a vapor, and been consumed like a smoke to nothing: even as it pleased the
Lord, so are these things infallibly come to pass, by whom is reserved for
their last sentence, for their ungracious scholars, for their friends and
favorites, a lake of brimstone, a gnawing worm, a consuming fire mingled with
percing cold, for evermore* for thus were the Jews cursed for their malicious
blasphemy against Christ in the time of his earthly and corporal humiliation,
neither can these and other like them be in better estate, which cry out and
rail against him in these days of his eternal heavenly exaltation, as S.
Augustine reasons truly upon a text of S. Matthew. And what is become of
those wicked Romans which I the^ named, but shame and discredit, reproach and
confusion among all virtuous and well disposed christians? they might for their
style and phrase have purchased our lyking; for their grave and politic gnomes
have been in good account among good men, whereas now their malcontentship
against Christianity, and their hauty and scornful attemptes against Gods
anointed, together with their disdainful terms against our Christian
profession and professors, have cast their works into great contempt, that
might else have been in greatest price, because no honest man will in confcience
approve false famous libels, or any grave man can scarcely even in reason
believe a liar when he speaks truth, much less when he tells his own
tales: or any man shall not measure but like for like, and upon compulsion
compare themselves with their enemies, these sudden slidinges with the others
wilful fallinges, these suborned reproaches with the others judicial
penalties, true conuictions, unchangeable executions. If they had been of so
upright a nature, or of so civil nurture, to report all well of them, which
did nothing ill or hurtful to any, but were innocent lambs of God, they might
have otherwise then now they are, been reckened with the best sort of best
writers, and gotten our subscriptions as well as their own friends
commendations; but seeing their venim was so great and abundant, to thrust out
their stinges and spyt out their ranknes at godly and heavenly minded
Christians, they bewray the stock and brood they came from, even the spawne
of that old serpent and seed of Satan, and make us al in good consciences
freely to denounce and proclayme them, enuyers, deceyuers, falsifiers, to brand
them with the mark of strong thieves for robbing Gods church, to set them in
the black book of damned souls, for defying and diffaming Gods own militant
teachers and messengers, which preach the truth, which spend their lives in
defense of the word, which offer themselves a daily sacrifice unto him that
gave himself once a pure and perfect oblation for the^ and all, which honor
both spiritual and temporal fathers without any grudging, because of Gods
ordinance, and for conscience sake, which study and pray continually for the
perpetual glory and honor of Gods Church, Gods house, Gods visible throne,
which persuade some, and exhort all men to virtue, to devotion, to love of God,
and love of man: which dry up their hearts and brains day and night, even to
the decay of their own health and strength, to heal the wounded and afflicted
conscience, to confirm and stablishe the faith of their country, to abandon
uncharitable and disobedient opinions, to bid men take heed of furious and
tedious self-will, to remember they are as Gods small sheepefold in the midst
of a Wolves forest, to be as doves among themselves without harm; and
subtle serpents when the adversary comes, to magnify God for his manifold
benefits, and to hold out the hand when he gives his blessings, and ever to
behold and worship the blessed lamb of God, that washes away the sins of the
earth.

But alas there are many strange errors abroad in the earth, and there are too
many headstrong mainteyners of old paradoxes and newfangled novelties, which
either renew those antiquated trifles, or give them a color, a devise and
gloss of the makers, which are their crafts masters and bondslaues* such men
are girded and wrapped in with spleen and brought up chiefly in the chapters De
contradicentibus, and so wedded and given to alter all statutes and turkisse
all states, that they are become plain turkish and rebellious, unnatural
countrymen and unkind neighbors, they do not behold and follow the harmeles
lamb of God that ever most graciously helps offenders, and brings them
from deadly trains. I have hitherto told of open, known, and professed
enemies, I have already confuted those notorious and famous antichristians,
such as with a wild and wide throat, or infamous tongue and pen, have without
al manner of colorable or shadowed pretense, enhaunced themselves and their
graceles wits, to deface the son of God, to disgrace the holy one of Israel,
that is the only mediator between men and God, and the only peacemaker
between God and men.

Those madmen blasphemers come to our gates, and defy our profession, we see
them, we read and hear their notorious blasphemies, we abhor and curse them
in the name of our God, as Eliseus that mighty Prophet in Israel looked
backward upon the malapert and wanton children of Bethel, 4. Kings c. 2. v. 23.
or as David detested that uncircumcised Giant the railing Golias, 1, Kings. c,
17. v. 32, 34. and slew him though he were his Cosen german, as Drusius notes
out of Prudentius and Philo, being no better in his eyes then a great wood
bear, yet these blasphemers more unlearned and unruly then all children, and
more barbarous then all rude giants and bears: this is the way of them, this
is their foolishnes, and yet their posterities praise their sayings, Psalm. 49.
according to the prophecy of Abacuk, ca. 1. v. 5. behold ye despisers, and
wonder, and pearish ye, for I work a work in your days, a work that ye
shall not believe though a man should declare it unto you, which word S. Paul
confirms in his sermon made at Antioche, Acts. c. 13. v. 41.

But there remains yet a monstrous and a crafty antichristian practisser,
not already touched to the quick, one and his mate compounded of many
contraries, to breed the more confusion in simple vulgar wits, who like
Passauantius, is content to be ridiculous himself, so that his envy in any
sort make poor Lysetus contemptible, that else perhaps had never bin known, he
is a boon companion for the nonce, a secret fosterer of illegitimate corner
conceptions, a grave orator for ruffianly purposes, a busy bookeman to help
the sword, a rebuker of play, and yet making a play of himself and all
things, a ravening woolfe in sheep wool, a bloody massacrer and cutthroate
in iesters apparel, a post upon hackney sillogismes to have silly ones give
him the way, yet like the reasons of Lindanus which may most easily and fitly
be returned upon the replyer and his faction, with much more force of proof
and consequence, a religious pilgrim to gather heaps and ra^pires of trash, a
wily fox in a lambs skin, first jesting at mathematical caps, as if round
fashions were not more mensurable and mathematical then quadrates and oblongs,
or an ace mean as a quater: then flinging at manners, as if he cared for the^
which teaches nothing so much as malignity and detraction; at last fishing
with a golden hook which is all predicables and predicaments with simonists,
imagining his case and Simon Fishes supplication to be alike, being directly
opposite in causes, in effects, in comparisons, and otherwise; he does not
openly and outragiously in set words and coined phrases, despise the lamb of
God the savior and redeemer of Gods people, but closely and a far of prepares
his mines, and traps, and snares, playing secreetly upon S. John's words,
counting them about ones loins a receipt only for the collicke: see an impe of
antichrist and hell, and reckoning all that he does unto Christ's flock, as
done to lambs, that will not once quetch, that use to take all well, as if they
were ordinary, common, woolly and fleshy lambs, and called lambs only of
suffering, not of doing, as though all parts and ends of every similitude
should ever meet in one, and nothing were written of a lamb, but it must
appear in Christ, or any man should challenge that of God, which comes of his
appointment, not our, of his mercy, not our merit, to use rightly, not to
abuse. But Calumny in her heat and fury calls Joseph an adulterer, Daniel a
rebel, Susanna an whore, and Christ Jesus himself a nigromancer; yet wisdom
is justified of her own children: no greater enemies to virtue then humorists,
a man must only be judge of that he knows certainly, the carnal Mammonist
cannot rule and direct celestial things, they are as far beyond his reach,
as his skill is short of them.

This is the byway of some careless and lawless quidams, which make the holy
and most reverend word of the only wise God, to serve their bastardly turns
and dishonest inventions and intentions, and will not stick to say with the
Gentiles, with the Jews, with the turks, and such as are without God; that
christians must take two blows and not smite again, that they are bidden, to
forgive their enemies, to bless them that curse them, to love them that hate
them, to pray for them that persecute them, to be like their Lord and master
Jesus the lamb of God, not given to anger or defense more then he was, and
more then a lamb is given to defense.

This is the groundworke and postulate of Cartwrighttisme and Martinisme,
without which all their doings are undone, and with which Christianisme will
soon be vanquished or abridged. Thus they teach other men their duties, but
think not on their own duties, they prove, if we must do as God bids us,
they will not do as God bids them: they force a general text, Matthew. c. 5.
and thrust a rule made for all christians, upon the clergy alone, from our
obedience they infer their own disobedience, and thus they stamp a
conclusion more against their own Christendom, then the reverence of the
church: the Clergy men, those elect men, profess the innocence of lambs,
therefore we need not fear to handle them at our pleasures, as though they
were not Christians alike with us, by baptism and vow, by doctrine and
policy, or ought not likewise to be harmless as lambs among their own
christian brethren. Even so that profane tyrant Antiochus reasoned with the
godly Jews of his time, and argued with them out of their own law concerning
the Sabbath day, that they must not defile and unhallow it with murder, with
battle, with violent resistance, because they were better be flapt down like
flies, and not hurt his men, then break the law of their God, and incur his
displeasure, 1. Macab. c. 2. And thus has this sophistical reformer perverted
Gods word, he has learned the elench which anger moves against patience in
the Soules-fight of Prudentius, Die here and weep not, for wayling is against
thy profession, yea and behaved himself heathenishly and angerly, he urges
the surname of Christ, and the nature of a lamb, and then he tells him and
his preachers; That their wealth, their power, and strength should be no
greater, then the power, the wealth and strength of a lamb, thus should he be
pitomized, and thus should his flock be pistled.

Now mark I pray you, what end comes on these and such men, and I beseech
you consider the seat of the scorner, which commonly proves like the seat,
that old courtier Hely sat upon. 1. Kings c. 4. v. 18. Woe worth the blasphemy
of Sennacherib and blackmouthed Rabshakeh, that cost the lives of an hundred
four score and five thousand Assyrians, yea and the life of Sennacherib
himself in the temple of Nisroch, by the word of Esaias, but the sword of Gods
angel, and his own sons, by the prayer of that good king Ezechias, 4. Kings
c. 19. Woe unto that breach and derision of Gods Sabbath, that caused Gorgias
to fly, Lysias to be driven out of Judea, the vanquishing of Ephron, the
astonishment, and sorrowful sickness, and sudden death of Antiochus
himself, besides the deaths and deadly wounds of their captains and
soldiers by the arm of the honorable Machabees reuengers of Gods Sabbath. 1.
Macha. c. 4, 5, 6. and what surer plague has Anger then hirselfe, which
kills her self with her own weapons? And woe is likewise to this
counterfeit reformer, that opposes his Scriptum est against the clergy, as the
tempter his pattern opposed his Scriptum est against Christ* for how can he
escape the vengeance of God, that makes a jest of descant upon our Messiah the
mighty lion of the tribe of Judah, because he is otherwile analogically called
the meek and loving lamb of God? let him be sure, he shall never fly from
the presence of this lamb, neither shall he ever hide his head safely from
him, whom he thus lambacketh and abuses in his paltry reformatiue and
ironicall discipline, no more then Martin de Pester did in Gaunt, that
suddenly died in the heat of his secretariship going about to swear men
against the gospel, or then Martin Sward did in England, who died like a thief
among traitors, when he would have deposed king Henry the seventh by a set
battle, to install a counterfeit in his place.

But in heaven all honor is given to this lamb of God, that sits on the
throne, says S. John in his Revelation; and if the heavens obey him, the earth
cannot withstand him, but all his tempting, despising, and ironising reformers
shall laugh, and perish, and be laughed at, and such as know not, or fear not
the lamb of God shall be put to confusion for wishing him evil. Nevertheless this
glozing theologer and privy underminer that would in these days with his
creatures dig up our Church, as moules and frogs have in old time undermined
fair and strong towns, according to some old and credible historians, is in
his earthly labors and fennish coaxations persuaded for want of meekness and
charitable insight, that he does God great service and honor, to open his wide
throat: o an Aristophanes might best handle him in his kind, to set up a new
house in the old room, to take down and build up that is well builded
already, as truly appertaining to him and his presumptuous scismaticks, as the
reforming of the temple of Jerusalem pertained unto Herod, or the burning of
incense belonged to Vzziah, who were both too bold and lofty in heart, and so
perished in their confidence and vsurpatio^. 2. Chron. c. 26. He might have
learned even of Numa an heathen prince, lege 23. That religion public is not
subject to any one; or of king Martius, lege 1. That religion is no private
invention; and not exceed them in blind ignorance, who thought in natural
reason: that none is above God or men's souls, to make them what he alone
lists, as Plato by the same light of nature saw, that self-will in religion
which he terms (...), is the root and original of all mischiefs and
inconveniences; l. 10. de legibus, a book made purposely in honor of divine
matters according to the natural light of so learned a philosopher.

He thinks himself the preacher of humility and christian liberty, as one
Wall thought himself too in the days of king Richard the second, when as in
plain evident proof he hinders one special cause thereof, I mean the
authority and reverence of Gods divine lawiers and gospellers, as he that
reads the third epistle of S. Cyprian will certainly judge, and would make
them of true shepeheards very mercenaries, of right patrons right beggars, of
me^ in greatest account by law of nature, by law of grace, by all true law of
reason and conscience, men of small reputation and triobolares, me^ of small
power, of smaller ability, of least sovereignty in virtuous exercises, of
christian magistracy, of ecclesiastical hospitality, of godly correction. So
Julian their Emperor took away the revenues of the church, that it might be
the lighter and nimbler to fly into heaven, as he said, blessed are the poor,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; whereas Christ's poverty is an example of
humility as well for temporal christians as for spiritual, unless the laity
will loose the name and nature of christians, and bequeath it only to the
clergy, which is in the higher sort very poor and needy in respect of those
domestical and political acts which are regularly belonging to them, and in
the lower sort, with reverence be it spoken of so good a company as that is, or
may be, when God shall in mercy amend patrons, most woeful and miserable in
respect of that provision which is necessary for him that would not be
defective in his own profession. If either be insufficient for life or learning
and altogether unworthy of their living, there are a great number sufficient
enough that in peaceable and militar government could supply their wants.

O sweet country and countrymen, let the inheritance and succession remain in
the lineage of teachers, unless you will have learning leave the earth and
return to heaven, where above all principalities it is adored and is named no
less thing then God, then the word, then maker and ruler over all. For this
reformer, which is no better then a blinded and hardharted guide may say, he
loves Christ the word, but you, and I, and all good christians may hardly
believe him because we must judge of a tree by the fruit, and never call it an
apple tree that brings forth crabs; we must never imagine he can love and
allow Gods laws, which hates and disaloweth the true preachers thereof, and
because I am assured, that he cannot show you, or me, or any Christian another
rule and example of better credit, then the law of the Lord, and the gospel of
his lamb, both which are ever in building, not in spoiling the church, in
helping ever, not in beggering the brethren, in doing good to all companies
and honest societies, not in undoing any, in giving to Caesar and giving to
God, and not giving that distinct part to Caesar that is due to God, seeing all
that Caesar himself has is due to God. If this truth be untruth, if this
light be darkness, yet all scismaticall Tees, and such Cees, and such Ems in
the world can never disprove it; shall we once think, that this, or that one
man who is in some men's and women's supposes of a most od disposition and rare
judgment, has more knowledge in government then Moses had, the lawgiuer of
Gods own elect people so peculiarly and wonderfully called and chosen? or will
any peevish vain and factious tongue on that side once say for his life, that
master Reformer knows in his wisdom better then did Solomon, what is best
belonging and behouefull to the Church Christ's beloved spouse? or may the
zealous bounty of Christian Emperors, the devout gifts of noble and godly
Princes, the liberal adoptions of magnificent and mighty men, bestowing
worldly goods on heavenly uses, and bequeathing mortal heritages to immortal
services, may these lawful, and just, and successiue possessions, privileges,
and charters, and codicilles of ecclesiastical endowme^t and maintenance be
once abrogated? ought all these liberties and prerogatives to be made void, to
be disanulled, and brought under, then which none can be, or should stand in
more full strength and virtue? for Bishops, and under them Elders, ought no
less to be reverenced of all christened souls in the churches, then fathers
are of their children in the family, as Heresbachius writes in his Christiana
iurisprudentia.

But the living Lord of heaven, and God of peace, the God of our forefathers,
and king of all kings, preserve and arm his own christian children from that
outrage, from that desolation, from such abomination standing in the temple of
God, where it ought not, from such heathen, turkish, martinish, and carterly
brutish rauine, and make us like his own Moses, like his own Solomon, like
all his own godly gouerners and Christian Princes, and other good men of his
own in all ages, not like any other unlike them, that maintain seminaries of
schism and malignitie, that hatch the Cockatrices egg, and weaue the spyders
web, and would make men believe, they are for their eating and wearing,
which in final proof would eat up and wear them out, to the poisoning and
undoing of themselves, of the whole Realm, and of the whole world too, as may
easily appear to them which can compare consequents and antecedents together.

Then look not to them, but look into Gods own holy and faultlesse book,
the only chief doctor and reformer of government, that is by Gods gracious
providence more common among us, then it was with grandfathers in England by
print, by translation, by exposition and meditation: in which book we know the
ever lasting will and testament of God more then they did, and wherein we learn
all that pertains to our direction and instruction for all spiritual and
temporal jurisdictions and regiments whatsoever. Here you have, and you read,
or may have and read, the Oecomenickes and Politics of the Hebrew
commonwealth, which is the most ancient and excellent of all other, as
Sigonius writes in the years of his best and ripest judgment, when he had
entreated upon the Athenian and Roman commonwealth in his younger days, and
by which the most and best Nations of the earth have bin taught and ruled to
this present day, in all good counsels, in all great affairs, in every good
intendment, or order in personal, and actionall, and real causes. In this
heavenly and righteous book, the same hand of Moses which gave the Hebrews
laws from above, and said, Thou shall not steal from the Clergy or Laity,
thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, or any thing that he has in the
church, or out of the church; does also institute and ordeyne, that the measure
of the sanctuary should be much more then the measure of the congregation, and
the weight as much more again, the sanctuary serving God and, his ministers
the Elders of the Levites and the high Priest set over them, the other
belonging to the people of Israel, and other tribes only among themselves, who
reckoned in their accounts to the tribe of Levy two for one, and double for
single, as the sicle and talent of the Sanctuary was as much more as the sicle
and talent of the congregation, the cubite much more, even a hand breadth,
which is named a great cubite, Ezech. c. 41. v. 8. c. 43. v. 13. Exodus c. 30.
v. 13. Leuit. c. 27. v. 25. Number. c. 18. v. 16. Cenalis tomo, 5. fol. 87, 88,
89. and tomo 9. fol. 133, 134, etc. Whose zealous example and godly devotion,
all good men and women that love God and his rulers, ought readily to follow,
yea much more willingly and earnestly in this light of the truth, that shines
out among us now, then other did in time of ignorance next past, whose
reddinesse notwithstanding was more forward then our, least we learning more,
and doing less then they, be beaten with more terrible and woeful stripes,
according to Christ's own sentence in Luke c. 12. v. 47. Neither yet Moses the
sovereign teacher and Lord of the Hebrews stayed there, but God bad him
command the people of Israel, and in them all true Israelites for ever, to give
the cleanest, the purest, the fattest and lustiest of the sacrifices of lambs,
and goats, and other cattle, and the tenths and first-fruites of all fruit
unto Gods uses, Gods services, Gods seruitors; and every thing that belonged to
the church and sanctuary, both living and dead, both agent and instrument, to
be appointed in the best and goodliest manner that could be devised, beside
other certain and determinate prescriptions given indefinitely by God
himself, agreing with that eternal statute of S. Paul 1. Cor. c. 14. where
lastly he charge them in the name of the holy spirit, which he verily
believed to be in him, both to keep a good order always, and specially to
have a special care of adorning and bewtifying it with all seemly supplements
or additions, even as the circumstance of the place, or the time, or the person
may deserve and require.

In this consideration, when the Hebrews used metals for the sanctuary, they
were clear and pure in the highest degree; their wood must ever be that
durable Sethim, and the best or smoothest; their oil the sweetest and
cleanest; their frankincense the brightest; their odors pleasantest, their
sacrifices males and without blemish; their flower similage and no meaner;
their fruits of the fairest trees; the place of offering without all foulness;
the fat must be the Lords, and if any man eat it, he shall be cut of from his
people; their music choicest of all sorts, harpes, and trumpets, and cymbals,
and organes, and psalteries, and other instruments, together with loud hearty
voices; their vestures and garments of finest linen, and finest silk
furnished with gold and precious pearl; their workmen the most famous and
cunning that could be gotten; the churchmen without deformities of body comely
and cleanly, as it evidently and notably appears in Exodus, from the 25.
chapter to the 32, and in Leuiticus almost throughout, and much elsewhere. For
seeing these outward and momentany goods are not our, but the good blessings of
our God, lent and given us for his use and glory, then judge I pray to whom
they may so rightly or truly belong by way of dispensation, as to Gods own
spiritual and temporal ministers, which in all earthly and heavenly business
and actions serve him and his congregation, him and his people, him and his
saints which excel in virtue, in higher and lower places of degree and title
both in the church and out of the church, as those goods have been ever most
plentiful since the world began with the godliest fathers of all ages, and
namely most of all with those chief men, Noa, Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, Solomon,
Job, Ezechias, and the rest, who never thought any goods too good for Gods
Church; for his right hand is on them that fear him throughout all
generations, as his children are righthanded one to another in all places and
in all cases of truth and conscience.

Yet if these men in our white lilly mending days more divine reformers
forsooth and purer correctors of abuses then Moses, if these little ones divine
ones descended from the bosom of father Abraham, or some better Saint, if
better may be, for so they bear themselves ever with and above the best, that
have all zeal and all knowledge among them, and can spare or affourd no
morsel or parcel of these their two Spiritual graces for other pore men
simple creatures in respect of such new creators, if they had bin in the time
and reign of Moses and Joshua, or rather very Moses and very Joshua were now in
their times, for all must be drawn to M. reformers co^putatio^, and perhaps we
shall hear news shortly, of another co^putation, and then we must say, in the
year of reformation, 1, 2, 3, 4. and so on apace as long as it lasts, be you
sure of it, that they would in their pure quick fine Sybilline melancholy, the
cause of Prophets and Prophetisses in Agrippaes mind, that never kept a mean,
but was ever extreme, in writing magical toys or dispraysing all liberal and
mechanical arts, in extolling women above men, and suppressing almost every
man with his own excellency in his Epistles, no unfit master for these
extreme reformers, have said, and say unto Moses and Joshua, even as they said
to our Mosees, and Iosuees, to our priests and rulers. For look how Corah,
Dathan, Abyram, and On rose up before Moses and Aaron, and told them in their
reformatiue discipline: ye take too much upon you, why lift ye your selves
above the congregation of the Lord? we are all as holy as you, what Moses and
Aaron? ye are too high. Number. c, 16. v. 3.

So spreaken our pure and holy ones reformers, so our holy and pure ones
speak, even thereabout as holy as Corah, and as pure as Abyrams conspiracy,
and as pure and precise, as all honest conspirators: sober men men in other
times, who at the first ever pretended reformations and corrections of abuses,
and then corrections and reformations of vices, and nothing but amending of
unjust matters, corruptions, relics: these have a pleasure to water and
dress, and revive that withered oak, that reformatoria quercus Ketti ducis,
adorning and adoring it as the only chief tree of the field and forest, even
in a precise iollitie to abase and ouer-crow the famous planetree of Xerxes, or
any other Dodonean shade, but they for all their numbers of voices, their
singular holiness, or hollownes of heart, so cunningly hid, were devoured of the
earth; and swallowed up quick, to the example and terror of all conspiring
reformers even to the worlds end, that now they should hinder the authority of
Gods messengers no more, like those cursed Dathanites. And what became of
furious Ket? and what is like to come upon these practisers that can never see
when they are well? Neither yet did Moses put of his zeal, or leave of from
enriching the holy Priesthood in Israel, or from honoring their posterities
successively after his and their death, but he gave them the goods, and
lordships, and dominions of many cities for themselves, and the lands and
suburbs of them for their cattle and substance, Number. c. 35. Ios. c. 21.

No doubt at that time many rough mal-contents and envious Reubenites spoke
among the Israelites, as our hotspurres and Rufi say now among us, Church-bread
is sweet, that is, stolen things are pleasant, but heard they never of a
sweet and pleasant poison among their proverbs, delightful at the first, and
at the last deadly? It is not Gods will, say they that know not the legacies of
Gods will, that they should be troubled with such revenues, with such lands and
livings, with so many loaves which might find an army to defend Israel, a
number of lusty and choice valiant yongmen, a sort of experie^ced captains and
soldiers of the best stamp.

Notwithstanding such a vulgar and plausible insinuation, the most provident
and heavenly law-geuer Moses reproves their rebellious and stiff-necked hearts,
he went forward in settling the ground of his godly government, because he by
years and wisdom knew better then they could tell him, that their youth is
too rash to wish that which troubles men: that their experience is utterly
imperfit: that greatest hotspurres are least conquerors: that a man is not
delivered by much strength: that armor and men are counted but a vain thing
to save a country: that nations are not defended and preserved by the
puissance and chiualry of the inhabitants, but that the wisdom and gravity of
learned me^, the counsel and understanding of sober discreet me^, that the fiery
zealous and heavenly minded man, like the priest Phinees, or the king Iehu,
that moderation which is neither too high nor too low, half up and half
down, even in the mids, that Gods blessing bestowed on those that bless him,
is cause of al obedience and peace at home, of all safety and security in
respect of foreign danger abroad; that the head and heart must rule the hand
and foot; that the outward parts must be preserved by the inward, and
preserve one the other mutually; that if they must needs take away goods from
other men, their value should be stretched out against their heathenish
enemies; and therefore he commanded them in Gods holy name on the Eastside of
Jordan in the land of promise, and in the same holy name the fathers commanded
Joshua his successor on the other side of Jordan in the land of promise, they
willed and charged their Tribes by the will of their God to whom they were al
tributary, that forty and eight cities with the granges, and villages, and
suburbs, and all bounds and limits of them, should be allotted unto the
principal fathers of the Levites out of their inheritance, which the Levites
God and their God had bestowed upon them; among which eight and forty cities
were those six principal places of refuge and noblest sanctuaries of safeguard
for the unwilling unlucky slayer, even those three cities within the river,
Chades, Sichem, Hebron, and those three cities without the river, Golan,
Ramoth, Bosor, standing in both the ends, and in both the middle parts of the
land, that no tribe might be without the lordships of Leuy, that the land and
manors of Leuy might with greatest liberty lie in every part, and on either
side of the land of promise, the holy land, and pattern of all holy land, so
far and so long as nothing was done without the laws of Moses which were the
laws of God.

Now if it would please God, to open the eyes, and ears, and hearts of our
tribes, of our hundreds, of our counties, of our shires, of our fathers, and
rulers, that they might see and perceive, hear and understand, know fully and
acknowledge freely, I say no more; yet I might well name our reformers a sort
of new Arrians, that invent lies against our spiritual lords, as they did
against Athanasius devise one slander of his abusing a woman, another of
cutting of Arsenius arm, both which in the trial proved false and ridiculous,
as those should do if the libelling accusers were known, yet truth will reign
though they die in the dark, and in another kind of Arrianisme abuse Christ's
church impudently and profanely, as if he were a man and no God, not caring
whether it be true or not true that they write, so that the wavering and rude
multitude void of deliberation and judgment seem to like it, for whose only
pleasures it is published in the rudest fashion, seeing al learned and civil
men peacemakers abhor it; but God almighty send a true spirit into them,
that as newborn babes they may be children concerning maliciousnes, not in
knowledge, or a new Iubilee in us, and for us, at his good pleasure.

These are Gods goods, Gods cities, Gods suburbs, Gods manors, which he
himself has given, before Constantines donation no whit belonging to us, as
legacies of his first will and testament, to his own holy and beloved
Priesthood. Or if our rough smoothed brethren, which name they use for a bayte,
if our Esaus and Nymrods reformers hunters, if our temporizing temporal
correctors mammonistes, these presumed and supposed judges of eternal laws,
if they will in their wild and wily wilfulnes frustrate this constitution of
God, if they care not how short their days may be upon the earth which the
Lord has given them, so that they may not honor their ghostly fathers,
without whose authority they shall never rule Subictes, or servants, or
children, but suppress and overrule them: if they will claim and avouch a
second will or testament, and disauow and disclayme the old will and testament,
cancel the ancient acts of Gods former registers, make a parliament act of
their own private, and in deed no better then apostumated brains, which in
the second consequence, and in the third depending thereon, concluding any way
either simply or comparatively, a causis and a partibus, will certainly cast
themselves and all other into a manifest anarchy, into all disturbance and
utter confusion: because the same objections against one state of spiritual
Lords, may as justly and more sensibly be derived upon secular Lords of like
degree. I say, if Moses eternal laws, the very true laws of God, be in these
new reformations no better then temporary and transitory laws, which were a
deep root for atheism, and a groundwork for blasphemy, yet I hope these
Martins will not make themselves worse then Pagans, being counted Christians,
they cannot possibly, I trust, be so irefull and raging, as to exceed the
profane Egyptians, who allowed their priests no small commodities, in plenty
of bread, of flesh, of wine, besides their domestical immunities and
privileges, whereby they spent nothing of their own, neque e re domestica
aliquid conterunt, neque impendunt, says Herodotus in Euterpe, and Danaeus in
his Aphorisms gathers more from that second book than I do: they will not
for shame do less for other christians, the^ they did for other idolatrous
Egyptians, cap. 47. ver. 22. of Genesis.

But in truth, these reformers have without truth contemned Moses and Joshua,
like Iannes and Iambres, and the Gibeonites in former times, God send them more
of his grace and mercy, or the reward of those men, if it be his will: now
will they also count Joseph that heavenly politic guide, that true pattern of
politickes, a partial and parciall judge, and account him and his rulers al
superstitious rulers, for not touching and buying the lands of the Egyptian
priests and fathers in the seven years of intolerable dearth and famine, when
all other men of the Temporaltie sold every man his land, his cattle, himself
and all to buy bread? Surely those holy men of our so learned days and so
christian peace, that put almost all Gods husbandry in lopping, and proyning,
and making every thing less then it should be: much like that holiness that
the Graecians and Hyppocrates name in those words, sacer morbus, sacer piscis,
os sacrum, whereby they understand greatness more the^ goodness, quantity more
then quality, a diseased holiness, a fishy holiness, slicke on the skin, and
sick within, a bonish holiness, and fitter to choke men, then to feed them,
would in their reforming discipline, make our gouerners and Joseph's, worse
affectioned to their natural and spiritual countrymen or fathers and
instructors, that have altogether alike one baptism, one confirmation, one
communion, one belief, one prayer, one law, one gospel, one God, and one
mediator and savior, then Pharao was to the idolatrous Priests of his
kingdom, having more forcible necessity, then to have sequestered and
impropriated their church-landes and goods, then ever other kings and princes
had or ought to have, by the rule of Gods word, to empayre their church lands
and goods, which even in the natural wit of Trebatius are sacred, being once
dedicated unto God, and therefore inviolable, according to the nature of holy
things, Macrob. l. 2. Satur. cap. 3. but receiving al their blessings and
fruits for the churches sake, whereof they are members, which is the only
spouse and best beloved sister of the lamb of God, not for any meritorious
work of their own, ought contrariwise rather to increase their annuities and
revenues, as they will for a worse and meaner loves cause in common usual
favor increase the livings of such as they only wish well unto. But these
our reformers say what they list, either like tyrants that cannot be hindered,
or like wittals that must be tolerated, and these will have their words, though
the rulers bid peace.

Then leave them a while to themselves and let them alone, and think in your
hearts, beloved christians, and judge in your own consciences unfeignedly like
right Nathanaels without guile or gal, judge I pray soberly and advisedly in
your minds, and then mark my communication; Is not equity or law and reason
universal and common for all reasonable men? is any man forbidden in equity and
reason to keep his own goods which are lawfully given him? did Naboth offend
God, by keeping his inheritance and vineyard, or Ahab in asking, and Iezabel in
catching it by false process and wrongful execution, when her cosmeticall
physicians had commended the prospect and recreation of the place, and his
greedy lawiers told him of his profit and prerogative? may one man or lord say,
let it alone, it is mine not your, seeing he speaks truly? and may not an
other man or lord say, let it stand, it is mine not your, it is Gods, not your,
given as truly and lawfully to his house and householders, as ever any right and
title was given in the world, by Gods word or man's, by Gods written promise and
covenant or by man's, or by any other means? Learn of Comes Purliliarum in his
first book of the art of war, to abstain from sacred things, not to touch
them your self being captain, and to punish them grievously that touch them,
less you come to naught, by making God and godly men your enemies, which being
a rule of war with the best Admirals of the field toward the enemy, must for
horror of shame not once be broken in peace toward the neighbor; Learn of
Onosander Platonicus first to have a chief eye to holy matters, that by this
skill of the general other matters may prosper, in his book De optimo
Imperatore; Learn of Dions first precept De regno, not to dally with God, as
if he were Prauus or Stultus, but principally to adore him, in his visible
ministers, the only way in this life to approve our faith; Learn of Xenophon
in his Hipparchicus, to pray to the God of the world above all things for health
and glory, and not to esteem him under all; learn of Pythagoras, God
immortal must be first honored; of Phocylides, worship God first: of all
teachers, to excel pagans in that Eusebeia which has the first place in
Isocrates and al other gnomographers, increasing daily in piety and virtue;
there is Meum in the clergy, not only in the laity, and if either of them
plead lawful inheritance and possession, they say well and speak no less
then truth, and yet the clergy should in equity and truth be first and more
forward then the other, by how much Gods plea and interest must have greater
audience then the plea of men.

Yea reason and truth cry out upon these Mosemastiges and Theomastiges too,
who when they hear Moses say in Gods law, all the fat is the Lords, Leuit. c.
3. v. 16. that is, the best is the Lords offering, as may appear, Number. c. 18.
v. 12. and Ps. 81. v. 16. they answer him in their lawless mouths and
malcontented hearts, let all the lean be his, he has no need, the lamb is fat
enough already, his pasture is good enough: neither needs he either of them,
the fat or the lean, or any thing else, because he has all things at
commandment without your leave, and is the Lord of Lords both ghostly and
bodily, yet thus by your inco^siderate wits and spritish mockeries and
new-founded minds which you bear, you incur the danger of his heavy wrath, o
ye sons of Belial, with your incredible vanities and credulous followers,
that in S. Paul's eye c. 16. v. 17. Romans fight all for the belly maintenance,
and bring al their zeal to the merchants shops, their learning to money
matters, their pure meditations to set up shifters, their discipline to bannish
or imprison roialties now stablished, their christianisme to open Iulianisme,
their wits to Lucianisme, beware in time of Gods displeasure, which being once
kindled yea but a little, blessed are al they that trust in him, and cursed are
they that make such a turkissing and furbushing of his omnipotent and
irreprehensible word, which has bin ever hitherto the word of joy and comfort,
and will be hereafter the word of Iubilee it self, of victory herself; which
Iubilee is neither against the institutions and grounds of our, or of other
soundest laws, or any way against the analogy of christian religion or
regiment, but a true restoratiue for decayed families, and a good preservative
against the proud poverty, and is therefore so highly extolled and magnified by
Moses, Leuit, cap. 25. v. 10. as these are professed of us with heart and
voice, and yet are daily defaced and weakened among us, so far as truth may
be enfeebled, which is invincible, by privy and open treacheries, falsely
called reformations.

O merciful God, seeing it is thy sovereign majesty's most gracious and
apparent word, not to touch thine anointed, or do thy Prophets any harm,
Psalm. 105. v. 15. either execute thy will, and pour out thy vengeance upon
such wicked ones, as seek both to touch thine anointed, and hurt thy
Prophets, or else shorten the day of thy second coming, and quickly sound the
last thundering trumpet of thy greatest glory, that all these impostors and
intruders may know, that thou, o Lord, art God above all men, and emperor of
all the world, but specially of thy little flock, to give it a kingdom
according to thy word, which thy son and our Savior purchased with the
inestimable and unspeakable price of his most precious life blood, which to us
is so hearty and full of life, and in which lies the life of our souls, as
the life of our bodies is in our own blood.

They went out from us, o God of heaven and earth, they went out from among us,
and why are they suffered to live by us? that would betray us and thy
sheepeheards upon no just causes, but by vain and vile means, out they went
from us and were not of us, but they were of that malicious arch-rebel Caine,
and that pecuniarie Ringleader Judas, they were of themselves, and their own
selfewil, that have rebelled against our reverend spiritual fathers, and our
honorable spiritual Lords, and but for fear of losing their heads, would
hold up their pens and Printes that come from Ouids Europa, a metamorphosed
defloured beast, or rather from Aristotle's Euripus a desperate problem, and
throw their books, their libels, their lies at temporal fathers and secular
Lords: for both these tenures hold alike by thy service, in ruling the souls
and bodies of thy people.

O Lord, they have opened a gappe to all obstinacy, outrage, and misery,
their malicious proceedings have put shameful and perverse paradoxes into
Subjects minds: how much better were it to hold them down, and as it were to
the grinstone, as Moses and Lycurgus did by just executions, then thus to let
go the reins, and to let them loose till they looze themselves and al? as the
Athenians and Rhodians, which therefore at this day are of no account, but
slavish and unknown, did play the part of children, in breaking their laws so
soon as they made them, or the part of spiders, in catching small flies, and
letting go great hurtful hornettes and dors: by the discipline of their
reformatio^s many have reached beyond the compass of thy word, in these
common places, of accepting no persons, of unequal comparisons, in striving
against external decent ceremonies and customs, as though they were
principals of our salvation, cases of life and death, matters of hell and
heaven: they have been disobedient to the Magistrates of thy Sanctuary and
congregation, they would ouerrule thy rulers in indifferent things, rather then
be ruled by them, as if they were above them: they speak of peace, and make
continual war: they think them selves Nathans and good finders out of
errors, and correctors of abuses, when as in very deed the parable of Nathan,
2. Kings, cap. 12. v. 1, 2, 3, 4. is verified by them in the fifth
commandment, Honor spiritual and corporal fathers, as it was true in David
by the tenth, thou shall not covet thy neighbors wife, and they are in mind
as their works prove the^ very Mathans of some one Baals grove or other, if all
were known to us that is known to thee, to bring his vilest indignities to
pass, to make a woeful Democraty without order, honor, or seemly estate, and
a right cyclopical and giantlike church, and consequently such a commonalty,
where every bold one may be a controller of his betters, and power out his
fancies like water that runs apace, their arrows are shot, when shall they
be rooted out? where the stipendiary man may esteem of his reverend Lord, as
the vast rudes by Polyphemus cou^teth of superior powers, poetically termed
Jupiter and the gods, and says, that he is but a cyclops with half his eyes,
yet will do what he list and ask them no leave, though at last he lost his one
eye like enough for his blasphemous treason. Lord God, what a desperate state
is this? how shall duties be regarded? how shall offices be performed? how can
thy great name be honored in thy rulers? how can the government of civil and
godly nations endure, if the chief pillar and ankerhold of all fear and
obedience be once broken and taken away from thy sanctuary and holy church? if
their hearts be thus set against thy glory, who shall safely trust them in
men's affairs? if their Deleatur begin at thy house, where shall the ungodly
and sinners appear? if one lamb and sheep thus rend another, what rendings
and tearings shall the woolues make? if they behold thy lamb, o God, with so
cruel and envious eyes, how can they be loving and merciful toward thy
children? O how truly have the Prophets and Apostles compared such men to
unreasonable creatures? as Paul has called the Cretians Evil beasts, and
Christ surnamed Herod a Fox; whom other zealous and learned writers have
followed in like causes of pride and mischief, but especially Epiphanius above
other, who by his manifold natural similitudes, seems to write his books of
Poisonous beasts, being made purposely against rebellious heretics; to omit
our countriman Gildas surnamed Sapiens, and other, who dealing plainly against
notorious enormities, told kings to their faces, that they lived like outlawes,
lions, and lions whelps, and leopards, and bears, and dragons, and dogs,
forsaking the rules and manners of men, and living in lust not in order, in
will not in skill, at rouers and rangeal, not within bounds and compass, madly
and drunkenly; to let pass the surpassing style and violent phrases of Luter
in this vain forced upon causes. Therefore from all such reforming discipline,
that is privy conspiracy against all rulers, from all such falfe doctrine and
heresy, which no magistrate can allow without perjury, from such hardness and
deceitful contempt of thy word and commandment, good God save us or deliver
us, and let thy will be now done still and still in earth, as it has ever more
and more been in heaven by thy will, and lead not thy princes and people into
these snares and calumnies of the devil, that in his angelick sophistry goes
and looks like a reformer, intending wrong and pretending right, that is honey
and mealemouthed to look unto, but has his entrals compounded of all
unhealthful bitterness, and is in true taste a wild kind of Coloquintida or
death it self in the pot of the prophets children, in our schools and towns,
which the gatherer shredded in steed of good herbs, being too hasty and
presumptuous to ask, and too ignorant to know of himself what he should have
gathered.

How can I but be moved heartily, to write against some such grave and some
such bragging conspirators in these days, whose heresy is more dangerous then
any old one, being a more winding and crooked mutiny then any of them? And now
at last it is proved no better then a spiteful sect, a very mocking
Ismaeliticall kindle, Genesis c. 21. v. 9, 10, 11. a counterfeit holiness, a proud
self-love, an old militar objection and barbarous paradox, renewed a fresh and
misalledged* tush man, quoth he, temporal and ecclesiastical are synonima, it
is popery to count ecclesia and ecclesiastica for coniugata, cedant togae
armis* it is a stubburne and arrogant quarrel, begun upon private aemulation,
and continued with a brazen forehead, uttered first in heat and haste, and
then defended in earnest, one great cause of corrupted arts, as Viues judges
rightly, l. 1. de disciplinis* herein following the judgment of Solomon, Bion,
Seneca, and experience it self, a swelling and harmefull scisme sprung from a
college mal-contentship to a common-wealth-braule, a clamarous and wrangling
doctrine of another brytish Sphynx, a spotted linx, or such, not innocent and
harmless as the doctrine of Gods blessed lamb, an hypocritical imposture,
which has the face of a man, and the tail of a Scorpion, a show of peace
before it, and fire and powder following it, which propounds conscience, and
concludes injury, pretends purest divinity, and is farthest from charitable
necessary christian humanity, a most perfect enmity to the lamb of God, and
God himself, in defacing and supplanting the magistracies of both.

For seeing in Greece this day not only the doctrine and rites of christian
religion, but also the order and degree of Bishops, and the whole
ecclesiastical regiment and jurisdiction are both tolerated and defended under
the Turkish tyranny, as many faithful men which lived there a long time, have
witnessed in an oration of David Chitreus, written about twenty years since,
and as he there tells more plentifully, how can we esteem them so godly as
Turks, that seek in their own country to hurt the Church, more than those
infidels antichristians do, though they can, and these cannot? as God forbid
they should ever do it. Church goods are only to be reserved to the churches
use, says Hadamarius in his institution of a Prince. Or if these words seem
any way hard to any good christian, which to the well disposed and skillful
reader are no less allowable by good example, then apparently true, and more
true than he or I would they were by reason, I desire some good Christian, even
in christian charity and godly brotherhode, to think upon, to consider and
examine the proofs and grounds of this assertion, and then judge thereafter
accordingly in conscience as he ought, specially when he remembers that the
heathen writers themselves never set any men but the vaynest and maddest of all
the rest against their Priests, which men either lived in reproach, or came to
shame, or for the time were generally reputed reprochefull and shameful men,
as may appear in their gigantomachies and theomachies, commonly made even of
poets in reverence of religion, the causes of greatest mischiefs and sorrows,
to which end and purpose all the most ancient tragedies have been written,
eue^ every one of them, as R. Haruey has proved in his Logical and
Enthymematicall Analysis, dedicated to the valiant and virtuous noble Lord, the
Earl of Essex. If Menelaus counted a light and idle pratler abuse Calchas, or
Agamemnon a great drinker in his have and anger misuse Chryses, or Pentheus in
his frenzy disturb the Bacche, or Creon in his pride disable Tyresias, and so
forth, neither shall their passions hinder the spirits of those Prophets, nor
make Nestor, or Ulysses, or Cadmus, or the Thebanes, or the wiser sort, or God
himself, in their phrase termed Apollo and Dyonisius of destroying evil
things, and working great matters, to despise them one jot the more, but the
rather to defend them, which decorum is ever kept in all their books, in
giving the best end of their controversies to their religious persons, he
that has eyes to read, let him read.

Then let him think in his heart, whether patience and humility in one man
should provoke another man to presumption and rigor, and the naked innocence
and innocent nakedness of Gods holy prophets and teachers may in any heavenly
or worldly reason cause busiebodies the rather to annoy them? if he answers
in himself, it should not, it may not be, why goes he against his conscience
and wounds his own soul, in allowing these idle flies, these troublesome
waspes, these stinging gnats, these unprofitable worms? if he says, it should
be, it may be, he makes love a reason of hatred, and submission a cause of
oppression, he takes away the reward of virtue, and does evil for good, which
is worse then the worst beasts, then devils and all. Then I beseech him to
consider, how disalowable it is in good discipline, which they and he stand
upon so much, to change that order and break down those degrees, that are
nether diverse from Gods holy and reverend word, nor contrary to true and godly
government, to be fiery and vehement in their innouatio^s, whereas old standards
have more equity and safety in the^ by much, or else by such an infinite
method we shall never make an end of changings, and ever trouble the world
with needles questions, besides, that is the most inordinate and unlawful
thing in the world, to have private men speak and write their pleasures in
public cases, seeking on their own heads without any good allowance or
lawful warrant of the rulers, factiously and arrogantly to alter the state
that is builded and framed on Gods and man's law.

Then I desire him to examine this question, whether virtue and wealth,
godliness and riches may not be in one and go together? if they may not, why
were the most sovereign princes and godly puissant captains of Gods church,
ever as welthy and rich as any other? will they reform God too, for doing
this, and teach the Almighty to do better? or if they may be in one, being
both good, what mean these immoderate clensers of no faults, to pull down or
spoil, to beggar or abase with all their forces the countenance and
maintenance of spiritual magistrates and fathers, of ecclesiastical teachers
and rulers? whose revenues and jurisdictions are more necessary and less
hurtful, more charitable and natural then any other, and whose children shall
not be behind any in true virtue and true proof. How truly has S. Augustine
defined him to be an heretic, which for profits sake or fame begins or
follows new opinions? God in his goodness and mercy forgive all ignorant and
weak offenses, as he will in his powerful justice overthrow all presumptuous
and strong offenders, to his own immortal glory, and the everlasting comfort
of his true church, his peculiar people, his faithful children, his obedient
servant, which believe in him above al, which fear him under all, which love
him with all the powers of their souls and bodies, in all thankfulness and
duty, in all visible and invisible offerings of their goods and goodwils. For
when the reasonable and honest soul remembers in it self, that the weight of
Gods sanctuary was ever as much more as the weight of the congregation, and the
measure much more; that the best and fairest of all things were always
bestowed upon Gods divine uses and services, who gives us the best and all for
his uses; that the lands of the Levites in that only little land of Canaan
contained at the least in compass one hundred and ninety miles, Number. c. 35. v.
5. or if later times be better, that of the whole land of Jury divided into
four several parts, two parts of them were given to the priests, to the
temple and the Levites for their inheritance. Ezech. cap. 45. verse. 3, 4, 5. or
if an interpretor be required herein, in, that S. Jerome in his notorious and
notable epistle to Euagrius, concludes, and calls this an apostolical
tradition, that the Bishops and Priests and Deacons may ask and challenge so
much in the church, as Aron and his sons and the Levites did in the temple;
that the livings of the Egyptian priests, even idolatrous priests were not
once touched or diminished in common dearth and famine and need, and knows
withal that these benefits and liberties were ordained by two of the most
godly and politic lawmakers that ever lived, except Christ, even by Moses and
Joseph, men every way most singular and unmatchable, men taught of God
himself, from heaven it self, by visions, and revelations, and familiar
conferences; how can he judge otherwise then honorably and graciously for the
heads and parts of the church, as he will judge both graciously and honorably
for the heads and parts of the congregation? and there is not I am sure any one
of us, that reading S. Paul 2. Cor. c. 3. v. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. of the glorious
and continual ministry of righteousness more excellent then the ministry of
condemnation, or c. 4. Galat. humbling the law with the names of rudiments and
bondage, and those which lived under the law of children and servants, but
exalting the gospel with the titles of fullness of time and redemption, and
the gospellers, of sons and heirs and such other concordances of like
Scripture, can once think, that the law of Moses is greater then the gospel
of Jesus, but that the gospel is, both for the godhead of the author, Hebr. c.
3. v. 3. and for the doctrine it self, and for the first teachers of both,
greater and woorthier then the law; which proposition of the gospels excellency
and preferment being truly granted and rightly grounded, these consequents
must necessarily be conjoined; that they which teach the gospel ought every
way to live in more honor and credit thereby among the Christians, then they
which taught the law lived in honor and reverence thereby among the
Israelites: as the perfitest state of the church must have perfitest honor;
that he is the surest friend to God and Gods people, which joins the power of
the world unto the mightines of the word, the arm of Moses to the tongue of
Aron, the blessings of God to Gods blessed church; that by uniting of both
powers either may be stronger. Eccle. c. 4. v. 12. that in this greatest light
of divinity, divines should be in greatest light and reputation, yea if it
were but to anger the devil in hell, who like a crafty thief as he is, ever
seeks by miserable poverty to cast them into woeful and contemptible estate.
That unhappy poverty may make the men ridiculous, as Iuuenall writes Satyra
3. or as Synesius bishop of Ptolomais sings in his second and third
Hymn, sad poverty may pull them from heavenly studies to earthly cares, as he
had learned of Agur the son of Iaketh, or rather of experience the daughter
of truth; that our preachers now may pronounce a seuenfold Vae, and a mighty
malediction over the^ which empayre Gods tenthes, or any other dues, as the
old Prophets aforetime did in Iudaea, Mala. c. 3. v. 8, 10. Amos cap. 4. verse.
4. that there is no just cause why the papists should be readier to magnify
their Clergy in a false superstition, then the Protestants to uphold and
reward their clergy in a true religion, why the heathen churches should be
in greater reverence with the paganes, then the christian churches with the
christians: as the love of good men should exceed the love of the wicked, why
secular men may get their wealth by testament or desert, and spiritual men
having the same plea both of testament and desarte, may miss of their own
goods, and lose them by force, by tyranny and hypocrisy, under a merciful
Prince, in a peaceable state, in their own native country, of their own
neighbors, by the waiward and sophistical wrangling of their own professors,
and such other deceitful and ungodly means and essays of the maker, the
shifter, the hooker, against the golden rules of universality, of antiquity,
of unanimity, which Vincentius in his commentary stands so well upon.

Then to whom may I best liken this race of Reformers, and with what may we
justly and truly compare them? If I should continua similitudine resemble them
to the Vipers brood, that kill their own damme which bred and brought them up
to life, I am sure you that know the use of this kind of simile, and the
manners of this people against their mother the Church that first bred them,
will say I speak truth.

If in like sort I compare them to the noisome Cuckoo, reckoned among other
unclean birds in Leuiticus which must not be eaten or tasted of, c. 11. v. 16,
whose property is to starve his nest-felowes, and destroy his nurce that fed
him, our daily experience does approve it, and if Orus or Pierius were alive,
even they would make these two natural examples the Hierogliphickes of
Reformers. God grant they be not like the unadvised Physician, that would
needs cut a vein where no danger was, and thinking to ease and lighten the
head, where the sign was, which point he either forgot or neglected, let the
life blood out, and killed both head and heart together. I pray God they prove
not like the hasty and curious husbandman, that to make his trees grow in more
sightly order, as he thought, so cropped, and disarmed, and disarayed them,
that in short time they withered up.

I hope in Christ they shall never be like that conceited harebrainde Captain,
who when by gross oversight and blindenes he had lost the City in neglectigg
one gate which had most need of defense, beyond his expectation cast himself
and his neighbors into bondage and death, and as it were out of Gods blessed
Paradise, into the wild field, and hot Sun.

But alas I see well, they are to day like themselves yesterday, and to morrow
like themselves to day, seking this day and all other like themselves, to make
desperate exchanges, to bring in fruitless amendments, stu^bling at strawes
that hinder not the way, and leaping over great blocks that half stop up
the way, crying out upon the godly orders and decent customs of the church, as
il birds that file their own neast, exclaiming against convocation robes, and
grave apparel, because sometimes, forsooth, there hangs a straw, or feather,
or threads end, or some such great thing, which a cranke, a cursitour, a
Martin, a carter, threw or blewe upon them in his terrible mocking vain, and
letting pass the monstrous unnatural, unlawful, ungodly, uncivil, and more
then Jewish usurers, whom the most learned M. doctor Wilson, once her Majesty's
Secretary, has condemned in his Dialogues, to the endless shame of
gromelgayners, ill occupiers, by heathens, by Christians, by the old fathers,
by the ancient counsels, by emperors, by bishops, by decrees, by canons, by
all sects of regions, and of all religions, by the gospel of Christ, by the
mouth of God: omitting the outlandish and English corruptions or witcrafts, by
which and those kind of people together, if we mark well, this seminary of
reformers is chiefly vpholden and boulstred out, and by such companions as make
the bookish unwary Minister a cloak for their conueyances, and a shadow for
their skarres.

It is but too true which Ptolomy writes in his 12. aphorism, that love and
hatred corrupt men's judgments, either in themselves by extenuating the
greatest faults, and by extending the least commendations, or by enlarging the
least faults, and abridging the greatest praises of their adversaries which
like not their proceedings. Wherefore I would to Christ they would once leave
off from their uncharitable and unwary contradictions, and be so graciously
and godly wise, to take the lamb of God out of the Lions and Bears mouth, as
valiant young David did save his lamb with his cunning and hardy sling, and
taught some old shepheardes as he learned of other, to keep their sheep and
lambs from hungry, and empty, and ravenous beasts of the field and of the
wood: Save the lamb of God, not because he has need of your help, but that
ye may be blessed and saved by him. Hurt not the servants of the Lamb, if ye
have any foresight in you, least while you go about to drown the poor mouse,
as the enuyous frog did, you make your selves a pray to your enemies, by the
same devise and thread which drowned him, as Aesope said to Delphi for
himself, in a silly tale containing a subtle and solemn precept to beware
of revenge.

Let us look upon the Princes and heads of Israel, let our noblemen allow and
follow their acts, which shall be renowned and praised for ever, their
offeringes shall be famous throughout all posterities, no reformers or
misinformers shall ever deforme and defame their good works and good names,
and the six sons of Arcturus in heaven shall not continue longer then the
gifts of Naason, Nathaniel, Eliab, Elizur, and the other rulers unto Pagiel
and Ahyra, which gifts they gave at the setting up of the tabernacle, and the
dedication of the altar, Nom. c. 7. v. 11. unto the 88. they offered silver in
very great measure, they offered gold a mighty quantity, they presented the
finest flower, mingled with pleasant oil in most bountiful manner, they gave
of the best of their cattle a goodly number, and because they came so willingly
unto God, behold the reward of godliness, God came the more readily unto them,
and God talked presently with Moses their chief ruler and captain from his
mercy seat, v. 89. both to encourage them in the work of their free will
offeringes, and to stir up their children and successors after the^ unto the
worlds end, to such religious devotion and restitution. Their, and all the
peoples voluntary contribution toward the tabernacle was so great and
plentiful, even in that time of their wandering and poverty in the wilderness,
that the workmen complained of too much trouble in receiving their daily gifts,
that Moses at their requests proclaimed in their armies, to have them cease
from offering any longer. A crystal glass for this age to look in, and see
to wipe out their cankred spots, which make them most unlike those primitive
Israelites, and as devilish in purloyning the beneuolences and legacies given
to Gods holy places, as good Christians were liberal in providing for their
spiritual fathers, Exodus c. 35. and 36. They all gave their offeringes for
love, for example, for thanksgeuing, they restored to God that which God gave
them, they knew that their goods without Gods service, should be unto them as
those delicate quayles, and that white pure Manna, the quayles choking those
that did eat them against Gods will, and the Manna smelling with worms, that
was kept against Gods commandment, Number. cap. 11. v. 19, 29. Exodus c. 16. v.
20.

But why stand I upon those virtuous examples? was not that infamous Balaam
more just then these new fangled censuring reformers? yea and was not his very
rude ass more respective and regardant in humble submission to his better,
then these busi-motespiers smoothing hipocrites? O let those precise lips and
pure sanguine livers pardon me, that love to feed finely and sleep softly,
not on thistles, not asselike, not hardly. No fair allurement of king Balac,
no subtle suggestion of his lords of Moab, could make him go beyond the word of
the Lord God, but he took up his parable and blessed Jacob, he spoke once and
twice, and exalted the flourishing and happy estate of Israel, he could not
curse them whom God had blessed, and he would not go against the word of their
God* neither was he himself only obedient, though he were in the number of
false prophets, but his ass likewise did bow to the Angel in the way; the
beast bowed and fell down before Gods messenger again and again, and God made
the dumb brute to seem somewhat reasonable with a ma^s voice, Number. c. 22. v.
22. whereas these strange new founders of discipline, will look on the
magistrate, which is Gods angel, and neither bow heart, nor bend body to him,
but in a blind courage will bite the lip at him, and look under the browe, and
walk on proudly apace, will tell Gods angel that he must put up his sword,
that they are not borne to obey him, but to govern and reform them, though
neither Sultan nor Saphra, neither princes nor judges, neither valiant nor wise
men be on their sides, otherwise then Ioab was next to Abner, and Hamon to
Guinder, even to execute their own purposes, though Abner and Guinder paid
their lives for them in the end. 2. Kings c. 3. v. 27. or if perhaps any hold
with them, it is the horsleach and his daughter, that cry give and give, and
nothing but give, Prou. c. 30. v. 15. if themselves have any zeal, it is the
zeal of Judas Iscariot, who envied the precious anointing of Christ's body,
that now is the Church. John c. 12. v. 5, 6. if they have any spirit for them,
it is that false spirit, that flew into the mouths of Ahabs prophets, and blew
all their proofs to a goodly and new gay nothing, like our new reformations.
3. Kings c. 22. v. 23. or rather it is that foul vggly spirit, their own very
type and example, who in calumny and lying has no priour nor peer, and being
a traveler to and fro, and maligning the prosperity of rich and righteous
Job, came among the children of God on a day, as these pure ones do often, and
tempted God openly, as these tempters do their adherents and hearers in
corners and conuents, to plague good Job, to punish him, to torment and vex
him, and if the holy plaintifs might have the devils luck, and by some
sinister means obtain their request, they would even for perfect zeal do as
the devil did, and leave their father Job nothing but nakedness and woe; or at
their best, be but like the pure penitent, that stoale away a swan and picked
down a feather: desiring in their too singular and too extraordinary
discipline, that God might be magnified, in restoring him again to his
children, in reedifying his houses, in renewing his lands and goods and all
that he had, much like him that would break his fellows head, to give him a
plaster, or that put his finger in the fire, to have it healed again, that
contrary to S. Paul's counsel would do evil that good might come of it; Romans
c. 3. v. 8. Job c. 1. v. 6. c. 2. v. 1. never regarding that prohibition in
Gods proverbs, of not remoouing the bounds of their ancestors, c. 22. but
devising and filling their lusts.

Hereafter I for my part must account Aristotle and his scholars more
religious then these news bringers, that use holy magistracies that are
public offices like private charges, that are necessary duties like decent
orders: for he judges them both public and necessary, which must be regarded
publicly of al men, and without which the commonwelth cannot begin or endure.
and though at first he reckons religious degrees after politic, yet in his
methodicall transition or recapitulation of necessary offices, he sets
divine before warly or any other, perhaps criptically and histerologically,
perhaps in his lukewarm zeal not caring which were placed first, as may
appear by Laertius l. 5. and elsewhere in his own works. Polit. l. 6. c. 8.
Yea these men may well be set even to Phalaris the tyrants school, to learn
devotion and zeal of him, after thus many years purity and purgation, who in
his 84. epistle to the Messanenses, accuses the^ of theft, of impiety, of
sacrilege, for doing that which our reformers seek with tooth and nail
continually, and dividing those golden gifts among themselves, which he had
sent to Delphos as a thanksgiving after the recovery of his health, and
threatens them with revenge from heaven, and gives them at last a (...), a
farewell with a mischief. Yea and Julius Caesar that great spoyler may read a
divinity lecture to these reformers, though those germane currages Agrippa and
Luter make account of him as of a thief, he may well teach them a way of
regiment, which after his victories and instigations of many friends would not
in any wise take his sword from a temple of the people called Aruerni in Gallia
Aquitanica, where he that got it from him in battle or some other, had
dedicated it to the honor of God In sempiternam rei memoriam.

In which kind of regard toward reverend orders Plutarch reprooueth the
covetous Graecians, which in steed of golden spoils constituted brazen
remembrances and counterfaits in their public places and temples. Yea and the
oath of Hippocrates that heathen doctor, shall be in more honor with good men,
wherein he bound himself, not to be persuaded either by counsel or by hand to
minister any poison to any man, then these reformatorie pastoral inventions,
by which they poison and bewitch the people with a taste of holiness, bringing
them by little and little to live wholly upon poisons, or to make them madly
affected thereby, that they may abhor all men beside their own brood, as
drunken men delight in none but drunkards company. O what pity or shame is
it, that the statute of prisoning such maleparts and obstinates, or depriving
their hedstrong teachers of their usurped livings, is not like the laws of the
Medes and Persians, that must not be broken? Now fie upon Lucian, he was not
worth a bean, and out upon the wits of Italians and Greeks, that are not
any way comparable with these men, they are feign to rail grossly, or taunt
vainly after their own carnal manner, but these vpstarted wits will choke God
with his own scripture, these can construe his own will and testament otherwise
then he ever did, with their placets, and interlacings, and grand
protestations, these will by their physical informations and magicals, think
and tell God himself, that if one pasture and close will not serve one lamb
of his, the lamb must starve for them, and learn of the wolf to eat earth,
and make shifte as foxes do, the best they can: they will tell him that his
lamb is too hot and wants a shearer, that he is cloyed with too much, and
must be dieted, that the virtues and patience of lambs appears most in
misery, and therefore it were good to keep them still in it, lest they forget
all; that having high minds and proud looks, unlike David the prophetical
Prince, tell him in his triumph over Goliath, of his shepherds bag and sling,
and it be but to pull David's grace an ace lower: presuming that all goodly
proceedings are disgraced, because all their first beginninges in comparison
were simple and but vile, which wiser men judge e diametro contrarily; and
while the virgins of Jerusalem sing of Saul's thousand, these blunder about the
meannesse of his tribe and house and of his seeking his fathers asses; and by
equal reason abasing the miracles and blessings of the almighty, whereby he
puts down the mighty from their seat, and exalts the humble and meek;
yea and abasing our saviors Osanna, because of the maunger where they laid
him; dispraising that good wine of Cana, because it was once water: humbling
the excellency of one contrary, because it is compared with the lowliness of
another; and so forth, in a strange new Martinish hasty logic, the very
reuersion and scrapings of Sophistry hirselfe, they in this and such manner
have sold themselves to hatch nothing but injurious themes and inuectiues all
their life long; or if it were as they say being extreemely and abominably
false, yet how great was the pride of Diogenes which contemned the decency of
Plato? and what lords would these lordings be, think you, that would overthrow
lordships? how lofty was Carolus Martellus that hammer of christians, which
scorned the thrones of princes, and yet lived in meaner state, belike affecting
the insolent nature of Caesar, that in winged selfeloue refused all names of
magistracy, and would rather be remembered by his own name then any other, as
in their several histories it is recorded? or if these men be in their own
confession inferiors and no Lords, why do they so wrongfully and shamefullie
rebel against their heads? much like those heretics in Epiphanius, by name
called of him Cathari, which are in English Puritans, and by natural qualities
right reformers and crooked patrons for our queint ones, that did put shoes on
their heads, and garlands on their feet, and rings on their toes, only to
cross them in this co^temptuous guyse, that used them as all sober and wise
men do now in their proper places.

So judged the reverend Bishop Epiphanius of all heretics, and inclusiuely of
those Cathari or Puritanes, which lived in the time of the Emperors Decius and
Aurelianus, and so he prophesied of these pure men, and purer women which are
in some places, and prevail among their own ignorant and headlong favorers,
which will never leave to break down the hedge, till a serpent bite them,
Eccles. c. 10. v. 8. of both he gives forth that true and Apostolic
sentence, 1. tom. 2. l. 59. Her. Hi vero qui seipsos Catharos, id est, puros
appellant, ab ipso doctrinae suae argumento impuros seipsos efficiu^t. And his
proof is all one with the proposition of the Apostle S. John, Omnis enim
quiscipsum purum pronunciat, impurum seipsum perfect condemnauit, if we say we
are pure and have no sin, we deceive our selves, and there is no truth or
purity in us, 1. ep. c. 1. v. 10.

But if they will needs down with jurisdictions, and up with deformations, if
they will not honor priests as Jesus bids them, cap. 7. v. 31. if they will
yet go forward in their froward doings and sayings, if they will forsake the
Leuite contrary to Moses, Deuteronomy. c. 12. v. 19. c. 33. v. 11. if Satan that
calumniator be so great and hot within them, that they cannot stay
themselves, if they will needs be rich, though they fall into many temptations
and snares, and into many noysom and foolish lusts, which drown men in
perdition and destruction, for the desire of money is the root of all evil,
which while some lusted after, they erred from the faith, and perced themselves
thorough with many sorrows, but thou which art a man of God, fly these things,
1. Timo. c. 6. v. 9, 10, 11. if their note be still, there, there, so would we
have it; then let all mal-contents, usurers and Jews, all iuglers, owlegasses,
and poggians, all decayed and bankrout spendthrifts, all lightheaded and
ungracious mates, all turkissing and newfangled turkish poncet practisioners,
all these and such like martinish fellows go, for none but these and such
jolly fellows will go unto them at any time, to loose an hour among them,
though TeeCees stand never so stately at the door, to entertain all that come
and go, with protections and licenses, and tollerations, let these go unto
them and encourage them in their extreme vengible reformatiues, these new
metrapolitanes, that have pasports and inuestitures of the devils good holiness,
to Nymrodize and Iudaize their filles, these that care not if heaven fall down
and earth rise up, so they have their wills, and get themselves a day, and a
name, being now weary of their right surnames and christian, and wishing to
be their own godfathers or nicknamers, for here is their great theme and
maxim of pure and purpure misrule, I warrant you largely and illuminately
handled, here is the goal and price they run at and long for, here is that
crucifige which they cried so long, here is a correctiue Leiger and Factor for
their new-shapen worships, their humors of all sorts; here is their upright
patrico or Abraham man, as they term him, at a beck, at an inch with his dieu
guard, that can and will at a dead lift prove it good by his laws and canons,
by his reasons and senses, by his fathers, and brothers, and sisters, by his
angels and perhaps paredrall devils, that bare such a sway in their book
Nemith vel legum Orci and Inferorum: That Hazael and Ioas princes, were base
kings and as it were flattering dogs, to call the ecclesiastical prophet
Elisaeus their lord and father: 4. Kings c. 8 v. 12. c. 13. v. 14. that the
third Semicenturion or captain of king Ochoziah with all his fifty men was but a
swain, to fall on his knee, and do the ecclesiastical prophet Elias
reverence, and call him his good lord; 4. Kings c. 1. v. 13, 14. that king
Benhadad, Naaman the captain, and the rest in holy Chronicle did amiss, to
call prophets their fathers and lords, themselves being noble and mighty men.
4. Kings c. 5. v. 17. c. 8. v. 9. that God did not well to make Moses that was
but a lawgiuer and counselor the God of Pharao, a king and drad sovereign.
Exodus c. 7. v. 1. that al men in the earth which have called the heads and
rulers of the church their lords, in books, in sermons, in other meetings,
shall for that idle word give account at the last day, but not for calling
other me^ their lords: that our Church is maimed, unless we turn 7. into 4,
and yet so we mayme it more; that our bishops are blasphemers and traitors,
unless they set down 4. sorts of churchmen by those texts, where S. Paul
sets down 7. several things, Prophecy, Office, Teachers, Exhorters,
Distributers, Rulers, Mercymen. Romans c. 12. v. 6, 7, 8, etc. where he sets
down nine gifts of the spirit, wisdom, knowledge, faith, healing, great
works, prophecy, discerning of spirits, diversities of tongues,
interpretation of tongues, 1. Cor. c. 12. v. 8, 9, 10. where he sets down
five orders with the fruits of them, apostles, prophets, evangelists, pastors,
teachers, etc. Ephesians. c. 4 v. 11, 12. that deacons must not teach wisdom, but
pastors; that elders must not teach knowledge, but doctors; that pastors must
not meddle with goods, but deacons; that doctors must not deal with manners,
but elders; that wisdom, knowledge, manners, accounts, these four things
belong not to every pastor, to every doctor, to every elder, to every deacon,
because every one in himself belike and in other men, must not look to the
soul and body, to the mind and ma^ners, to the inward and outward man; that
our confessors and martyrs of late time, men as careful of every word they
spoke, as men might be, and specially that most innocent and righteous preacher
M. Bradford was ouerseen in being so dutiful and courteous, to call the Bishops
lords; that these our Eliae, Elisaei, Moses, our spiritual captains and
fathers, should not be called lords, nor charret and strength of England any
more, though they ever were and will be so; that teachers must be poorer then
their inferiors and scholars; that the magistracies for none or least causes
must be contemned and overthrown; that the sheepherd must not be richer then
a sheep; and Christ put from his See in the church, because he is not
corporally resident* that laughing and rejoicing upon supposed faults
betokens Gods spirit; that the watchman in the tower must be kept of the
meanest that saves me best and al; that he may in conscience be fostered that
stands stiffly in a lewd cause: that Philemon did not owe himself to Paul
his spiritual father, v. 19. that physicians of the bodies shall be in great
account, for healing an outward malady that would cast into the grave, and
looking to the mortal part of man, and our ghostly and heavenly physicians of
the soul must be out of account, for preserving the immortal part of a man,
and curing the inward diseases that otherwise would cast down to hell; that
the minority of Saul and the Iudaisme of Paul must prejudice the ones title
and roialtie, and the others doctrine and divinity; that Edgars and
Justinians, and the first Williams, or third Edwards and Henry's laws, or
Magna charta, should set their lawiers aflote in wealth, in magnificencie, in
all ability, and Gods law descending from heaven upon the holy mountain Sinai
in all majesty and honorable reverence, and the prophets words written by the
wisest spirit of the whole world, eue^ Gods own holy Ghost, and the gospel of
Christ, that has by Gods providence conquered heaven and earth, as I could
easily show unto you, if puritanisme were not, and the spiritual and true
decretals of the Apostles, which keep all men from follies, and lawmen from
injuries, and these 4. chartae maximae of God himself, that hold up even the
four corners or quarters of heaven over our heads, that else for our sin would
contrary to all philosophical quintessences fall upon us, shall set their
students, their barresters, their counselors and judges at an eb, or in a
drought, in more penury, in greater want and contemptible estate.

Such reasons and conclusions which either must be vpholden with many other
like inconveniences and mischiefs, or else these novelties and quarrels must
be cast down, are more fit for the oration of Catiline, with the coniuration
of Lentulus and Cethegus once in Rome, then for reformation of our English
church, which is not of the same manner of spirit that Elias was, for so our
Savior teaches his Apostles in the gospel of S. Luke c. 9. v. 55. even as
this commonwelth is not in such distress by Gods favorable goodness wherein
it lives, for according to the times God raises up diverse graces in the
world, as those regions were at that day under persecution, when
notwithstanding the prophet was thus highly honored and reverenced of princes;
which if it were otherwise in deed then it was, yet in right what argument
call you this by your reformation? what consequence is this in your witcraft
your new logic, which desire to seem so logical and sensible witty men? To
set worldly magistrates up on height, for good service done to their prince and
country duly and justly, and to thrust down these magistrates of magistrates,
as Ignatius, Ambrosius and other have truly judged, the one almost in every
epistle, the other in his pastorals, for the divine court of conscience rules
al courts whatsoever and wheresoever, into the lowest places and offices with
the lowest provision of external goods, for their divine and politic service
done to God and their prince, to God and their country, to God and the whole
earth: and herein I commend all christians to truth, to charity, and to faith,
which bid al true charitable faithful christians, to obey their guydes and
submit themselves to those which have charge of their souls, Heb. c. 13. v.
17. must the greatest service be least regarded and reco^pensed? God be
merciful to us, what a wilful world live we in? shall the service of all
services, even Gods own divine service be least considered and rewarded,
whereby al other services and masteries are holden up? Then farewell all virtue
which should be Lady and Queen over all, then God help godliness, that
orders all virtues, and is of highest orders, then let Porphyrius saying of
Britanie revive again, That it is a fertile Province of Tyrants: nay but must
the greatest service among the greatest be smally respected, and simply
honored? which helps men of all diseases and hurts, more then all Lawyers
and Physicians, the precepts thereof being better remedies against diseases and
poverty, either in preventing them best by temperance, or ouercomming them by
patience, as it may appear to them that read the Scripture over but half so
often as Alphonsus Arragonius did.

Then let in all dissolution and neglect of justice, then Britannia shall be
Romania, not as Gildas meant of Rome which conquered us in Caesar's time, and
after that kept us long under yoke. Ecce quam malum and iniucundum non habitare
in vnum, but as Romania is taken this day for a part of Turkey, which, if we
that profess the Gospel had the grace to agree in our selves, might go hang
it self for any hurt it could do us; then your and our Eirenarchy will be
anarchy, the^ shall those paddock lordings rule al with their line and revel,
that have in their charity and christianity so unruly and irregularly, in their
policy, and their humanity so traitorously and peruersly opposed and set
themselves against the power and honor of the lamb in heaven, of the almighty
lamb, which is Lord over all, and within all, ruling for ever, in that they
are adversaries to the reverence and fatherhoode of his kingly prophets, and
messengers, and lawyers, his visible angels, and priests, and saints, created
and ruled by his most happy and blessed word. Which name of priests or elders
by their reformatiue sullen misorder, and their terrible grave Lord of misrule,
is now half reckoned with some harebraines a name in reproach, and so the
best names of fathers, and brothers, and other, will shortly likewise be in
contempt, if this correcting, corrupting Mart. endure long, as he that has but
half an eye may plainly see how it is already crept in with these markers and
marrers, and by disobedient thoughts has bred more equality in men's minds,
then was wont to be in my short remembrance, or ought now to be in our
experience, unless you would have in your time, and in your successors, a
monarchy turned into a democratie, a king into a subject, a better into a
worse, contrary to Christ's own rule in his Gospel, The servant is not above
his master, Matthew. c. 10. v. 24. for all the fire burns not at the first or
second blast, but rises and spreddeth by little and little, and so clymeth up
to the top, and can hereafter turn equalities upon their temporal Lords and
tenants, as it appears already by some they call Brownists, or Downists, and
Downings, or such men of plucking down both great and little hills, by the same
texts which they wrest upon spiritual lords and their curates, which texts
belong universally to all christians, as the Lords prayer and other textes
do, being spoken likewise at first to the Apostles, and that people only.

But perhaps I am in a wrong confutation, seeing these reformers are of so
sober and maydenly discreet advised behavior? what? say you advised and
discreet? when you might say as truly, the most wise that ever lived under
the sun, and the purity it self of mortal sapientials? for Solomon
himself ever counted hitherto the wisest of men, was not, it seems by them,
of half so wise a spirit, as these frugall dainty mote-spyers be in these
points, wherein both of them show forth their love and zeal toward Gods
church. I beseech you weigh them both together, and so you shall find the
truth by trial. Salomons love is loved of all good men, in buylding and
bewtifying Gods temple most gloriously, because it is lovely in it self, and
loving unto all. 3. Kings. cap. 6. v. 2.2.3. cap. 7. verse. 15. Reformers love
is the cleaving of yuie to the tree, to rotte it, or to the wall for snayles
and vermin to creep up aloft by it, their love is of the ape, the fond old
ape, that with embracing too closely killed his young one, when he did all for
apish love: their love is of the kiss of that hellish ape, that antichristian
Judas, it is falshoode in fellowship, we find it so: it is no kind of good
love or zeal toward God or man, which breaks down his holy places with axes
and hammers, which cries down with them, down with them even to the ground,
and are hereupon called enemies and blasphemers of God and his honor, Psalm.
74. and makes the Turk and the devil to laugh at Christians: God grant this
division cause not the increase of Mahomets kingdom, as the faction of
Jeroboam was cause of Nabucodonosers victories over Israel. Solomon has so
entirely and fervently loved the church, that in reading him any man would
think he could scarcely imagine or tell how to express his affection
sufficiently and significantly enough to his contentation, that he ever
thought, he never did good enough, or said good enough to Christ's spouse and
Church. Reformers Solymans, or half Turks have so sheerely and purely loved
the Church Christ's sister and spouse, which that king so magnifieth and
extolleth in his divine caution or heavenly hymn, by most hearty exclamations,
and most sweet comparisons, that they cannot tell which way to abase her
prelates too much, or enough to impouerish her estate, and make it like
themselves rather then Christ, who is Lord over all things, and has all power
in heaven and earth, taking Luke for no body, c. 22. v. 30. and naked truth in
a scogginly and ruffianly sense, not as it is meant of plainness and
perspicuitie, they cannot affoorde her any honor and grace, by whose doctrine
all other powers are honorable and gracious, otherwise remaining in their old
heathenish slipperie estate, with catch that catch may, as Brennius once said,
they cry out for spritish zeal, and without spiritual skill, they call
envious detraction religious purgation, and violent robbery valiant jealousy,
and false dealing godly insinuation. Lord God amend them if it be thy will,
for they know not what they say.

Solomon writes in his sure promise and exhortation, that if his spouse be a
wall, he will build a silver bulwark upon it, to make it the more venerable and
glorious among men; Reformers in their discipline and exhortation are as ready
to steal his silver work away by a false plea, as he was to set it up by a
good conscience, they are ready to rob the Church for love, they now with all
blasphemous impudency profess it openly and set a price on it, as the
malecious men in in old time did on Joseph, and Judas in later time on Jesus
himself, and soldiers cast lots on his own garment, Genesis c. 37. v. 27. Math.
c. 27. v. 5. and some care not in their madness, if he were stripped from top
to toe, such is their lunacie, and so are they puffed up with pecuniary logic,
which Verres a worthy teacher has taught the^, making more account of money
then of men, and teaching other men, how to buy the best princes alive of their
own men, but shall this Iugurth say of you relatiuely, o angliam venalem si
inuenerit venditorem? shall he thus vilely dishonor the judges of this age with
such proffers as if they were for his tooth: maligning secretly our gracious
and blessed prince, and devising how to blot her Royal immaculate glory in
this her merciful and right Christian reign, by some such villainous desperate
act, whereby she might be stained in all posterities and records, by
pleasuring Martinish malcontents once, and displeasuring all learned men for
ever* even for love they would worse then that excessive tyrant Richard the
third, play an enemies part to the Church, for the love they have to God, they
wish the decay of Gods temple, these Antidauids and Antichrists have not loved
the habitation of his house, nor the place where his honor dwells; as their
S. Dionysius, to whom the hotter and wittier they are, the liker they are,
robbed the church of his god whom he worshipped because he would taste of the
goodness of his God, but we see what sorrow came on him, even by deriding that
religion which was bad, or as mad men and fools, and drunkerds condemn their
own souls for money, and loose the blessings and joys of Gods kingdom, to win
the transitory goods of the earth by mischievous ways, being misled of an
ignorant will, and unadvised resolution, blinded with a fond desire of
innovation only, and presuming to rule the wheel which themselves never made
or knew.

Solomon says in the abundance of that wisdom which God gave him, that if
his sister and spouse be a door, as Christ metaphorically calls himself a
door, by which we enter into heaven, as by his Church we enter unto him, he
will keep her in with the best wood he can come by, even with the boordes of
Cedar wood, which is a wood ever good, of greatest continuance, of fairest
beauty, of noblest worthiness, insomuch that young gra^marians can say
prouerbially, Cedro digna, of a thing that deserves immortality and the
renown of all posterity, that preserves it self, and other things, that are
in it, from corruption: but these supposed gentlemen as far from gentleness as
the goats be from sweetness, these courtiers as far from courtesy, as devils
are from goodness, these shrewde reformers of Moses and Joseph, and Solomon, I
pray God, if it be possible, they may once prove reformers of themselves, and
learn to be ruled by their rulers, had rather that preservation, that future
renown, that immortality of name, those cedar bords should only or chiefly be
given to the temporal scholar then the spiritual teacher, to the easy
hearer then the painful speaker, to the external ruler the image of God,
then the internal ruler the other image of God, then to the kings of all kings
even God himself, or to his house for his own sake, that gives all goods
only for his houses sake (as he blessed Pharao for Iofephs sake, and the poor
widow of Sarepta for Elias sake, and Laban for Jacobs sake) where his blessed
name is called upon, where his ears are open out of heaven to our prayers,
where the bottomless graces and immeasurable benefits and all happiness begin,
where his own word is once and for ever sent from above, where in a better
imitation of heavenly harmony then Macrobius mentions, l. 2. c. 3 Satur. the
nightingale, and the lark, and al sweet birds, for so I may well name them,
sing Jesus, and Gloria all the year, where Gods own word is in man's phrase,
that men may understand it: a thousand times more worthy of golden cover and
golden deske, then the furious Iliads and fraudulent Iliads, then the lion and
fox of Homer were in the judgment of Great Alexander, according to the like
co^paritiue argument of the kingly prophet David, who thinks it no reason,
that himself should dwell within cedar walls, and the Ark of God should abide
in tents and be carried upon cart wheels in a more penurious and simple
manner, then was either lawful or expedient. 2. Kings c. 6. v. 3. c. 7. v. 2.
For David did not make such a conclusion as our deformers do, he was not so
headstrong a gentleman, or so presumptuous a man of worship, as this great
mender thus counselling all before he be called, and cancelling that he never
had, with a metrapolitanisme of his own making and fashion: he said not, that
the arc of Gods covenant should stay on a cart still in other ages after him
because in the primitive necessity it was first carried upon cart wheels, as
these seniors in railing and iuniors, in obeying say, that the church must
stand for ever, as she stood in her apodemicall mobilitie at the first, in
travail, in trouble, in sorrow, in persecution, like the first churchmen, and
if that were granted, yet even at those days the true christians of the laytie
laid down their goods at the churchmens feet, and they did not the like only
that were infidels and very pagans, Acts c. 4. v. 32. which bounty showed in
the dreadful time of persecution, when themselves might have need, should
teach our men to do the like in time of peace, and liberally supply the wants
of the clergy, which by ungodly Martinish unreasonable absurdest means are
beyond a mean very grievous and many, and if christian patience were not most
intolerable: o ye devilish cormora^ts, read the 83. Psa. v. 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, 17, 18. and repent, and make restitutio^ of those church lands and goods so
lewdly and vngratiously gotten, and kept, and spent in pride and lechery,
unless with your other hellish paradoxes ye will make the time of peace in a
settled state, more niggardly and ravenous, then that time of affliction in a
moveable wandering commonwealth, so that they may as readily protest and
maintain this with Wall and Straw, with Leyden and his mate, that the
Nobility must return back to ancient poverty, and divide their sums and
goods among their needy secular brethren, and be reformed for company into a
woeful and distressed case, till every one has enough to live thereby in some
trade without beggary and woe, because the first Nobles in this realm, and all
other lived so at the first in the primitive Nobility, following the sun and
moon and all lights, which the higher they are, the less shadows they make,
without such costly traynes, and deep expenses, and so many good morrowes,
whilst hu^dreds starve for want of that they cast away. But they never
consider that none should want, if either those numbers would labor in their
vocations soberly and painfully, or many other beside Noblemen could do their
duties neighbourly and willingly toward the impotent creatures the objects of
mercy: they remember not that idleness destroys more then poverty, and that
infinite men die, or come to naught by their folly, not by misorder of
superiors, by not obeying them, not by any fault of them, of their own stony
obdurate wilfulness, not otherwise.

O unthankful wretchedness and wretched unthankfulness, o disobedient tongues
against the law and impenitent souls against the gospel, o forgetful and
ungrateful iniquity, o creatures marprelates most unkind and barraine of
justice distributive, as Sir Thomas Elyot proves solemnly, l. 3. c. 2. in his
governor, where he thus exclaimeth against the^ which dislike the names and
ceremonies that appertain to reverence and obedience, together with the costly
rewards and ornaments of virtuous and godly men. Ought they not to fall
prostrate on the ground with fasting and prayer? to glorify God, for his most
loving and fatherly care, for his princely providence, for his bountiful
goodness ever more and more bestowed upon us, and them? ought they to refuse
Gods gracious liberality, to look backward when he looks forward, to think
they can have too much of Gods blessings, to restrain that which is given only
to a godly and honest end, for the sustenance of learned and religious men in
schools and churches, for the reverence and safeguard of the chiefest sober
stayed men and fathers, approved and constant in learning and manners of life,
not for martinish whelps that can neither speak well nor do well, thrust in
by them that now are offended with their dignities? as Palamedes, and Joseph's
brethren, and Aesope were accused for having that which was thrust upon them,
injuriously.

O vos nefarij gnauiterque impudentes libelli, nulla est Ecclesiae Anglicanae
macula, cuius autores and fautores non sint vestri laici martinistae, as the
devil cast sores upon Job, and then made his lightheaded wife to vpbrayde him
and tell him of that he had against his will. It must needs be, that offenses
should come, but woe be to them by whom they come, and woe be to you, that
curse those things, which your selves have caused, Math. cap. 18. verse. 7.

But happy are they, that avoid the curse, by keeping the right way, by not
coveting that which belongs only to churchmen, contenting themselves with their
own, not co^tending for sacred goods and possessions, without which
interserted among other, the whole body of the kingdom would soon prove a
huge monster of ataxy and anarchy, with a moving earth, and an immovable
heaven, in Copernicus guise, neither true astronomer herein nor theonomer,
howsoever he seems a reformer to some, that are open at all times to receive
all that falls or comes next to hand, yea if it were in their heat, when
they have not their wills, to curse God and die, to lift fools on horseback
and set kings on foot, to convert with our deriuatiue co^uerts the belles into
guns, the leads into pellets, the mother cathedral churches into close
chambers, the fonts into basins, the organes in water pipes, and then
themselves into devils, the realm into hell, though God has abundantly
besides their desert indewed them with all kind of principal and necessary
provision for peace and war, that they might not have evil eyes because he
is good unto other. Math. c. 20. v. 15. How can they be the members of Christ,
that are the lims of Satan, and make a sport of mocking those chief men of
learning and sober life, men casting aside all railing and unlearned
innouations, and as sufficient for their places of government as ever any have
been in England, and notwithstanding the superlatiue of Erasmus concerning the
fathers in his days? How can they be true subjects, that tell the Parliament,
they are starued with their Service book, wherein is the most perfect order and
matter of divine prayer and thanksgiving set down for all men, that rend and
cut in pieces her Maisties irreprehensible Statutes inacted in the first year
of her gracious reign, c. 2. spurning them and abusing them rebelliously? O
good God, we beseech thee, if they be of thy flock which have erred and
strayed thus desperately from thy way of peace and righteousness like lost or
diseased sheep, to open their ears, and eyes, and hearts, that they may at
length by thy provident favorable goodness hear, see, and know, what they
are doing and undoing, for they are as deaf, and blind, and dead in sin
without thee, as the Jews were that stoned thy protomartyr Steven, as the
Libertines and Cyrenians were that persecuted thy disciples, not otherwise able
then with raging words and hundreds of headlong sectaries to resist their
power, but only thought they did well for want of thy spirit, and through
ignorance of thy holy word. Acts c. 6. v. 10. c. 7. v. 60.

Thy primitive Apostles count it in thy evangelical histories a glory to thy
name and increase of thy gospel, thy faith, thy love, thy church, when any
maintenance and reuenew was bestowed on them and thy faithful disciples, and
laid down at their hands and feet. 1. Cor. v. 16. v. 17. when any zealous
patron or other devout person by thy fatherly love and oeconomie, was sent to
help their christian brotherhoode and fellowship in thy battles and heavenly
embassages, the more they received the more they rejoiced, they prayed daily
for them which ministered to their wants, Philip. cap. 4. v. 18. they were then
enrolled among the godly Christians that intertayned and maintained thy Saints,
the laity then striued among themselves who should be greatest in christian
devotion, in liberality, in patronage, in love and such like virtues which
uphold mankind, 1. Thessal. 6.5. v. 12, 13. they were such as should be saved,
says the Evangelist S. Luke, that were added, and that added to the church,
Acts c. 2. v. 47. they were called brethren, because they fed, of the same
table, of the same milk, of of the same store, Acts. c. 21. v. 7. Romans c. 1.
v. 13. and shall their deriuatiue successors, o merciful God, o bountiful
Jesus, count it for a dishonor to thy name, and a decrease of thy Gospel, a
decay of thy love, thy faith, and thy church, unless their apostasy, heresy
and Martinisme prevail, and those goods, which as thy Apostle S. James
teaches us, came from above by former good instruments, be rauened, and
bribed, and pulled away by these wicked instruments, these mad dogs, these
infamous libellors, from our feet and heads, from our tables and studies, from
our mouths and hearts, to feed hounds, to dress whores, to multiply
helhound and whore-hound ruffians, swearers, harebraines? unless we be
desolate and forsaken, without our own patrones, without tutors of our own,
without our own Judges, as other men have all of their own, without the
possession and fruition of our own, or rather of thy goods, to the derision of
thy omnipotent power, to the contempt of thy reverend word, to the overthrow of
thy catholic and apostolic church, of thy faithful and true bishops and
priests, which have authority even from the great commission of thy holy
spirit, to be chargeable to the hearers and professors of the faith, 2.
Thessal. c. 3. v. 8, 9. in the days of this life, and have a more singular
praeeminence then any other in the life of the resurrection? Dan. c. 12. v. 3.
which are the chiefest pillars in thy commonwealth, that being in honor and
reputation, and environed with many godly Centurions and defenders, with many
loving David's, meek Mosees, and liberal Salomons, the whole glory, and every
part thereof, shall redound to thee, o father of heaven, now in the last times
and years of the world, and continue evermore by thy mighty will, as it did
in the beginning of the law, and the dayspring of the gospel, when true zeal
was earnest in enriching thy flock, and tyranny only occupied in
empouerishing it; when it was true religion to confirm the estate of thy
preachers, and execrable atheism to enfeeble them; when it was esteemed for
right divinity to obey God more then man, and for profane Iudaisme to serve
God and Mammon, much more to serve Mammon and God after the Jewish co^struction
and antichristian manner; that triumphs in the name of blood which is but
aerie; of seed which is but fiery, of elementarie and mineral accidents
which are but earthie and watrie, of those bodily blunt and sharp properties
and casual endowments, which make the life tedious unto men of this world, and
odious to thy majesty in the world to come, unless they be consecrated to thy
blessed lamb, and dedicated to the use of thy holy Church, whose internal
prosperity first, then external is regarded of all good men, howsoever these
new putfoorths, dronken textuals, brainsick templaries, monstrous protesters,
play the verbal sophisters throughout their whole generations. Now dear
Christians, let us labor continually to be dear to God; let us not undo the
whole body for the faults of some parts; let us not for a worldly hope lose a
heavenly certainty; for accidental shadows essential substa^ces; for
indifferent ceremonies necessary laws, the good wheat for the cockle in the
fields; the fruitful trees for the fruitles and hawty bra^ble in the woods, for
the frail love of a man, the endless love of our God and his lamb that
teaches us only to fly from the sin, not the goods of the world, but use them
godly and canonically.

Let us I beseech you duly consider the word of the Lord of hosts unto
Zachary his prophet, which bids us, Execute true judgment, and show mercy
and compassion, and that none imagine evil against his brother in his heart.
cap. 7. verse. 9. Let us daily and instantly pray unto God, to illuminate our
knowledge with his heavenly empireall light, to establish our faith, to
multiply his gifts and graces upon us, that we sing with the spirit and with
the understanding, as S. Paul our great doctor has said, If God be on our
side, who can be against us? who spared not his own son, but gave him for us
all as a lamb to death, how shall he not with him give us all, even all things
also? Romans c. 8. v. 31, 32. Let not us make our selves worse then the heathen,
or reverence our religious fathers and bishops less then they did their holy
men, accounting their priests and pastors for nobles and princes, and their
princes and nobles for priests and pastors of the people, as Homer names
metaphorically Agame^non the prince of Graecians the pastor of the people, and
Hector the prince of Trojans the bishop of men; as Sophocles and the other
grave and sententious Tragedians call their prophets princes, and namely
blind Tyresias for being a prophet is called a king even of a king; as Virgil
familiarly known to young scholars, calls Anius a king and a priest; or as
Moses rather tells us in his divine judgment, that Melchisedech was the
prince of Salem and the priest of God, Genes. cap. 14. v. 18. and S. Paul to
prevent glossary cauils names him king plainly by the word (...), which is
the ground or foundation of the people, whereon they build their confidence and
strength, Jesus being the corner stone. Heb. c. 7. v. 1. and who has not heard
of the kingly prophet David? of Hermes that was a philosopher, a priest, a
king, and thereof was among other Egyptian princes named Trismegistus or thrice
excellent. Let not us English men make our selves worse affected toward Gods
Church, then our forefathers have been before us, whereof some leaving their
crowns, some their royalties, some their riches, devoted themselves wholly to
the orders of the Church, and bestowed their lives and liuelihoods upon Gods
ministrations and services, as some readers know very well, besides diverse
examples of other foreign chronicles, judging the name of a divine, better
then of a man, and the title of Gods priest, as joyful and honorable with men
and Angels, as that which is the very best of all titles. Let him that is
taught in the word minister unto him that teaches in all good things: who
goes a warfare at his own cost? who planteth a vineyard, and eats not of
the fruit thereof? who feeds a flock and suffers another to devour the
milk? says S. Paul the mighty Apostle and Bishop of the Gentiles. Galat.
cap. 6. verse. 6. what true Christian man will once do otherwise unto an other,
then he would in that others place a paribus causis should be done to him?
says Christ the almighty Savior. Math. c. 7. v. 12. Let us not follow Aerius
the heretic, whose opinion concerning the equality of Bishops and Priests
Epiphanius confuteth l. 3. haer. 75. but rather satisfy our selves with the
confutation thereof in that place, then seek new shifts for him and starting
holes* for that sentence of S. Jerome pronounces a bishop to be a priest,
because they are diverse orders, as a man might say in that phrase without
confounding the degrees, the same man which is a doctor is a master, but it
does not by conversion judge a priest to be a bishop, a master to be a
doctor. Or if the words following in him will not suffer you to be content
with this answer, even from that which follows there I reason thus: That
which takes away the seed of scismes is necessary in our church, wherein the
people is so ready to say, I am of one, I am of another, I am of neither, as
they were in former times: but to choose one among the priests to be ouerseer
or bishop above the rest, by Ieroms confession takes away the seed of scisme
in the church now as it did aforetime, or else every parish priest will be a
bishop, a judge, without check of any there, and mar all obedience for want
of bishop-like government in himself, and due reverence in the neighbors. Ergo
it is necessary in our church, to choose one among the priests to be ouerseer
and bishop above the rest, and to rule them with discretion and knowledge.

If any man argue against this argument, of the effect, and urge the word of S.
Paul Philip. c. 1. v. 1. we may deny the consequence of the reason, either
because it is a synecdoche of a general for a special, or such a speech as
this, To the prince and people, taking away lords herein, and reckoning them
with the people, as S. Paul contriueth priests in the word deaco^s, which in
respect of bishops are deaco^s, as lords in respect of their princes are of the
people, according to that parcel of a prayer in our common service book, Upon
our bishops and curates, which judges the dioces the bishops parish, and
priests under them in several parishes their curates, which take their cure
and charge of them by institution, as the spiritual sons of spiritual
fathers. If any shall yet reason from S. Peter 1. Epist. c. 5. v. 1. we may
answer, that either he might call himself a priest in his humility in
respect of Christ the chief bishop of souls, as Emperors have in modesty
named themselves their soldiers fellows, yet none will, I trow, be so wise to
conclude hereupon, that captains and soldiers aforetime were all one, or that
he being in the order of a bishop, now was withal a priest, and writ to them
which had been his fellow priests, and were not yet elected bishops, as a
doctor may call a master his fellow pupil, in remembrance of old frendshippe,
though he never mind to make both dignities one.

If the text of the Acts c. 20. v. 28. be urged upon us, where S. Paul calls
them bishops whom before in the seventeenth verse he named priests, which
seems more forcible at the first sight, then any other text among their
objections, yet I pray, S. Paul had sent for the fathers and masters of
families, and in his exhortation called them kings and captains over their
own houses, you could not deny them to be subjects still, or say they are
kings. It is written that they to whom the law was given were called gods,
(...), but not the gods, (...), for that were simply to make them gods, and
commit idolatry, John. c. 10. v. 34. so in this text it is written, that the
holy Ghost appointed them bishops, (...), but not the bishops, (...); as it
were bishops comparatively, not the very bishops themselves, looking
carefully and vigilantly to their Churches by the example of the bishops, which
were as S. Paul testifies, careful for all churches, as the bishops are in
their own and other dioces and provinces. 2. Cor. c. 11. v. 28.

As for the objections of Chemnisius taken from Ierom, from the counsel of
Toletum, and from Gregory's 95. distinction, 2. part, 70. page, they move me
no more then if he had said, They that use viceroyes and vicegerents, have no
necessary places and offices. Such magistrates use substitutes, ergo they are
not needful: for so I may best answer him with a parallele even as our
hundred thousand Martins with their protestations may be answered, to make as
speedy a dispatch in temporals as in spirituals, upon as probable accusations,
causes, articles. And look what this examiner writes upon the fourth chapter
in the same part, it proves nothing but a superiority, a regiment, a place
over other, a bishopric, which some sons and vassals of envy prick against,
tolerable by the confession of Che^nisius, among true bishops, so partial is
he in his tolleration, when as S. Paul's Examen. 1. Tim. c. 5. v. 17. appoints
double honor to worthy men, which are with virtuous men as S. Augustine and
S. Jerome in their Epistles call one another, Domini vere sancti, and
beatissimi papae, and in christi visceribus honorandi, and venerandi, not
Popes, not Antichrists, not Beelzebubs, as these new Iacobines lately famous
count all men Esaus which please not them, Iacobines that have begun in France
and would go in England with mischiefs and spoils* they go to their lords
Esaus, as they call them, and send three railing Rabshakees messengers, as
Jacob sent humble servants; they stand at defiance with all the hundreds of
Esau, as Jacob was greatly afraid and sore troubled; they curse and rage, as
Jacob prayed and blessed; they present as many lies and foul words, as Jacob
did scores and hundreds of cattle: they strive and are disallowed of all
discrete men and worse reputed then the vainest rimers and players that ever
lived, as Jacob wrastled and was blessed of the Angel; they desire to pull and
catch from their lords Esaus, as Jacob would needs bestow a gift upon his
brother; so that we cannot esteem them Esaus till these prove themselves
Iacobites, seeing there can be no Esau where no Jacob is, no Antichrist without
Christ, no Popes without Papists, no devil unless he that is against him be a
God* but alas poor Jacob, thy prudent Rebecca is tky enemy, thine own speech
bewrays thee, surely thou art Esau; o thou french and popish and
antichristian and devilish counterfaite, thou art nothing but Esau in every
part, and so will prove in soul as thou art already in body, unless thou
become a newborn babe in innocence and concerning malice.

Let us good Christians, not strive to be like lions and eagles, like bears
and other beasts, in cruelty, in rauine, in such other qualities, which are
by Gods own will made our own servants and put in subjection under our feet,
Genesis c. 9. v. 2. but follow the nature of Salomons dove that is washed with
milk and of a clean fair behavior, which has a sweet voice or loving
conferences for peacemakers, which has a comely face, and threatens no
mischief, Cant. cap. 2. ver. 15. c. 5. v. 12. but follow the nature of the
innocent lamb, and specially of this principal and righteous Lamb of God,
that cleanses and takes out our spots, blots, sins, filthiness, and all
our corruptions, to give us a contented and peaceable mind, a quiet and
thankeful tongue, a brotherly and neighbourly helping hand toward one another,
to give us soft tender hands and soft tender hearts every one to other, that
we perish not in our own folly by discord, that we open no gates or doors to
confusion and misrule, that we prove not a by word or laughing stock to our
enemies, but that God may bless us and be blessed in us for ever and ever.

Let us always remember that memorable sentence and comparatiue suppose of our
highest teacher and archbishop Jesus Christ, and apply it unto our naked
hearts, and be fully persuaded of it without wayning and minishing in this
faith, that if any one despises his preachers and messengers, he despises
him, and that he which despises him despises the father which sent him. Luke
cap. 10. verse. 16. whereby he is necessarily brought to a naughty and
shameful end, having God and his Christ with the same Christ and his
faithful ones his accusers and judges* which precept of personal regard is in
all reason so necessary to maintain discipline, that the Romans having only
a politic regard of religion in their blindness, grounded their devotion
upon Numaes fourth law, Feroces animos non posse in officio contineri nisi
deorum metu, ideoque religionibus and ceremoniis esse alligandos, so honored
their chief bishops, or Archbishops, and namely among other, Marcus Aemilius
Lepidus their chief Bishop, that they set a great punishment and fine upon
Cneus Cornelius the pretors head, for abusing him, and in him religion, with
reproachful words, whose name they tendered chiefly next the greatest name of
all other, as Alexander ab Alexandro records, l. 2. c. 8. genia. and how much
more should true honor be given to the chief priest in a true religion,
then in a false? then in the profane religion of Orestes yet being sober, and
of his sister Iphigenia among the Commani? where the priest is next the king in
honor, seeing he that is a king, and he that is a priest, are commonly of one
family and progeny, in so much that their priests on the feast days twice in
the year did wear a crown or diadem, and Pompeius that conquered their
country Cappadocia, made the inahbitants subject to Archelaus their high
priest, who had by his decree 6000 servants at commandment for holy things,
and for his use two skoenes, or 60. furlongs, or 7. miles and a half of ground
about the city Comana, as Budaeus reports in his third book de ass out of
Straboes 12. book of Cosmography; then in that vain religion of the Druides
among the primitive Galli? where the priests were in chiefest account and
honor, they had a high priest, they enjoyed privileges miuerualia and (...),
in being free from wars, in paying no tribute, in other immunities, they were
judges in private and public controversies, so that they were excommunicated
from all companies, which yielded not to their decrees, and to the shame of
these newfangled brablers it is written, that arts were much esteemed, that
judges were in great authority, that the propitiation and divination of
sacrifices was no less then augustae maiestatis, and even imperial. To let
pass the clean, beautiful, and reverend order of the Tanagraei, and the
Cabiri, commended by Paufanias lib. 9. for the regard they had to religious
buildings, and many other, whose policy was greater, and learning profounder
then the skill of all church-robbers in this Island.

Let us not lay up for our selves treasure in earth, and specially not ill
gotten goods, against Gods will, but make us friends of unrighteous Mammon, that
the mountains or greatest men may bring forth peace, and the little hills or
inferiors righteousness unto the people, that they may receive us into
everlasting habitations, where Seraphin, and Cherubin, and Angels, and
Prophets, and Apostles, and Martyrs, praise the God of this Church for ever and
ever. Let us follow the widow of Sarepta, and ever be like her whose praise
is in the Gospel, Luke chapter 4. verse 26. that having but a little oil, and
a little meal, was so obedient and faithful toward God, when she had but once
heard Gods word, that she would rather, even in a great famine, put her self
and her son in danger, then not do for Elias the man of God; and what lost
she by it? or what loose any other by the like? 3. Kings chapter seventeen,
verse nine.

Let us live and dwell among our selves in unity and concord, like Lambs and
Doves, like fathers and sons, and be Lions in Gods name to our forrayne
enemies, that are Gods enemies, not to our neighbors, whom we must love as our
selves, seeing God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, 1. Cor. c.
14. v. 33.

Let us live, let us, the prince and people of England, live in the band of
impregnable love and charity, like fellow laborers, and sworn men, and
sworn brethren, and because the Clergy sows unto us spiritual things,
is it any matter if they reap our temporal things? which without their
divine regiment the strong commonaltie would by force pull from us idle
politics, and too idle in suppressing the foes of holy Church. 1. Cor. cap. 9.
v. 11.

Let us hold fast together in uniformity like the parts of one and the same
body, not defying and enfeebling one another without all wisdom and
compassion that become true Christians, seeing the body shall be too much
defied by the enemies, God knows, though it hurt not it self* for who ever
in a good mind hated his own body? Ephesians. c. 5. v. 29. Let us leave the
motespying of wordly men and hypocrites, that Judah and Israel, Roboam and
Jeroboam, Jerusalem and Samaria, may be no more among us in England, according
to that historical prayer of Tertullianus against the Arrians; Let Martin and
his Martinets not think the realm so rude as to be delighted in his indecent
and uncivil language, or the rulers so unlearned as to be persuaded by his
gross and ignorant opinions, but leave to strike at them whom he cannot
reach, though he has three more sheaues to stand upon.

What if the old cocks of Danubius and Rhenus have putrified humors in them,
and thereby lay vnhealthful eggs, must the merchants of Tamesis and Seuerne
bring them hither for novelties, where the swelling corner birds and toades of
the hellish calumniator are so ready to brood them, and breed such Serpents
and Cockatrices as are lately flowne abroad? or if we shall have 100000.
Iudasses and as many Caines, to betrray Christ's holy Church for 100000.
pounds, and crucify his disciples, and give him and them gall and vinegar to
drink by reeds of pitomees and pistles, let us be sure, that Christ shall
rise again from death, for it is impossible that he should be holden of death,
neither can his ministry see corruption, be sure that Abels blood will cry
from the earth, and then woe be to them by whom the Son of man was betrayed,
it had been good for them, if they had never been borne, and then shall their
scornful generation be cursed from the earth and prove but runnegates and
vagabonds in the earth, and not be able to keep themselves that disdained to
be their brethrens keepers and defenders. Math. c. 26. v. 24. Genesis c. 4. v. 9,
10, 11, 12.

Let no man speak ill of them that be in authority or revile the High priest,
so, as Martinists do, not in calling him mildly painted wall, but ragingly
very Cayphas him self, who doubted of Christ whom he has professed mightily
in word and deed, who rent his clothes in horror of Christ's divinity which
he has in daily Prayers and every way acknowlodged and maintained honorably
and heartily, but they can be content, that as Cayphas was the devils high
priest, so the electors and favorers of our gracious archbishop should be
reputed devils and rakehels, and none but these most rebellious and heretical
Iacobites reformers good livers.

Let no man think to make a doctrine of one man's head, but follow the divine
and sweet counsel of S. Paul, and learn to go the right way to the truth of
the gospel, not in dissimulation and flattering our selves with the fashions
of worldlings, but in plain and sincere dealing without bitterness or
disdain against the Christian fellowship of the church, ever taking heed
thorough the holy ghost, that we do not with the ignorant and unstable pervert
the scriptures of S. Paul and other, as S. Peter warns, 1. Epist. c. 3. v.
16.17. Galath. c. 2. v. 14.

Let us consider, that which Julian the apostata writes to Arsatius bishop of
Cappadocia, how christian religion grows and spreads abroad because of the
liberality that christians use toward all men of all sorts, and follow those
primitive Christians in all good nature, unless we be come to that apostasy,
iulianisme, and martinisme, which would neither see it grow or spread abroad,
but bannish it into the nouus orbis, whether the ten tribes of Israel went
long before Portugals, and deliver it self another while into the outlandish
devises, now loathing the Angels food and Manna after these thirty years.

O where are our renowned old noblemen and yeomen of Britannie? where be the
cities, and castles, and victories, which they were usually accustomed to win
from their enemies? are our hearts out of our bodies, that we cannot understand
what belongs to men of so manly a nation? are british wits become now so
brutish, to judge it manhood and counsel, to rob poor scholars of their
rewards provided for their labors in mind, as other have rewards appointed
for labors of body? cannot the beast that has a man's face be content, to be
a Fox at fifty and beguile many, but it must be a woolfe and old dog at
seventy and eighty, and rauin all?

O let us all look about us, and see how the professed enemies of Christ the
Saracens are at hand and insult upon us; how they have gotten Asia minor, and
great parts of Afric, and in them possess the four chief patriarch cities
of old christendom, Jerusalem, Antioche, Alexandry, Carthage; how they are
entered into the bowels of christian lands, inhabiting the imperial city
Constantinople, thorough the idle arms and miserable discordes of Christian
people, which by self-will is grown more proud then valiant; how the turkish
Mahound like another Pharao or Nabuchodonoser threatens the bondage of old
Egypt, and the captivity of old Babylon; how he has conceived Rome and
trauaileth with Pope, as Peter Ramus the most blessed martyr of Paris writes
in his divine commentaries of Religion. lib. 4. cap. vlt.

Let not the devil beguile us with his shadows and faces, with his gallant
brood and hospital knights, and temporal church men, to believe him more
against the title of our ecclesiastical Lords, when he quoteth Luke c. 22. v.
26. then we believe him when he cites Math. c. 23. v. 8, 9. against the title
of our corporal Fathers and virtuous doctors, but resist him faithfully and
bid him heartily avoid Satan, and tell him we must honor our fathers and
masters, our doctors and lords and all our betters: who confess, they learn
by these comparatiue texts, not to be impatient as the Gentiles, not to be
vayne-glorious as the Pharisees, not to be Lords over the faith, or tyrannical
commanders of the faithful, but to follow the example and life of Christ
their Lord and Doctor, to hold up all with love and peace, to be meek and
lowly, to help even the meanest, and regard the poorest Christian, as he
washed and wyped the basest parts of his Apostles, even the very feet of
them, which the Lords and Doctors of the Gentiles would never have done for any
cause to their servant and scholars. John c. 3. v. 5, 14. for bathing the
feet may save the life, or preserve the health, or refresh the body, or do
some good: and these effects, to save life, to save health, to help the body,
to do good, are no abasements, no disgraces, no shame, but manly regard,
neighbourly concord, christian community and commonwealth. Let not the proud
and pompous challenges of the envious men fear any young scholar in Christ's
school more then it disquieteth the elder sort, which know assuredly, that put
forths metal is in nature lightest and in proof weakest, that audacious
crakers are commonly fugitives, that vnablest workers are busiest worders, that
the chalenger is for the most part ever vanquished, to day in the full who but
he? and to morrow in the wanes who would have thought it? the very stones cry
out upon them. Let us buy the truth and sell it not, likewise wisdom,
instruction, or understanding. Proverb. c. 23. v. 23. and speak every one the
truth unto his neighbor. Ephesians. c. 4. v. 25. Let us every one amend our own
lives in all duty and thankfulness, and still and ever behold, mark, know,
remember, imitate, worship, honor, serve, adore and praise the only true right
Lamb of God, that was made the son of man as we are, to make us the sons of
God as he is, that made, and saves, and crowns men with his greatness and
goodness for ever and ever. Amen-

Autoris verbum ex Augustini epistola 163. ad Generosum.

Si ergo aliquid aspere diximus, non ad amaritudinem dissensionis, sed ad
correctionem dilectionis valere cognosce.

Faults escaped.
Page 4. line 7. necessary read accessory. page 7. line 15. c. 32. read c. 35.
page 9. line 8. sesquiamus read sesquiannus. page 14. line 7.1. 1. Kings read
3. King. line 10. 2. Cor. not 1. page 22. line 17. read iugling oracles of the
East. page 24. line 21. Senezar read Genezar. page 40. l. 16. irrideri read
irridere. p. 87. l. 9. Libanus read Libanius. p. 96. l. 2. arrogantest read
arrantst. pa. ead. for (...). read (...). p. 111. arms read armies. p. 127. l.
30. oecomenikes, read oeconomickes. p. 131. l. 32. men read minded. p. 136. l.
1. partibus read paribus. p. 146. l. 13. for some, read the same.


