

The descrypcyon of England. Here follows a little treatise the which
treats of the descrypcyon of this land which of old time was named Albion
And after Brytayne And now is called England and speaks of the nobleness and
worthynesse of the same.



Hit is so that in many and diverse places the common Chronicles of England ben
had and also now late enprynted at Westmynstre. And for as much as the
descrypcyon of this land which of old time was named Albion / and after
Brytayne is not descryued ne comynly had / ne the nobleness and worthynesse
of the same is not known. Therefore I entende to set in this book the
descrypcyon of this said Isle of Brytayne and with the commodytees of the same.
In the first shall be told the names of the Ylonde. Ca. j. Of the ^ettynge
bou^dynge length and bread. ca. ij. Of the worthynesse and prerogatyues. ca.
iij. Of the merueylles and of the wondres. ca. iiij. Of the chyef parties of
the same land ca. v. Of the Ylondes that been thereto adjacent. ca. vj. Of the
kings hye ways and streets. ca. vij. Of the famous Ryuers and stremes. ca.
viij. Of au^cyent cytees and towns. ca. ix. Of prouynces and shyres. ca. x. Of
the laws and the names of the laws. ca. xj. Of kyngdoms of bounds and marks
between them. ca. xij. Of bysshoryches and their sees ca. xiij. Of how many
manner people have dwelled therein. ca. xiiij. Of the langages of manners and
usage of the people of that land. ca. xv. Of the land of Wales. ca. xvj. Of
the name and why it is named Wales. ca. xvij. Of the commodytees of the land
of Wales. ca. xviij. Of the manners and rytes of the Walsshmen. ca. xix. Of the
merueylles and wondres of Wales. ca. xx. Of the descrypcyon of Scotlonde
sometime named Albania. ca. xxi. Of ye descrypco^n of Irlonde. ca. xxij. Of y^
bou^dynge of Irlonde. ca. xxiij. Of the gretnes and qualyte of that land. ca.
xxiiij. Of the defautes of y^ land. ca. xxv. Of them that first enhabyted
Irlonde. ca. xxvj. Of the condycyons and manners of Irysshmen. ca. xxvij. Of the
merueylles and wondres of Irlonde. ca. xxviij. Of the merueylles of saints of
Irlonde. ca. xxix.
Explicit tabula.
The names of this Ylonde. Ca. j.
First as Galfrydus says this land was named Albion after the name of Albyne
the oldest daughter of Dyoclesyan / and had xxxij. systers. And they were first
that enhabyted this land. And by cause she was the oldest sister she named
this loud Albion after her own name as the Cronycle reherseth. Other say
that this land was named Albion as it where the white land of white rocks
about the clyues of the sea that were seen fro far. Afterward Brute
conquered this land and called it Brytayn after his own name. And then
Saxons or Englysshmen conquered this land and called it Anglia that is
England. Or it is called Anglia of a queen that owed this l^nde / sthat was
named Angela and was a noble dukes daughter of the Saxons. Or as Ysyd says
Ethi.xv. Anglia has that name as it were an angle and a corner of the world.
Or else as Beda says li. j. Saint Gregory saw English childern to selle at
Rome and he accorded to the name of the land / and said they ben sothely
angles / for her face shyned as angels / for the noblyte of the land shone in
the childern faces. Alfre. The Bryttysshe Anglia is called the other world /
and for great plente of all good the great Charles called it his own chamber.
Solinus The edge of the frensshe clyt should be the end of the world / if the
Ylonof Brytayne ne were not / which is worthy to have the name of an other
world. Alfre. This Ylonde is called Insula for it is in salo / that is the sea
/ and is beten of with diverse course of waters with stremes and with wawes of
the s^e.

Of the setting bou^dynge length and bread of this land. ca. ij.
THis Brytayne is acou^ted a noble land both in our stories and also in the
stories of G^ekes / and is set against Germania. Gallia. France and Spain
between the north and the west and the sea between. This land is fyfty mile
from the clyf of the men that be called morim gessorico. Beda li. j. And for
this Ylonde ^yeth under the north heed of the world / and it has light and
bright nyghtes in the somer time. So that oftentyme at mydnyght men have
questyons and doubt whether it be even tide or dawynge / yt is for the time of
the year yt the son goth not far under y^ earth by night but passes by the
north side and comes soon in to the eest again. And therefore in the somer
ben thyr days full long of.xviij. hours / and the nyghtes of.vj. hours. And
after in the winter ben long nyghtes of.xviij. hours and short days of.vj.
hours. Also in Armenia. Macedonia. Italia and in other lands of the same line
the lengest day and lengest night also is of.rv. hours / and the shortest
day or night is ofix. hours. Pliuus in mewe. That Ylonde is chyef of black
men there / is the lengest day.xij. hours. In Alexandria in Egypt of.xiiij.
hours. In Italia of.xv. hours. In Brytayne of.xviij. hours. In the Ylonde
named Tyle all the.vj. somer months is day / and all the.vj. winter months
is night. Ysyd li. xiij. Brytayne is set within Occean as it were without the
world / and is set against France and Spain. Giraldus. Brytayne is endlonge
and larger in the myddel than in thendes. Orosius. Brytayne stretches in
length out of the south in to the north / and in the southest side hit has
France / in the south Spain / in the noth Norwaye / and in the west His
bernia / that is Irlonde. When shypmen passen the next clyf of that land they
se a cite that heet Ru^py mouth. Beda li. j. That cite is now called shortly of
Englysshmen Reptacestre / Solinus. Brytane is. viij. hundred mile of length
and it be moten from the clyf of Totenesse to the angle of Calydon Alfre. That
is from Penwith street.xv. mile beyond Michels stowe in Cornewayle unto
Catenesse yt is beyond Scotlonde / and Brytayne is more than two hundred mile
broad from Meneuia yt is the vttermest place in Wales unto Yarmouth in
Northfolke. Beda. Oonly outake the lengest out shetynge of diverse forlondes
with y^ which Brytayne is all about. xlviij. sithe.lxx. thousand paas.

Of the worthynesse and prerogatyues. ca. iij.
AS France passes Brytayne so Brytayne passes Irlonde in fair weder and
noblyte / but not in health. Beda li. j. for this ylonde is best to bring
forth trees and fruit / Ruthern and beestes. And wine grows therein in some
place. The land has plente of fowls and of beestes of diverse manner kind.
The land is plenteuous and the sea also. The land is noble copyous and rich
of noble wells and Ryuers with plente of fysshe. There is great plente of
small fysshe of samon and of celes. Wilhel. de pon. li. iij So that the people
in some place fedeth their swyne with fysshe. Beda li. j. There be^ oftentimes
taken Dolphyns. See calves / and Balaynes great fysshes as whales kind / and
diverse manner shelfysshe / among the which (...) ben muskles that within
(...) Margery peerles of all manner of color and hew of tody and reed purpure
and of blewe / and specially and most of white. There is also plente of
shelfysshe that men dyen therewith syne reed / the redenes thereof is wonder
fair and stable / and steyneth never with cold ne with (...) / with w^et ne
with dry / but ever the ^lder the color is the fayrer. There ^en also salt
wells and hot wells / thereof rennen stremes of hot bathes departed in to
diverse places (...). For man and woman of all manner age old or young.
Basilius says. That the water that renneth and passes by veins of certain
metalle takes in his course great hete. This ylonde is plenteuous of veins of
metalles / bras of iron / of leed / of tyn / and of silver also. Plinius li.
vj. ca. vj. In this ylonde under the turfe of the land is good merle fou^den /
the thryfte of the fatnes dries himself therein. So that ever the thycker the
field is merled the better corn it woll bear. There is also an other manner
white merle / that the land is y^ better four score year that therewith is
merled. Solinus. In this ylonde grows a stone y^ is called Gagates / if ye
will know his fayrenesse / it is black as genunes ben / if ye will know his
kind / hit brenneth in water and quenches in oil and as to his might / if
the stone be froted and chauffed hit holds what him neygheth as Succuns a
stone that is so named. Ysydorus li. xv. There ben sheep y^ beren good wulle.
There ben many hertes and wild beestes and few wolves / therefore sheep ben
the surer without keeping left in the field. R. In this ylonde also ben manner
Cytees and towns fair and noble and rich / many great Ryuers and stremes
with great plente of fysshe / many fair woods and great / with right many
beestes tame and wild. The earth of that land is copyous of metal oor / and
of saltwelles / of quareyes of marble of diverse manner stones / of reed of
white of soft and of hard / of chalk and of white lyme. There is also white
day and reed for to make pottes crokkes / stenes / and other vessel / and
burnt tyle to couere with houses and chirches / as it were in the other samia
/ that is named samos also. Flau^dres loves well the wulle of this land. And
Hollande the skynnes and felles of all manner of beestes. Guyan the iron and the
leed. Irlonde the oor and the salt. All Europa loves and desires the white
metal of this land. Alfredus. Brytayne has enough of matter that there needs
to bye and selle, or is needful to man's use / there lacks neither salt ne
iron. Therefore a versefyour in his meter prayseth this land in to this manner.
England is a good land fruytfull of wulle / but it is a comer England is
full of play / free men / well worthy to play / free men / free tongues / free
hertes / and free ben all their things / their hand is more free and better
than their tongue. Also England is beauteuous of land / flower of lands all
about / that land is full paid with fruit and good of his own / that land
releueth strange men that has need thereto. And when honger greueth other
lands that land fedeth them. That land bears fruit and come good enough.
That land is well at case / as long as men live in peace. Eest and west in
each land / ben known well the hauenes of England. Her ships foundes and
often helps many lands. Their mete and money / men have there more common
always. And for to learn men gladly give gifts. In land and sronde / wide
speak men of England. Land honey milk chest this ylonde thereof shall bear the
price. This ylonde has no need of other lands all lands must seek help at
this allone. Of the liking of their woun^^ might wonder king Solomon. The
richesse that there is an / would desire Octauyan.

Of the merueylles and of wondres. ca. ^^
IN Brytayne ben hoot wells well arrayed and a dressyd to the use of manhood /
marshesse of th^^ke wells is the great spyryte of (...) In her house the fire
endures always that never changes in to ashes but there the fire slaketh /
hit changes in to stone clottes. Alfre. In Bretayne ben many wond^es
nevertheless four ben most wonderful. The first is at Pecton there blows
so strong wind out of the chynes of the ^^the that it casts up again
clothes that men cast in. The second is at Stonhenge besides Sal^sbury /
there ben great stones and wonder huge / and ben re^ed an heygh as it were
yates set upon other rates. Nevertheless it is not known clearly ne
aperceyued how and wherefore they ben so are^ed and so wonderfully honged. The
third is at Cherdhoke / there is a great holownes under the earth / often
many men have walked therein and have seen Ryuers and stremes / but nowher can
they find none end. The fourth is that rain is seen raised upon hills and
anon yspronge about in the feldes. Also there is a great ponde that
conteyneth. lx. ylondes couenable for men to dwell in / that ponde is
be^lypped about with six score roches and upon every roche an egles nest / and
three score ryuers rennen in to that ponde / and none of them all run in to
the sea but one. There is a ponde closed about with a wall of tyle and of
stone. In that ponde men wasshe and bathe well often / and every man feleth the
water hoot or cold right as he will himself. There ben salt wells far from
the sea and ben salt all the weke long unto saterdaye at noone / and fresshe
fro saterdaye noone unto mondaye. The water of these wells when it is soden
torneth in to small salf fair and white. Also there is a ponde / the water
thereof has wonder werkynge / for though all an host / stood by the ponde and
turned their face thyderwarde the water would draw him vyolently toward the
ponde and wete all their clothes / so should horse be drawn in the same wise.
And if the face be turned away fro the water the water noyeth not. There is a
well that no streme renneth fro / neither thereto / and yet four manner
fysshes be taken therein / that well is but.xx. foot long and.xx. foot broad /
and not deep but to the knee / and closes with high banks on every side. In
the contree about Wynchestre is a den or a ca^^ / out of that cave blows
always a (...) wind / so that no man may endure to stand tofore that den
or cave. There is also a ponde that torneth tree in to iron if it be therein a
year. And so trees ben shapen in to whestones. Also there is in the top of an
hylle a buryels every man that comes and meteth that buryell / he shall find
it even of his own length and mesure. And if a pilgrim knele thereto anon he
shall be all fresshe and feel no gryef of werynes. Gir. in top. Fast by the
mynster of Wynburney that is not far fro bathe is a wood that bears much
fruit / if the trees of that wood fall in to water or ground that is neygh
and lie there all a year / the trees tornen in to stones. Gir in itinere. Under
the Cite of Chestre renneth that River Dee / that now departed England and
Wales. That River changed every month his fordes as men of the contree tellen
/ and leueth often the channel / but whether the water draw more toward
England or toward Wales to what side that it be / that year men of that side
have the worst end and be ouersette / And men of that other side shall have
better end and ben at their above. When the water so chau^geth his course hit
bodeth such happes. This River Dee renneth and comes out of a lake that heet
Pymblemere. In this River is great plente of samon / nevertheless in the lake
is never samon founden. Wilhel. de re. li. ij. Take heed how great light and
bryghtnesse of gods myldenesse has be showed upon Englysshmen sythen they
first turned to right believe. So that of no men in one prouynce ben founden
so many hoole bodies of men after her death in lyknes of euerlastyngnes that
shall be after the day of dome / as it well seems in these holy saints. As
Edeldrede. Edmonde / the king Elphege. Edgar. Cutherd and saint Edward and
many other. I trow that it be do by a special grace of god almighty for the
nacyon that is set as it were without the world should take heed to buryenge
of bodies without corrupcyon and rotynge / and ben the more bold and steadfast
for to trust on the fynall arysynge of deed bodies for to last evermore after
the day of dome.

Of the chyef parties of the same land. ca. v.
AFter the first Brutes time the ylonde of Brytayne began for to have the
pryncypall parties / that been Loegria Cambria that is Wales. And Albania that
is now Scotlonde Loegria has that name of Locrinus that was Brutes oldest sone
/ and heet Loegria as it were Locrinus land / but now Loegria is called
England The bounds and merkes were thereof some time the Frensshe see both by
cest and by south Beda li. j. ca. ij. And by north two arms of the sea yt
breketh far in to the land either against other But they reche not together /
the eest arm of tylke tweyne begy^neth about a two little mile fro the mynstre
of Ebburcurynge. In the west side of Penulton in that arm is a town that is
called Guydy. The west arm of thylke tweyne has in the right side a strong
Cite that heet Aldiud which in her langage is called Clyn^stone and stands
upon a River that is called Clynt also. R. Some men would mean that Loegria
ends at Humbre / and stretches no ferther north ward. The second party
of Brytayne is called Albania that is Scotlonde and has that name of
Albanactus Brutes sone and stretches fro the foresaid two arms of the sea
northwarde unto the sea of Norwaye. Nevertheless the south parties of Albama
where as Pictes dwelled sometime lies from the water of Twede unto the
Scottesshe see. All that longed some time to the kingdom of Northu^berlonde
Brenycon the north side of Northumberlonde fro the first time of English
kings to yt time wha^ Kynadius king of Scotlonde that was Alpinus sone did
away the Pictes / and so Joined that con^ee to y^ kingdom of Scotlonde. The
(...) party of Brytayne is Wales Wallia that heet Cambria also and has that
name Cambria of Camber Br^tes sone for he was prince of Wales. In the cest side
Seuarne departed some time between England and Wales. But now in the north
side the River Dee at Chestre / and in the south the River that is named Vaga
at the Castle of Strygelyn departs England and Wales. Also king Offa for to
have a dystynceyon for evermore between the kings of Englond^ and of Wales
made a long dyche that strecheth forth out of the south side by Brystowe under
the bylles of Wales northwarde and passes the Ryuers Seuarne and Dee all most
to the heedes and unto the mouth of the river Dee beyond Chestre fast by the
castle it renneth between Colehylle and the mynstre of Basyngwerk in to the sea. This dyche is yet in many places seen. In saint Edwardes time Walsshe men
should not pass that dyche wc wepen upon a great pain. And that was at earl
Haroldes procuring as it shall be said here after. But now in either sides
both ayonde half and a this half the dyche and specially in the shyres of
Chestre of Shrowesbury and of Herforde in many places ben Englysshmen and
Walsshmen meddled togyders.

Of the Ylondes that been thereto adjacent. ca. vj.
BRytayne has three Ylondes yt ben nyghe and longen thereto all without the
ylondes Orcades / as it were answering to the three chyef parties of Brytayne.
For yeyle of Wight longs and lies to Leogria that is England. The ylonde
Mon that is called Angleseya also longs to Wales / And the ylonde Eubonia yt
has two other names and is called Meneuia and Man also which longs to
Scotlonde. And all these three ylondes Wight Mon and Man ben almoost alyke much
and of ye like quatyte / of the which three all a rewe now follows our speech.
Beda li. j. ca. iij. Claudius sent Vespasianus / and Vespasianus wanne Wight /
and Wight stretches out of the cest in to the west.xxx. mile long And out of
the south in to the north.xij. mile / and is in the eest side.vj. mile fro the
south clyf of Brytayne / and (...) mile in the west side. Beda li. (...) ca. v.
The mesure of this ylonde as Englysshmen guess is a thousand housholdes and
two hundred. Gir. in itinere. Mon that is called Angleseya also is departed
from northwales by a short arm of the sea as it were two mile broad. In Mon
ben. iij. hundred / towns. lxiij. and ben accounted for candredes that been.
iij. hondredes / the ylonde is as it were.xxx. mile long and.xij. mile broad.
Candredus is so much land as co^teyneth an hundred towns / that name
candredus is made out of two langages of Brytysshe and of Irysshe. In praysynge
of this ylonde Walsshmen he wont to say a proverb and an old saw. Mon man
kembry / that is to say in English / that land is so good that it seems yt
it would find corn enough for all the men of Wales. Therefore Virgyls verses
may be acordynge thereto / as much as guawes / bestes long Inneth dawes. So
much efte / brings cold dew in a night. In that arm of the sea that
departed this land and northwales / is a swolowe that draws ships to it
that saylleth by and swoloweth hem in / right as does Cylla and Carybdis yt ben
two peryllous places in the sea of myddell earth. Therefore men may not saylle
by this swalowe / but slyly at full see. R. Of the merueylles and wondres of
the ylonde Mon thou shall find tofore in the chapter of Wales Gir. in
itinere. The third ylonde that is called both Eubonia and Meneuia that is Man
stands in the myddell between the Irysshe vlster and the Scottysshe gallewaye
/ as it were in the navel of the sea. Beda li. ij. ca..ix. This ylonde Man
conteyneth as it were two ylondes The first is southwarde the more country and
the better corn land / and conteyneth.ix. hundred and.lx. housholdes. The
second conteyneth the space of. CCC. and moo as Englysshmen guess. Gir. iij
top. Sometime was strife whether this ylonde Man should long to Brytayne or to
Irlonde. And for as much as venomous worms yt were brought thy^ lived there /
it was Iuged yt the ylonde Man should long to Brytayne. R. In yt ylonde is
Iortylege and wytchecraft used. For woman there selle to shypmen wind as it
were closed under three knottes of threde / so yt the more wind he will have /
the mo knottes he must undo. There often by day time men of that land seen
men yt ben deed ^^fore hand byheded or hoole and what death they deyed. Alyens
set their feet upon feet of the men of y^ land for to see such syghtes as
the men of y^ land done. Beda li. ij. Scotts dwelled first in this ylonde.
Thanatos that is Tenet and is an ylonde besides ^ente / and has that name
Thanatos of death of serpents / for there ben none / And the earth thereof
sleeth serpents yborn in to other lands. There is noble corn land and
fruytfull. Hit is sapposed that this ylonde was hallowed and blessed of saint
Austen the first doctor of Englysshmen for there he arrived first.

Of the kings hye ways and streets. ca. vij.
MOliuncius king of Brytons was the.xxiij. of hem and the first that gaf hem
law. He ordained that plowmen folowes / gods temples and high ways that
leden men to Cytees and towns should have the fredom of socour / so that every
man that went to any of them for socour or for trespaas yt he has do should
be sauffor poursute of all his enemies. But after ward for the ways were
uncertain and stryf was had. Therefore Belinus the king yt was the foresaid
Moliuncius sone for to put away all doubt and stryf / made four high
kings ways preuyleged with all preuylege and fredom. And the ways stretche
through the ylonde. The first and gretest of the four ways is called Fosse /
and stretches out of the south in to y^ north and begins from the corner of
Cornewayle and passes forth by Deuenshyte by Somersete and forth besides
Tetbury upon Cottes would beside Couentre unto Leycestre / and so forth by
wild playnes toward Newerke and ended at Lyncoln. The second chyef kings
high way is named Watlyngstrete and stretches thwart over Fosse out of the
southeest in to the northwest and begins at Dover and passes by the myddell
of Kente over Temse beside London by west Westmestre and so forth by saint
Albon in y^ west side by Don staple by Stratforde by Toweetre by Wedon by south
Lylleborn by Atheryston unto Gilbertes hylle that now is called Wrekene and
forth by Seuarne and passes besides Wrokcestre and then^e forth to Stratton
and so forth by y^ myddell of Wales unto Cardykan and ends at Irysshe see.
The third way is called Erynnugestrete and stretches out of the west
northwest in to erst southeest / and begins in Men^uia y^ is in Saint Dauyds
land in weste Wales and stretches forth unto Souhthampton. The fourth is
called Rykenyldestrete and sretcheth forth by Worchestre by Wycombe by
Byrmyngeham by Lychefelde by Derby by Chestrefelde by York and forth unto
Tynmouthe.

Of the famous Ryuers and stremes. ca. viij.
Three famous Ryuers rennen through Brytayne by the which three Ryuers
merchants of beyond the sea comen in ships in to Brytayne well nyghe out
of all manner of nacyons and lands. These three Ryuers ben Temse. Seuarne / and
humbre. The sea ebbeth and flows at mouths of these three Ryuers / and
departs the three prouynces of the Ylonde as it were the three kingdoms a
sondre / The three parties ben Loegria. Cambria / and Northumbria. That been
myddell England. Wales / and Northumberlonde. R. These name Temse seems made
one name of two names of two Ryuers that been Tame and Yse for the River Tame
renneth besides Dorchestre and falls in Yse / therefore all the River fro the
tyrite heed unto y^ eest see is named Tamyse or Temse Temse begins besides
Tetbury that is three mile by north Malmesbury. There the Temse spryngeth of a
well that renneth eestwarde and passes the Fosse and departs Glouce^tre
shyre and Wylshyre / and draws with him many other wells and stremes and
wexeth (...) at grecestre and passes forth th^n (...) Hampton and so forth by
(...) by Wallynforde by Redynge and by London. (...) de (...) ca. ij. At
haven of Sandwhiche hit falls in to the test see / and holds his name.xl.
mile beyond London and departed in some place L^c^te and Essex West^ex and
Mercia / that is as it were a great dele of myddel England R. Seuarne is a
River of Brytayne and is called Habern in Brytona / and has that name Habern
of Habe^en yt was Estryldes daughter. Guendolon the queen drenched this Habren
therein / therefore the Brytons called the River Habren after the woman that was
drowned therein / but by corrupt latin it is called Sabrina Seuarne in
English. Seuarne begins in y^ myddell of Wales and passed first toward
the eest unto Shrowesbury / and then^e tomed southwarde unto Bryggenorth
Wyrcestre and Gloucestre and falls in to the west see besides Brystowe / and
departed in some place England and Wales. Wilhel. de pon. li. iiij. Seuarne is
swyft of streme / fysshe craft is therein / wodenes of the swolowynge and of
whyrlynge water casts up and gadreth to hepe great hepes of grauel. Seuarne
often aryseth and ouerfloweth the hankes. R. Humbre has that name of Humbre
king of H^^es for he was drowned therein. And renneth first a crook out of the
southsyde of York / and then it departed the prouynce of Lyndeseye that
longed sometime to the Merces from the other country Northumberlonde. Trente
and Ouse rennen in to Humber and maken the River full great. Treuisa. The
Merces were men as it were of myddel England as it shall be said here after.

Of au^cyent cytees and towns. ca. ix.
THe kingdom of Brytayn was some time made fair with.xxbiij. noble Cytes
without right many Castles that were walled with toures with yates and with
bars strongely builded. Alfre. These were the names of the Cytees. Ca^rlud
that is London. Caerbranck that is York / Caerkente that is Canterbury.
Caergoraugon that is Wyrcestre. Caerlirion that is Leycestre. Caerclon that is
Gloucestre. Caercolden that is Colcestre. Carrei yt is Chichestre. Saxons
called it sometime Cyssoncestre. Caerceri that is Cyrcestre. Caerguent that is
Wynchestre. Caergrau^te yt is Cambrygge. Caerleyll that is Lugubalia and
Karlyll. Caerperis that is Porchestre. Caerdrom y^ is Dorchestre. Caerludcoit
yt it Lyncoln and Lyndecolyn. Caermerthyn that is Merlyns Cite. Caersegent yt
is Sycestre and is upon Temse not far from Redynge. Caerthleon that is
Caerlegyon also and hight first Legecestre and now is named Chestre. Caerbathon
yt is Bathe and hight sometime Athamannus cite. Caerpaladour that is Septon yt
now hight Shaftesbury. R. Other cytees ben fou^den in Chronicles for
understanding of stories / of whom it shall follow. Wild pon. London is a
ryall and a rich cite upon Tamyse / of burgeysses of tychesses of merchants
of chaffare and of marchau^dyse. Therefore it is that sometime when derth of
vytayls is in all England commuly at London it is best chepe by cause of the
buyers and sellers that been at London. Gaufre Brute y^ first king of Brytons
builded and edefyed this cite of London the first cite of Brytayne in
remembrance of the cite of Troy yt was destroyde and called it Troyeneweth
and Trinouantu^ that is new Troy. After ward king Lud called it Caerlud
after his own name / therefore Brytons had great indygnacyon as Gyldas tells
Afterward Englysshmen called the cite London / and yet after y^ Normans called
it Londres / and is named in latin Londonia. Rudhudibras king Leyles sone was
the.viij. king of Brytons / he builded Canterbury the chyef cite of Prente /
and called it Caerkente. After ward Englyssmen called it Do^oberma / but that
is not Dover yt stands upon the clyf of the Frensshe see and is from this
Dover.xij. English mile. Afterward this Doroberma was and is called
Canterbury. The same king Rudhudibras burlded W^nchestre and called it
Caerguent and (...) Englysshmen called it Went and W^nchestre after the name
of one wine an Englysshman that was bishop the^e All westsaron was subgette to
him the same king builded Paladour y^ is Septon that now is called Shaf^e^bury.
Brytons tellen that an Egle prophesied there sometime. Bladud Le^les sone a
Nygromancer was the.it. king of Brytons / he burlded Bathe and called it
Caerbathon. Englysshmen called it after Athamannus cite but at last men
called it Bathoma y^ is Bathe. Wilhel. de pon. li. ij. In this cite welleth up
and spryngeth hoote bathes and men wene that Julius Cezar made there such
bathes. R. But Gaufre. monemute^sis in his brytons book says that Bladud made
thylke bathes because william has not seen that brytons book wrote so by
telling of oath men / or by his own gessynge as he wrote other things not
best auy sedly. Therefore it seems more sothly that Bladud made not the hoote
bathes / ne Julius Cezar did such a deed though Bladud build and made the
cite / but it accords better to kyndly reason yt the water renneth in the
earth by veins of brymstone and sulphur and so it is kyndly made hoote in yt
course and spryngeth up in diverse places of y^ cite. And so there ben hot
bathes that wasseth of tetres soores and skabbes / Treuisa. Though men might by
craft make hoote bathes for to dure long enough / this accords well to
reason and to phylosophye that treats of hot wells and bathes that been in
diverse lands though the water of this bathe be more trobly and sourer of
savor and of smelle than other hot bathes ben that I have seen at Akon in
Almayn. And at eyges in Sauoye / which ben fair and clear as any cold well
streme I have been bathed therein and assayed them. R. Claudius Cezar married his
daughter to Aruiragus king of Brytons. This Claudius cezar builded Gloucestre
in ye wedding of his daughter. Brytons called this cite first after Claudius
name / but afterward it was called Gloucestre after one Glora which was duke
of yt contree and stondeth upon Seuarne in the march of England and Wales.
Shrowesbury is a cite upon Seuarne in ye march of England and Wales ysette
upon the top of an hylle / and it is called (...) wesbury of shrobbes and
fruit yt (...) there sometime on yt hylle. Brytons called it sometime Pengwern
that is the heed of a fair tree. Shrowesury was sometime the heed of powesye
that stretches forth thwart over the myddell of Wales unto y^ Irysshe see
Notyngham stands upon Trente and sometime heet Snotyngham that is ye wonnynge
of dens / for the Danes dwelled there sometime and dygged dens and caves
under hard stones and rocks and dwelled there. R. Lyncoln is chyef of the
prouynce of Lyndesaye and was called sometime Caerludcoit / and afterward
Lyndecoln. It is uncertain who builded first this cite but if it were king Lud
/ and so it seems by menynge of the name / for Caer is brytysshe and is to
say a cite and coit is a wood and so it seems that Caerludcoit is to say
Luddes wood town. King Leyr was Bladuddes sone and builded Leycestre / as it
were in the myddell of England upon the River Sos and upon Fosse the kings
hye way.

Wilhel. de pon. li. iij.
York is a great cite in either side of the water of Ouse that seemed as fair
as Rome unto the time that the king William had with brennynge and fire
defouled it and the country about. So that a pilgrim would now weep and he
saw it / if he had known it tofore. Gaufre. Ebrancus the. v. king of Brytons
builded York and called it after his own name Caerbranck / he builded also
two other noble cytees one in Scotlonde and is called Edinburgh / and an other
toward Scotlonde in thendes of England and is called Alcluid. R. Edinburgh is
a cite in the land of Pictes between the River of Twede and the Scottesshe see
/ and heet sometime the castle of Maidens and was called afterward Edinburgh
of Edan king of Pyctes that reigned there in Egfridus time king of North
humberlonde. Alcliud was sometime a noble cite / and is now well nygh unknow to
all Englysshmen / for under the Brytons and Pyctes and Englysshmen it was a
noble cite unto the coming of the Danes. But afterward about the year of our
lord.viij. C. lxx. it was destroyed when y^ Danes destroyed the contrees of
Northumberlonde. But in what place of Brytayne that cite Alcliud was builded.
Auctours tellen dyuersely. Beda li. j. says that it was build by west yt arm
of the sea that departed between the Brytons and the Pyctes sometime there
Seuerus famous wall ends westwarde / and so it seems by him yt it is not
far from Caerleyll for that cite is set at the end of that wall. Other
writers of stories written that the cite of Alcliud is yt cite yt now is called
Aldburgh / yt is to say an old town / and stands upon the River Duse not
far fro Burghbrygge / that is. xv. mile westwarde out of York / and it
seems that he preueth that by Gaufryde in his book of deeds of Brytons / he
writes that Elidurus king of Brytons was lodged at the cite Alcliud by cause
of solace and hunting / and found his brother Argalon maskynge in a wood nyghe
there beside yt hight Calatery / but that wood Calatery which is caltres in
English recheth almoost to York and stretches toward the north by Aldburgh
in length by space of.xx. myly / the most dele of that wood is now drawn
down and the land ytylled Other men would suppose yt Alcliud was that cite yt
now is called Burgham in y^ north contree of Westmerlond fast by Comberlonde /
and stands upon the River Eden / the cite is there wonderly seen. Deem ye now
where it is build. Treuisa. It is not hard to assoylle if men take heed /
that many towns bear one name / as Cartage in Affryca and Cartago in Spain.
Newporte in Wales and Newporte in y^ parysshe of Barkeley. Wotton under egg
and wotton passes. Wykwar wyk pain and wyk in the parysshe of Barkeley. And
two shyre towns either is called Hampton / as Southampton and Northampton so
it seems by the stories that one Alcliud was in Yorkshyre / an other in
Westmerlonde / and one fast by the right side of the west arm of the sea that
departs England and Scotlonde. But yt Alcliud was a right strong cite as
Beda says / And yt cite stands fast by a River yt is called Cliud. And there
is no such River in Yorkshyre neither in Westmerlonde as men of the contree
tell me. Some men say that the River Cliud is now named Sulwach. Sulwach is
but five mile fro Caerl^yll which is a cite in the contree of north England
toward the north west / and has an other name which is Luguball. Leyll
the.vij. king of Brycons builded Caerleyll. R. In this cite is somewhat of that
famous wall yt passes Northumberlonde. and Wilhel. de pon. In this cite is
yet a three chambred house made of vawte stones that never might be destroyed with
tempest of weder ne with brennynge of fire / Also in the contree fast by in
westmerlonde in the front of a three chamber place is written in this manner.
Marij victory. What this writing is to say I doubt somewhat / but if it were
so yt some of the Cumbres lay there some time when ye consul Marius had put
hem out of ytalye / but it seems better that it is written in mind of Marius
king of Brytons yt was Aruiragus sone. This Marius overcome in yt place Rodryke
king of Pyctes. So says Gaufre. in his brytysshe book. William malmesbury saw
never yt book. At Hagulstaldes chirch is a plac.lxxx. mile out of York
northwestwarde ye place is as it were destroyed / so says Wilhel. li. iij. de
pon. That place longed sometime to y^ bysshopryche of York / there were sometime
houses with vice arches and voutes in the manner of Rome. Now yt place is called
Hestoldesham and Heglesham also. Beda li..iij. ca. j. says. That yt place is
fast by the long wall of the work of Rome in the north half. R. There is
dyfference between the prouynce of Lyndeffar and the church Lyndefarne. For
the prouynce of Lyndeffar and Lyndeseye is all one / and lies by eest Lycoln /
and Lyncoln is the heed thereof / of the which says Beda li. iiij. ca. xj. yt
Sexwulfus was first bishop there. But Beda li..iiij. ca. xxiij. says. That
Lyndeffarn church is an ylonde that is called holy ylonde in the River Twede
next Berwyk. And so it is gadred of Bedaes sawes yt Twede renneth in to the
famous arm of the sea yt now departs Englysshmen and Scotts in y^ eest half
(...) in y^ arm ben three ylondes. That one is Maylros that now is called
Menros. Then above toward the west is Lyndeffarn church yt is called holy
ylonde. Then y^ third is above upward and is the ylonde Farne / and is
called also Farny ylonde. Then upward above yt two mile is a ryall cite upon
the brynke of Twede / yt sometime hight B^banburght yt is Bobbes cite / and now
is called Bamburgh and has a right strong castle. Gir. in itinere. Two
cytees there ben either is called Caerlegion and Caerleon also. One is Demecia
in southwales that is named Caerusk also / there ye River Vske falls in to
Seuarn fast by Glamorgan. Bellinus king of Brytons sometime builded yt cite and
was sometime y^ chyef cite of Demecia in southwales. Afterward in Claudius
cezars time it was called the cite of Legyons when at prayer of Genius the
queen Vespasianus and Aruiragus were accorded and Legyons of Rome were sent in
to Irlonde / tho was Caerleon a noble cite and of great auctoryte / and by the
Romans ryally builded and walled about with walls of burnt tyle / Great
nobley yt was there in old time is there yet in many places seen / as the
great palayses / gyau^tes toures / noble bathes / releef of the temples places
of theaters / that were places hye and ryall to stand and sytte in / and to
behold about. The places were ryally closed with ryall walls that yet somdele
stondeth right nyghe cloos. And with in the walls and without is great
building under earth / water conduytes and ways under earth and stews / also
thou shall see wonderly made with strayte side ways of brethynge that wonderly
cast up hete. In this cite were sometime three noble chirches / one was of saint
Julius the martyr and therein a great company of virgynes / That other was of
saint Aaron that was of the order of black Chanons / that church was right
nobly adourned. The third church was the chyef mother church of all Wales and
the chyef see. But afterward the chyef see was turned out of that cite in to
Meneuia that is saint Dauyds land in westwales. In this Caerleon was
Amphibalus born that taught saint Albone. There the messagers of Rome come to
the great Arthurs court / if it is leeffull to trow Treuisa / if Giraldus was
in doubt whether it were leeffull for to trow or not / it were a wonder
shown as men would wene for to have evermore in mind / and ever be in doubt
if all his books were such what lore were therein and namely while he makes
none euydence for in neither side he tells what meueth him so for to say. R.
There is an other cite of Legyons there his Chronicles was bytrauaylled as it is
clearly known by the first chapter of this book. Treuisa. That is to
understanding in the latin writing For he that made it in latin turned it not
in to English / ne it was turned in to English in the same place that it
was first in latin. The understanding of him that made this Cronycle is thus
written in latin in the beginning of this book. Presentein cronica^ compilauit
frater Ranulphus Cestrensis monachus. That is to say in English. Brother
Ranulph monk of Chestre compyled and made this present Cronycle. R. The cite
of Legyons that is Chestre stands in the march of England toward Wales
between two arms of the sea that been named Dee and Mersee. This cite in time
of Brytons was heed and chyef cite of all Venedocia / that is Northwales. The
fou^der of this cite is unknown. For who that sees the fou^dementes of the
great stones would rather wene that is were Romans work or work of Gyau^tes
/ than it were made by setting of Brytons. This cite sometime in Brytysshe
speech heet Caerthleon Legecestria in latin and Chestre in English and the
cite of Legyons also. For there lay a winter y^ legyons of knights that
Julius cezar sent for to win Irlonde. And after Claudius cezar sent Legyons
out of that cite for to win the Ylondes that be called Orcades / what ever
William Malmesbury by telling of other men met of this cite. This cite has
plente of lyuelode of corn of flesh of fysshe / and specially of price of
samon / this cite resseyueth great marchau^dyse and sends out also. Also
nyghe this cite ben salt wells / metal and oor. Northumbres destroyed this
cite sometime. But afterward Elfleda lady of Mercia builded it again and made
it much more. In this same cite ben ways under the earth with vowtes and
stone work ^onderly ywrought / threchambred works / great stones ygrauen with
old men's names therein. There is also ^ulius cezars name wonderly in stones
ygraue and other noble men's also with the writing about. This is the cite
that Ethelfryde king of Northumberlond destroyed / and slew there fast by
nyghe two thousand monks of y^ mynster of Bangor. This is the cite that king
Edgar come thither some time with.vij. kings that were subget to him. A metrer
breketh out in this manner in praysynge of this cite. Chestre castle town as
it were / name takes of a castle. It is unknow what man builded this cite
now. Tho Legecestria chees / hete now town of legiones Now Walsshe and
English / hold this town of great price. Stones on wall / seems work
Herculis all. There long with might / to dure that hepe is y hight. Saxon
small stones / set upon great ben attones. There under ground / lotynge
double vout is found. That helps with sondes / many men of western lands.
Fysshe flesh and corn low / this cite town has ynowe. Ships and
chaffare / see water brings enough their. Godestalle there is / yt was
Emperor er this. And forth Henry king / earth is there right dwelling. Of
king Haralde / powder is there yet y halde. Bachus and Mercurius. Mars and Venus
/ also Lauerna. Protheus and Pluto / regnen there in the town. Treuisa. God
wot what this is to mean / but poets in her manner of speech faynen as though
every kind craft and living had a diverse god eueryche from other. And so
they feigned a god of battle and of fighting and called him Mars / and a god
of couetyse of richesse andmar chaundyse and called him Mercurius And so Bachus
is called god of wine Venus goddess of love and beauty / ^auerna god of theeft
and of robbery (...) god of falshede and of gyle and Pluto god of hell. And so
it seems that these verses would mean / that these foresaid gods regne and
ben served in Chestre. Mars with fighting and cokkynge. Mercurius with
couetyse and richesse. Bachus with great drinking. Venus with love lewdly
Lauerna with theeft and robbery. Protheus with falshed and gyle. Then^e is
Pluto not unserved y^ is god of hell R. There babylon lore more might has
truth the more.

Of prouynces and shyres. ca. x.
Take heed that England conteyneth.xxxij. shyres and prouynces that now ben
called Erldoms reserved Cornewale and the ylondes / Alfre. These ben the names
of the Erldoms and shyres. Kente Southsex Sothery Hampshyre Barokshyre that
has his name of a bare ooke that is in the forest of Wyndesore / for at that
bare oak men of that shyre were wont to come together and make their treatys /
and there take counseyll and advise. Also Wyldshyre that hete some time the
prouynce of Semeran / Somersete Dorsete Deuenshyre that now is called deuonia
in latin. These.ix. south shyres the Tamyse departed from the other deal of
England which were sometime governed and ruled by the westsaxons law. Eestsex
Myddelsex Southfolke Northfolke Hertfordshyre Hu^tyngdon shyre North hampton
shyre Cambryggesyre Bedfordshyre Buykynghamshyre Leycestreshyre Derbyshyre
Notynghamshyre Lyncolnshyre Yorkeshyre Durhamshyre Northumberlonde
Caerleylshyre with Cumberlonde Appelbyshyre with Westmerlonde. Lancastershyre
that co^teyneth five little shyres. These.xv. North and Eest shyres were
sometime governed and ruled by that law which is called Danelawe. But
Oxenfordshyre Warwykshyre Gloucestreshyre Wyrcestreshyre Herfordshyre
Shropshyre Staffordshyre Chestreshyre. These.viij. myddell and west shyres were
sometime governed and ruled by the law called Mercia in latin and merchene law
in English It is to wete that Yorkshyre stretches from the River of Humbre
unto the River of Teyse. And yet in Yorkshyre ben.xxij. hondredys hundred and
candred is all one. Candred is one word made of Walsshe and Irysshe / and is
to menynge a country that conteyneth an hundred towns / and is also in
English called wepentak / for sometime in the coming of a new lord
tenau^tes were wont to yield up her wepen instead of homage. Duramshyre
stretches from the River Teyse unto the River Tyne. And to speak proprely of
Northumberlonde it stretches fro the River of Tyne unto the River of Twede
that is in the beginning of Scotlonde. Then if the country of
Northumberlonde that was sometime from Humbre unto Twede be now acounted for one
shyre and one Erldome as it was sometime. Then ben in England but.xxxij.
shyres / but if the country of Northumberlonde be departed in to.vi. shyres /
that been Euerwykshyre Duramshyre Northhumberlonde Caerleylshyre Appelbyshyre
and Lancasshyre. Then ben in England.xxxvi. shyres without Cornewayle and
also without the ylondes. King William conqueror made all these prouynces and
shyres to be descryued and moten. Then were founden.xxxvi. shyres and half a
shyre Towns two and fyfty thousand and four score. Parysshe chirches.xlv.
thousand and two. Knights fees.lxxv. thousand / whereof men of relygyon
have.xxviij. thousand and.xv. knights fees. But now woods ben hewn down
and the land new tylled and made much more than was at that time and many
towns and vyllages builded / and so there ben many mo vyllages and towns now
than were in that time. And were as before is written that Cornewayle is not
set among the shyres of England it may stand among them well enough for it
is neither to Wales neither in Scotlonde but it is in England and is Joins
unto deuenshyre / and so may there ben acompted in England.xxxvij. shyres and
an half with the other shyres.

De legibus legu^que vocabulis.
DVnwallo that heet Moliuncius also made first laws in Brytayne / the which
laws were called Moliuncius laws / and were solempnely observed unto William
conquerours time. Moliuncius ordained among his laws that Cytees Temples and
ways that led men thereto / and plowmen solowes should have preuylege and
fredome for to save all men that would flee thereto for socoure and refuge.
Then afterward Marcia queen of Brytons that was Gwytelinus wife of her the
prouynce had the name of Mercia as some man suppose. She made a law full of
right of wit and of reason / and was called merchene law. Gyldas that wrote
the Chronicles and hystoryes of the Brytons turned these two laws out of Bryton
speech in to latin. And afterward king Aluredus turned all out of latin in to
Saxons speech / and was called merchene law. Also the same king Aluredus wrote
in English and put to an other law that heet westsaxon law. Then
afterward Danes were lords in this land / and so come forth the third law
that hete Danelawe. Of these three laws saint Edward the third made one
common law that yet is called saint Edwardes law. I hold it well done to
write here and expowne many terms of these laws. Myndebruche hurtynge of
honor and worshypp. In Frensshe bleschur dho^nour. Burbruck in Frenssh
bleschur de court ou de cloys Grithbruch brekynge of peace. Myskennynge
chau^gynge of speech in court. Showing setting forth of marchaundyse / in
Frensshe disploier de marchandyse. Hamsokne or Hamfare a rese made in house.
Forstallynge wrong or bette down in the kings hyghwaye. Frythsoken surete in
defense. Sak forfayt. Soka suit of court and thereof comes soken. Theme suit of
bondmen fyghtyng wit. Amersement for fighting. Blodewyte. Merseme^t for
shedynge of blood. Flytwyte amends for chiding of blood. Leyrwyte amends for
lyenge by a bond woman Gul^wyte amends for trespass. Scot^^^rynge to work of
bayllyes. Hydage tayllage for hydes of land. Daneghelde tayllage given to the
Danes that was of every bona taterre / that is of every ox land three pens. A
wepentak and an hundred is all one. For the country of towns were wont to
give up wepen in the coming of a lord Lestage custom challenged in chepynges
fayres and stallage / custom for standing in streets in fair time.

Of kyngdoms of bounds and marks between them. ca. xij.
THe kingdom of Brytayne stood without departing hole and all one kingdom to
the Brytons from the first Brute unto Julius Cezars time / and fro Julius
Cezars time unto Seuerus time this land was under trybute to the Romans.
Netheles kings they had of the same land from Seuerus unto the last prince
Gracyan successors of Brytons faylled and Romans reigned in Brytayne.
Afterward the Romans left of her regnynge in Brytayne by cause it was far
from Rome / and for great business that they had in other side. Then Scotts
and Pyctes by mysledynge of Maximus the tyrant pursewed Brytayne and warred
there in with great strength of men of arms long time unto the time that the
Saxons come at the prayenge of the Brytons against the Pyctes / and put out
Gurmonde the Irysshe king with his Pyctes and the Brytons also with her king
that heet Careticus and drofe hem out of England in to Wales / and so the
Saxons were vyctours and every prouynce after his strength made them a king.
And so departed England in to seven kyngdoms. Netheles afterward these seven
kingdoms every after other come all in to one kingdom all hoole under the
prince Adelstone. Nevertheless the Danes pursewed this land fro Adel wolfys
time that was Aluredes fader unto the third saint Edwardes time about
hundred.lxx. year that reigned co^tynuelly therein. After the Danes.xxx. year the
third saint Edward reigned therein.xxiij. year and a little more / And after
him Haralde held ye kingdom.ix. months. And after him Normans have reigned
unto this time But how long they shall regne / he wot / to whom no thing is
unknown. R. Of the foresaid seven kingdoms and her marks meres and bounds
when they began and how long they endured here shall I somewhat shortly tell.
Alfre. The first kingdom was the kingdom of Kente / that stretches fro the
eest Occean unto the River of Tamyse. There reigned the first Hengistus / and
began to regne by the acomptynge of Dyonyse the year of our lord four
hundred.lv. that kingdom dured three hundred and.lviij. year under.xv. kings
unto the time that Baldrede was put out and Egbert king of westsaxon Joined
that kingdom to his own. The second kingdom was of southsaxon / that had in
the eest side Kente / in the south the sea and the isle of Wight / in the west
Hampshyre / and in the north sothery / there Ella reigned first with his three
sons / and began to regne the year after the coming of the Angles even.xxx.
But that kingdom within a short time passed in to the other kingdoms. The
third kingdom was of eestsaxon / and had in the eest side the sea / in the
west the country of London / in the south Tamyse and in the north southfolke.
The kings of this country of westsaxon fro the first Sebertes time unto the
time of the Danes were there.x. kings the which were subget somdele to other
kings. Nevertheless oftest and lengest they were under the kings of Mercia /
and unto that time that Egbert the king of westsaxon Joined that kingdom to
his own / The fourth kingdom was of eest Angles and conteyneth Norffolke and
Suffolk / and had in the eest side and in the north side the sea / and in
the northwest Cambrygeshyre / in the west saint Edmondes dyche and Herfordshyre
/ and in the south Estsex. And this kingdom dured under twelve kings unto the
time that king Edmonde was slain. And then the Danes took wrongfully both
y^ kyngdoms of eest Angles and of Eestsaxon Afterward the Danes were put out
and driven away or made subgette / And then the elder king Edward Joined
both the kingdoms to his own. The fyfthe kingdom was of Westsaxon and dured
lengest of all these kingdoms / and had in the eest side Southsaxon / in the
north Tamyse / in the south and in the west the sea Occean. In that kingdom
reigned Serdryk with his sone Kenryk and began to regne the year of our lord
five hundred and.xix. and then after the coming of Angels.lxxi. so says
Denis the other kyngdoms passed in to this kingdom. The sixth kingdom was of
Mercia and was grettest of all. The marks and the meres thereof were in the
west side the River Dee fast by Chestre and Seuarne fast by Shrowesbury unto
Brystowe / in the eest the eest see / in the south Tamyse unto London / in the
north the River Humbre. And so westwarde and downewarde unto ye River Mersee
unto the corner of Wyrhall / there Humbre falls in to the west see. Penda
Wybbes sone reigned first in this kingdom in the year of our lord Ihesu
Christ.vi. hundred.xxvi. so says Denis. And fro y^ coming of Angles an
hundred.lxxv. year. This kingdom dured under. xviij. kings about two
hundred.lxiij. year unto the last Colwulf / to the which Colwulf the Danes
betoke that kingdom to keep when Burdred the king was put out / but the elder
Edward the king put out ye Danes and Joined the kingdom of Mercia to his own
kingdom. Netheles at y^ beginning this kingdom of Mercia was departed in three
/ in west Mercia / in myddell Mercia / and eest Mercia The. vij. kingdom was
Northamhymbrorum yt is the kingdom of North humberlonde / the meres and marks
thereof were by west and by eest the sea of Occean / by south the River of
Humbre and so downewarde toward the west by thendes of ye shyres of Notyngham
and of Derby unto the River of Mersee and by north the Scotts see / that heet
forth in Scotts / werys in Brytysshe (...) Scottysshe see in English. This
(...) of Northumberlonde was first dealed in two prouynces / that one was the
south side and heet Deyra / and that other was the north side and heet Brenicia
/ as it were two kyngdoms / and the River departed these two kingdoms that
time / for the kingdom of Deyra was from the River of Humbre unto ye River of
Tyne. The kingdom of Brenicia was fro Tyne to the Scottysshe see. And when
Pyctes dwelled there as Beda says li. iij. ca. ij That Ninian that holy man
converted men of the south side. Ida the king reigned there first and began to
regne the year of our lord five hundred.xlvij. so says Dyonyse. In Deyra
reigned king Elle the year of our lord five hundred. xlix. These two kingdoms
were otherwhyle as it is said departed between two kings and sometime all hole
under one king / and dured as it were.xx. English kings.CCC.xxi. year. At
last Osbertus and Elle were slain in the.ix. year of her kingdom the Danes
slew them / and Northumber land was void without king. viij. year. Then
afterward the Danes reigned in Northumberlonde. xxxvi. year unto the oonynge of
y^ kyngdons Adelstone / he made subget y^ kings Danes Scottysshe and Walsshe
and reigned first allone in England and held ye kingdom of England all hole
and all one kingdom y^ was the year of our lord.viij. C. xxviij. That River
of Mersee was sometime the mark and mere between the kingdom of Mercia and the
kingdom of Northumberlonde / that may be showed in two manners / first by the
properte of this Mersee / that is as much to say as a see that is a bound
and a mere for it departed one kingdom from an other. Also it is written in
Chronicles of Henry and of Alfrede that king Edward the elder fastened a castle
at Mamcestre in Northhumberlond / but that cite Mamcestre is fro the River of
Mersee scarsely three mile.

Of bisshopryches and their sees ca. xiij
LVcius was the first king crystened of the Brytons / in his time were three
Archebysshops sees in Brytayne / one was at London / an other at York / and
the third at Caerusk the cite of Legyons in Glamorgan / that cite is now
called Caerleon. To these Archebysshops sees were subget.xxviij. bishops and
were called Flammes. To the Archebysshops see of London was subget Cornewayle
and all myddel England unto Humbre. To York all Northumberlonde from the how
of Humbre with all Scotlonde. To Caerleon all Wales / there were in Wales. vij.
bishops / and now ben but four. Tho Seuarne departed England and Wales.
Wilhel. de pon. li. j. But in y^ Saxons time though saint Gregory had granted
London the preuylege of tharchebysshops see. Netheles saint Austen that was
sent in to England by saint Gregory turned tharchebysshops see out of London
in to Caunterbury. After saint Gregoryes days at y^ prayer of king Athelbryght
and Cytezeyns and burgeyses of Canterbury / there tharchebysshops see has
dured unto now save that in the mean time Offa king of Mercia was wroth with
men of Canterbury / and benam them that worship / and worchyped Adulph bishop
of Lychfelde with the Archebysshops palle by assent of Adryan the pope upon
caas by yeftes sent. Netheles vn^ Kenulph the king it was restored to
Canterbury again. The worship of the sea of York has dured there always and
dured yet though Scotlonde be withdraw fro his subieccyon by passing of time.
Gir. in itinere. li. j. The Archebysshoppes see was turned out of Caerleon in
to Meneuia that is in the west side of Demecia upon the Irysshe see in Saint
Dauyds time under king Arthur. From saint Dauyds time unto Sampsons time were
in Meneuia. xxiij. Archebysshops. Afterward fylle a pestylence in all Wales of
the yelowe evil / that is called the Iau^dys. And then Sampson the
Archebysshop took with him the palle and went in to Brytayne Armonica the
less Brytayne and was there bishop of Dolensis. From that time unto the
first Henryes time king of England were at Meneuia which is called Saint
Dauyds.xxi. bysshoppes all without palle / whether it were for uncunning or
for pouerte. Netheles always fro that time the bysshoppes of Wales were sacred
of the bishop of Meneuia of saint Dauyds / and the bysshopp of Meneuia was
sacred of the bysshoppes of Wales as of his suffrygans and made no
professyonne subieccyon to none other church. Other bysshoppes that come
afterward were sacred at Caunterbury by compellynge and heest of the king /
in token of that sacrynge and subiecco^n Boneface archebysshop of Canterbury
that was Legate of the Cross song in every Cathedral church of Wales
solempnely. Amas he was the first archebysshop of Canterbury yt so did in
Wales / and that was done in the second Henryes time. R. But now ben but two
prymates in all England of Canterbury and of York. To y^ prymate of
Canterbury ben subget. xiij. bishops in England and. iiij. in Wales The
prymate of York has but two suffrygans in England yt ben the bishops of
Caerleyll and of Durham. Of all these sees and chau^gynge of her places I shall
show you here following Take heed in the begynny^ge of holy church in
England bishops ordained their sees in low places and simple y^ were
couenable for contemplaco^n for prayers and devotion. But in William
conquerours time by done of law Canon it was ordained yt bishops should come
out of small towns in to great cytees. Therefore was the sea of Dorchestre
changed to Lyncoln. Lychfelde to Chestre. Tetforde to Norwyche. Shyrborn to
Salesbury. Wells to Bathe. Cornewayle to Exestre / and Seleseye to Chichestre.
The bishop of Rochestre has no parysshe but he is ye archebysshops chapelayn
of Canterbury. Sith the sea of Caunterbury was first ordained by saint Austen
/ it changed yet never his place. Chychestre has under him oonly Southsex and
the isle of Wight / and had his see first in Seleseye in the time of the
archebysshop Theodore / and the sea dured there.CCC. xxxiij. year under.xx.
bishops fro the first Wilfrede unto the last S^ygande / at the commandment
of king William conqueror changed (...) see fro Seleseye to Chichestre.

De episcopis occidentalibus. Wilhelmus.
Have mind that all the prouynce of westsaxon had always one bishop fro the
beginning unto Theodorus time / by grant of king Islo king of westsaxon the
first Birinus ordained a see at Dorchestre yt is a simple town by south
Oxenford beside Walyngforde between the metynge together of Temse and Tame when
Birinus was deed Kenwalcus the king ordained a see at Wynchestre as his fader
had purposed / there Agil bert a Frensshman was first bishop of all the
prouynce of westsaxon / fro that time the cite and the sea of Dorchestre
perteyned and longed to the prouynce of Mercia / for yt cite stands within
Temse. And the Temse departed between Mercia and westsaxon / After that
Agilbert was put out of Wynchestre that tho hight wynton / Then was there an
English bysshopp there that was called Wine. Some men suppose that the cite
has the name of this Wine / and is called Wynchestre as it were Wynes cite. At
the last he was put out / and after him come Leutherius the foresaid Agelbertes
neuewe. After Leutherius Hedda a while was bishop there. when he was deed
Theodorus the archebysshop ordained two bishops to the prouynce of westsaxon.
Danyell at Wynchestre to him were subgette two countrees / Sothery and
Southampshyre. And Adelme at Shyrborn / and to him were subget six countries.
Barkshyre Wylt shyre Somersete Dorseteshyre Deuen shyre and Cornewayle.
Treuisa. It seems by this that westsaxon contained Sothery. Southamshyre.
Barkshyre wyltshyre Somersetshyre Dorseteshyre Deuenshyre and Cornewyle /
Wilhel. Afterward in elder Edwarees time to these two sees were ordained by
commandment of Formosus y^ pope three other sces. At Wells for Somerfete. At
Kyrton for Deuenshyre / and at saint Germayn for Cornewayle / Not long
afterward the sixth see was set at Ra^mesbury for wyltshyre. At the last by
commandment of king William conqueror all these sees save wynchestre were
turned and changed out of small towns in to great cytees for Shyrborn and
Ra^mesbury were turned in to Salesbury. Now to yt see is subgette Barkshyre
wyltshyre and Dorsete The sea of Wells was turned to Bathe / thereto is now
subgette all Somersete. The sees of Kyrton and of Cornewayle were changed to
Exestre / thereto is subgette Deuenshyre and Cornewayle

De orientalibus episcopis.
IT is known yt the eest saxons always fro the begin to now were subget to
the bishop of London But the prouynce of eest Angles that conteyneth Norffolke
and Suffolk had one bishop at Donwyk / the bishop heet Felix and was of
Bourgon and was bishop. xvij. year / after him Thomas was bishop. v. year /
after him Boneface. xvij. year. Then Bysy afterward was ordained by
Theodorus and rules the prouynce while he might endure by himself allone /
after him unto Egbertes time king of west saxons an hundred. xliij. two
bishops ruled that prouynce one at Donwyk / and an other at Elyngham. Netheles
after Ludecans time king of Mercia left and was only one see at Elyngham unto
the. v^ year of William conquetour / when Herfastus the.xxiij. bishop of the
estrene changed his see to Totforde / and his succesour Herbertus changed the sea fro Tetforde to Norwhiche by leave of king William the reed. The sea of Ely
yt is nyghe thereto the first king Henry ordained the.ix. year of his regne /
and made subget thereto Cambryggeshyre that was tofore a part of the
bysshopryche of Lyncoln. And for quytynge thereof / he gaaf to the bishop of
Lyncoln a good town called Spaldynge.

De episcopis merciorum. Whilhelmus.
HEre take heed that as the kingdom of Merci^ was always grettest for the time
/ so it was dealed in mo bysshopryches and specially by great heart by king Off
a / which was.xl. year king of Mercia / he changed the archebysshops see fro
Canterbury to Lychfelde by assente of Adryan the pope. Then the prouynce of
Mercia and of Lyndeffar in the first beginning of her crystendome in king
W^lfrans time had one bishop at Lychfelde / the first bishop yt was there
hee^ Dwyna / the second hee^ C^lath and were both Scotts / after them the
third Trumpher / the fourth Iarmuanus / the fyfth Chedde. But in Edelfredes
time yt was Wulfrans brother when Chedde was deed. Theodorus the archebysshop
ordained there Wynfrede Cheddes deken. Netheles apud Hydon after that for he
was vnbuxom in some point / he ordained there Sexwulf abbot of Medamstede that
is named Burgh. But after Sexwulfus fourth year Theodorus tharchebysshop
ordained five bishops in the prouynce of Mercia. And so he ordained Bosell at
Wyrcestre. Cudwyn at Lychfelde / the foresaid Sexwulf at Chestre. Edelwyn at
Lyndesey at cite Sidenia / and he took Eata monk of the abbay of Hylde at
Whythy and made him bishop of Dorchestre besides Oxenforde. Tho this
Dorchestre heet Dorkynge / and so the sea of y^ longed to westsaxon in saint
Birines time longed to Mercia from Theodorus the archebysshops time. Ethelred
king of Mercia had destroy de Kente / this bishop Sexwulf took Pyctas bishop
of Rochestre yt come out of Kente and made hy^ first bishop of Herforde. At
last when Sexwulf was deed Hedda was bishop of Lychfelde after him / and
Wilfred flemed out of Northumberlonde was bishop of Chestre. Netheles after
two year Alfrede king of Northumbrelonde deyed and Wilfred turned again to his
own see Hagustalden / and so Hedda held both the bysshopryches of Lychfelde
and of Chestre. After him come Albyn yt heet Worcester also / and after him come three
bysshoppes. Torta at Chestre. Witta at Lychfelde / and Eata was yet at
Dorchestre. After his death bishops of Lyndeseye held his see. iij. hundred.
liiij. year / unto Remigius changed the sea to Lyncoln by leave of the first
king William. But in Edgars time bishop Leofwinus Joined both bishop riches
together of Chestre and Lyndeffar while his life dured.

De episcopis Northumbranis. Wilhel. de pon. li. ca. xi.
AT York was one see for all the prouynce of Northumberlonde. Paulinus held
first yt see and was ordained of the bishop of Canterbury / and held that
see of York. vij. year Afterward when king Edwyn was slain and things were
dystourbed paulinus went thens by water away in to Kente from whens he come
first and took with him the palle. Wilhel. li..iij. And so the bysshopryche of
York ceased. xxx. year / and the use of the palle ceased there an hundred.
xxv. year unto that Egbert the bishop yt was the kings brother of the land
recovered it by auctoryte of the pope. R. when Saint Oswalde reigned Aydanus a
Scot was bishop in Brenicia that is the northsyde of Northumberlonde / after
him Finianus / after him Salmanus. Wilhel. vbi ^. At last he went in to
Scotlonde with great indygnacyon / for Wilfred undertook him for he held
unlawfully Eesterdaye. xxx. year after yt Paulinus was gone from thens Wilfred
was made bishop of York. Beda li. iiij. But while he dwelled long in France
about his sacrynge at excytynge of quartadecimanorum / that were they yt held
Eesterdaye the. xiiij. day of y^ moan. Chedde was ytake out of his abbaye of
Lestynge and wronfully put out in to ye see of York by assent of king Oswy.
But three year afterward Theodorus tharchebysshop did him away and assygned
him to the prouynce of Mercia / and restored Wilfred to the sea of York. But
after Wilfred by cause of wrath that was between him and the king. Egfryde
(...) put out of his see by Theodorus help tharchebysshop that was corrupt
with some manner mede / this was done after that Wylfred had been bishop of
York. x. year. Then at ^nstau^ce of the king Theodorus made Bosam bishop
of York / and Cumbert at Hagustalde church / and Eata at Lyndeffar church yt
now is callid holy ylonde in the River of Twede. Aydanus founded first the sea
/ and Theodorus made Eadhedus bysshopp of Repoune yt was comen again out of
Lyndeseye. Wilfred had be abbot of Repoune / Theodorus sent Trunwynus to the
land of Pyctes in thendes of England fast by Scotlonde in a place y^ heet
Candida casa / and Whyterne also / there saint Ninian a Bryton was first
fou^der and doctor. But all these sees outake York failed little and little /
for y^ see of Candida casa yt is Galewaye that longed tho to England and dured
many years under. x. bishops unto that it had no power by destroyenge of the
Pyctes. The sees of Hagustalde and of Lyndeffar was sometime all one under. ix.
bishops about four score year and ten and dured unto the coming of the
Danes. In yt time under Hyngar and Hubba Ardulf the bishop yede long about
with saint Cuberts body unto king Aluredes time king of west saxon / and the sea of Lyndeffar was set at Kunegestre yt is called Kunyngysburgh also / that
place is called now Vbbesforde upon Twede. At the last the. xvij. year of king
Egbert king Edgars sone / that see was changed to Durham / and saint Cutbert^
body was brought thither by the doing of Edmoude the bishop / and fro that
time forward the sea of Hagustalde and of Lyndeffar faylleth utterly. The
first king Henry in the. ix. year of his regne made the new see at Caerleyll.

THe Archebysshop of Canterbury has under him. xiij. byshopes in England
and. iiij. in Wales / he has Rochestre under him / and that see has under hy^
a part in Kente alone London has under him Estsex Myddelsex and half
Herfordshyre. Chychestre has under him Southsex and the isle of Wight.
Wynchestre has under him Hampshyre and Southerye. Salesbury has under him
Barkshyre Wyldshyre and Dorsete. Exetre has under him Deuenshyre and
Cornewayle. Bathe has under him Somerseteshyre alone Wyrcester has under him
Gloucestreshyre Wyrcestreshyre and half Warwykshyre. Herforde has under him
Herfordshyre and some of Shropshyre. Chestre is bishop of Couentre and of
Lychfelde / and has under him Chestreshyre Staffordshyre Derbyshyre half
Warwykshyre some of Shropshyre and some of Lancastreshyre fro the River of
Mersee unto y^ River of Rypyll. Lyncoln has under him the prouynces y^ ben
between Tamyse and Humbre y^ ben the shyres of Lyncoln of Leycestre of
Northampton of Huntyngdon of Bedforde of Bokyngham of Oxenford and half
Herdfordshyre. Ely has under him Cambrygeshyre outake Merlonde. Norwyche has
under him Merlonde Norffolk and Suffolk. Also tharchebysshop of Canterbury
has four suffrygans in Wales that been Landafsaynt Dauyes Bangor and saint
Assaph The archebysshop of York has now but two bishops under him that been
Durham and Caerleyl. R. And so ben but two prymates in England / what of hem
shall do to yt other and in what manner point he shall be obedyent and under
him. It is fully contained within about the year of our lord Ihesu christ a
thousand. lxxij. tofore ye first king William / and the bishops of England
by commandment of the pope / the cause was handled and treated between the
foresaid prymates and ordained and demed yt the prymate of York shall be subget
to the prymate of Canterbury in things that longen to the worship of god and
to the believe of holy church / so yt in what place ever it be in England yt
the prymate of Canterbury will hot and constreyne to gader a counsel of
clergy / the prymate of York is holden with his suffrygans for to be there and
for to be obedyent to the ordinance that there shall lawfully be ordained. When
the prymate of Canterbury is deed ye prymate of York shall come to
Canterbury and with other bishops he shall sacre him yt is chosen / and so with
other bishops he shall sacre his own prymate If the prymate of York be deed
/ his successor shall come unto the bishop of Canterbury and he shall take
his ordenau^ce of him and do his oath with professyon and lawful obedyence. After
within about ye year of our lord. xi. C. lxxxxv. in the time of king Richard
ben resons let for the right of the party for either prymate / and what one
prymate did to yt other in time of Thurstinus of Thomas and of other bishops
of York from the conquest unto king Henryes time the third. Also there it is
said how each of them starte from other. This place is but a forspekynge and
not a full treatys thereof / therefore it were noyfull to charge this place with
all thylke reasons yt there ben made.

Of how many manner people have dwelled therein. ca. xiiij.
BRytons dwelled first in this ylonde the. xviij. year of Hely the prophet /
the. xi. year of Solinus posthumus king of Latyns. xliij. after the taking of
Troy / tofore the building of Rome. CCCC. xxxij. year. Beda lio. jo. They
come hyder and took her course from Armoryk that now is that other Brytayn /
they held long time the south countrees of the ylonde / hit befell afterward
in Vespasianus time duke of Rome / that ye Pyctes shypped out of Scicia in to
Occean / and were driven about with the wind and entered in to the north costs
of Irlonde and found there Scotts and prayed to have a place to dwell Inn
and might none get. For Irlonde as Scotts said might not sustain both
people. Scotts sent the Pyctes to the north sides of Brytayne and behyght
them help against ye Brytons yt were their enemies if they would arise / and
took hem wives of her daughters / upon such condyco^n if doubt fylle / who
should have right for to be king / they should rather chese hem a king of the
mother side than of the fader side / of the wymmen kyn rather than of the men
kyn. Gaufr In Vespasyan the Emperors time when Marius Aruiragus sone was king
of Brytons. One Rodryk king of Pyctes came out of Scicia and began to destroy
Scotlonde. Then Marius the king slew this Rodryke and gaf the north party
of Scotlonde that heet Cathenesia to the men that were come with Rodryk and
were overcome by him for to dwell ^nne. But these men had no wives ne none
might have of the nacyon of Brytons / therefore they saylled in to Irlonde and
took to their wives Irysshmens daughters by yt covenant yt the mother blood
should be put tofore in succession of heritage Gir ca. xvij. Netheles Sirinus
sup Virgiliu^ says that Pyctes ben agatyrses that had some dwelling place
about the waters of Scicia / and they ben called Pyctes of peyntynge and
smiting of wou^des yt ben seen on her body. So yt they seemed as men were
peynted with wou^des / therefore they were called Pyctes as peynted men. These
men and these goths ben all one people. For when Maximus the tyrant was went
out of Brytayne in to France for to occupye thempyre. Then Gracianus and
Valentinianus yt were brethern and fellows of thempyre brought these goths out
of Scicia with great gifts with flateryng and fair behestes in to ye north
country of Brytayne. For they were stalworth and strong men of arms / and so
these thieves and brybo^^s were made men of land and of country / and dwelled
in the north countries and held there cytees and towns. Gaufre. Carancius the
tyrau^t slew Bassianus by help and treason of the Pyctes yt come in help and
socour of Bassianus / and gaf the Pyctes a dwelling place in Albania that is
Scotlonde / there they dwelled long time afterward and meddled with Brytons.
R. Then sith yt Pyctes occupied first the north side of Scotlonde. It seems
yt the dwelling place yt this Carancius gaf hem is the south side of Scotlonde
that stretches from the thwart over wall of Romans work to the Scottysshe
see / and conteyneth Gallewaye and Lodouia yt is Codewaye. Thereof Beda li. iij.
ca. ij. speaks in this manner. Ninian the holy man converted the south Pyctes.
Afterward the Saxons come and made yt country long to Brenicia y^ north
party of Northumberlonde unto the time that Kynadius Alpinus sone king of
Scotlonde put out the Pyctes / and made that country yt lies between Twede and
the Scottysshe see long to his kingdom. Beda li. j. ca. j. Afterward long
time the Scotts were led by duke Renda and come out of Irlonde y^ is the
propre country of Scotts and with love or with strength made hem a place fast
by the Pyctes in the north side of that arm of the sea / that breketh in to
the land in the west side y^ departed in old time between Brytons and Pyctes.
Of this duke Renda the Scotts had the name and were called Dalrendines as it
were Rendaes part / for in her speech a part is called dal. Gir ^. The Pyctes
might have no wives of Brytons / but they took hem wives of Irysshe Scotts and
promised hem fair for to dwell with hem / and granted hem a land by the sea
side / there the sea is narowe / that land is called now Gallewaye. Marianus
Irysshe Scott^ londed at Argayll / that is scotten clyf for Scotts londed
there for to do harm to the Brytons / or for that place is next to Irlonde
for to come a land in Brytayne. Beda. And so the Scotts after the Brytons and
Pyctes made ye third people dwelling in Brytayne. R. Then after that come the
Saxons at prayenge of the Brytons to help hem against the Scotts and Pyctes.
And the Brytons were soon put out in to Wales / and Saxons ocupyed the land
little and little / and efte more to the Scottysshe see. And so Saxons made the
fourth manner of men in the ylonde of Brytayne. Beda. li. v. ca. ix. For Saxons
and Angles come out of Germania / yet some Brytons that dwellen nyghe callen
hemshortly Germayns. R. Netheles about y^ year of our lord. viij. hundred
Egbertus king of westsaxon commanded and had all men to call the men of the
land Englysshmen. Alfre. Then after that y^ Danes pursued the land about a
two hundred year / that is for to say fro the foresaid Egbertus time unto saint
Edwardes time / and made the fyfth manner of people in the ylonde / but they
faylled afterward. At the last come Normans under duke William and subdued
English men / and yet keep they the land and they made the sixth people in
the ylonde. But in the first king Hemryes time come many Flemynges and received
a dwelling place for a time beside Maylros in the west side of England / and
made the seventh people in the ylonde. Netheles by commandment of the same
king they were put thens and driven to Hauerfordes side in the west side of
Wales. R. And so now in Brytayne Danes and Pyctes fayllen all out / and five
nacyons dwellen therein that been Scotts in Albania / that is Scotlonde. Brytons
in Cambria that is Wales / but that Flemynges dwell in that is west Wales. And
Normans and Englysshmen ben meddled in all the ylonde / for it is now doubt in
stories how and in what manner they were put away and destroyed out of
Brytayne. Now it is to declare how the Pyctes were destroyed and faylled. Gir.
^. ca. xvij. Brytayne was some time occupied with Saxons / and peace was made
and stablysshed with the Pyctes / then the Scotts that come with the Pyctes
saw that the Pyctes were nobler of deeds and better men of arms though they
were less in nombre than the Scotts. Then the Scotts having thereof envy
turned to their naturell treason that they have often used For in treason they
pass other men and ben traitors as it were by kind / for they prayed all the
Pyctes and specially the great of hem to a feast / and waited her time when the
Pyctes were merry and had well drunk / they drew up nails that held up
holowe benches under the Pyctes and the Pyctes unware and suddenly fylle in
over the ha^mes in to a wonderful pytfalle. Then the Scotts fylle on the
Pyctes and slew them and left hone alive. And so of two manner people the
better warry ours were ho^ly destroyed. But the other that been the Scotts
which ben traitors all unlike to the Pyctes took prouffyte by that falls
treason / for they took all that land and hold it yet unto this time and
call it Scotlonde after her own name. In king Edgarus time Kynadius Alpmus
sone was duke and leder of the Scotts and warred in Pycte land and destroyed
the Pyctes. he warred six sythes in Saxon and took all the land yt is between
Twede and the Scottysshe see with wrong and with strength.

Of the langages of manners and usage of the people of that land. ca. xv.
AS it is known how many manner of people ben in this ylonde / there ben also
so many langages and tongues. Netheles Walsshe and Scotts yt ben not meddled
with other nacyons keep nyghe yet their langage and speech But yet the Scotts
yt were sometime confederate and dwelled with Pyctes draw somewhat after their
speech. But the Flemynges yt dwell in the west side of Wales have left her
strange speech and speken like to Saxons / also Englysshmen though they had
fro the beginning three manner speches. southern northern and myddell speech in
the myddell of the land as they come of three manner of people of Germania.
Netheles by co^mixion and medlynge first with Danes and afterward with Normans
in many things the country langage is appayred / for some use strange
wlaffynge chyterynge harrynge garrynge and grysbytynge. This apayrynge of y^
langage comes of two things / ones by cause that childern yt gone to scole
learn to speak first Enlysshe / and than ben compelled to constrewe her lessons
in Frensshe and that have been used syn the Normans come in to England / Also
gentylmens childern ben learned and taught from their yongth to speak Frensshe /
and up londesshmen will cou^terfete and lyken hem self to gentylmen. and arn
besy to speak Frensshe for to be more set by / wherefore it is said by a common
proverb. Jack would be a gentylmen if he could speak Frensshe / Treuisa. This
was much used to for the great death / but sith it is somde le changed / for
sir Johan Cornewayle a master of gramer changed the techynge of gramer scole
and construccion of Frensshe in to English. And other scole masters use the
same way now in the year of our lord a. M.CCC..lxxxv.the. ix. year of king
Richard the second / and leave all Frensshe in scoles and use all construcco^n
in English wherein they have auau^tage one way that is yt they learn the
sooner their gramer / and in an other dysauauntage / for now they learn no
Frensshe ne can none / which is hurt for them that shall pass the sea. And
also gentylmen have much left to teache their children to speak Frensshe. R.
Hit seems a great wonder yt Englysshmen have so great dyuersyte in their own
langage in sown and in speaking of it which is all in one ylonde. And the
langage of Normandye is comen out of an other land and has one manner sown
among all them that speaks it in England / for a man of Kente. Southern.
Western and Northern men speken Frensshe all like in sown and speech / but
they can not speak their English ^oo. Treuisa. Netheles there is as many
diverse manner of Frensshe in the reame of France as diverse Englyssh in the
reame of England. R. Also of the foresaid tongue which is departed in three is
great wonder / for men of the cest with men of the west accord better in
sownynge of their speech / than men of the north with men of the south Therefore
it is yt men of Mer^^ that been of myddell England as it were partyners with
the ends understand better the side langages northern and southern than
northern and southern understand either other Wilhel. de po^ li. iij. All the
langages of the Northum bres and specially at York is so sharp shyttynge
frotynge and vnshappe / that we southern men may uneath understand that
langage. I suppose the cause be y^ they be nyghe to the alyens that speak
strau^gely. And also by cause that the kings of England abide and dwell more
in the south country than in the north country. The cause why they abide more
in the south country than in the north country / is by cause yt there is better
corn land more people moo noble cytees and moo profitable havens in the south
country than in the north.

De gentis huius moribus. Gir. in itinere.
FOr the manners and the doing of Walsshe men and of Scotts ben tofore somewhat
declared. Now I purpose to tell and declare the manners and condycyons of the
meddled people of England. But the Flemynges that been in the west side of Wales
ben now all turned as they were Englysshmen by cause they company with
English men. And they be mighty and strong to fight / and ben the most
enemies that Walsshmen have / and use marchau^dyse and clothing and ben full
ready to put themself in auentures and to peril in the sea and land by cause
of great wynnyuge / and ben ready sometime in the plowe and sometime to oedes of
arms when time and place axeth. It seems of these men a great wonder that in
a bone of a wethers right sholder when the flesh is soden a way and not
roasted they know what have be done / is done / and shall be done / as it were
by spyryte of prophecye and a wonderful craft. They tell what is done in
far countrees / tokenes of peace or of war / the state of the royame /
sleyng of men / and spousebreche / such things they declare certainly of
tokenes and signs that is in such a sholder bone. R. But the Englysshmen yt
dwell in England ben meddled in the ylonde and ben far fro the places yt
they spronge of first / tornen to contrary deeds lightly without entysyng of
any other men by her own assent. And so vnesy also full impatient of peace /
enemy of besynes / and full of slouthe. Wilhel de pon. li. iij. says. That
when they have destroyed her enemies all to the ground / then they fyghten
with hem self and sleeth each other as a void and an empty stomach werketh in
hit self R. Netheles men of the south ben e^yer and more mylde than men of the
north. For they be more unstable more cruel and more vnesy. The myddel men ben
somdele parteners with both. Also they use hem to glotony more than other men
and ben more costle we in mete and clothing. Men supposes yt they took that
vice of king Hardeknot that was a Dane. For he heet set forth twyes double
mess at dinner and at souper also. These men ben spedefull on horse and a foot.
Able and ready to all manner deeds of arms / and ben wont to have vyctory and
maystrye in every fight where no treason is walking / and ben curyous and can
well tell deeds and wondres that they have seen. Also they gone in diverse
lands uneath ben any men rycher in her own land or more gracyous in far
and in strange land / they can better win and get new than keep her own
heritage / Therefore it is that they be spradde so wide and wene that every
land is their own. The men be able to all manner sleyght and wit / but
tofore the deded blonderynge and hasty. And more wise after the deed than
tofore / and leven of lightly what they have begone Solinus li. vi. Therefore
Eugenies the pope said that Englysshmen were able to do what ever they would /
and to be set and put tofore all other / ne were yt light wit lets. And
as Hanyball said that the Romayus might not be overcome but in her own
country / so Englysshmen may not be overcome in strange lands / but in her
own country they be lightly overcome. R. These men despysen her own and
praise other mennys. And uneath be pleased ner apayd with their own astate /
what befalls and becomes other men / they will gladly take to hemself.
Therefore it is that a yeman arayeth him as a squyre / a squyre as a knight / a
knight as a duke / a duke as a king. Yet some go about and will be like to all
manner state and ben in no state. For they take every degree that be of no degree
/ for in berynge outward they ben mynstrals and herowdes. In talking great
spekers. In etynge and drinking glotons / In gaderynge of catell hucksters and
tauerners. In array tormentours. In wynnynges argi. In trauayll tantali. In
taking head dedaly. In beds sardanapali. In chirches mawmetes. In courts
thonder / oonly in preuy lege of clergy and in prebendes they knowleche
hemself clerks Treuisa As touching the terms of latin as argi / tantaly /
dedaly / sardanapaly / ye must understand them as the poets feyned of them.
Argus was an herd and kept bestes / he had an hundred eyes. And Argus was
also a ship / a shypman and a chapman / and so Argus might see before and
behind and on every side. Therefore he that is wise and ware and can see that
he be not deceived may be called Argus. And so the Cronycle says in plurell
nombre that Englysshmen ben argi / that is to say they see about where as
winning is. That other word tantali / the poet feyneth that Tantalus flewe
his own sone wherefore he is dampened to perpetuell penance and he stands
always in water up to the nether lyppe / and has always type apples and noble
fruit hanging down to the ouerlyppe / but the fruit ne the water may not
come within his mouth / he is so hold and stands between mete and drink
and may neither etene drink and is ever an hongred and a thyrst that woe is him
a live / by this manner likeness of Tantalus / they that do right naught there
as much is to do in every side ben called tantali. It seems that it is to
say / in trauayll they ben tantali / for they do right naught thereto. The
third word is dedali / take heed that Dedalus was a subtle and a slye man.
And therefore by lykenes they that been subtle and slye they be called dedali.
And the fourth word is sardanapali / ye shall understand that Sardanapalus was
king of Assyryens and was full unchaste / and used him for to lie soft And by a
manner of lykenes of him / they that live unchastly ben called sardanapali. R.
But among all English meddled togyders is so great a chaungynge and dyuersyte
of clothing and of array and so many manners and diverse shappes that well
nyghe is there any man known by his clothing and his array of what some ever
degree that he be. Thereof prophesied an holy Anchor in king Egelfredes time in
this manner. Henri. li. vi. Englysshmen for as much as they use them to
dronkelewnes / to treason and to rechelesnesse of gods house / first by Danes
and then by Normans / and at the third time by the Scotts that they hold
the most wretches and lest worth of all other they shall be overcome. Then
the world shall be so unstable and so diverse and varyable that the
unstableness of thoughts shall be bytokened by many manner dyuersytees of
clothing.

Here follows the descrypcyon of the land of Wales.
Of the land of Wales. ca. xvi.
NOw this book takes on hand
Wales after England
So take I my tales
And wend in to Wales
To that noble blood
Of pryamus blood
Ernowleche for to win
Of great Iupyters kynne
For to have in mind
Dardanus kind
In these four tytles I fond
To tell thestate of that land
Cause of the man I shall tell
And then praise the land and well
Then I shall write with my pen
All the manners of the men
Then I shall fond
Te tell merueylles of the land
Of the name and why it is named Wales. ca. xvij.
WAles now is called Wallia
And sometime it heet Cambria
For Camber Brutes sone
Was prince and there did wone
Then Wallia was to mean
For Gwalaes the queen
King Ebrancus child
Was wedded thither mylde
And of that lord Gwalon
Withdraws of the soun
And put to l. i. a.
And thou shall find Wallia
And though this land
Be much less than England
As good glebe is one as other
In the daughter as in the mother
Of the commodytees of the land of Wales. ca. xviij.
THough that land be luyte
It is full of corn and of fruit
And has great plente ywys
Of flesh and eke of fysshe
Of beestes tame and wild
Of horse sheep oxen mylde
Good land for all seeds
For corn gras and herbs that spredes
There ben woods and medes
Herbs and flowers there spredes
There ben Ryuers and wells
Valeyes and also hills
Valeyes bring forth flode
And hills metals good
Cooll grows under land
And gras above at hand
There lyme is copyous
And slattes for house
Honey and milk white
There is deynte and not lyte
Of braket meet and ale
Is great plente in that vale
And all that needs to the live
That land brings forth ryue
But of great riches to be draw
And close many in short saw
Hit is a corner small
As though god first of all
Made that land so feel
To be selere of all hele
Wales is deled by
A water that heet twy
North wales from the south
Twy deleth in places full couth
The south heet Demecia
And the other Venedocia
The first shoteth and arowes beres
That other deleth all with speres
In Wales how it be
Were sometime courts three
At Carmerthyn was that one
And that other was in Moan
The third was in Powysy
In Pegwern yt now is Shrowesbury
There were bishops seven
And now ben four even
Under Saxons all at hand
Sometime under princes of that land
Of the manners and rytes of the Walsshmen. ca. xix.
THe manner living of yt land
Is well diverse from England
In mete and drink and clothing
And may other doing
They be clothed wondre well
In a shyrte and in a mantell
A cryspe breche well feign
Both in wind and rain
In this clothing they be bold
Though the weder be right cold
Without shetes always
Evermore in this array
They go fight play and lepe
Stand sytte lie and sleep
Without surcot gown cote and kyrtell
Without jopen tabard clok or bell
Without lace and chaplet that her lappes
Without hode hatte or cappes
Thus arayd gone the segges
And always with bare legs
They keep none other going
Though they mete with the king
With arowes and short speres
They fight with them yt them deres
They fight better if they neden
When they go than when they ryden
Instead of castle and toure
They take wood and mareys for socoure
When they seen it is to do
In fighting they would be ago
Gyldas says they ben varyable
In peace and not stable
If men axe why it be
It is no wonder for to se
Though men put out of land
To put out other would fond
But all for naught at this stand
For all many woods ben at gronde
And upon the sea among
Ben castles builded strong
The men may dure long un ete
And love well conume mete
They can ete and ben mury
Without great cury
They ete bread cold and hot
Of barley and of ote
Broad cakes round and thynne
As well seems so great kynne
Selde they ete bread of whete
And selde they done ones ete
They have gruell to potage
And lekes kind to companage
Also butter milk and chese
Y shape endlonge and corner wese
Such messes they ete snell
And that makes hem drink well
Meet and ale that has might
Thereon they spend day and night
Ever the redder is the wine
They hold it the more fine
When they drink at ale
They tell many a lewd tale
For when drink is an handlynge
They ben full of Jangling
At meet and after eke
Her solace is salt and leke
The husbonde in his wise
Tells that a great price
To give a caudron with gruwele
To hem that sytten on his mele
He deleth his meet at mele
And gives every man his dele
And all the ouerpluse
He keeps to his own use
Therefore they have woo
And myshappes also
They eten hot samon always
All though physyk say nay
Her houses ben low with all
And made of yerdes small
Not as in cytees nyghe
But far a sonder and not to high me
When all is eten at home
Then to her neighbors will they to
And ete what they may find and se
And then torn home aye
The life is idle that they ledes
In brennynge slepynge and such deeds
Walsshmen use with her might
To wesshe their ghestes feet a night
If he wesshe her feet all and sum
Then they know yt they be welcome
They live so esely in a route
That selde they bear purs about
At her breche out and home
They honge their money and comb
It is wonder they be so hende
And hate crak at nether end
And without any core
Make their wardrope at door
They have in great mangery
Harp tabour and pyp for mynstralcy
They bear corpse with sorrow greet
And blow loud horns of gheet
They praise fast Troyan blood
For thereof came all her broad
Nyghe kyn they will be
Though they pass an hundred degree
Above other men they will hein dyght
And worship prestes with her might
As angels of heaven right
They worship servants of god almyght
Often gyled was this broad
And yerned battle all for wode
For Merlyns prophecye
And often for sortelegye
Best in manners of Brytons
For company of Saxons
Ben turned to better right
That is known as clear as light
They tyllen gardyns field and downs
And draw hem to good towns
They ride armed as woll god
And go y hosed and y shood
And sytten fair at her mele
And sleep in beds fair and feel
So they seem now in mind
More English than walsshe kind
If men axe why they now do so
More than they wont to do
They lyuen in more pees
By cause of their riches
For their catell should slake
If they used often wrake
Dread of loss of her good
Make them now stylle of mode
All in one it is brought
Have nothing and dread naught
The poet says a saw of preef
The foot man syngeth tofore ye thief
And is bolder on the way
Than the horse man rich and gaye
Of the merueylles and wondres of Wales. ca. xx.
There is a pole at Brechnok
Therein of fysh is many aflok
Often he changes his hew on cop
And bered above a gardyn crop
Often time how it be
Shape of house there shall thou se
When the pole is frore it is wonder
Of the noise that is there under
If the prince of the land hot
Birds sing well merry note
As meryly as they can
And syngen for none other man
Besides Caerleon
Two mile fro the town
Is a roche well bright of leem
Right against the son beem
Goldclyf that roche hight
For it shyneth as god full bright
Such a flower in stone is naught
Without fruit if it were sought
If men could by craft undo
The veins of therthe and come thereto
Many benefyce of kind
Ben now hyd fro man's mind.
And ben unknow yet
For defaute of man's wit
Great tresour is hyd in ground
And after this it shall be found
By great study and besynes
Of hem that comen after us
That old men had by great need
Treuisa.
We have by besy deed
In books ye may read
That kind fails not at need
When noman had craft in mind
Then of craft halpe god and kind
When no techer was in land
Men had craft by gods hand
They that had craft so then
Taught forth craft to other men
Some craft that yet come not in place
Some man shall have by gods grace
R. An ylonde is with noise and stryf
In west Wales at Kerdyf
Fast by Seuarne stronde
Barry hight that ylonde
In that hither side in a chene
Shall thou here wonder dene
And diverse noys also
If thou put thyn eere to
Noys of leaves and of wind
Noys of metal thou shall find
Frotynge of yren and westones you shall here
Hetynge of ouens then with fire
All this may well be
By wawes of the sea
That breketh in their
With such noys and fare
At Penbrok in a stead
Feudes do often quede
And throws foul thing jnne
And despyseth also sin
Neither craft ne bedes may
Do thens that sorrow away
When it greueth so
To the men it bodeth woo
At crucynar in west wales
Is a wonder buryals
Every man that comes it to se
Seems it even as much as he
Hoole wepen there a night
Shall be broken er day light
At nemyn in north wales
A little ylonde there is
That is called bardysay
Monks dwell there always
Men live so long in that hurst
That the oldest deyeth first
Men say that Merlyn there buried is
That hight also syluestris
There were Merlyns tweyne
And prophesied beyne
One hyte Ambrose and Merlyn
And was ygoten by gobelyn
In demecia at carmerthyn
Under king Vortygeryn
He told his prophecye
Even in snowdonye
At heed of the water of coneway
In the side of mount eryry
Dynas embreys in Walsshe
Ambrose hylle in English
King Vortygere sat on
The watersyde and was full of wone
Then Ambrose Merlyn prophesied
Treuisa
Tofore him right tho.
What wit would wene
That a fend might get a child
Some men would mean
That he may no such work welde
That fend that g^th a night
(...) full often to gyle
(...) is named by right
And gyleth men other while
Succubus is that wight
God grant us none such vile
Who that comes in hit gyle
Wonder hap shall he smyle
With wonder deed
Both men and wymen sede
Fendes woll keep
With craft and bring an hepe
So fendes wild
May make wymmen bear child
Yet never in mind
Was child of fendes kind
For withouten eye
There might no such child deye
Clergy makes mind
Death sleeth no fendes kind
But death slew Merlyn
Merlyn was ergo no goblyn
An other Merlyn of Albyn land
That now is named Scotlonde
And he had names two
Siluestris and Calidonius also
Of that wood Calydonye
For there he told his prophecye
And heet Siluestris as well
For when he was in batell
And saw above a grysly kind
And fill anon out of his mind
And made no more abood
But ran anon unto the wood
Treuisa. Siluestris is wode
Other wild of mode
Other else
That at wood he dwelles
R. Siluestris Merlyn
Told prophecye well and fyn
And prophesied well sure
Under king Arthure
Openly and not so close
As Merlyn Ambrose
There ben hills in snowdonye
That been wonderly hye
With heyght as great away
As a man may go a day
And heet eryry on Walsshe
Snowy hills in English
In these hills there is
Leese enough for all bestes of Walis
These hills on coppe beres
Two great fysshe weres
Contained in that one ponde
Meueth with the wind an ylonde
As though it did swymme
And neyheth to the brymme
So that herdes have great wonder
And wene yt the world meueth under
In that other is perch and fysshe
Every one eyed is
So fares all well
In Albania the mylwell
In Rutlonde by Tetyngelle
There is a little well
That flows not always
As the sea twyes a day
But sometime it is dry
And sometime full by the eye
There is in Norwallia
In Mon that heet Anglesia
A stone according well nyghe
As it were a man's thyghe
How far ever that stone
Be borne of any mon
On night it goth home his way
That he found by assaye
Hughe therthe of Shrowesbure
In time of the first Harry
For he would the soth find
That stone to an other he began bind
With great chains of yren
And threw all y feren
Y bound at one hepe
In to a water deep
Yet a morrow that stone
Was seyne erly in mon
A chorle held himself full slyghe
And bound this stone to his thyghe
His thyghe was roten or day
And the stone went a way
If men done lechery
Nyghe that stone by
Swote comes of that stone
But child comes there none
There is a roche right wonderly
The roche of herynge by country
Though there cry one man born
And blow also with an horn
Noise there made though thou abide
Thou shall here none in this side
There is an other ylonde
Fast by Mon at hand
Hermytes there ben ryue
If any of hem done strive
All the myse that may begete
Come and ete all their mete
Then cesseth never that woo
Till the strife cesse also
As men in this land
Ben angry as in Irlonde
So saints of this contreye
Ben also wretchefull alweye
Also in this land
In Irlonde and in Scotlonde
Ben belles and staves
That in worship men haues
And ben worshyped so then
Of clerks and of lewd men
That dreden also
To sweren on any of tho
Staff either belle
As it were the gospelle
At Basyngwerke is a well
That Sacer heet as men tell
Hit spryngeth so sore as men may se
What is cast in it throws aye
Thereof spryngeth a great stronde
It were enough for all that land
Seek at that place
Have both hele and grace
In the welmes ofter than ones
Ben found reed spercled stones
In token of the blood read
That the maid Wenefrede
Shad at that pytte
When her throat was kytte
He that did that deed
Has sorrow on his sede
His childern at all stoundes
Berken as welpes and hounds
For to they pray that maid grace
Right at that well place
Either in Shrowesbury street
There that maid rested sweet
Of the descrypcyon of Scotlonde sometime named Albania. ca. xxi.
IT is a common saw yt the country which is now named Scotlonde is an
outstretchynge of ye north party of Brytayne / and is departed in the south
side from Brytayne with arms of the sea / and in the other side all about be
clypped with the sea. This land heet some time Albania and had yt name of
Albanactus yt was king Brutes sone / for Albanactus dwelled first therein / or
of the prouynce Albania yt is a country of Scicia and nyghe to Amazona /
therefore Scotts ben called as it were scyttes / for they come out of Scicia.
Afterward yt land heet Pictauia for ye Pyctes reigned therein a. M. lxx. year /
or as some tell a M. CCC. lx. year. And at last heet Hibernia as Irlonde
hight Gir. in top. For many skylles / one skyll is for affynyte and alye yt was
between them and Irysshmen / for they took wives of Irlonde and that is openly
seen in her believe / in clothing / in langage and in speech / in wepen and in
manners. An other skyll is for Irysshmen dwelled there sometime Beda li. j. Out
of Irlonde yt is the propre country of Scotts come Irysshmen with her duke yt
was called Renda. And with love and we strength made hem chyef sees and cytees
besides the Pictes in y^ northsyde. Gir. Now ye land is shortly called
Scotlonde of Scotts yt come out of Irlonde and reigned therein. CCC. xv. year
unto ye reed Williams time yt was Malcolins brod R. Many euydences we have of
this Scotlonde yt it is often called and hight Hibernia as Irlonde does. There
for Beda li. ij. ca. xi. says yt Laurence arche bishop of Dunbar was
archebysshop of Scotts yt dwelled in an ylonde yt heet Hibernia and is next to
Brytayne Also Beda li. iij. ca. xxvij. says. Pestylence of moreyn bare down
Hibernia Also li. iij. ca. ij. says That the Scotts yt dwelled in the south
side of Hibernia Also li. iiij. ca. iij. he says that Cladde was a yonglynge
and learned the rule of monks in Hibernia. Also li. iiij. ca. xxij Egfridus
king of Northumberlonde destroyed Hibernia. Also li. iiij. ca. xv. the most
dele of Scotts in Hibernia / and in the same chapter he called Hibernia
proprely named / yt west ylonde is an hundred mile from eueryche Brytayne / and
departed with the sea between and called Hibernia yt country yt now is called
Scotlonde / chere he tells yt Adamuan abbot of this ylonde saylled to
Hibernia for to teache Irysshmen the lawful esterdaye. And at last come
again in to Scotlonde. Ysy. ethi. li..xiiij. Men of this Scotlonde ben named
Scotts in their own langage and Pictes also / for sometime her body was
peynted in this manner / they would sometime with a sharp egged tole prycke and
kerue her own bodies and make thereon diverse fygures and shappes and peynte
hem with ynke or with other peynture or color / and by cause they were so
peynted they were called Picti / that is to say peynted. Erodotes Scotts ben
light of heart / strange and wild enough / but by medlynge of Englyshmen they
ben much amended / they ben cruel upon their enemies and hates bondage most
of any thing / and hold for a foul sloth if a man deye in his bed / and
great worship if he deye in the field / They ben little of mete and mow fast
long / and eten selde when the son is up / and eten flesh fysshe milk and
fruit more than bread. And though they be fair of shappe they ben defouled and
made unseemly enough with their own clothing. They praise fast the vsages of
their own forfaders and despysen other me^nes doing / her land is fruit full
enough in pasture gardyns and feldes Gir. de ^. ca. xviij. The princes of
Scotts as the kings of Spain ben not wont to be enoynted ne crowned. In
this Scotlonde is solemn and great my^de of saint Andrewe thapostle For saint
Andrewe had the north contrees of the world Scytes and Pyctes to his lotte for
to preche and convert ye people to Crystes believe. And at last he was
martred in Achaia in Grecia in a cite yt was named Patras / and his bones were
kept. CC. lxxn. year unto Constantinus themperours time / and then they were
transleted in to Constatynople and kept there. C. x. year unto Theodosies
themperours time. And then^e Vngus king of Pyctes in Scotlonde destroyed a
great part in Brytayne and was besette with a great host of Brytons in a field
called Merke / and he herd saint Andrewespeke to him in this manner. Vngus
vngus here you me crystes apostle. I promise the help and socour / when you have
ouercomen thyn enemies by my help / you shall give the third dele of thyn
heritage in alms to god almighty and in the worship of saint Andre we / and
the sign of y^ cross went tofore his host and the third day he had vyctory
and so turned home ayene and deled his heritage as he was boden And for he was
uncertain what cite he should dele for saint Andrewe / he fasted three days /
he and his men prayed saint Andrewe yt he would show him what place he would
chese. And one of the wardeyns yt kept the body of saint Andrewe in
Constanstinople was warned in his sleep yt he should go in to a place whyder an
angel would led hy^ and so he come in to Scotlonde with. un. fellows to yt
top of an hylle named Ragmonde. The same hour light of heaven beshone and
beclypped the king of Pyctes yt was coming with his host to a place called
Carceuan. There anon were heled many seek men There met with the king Regulus
the monk of Constantynople with the relyques of saint Andrewe. There is
founded a church in worship of saint Andrewe yt is heed of all the chirches in
the land of Pyctes y^ is Scotlonde. To this church comen pylgryms out of al
lands. There was Regulus first abbot and gadred monks. And so al ye tyenthe
land that the king had assygned him he departed it in diverse places among
abbayes.

Of ye descrypco^n of Irlonde.ca.xxij.
HIbernia yt is Irlonde / and was of old time Incorperate in to the lordshyp
of Brytayne so says Gir. in sua topp^. Where he descryueth it at full. Yet it
is worthy and semely to praise ye land with larger praysynge / for to come to
clear and full knowleche of yt land these tytles yt follow opene ye way
Therefore I shall tell of the place and stead of yt land how great and what
manner land it is / whereof yt land has plente and whereof it has defaute /
also of what men y^ dwelled therein first. Of manners of men of y^ land. Of the
wondres of that land / and of worthynes of halowes and saints of that land.

Of ye bou^dynge of Irlonde. ca.xxiij.
IRlonde is the last of all the west ylondes and hight Hibernia of one Hiberus
of Spain yt was Hermonius brother / for these two brethern gate and wanne yt
land by conquest. Or it is called Hibernia of yt river Hiberus yt is in the
west end of Spain / and yt land hight Scotlonde also / for Scotts dwelled
there sometime er they come in to yt other Scotlonde yt longed to Brytayne /
therefore it is written in the Martyloge. Such a day in Scotlond saint Bryde was
born / and yt was in Irlonde This land has in the southest side Spain three
days sayllynge thens a side half / and has in the est side ye more Brytayne
thens a days sayllynge / in the west side the endless Occean / and in the north
side Yselonde three days sail lynge thens. Solinus. But the sea yt is between
Brytayne and Irlonde is all the year full of great wawes and vnesy / so yt men
may selde saylle sykerly between / that see is.C. xx. mile broad.

Of the gretnes and qualyte of that land. ca. xxiiij.
IRlonde is an ylonde grettest after Brytayne / and stretches north ward from
Brendas hills unto the land Columbina and conteyneth.viij. days Journey /
every Journey.xl. mile / and from Deuelyn to Patryks hills and to the sea in
yt side in bread.iiij. Iourneys / and Irlonde is narower in y^ myddel than in
thendes / al otherwise than Brytayne is / as Irlonde is shorter northwarde than
Brytayne / so is it longer southward / ye land is not plain but full of
montayns of hills of wodes of mareys and of mores / the land is soft rayny
wyndy and low by ye see side and within hylly and sondy. Solinus There is great
plente of noble pasture and of leese / therefore the bestes must be often driven
out of their pasture lest they ete ouermoche for they should shende hem self if
they might ete at their will / Gir. Men of yt land have co^munely their health
/ and strangers have often a perylous flux because of the moisture of ye mete.
The flesh of kyen is there wholesome / and swynes flesh unwholesome. Men of yt
land have no fever but only the fever ague and yt right selde. Therefore the
holsomnes and health of yt land and the clennes out of venyme is worth all the
boost and richesse of trees of herbs of spycer of rich clothes and of
pretyous stones of the cest lands. The cause of the health and holsomnes of yt
land is the attemperate hete and cold yt is therein. In ^bz rebz sufficit. In
this land ben mo kyen than oxen / more pasture than corn / more gras than seed
/ there is plente of samon / of lamprayes / of celes and of other see fysshe. Of
egles / of cranes / of pecoks of curlewes / of sperhaukes / of goshaukes and of
gentyl fawcons. Of wolves and right shrewed myse There ben attercoppes / blood
soukers cettes y^ done none harm / there ben ^eyres little of body and full
hardy and strong / there ben bernacles fowls like to wild ghees which grown
wonderly upon trees / as it were nature wrought again kind. Men of relygyon
eteth bernacles on fastyndayes because they ben not engendered with flessh /
wherein as me thinks they err / for reason is against that. For if if a man
had eten of Adams leg he had eten flesh / and yet Adam was not engendered of
fader and mother / but yt flesh come wonderly of the earth / and so this
flesh come wonderly of ye tree. In this land is plente of honey and of milk
of wine and of vyneyerdes Solines and Ysid. written yt Irlonde has no bees
Netheles it were better written yt Irlonde had bees and no vineyards Also Beda
says yt there is great hunting to roobuckes / and it is know yt there ben
none. It is no wonder of Beda for he saw never that land but some man told
hy^ such tales. Also there grows yt stone Saxagonus and is called Iris also
as it were ye raynbowe if ye stone be hold against the son anon it shall
shape a raynbowe / there is also fou^den a stone yt is called Gagates and white
margery perles

Of the defautes of ye land. ca.xxv.
WHete corns ben there full small uneath yclensed with man's hand / reserved
m^n / al bestes ben smaller there than in other lands. There lacks well nygh
al manner fysshe of fresshe water yt is not gendred in the sea / there lacken
unkind faucons gerfaucons / partrychis / fesau^te nyghty^gals and pyes / there
lacken also Roo and bucke and Ilespiles wontes and other venomous bestes.
Therefore some men feynen and y^ favorably yt saint Patryke cleansed y^ land of
worms and of venomous bestes but it is more probable and more skillful yt this
land was from the beginning always without such worms for venomous beestes
and worms deyen there anon if men bring hem thither out of other lands. And
also veyyme and poison brought thither out of other lands lesen their malice as
soon as it passes ye myddell of the sea. Also powder and earth of yt land
cast and sown in other lands driven away worms ^o ferforth yt if a turt of
yt land be put about a worm it sleeth hy^ or makes him thrylle ye earth for
te^cape away In ye land cocks crow but little tofore day / so yt the
first crowynge of cocks in yt land and the third in other lands ben like
far tofore the day.

Of them that first enhabyted Irlonde. ca. xxvi.
O Iraldus says ye Casera Noes nece drad the flood and fled with three men and
fyfty wy^men in to y^ ylonde and dwelled therein first the last yeretofore Noes
flood. But afterward Bartholanus Seres sone that come of Iaphet Noes sone come
thither wr his three sons by hap or by craft.CCC. year after Noes flood and
dwelled there and encreaced to ye nombre of.ix. M. men and afterward for
stenche of kareyns of geau^tes yt they had kylde they deyeden all save one
Ruanus yt lived a.M. vc. year unto saint Patryks time / and informed the holy
man of the foresaid men and of all their doings and deeds. Then the third time
come thither Nymeth out of Scicia with his.iiij. sons and dwelled there.CC.xvi.
year. And at last of his ofspryng by diverse myshappes of wars and of
moreyne they were clean destroyed and ye land left void.CC year after. The
fourth time five dukes yt were brethern Gandius. Genandus. Sagandius.
Rutheragus Slauius of the said Nymethes successors come out of Greece and
occupied y^ land and deled it in five parties / and every party
conteyneth.xxij. candredes. A candrede is a country yt conteyneth.C. towns /
and they set a stone in ye myddell of the land as it were in the navel and
beginning of five kingdoms. At the last Slauius was made king of all ye
land. The fyfth time when this nacyon was.xxx. year together they wexe feeble
Four noble men yt were Millesius the kings sons come out of Spain with many
other in a nauye of.lx. ships And two of the worthyest of these.iiij.
brethern y^ heet Hiberus and Hermon deled the land between hem tweyne / but
afterward covenant was broken between hem both and Hiberus was slain Then
Hermon was king of all yt land. And from his time to the first (...) time were
kings of yt nation.C.xxxi. And so fro the coming of the Hibernensis unto the
first Patryk were.M.viij. year. They had that name Hibernenses and Hibernia of
ye foresaid Hiberus / or else of Hiberus a River of Spain. They were called also
Gaytels and Scottus of one Gaytelus yt was Phenis neuewe. This Gaytelus could
speak many langages / after the langages yt were made at Nemproths tour and
wedded one Scotta Pharoes daughter. Of these dukes come ye Hibernensis Men say
that this Gaytelus made ye Irysshe langage and called it Gaytelaf as it were a
langage gadred of all langages and tongues. At the last Belinus king of Brytayne
had a sone and hight Gurguncius. As this Gurguncius come out of Denmark at
ylondes Orcades / he found men yt were called Basclensis and were come thyd
out of Spain / these men prayed and besought for to have place to dwell jnne.
And ye king sent hem to Irlonde yt was tho void and waste / and ordained and
sent with hem dukes and capteyns of his own / and so it seems yt Irlonde
should long to Brytayne by right of old time. From the first saint Patryk
unto Fedliundius the kyngus time. CCCC. year reigned xxxiij. kings eueryche
after other in Irlonde. In this Fedliundius time Turgesius duke and captain of
Norwayes brought thither men of Norwaye and occupied yt land and made in many
plac^ deep dyches and castles sengle double and treble and many wards strongly
walled and many thereof stand yet all hole / but Irysshmen reche not of castles
/ for they take wodes for castles and mareys and mores for castle dyches / but
at last Turgesius deyed by gylefull wyles of women / and Englysshmen say
that Gurmundus wanne Irlonde and made thylke dyches / and make no menco^n of
Turgesius / and Irysshmen speak of Turgesius and know not of Gurmu^dus.
Therefore it is to wete yt Gurmu^dus had won Brytayne and dwelled therein / and
sent Turgesius with great strength in to Irlonde for to win that land. and
because Turgesius was captain and leder of that vyage and Iourneye and seen
among them / therefore Irysshmen speak much of him as a noble man that was
sern in that land and known. At last when Gurmu^dus was slain in France.
Turgesius loved the kyngus daughter of Irlonde / and her fader behyght
Turgesius that he would send her him to the low larherin with.xv. maidens /
and Turgesius promised to mete there with.xv. of the noblest men that he had /
and held covenant and thought no gyle / but there come. xv. young berdles men
clothed like wy^men with short swerdes under her clothes / and fylle on Turgesius
and slew him right there / and so he was traytoursly slain after he had
reigned xxx. year. Not long after three brethern Amelanus Siracus and Iuorus
come in to Irlonde with her men out of Norwaye as it had been for love of peace and
of marchau^dyse and dwelled by the sea sides by assente of Irysshmen that were
always idle as Poules knyghtus / and ye Norwayes builded three cytees Deuelyn
Waterforde and Lymeryche and encreced and after wexe rebel against men of that
land and brought first sparthes in to Irlonde. So fro Turgesius time unto
Roderyks time king of Connacia that was ye last that was king of all the land
were.xvij. kings in Irlonde. And so the kyngus that reigned in Irlonde from ye
Hermons time unto the last Roderyks time were in all an.C.lxxxi. kyngus that
were not crowned neither enoynted ne by law of heritage / but by might
maystrye and strength of arms. The second Henry king of England made this
Roderyk subget the year of king Henryes age.xl. and of hit regne.xvij. the year
of our lord.xi. hundred.lxxij.

Of the condycyons and manners of Irlonde. ca. xxvij.
sOlinus says that men of this land ben strange of naco^n houseles and great
fyghters and acou^te ^yght and wrong all tor one thing / and ben syngle of
clothing scarce of mete cruel of heart / angry of speech / and drynketh first
blood of deed men y^ ben slain and then wesshen their vysages therewith and
hold hem paid with flesh and fruit instead of mete and with milk instead
of dry^ke / and vsen much playenge ydlenes and hunting / and trauayll but
little. In their chilhode they ben hard nourysshed and hard fed and they be
unseemly of manners and of clothing and have breche and hosen allone of wolle
and strayte hodes y^ stretches a cubyte over the sholders behind and
foldynges instead of mantels and of clokes. Also they use no sadels boots ne
spores when they ride / but they drive their horses with a chambred yerde in ye
over end. Instead of byttes with trenches and of brydles of reest / they use
brydles y^ let not their hois to ete their mete / they fight unarmed naked in
body / netheles with two darts and speres. and with broad sparthes they fight with
one hand. These men forsaken tylly^ge of land and kepen pasture for bestes
They use long berdes and long locks hanging down behind her hedes / they
use no craft of flax / of wolle / of metal / ne of marchaundyse / but give
hem to ydlenes and to sloth / and reken rest for liking / and fredome for
riches. And though Scotlonde the daughter of Irlonde use harp tymbre and
tabour. Netheles Irysshmen be conning in two manner Instruments of musyke / in
harp and tymbre yt is armed with wyre and strenges of brass. In which
Instruments though they play hastily and swyftely they make right merry
armonye and melodye with thycke tewnes werbles and notes and begin from bemoll
and playen secretly under dyme sown in the great strenges / and torn ayene
unto the same so yt the grettest party of the craft hydeth the craft / as it
would seem as though the craft so hid should be ashamed if it were take.
These men ben of evil manners in her living / they pay no tythynges / they
wedde lawfully / they spare not their alyes / but the brother wedded the
brothers wife / they ben besy to betraye her neighbors and other / they bear
sparthes in their hondes instead of staves and fight against them yt trust
most to them / these men ben varyable and unsteadfast trechours and gyleful who
yt deals with them needs more to beware of gyle than of craft of peace than
of brennynge brondes / of honey than of galle / of malice than knyghthode / they
have such manners yt they ben not strong in war and in battle ne true in
peace / they become gossybs to them that they will falsely betraye (...)
gossybrede and holy kynrede. Eueryche drynketh others blood when it is shed /
they love somdele her noryce and her playfers which yt souke the same milk
that they souked while they were childern. And they pursewe their brethern /
their cosyns / and their other kyn / and despysen their kyn whiles they live /
and avenge their death when they ben slain. So long has the usage of evil
custom endured among them that it has gotten the maystrye over them and
torneth treason in to kind so ferforth yt they ben traitors by nature. And
alyens and men of strange lands that dwell among them folowen their manners
that uneath there is none but he is besmetted with their treason also. Among
them many men pyssen sitting / and wy^men standing. There ben many men in
that land foul shapen in ly^mes and in body / for in their ly^mes they lack
the benefyce of kind. So that nowhere ben none better shapen than they yt ben
there well shapen and none worse shapen than they yt ben evil shapen. And
skylfully nature hurt and defouled by wyckednes of living brings forth
such foul gromes and evil shapen of hem that with unlawful delynge with foul
manners and evil living so wyckedly defouled kind and nature. In this land
and in Wales old wives and wy^men were wont and ben yet as men say often for
to escape themself in lykenes of hares for to milk their neighbors kyne and
stele her milk / and often greyhoundes rennen after them and poursewen them and
wenen that they be hares. Also some by craft of Nygromancye maken fat swyne
for to be reed of color and selle them in markettes and feyres. But as soon
as these swyne pass any water they torn in to their own kind whether it be
straw heye gras or turues. But these swyne may not be kept by no craft for
tendure in lykenes of swyne over three days Among these wondres and other take heed that in the vttermest end of the world falls often new meruaylles and
wondres. As though kind playde with larger love secretly and far in thendes.
than openly and nyghe in the myddell / therefore in this ylonde ben many grysely
wondres and meruaylles.

Of the meruaylles and wondres of Irlonde. ca. xxviij.
MAny men tellen yt in the north side of Irlonde is the land of life. In that
ylonde noman may deye but when they ben old and ben vexed with great sekenes /
they ben borne out in to the next land and deye there. There is an other
ylonde in Irlonde that no woman therein may bear a child / but yet she may
conceive. Also there is an ylonde in which no deed body may roten. In vltonia
that is Vlster is an ylonde in a lake wonderly departed in tweyne In that one
party is great dysturbau^ce and dyscomfort of fendes / and in yt other party
great liking and comfort of holy angels. There is also saint Patryks
purgatory yt was showed at his prayers to conferme his prechynge and his lore
when he preched to mysbleued men of sorrow and pain yt evil men should suffer
for her wicked works. And of Joy and of bliss y^ good men shall resceyue for
her holy deeds / he tells that who yt suffers the pains of the purgatory /
if it be enjoined him for penance he shall never suffer the pains of hell /
but he deye finally without repentance of sin / as the ensample is set
more full at this chapytres end. Treuisa. But truly noman may be saved but if
he be very repentaunt what someuer penance he do / and every man yt is very
repentaunt at his lives end shall be sekerly saved / though he never here of
saint Patryks purgatory. There is an ylonde in Connacte Salo / that is in the sea of Conaccia / hallowed by saint Brandan that has no myse / there deed
bodies ben not buried / but ben kept out of the earth and roten not. In Mamonia
is a well / who y^ wassheth him with that water of that well he shall wax hoar
on his heed / There is an other well in Vltoma / who someuer is wasshen therein
he shall never wexe hoar afterward. There is a well in Mounstre or Mamoma ^f
any man touch that well anon shall fall great rain in all the prouynce and
y^ rain shall never cesse till a priest y^ is a clean maiden sing a mass in
a chapel fast by and bless the wa^er and with milk of a cow y^ is of one here
bell pry^ge the well / and so reconcyle the well in this strange manner. At
Glyndalcan about the oratorye of saint ^eywyn withges berith apples as it were
apple trees and ben more wholesome than sauery That holy saint brought forth
these apples by prayers for to hele his child that was seek. There is a lake in
Vlster and much fysshe therein / which is.xxx. mile in length and.xv. in bread
The River Ban renneth out o^ that lak^ in to the north Occean / and men say
that this lake began in this manner. There were men in that cou^tr^e that were
of evil living / (...) cu^brutis. And there was a well in y^ land in great
reverence of old time / and always covered / and if it were left uncovered
the well would rise and drown all the land. And so it happed yt a woman
went to yt well for to fetch water and hyed her fast to her child yt wept
in the cradell / and left the well uncovered / then the well sprange so
fast y^ it drowned the woman and her child and made all the country a lake
and a fysshe ponde. For to preue that this is south it is a great argument /
that when the weder is clear / fysshers of yt water se in the ground under the
water round toures and high shapen as steples and chirches of that land. In
the north side of Irlonde in the country of Ossyryens every.vij. year at the
prayer of an holy Abbot / tweyne y^ ben wedded a man and a woman must needs ben
exiled and forshapen in to lyknes of wolves and abide out.vij. year. And at
end of.vij. year if they live they come home again and take again their own
shappe / and then shall other tweyne go forth in their stead and so forshapen
for other.vij. year. There is a lake in this land if a poole of tree be pyght
and stycked therein that part of the shaft or poole y^ is in the earth shall
torn in to iron / and that part y^ abides in the water shall torn in to
stone / and the part that abides above shall be tree in his own kind Also
there is a lake y^ torneth hasell in to asshe and asshe in to hasell if it be
done therein. Also in Irlonde ben three samon lepes there as samons lepe against a
^^che a long speres length. Also in (...) is a ponde there be seen (...)
birds / y^ birds ben called certell^^ and come homely to man's hand but if
men do hein wrong or harm. thry gone away and come not again / and the water
there shall wexe bitter and stynke / and he y^ did the wrong shall not a
sterte without wretch and myschyef but if he do amends. R. As touching
Patryks purgatory. Ye shall understand yt the second saint Patryk that was
abbot and not bishop while he preched in Irlonde labored and studied for to
torn thylke wicked men that lived as bestes out of her evil life for dread of
pains of hell / and for to comferme hem in good life / and they said they
would not torn but some of them might know somewhat of the great pains / and
also of bliss y^ he spoke of. T^enne saint Patryk prayed to god almighty
therefore / and our lord Ihu christ appyred to saint Patryk and took him a staff
and ladde hy^ in to a wild place and showed him there a round pytte yt was
derke within and said / that if a man were very repentau^t and stable of believe
and went in to this pytte and walked therein a day and a night / he should see
the sorrows and the pains of evil men / and the Joy and bliss of good men.
Then Christ vanysshed out of Patryks sight / and saint Patryk arered and
builded there a church and put therein chanons reguler and closed the pytte
about with a wall / and is now in the church yerde at cest end of the
church and fast shytte with a strong door. For no man should nycely go in
without leave of y^ bishop / or of the pryour of the place. Many men went in
and come out again in Patryks time and told of pains and Joy that they had
seen / and the meruaylles yt they saw ben their yet written / and by cause
thereof many men turned and were converted to right believe. Also many men went
in and come never again. In king Stephens time king of England a knight that
hight Owayne went in to saint Patryks purgatory and come again and dwelled
ever after during his life in the needs of thabbaye of Ludensis that is of
thorder of Chystews and told many wondres y^ he had seen in Patryks
purgatory. The place is called Patryks purgatory and the church is named
Reglis. Noman is enjoined for to go in to yt purgatory / but cou^seylled that
he should not come therein but take upon hy^ other penance. And if a man have
auowed and be stable and will needs go therein / he shall first go to the
bishop and then^e he shall be sent with letters to the pryour of the place and
they both shall counsel him to leave and if he will needs go thereto he shall be
in prayers and in fasting.xv. days and after.xv. days he shall be houseld
and ladde to the door of the purgatory with processyon and letanye / and yet he
shall be cou^seylled to leave it / and if he be steadfast and will enter / the
door shall be opened and he blessed and go in on gods name / and hold forth
his way / and the door shall be fast shette till the next day / and when the
time is the pryour shall come and opene the door / and if the man be comen he
ledeth him in to the church with processyon / and there he shall be.xv. days
in pryers and fasting.

Of the meruaylles of saints of Irlonde ca. xxix.
HEre Giraldus makes mind that as men of this nacyon ben more angry than
other men and more hasty for to take wretch whiles they ben a live / so
saints and halowes of this land ben more wretchefull than say^tes of other
lands. Clerks of this land ben chaste and sayen many prayers and done great
abstynence a day / and drynketh all night / so is acou^ted for a miracle /
that lechery regneth not there as wine regneth / and they that been evil of
them ben worst of all other. So good men among them though they ben but few
ben good at the best / prelates of that country ben full slow in correccyon
of trespass / and besy in contemplacyon and not in prechynge of gods word.
Therefore it is y^ all the saints of yt land ben confessors and no martyr
among them / and no wonder for all the prelates of this land ben chosen out of
abbayes in to the clergy and done as monks should / what clerks and prelates
^ should do is to them unknown Therefore when it was put ay^nst the bishop of
Cassyll how it might be yt so many saints ben in Irlonde and never a martyr
among them all sythen that the men ben so shrewed and so angry / and the
prelates so recheles and ^^owe in correcco^ns of trespass. The bishop answered
frowardly enough and said / our men ben shrewed and angry enough to themself /
but to gods servants they leye never hand but do hem great reverence and
worship / but Englyssh men come in to this land y^ can make martyrs / and were
wont to use that craft. R. The bishop said so because y^ king Henry the
second was tho new comen in to Irlonde fresshly after the martyrdom of saint
Thomas of Canterbury. Gir. In this (...) in Wales and in Scotlonde ben be^^es
and s^aues with crooked hedes and other such things for relyques in great
reverence and worship / so that men of this land droden more for to swear up
on one of thylke belles and gold staves than upon the gospel. The chyef of
all such relyques is holden Ihus staff that is at Deuelyn / with the which
staff they say that the first saint Patryk drofe the worms out of Irlonde
Auges. de ci. dei ca. vij. If men axe how it may be yt diverse manner bestes and
of diverse kind that been kyndly gotten between male and female come and ben in
ylondes after Noes flood. Men supposen that such beestes swa^me in to ylondes
about / and first to the next and so forth in to other. Or else men sayllynge in
to ylondes brought with hem such beestes for love of hunting / or angels at
god almyghtyes commandment brought such beestes in to ylondes about / or the
earth brought them forth first and fulfilled tho gods commandment / that
commanded the earth to bring forth gras and quycke beestes.

Here ends the descrypcyon of Brytayne / the which conteyneth England Wales
and Scotlonde / and also by cause Irlonde is under the rule of England and of
old time it has so continued / therefore I have set the desrypcyon of the
same after the said Brytayne / which I have taken out of Polycronycon. And by
cause it is necessary to all Englysshmen to know (...) propretees co^modytees
and meruayl^^ of them / therefore I Williain (...) have them set first in
enprynte (...) to the (...) (...) / which at request of the lord Barkeley
translated the book of Polycronycon in to English.
Fynysshed and enprynted at Westmestre by me Wynken de word / the year of our
lord a.M.CCCC. and four score and.xviij.


