

Floreat.

THE Passionate Spark of a Relenting Mind.

WRITTEN BY Simion Grahame.

Quo fata vocant.
Seen and allowed by authority.

Printed at London by Humfrey Loins, and are to be sold at his Shop at the
West door of S. Paul's Church. 1604.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Prince James, by the grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France and Ireland. etc.
THis spark comes from the quenchlesse fire of my euer-burning love, which (to
your Highness) J sacrifice upon the Altar of my spotless heart. Jn the seruent
flames of this ardor, my Muse with restles flightring wings combur's, still
hoping to be Nourished with the radiant beams and propitious splendors of
those gracious Eyes. Then, O then let not the Mistie Vapors of dark Oblivion
ouercloud the bright quickenesse of such shining Suns. But rather let the
Jnfluence of their admired virtue exhaust these my rude lines up into the rare
and rich treasure of your Maisties superaboundant favor. So ending (to begin
again) J wish your Grace a most happy and long Reign.

Your Majesty's ever loving subject. Simion Grahame.

To the King his Majesty.
1
GO thou proud Muse with thy ambitious flight
Let Wisdom with her pleasing plumes adorn thee
If lofty thou should soar thy self from sight,
What need'st thou care, the worlds Envy to scorn thee?
2
Let Heavens thy Song with Echoes still resound,
A Royal Subject does thy wings uphold,
And bids thee Mount above the valted Round,
Love has no scope, be prodigal and bold.
3
Go then my Muse His mighty Muse adore
Pull of the Veil that hid thy high desire
With consort sweet she shall thy song decore,
Her feathers fair giu's promise to aspire.
4
Then like the Lark ascen'd the Azure Air,
With quiu'ring wings go houer in the sky,
Out blast thy Notes, and send them here and there
Filling his ears with this melodious Cry.
5
O mighty King, Celestial glory shine
Over thy Crowns and thy earth'ruling hand,
Let hearts inspired thy happiness divine:
And let the world come stoop at thy command.
6
Fame through this Globe most furious-like shall thu^der
Fraught with thy praise on Virtues worth to flee
And choke the Earth with such admiring wonder
That potent Kings may come and honor thee.
7
Hearts shall Consume, of thy astonished foes
To see thy rare and high stupendous street
All paueat (whereon thou sacred goes)
With Crowns and Scepters thrown before thy feet.
8
Why hear'st thou not thy smiling Fortune call,
And bids thee spurn that pleasure mak's thee stay?
Go climb her wheell, be not afraid to fall
Thy strength but thinks this world a slender pray.
9
Seek first thy own, what force can thee resist?
A name with naught, makes all thy people rage
Like eager Hawks, reteinde upon the fist,
Who cannot have their hunger to assuage.
10
The Apple stays the simple Child to weep,
And does appease his sobbing heart of harms:
So flattering songs lulles courage fast a sleep,
And makes the Soldier throw away his Arms.
11
Now sits he wrapped up in a warm furred gown,
Over the fire with firme-fixt-gazing eyes:
There battles brave Characters does set down,
He apprehends which thought deceiving sees
12
An Army there in bloody rage forth goes,
With fury for'st, swelde with revenge and grief:
And yonder flies their faint and feeble foes,
Here stands some troops cut of without relief.
13
Some Martial men bewitch't with beauty rare,
Are intricate in Laborinthes of Love:
And for'st to try in fancies flattering snare,
What sweet-mixt-sowre or pleasing pains can prove.
14
Then Nymph-like-she with strange intising look
Does so inchant the gallant minded men
The bayte still hides the poison of the hook
Till they be fast, and thus betrayed, what then?
15
Poor captive slaves in bondage prostrate lies
Yielding unto her mercy-wanting-will
She in disdain scorns all their careful cries.
And Circes-like triumphs in learned skill.
16
With ambling trippes of beauties gorgeous grace
Aurora-like in fiery colors clad
And with bright reflex of her fairest face
She tempting goes with brainsicke humors lad.
17
Fearing that if she should but look below
Then Beams would from her burning eyes descend
On Iuory breast proud swelling hills of snow
Would melt, consume, and all their beauty spend.
18
And so she lets her curled locks down fall
Which do allure the gentle cooling wind
To come and play still wrapping up in thrall
Chains of her hair, fond lovers hearts to bind.
19
Beauty in prime adorned does feed the fight
From Crimson lips sweet Nectars gust forth flows
Odor's perfumes the breath, not Natures right
White Iourie hands a sacred touch bestows.
20
And when those pearl of Orientall-rankes
With treasure rich of tempting sound deuides
From two bright dainty mouing-corall-bankes
In*circkled cares calm smothing speeches slides.
21
Each senseless sense on doting pleasure fast
Does in a carelesle Register inroule.
Wishing that course of swift-wing'd Time to last
Which spots the spotless substance of the soul.
22
But oh behold, Nature in morning weed
Wepes to be wronged with supesttitious Art
For what can brains of rare invention breed?
Or what is unsought which pleasure may impart?
23
The sharpest wit whose quick deceiving still
Makes restlesle musing of their mind to try
Vain trifling snares, mixtur'd with Magicks skill
So Art adds that which Nature does deny.
24
And thus much more sweet Sirens songs she sounds,
To charm, conjure and tempt his hstning care:
Oh, then the poor Captiued wretch abounds
In perverse vows and monstrous oaths to swear.
25
By furious force of Fancy more than madd,
With fond desire in restless course he hunts:
Blind Love can not discern the good from badd,
When on the eye-plumde tail of pride it mounts.
26
The curious mind makes choice of good or ill,
Then scales the fort of his engine to clym
Above the top of Art exceeding skill,
Perfect in that predominates in him.
27
Drunk with the wonders of a worthless worth,
From prospect of a looking glass he takes
Strange Apish tricks to set his folly forth,
Mocked with the gesture, that his shadow makes.
28
When foolish feats no ways will serve his turn,
All hope is drowned in despaires groundlesle deep:
In restlesle bed (he martir'd man) must mourn,
Thoughts, sighs, and tears admit no kind of sleep.
29
Thus lays the Conquest Conqueror of fields
on his hurt heart he carries Cupids skarre.
The skiruie fainting Coward basely yieldes:
to idle Love the enemy of war.
30
Now Trumpets sound, brave Martial music turns
To fiddling noise, or else some amorous song,
That glorious fame her wings of worth now burns,
When golden youth in prime must suffer wrong.
31
Thus gallant sprights do quintesence their wits,
Spending the rare invention of their brains,
On idle toys, at which high honor spittes,
Nor memoriz'd memorials remains.
32
What Marble mind at this would not amaze,
To see the ambusht robberies and spoils,
O Royal Sir, with Conqu^ring eyes now gaze,
Conquer this loss tha'ts lost in all thy soyles.
33
Go, go, and make the skiruie world to yielde force
Which trembling stoopes, made fearful with thy
Outsprede an host upon each foreign field:
And from self pleasure, do they self divorce.
34
(But stay my Muse recall this word of woe)
Thy self shall with thy second self abide,
The glorious issue of thy loins shall go
His honor shall the proud earths honor hide.
35
It Is he the flourish of thy Princely prime,
It Is he that Kings are made for to adore
It Is he bewayles the slow and tardy time,
It Is he that weeps there is not worlds in store.
36
It Is he that with a greater Courage com's,
Than Godfrey did to sacked the Pagan Turk
With Tru^pets sounds and with great noise of Drum's,
It Is wondrous he will set this world on wourke.
37
In his approach allegreat thy own,
With mighty Music of a Martial mirth.
Behold thou make great Neptunes pride be shown,
Adorning him with such a gorgeous birth.
38
Let matchless marching-Castles with the wind,
In Armies strong and stately troops forth shine:
Now let them go as harbingers to find*
Each unknown Coast and tell them all is thine.
39
Look on that power that potent thou Commands,
In learned Military Art, and how,
Thy eager-harted ventring Subjects stands
Waiting that Gallant warriors word. Go tow,
40
Then do not stay Victorious Troph's to raise,
Let my Tryumphes through Sea and earth be spread,
When thou art dead high fame shall pen thy praise,
Of great renown in volumes to be read.
41
Thou Eagle thou look not on base fowls wings,
Out-stretch thy own and fly this world about.
Thou Lion thou leave beasts and hunt at Kings,
From their usurped dens go rouse them out.
42
Proud Valor for the vangard shall make strife,
And lofty sprights for Honor will advance.
Let him be loathed that loth's to loose his life,
Or in thy quarrel skornes to try his chance.
43
He willbe first who dying lived to see,
This soil thy right governed with thy great grace:
And that black mist of vap'rous clouds to flee
Which long obscured the splendors of thy face.
44
O, when he heard thy peoples joy proclaim
The righteous King in their exalting Cries,
And when he heard them sound thy sacred Name,
He threw his hatte up in the azure skies.
45
On the Towers top incarcerat he stood,
And said, O rare and sweet exchange in deed!
Thou fleetst on Neptunes dutie-paying flood*
Hatte, thou art lost, and I have gainde a head:
46
His Lady staide her sweet eyes silver streams,
The hart-burst sighs which that dear dame did breath:
Thou with the radia^t brightness of thy beams
Expeld her woes, and his untimely death.
47
Pity in thee does Pitties self surpass,
With pity hear thy peoples mourninge songs:
Look in abuse, as in a looking glass,
Appease this plague of their pestif'rous wrongs
48
With treasure rich and rare adorniug gifts
Of Justice ioynde with mercy both in one:
See how the worngde Complainer kneeling liftes,
His hands, his eyes, and sighs with martring moan.
49
He says O Sir I would to God thou saw,
What numbers great, Damned Usury does kill
The snakye Lawyer with unlawful law
He suckes the hartblood of his Clients still,
50
His hopeless shifts will promise very fayer,
And take their soul, if that their soul were gold
He robbes them first, then drownes them in despair,
So poor men's right, is to the rich men sold.
51
To come to thee alas they are chokte with fear,
Some are put back, when kneeling on their knees
Do what they can before they get thy ear,
The bribrous Minion, needs will have his fees.
52
He takes in hand each suit both great or small,
And sweates they are sure yea to them surely lost.
For first he tryes the walue of them all,
And selles them quite to those that will give most.
53
When days, weeks, months and years are spent he tells
The King will no ways grant your suits: farewell,
This whorles the poor man in a hundred helles
Both them and theirs to beg, to rob, and steal.
53
O Heavens what filthy Colors can I have.
To painte such ugly Monsters in their kind:
They flatter most when they would most deceive,
There honey tongues stinges with a Vip'rous mind.
34
It Is this vile Caterpillars Mischeifes-Nurse,
That fills thy Commons full of sad Complaints,
Thou come to cure this strange consuming Curse,
At which I know thy ruthful heart relents.
55
I care not for the falty-ons envy,
I know this Physic makes his soul to smart:
O that it could both make him Weep and Cry.
Whilst Conscience-worme eats up his guilty heart.
56
Spare not Revenge, God sends thee to redress,
Long-suffring-greife, and Rigor to remove
Tread down their heads that would the poor oppress
So shall thou win and keep thy peoples love.
57
Still may thy love with their true love be bought,
Still may thy Crown bring Crowns upon thy Crown
Still may thy worth with wondrous worth be wrought
Still may renown enrich thy rich renown.
51
Still may thou reign in happiness and health
And still may thou in being ever be:
Believe me Sir my love is all my wealth,
And all that wealth I sacrifice to thee.
So only Love has given my Muse this flight,
And makes her come salute thy sacred sight.
FINIS.
Of a Be.
De l' Ape ch' loprenai Dolce, e Crudele
Le ago nel Core, Nella bocca La mele.

Madrigall.
Once did I see
a sounding Be.
Amongst her sweetened swarm
still would she flee
and favor me.
Then did I dread no harm.
Now whilst in Nectred-glory of her gains,
She sitts and suckes the fair well-florisht flower:
My sugared hopes are turned to bitter pains,
And lookt*for-sweete is nothing else but sower
Ah cruel sweet Be sweet and cure my smart,
Honny my mouth, but do not stinge my heart.
FINIS.
To the famous I Will of Glorious Britannie.
1
ON Parnasse hill whilst as I sit to sing*
Of stately joy the streams that by me slides:
Sweet consort yields from the Castalean spring
Whose murmr still in Silver veins deuides,
Then intricate with courses to and fro*
They seem to turn whilst as with speed they go.
2
The Muses scarce in circuit is sat down,
When Laureat troops comes kneeling me before,
In humble show each takes his Laurel Crown,
And swears they shall this subject all adore:
So am I forced by thee, O wondrous worth!
In warbling notes sweet consorts to send forth.
3
With nine-voyc'd mouth, my Delphin song I sound,
Of all the world blessed be thou Britains I Will.
Thou, only thou within this mortal round
On whom the Heavens have lou'de so long to smile
For Phanix-like thou have renewde by kind
In getting that which lay for thee iushtinde.
4
Thy present time does winter-blast despair
At force of Joy the barren branch decays
Long florish'd hope now fruitful is and fair
Whose lod'ued birth with burden bows the bays,
So downward tops inclining still below
Such homage to their owner do they show.
5
Then soil in this most happy haru'st your right
Ripe sweet desire in spite of vilde Envy
So shall you with your Monarches*matching-might
Make earthly Kings to fear your conquering cry
The circuit of this spacious Ball at length
shall yield unto your army potent*strength,
6
As sounds below relents the Air above
That hideous noise of Thunderclaps may swage
So proud usurping minds shall stoop to move
The Lion read to stay his roaring rage
Their honors high when he has made them thrall
Since with his force their forcelesle force must fall.
7
He threatens the earth with such tryumphant might
That makes his foes afraid to hear his name
On Virtues wings oreshinde with honors light
Borne through the world with ever flying fame
Which still the Echo of his might resounds
A terror threatening these terrestiall bounds.
8
His Scepter proud and his great conquering hand
Will erect Troph's of high Triumphs on all
Earth-ruling minds stooping at his command
Adorned they are by him to be made thrall.
So Monarch he must cause each potent King,
For him and his rich tributes for to bring.
9
No treasons gilt, such threatningss can abide
Nor Vipers vilde who cates their tongues to bark
With fears confused must needs their selves go hide
And lie obscure in the Cemerian dark.
From light debarred to pressage Plutoes place
Where monstrous spirits such mo^sters shall embrace
10
Sweld with Envy and poys'ned great with grief
Most serpent-like spewes Vennome on their own
Damned hearts abhord whose mutins breeds mischief
They with their self, their self shall be orethrowne.
So diu'llish brains brings restless murder still
They silthie frogs each one shall other kill.
11
Then subjects true on honors throne set forth
No death your eternized life can end
For famous feats ad's wonders to such worth*
And truth still does a shining light out send
Whose glancing beams reflexing here and there
By flowing quilles of Poets are made rare.
12
Now happy I Will sequestered lives no more
Since ioyn'de expel the excrements of wrath
And let their foul ambitious factes implore
Their own orethrow and well-deseruing death.
Raze down, tread on their turrets of Envy
Whose pride would mount above the valted sky.
13
The Register of Memory behold
How God of wonders, wondrous works has wrought
When life past hope to Treason he was sold,
Till threatning*death in dangers mouth him brought
In such extremes deaths ambush was in vain
For Heavens strong hand did save him still unslain.
14
All high attempts of deu'llish foes was foyld
All hideous noise of horrors did assuage
All tragike troops of hellish thoughts was spoylde
And rigors self gave rigor to their rage
Ensigns displaid whose terror them confounds
Whilst conquering Joy victorious trumpet sounds.
15
The ship which death with tempests grief did threat'n
And gulfes of seas was ready to devour
When restlesse-mercy-wanting-stormes had beat'n
At last came safe unto her long-sought shore.
So heaven now brings him to his hau'ning place
Still to succeed to him and all his race.
16
The upright in each true external thing
Bewrayes the force hart*burnig-loue does yeald
For smiling looks of such a gracious King
Shall make your love with lise and blood be sealed,
Unworthy to enjoy this mortal breath
Who for this King or country fears their death.
17
The Altar is a spotless mind whereon
You sacrifice and offer up good will
Love yields the fuel from the heart alon
Which once inflamed is quenchlesse burning still
Then Martial feats shall breed courageous strife,
In battles brave to try a careless life.
18
Though the Idaa of your long desire
Unsettled Time obscures him for a space
Yet shall this Time with coming Time expire
And then receive fruition of his face
Who Justice seeks, his wisdoms eyes shall see
With Reasons right each may contented be.
19
Lo Springtime comes, long dark'ned Sun com's out
All to renew that Winter blastes had spoiled
When sending forth, his gorgeous beams about,
Hopes haru'st expel's which high despair had foiled
So hope triumphs, despair lies quite o'rethrowne
Sweet Soil thou have which God has made thine own.
20
Misconster not his well-inclining-minde
Do not mistrust, for Trial lurkes in Time
Why to his Kingdoms shall he prove unkind,
And glory stayne of his adorning prime?
No counsel can make him become so strange,
Nor earthly pomp his burning love to change.
21
Murmour no more nor be not discontent
When constant love and spotless Justice stands
With eager piercing looks for to prevent
All kind of foul oppression in his lands.
This is the right inricheth his renown,
This is the oath made to his royal Crown.
12
And you whose long tormented hearts has still
With cloudie mistes and darkness been obscured
You all the world with Tragike volumes fill
What woe's devised that you have not endured
Your Register this Rigor may recall,
Shame, bloodshed, death, still captives led in thrall.
23
In guiltless him, no cruelty does dwell
Nor from his mercy never sprang mischief
Your conscience read and it shall surely tell
His hands are washed as causeless of your grief
Then let the blood the banishment and death
Be on their heads the Authors of your wrath.
24
What though a King? yet Kings are sometime forced
To yield consent with vnconsenting heart
As from his will unwillingly diuorc'd
That no uproar should rise any part:
Such is the only prudence in a Prince
That against a murmuring Momus makes defense.
25
Why, do not then degorge satyrike words
Usurping right, thou shall usurp thy brain
For lo naught else such foolish feats affords:
But diu'llish guerdon for thy greatest gain,
And still thou shall infamous make thy name
When as thy end's to end in endless shame.
26
If Christian thou, then Christian-like abide
Till flowing favor from his Kingly love
By Stately rule thy fredome shall provide
When minds remorse and mercy shall him move,
So Conscience thral'd, made free and grief is gone
Then shall his Soyles contented hue in one.
27
And dark'ned Clouds that lowers upon you heads
Gives place unto the glori'us shining Sun
Whose burning beams with radiant splendour spreads
A restless race not ending still begun
To show the ods 'twixt heau's Caelestiall light
And glomy mist of Helles eternal night.
28
From treasure rich of Gods immortal store
Let fervent love in fity flames descend
And sill you: hearts with pity to implore
That heavens preventing hand may him defend
Let highest curse breath forth consuming woes
For to convert or else confound his foes.
29
A gracious King whose Mercy still abounds
A gallant Queen by Nature made none such*
A Prince whose worth James restles Trumpet sounds
And Princess she I cannot praise too much
A King a Queen, a Prince, a Princess rare
O Soil, what Soil, can with this Soil compare.
30
Then happy I Will, in this thy happy day
Gods thundering voyee with hearts relenting hear
Whilst heavens high Troops theatred in array
With sounding loy before Christ's throne compeare
In consort sweet melodious songs to sing
Live hue great James most blessed and potent King.
FINIS.
To Scotland his Soil:
To thee my Soil (where first
I did receive my breath)
These Obsequies I sing
Before my Swan-like-death.
My love by nature bound
which spotless love I spend
From treasure of my heart
to Thee I recommend.
I care not Fortunes frown,
nor her unconstant Fate:
Let her dissembling smile
and triumph in deceate.
Cursed be that man which hoords
his hopes up in her lap,
And cursed be he that builds
upon her haplesle hap.
I tread on that blind Bawd
and scorn her sowre-mixt-sweet,
In spite of all her spite
I spurn her with my feet.
Now let her spet more wrath
(If any more yet be)
Let horror of her heart
thunder at careless- Me.
Then all the flattering shows
of Fortune I disdain,
So farewell Soil and friends,
a Pilgrim once again.
FINIS.
His Passionado when he was in Pilgrimage.
1
THou Phaeton thy fity course do end,
and Cinthia thou with borrowed light do shine
These woods their silent horrors do out-send,
And Valleys low their mistie Vapors shrine,
Each huely thing by natures course does go
To rest save I that wander now in woe.
2
My plaints impart these soli'd parts to fill,
Whilst roaring Rivers send their sowndes among
Each dreadful Deen appears to help me still,
And yields sad Consorts to my sorr'wing song,
How often I breath this woeful word alace,
From Echo I sad accents back embrace.
3
I will* advance, what fears can me affray*
Since Dreades are all debarred by high despair,
Lake dark nights-Ghost, I Vagabond astraye
With trobled spri't transported here and there,
None like my self but this my self alone
I matur'd man bewail my matchless moan.
4
You flintic stones take ears and eyes to see
This thundering grief with earthquake of my heart
That you may sigh and weep with miser- Me
Melt at the tragic Commentes of my smart.
Let these my tears that fall on you so often
Make your obdurate hardness to be soft.
5
You liquid drops distilling from mine eyes,
In Crystal you* my second self appears*
Pattern of pain, how do thou sympathize
In visage wan, and Pilgrim's weed thou bears?
And on those signs of miscontent attire
Still do I read, debarred from my desire.
6
This hairie Roabe which does my corpse contain
This Burden and my rough vnrased head
A winter and a summer have I bin
In dangers great still wandering in this weed,
Lo thus the force of my disasters strange
Has made me use this unacquainted change.
7
I am dried up with Dolors I endure
My hollow eyes bewray my restles night
My Visage pale self pity does procure
I see my sores deciph'red in my sight.
A Pilgrim still, my Oracle was so,
And made my name, AH MISER MAN I GO.
8
Now do I go and wander any way,
No strange estate no kind of trau'ling toils
No threatening Cross nor sorrow can me stay,
To search and seek through all the sorts of soyles.
So round about this Round still have I run,
Where I began, again I have begun.
9
In strangest parts where stranger I may be,
An outcast lost and voyed of al relief:
When saddest sights of sorrow I can see,
They to my grave shall help to feed my grief*
If Wonders self can woeful wonders show
That sight, that part, that wonder I will know.
10
Thus do I walk on foreign fields forlorn,
To careless- Me, all cares do prove unkind,
I do the Fates of sickle Fortune scorn:
Each Cross now bredes contentment to ^y mind
Astonish of stupendous things by day,
Nor howling sounds by night can me affray.
11
You stately, Alps surmounting in the skies
The force of floods that from your heights down falls
There mighty Clamors with my careful Cries,
The Echoes voice from hollow Caves recalles.
The snow froz'n-clowds down from your tops do thu^der
Their voice with mine does tear the air a sunder
12
And Neptune thou when thy proud swelling wrath
From gulphes to mountains moved with Winters blast
In anger great when thou did threaten death
Often in thy rage, thy raging storms I past
And my salt tears increast thy saltnes more,
My sighs with winds made all thy bowels rore.
13
The spacious earth and groundless deep shall bear,
A true Record of this my mart'ring moan
And if there were a world of worlds to hear
(When from this mortali Chaos I am gone)
I dare approve my sorrow has bin such
That all their wits cannot admire too much.
14
On the cold grownde my Caytife-Carcasle lies,
The leaueles trees my Winter*blasted-bed.
Noc Architecture but the Vap'rous skies,
Black foggie Mist my weari'd corpse has cled,
This loathsome La^e on which I restles turn
Does best befit Mee-Miser-man to mourn.
15
With open eyes Nights darkness I disdain*
On my Cros'd*brest I Crosle my Crossed arms
And when Repose seckes to prevent my pain*
Squadrons of Cares do sound their flesh alarmes
So in my sleep (the Image of pale Death)
These sighing words with burden brus'd I breath.
16
I ever rowed my Barge against the stream,
I scaled those steps that Fortune did me frame
I Conquered, which impossible did seem.
I, haples I, once happy I became
Now sweetest Joy is turned to bitter gall
The higher up the greater was my fall.
17
What passing Follies are in high Estates,
Whose foolish hopes give promise to aspire:
Selfe-flatt'rie still does mask the fear of Fates
Till unawares deceived in sougth desire,
This breeds despair, then force of Fortunes change
Setts high Estates in dread and perrill strange.
18
There secret grudge, Envy and Treason dwelles
There Justice lies, in Dole*bewraying weed
There slyding Time with alt'ring feats still tells
The great Attempts ambitious minds do breed.
They who have most still hunt for more and more
They most desire that most are choked with store
19
Henceforth will I forsake Terrestiall Toys,
Which are naught else but shawdowes of deceat
What Covered danger is in earthly joys,
When vilde Envy, triumphs on each Estate.
Thou Traitor Time thy Treason does betray
And makes youths Spring in flourish fair decay.
20
What Is in Experience which I have not sought
All (in that All) my will I did advance
At highest rate, all these my wits are bought
In Fortunes Lottrie, I have tried my Chance.
So what I have I have it not by show,
But by experience which I truly know.
21
Long have I searched and now at last I find,
Eye-pleasing-Calmes the tempest does obscure.
When I in glory of my prosperous wind,
With white*sweld*sayles on gentle seas secure
And when I thought my Loadstarre shined most fair
Even then my hopes made shipwreck on despair.
22
My light is dark whilst I am overthrown,
Poor silly Bark that did pure love possess:
With great ungrateful storms thus am I blown
On ruthlesse Rocks still deaf at my distress.
So long-sought-Conquest does in ruin's bost
And says behold, thy love and labor's lost.
23
Since all my love and labor's lost, let Fame
Spit forth her hate and with that hateful scorn
In dark oblivion sepulchrize my name:
And tell the world that I was never borne.
In me all earthly dream'd-of-Ioy shall end.
As Indian herbs, which in black smoke I spend.
14
All-doting-pleasure, that all-tempting-Deuill,
I shall abhor as a contag'ous Pest
I Will purge and cleanse my senses of that Evil
I swear and vow, still in this vow to rest,
In fable habit of the mourning black
I Will solemnize this oath and vow I make.
15
Then go vilde World confused Mass of naught,
Thy bitterness has now abused my brain
Avoid thy deu'llish Fancy from my thought
With idle toys torment me not again.
My Time which thy alluring folly spent
With heart contrite and tears I do repent.
FINIS.
Against Time.
SONNET.
Go traitor Time and authorize my wrong*
My wrack, my woe, my waiting on bewray
Look on my heart which by thy shifts so long
Then tyrannized with Treason to betray
My hopes are fled, my thoughts are gone astray
And senseless I have sorrow in such store
That pain it self to whom I am a pray
Of me has made a martred man and more.
Go, go then Time, I hateful thee implore,
To memorize my sad and matchless moan
Whilst thy deceipts by death I shall decore
My loss of life shall make them known each one,
So (I poor I) I sing with Swan like song,
Go traitor Time and Authorize my wrong.
FINIS.
The Estate of worldly Estates.
1
EAch has his Time whom Fortune will advance
Whose fickle wheel runs restless round about
Some flattering lie often changes others chance
Dangers deceit in guilty hearts breeds doubt.
It Is seen
What yet has been
With tract of time to pass,
And change
Of Fortune strange
At last has turned their glass.
2
Envy triumph's on tops of high Estate
All ouer-hung with veiles of feigned show
Man chmbes above the course of such conceate
That lothe-like, they loath to look below.
And what?
All Is haszard that
We seek on Dice to set,
For some
To height's do come
Then falls in dangers net.
4
The gallant man, if poor, he is thought a wretch,
His Virtue rare is held in high disdain
The greatest Fool is wise if he be rich
And wisdom flower from his Lunatique brain,
Thus see
Rare sprit's to be
Of no account at all.
Disgrace
Has got such place
Each joys at others fall.
3
The brib'rous mind who makes a God of gould
He scorns to plead without he have reward
Then poor men's suites at highest rat's are sold
Whilst Au'rice damned, nor Ruth has no regard.
For here
He has no fear
Of Gods consuming curse
His gains
Does pull with pains
Plagues from the poor man's purse.
5
The furious flames of Sodom's sudden fire,
With fervent force consume vain Pride to naught
With wings of wax let soaring him aspire
Above the Stars of his ambitious thought.
And so
When he does go
On top of Prides high glory
Then shall
His sudden fall
Become the worlds sad Story.
6
Ingratitude that ill,-ill-fauor'd Ill
In noble breasts has builded Castles strong
Oblivion sett's-vp the Troph's that still
Bewrayes the filthy vildenesse of that wrong.
Ah mind
Where deu'llish kind
Ingratitude does dwell
That Ill
Coequals still
The greatest Ill in hell.
7
On poisons filth contagious Error spreeds
Heavens spotless eyes looks as amazed with wonder
Their Viprous minds such raging horror breeds
To tear Religions virgin-roabes asunder.
What then
O wicked men
And Hels Eternal pray
Go mourn
And in time turn
From your erroneous way.
8
What course wants cross? what kind of state wants strife?
What worldling yet could ever seem content?
What have we here in this our thwartting life?
Joy, Beauty, Honor, Love, like smoke are spent.
I say
Time goe's away
Without return again
How wise!
Who can despise
These worldly vapors vain.
FINIS.
His Dying song.
1
NOw hapless Heart what can thy soars assuage
Since that art grypt with horror of Deaths hand?
Thou (baleful-thou) becoms the Tragic stage
Where all my torturing thoughts theatred stand:
Grief, fear, death, thought, each in a monstrous kind
Like ugly monsters muster in my mind.
2
Thou loathsome bed to restlesse-martred- Me
Void of repose, filled with consuming cares,
I will breath forth my wretched life on thee,
For quenchlesse woe and pain, my grave prepares
Unto pale-agonizing- Death am thrall
Then must I go, and answer to his call.
3
O Memory most bitter to that man,
Whose God is Gold and hoords it up in store,
But O that blind-deceiuing- Wealth what can
It save a life, or add one minute more?
When he at rest, rich treasures in his sight,
His Soul (poor Fool) is taken away that night.
4
And strangers gets the substance of his gain,
Which he long sought with endless toils to find
This v^lde worl^s silth and excrements most vain,
He needs must dye and leave it all behind.
O man in mind remember this, and mourn,
Naked thou came, and Naked must return,
5
I naked came, I naked must return*
Earths flattering pleasure is an Idle toy
For now I swear my very Soul does spurn
That breath, that froth, that moment fleeting joy,
Then farewell World, let him betrayed still bost
Of all mischief that in Thee trusts most.
6
Burnt- Candle, all thy store consumed thou end's,
Thy lightning splendour threat's for to be gone,
O how do thou resemble Me that spend's
And sighs forth life in sighing forth my moan?
Thy light Thee lothes, I loath this lothed life,
Full of deceit, false envy, grudge, and strife.
7
I call on Time, Tim's alt'red by the change,
I call on Friends, friends have closed up their ears
I call on Earthly Powers, and they are strange
I call in vain when Pity none appears.
Both Time and friends, both Earthly Powers and all
All in disdain are deaf at my hoarse call.
8
Then Prayer flow from my hart-humbling knees,
To the supreme Celestial Throane aspire,
And show my grief to heavens all seeing eyes,
Who never yet denied my just desire.
Man's help is nougth, O God thy help I crave,
Whose spotless blood my spotted Soul did save.
9
Then take my Soul which bought by thee, is thine,
Earth harb'ring-worms, take you my Corpse of Clay,
O Christ on me Eternal mercy shine,
Thy bleeding wounds wash all my sins away.
Now now I come to thee O I-su sweet,
Into thy hands I recommend my Street.
FINIS.

