The displaying of the Protestants, and sundry their practices, with a
description of diverse their abuses of late frequented. Newly imprinted again,
and augmented, with a table in the end, of all such matter as is specially
contained within this volume.

Made by Miles Huggarde servant to the Queen's majesty.

Anno. 1556.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

GO on good book, God grant that th^^.
Such fruitful favor find,
From readers eyes, and hearers hearts,
To banyshe errors blind.
And as thy trothe, by trade and time,
Is tried endless true,
So trust, thy plain apparent proof,
Shall endless troth renew.
Though wresting wits or taunting tongues,
Will seek the to deface,
To fawting foles, or spiteful sprites,
Give neither ear nor place.
For as offense to none is meant,
So if offense do groo,
The fault is theirs, the fruit is thine,
Sithe troth does force it so.
The maker minds to mende each mys,
That talk and time has bred,
Of heresies, and errors great,
That fancies late has fed.
Which so with wit and will have wrought,
As wrong has wrested right,
From fruitful faieth, to fruteles words,
And quenched virtue quyght.
Belefe is brought to talk of tongue,
Religion rackt amiss,
Open prayer, lyplabour called,
Fasting folyshe fondnes.
Prelacy is popish pomp,
Virtuous vows are vain,
Ceremonies curious toys,
Priesthod popery plain.
Thus vice of virtue bears brute,
True faieth is fled awey,
Presuming pride possesses place,
And fansy conscience key.
No man believed in his skill,
Each wight so wise does seame,
As both vnskild, and eake vnlearnde,
All learning yet will deame.
O endless error of selfloue,
Of ignorance the root,
Confounder of all faieth and grace,
And bale instead of boot.
O wilful wretched will,
That workest endless woo,
O arrogance and heresy,
That wrestest scripture so,
O hedles heaps of fervent sprites,
Why heat you so in heart?
By ending flamme, to endless fire,
Both souls and bodies part.
What ouerwening spirit,
Does puff you in such pride,
To think your selves more godly wise,
Then all the world beside?
What titles and what terms you use,
It makes most men smyle,
How droncken in the lord you are,
How closely you begyle.
You systers and you brethren both*
Thus each to others says,
The lord be praysde, when fylthy lust,
Ye use with feling faieth*
And what is found in all your deades,
But fruits of lyberty
Wind, and words, wilful works,
A mase of mysery.
Though in this book, sharp sense and words,
May seem to some appear,
Remember that, long festred sores,
Sharp corses do requere*
And you that read, now read to learn,
Come not with minds prepared,
To find out fautes, or fansy feed*
Let all delites be bard.
Thus wyshing well, for which I write,
This book then written thus,
For good men's gain, for ill men's grief,
An^ truth for to dys^us*
FINIS.
To the most excellent and most virtuous lady, and our woste gracious
sovereign, Mary by the grace of God Queen of England, Spaigne, both Sicilies,
France, Jerusalem, and Irelande, Defendour of the faith, Archeduchesse of
Austria, Duchess of Millaine, Burgundy and Braband, Countess of Haspurge
Flaunders and Tyrole. Your Majesty's most faiethfull, louinge and obedient
servant Miles Huggarde, wissheth all grace, long peace, quiet raygne from God
the father, the son, and the holy Ghost.
Having called too my remembrance my most dread soueraign the manyfolde
miseries, which by the just plague of God does now reign among us,
thoccas^ons whereof though every man may truly think his own sins to
deserve (as they do in deed) yet other special causes there be, which
provoke Gods vengeance to light upon us: as chiefly infidelity, whereby
God is most hainously dishonored, for the which we are most iustlye punished:
and also our rebellious murmuring against our regalerulers, appointed of God to
reign over us, to whom we owe our due allegiau^ce. The punishme^tes of which
offenses (beside al other vices which does abondauntlye flow among us at
this day) God has most greuouslye executed in the old time, to the terroure
of all traitors and riotous rebels. As namely for rebellion, and m^rmuring
against the magistrates, Chor^ Dathan, and Abyron, with many hundrethes mo,
may be examples. Whose terrible punishemntes the world does now little
regard, nether fearing God nor man. And also where Christ cursed two great and
notable cities for infidelitee, which was Chorazin, and Bethsaida giuinge them
over to their own vanities for their faiethles behauoure: This curse alsoo is
clean forgot among us, which appears by the infidelitee now raininge. But
god has not forgot to plague us for it, yet mercifullye, and not to our
deserts* This I say, most noble Queen, has moved me with the assistence of
my friend to make this little work (moore profitable in matter, then pleasant
in style, for lack of eloquence) this moved me, I say, as I can to displaie
and open the horrible inormities of the protestants. Whose murmuringe against
their magistrates may well match the rebelious Israelites, and in their
infidelitee the cursed cities of Iurye condemned by the mouth of Christ. Which
ennormities to remove, so much as lies in me by the help of Gods grace,
though not in those which are perverse in opinion, yet I trust those that be
wavering shall hear just cause to discredit them, and to abhor their
detestable factions, and also constant catholics better confirmed in faieth
and good living. Which thing to that end being finished, my duty being
considered in this behalf, I am thus bold to trouble your highness with this
li^le volume, which being before this time imprinted, althouh not in such
perfection as the same is at this present, having called since the first
edicion, the aid of my friend, and therefore thought it more mete the
dedication unto your majesty, most humbly besechyng the same to pardon this
my rude enterprise, praying our LORD GOD in whose hands are the hearts of
all kings, long to preserve the kings majesty. And grant unto his highness
a safe return to both your noble hearts desires, and comfort of both your
majesty's realms, and also preserve your grace in long prosperity to the
discomfiture of all your highness enemies Amen.

Your hyghnes faiethfull and obedient servant. Miles Huggarde.

The prologue to the reader.
IT is commonly seen that they which with precepts and rules do direct
others, and seem therein to excel, because they suppose they can not be
corrected, do either much good, over whom they have the government, or else to
ye same they co^ferre great damage, they themselves not escapinge without
infamy. In like manner, our late elders and ministers (for so they termed
themselves) if with the wholesome erudition of Gods undoubted truth, and with
the admouicio^s and persuasions of the gospel, they had applied the same to the
correction of life, and amendment of the conversation of them, over whom they
took upon the^ the charge, no doubt they had done much good too the common
welthe, and to the reformacion of man's corrupt nature. But using themselves
clean contrary, that is to say, neither vsinge gods truth as it ought to be,
but rather abusyng the same, neither in their attemptes established an uniform
religion, nor yet persuaded correction of life. They have brought this public
state of England into great detriment and mysery, as lamentable experience to
our great smarte declares. And because (most friendly reader,) thou may
perceive partly, with what vile doctrine a great part of this realm has
been allured, and with what pestilent persuasions men have been led, and
partly with what detestable vices, and horrible abuses the scholemaisters
themselves have been infected: This present volume, entitled The displaying
of the protestants, is compiled, not for any malice or envy me^t to any of y^
parties, but for good will to the Reader, and for a natural piety to this our
country, the natural nourice and mother of us all. Which protestants may
a^tely be compared Plato. lib. 2. De Re Pub.
to Plato his Gyges, ye tale of whom Tidly reci^eth in his third book of his
offices. At the falling down from above of certain storms of wether, the
earth opened in diverse places, by reason of the drought before. Gyges being a
Kings: Shepeherde, entered in to the earth at a great hoole, and found a
brazen horse (as the fables declare) in whose sides were doors, which being
opened, he espied the corse of a dead man of a wonderful hugenes, and a gold
ringe upon his finger, which as soon as he pulled of, he put it upon his own.
The nature of the ring was this: that when he had turned the head toward the
palm of his hand, he was invisible, and seen of nobody, and yet saw every
thing: and turnyng the ring from him again, he was seen of every body. And
so using this advantage of the ring, he lay with the queen wife to Candaules
king of Lydia. So the Herodotus in Cli^.
protesta^tes, when it pleased god to plague this our country for the sin of
the people, with the unquiet storms of heresy, got them out of the company of
other shepehardes, and dispersed themselfes into the earth, and at length
entered into brazen horses, the houses of the chief governors then, abusyng the
same with false interpretacion of Gods word, making the^ believe by their
crafty suggestions that all things which had continued in the church of God
to that time, was of no verity, but devised by man, calling the same toys and
ceremonies of Rome: who having a zeal to Gods truth, and credityng the merye
conceiptes of these yonglinges, trusting their talk had been the undoubted
verity, pelded to their practices. Then these shepeherdes perceiving ye chief
magistrates prone to sondrie alteracions and novelties, began by little and
little also to corrupt the consciences of the vulgar people, infecting the same
with the poison of heretical doctrine, that at length they became altogethers
dead corpses of wonderful hugenes. Then framed they rings to seem invisible
to the world: then played they Gyges part, then ruled they the rooste, then
began they to swarm in routes, then clustered they like humble bees to devour
the honye combs from the hiues of the poor bees, then like common soldiers
after the battle began they to fall to spoil, then defaced they Churches,
then made they hauoke of the ornaments of the same.

And in this sort with heresy and spoil feding the common peoples
simplicitee with a counterfeit zeal, they murdered men's consciences, and
distroied the realm and the commonwealth thereof. After which their practices
yet gave they not over like fainte hearted soldiers, but with stiff standing
stomakes continued to the end. And as Gyges by virtue of his ringe committed
adultery with Candaules wife who was then king of Lydia, and within short
time after by her ungracious counsel dispatched him of his life, even so
these adulterate protestants thought it not sufficient to effeminat the minds
of the simple with their false doctrine, and to contaminate the same with the
venime of their viperous tongues, but alsoo therewith have so slain the
consciences of many, that like desperate men they make haste to their own
destruction. Whoo being puffed up with presumption, seek to clime up to the
chariote of the son.

But as Phaeton was served for going about to aspire to his fathers secrets,
and with a flashe of lightening was set al on fire: So are these presumptuous
and ignorant people plagued with the like, as a due reward of presumption.
This it is to follow the hyssinges of the viperouse brood, who never depart
their haunt, til they have infected whole countries. For this cause (well-beloved
reader) this present treatise is publyshed, to set before men's eyes the
edible practices of these protestants, who in their own conceiptes presume,
they have the undoubted truth. Whom if you mark intus et in cute, you shall
well understand the contrary. But peradventure some man will muse of this
word Protestante, because it is no usual term. But because it is a word
greatly pleasyng themselves, a word invented after they and hearts desire, a
word devised of themselves, a word wherein they greatly triumph, and such a
word which serves most aptlye for the purpose: therefore it is here most
frequented. And it is the participle of the verb Protestor, which is to
declare, what should be eschewed. A very apt word, and mete for such, who in
very deed were al togethers Protestants, That is to say disswaders of wholesome
laws which touched the reformacion of man's nature, and reformers of such
good orders as were constituted for the bridlinge thereof. Therefore to conclude
this proeine, I most heartily beseech the to reach hither thy diligent and
indifferent ears, and judge well of mine entente, and do not imploye thy
judgment, like unto him who already is married to his own fancy: Letting the
to wit, that of man's malicious judgment I force not, for I know the passions
of maliciouse stomakes. In this doing I do not doubt* but thou for thy part,
shall have a just cause to pray unto God for unity (the sure band of all
common welthes) and to grant unto all men grace, to withstand heresies
assaults. And I finally for my part, shall have the like to think my pains
well implayed. And thus I commytte the to God. ()

Mense Iuni^, 1556.
The displaying of the protestants.
THE remembrance of the present state of this our miserable time, and the
revolution of the happy time past does inculcate a merueilous sorrow and
grief to him, which diligently does compare them both together. For as
Herodiane Libro prim^*
says: It is the common part of a man, to be wayle and lament the cases
human, especially such as are in present experience. For considering the
pitiful plight of these our wretched days, whereunto not only the stay of
our common wealth politic, but also the chiefest state of the
ecclesiastical and heavenly public wealth (religion) is fallen, besides the
decay of virtue and breach of charity: It must needs cause any true
christian to pour out a fountain of tears to bewail the calamity thereof.
Whose ruin is exceded so far, that it withdraws man's expectacio^ to look
for amendment, unless God of his great mercy supernaturally do work the
restitucion, as well of the common wealth politic, as also of the true and
catholic faith, charity, and good living. Agamemnon might now double his
exclamacio^ in these days, as Seneca reports, which is: Good Seneca in
Agamemnone. Act. 2.
life, law, good order, godliness, and faith are now decayed. Therefore calling
to my remembrance this our careful case, I mused with my self what might be
the cause thereof, and suddenly occurred to my remembrance the comfortable
promyses of God the father, made to the obseruers of his laws and
commandments. And likewise I considered his intolerable threateninges to y^
breakers of the same. Then comparing the wretchedness of our lives to the
sincerity of his holy precepts, I find a marvelous difference, Good life
The ^^^ causes of our miseri^
was never in such co^tempte, malice at no time bare such rule, the godly
never more dispysed, and finally God never more dishonored, nor his catholic
faith at any time had in so little regard, especially of such as most
arrogantly challenge to themselves the name of true christians, who in very
deed are of all christianity most barren, To whom the words of Christ may
be well applied, where he says: If I Joan. 9. et. 15.
had not come unto the^, they should have had no sin in them, but now their
sin does remain. Which words are verily verified in those false
christians, which not only in faith do err, but also most obstinatly seem to
defend the same. In whom error is turned to heresye, and of weak and frail
me^ are become obstinate heretics. It is by nature Obstinacy of opinions is
the cause of error.
given to men in sum things to err, but to persiste therein, it is
against nature. Officiorum. lib primo.
For (says Tully) we be al drawn and led to aspire unto knowledge, wherein
to pass other we think it a goodly matter: but to slide, to err, to be
ignorant, to be deceived, we count it evil and dishonest. Therefore says he,
one thing is to be avoided therein, which is, that we take not things we
know not, as though we knew them, and rashely assent to them. Wherefore
deliberation and aduisement is to be required in such causes. Now then, it
is the office and duty of man to apply his will to the grace of God, by who^
truth is reveled in time, whereunto he ought to consent: but to resist, his
sin Infidelity
does remain, which is the sin of Infidelity, a sin doubtless which most
displeases God, as appears by his plagues executed by his wrath upon all
sorts of infideles. But now to draw near unto the purpose, which chiefly
is to displaye the factious opinions of such, which not only do err, but also
continue in error, and seek with to the and nail to defendethe same. For
whose infidelity God at this day does so sore plague the world, chiefly
this realm, which for virtue and good living sake has been worthily
nominated Decus mundi, y^ flower of the world.

Now forasmuch as I know that they which commonly do err, being reproved
therefore, will immediately make as though they were ignorant what heresy is,
and sometime will demand what heresye is, or who is an heretyke: To whom if
answer be The definicion of heresy.
made according to the diffinition of learned men: It is any false or wrong
opinion, which any man choseth to him self to defend against the catholic
faith of the universal church. Truth in deed say they. But what means the
The catholic church and what it is
catholic church? Then answer is made. It is that congregation which wholly
does agree in one unity of faith and ministracion of sacraments. Which
answer when they likewise affirm: Then proceed they to know whether it be
known or unknown, and so forth. Doubtless, the catholic How to know the
catholic church.
church is so known to y^ world, that neither heretic nor other miscreant
can pleate ignorance, to learn that truth which leads to salvation. For
the Church is like unto a castle standing upon an hill, which cannot Matthew. v.
be hyd: Which hill is cut out of the hard rock, and exalted so high, that
is replenisheth y^ yerth as the prophet Daniel says. It Daniel. ii. Psalm.
xviii.
is rese^bled also by the psalmist to a tabernacle placed in the son: so
shyning throughout the world that it can by no cloud or tempest be obscured.
It is also as Paul ^. Tim. iii.
says, the foundation and pyller of truth, and can not be deceived though her
adversaries allege the contrary. Full well does the late most famous man
Lodouicus Lib. i. de veritate fidei.
Viues say. I do and will stand (says he) to the true judgment of the
church, although I saw to the contrary a most manifest reason. I may be
deceived as I am diverse times: but the church in those things which tend to
religion can not be deceived.

Therefore the church being so manifestly known as it cannot be hidden, so
replenished and garnished with truth, as it is the very foundation and pillar
of truth, with what face or countenance can the adversaries thereof stand in
contencion therewith? Unless they be infected with Circes cups, Homeri odyss:
libro decimo.
or else by her enchantme^tes transformed into the shape of swyne. But now
these swinishe adversaries will obiecte, saying: Sir The heretics objections.
those which you name heretics, we will prove to be the true congregation.
And this is their proof. We allege, preach, utter* or talk of nothing but
scripture, which can not deceive us, whereby we are the true church, and not
you which call your selfs catholics. Which reason seems to them so
infallible that it cannot be avoided, But forasmuch as the knowledge of all
truth, and ouerthrow^ of heresy, depends upon the thaucthoritie of the
church, both for the knowledge of the scriptures, and also for the exposition
of the same, I purpose briefly to say somewhat therein. The head The answer of
the catholics.
of the church is Christ, who by the Apostles was preached to all nations, of
who^ also his doctrine was received, at least of so many as were converted to
the faith. The conuerters of whom were the Apostles, which in the beginning
were the mystical body of Christ their head, who then being the Church,
exalted their Psalm. xviii.
voices in such sort, as it penetrated the whole earth, and their words
extended to the ends of the world. The succession of which Apostles, have
continued from time to time, in unity of the same faith: Which faith is left
unto the Church as permanent for ever, thereby to stre^gthen the weak, and to
confound the proud, to establishe the elect, and to overthrow all
misbeleuers and sects heretical: which sects not only abuse the open
places of that lively word, but also do falsely expound the dark and mistical
places thereof, as S. Peter ii. Peter. iii.
witnesses of s. Paul's Epistles. But if these* good fellows will needs be of
Christ's church, as arrogantly they presume by their own confession: They
must have one unity of doctrine as y^ church has, which surely they have
not. The punishementes are not so diverse in hell (as Vergill Aeneido. 6.
describes,) as are the sundry opinions of these Protestants* The serpent
Hydra with whom Hercules fought, had not so many Virgi an^id. 8.
heads, as each of these serpents had devised opinions: Nor yet Ixion begat
so many Ce^tauros, as Lucianus in deoru^ dialog.
these monsters devised heresies: insomuche that upon one point, which is the
chiefest comfort left here upon earth to feed our souls upon, there are
Myriades opinionum* innumerable opinions, and one so contrary to another, that
they agree like germans lips. The monstruositie of which opinions are such,
that to remember them it yeldeth a marvelous terror to the heart of any good
christian, that in heart he might have wyshed the like that Caius Pontius
Cicero: officiorum. lib. 2.
the Samnite did wish against that wicked vice of brybery in Rome. Would God
(quod he) fortune had reserved me to those days, and had been borne then,
when the Romans began ones to take brybes, I would not have suffered them
any longer to rule.

If in the beginning of Luthers doctrine some worthy soldier of Christ and
his church had gone about to have stayed the same, the world at this day had
never felt the calamity thereof. But as that wicked monstre monstruously
began, so God in the self same time to prove him a mo^stre and the like of his
here to be altogether monstrous, he showed an evident example.

There was in the country of This monster was a just token manifested by God,
to give me^ advertisement to take heed ofsuch false prophets, which under the
godly habites of religious men, should seek the subversion of his church.
Saxonye a woman, which out of her body brought forth a mo^stre having.iiii.
fete like unto an ox, his mouth, nose, eyes, and ears shaped like a calfe, a
lompe of flesh upon his head like a Preistes croune, and behynd upon his
back the form of a Monks coule, as one James Rueffe a Surgeon of Tigurine
in a book entitled De conceptu et generatione hominis, expressing there the
very figure it self, more at large declares.

Which mo^struous birth doubtless portended, that as in it self it was of
form diverse, so likewise the same Luther should be the father of many byrthes
that should be engendered in his unhappy posterity.

Paulus Iouius likewise describes ^ib. 13. histor. sui temporis.
the malign inclinations of the heavens at such time as Luthers heresy
began to kyndle, that the whole world, as well Hethen as Christen began to
put upon them new factions of religion. But what do I stand upon these
sects, sithe they are manifest to the blind and known to the deaff? Yet
because mo^struositie of byrthes seem wonderful to the world, I will open the
several ^ygures and shapes of some. I will not rehearse the horrible sects in
the primative Church engendered by Luthers graundfather Simon Magus,
Cherinthus, Ebion, Basilides, Arrius, with a thousand more, but I will touch a
few in our time: for the whole I cannot, and if I could, I would not, and if I
would I may not, for protracting of time and hynderyng of my purpose.

Luthher a Freer in Wyttenberge A rebersall of sundry^ sects devised by diverse
heretics.
under the dominion of Frederike duke of Saxonye, had an opinion, that in the
sacrament of the Altar was the natural body of Christ really with the
substance of bread*

Carolstadius another religious Heretic, seeing Luther to prevail so with his
new forged opinion, and perceiuyng the estimation thereof embrased of all men,
began too fall out with Luther, saying: that when Christ said Hoc est corpus
meum, He meant then of his visible body, and not of his body in the sacrament,
of which opinion were many favorers.

Zwynglius of a town called Sirich in Swycherland, was contented with noone of
the other twain, but invented upon the aforesaid words a new
interpretacion: which was, that they were not to be understood lyterally,
but by a figure: as, This is my body, is as much to say, as this signifies
my body. Of this matter he wroote diverse gloriouse epistles to certain of his
fre^des, gloriously rejoicing that he had found the long unknown truth of so
high a mystery.

Oecolampadius the^ a religious man of saint Brigittes order, in the province
of Bauarie, who with one Hutte^ a Gospelknight, ran away with a nonne of that
place to Basil, and there freshly uttered the wares of Zvvynglius mart, and
proved a ioly fellow.

Then began the Anabaptists, the Thaborites, the Hussites, and such other
rutterkyns, that in Germanye much unquietness reigned between the laietie and
clergy, and yet daily does reign (God knows) throughout the country, that
by report of them that come from thence you shall have the Lutherane, the
Zwynglian, the Anabaptiste, the Jew yea and the Papiste (as they term it)
dwell together in one town: whose chief captains are Calvin, Peter Martyr,
Bullingere Musculus, and such like.

Hoper in his book of thoffice of Christ, and Cranmere in his treatise of the
Sacrament of the alter, our late co^tremen, say that as well themselfes as the
Germaynes, erred greatly in taking Luthers part.

Another sect there is which deny all the foresaid opinions, and affirm that
when Christ said, this is my body: He meant only that the bread was his
body. That is to say, by creation I made it, and so it is my body.

Also about.xx. years past, there As this good minister loved good ale, so he
had.iii. ale knights to stand in defense of his opinion, called Good al^, New
ale ^ Rastale.
was a priest which consecrated the bloodde of Christ at Mass of ale and not
with wine, as christ ordained it, affirmyng that he might laufully do so, and
stood much in the defense thereof, but abiuring his folly, he bare a faggot at
Paul's cross.

Again there was a Tyler dwell lyng in S. Sepulchers paryshe in London, that
held opinion how Christ was only incarnate and suffered death for all those
that died before his incarnation, and not for them which died since, which
opinion he likewise abiuryng, bare a faggot.

There were moreover in this realm certain Anabaptists, which among other
heresies denied the baptism of Infantes: saying, that as many as were baptized
being children, ought to be rebaptised, when they come too age, whereof some
were burnt in Smythfielde.

There was a priest called Ashton, that denied the holy ghost to be God, who
had he not recanted, had been burnte also.

Furthermore, there was one Puttoe a Tanner, which denied one of the articles
of the Creed, which was that Christ descended not into hell, saying, he could
not read it in the word written and therefore not worthy to be credited. But
abiuring the same opinion he carried a faggot.

A Bricklaer taking upon him the office of preaching, affirmed he might
laufully do it, though he were not called there unto by the church. For
Spiritus Vbi Vult spirat.

Ioane of kent a great pratler of divinity, and brocher of our late doctrine*,
held an opinion that Christ took no flesh of the blessed virgin Mary, and
was worthily burned in Smythfielde.

A ducheman also that denied Christ to be God, and equal with his father, and
that he was not of the substance of his father, was likewise consumed in
Smythfielde.

Also about.xii. months past before the reuere^de father the bishop of
London, there were arrayned in the consistory at Paul's for their opinions
against the Sacrament of the altar.iiii. Sussex men, the one of the was a duche
man and dwelled besides Jews, who being demanded among others, what baptism
was, the one answered, it was a Sacrament, then he was demanded whether a man
might be a christian without it: yea doutles qv he. For it is but an externe
sign and works little grace. For said he, like as a man does wash his
hands in a basen of water, signifying that the hands are clean, so the
child is washed at baptism to accomplish the exterior figure. Then was
objected John.iii.
unto him the saying of christ: unless a man be borne again with water and the
holy ghost he could not be saved. Tushe says he, the water profits nothing,
it is the holy ghost that woorketh. Who with the rest most worthily were
condemned and burned in Sussex.

Finally there be many other opinions, not worthy the rehersall, devised by the
protestants, and for the mayntenance thereof, how many do we se for lack of
grace, wylfully without any fear of God or man, precipitate themselfes into
the temporal fire, without any respect or due consideracion of the life to
come, And God w^te some of them demanded questions of their belief, they
cannot tell what to say. Such is the iniquity of out time. It is before
declared, the sundry opinions of many, who altogether boaste themselves too be
of the true Church. Whose opinions partly I have noted, to set before men's
eyes the ex^ crable factions of their malignaunt church, to the intent they may
consider, that the catholic church is of one faith, of one spirit, and of
one judgment, not lacerated, divided or torn but whole and intier. From the
which who soever departs, procures unto himself dampnacion. For without
the church is no salvation. Now touching the unity and concord of the
church, it contynueth in the very same state, as it did in the primative
church, as we read how the Apostles were all of one consent and one mind.
Which unity as they the^ did embrace, placing the same as a sure toke^ or
badge to know y^ church, Unity the badge or co^^izance of Christ's church.
so look what church, let it have never so glorious titles, being without
that, it is evident that it is no church: but rather a den of thieves. Christ
leuing y^ world and asce^ding up to his father, be sides his several
admonicio^s to his Apostles, during the time of Marc. ix. Lu. x. xxiiii. John.
14. ^1.
his co^uersacion upon earth preached peace, saying: have peace among you. etc.
Paul in all his epistles persuades unity. Which may persuade any good heart
to acknowledge the catholic church to be that church, where all men may learn
the truth of the gospel, religion, faith, Sacraments, and al other kinds of
rites or ceremonies. Which church co^tempneth all sorts of Heretics and
other miscreantes, and stands vnremouable, notwithstanding their wicked
darts fethered with mischief daily thrown against her. But it behooves says
^. Cor. xii
s. Paul that there should be heresies among you, to try and make manifest
those that be constante. Therefore no maruayll though i. Tim. iiii.
now they bear such swinge. For in the latter days (says he) there shall be
perilous times, wherein some shall depart from the faith, and shall give head
to spirits of error, and deuelyshe doctrine of them which speak false through
hypocrisy, having their consciences marked with an hot iron, forbidding
men to marry, and commanding to absteyne from meats which God has
created to be received with thanks geuyng. etc. But the Protestants
tournynge this place from theimselfes, they would prove the Papisticall
Church (for so they term it) to be those heretics which saint Paul here
gives warning of. Do not the The words of the protestants.
papists (say they) even as saint Paul says, forbid matrimony which, he
says is holy in all mean And yet they prohibit priests, nu^nes, and other
religious to marry, proving themselfes thereby, to be those of whom Paul did
propherye. And do they not likewise forbid meats to be eaten, which God has
created too be received with tha^kesgeuyng? etc. In this sort these credible
gentelmen In all things the protesta^tes sekemeanes to discredit the church.
handled this place, to discredit the catholyke church, and to allure all men
with their pleasante outcries to cast of liberty, to offend God, to offe^de
the magistrates, to break all laws, to undo commen welthes, to make dearthe
and scarcity, finallye* to do what they list: But what meant they hereby?
Even to handle the matter as the Sirenes did Odyss. 12.
whereof Homere speaks: whose voices were so pleasant, that with their songs
they allured all passengers, which sailed by the seas where they haunted, to
approach unto them, and being within their thraldom, their custom was to
drown both them and their ships. Even so our late pleasant Sirenes, in all
pulpetes Liberty a pleasant harmony to the^ that are co^te^ted to embrace it,
as the protestants are.
used such pleasant songs, and allureme^tes, ente^ding thereby not only to
nosell the body with all kinds of bellychere, but also to make them to forget
both God and man, and so procure Hell mouth to open, and swallow up both body
and soul. Now I would gladly learn of them whether the heretics of whom
s. Paul This place of s. Paul was wont to be painted upon the walls of
churches to begyle the simple. But when thou read this place, way it well in
the mind and the^ give se^t^ce.
prophesied, did utterly forbid marriage to all men and women or not. If they
answer yea, as they cannot chose, then they cannot prove that the catholyke
church forbideth marriage to al me^. For who is it, priest, religious man or
woman, but that once in their life time they were at liberty either to marry
or live chaste? So that the choice of either state is free to do as the grace
of GOD shall work in them. Now again if Marriage is not discommendid of ye
church, but it is magnefied for out of the.vii. Jewels thereof.
they affirm the papists to forbid marriage to some, as to prietes, nonnes,
and other votaries therein showing themselfes to be those whereof saint Paul
affirms: truth it is, the Church forbids all such to marry, not
discommending matrimon^ie too such as may laufullye take it. But, forasmuch
as they have bound themselfes by vow and promise to the contrary, therefore
because they might not incur into the lapse of da^pnation, as Paul
reports, it is the charitee of the church to forbid the^ ^. Tim. v. Nu. 6.
and. 30. Eccle. v. John. ii.
marrye, as S. Paul's rule prescribes, who knew how straightly the scripture
charge such as have made vows to keep them. And for that cause, he says:
the wydowe has dampnation if she marrye after she is received into the Church
to be found of the goods thereof: because she vnloseth chastity, and therefore
he calls it her first faieth, in respect of the second made too man by
marriage. Whereby it is plain that S. Paul cannot mean by his prophecy,
that the church is heretical in forbiddyng the professed, and vowed to
marrye, as they teach. For then they must needs prove Paul to be an
heretic. O cancred stomakes, festred througheoute with malice. But will you
see their shyftes? Paul says receive no widows into the church under.lx.
year old. etc. and after he says, the younger widows refuse etc. Here say
they, taking any into the church under.lx. year old Paul's precepte is
broken. Whereby they that are taken in, are at liberty to marrye. This is
Poinettes doctrine Poinettes doctrine.
in his book of the defense of priests marriage. But what manne is he though
he be half mad, but he may perceive their follye. Herein I will ask whether
the old wydowe having the age that S. Paul names, if she marrye, does
incur the danger of dampnacion? Whereunto if they answer yea: then No
doctrine can be ill if it serve for the practice of the hot protesta^ces who
rather then they would live chaste would say the^cold not chose but burn.
how chances it, that some of them, notwithstanding their vows, being of
that age, yea and above to, not fearing da^pnation did marrye? But what shall
men judge of them? If rash judgment might conioyne with rash doctrine, truly
a man might speak rashely. But let God judge. For where as saint Paul does
vehemently exhort all wydowes to the vow of chastity, and excepteth no age
touching that profession, but only in respect of such as should be found by
the goods of the church: now comes in ruffling Poynet with his double
marriage two wives at a clappe, and makes S. Paul to correct i. Cor. vii.
that which first so earnestly he taught, and will have wydowes to vow
chastity no more, except they were at the least xl. years of age. But if a
question may be A question.
asked: I pray you sir, of what age was Timothe, when S. Paul exhorted him to
live chaste?

Was he xl? Was Paul xl. years when he said: I will have all me^ to be as I am
my self? Were they also lx. years old a piece that saint Paul spoke unto? Well
to confound Poynet, here a word or twain of Chrysostom upon that place.
Saint Paul (says he) A place of Chrisostom to prove that young wydowes did
vow.
forbyddeth such wydowes, and drives them from that purpose, not because he
would that there should (...)In grau^ting whereof they prove themselfes liars.
For the catholic church (which they call papistical) does neither forbid
flesh The church forbids no meats as the folly of the protestants does
imagine.
nor fyshe to be eaten at such times as by the same is prescribed. But for the
understanding of this place of S. Paul, touching certain which should come and
forbid marriage, and meats to be eaten: it is to wete, there were in the
primative church false prophets, Act. iiii.
which affirmed, that the old law was as necessarely to be observed Sundry
sects of heretics that verefied S. Paul's prophecy, ^ere ^osen ger^aines to
the protestants.
as the new: as Ebion, Cherinthus, and the Nazares, who following the uses of
the Greeks, abstained from meats which were suffocate: of whom s. Paul
speaks, saying: There were some which believed that certain meats naturally
were unclean, such was Tacianus, Eustacheus, and Priscillianus. There were also
a sect called Manichaei, who not only refused Flesh, but also Eggs, milk
and chese, and the like. Another sect also called Scueriani, utterly forbad
wine as unlawful. Another sect also called Cathari, ^uido de h^ resibus.
affirmed that to eat Flesh, Eggs and Milk, although it were great
necessity, was a deadly sin. And these and such like were they of whom
Paul speaks. For the church forbids none of these to be eaten, but at
certain times, which is both praised in scripture, as well to please God, as
also to profit and enriche the commonwealth. To abstain (...)e profitable
abstinence is.
from meats, commonly called fasting, is a thing much acceptable to God, and
in scripture estso^es persuaded. The children of Israel were commanded by God,
as it appears in Leuiticus, to abstain Leui* lx.
from meats: is not the man Numeri. vi.
and woman when they go about to do sacrifice, commanded to abstain from
wynes? Christ himself Matthew. xv.
bids us to watch and pray, because we know not the hour.

Put upon you (says Paul) our savior Roma. xiii.
Christ: and have no desire to the fulfilling of the desires of the flesh. And
they which be of Christ Gala. v.
let them crucify their own flesh by abstinence. The fathers of the old law
in all things they went about, used the armor of abstinence, especially to
overthrow Gods enemies. The people of Israel being commanded of Samuel ^.
Reg. vii.
to fast, overcame their enemies. Judas Machabeus being Macha, iii.
about to fight with Gorgias, as soon as he had fasted he obtained the
victory. Daniel fasting three Daniel ^.
wekes received a vision from the Lord. Achab by fasting, wearing iii. Reg. xi^*
of sackeclothe, and lamentacion obtained forgeuenes of his sins. Judith by
that armor vanquished Judith.ix. Hester* ^^i^.
Holofernes. And Hester after three days fast converted Assuerus furor into
temperaunce. Many other of the good fathers exercised that weapon to confound
their enemies. But our countremen, such chiefly as had y^ gospel most in
their mouths, so ouersawe the Gospel, that all these good places with
innumerable mo were quite ouerseen. I pray God to put such grace into their
minds, that hereafter they may no more ouersee y^ comfortable places of
scripture written for our erudition and comfort, but with diligence peruse
them, and with more diligence put them in practice.

Doubtless nature is satisfied with a small portion, if man will captiuate his
own sensuality, and bridle his affections. True are y^ words of Seneca.
Nature is content Epist. 18.
with a little, whose co^tentacion if thou do oppress with superfluity* it
will convert into things noisome. Follow not Sardanapalus With his belly chere,
nor yet Epicurus, whoo counted the blessedness of this life to consist in
pleasures of the body, but rather let us follow the example of a sort of people
called Essaei, who lived with such abstinence, Josephus ^^lli Iud^^ci. lib. 2.
cap. 7.
that their life was prolonged into years infinite: or else the good lives of
the godly fathers, Antonius, Paulus, and such T^^perti^^ historia.
like, who continually lived in desert with rotes and other thynne fare. Let us
learn of the Persians how to abstain: Who when Cicero. Tusculan. quest. lib. ^
they went about to attempt any enterprise, besides bread did eat Abstinence
of the Persians.
nothing else but Nasturtium, which is an herb called Cresses, supposing that
thereby their spirits were made more quick and lively. It were to be wished
that all me^ entending either to pray unto god for any temporal commodity, or
else for any heavenly treasure, or to do any good work, would follow the
Churches example therein, that is, before to begin with fasting, and to eat
Nasturtium, that is to say, to exhilarate their spirits by fast, to perform
their intent. Then might they accomplish Tobyas saying, that ^obi. iiii.
prayer joined with fasting and almesdedes, is profitable. Thus abstinence and
fasting is vniuer sally commended, as well by profane men, as by divine.
Therefore in this thing the Church cannot be those heretics, whereof Paul
prophesies. For it prohibiteth not meats utterly, but it gives a certain
prescription and order, foreseyng man's frailty, which were it not brought in
servitude by such means, it would not voluntarely for the most part indue any
godly inclinacion. For The church in all things keeps an order.
order, as well in things natural, as supernatural, has ever had such
preeminence, that thereby the incomprehensible majesty of GOD, as it were by a
bright leme of a torche or candle, is declared to the blind inhabitants of
the world. In framyng of all things says (Tully) in apt and Officiorum.
Libro. i.
convenient places, order is to be required. So that the church by the
administration of the holy ghost, from time to time to prevent man's
imbecillitie, has chosen out certain times for order sake, to put man in
remembrance of his duty toward God: which times are of al good christians
to be duly followed.

For it is well known as Tertullian In definitionibus ecclesiast. d^gmatum.
Cap. 66.
says, that it is good to take meats with thanks geuyng, and to eat that
which God has commanded, but to abstain from some, it is not evil done, not
for that they be naught, but for that they be not necessary. And to moderate
the use of them for necessity and time sake, it is the property of
christians. We know what the scripture speaks touching Gene. ix. i. Timo.
iiii. Roma. xiiii. Ma^c xv. Gene. iii.
the eating of all things, and that all meats are to be eaten with thanks
geuyng. But yet it does not so commend the eating, to condemn the forbearyng
and abstinence from the same. Sure, it was a pleasant matter to come to a
sermon to here fasting reproved, Pleasant sermons.
affirmyng that all kinds of meats, might lawfully be taken at all times, and
to fast from sin it was sufficient. And in those days to hear a sermon
intreatyng of such like matters, the fame anon was bruted, Oh this man has
made a goodly piece a work, this man is verily a prophet, with the like. But
what might be said to those ioly work men? eue^ the like that Papinianus Eras.
Apotheg. libro. 8.
answered to the Emperor Bassianus. For the Emperor bearing a notable
displeasure against his brother, insomuche that he went about to rydde him of
his life, and because murder in the city of Rome was an odible offense, he
entreated the said Papinianus, a man of great authority among the Romans,
that he would by some means defend his cause of murder. O Bassiane, quod he,
murder is sooner committed, then the quarrel thereof can be defended. Even so
these champions of heresy, could rather break their fast with flesh upon
Godfryday, then defend the quarrel why they ought so to do upon Maundythursday.
They could better give a liberty to maintain vice, then make restraynt to
suppress the same. But Aristotle might have Plutarch in Sylla.
given them the like answer for their liberal talk, as he gave Calisthenes
his scoller, for reproving of Alexander with this verse of Homere.

Thy talk my son being uttered so fondly,
Will breed thee confusion by death utterly.
What has followed this their liberal and vain persuasion, this realm most
pitiously does at this day feel. For those commodities which for the
sustentacion of all men, sometimes were here most abundant: now are most
skarse and uneasy to be gotten. But I pray God that that be the least plague.
It yeldeth almost as great a terror to remember the calamity of this realm,
grown by thin ferteignement of a common woman called Heresy, as the rehearsal
of the Troianes destruction did to Aeneas, who was friendly Aeneid. Virgi
welcomed to Carthage by Dydo queen thereof, that every christian may say with
Aeneas,

Horresco referens, gelidusque per ima cu^ currit Ossa tremor. To rehearse the
same, uerye fear does make me quake.
It thrilleth through my bones, that my flesh therewith does shake.
But now to return to fasting: The protesta^tes affirm, that it is a wholesome
thing. But what kind of fasting is it that they mean? to fast from sin say
they, and not from meats. For that which goes into the mouth, defyleth not
the man, but that which goes out. And the kingdom of heaven is not meat and
drink. These and such like they esteem to be such bulworkes against the
bodily fast, that no man can overthrow them. But herein a man may well
perceive how like the^ selves they be, and how rightly they accord with
those, of whom Paul gives admonition, saying: Let no man deceive you with
Ephe. v.
vain persuasions. It would be demanded where they find expressed in
scripture, that God commands only fasting from sin, and not from meats.
And as herein they can make no answer, so likewise they must affirm that the
next remedy to avoid Remedies to avoid sin.
sin, is to do good works, that is to say, to fast, to pray, to give
alms, to follow Gods precepts, to love one another, to subdue the
appetites, and to crucify our carnaltie, and this is to fast from sin. In
what sort did John the Baptiste fast from sin? In giving himself to
bellichere? No doubtless, his conversation Math. iii.
was in abstinence, fasting prayer, hard apparayle, living in deserte places,
and such like. The disciples of John Baptiste Math. ix.
came to Christ, saying: Why do we and the Pharisees fast, and thou and thy
disciples fast not? Note here that if the word Fast, should be understand
as the protestants would have it, which is only of abstainyng from sin:
the^ their saying must have been: why do we and the Pharisees abstain from
sin, and thou and thy disciples do not abstain from sin? Who is so blind
that sees not the blasphemous inconvenience which does follow of this word
fast, if it should be taken for abstayning from sin only? What answer made
christ to this* did he say that their fast was a supersticion? his answer
was. Can the bridegromes children morn while the brydegrom is with the^? But
when the brydegrom is taken from them, then shall they fast.

What more playner words can be spoken of Christ to persuade abstinence then
these are? Yet in another place Christ in a serino^ which he made to his
disciples, declares the straightnes of his law, in respect of the old, to
extinguishe the supersticion of the pharisees, saying: When ye fast, Math. vi.
be ye not like unto hypocrites. etc. By the which word fast, I am sure he
meant the bodily fast, or else he would not have described their manner of
fasting in such sort: Wherein he went about to correct the supersticion of
the pharisees, as well in this correction of the body, as in the other two
principal virtues, prayer and alms. For their delyght was principally to be
seen of men ypocritically. And here is to be noted that prayer and alms deeds,
be two particular virtues to be used of all men, according to their several
gifts. Prayer is common Prayer and almesdedes
to al men, to pray when they will* alms to them that have wherewith all,
which both with fasting, being used according too Gods holy word, and to
the censure of the church (no doubt) are most profitable and undoubted means
to aspire to salvation.

Thus touching the forsaid place of saint Paul, concerning those which should
prohibit marriage, and abstaining from meats, any man may most clearly
judge, by whom those words were spoken. Not by the church, as the heretics
maliciously mind: but by those before remembered. The first part of which
prophecy is verefied of these miscreantes in our time, and the latter part in
the old heretics, which started up, not long after the death of Paul.
Whereby it may appear whether part does persuade the eschewing of sin: The
church The catholic church. persuades austerite of life.
catholic, or the church malignante. The one exhorts al men to bear
Christ's cross, in hard life, trouble, and affliction: the other persuades
to embrace liberty, bellichere, and all pleasure.

The one gives rules and orders, to frame man's frail nature: The other
gives rules to advance man's nature. The one subiugateth thaffections: the
other vnbridleth the appetites. The one tells, as it were with the
forefynger, the way to salvation: The other discloseth with the whole hand,
the hie way to da^pnacion. The one gives rudimentes to withstand the devils
suggestions: The other frames rules to follow his collusions. Therefore let
every man give diligent head, how he follow rash doctrine, lest repentance
follow. Better it is to serve GOD then Mammon, to follow the wholesome counsel
of our spiritual mother, then the wicked persuasion of our worldly mother, the
parent of sin, and the nourice of iniquite. And like as the heretics
aforesaid in the primative church, did both deny marriage and faslyng from
meats, as things unclean: So do the protesta^tes and heretics of our time
in falling from the faith, abuse the^ both. So yt all me^ may (if they weyghe
the matter with indifferent judgment) see who be the false prophets, and
wolves in shepes apparel, whereof Christ gives premonicion to beware of.
Math. vii. The shepish apparel of the protesta^tes


Thapparaile which our protestants do wear, is the cloak of holy scripture,
lined with lies and false interpretacion of the same ever crying: The word of
the Lord, Gods book, and such other vain outcryes, nothing degenerating
from the heretics of ancient time: for they used not only the garments of
holy scriptures, but also the cloak of dissimulacion, pretending to the world
holiness of life, whereby many were deceived. The heretics in our days esteem
the fast in such sort, as they can do none other, but eat fast, drink
fast, prate fast, and lie fast: A sollempne fast surely, and mete for such
fasters. And here they demand, where do the Papists say they, find the
fast of the supersticious Lent, or any other day, prescribed in the
scriptures. Christ fasted.xl. days, being preserved by his godhed, but can we
do so being his weak members* Thus they triumph in wonderful manner,
dissuading the voluptuous carcas, from all paynful exercise. Al things
ordained to any godly intent, were by these Momi derided. A pitiful case and a
godly warnyng to teach men to beware of such belly gods, void of virtue,
and barren of all The protestants consciences.
good works. But if the consciences of these false Apostataes, were not marked
with an hot iron, kyndled in the deuels fiery furnesse of horrible heresy,
blown with the bellows of boastynge, pride, and bragging knowledge, resusyng
thauncient exposicions of the fathers: If their consciences were not thus
marked with that iron, which obstinacy has so sore pressed, that the print
will not out, they could not chose, but recognize their abominable errors:

But yet to remove one stumblyng A stu^bling stock very much used in ye mouth
of Gospellers.
stock, which the grande captains of this host armed against the church
have. touching this point of fasting, which is a place of Esaie the prophet,
where he shows how the people cried upon God, saying. Wherefore fast we, and
thou see it not, we put our lives in straightnes, and thou regardest it not?
Behold when you fast, your lust remains still, for you do no les violence
to your debtors. Lo you fast to strife and debate and smite with the fist of
wickedness. Now ye shall not fast thus that you make your voice to be herd
above. Think you this fast pleases me, that a man should chastise him self
for a day, to wrethe his hedde about like a hook, or to lie upon the earth in
an hearen cloth* Shall that be called fasting or a day that pleases our
lord? Does not this fasting rather please me, that thou lose him out of
bondage that is in thy danger, that thou break the oath of wicked bargains,
that thou let the oppressed go free, and take from them all manner of burdens,
to deal thy bread to the hungry, to bring the poor wandringe home into thy
house, when thou see the naked to cover him, and hide not thy face from thy
neighbor, and despise not thine own flesh? Then shall thy light break
forth in the morning. etc.

This place of Esaias they marueilously rejoice in, using it as a sure shield to
defend their doctrine. But herein they play their old parts, in alleging one
truth to confound another. This is The protesta^tes with one truth do seem to
confound another.
the truest fast, ergo the other fast is not profitable: the argument is as
like, as one being demanded which is the way to London, he answered, a poke
full of plommes. The prophet Esaye alleges this as the most certain and
truest fast. And Christ commends the other as a mean to atteine unto the
same: which fast if a man do neglecte, the other is not profitable, as is
aforesaid. And thus this block with the due consideracion of a good christian,
may be sone removed. But as this too some is an occasion of stumbling, so was
Christ in diverse his sayings too the sturdie Jews, that would not be leave in
him. And as christ in deed ministered no occasion to them, no more does y^
prophet Esaias to the stumblers of our time, which stumble at vice, and leap
over al good works. Therefore it is too be wished that men would take heed of
them, and beware how to taste of their pernicious doctrine, as is said in the
beginning, which is the only cause of our misery: for our fayeth is so
extenuated by their evil doctrine, rooted so in the heads of many, that GOD
has just cause too plage us al in general. For without Heb. x^*
faith it is impossible to please God. Then where infidelitee is, God is not
pleased. But hereto the protestants will replye and say, they be no
infideles, but do believe in the same everlasting Trinitee, wherein we believe,
as it does appear in diverse their libels, wherein they extol fayeth. Which is
true: but in their definition of fayeth they made such a mingle ma^gle of
the.iii. theological virtues: Faieth, Hope, and Charitee, that only fayeth
like a co^queror had discharged hope, and charitee, out of office. In the ^^^ot
in his book called the Governor.
which their doctrine of only fayeth, they fared much like to an Orator
which was brought in before an Emperor, to make A pretty example.
an oration. Which Orator when he was placed before the Emperor, beginning
his Oration, he so much liked himself for his eloquence, that he had forgotten
where he was: yet as he thought. he should have been greatly praised. His friend
asked The Emperor how he liked him. Forsooth (quod he) as I do my Cook at
home. For when he came to me first, he could make me a good mess of potage,
but he has sought so many new fangled ways, that he cannot now make me a
good sa^orie mess. Even so our curious doctors were so fine in setting forth
of fayeth, that they had forgotten their old catholic fayeth, by them
professed at baptism: and in the end they had forgotten themselfes to: much
like the vain glorious orator in his oration, and the Coke ruffian in making
his potage: the one insensible. and the other unsavory.

This faith only has wrought so hotlye, that rather then they would forsake
their drossie divinity, which they have gathered by their curiosity, they
thought with fagotes to end their lives miserably. And in this kind of death
they so arroga^tly rejoice, that they be so bold to compare themselfes with
the Martyrs of christ's church. But forasmuch as this is a cause which of
some men is thought marvelous: that men should die in the quarrel of religion,
and therefore the quarrel good, It shall be worth the traueill to say somewhat
therein: rather for the ignorance of the unskillful, then for the matter itself.

As in the body of a common A discoure touching the burning of heretics and
of the fond imaginatio^s of many concerning the same.
wealth politic, if any malefactor, these, or murderer, be found guilty in
the crime or offense wherein he is accused, forthwith the law does prosecute by
the verdicte of the.xii. men, and sentence of death is pronounced for his
deserte, as a man not worthy too live being an enemy to y^ weal public:
Even so in the church of Christ, which is the spiritual kingdom, such
malefactors, and miscreantes as do tra^sgresse the faith, and other wholesome
constitucions enacted, first by the providence of the holy Ghost, and
afterward diligently put in execution by the holy Patriarchs, Bishops, and
other governors of the same, are justly by the censure of the same committed to
the politic magistrates to be punished, either by death, or else by some other
means laufull for the same, as enemies to God, haters The Hethe^ could not
abide the despisers of their religion.
of his true religion, and co^temners of all good ordres.

The Heathen being noseled in their supersticions, and vain veneration of
their fained gods, yet bare such reverence to their religion, that in no
wise they could abide the despisers thereof. The Atheniens, for that Alcibiades,
a Justinius libr^ quinto.
stout captain in their wars, was supposed to have neglected the sacrifices
of Ceres, was in his absence by death condemned. The just Socrates, likewise
was conde^pned for the like, insomuch that Xenophon, writing of him, De factis
and dictis Socratis
marueiled much thereof, considering he bare himself so upright. If the
Heathen had such a regard to their feigned religions, what would they have
done, if they had known the true and living god, our creator? And what ought
we christians to do touching the contemners of our true religion? Christ
himself commands, that if any man does not give attendance to the churches
admonition, he wills him to be taken for an Heathen and publicane. Therefore
if that man be worthy to be taken for a Publicane, or Heathen person, which
will not here the church: Then the heretic which not only is incorrigible,
but also a contemptuous person against God and his church, is worthy the
name of an Heathen man, according to Christ's own sentence: and not worthy to
live, or be conversant among christians. If not worthy too live, then he is
worthy death.

In the old law we read in Deuteronomie this sentence. Deu. xiiii.
That man which is proud, and will not obey the priests commandment, which
that time does minister to thy lord thy God, and the judgment of the judge,
let him die: wherein thou shall take away an evil out of Israel. Also in Deu.
xviii*
another place it is written. The Prophet which being inflate with arrogance,
will speak those things in my name, which I have not commanded him, let him
be put to death. Forasmuch then as al proud me^ co^temning the churches
anthoritie, and the priest, are by the manifest scriptures worthy to be slain:
then it is not contrary to Gods word (as the brethren affirm) to punish
any man for his opinions. S. Paul admonishes us, yea and ii. These iii Roma.
^vii
entreats us too take heed of the^ which sow sedicion among the people,
and to eschew their company: for such as they be, do not serve their lord
Christ, but their own belly, seducing the minds of the innocent with sweet
talk and fair perswasio^s. Such are The manner of our heretics.
our martyrs in these days, who in their life time go about nothing else but
to sow sedicion, either conspiracy against their prince, and magistrates, or
else to peruerte the innocent with their vain perswasio^s and folishe talk. I
would to God, says Paul, Gala. iiii. ii. Cor. x. Gala. v.
that they which trouble you were cut of from the congregation. The which
words of s. Paul seems to be an infallible rule touching the punishment of
heretics. But our men not regarding the discommodities which might ensue by
means of their false persuasions: cry out with one voice, saying.

What cruelty is this, to put to The fond words of the simple and rude
people exclamed to the heretics passing to death.
death the brethren in christ? where do we read in scriptures that christ or
his Apostles sought the death of any man? Therefore (say they) it is mere
tyranny thus to persecute the little flock, the chosen and elect vessels of
God, crying by the way as they pass to deaah: Be constant dear brethren, be
constante in the faith, stick to it, it is not this temporal pain which you
ought to regard, your brekefast is sharp, your supper shall be merye. Therefore
the lord strengthen you. With these and such like vain words, they bring
the poor men in such foles paradise, that they with such vain arrogance,
and small Charitee, stick not to adventure themselfes into the fiery flambes.
O ye folishe and blind Galathiens, who has so bewytched you too think, that
that man which sticks to his opinion to death, and seals the same with his
blood, as you term it, therefore his opinion is good? But to answer your
fo^de objection touching Christ and his Apostles, whether they sought the
death of any man or not: ye shall be answered by s. Augustine. Augustinus super
Ioannem*
For the Donatistes, in his time iustlye condemned for their heresies, alleged
the very like objection, whom he answered thus. What Emperor the^ did believe
in Christ? The cause why the Apostles required not the death of heretics, was
for that the sword of Heathen Princes did not serve the Gospel. But assoue as
Constantine the first christian Emperor was baptized, the catholykes then
cried out against heretics. For if Emperors do punish theft, murder, rape,
adultery, and perjury, why should they not as well punyshe heresy and
sacrilege? Thus saint Augustine allegeth the cause, why heresye was not
punyshed in the primative church. For if the Princes then had yielded to the
Gospel, and not followed their supersticious Idolatrye, doubtless the quarrel
of Gods enemies had been revenged as well as now. And yet we read that one
thing was observed then as well as now: which was that all vain and curious
books, whereof we want no stoore at this present, were burned openly before al
men, and the sum which the books die amount unto, was five hundredth
thousand pence, as appears Act. xix.
in the Acts of thapostles. But here to note whether it be the cause, or else
the death that makes a martyr: we will allege the saying of the late Prophet
Whether it be the cause or the death that makes a martyr.
often by the protestants compared to the old Prophets, called Latymer, in his
book of sermons, Latimers co^b^t with sir Thomas Seamers spirit
made before the late kings majesty Edward the sixte, where shamefully
raylyng upon a dead man sir Thomas Seamer lord Admyrall, disgracyng him with
all vile words and histories of his life paste, that possiblye he could
devise: he seemed even openly before the king to make a co^batte with his
spirit. For as Plinye says, they that speak euel of dead men, seem to
contend and fight with their spirits. So this Prophet then to prove that
his stout diyng made not his quarrel good, had the words ensuing.

O say they the man died very boldly, In his.iiii. sermon.
he would not have done so, had he not been in a just quarrel. This is no good
argument my friends, a man seems not to fear death, therefore his cause is
good. This is a deceiuable argument: he went to death boldly, ergo he
stands in a just quarrel. The Anabaptists that were burnt here in England,
in diuer^ towns, as I have heard of credible men (I saw the^ not my self)
went to their death, even intrepride, as ye will say, without any fear in the
world, cherefully, well let them go. There were in the old doctors times,
another kind of poisoned heretics, that were called Donatistes. And these
heretics went to their execution as though they should have gone to some ^oly
recreation, or banquet, to some belly chere, or to a play, And will you argue
then, he goes to his death boldly, or cherefully, ergo he dies in a just
cause? Nay that sequel follows no more the^ this. A man semes to be afraid of
death, ergo he dies evil. And yet our savior Christ was afraid of death
himself. The^ he afterward warns his audience not to judge those which are
in authorite, but to pray for them. It becomes not (says he) to judge great
magistrates nor condemn their doings. Unless their deeds be openly and
apparently wicked. Charity requires the same, for charity judges no man but
well of every body. etc. Thus Latymer proves that stout diyng is no sure
token of a good quarrel, and proves it a false surmyse, if any do believe the
cause of death to be true, because of sturdines in the time of the same. Also
to prove that it is not the death that makes a martyr, but the cause. The
cronicles make mention of one John Oldecastell Polidorus Libro. 2 2.
a knight, a valiant man, although he were wicked, who with one Roger Acton
(togethers Old castle (in a book that Bale makes of his death) is cano^^zed
for a martyr
with him fauouriug Wickleffes opinions) co^spired against the kings majesty,
then Henry the fyft, only to set forwards their conceived opinions, and
with a desperate company assembled, thynkyng to obtain the city of London,
from the king. But being prevented, he was taken and put into the tower of
London. The said Acton also, who within a while after, was worthily put to
death, but Old castle escaped prison, not withstandyng within a short space,
he was taken again, and then hanged, drawn and quartered. But he went to his
death so stoutly, as though he had nothing deserved to dye. But if heresy, and
treason, be no just causes, then he dyed wrongfully, as in the chronicles more
at large appears. If the stoutnes of death be a just cause to prove a martyr,
then many which have denied Christ to be equal with A Fle^ming of the
heresy of ye Arria^s, burnt in Smythfielde.
the father, which was the Arrians opynion, were martyrs. Then Ioane Butcher is
a martyr. The^ the Flemyng which was burnt in Smythfielde, in the time of king
Edward is a martyr, who lived in such continency and holiness of life, that
before his going to meat, he would fall prostrate upon the ground, and give
thanks to God the father: his dyete was so moderate, that in two days space
he used but one meal, and at the time of his death he was so frollicke, that
he fared much like our martyrs, in embracyng Toys used of our martyrs.
the redes, kyssyng the poaste, syngyng, and such other toys. In like sort
the gross Ioane Butcher, otherwise called Ioane of Kent.
martyr, Ioane Butcher handled the matter. And where as one Skorie then
preached before the people, in time of her death, she reuyled and spytted at
him, making the sign of the gallows toward him, boldly affirming that all
they that were not of her opinion should be dampened. Yea and she was so bold to
say, that a. M. in London were of her sect. Such and the like was y^ charity
of Anne Askewe, so often by Bale lykened to Blandina that true martyr of
Christ's church, in his furious book which he wrote of her death a noble piece
of work, and mete for such a champion to be thauthor. The said Anne Askewe,
was Anne Askewe.
of such charity, that when pardon was offered, she defied them all, reuyling
the offerers thereof, with such opprobrious names, that are not worthy
rehersall, making the like signs too the preacher at her death, as her pue
fellow and systcr in Christ, Ioane Butcher did, at Skorie aforesaid. These
arrogant and presumptuous martirs, in the time of their deaths, do little
esteem the words of sayncte Paul, saying: If I had the spirit of
prophecy, and knew al mysteries and all manner of cunnyng: Also if I had all
faith, in so much as I could translate, and carry away mountains, yet were I
nothing if I lacked charity. Moreover, if I did distribute all my goods in
fedyng the poor people, and although I gave my body to be burned, having no
charity, it nothing avails me. Thus if they esteemed the Godly exhortacio^s
of holy scriptures, they would not so uncharitably use themselves especially at
the extremity of death. But the deuel, whose martyrs they be, does always
instruct his darlinges, to follow his ragyng steps. True are the words of
the wyseman, saying. A sturdy heart shall sustain damage, and he that loves
peril therein shall perish. Therefore sturdynes, and self love, is the only
cause of the martirdomes of our martyrs whereof do spryng innumerable faults
(as Cicero says) Officiorum. Libro primo.
When men puffed up with stoutenes of opinion, be shamefully inuolued in folish
error. Doutles a great fault it is, and contrary to civil life, so to be
addicted to self love and arroga^cie: as to think our selves to be so
learned, that no persuasion or terror can beat the mind from that folly. A
pitiful case it is to see, not only the learned, which for wa^te of grace
Blind Bayarde.
do fall, but also blind bayarde, who although he be utterly blind and dull,
yet his courage is such, that he cares not to leap over hedge and dytche, I
mean the simple and ignorant, which only for want of knowledge do err, and
yet have such audacitie, that they care not to spend their lives in their
folly. And for that these blind bayardes do so stycke in their opinions to
death: it is wo^dered at of many, not of learned or godly men, but of
braynesicke foles, which like feathers will be carried about with every blast of
new doctrine. At the deaths of which you shall see more people in
Smythfeilde flockyng together on heaps in one day, then you shall see at a
good sermon or exhortacion made by some learned man in a whole weke. Their
glory is such upon these glorious martyrs. And why is this? because their
minds are given wholly to vain things, much like the Atheniens. For when
Demosthenes Laertins in ^us vita.
was tellyng them a sole^pne tale of an asses shadow, and upon the soubden
brake of, leaving the tale half told, they instantly entreated him to make an
end. O ye foles, quod Demosthenes, ye love to hear such trifling tales, but
if I went about to declare unto you any serious matter, you would skarse give
me the hearing. Thus fare our countreme^, if there be any vain syghtes to be
seen, or any folishe matters to be heard, lord how they run, and sweat in
their business. But if there be a sermon at Paul's cross, after they have
^aried there a while, to here some news, and the preacher at the prayers,
lord how they vanishe away in clusters, repairing into Paul's, and either by
and sell some bargain in the body of the church, or else tell some tale of an
Asses shadows. But to the purpose, if our men will needs be martyrs, as they
pretend to be, where is their modesty, their patience, Special^ poynces to be
required in a martyr.
their tharitie, their love, that is required in a martyr? I am sure, they dare
be bold to compare them selves to the martyrs of the primative Church. To
whom they be nothing like. For the sure token then of a martyr, Eusebius lib.
^* Cap. ^.
was to have a sure profession of Gods truth, which token they can not
challenge. For in it self their profession is divided, unless they would make
Gods truth (which is one) to be diverse. If they will challenge their modesty,
they be far deceived, they use no such glorious titles. For if any man had
named them martyrs in their co^munications or letters, they would reprove him
therefore, saying: that that title was worthy for Christ only, who alone was
the faithful witness of his truth. If they will challenge to themselves charity,
patience, and such like: they be as wide. For Paul, Stephen, and the rest,
used no tau^ting words or reprochefull checkes against the Bishops and
magistrates in their time, but with mylde countenance, they answered their
objections. But our martyrs will not stick to call them slaughtermen, butchers,
blodsuckers, and such like blasphemous names, more like helhoundes then holy
ones: such is their patience. Paul being brought before Ananias Act. xxiii.
the hye priest, and being beaten of the standers by, saying: Do thou strike
me thou painted wall, do thou sit upon me here in judgment, according to
the law, and do then command that I should be stricken, contrary to the
law? Then the standers by told him that it was the hye priest. I knew not
(quod he) that it was the Exodus xxi^. Philip. iii. Matthew. xxii Paul wasory for
hi^ taunt, but the protesta^tes rejoice in their.
hye priest, for it is written. Thou shall not revile the head of the people.
Paul herein was sorry that he had reviled the magistrate. But our martyrs
forgetting S. Paul's rule, cease not from time to time, contumeliously to rail
upon the bishop, and other learned and godly men, with the most vylest terms
they can devise, and yet sheweno cause of sorrow, but like Orestes, Tantalus,
Theseus, and Proserpina, and such other infernal furies, they exclame in a
tragical manner upon God and his church, the heavens, the yerth, and all that
is. But yet one thing there is, wherein they greatly The consta^cie where in
our martyrs triu^ph
triumph, that is, the constancy of these men (oh their constancy is
wonderful) which is no cause, as partly is touched before, to prove them
martyrs. For if their constancy were used in a good cause, then were it worthy
fame. What follye is so great, says Tully, or so unworthy a wysemans De
natura deo ^um. lib. i.
constancy, as is false opinion? The constancy whereof our men so brag of,
is not for any opinion that is good or commendable, it is but only for worldly
praise or disprayse, the zeal of whether being taken away, it would convert
into inconstancy. The cause, as is aforesaid, does make a martyr, and not the
valiant death. A notable history occurreth now to my remembrance of a true
martyr, and it is rehearsed in a book made by that most excellent and well
learned gentleman, called sir Thomas Elyot knight. Valeriane being The governor
ye third book. A true martyr.
Emperor of Rome, and perfecuting the church, in Egypt was a christen man
presented unto him, whom he beholding to be young and lustye, thynking therefore
to remove him from the faith, rather by venereall mocions, tha^ by sharpnes of
torments, caused him to be laid in a bed within a fair gardin, having
about him all flowers of sweet odor, and most delectable savors and perfumes.
And than caused a fair tender young woman to be laid by him al naked, who
ceased not swetely and louyngly to embrace and kiss him, showing to him all
pleasant devises, to the intent to provoke him to fornication. There lacked
little that the young man was not vanquished, and that the flesh yielded not to
the service of Venus. Which thing the young man perceiving, which was armed
with grace, and seeing none other refuge, with his tethe did gnawe of his own
tongue: wherewith he suffered such incredible pain, that therewith the bre^ning
of voluptuous appetites was utterly extincte. In this notable act, I wot not
which is to be commended, either A merueilous resista^ce of the spirit
against the flesh, and a good lesson for our married votaries.
his invincible courage in resisting so much against nature, or his wisdom in
subduyng the less pain with the more, and biting off that whereby he might be
constrained to blaspheme god, or renounce his religion. Sure I am that he
therefore received immortal life, and perpetual glory. This young man was a true
martyr, this man followed his master Christ in bearyng his cross to crucify
the affections. This man showed a notable example of constancy, in not denying
his creator, the author and founder of his faith.

Ignatius, of whom we read in Ignatius.
Eusebius, was a constant and undoubted martyr, whoo cared for no punishment,
persecution or other torment. So was also Policarpus and Justinius martyr. These
Policarpus. Justinius.
and such like are true martyrs, which against the infideles, and Gods
enemies yielded their bodies to the service of death: not caring either for
words, fame, or praise of men. These men were with torments inspeakable
constrained to deny the name of Christ: These men were allured by fair
promises to forswear their master. But our men are with torments and terror
of death compelled to embrace Christ's faith, and to relinquishe their Iewishe
opinions. Thauncient martyrs were tormented to the intent they might fall to
Idolatry. Our men are entreated by all fair means possible to worship the
liuyug God. O what madness is this, to seem to dye for the name of Christ, when
the sentence geuers do exhort them to embrace Christ? Who can call this
persecution? If the Turk be persecuted, when he is by a christian gently
persuaded to be baptized, and to put upon him Christ, and to forsake Mahomet,
then may the heretic say that he is In what causes men ought chiefly to
spend their lives.
justly persecuted. But if our men do love wylfull death, and be weary of
their life in this world: I would have them either arm them selves in battle
to fight against the great Turk or other enemies of the faith, or else to offer
them selves in Turkey to be burnte, or otherwise persecuted, and not in
christendom, where Christ is sufficiently known to all men: if they will
needs dye, to be renowned after their death, let them do as many A notable
death to die for the causes of the king and Queen's majesty's.
notable men among the Romans, and other have done, fight for their common
welthes sake, and for the cause of their princes. Brutus the first consul of
Rome, with such a zeal sought to defend the liberty of his country, that
he encountered so fiercely with Aruns, son to Tarquinius the proud, which
was banished for the rape of Lucrece, that in the cloase with their lances
they both perished.

Mutius Sceuola, a worthy gentleman emonges the Romans, to deliver his
country from the siege of Porsenna king of Hetrurie boldly entered into his
ca^pe, thinking to kill the king: but when he came into the pauilion where the
soldiers were wont to be pa^ed, he discovered his dagger and stroke at the
kings secretary, supposing it had been the king, because their apparail was
much like. But being taken and demanded what he was, and why he took upon him
such an enterprise: with a stern countenance answered: I am a citizen of Rome,
quod he, my name is Mutius, and I being an enemy would feign have killed mine
enemy, and my stomach is no less to dye for the cause, then it was ready to do
the slaughter. For it is the part of a Roman both to do, and to suffer
valiantly: with other y^ like words. Wherewith the king being moved, said unto
him, that unless he would disclose unto him what treason was imagined against
his person, he should with fire be tormented to death. Then behold^ O king
(quod he) what a small matter the fire is to them which seek to be renowned
with glory: and immediately thrust his hand into the fire and burnte it quite
of. By which fact his country was delivered from the extremity of that siege.

Moreover, Codrus king of Athenes, Inslinus. lib.ii.
at such time as the city was in great distress, by reason of the siege
laid to the same, repared to Appollo, by Oracle to know what should become of
the city. The answer was, that unless he himself should be slain, the city
should be won. Codrus therefore bearing a natural piety to his country:
rather contented to give his own life, then the city should be given into the
hands of his enemies: put on a beggars apparel, and conveyed himself into the
camp of his enemies, and there gave an occasion to one of the soldiers to
strike him and so was slain with a byll.

Whereby the siege not long after brake up. These examples are sufficient to
spur these wylfull men forwards, rather to give their lives for the defense
of the common wealth and Princes, against the enemies, then with such
obstinacy to consume it in the fire, and no cause why. They might in spending
their lives in the cause of their Princes, or else in defense of Gods religion,
deserve both reward at the hands of God, and also immortal fame in merityng
well of their common wealth. This is the death wherein a man ought to triumph:
In this death a man heapeth up in heaven treasures inspeakable, and in earth
fame immortal: a worthy death, and worthy a christen man. For this cause it is
that the feast of S. Stephens martyrdom is yearly celebrated: For this cause
it is that the blessed feasts of the Apostles have their yearly recourse. For
this cause it is that the memories of Martyrs be registered in the Church of
God.

For this cause it is that the annual celebracions of all the saints of
Christ, are had in yearly remembrance. Then all men which entende to embrace
the benefits of Christ, and seek means thereby to attain to salvation, let
the^ rather by this kind of death, that is to say, either to fight and suffer
death for the defen^ of the name of Christ, or else in the quarrel of his
Princes, and other magistrates. But it is thought of many of these
prot^stantes, that no man ought to suffer death for his conscience. And they
learned the same of Luther, who in deed is of that opinion. In Turkey (say
they) a man may live with his conscience, why then should a christian man
among christians, be punyshed for his conscience? Then may I ask them the
like question if a Turk or heretic may use his conscience: Why did they
punish Ioane Butcher and the Flemming, which were of the sect of the
Arrians? For their conscience led them so to believe. Why may not the Turks
use Mahome^es law among us? Why did Peter in ^^e Acts of the Apostles
Acts. v.
destroy Ananias and Saphyra, for making a ley? For their conscience conceiled
the portion which they kept b^^ke. If it be not laufull for a man to dye for
his conscience, than they did ill too punyshe heresye by death, in the like
time of procedinges, whereunto I am sure they will not grant. For in any wise
they must be no liars: although it be proved manifestlye to their faces. Tushe
Math. ^v.
say they: suffer the Cockell too grow with the good corn till the harvest
come. Then the lord of the harvest shall divide the^, and shall put the good
corn in to his barn, and cast the cockle into the fire. But this parable (GOD
wot) makes no more for their purpose than it does against the hangyng of
thieves and other offenders. For if the offenders and breakers of the law, I
mean such as concern treason, murdre, or felony should live, how should a
king or ruler govern his common wealth, wherein the honor and maistie of a king
consists. And like as if such malefactors should ^ee suffered to continue in a
common wealth without any restrainte of punishment, the same common wealth,
with the governor thereof, were like to fall too ruin: Even so in the state of
the church: if heresy should be maintained, and the fautours thereof escake
unpunished, it would not only bring the just plague of God upon the
sufferers, but also it would utterly consume all faieth and good orders, and
so bring the soul of man to everlasting confusion. And that a king may
punyshe such malefactors by death, as well such as offend the church, as
such as noye the common wealth, it does appear by S. Paul's words to Timothe.
We know (says he) the law is good, if ^. Tim. ^.
a man use it laufully, knowing this how that the law is not given unto a
rightuous man, but to the unrighteous and disobedient, to wicked men, and
sinners, to vnreuere^t and profane, with such other: And then concludes,
that if there be any other thing contrary too wholesome doctrine of the Gospel,
the glory of the blessed GOD, which gospel is committed unto me. Now note here
that he says the law is not given unto rightuous men, whose wicked deeds
rehersing to the Romans as well, as he does in this place, he says is worthy
of death. May not a king justly put them to death by the law, which law he
says is good, if a man uses it laufullye Then to execute it upon the
unrighteous, which committed any falte against the Gospel, which reproves
true religion: is a thing most laufull, which fautes are adjudged by the
church worthy excommunication, that is to say: to cut them of which are
obstinate, as s. Paul wysheth Titus. Tit. iii.
Now if the law be good to cut them of, as rotten branches, which either be
authors of sects, or offenders otherwise, the law judging them worthy death:
then it is a thing persuaded by scriptur to burn such branches, which are
dampened by their own judgment, and no injury done to the one or thothe^, but
charity in cuttig them of: that they should sin no more in y^ like faults
to encresse their own da^pnation. We would Contra Crescomum gram. libro. 4.
cap. 4.
not (says saint Augustine) have them cut of (meaning heretics) from the
other joints and members of the body, but forasmuch as the wound by cutting
away the dead flesh, may sooner be healed, then if it were suffered to remain
still. Therefore a more holsom remedy is foud with a short pain to ease the
grief, then to suffer it to fester and rankc^e the other members. So it
appears that it is a most pestilent error to think that noone for any
opinion, or conscience ought too be put to death. But peradventure they will
allege again: saying: why does God say, which is the lord of the harvest,
suffer the cockle, and the good corn to grow together till the harues^, lest
you pull up the good corn therewith* Doutles even for this cause. We se by
experience, when seeds good and bad are throwe^ upon the earth together.:
while they be young, it is dangerous to pluck up the one, lest the other be
plucked up also. But i^ they be suffered to grow till the good corn have a
strong root, then the cockle growing up therewith, may be easily discerned,
and The cau^^ why heretics wernot punyshed in the (...)ti^e ^hu(...)
without danger of hurtyng the good corn, the cockle may be roted out. Even
so in the infancy of the church, at such time as the faith was not thoroughly
roted in the hearts of men, much lenite and genlenes was used, in ouercommynge
the stubburnes of heretics, least the weak christians not fully instructed in
the faith, might have fallen thereby. So that there was no sharpnes At what time
the sword began to serve the Gospel.
showed upon any, till the time of Maximus the emperor, by whose authorite,
heretics began to be odible, and were cut of by the te^porall swoorde. After
whom Theodosius, Valentinianus, Martianus, the like Emperors reigned in whose
times also, laws were made for the punyshyng of heretics, and such as were
authors of evil doctrine, and the cause was for that the fayeth of Jesus began
firmly to take hold, as well in Emperoures, Kings, and Princes, as also in
others. And the church (as it is now) so grown that it has so strong
root, that hell gates shall not prevail against it: that is too say:
neither the persecution of tyrants, nor the peruersite of heretics, can
overthrow it: the church, I say, now being in this state, and that
heretics may easly be discerned, as cockle is in harvest (which is then weded
for ouergrowing the good corn) does by by excommunication cut them of, as
scripture commands. For every perverse doctrine is, as saint Hierome says,
Leaue^. ^^ (...) a^^ (...) (...).
And leanen ought to be taken from the doughe. A sparckle as soon as is does
appear, ought to be quenched: rotten flesh ought to be cut away: a skabby
sheep, ought too be repealed from the flock, least the house, the doughthe
body, and the flock be thoroughly corrupted, do burn, do putrify and mar.

Arrius in Alexandria, was but one sparcle: but because it was not immediately
put out, y^ flame thereof destroyed the hole world. What mercy is this to
favor, ^^ to bring all other in peril of their lives? Meaning heretics, who
if they might be suffered too reign, would bring all things to ruin, as is
aforesaid. Of that Epistola ad Galath. cap. 1.
mind is Chrysostom, that eloquent Atlas, one of the pillars of gods
verity, saying. Have you not heard (says he,) that he which in the old
testament, gathered styckes upon the Sabbath day, for that he offended that
one commandment, was destroyed with extreme death? Have you not heard also,
that Ozi, which did but stay up the Arc from falling, was immediately stricken
stark dead, because he took upon him an unfit ministry? Therefore does the
violacion of the Saboth, and the touching of the Arc, so much offend God,
that the offenders could obtain no pardon? What Pardon and excuse shall he
have then, that does corrupt wholesome doctrine, and in place thereof sows
wicked opinions? Thus Chrysostom and the other Doctors of Christ's church,
judge them, which by their evil suggestions corrupt the simple members of
the church, worthy temporal death, and punyshement. Then that opinion which
the Protestants conceive of their own brain, upon the aforesaid parable of
the gospel, and also that no man ought too suffer death for his conscience,
is quite frustrate, and of none effect.

And because our heretics will The bones of our martirs, of some preserved for
relics
needs have their men to be taken for martyrs, some of them counterfayting the
trade of the ancient state of the true church, gather together the burnt
bones of these stynking martyrs, entendyng thereby (by like) to shryne the
same, or to preserve them for relykes, that at such a time as when an heretic
is burnt, ye shall see a route enclosing the fire, for that purpose. And when
the fire is done, they lie wallowyng like pigs in a stie to scrape in that
heretical dongehill for the said bones. Yea and as it is reported, some
gossyps and fellow disciples of these wicked apostles, use the same next to
their hearts in the morning, being grated in a cup of Ale, too preserve them
from the chyncoughe, and such other maladies incident to such hoote burning
stomakes.

A pretty medicine and apt for such brainesicke pacientes. They may be well
compared to Artemisia, of whom we read in Aulus Gellius, De ^octibus atti^is
lib. x. cap. xviii.
which was wife to Mausolus king of Caria, who when her husband was dead she
was of such an affection (being beyond al measure rapt with his love) that after
the funeralles was done, she gathered together all the bones and ashes of her
husband, and minglinge the same with perfumes and other sweet odours, she
drank them up, declaring by such outward tokens her immesurable affection.
Many of our gosseps taken with the same spirit in love (not with their: own
husbands, whose like examples I never herd of) but with their merry martyrs,
that for their sakes they care not to quaffe up the poudet of their durtye
bones too declare their burning affections. A pityfull case and with tears too
be lamented, that the innumerable relyques of Christ's True relics contempned.
true martirs were so wyckedlye neglected, as they have been in the late
malicious time. But they were the^ rediculous to these sorts of men, who
cried out with all wehemence: to what purpose are the reseruacion of the dead
bones, and so contempning the relics of thapostles, John Baptist, and such
other holy and blessed saints, are not now ashamed to reserve to them
selves the vile bones of these blasphemous martyrs, who neither in purity of
life, or constancy in death were worthy the names of Christians. Thus these
protestants contrary to their own doctrine, strive with their own shadows.
They in their books and talk contempne relics, and yet using the same
after thyr own fancies, they are contented to allow the^. Who cannot play
Democritus part continually too laughe at their folly? or who can forbear to
say: Ocaecas hominum me^tes, o pectora caeca? For what is blyndnes, if this be
none? Moreover when Rogers their pseudmartyr (protomartyr I would say) Rogers
burnt in Smithfield and the fond: imaginations of diverse in the time of his
death.
was burnt in Smythfield, were there not diverse merchant men and others, which
seeing certain pigions flying over the fire that haunted to a house hard
adioyninge, being amassed with the smoke forsook their nestes, and flew over
the fix, were not ashamed boldly to affirm that the same was the holy ghost
in the lykenes of a dove. This thing is sufficiently known by experience to
them which were there present. Then by the like argument they might have said
the crows which the same time houered over the fire, were deuels. But what
blasphemy is this, such opinionatiue fools to believe or credit such fancies?
The Heathen poets never devised more toys upon Jupiter, Juno, Diana, Actaeon,
Io, or such other counterfaites, then the madbraynes of the protestants have
invented tales upon these Ethnikes. Whose lying lips are so sugared with false
reports, that y^ brethe thereof is marvelous delectable to a great many of the
same generation: yea it is supposed that a great number be found as hyrelinges
to maintain that art, which among the simple wander as pilgrims too
publyshe their hid mysteries: much like Sinon, who with his disguised habit,
Virgil aenei^ S^^ur^do.
and proporcion of body, togethers with his unhappy oracion, begyled the poor
Troianes. But al wise men which can beware of other men's harms, no doubt
will take heed of the loytering adders, which hide themselves Loyteryng Adders.
in the grass. And as for other, which pass for no admonicion, I fear me
(without God of his mercy spare them) will verefie the proverb: Sero s^^iu^t
^br ^^ ^es, and so will repent with had I wist, as the unhappy Troianes did.
But yet these overthwart neighbors, thynkyng too cast another bone for the
catholics to gnawe upon, hit them home as they think with this objection. Oh
say they, what a beggarly Another objection of ye protesta^tes.
religion is theirs, which has no man valiauntly to stick to the death in the
defense thereof? For a good shepehearde will give his own life for his sheep.
Therefore it appears, our religion is found, which has had so many
shepeheardes, that has bestowed their lives in the defense of the verite, But
here they begin too tryumphe like unto a pestilent heretic in the primative
church, called Montanus Eus^^ius ^^. ^*
who affirmed that he was the holy ghost. And when he and his adherentes were
convicted of heresy, they boasted (as our men do now) that they had many men,
which spent their lives in their opinion, and that that was an infallible
argument, that they had the spirit of God. Unto whom it was answered: that
that case was not always true. For certain other heretics there were, which
boasted of their false martyrs, as the Marcionites, which denied Christ, and
other a great number. And because they say that in this Realm there were
none, which were content to give their lives for the defense of their faith:
the matter is so apparently known to be false, as the young infant can by
report of his own parents say the contrary. But what shall I need to rehearse
the most godly, and no less learned, which have been contented too have not
only ben depryued their nobilite and great possessions, but also to yield their
necks too the stroke of the axe and sword, for the defense of the liberty of
christ's church. Whose fames are so registered in the volume of immortalite,
that no continuance of time nor inconstancy of fortune, can wipe them out of
memory. What shall I need to remember Albanus ^edaecclesiast. historiae gentis
Anglori^s lib. 1. Capit. sepr^mo.
the first martyr in this realm, which with most vile torments was
persecuted of Dioclesian the^peroure, in the year of our lord. 286. for the
faieth of the Gospel, and the verite of the church, that one Fortunatus,
writing of the praise of virgins says.

Albanu^ egregium foecu^d a Britannia profert. Britane of abundance, and plenty
most able.
Procreated Albane that martyr honorable.
Which worthy man was buried at a place then called VVarlingacester, now
called of his own name saint Albons. Where was exerted a notable monument or
abbey, for perpetual memory of this worthy man. Many other at that time
likewise suffered, for the cause of the church. What Saint Thomas of Ca^torbury.
shall I stand here upon the praise of that godly man, saint Thomas sometimes
archebysshop of Cantorbury: unto whom I will attribute none other praise, then
Polydorus Virgilius, and other chrono graphers do. Who called him vir Polydori
Virg. Angl. hist li. 13 Charion, cromcor. lib. 3. quart. monar. ter^iae
aetatis. Georg. Liuius.
summa integritate atque prudentia, a man of much holiness and wisdom. Who
after he had been in exile more then.vii. years, banysshed by Henry the
second into France, not for ambicion as the malicious headdes of the
protestants conceive, but only for admonyshing the king for misusing the
liberties of the church, for perverting godly orders, for il and wicked
living, and for exterminating the spiritual promocions upon noughty uses.
These were the causes why this man was banyshed, not here rehearsed for zeal,
but spoken for truth, not gathered without authority, but reported upon the
words of chronicles, the faithful arbiters of things already past. This man I
say to the intent the things aforesaid, should not decay, had rather to have
given his life, not of malice to withstand the king, unto whom he bare most
obedience, but for the zeal he had to gods church, the chamber of the pore.
But as now there wants none if time served, which would not stycke too do
mischief: even so then their wanted not unhappy harebraynes, to rydde this
godly man of his life. Who within a Anno do* ^^^^
while after as a just reward for their cruel fact in a most miserable
manner, as the history declares, ended their lyfes. The death of which godly
manne was not only a cause of great repentance to the king himself, but the
people universally most devoutly be wailed his death saying: We the people
and flock of The lamentatio^ of the people upon the death of s. Thomas.
Christ have lost our good and godly shepeharde. Thus this godly man of the
godly people the^ was had in great admiration: although it pleases the
gallantes of our time to say otherwise. What shall I stand here upon the
death John Fiswer the bishop of Rochester. Sir Thomas More.
of John Fyssher semetyme Bishop of Rochester, a man of notable learning and
innocence of life, or the death of the second Cicero, sir Thomas More, a man
endewed with heavenly eloquence. Qui demum ambo maluerunt de Vita, quam
Polidor. lib. 27.
de To p^ntificis autoritatis sententia decedere, Vt ocius in caelo,
quemadmodum ipsi sperabant, fruerentur aeuo.

What shall I need to stand The poor monks of the Charterhouse.
upon the poor Monks of the Charterhouse, who were contented to suffer their
bodies to be dismembered in pieces and to be hanged upon sundry gybbettes, rather
then they would yield to the depriuacion of the Popes authority. Whose worthy
names, worthy perpetual memory hereafter follow. That is to say: John
Houghten, Robert Laure^ce, Augustine Webster, Humfrey Middelmore, William
Exmewe, Sebastian Nedigate, Wyllia^ Horn, John Rochester, James Walwerke,
Rychard Bear, Thomas Ionson, Thomas Grene, John Dauye, William Grenewoode, Tho.
Screuen, Robert Salt, Walter Pereson, and Thomas The abbottes of Rending
Colchester and others.
Reding. What need I else to stay upon the deaths of the good me^, the Abbotes
of Colchester, Glastonbury and Redyng, or else of Powel, Fetherstone, Abell,
Germayne, Stone, Forest, and many others, to whom death was nothing ferefull
for the quarrel of God and his church? These and a great number mo died for
the cause of the catholyke fayeth, that fayeth which has ever continued from
age to age, with the consent of all kingdoms christen, even from the
beginning, whose memory shall be magnified till the end of the world. But the
deaths of our cranke Heretykes, lie dead and are buried in the grave of
cankred oblivion, covered with perpetual infamye, except they be enrolled in
a few threehalfepennye books, which steal out of Germanye replete as well
with treason against the King and Queen's majesty's, as with other abominable
lies.

Moreover in the late kings time Edward the syxte, wherein heresy expressed
her game, there were many godly me^ which for the defense of the most
honorable* Sacrament of the Altar and the other sacraments, yielded their
bodies to prison. As the late worthy Prelate Doctor Stephen Gardener bishop
of Wynchester, with other Bysshoppes, and men of great learning. Yea and if
their deaths had been required, they would with most willing hearts have
suffered the same. But the proceders then knew well inoughe, that that was not
the way too proceed in their doings, least they should have become odious to
all sorts of people. But they fared like Wyatt the late rebel of Kent, who
went about to achyue Wy^t the Kentish rebel.
his enterprise not with rapine and spoil (according to the nature of
rebellion) but with all lenite and gentleness, thereby too allure the peoples
hearts, the rather to embrace and aid his attemptes: but as his cloak was
then spanishe, so was the others of late time Iewishe. Then having all these
not only well learned, but also godly men, which as well have suffered pains of
death for their religion, as these protesta^tes have for theirs, what have they
gained then by this objection? If the stout death of a man does approve his
cause good, then what cause have the protestants to refell the religion now
used? But here to finyshe this matter, and to proceed in further explication of
the fantastical feats and abuses of the protestants, let us learn further
of Saint Paul: who says these words. Know this (says he) that ii. Tim. iii.
in the last days shall come perilous times. For men shall be lovers of the^
selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to fathers and
mothers, unthankful, ungodly, unkind, truce breakers, false accusers,
Riotors, dispisers of them that be good, Trayters, heddy, high minded, gredy
upon voluptuousnes more the^ the lovers of God, having a similitude of
godliness, but deniing the power thereof, and such abhor. For of this sort
are they which enter into houses, and bring into bondage women laden with
sin, which women are led with diverse lusts ever lerning and never able to
come to knowledge of the trut he Now let every man weyghe these words of
s. Paul And note if we have not had among us the like false prophets with
the like co^dicions. First Math. ^. Self love and yelding ^o the flesh.
he says they shall be lovers of themselves. Christ says, He that loves
himself more then me, is not worthy of me. Who be they, which love them
selfs more the^ they do Christ? Doubts they that prefer y^ love of this
world before Christ, giving place to the world, and the lusts thereof.

Which vice is commen to al men and used of to many, especially to such
whereof mention is made before, which neglecting the brynging of their
affections into bondage, live as their own sensuality does lead them, not
caringe for the wholesome precepts of gods most holy word, but disobeying
the laws of the magistrates constituted too a good purpose to yoke the heavy
carcass, to thyntent he may the better obey the precepts divine.

For if the appetites do rule with out resistance, they will soon overcome y^
imbecillitie of nature. A victory or field is soon won, if there be none to
resist. Then the protestants being married priests, yeldynge the service of
their body to the fraylitie of the flesh, was thereof ouercommed. But if they
had been good soldiers, and had fought under the standerd of continency, no
doubt but they had won the field. Think you Alexander the great Q. Curtius,
libr^. ^
had he given his mind too serve his appefites in his first wars, had proved
so valiant a conqueror* No truly. For after his first victory against Darius,
king A notable example of Alexander touching the brydelinge of his own lusts.
of Persia having always in his host the wife of the same Darius which
incomparably excelled all other women in beauty, would never after he had
once seen her, have her to come into his presence, albeit that he caused her
estate still to be maynteyned, and with as much honor as ever it was. And to
them which wondryng at the ladies beauty, marueyled why Alexander did not
desire too company with her, he answered, saying: It shoud be to him a reproach
to be subdued by the wife of him whom he had vanquyshed. This was a right
conqueror and worthy to win all the world, which in this sort could have
the victory over his own lusts, being a cruel fight for a faint hearted
souldior. This fight fought Scipio surnamed Aphricanus, when Titus Liuius deca.
3. libro. 4 Appianus. libro lyb^co.
he had won Carthage. For emonges diverse women which were taken, one most
fairest emo^ges the rest, was* brought unto him to do with her his pleasure.
But when he knew that she was affiaunced to another called Indibilis, he caused
him to be sent for, and perceiuyng the loving tokens between them, he delivered
her to Indibilis, paying for her rau^some, and adding further an honorable
portion of his own treasure. This was another excellent victory, gotten of a
famous souldior, which would not (though he had liberty) violate his mind
upon the beauty of a woman. But our protestants and married preistes,
neglecting their first faith, cared not upon whom they had bestowed themselves,
little waying the counsel of saint Paul, that he can be no ii. Timo. ii.
good soldier to God, which enwrappeth himself with secular affairs. These
be they which pretended godlynes, and under the hypocrisy of marrying deceived
the simple, and begyled their own selves. For when they thought themselves
surest of their fained wives, they did the sooner forgo them. A just plague of
God upon such dissolute preistes: who cared not what women they married, common
or other, so they might get them wives. For true are S. Paul's words: they
enter into houses bringing into bondage women laden with sin. The What kind
of women our married preistes used to marry.
women of these married preistes were such for the most part, that either they
were kept of other before, or else as common as the cartway, and so bound them
to incesluous lecherye, which women are led with diverse lusts, ever learning
and never able to attain unto the truth. Were not the said women ever lerning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of ye truth, being led with diverse
lusts, using their bodies with other men as well as with their supposed
husbands: yea and one of them with another woman, taking it (as it is
thought) for a brotherly love, one to help another, after the doctrine of
Freer Luther, the In libro de caep ^^u^^a^^ ^ab^lo^^c^.
first author of their marriage* Is it not seen now by experience that some
of their women being divorced, are married again to ruffians, and such other
gallantes following the opinion of sir Ihon Hoper in his book of the ten
commandments? What shall I rehearse their sundry abhominacions, which shame
constrains to say no more. And these women were not only learning and never
hable to attain to the truth, but many other simpering gosseppes Chatering
gosseps.
and parottes of the new found worlds are ever learning, but as far from
the truth, as they that never went to schole. These dames are like the
wanderyng gyllottes, that followed the heretics of old time, which under the
color of sticking to the gospel covered their evil lives. And by saint Mary a
number are contented to run from their husbands into Germany, the dongion
of heretics, being a meet cover for such cups. And these are thought to be
such mates to match with the protestants in their doings, that in nowise
they can be with out them. Simon Magus, The aun^^ent heretics in old time used
womenne a society, for the better maintenance of their doings. Simon Magus
Helene. Nicolaus. Marcion.
to maintain his opinions, had one Helene a fair we^che to match with him.
Nicolaus the heretic and furbisher of all fylthynes in Antioche, had many
women to toyne with him in his art. Marcio^ to prepare the minds of the people
in Rome to favor his heresy sent a woman before much like Ioane Butcher,
which in the beginning of our newfound opinions was greatly maintained by
Cranmer in Cantorbury, and other places of Kent.

Apelles had one Philomena, not Appelles. Philomena.
his own wife, but the wife of another man, as a companion in his procedinges.
Montanus another Montanus.
heretic endued with a wicked ghost, through the help of Prisca and
Maximilla, first with Prisca. Maximilla.
money corrupted many women of honor and great substance, and after polluted
them with heresye. Arrius, the rather to Arrius.
deceive the world, procured a kings daughter to sustain him Donatus.
and to bear him out. Donatus Lucilla.
in Aphrica had releife of one Lucilla. Finally in all ages at any ryme when
one had devised some folishe error or other, straight way women were ready
to apply to their fa^ries. Thus as one heresye begatte another, so one heretic
brought forth another. Doutles the weakness of women The weakness of women.
is such, that they be ever prone and ready to mischief, and to bring men to
their confusion. Did not Gene. iii.
Eve deceive her husband in perswadyng him to eat the apple, at the
suggestion of the serpent? Did not Dalida deceive Sampson, Judith.xv.
by persuasion to utter unto her, where the force of his strength co^sisted?
Did not the Concubines iii. Reg. x.
deceive Salamon, to make him commit idolatry? Did not Ieroboams Ibi. xiii.
wife deceive him in fayning her self to be another woman* How did wicked
Iesabel inue^t means to procure the death of Naboth, iii. Reg xxi.
by bearyng false wytnes? Many other such examples there be in holy write, to
prove the redynes of women in deceiuyng of men with their vain persuasions.
For the devil has many such prancking dames in league with him, to the end
to bring men to mischeife.

What brought Alexander the Q Curtius. lib. 6.
great to grow insolent, but only the vain persuasion of Thalestris the queen
of the Amazons, who from her own country repaired unto him to have his carnal
Ibidem. libro. 5
company? What caused him to destroy the noble city Persepolis, but the
persuasion of Thais, the dronken harlot? Therefore let al men beware of the
subteltie of women, and to follow their vain persuasions. For they be ever
learning, and never hable to attain unto the truth: ever busye like waspes,
rather to do hurt then good. I speak not here of matrones, which are modest
and sobre, obedient to their husbands, contented to apply their minds to the
government of household matters, and to bring up their children in a goodly
order, but of such only which are curious in all matters, especially of
that, whereof they have nothing to do: I mean these London ladies, and London
Ladies.
other the like, whose talk is nothing but of religion, of Peter and Paul,
and other places of scripture. Whose scripture mouths are ready to allure
their husbands to dye in the lords verity, because they would feign have
new, much like to the wife of Aman, who gave her husband Hester.v.
counsel to make a gallows to hang up Mardocheus, and yet at length he was
hanged upon the same himself. Diverse other also are ever learning and never
able to come to the knowledge of y^ truth, as are those, which are of such
cold devotion toward Gods church, that they are contented with heat to
end their lives.

Women, as says saint Paul, The feru^cie of some of our she Apostles.
ought to be silent among ^he congregation. But these hot souls are so
fervent in sprite, that because they may not preach, they are contented to
burn. O wicked daughters of heresy, and dames of the devil himself. Is this
your profession at your marriage day, to be at commandment to your
husbands? And many of you contrary to their wylles maintain your
obstinacy by death. You ought, being Christians, and traded up in Christ's
faith, rather to spend your lives The cause why w^m^ ought to be stowe their
lives.
for the defense of your chastity, and the lives of your dear husbands, then
in the cause of herisie, the cause of your confusion. We read of many notable
women, which were worthy martyrs, for the defense of Christ's most holy name,
and suffered sundry torments for the quarrel of his faith. But you not
compelled, neither to abjure his name, nor yet to forsake his faith, what
should be the cause of your folly? For soth even the devil, who goes about
like a roaryng Lion, to seek who^ he may devour. I know the woman and her
seven sons, whereof we read in the Machabees, offered 2. Macha ^.
her self to death. What against the church of God? No doubtless, but for
obseruyng the commandment of God, prescribed unto her by the church. We read
of many other godly women, which dyed for Christ's faith, and the unity of
his church: but not as you do against his church and the unity thereof. But
peradventure you will say, we are his church, and we are his little ones. But
if you so be, you are an ill favored church, a deformed church, a cornered
church, a dispersed congregation, altogethers divided, as partly is proved
before. You ought rather, as I said before, to spend your life for the
sauegarde of your husbands, and the defense of your chastity, the band of
matrimonye, as many good women have done in time past. Michol like a faithful
woman, i. Reg. xix.
preserved her husband David, when he was sought for of her own father king
Saul. We read of a noble woman called Valeri. Maxi. lib. 6. cap. 7.
Turia, who to save her husband named Q. Lucretius, from the cruelty of the
Romans, offered her self into many dangers. Also the wives of certain
notable Valerius Maximus. lib. 6. capi. vlt.
men called Mimi, have left behind them their worthy praise. For their
husbands being committed to prison by the Lacedemoniens, and condemned to
dye: their wives to the intent they might speak with their husbands before
their death, had leave to enter into prison, who changing their apparel with
their husbands, and they being in their wives garments, counterfaiting also
their sorrows, escaped prison, leauyng their wives behind them, who were
contented for their husbands sakes to yield them selves to death. These were
wives worthy of immortal fame, and vouchsafed to have their images to be
erected of gold for their perpetual fame. Lucrece the Roman T. Liuius dec.
prim^. lib. 1.
matrone, for the loss of her chastity killed her self, saying: what can be
safe to a woman when she has lost her chastity? The fyftie virgyns of the
city of Sparta, being sent by their fathers to Micenae a cicie of Achaia to do
sacrifice, the citezens being enflamed with their beauties, required that they
might acco^plishe their lusts. Who not granting to their desires, they were
in manner constrained. But rather then they would loose their maydenheades, they
were contented to lease their lives, which afterward was revenged by the
Lacedemoniens. These were valiant women, which rather then they would yield to
the service of Venus and violate their innocente minds, were content to
suffer death. I would that our women martyrs (if they would needs be martyrs,
as I ca^ se no cause thereof, but only arrogancy) thus should imploye their
lives, and not for a fantastical opinion newely crept out of the shell. It
should be wished of all godly men, that it would please God of his surpassing
goodness to pour grace into the hearts of these graceles persons, most
humbly to fall down prostrate before the magistrates of his Church to ask
mercy, and at length to acknowledge the vanity of their errors.

But yet there were other in y^ late malicious time, as the effeminate
Effeminate bishops and their in constancy.
bishops and other, which were ever lerning and never able to come to the
truth, as it appeared by their often alteracions of their procedinges. And
touching their Communion, they were ever learning, and in the end so well
learned, that they fell to the denial of Christ's own words, not attaining to
the knowledge of y^ truth, but to the knowledge of errors. How long were they
learning The Communion table.
to set their table to minister the said communion upon? First they placed it a
lofte where the high altar stood. Then must it be set Procedinges.
from the wall that one might goo between, the ministers being in contention
on whether part to turn their faces, either toward the Weste, the North or
South. Some would stand Southward, some Northward, and some Westwarde. Thus
turning every way, they myste the right way, but yet they could not hytte
it. Then down it must come from Sursum to Deorsum. In some places benethe the
steps, in the quier, covering it round about with Curtens, for fear of
bugges. Within a while after, it skipped out of the quier into the body of the
church. And in some places, neither in the quier, nor Another procedyn^.
yet in the body of the church, but between both. And some, because they
would hitte it right, pulled down the Rodeloftes, making such a confusion,
that neither was there quyer, nor body of the church, but making if like
Westminster hail. They stailed it about ^n manner of a Cock pytte, where all
the people might see them, and their communion. In many places the table stood
very nere the church porch, that it might the sooner go out into the
churcheyarde. Thus they proceeded not vpwardes, but outwardes and down wards.
Ab equis ad a^inos, that the church, belles and all, was ready to leepe out of
the wyndowes. Then An other procedng.
touching the ministration, whether it should be leuened or unleavened bread, oh
what a do there was? First it must be unleavened, but brooder and thicker then
the old manner was, and in anywyse the prynte of the name of Jesus left out,
which was as odious a sight to the^, as ye sign of y^ cross was to Iulianus
Apostata, who in Eusebiu^.
any wise could not abide the said sign, neither in church, wyndowe, or
other place. Then these Iulianistes to bring the Sacrament to a more profane
use, they devised, that the bread should be leuened like to other common bread:
from the which though many crommes did fall they forced not, so little they
esteemed the matter. For such Sacrament, such minister, such carpenters,
such toles. And too color the matter for the better deceyuinge of the
unlearned people, they followed the ensample of a Mason when he works stones
to build a house. For first he does rough hew them, somewhat to proportion:
the^ he polysheth the^ to make them pleasant to the eye. In like The first
communion books were rough hewe^
manner (said the Protestants, and authors of our late religion) do we. The
first and second Communion book, were but rough hewn, wherein they said
truth, for god knows they were but homely stuff. But this book (quod they)
meaning their last book of Communion (which was the worste of all) is wrought
too the perfection. Wherein they seined much like unto a poor blind Mason,
that should come to stones that were purely wrought to a perfect form, by the
finest workman that could be found: who poring on them with his dymme
spectacles of ignorance, does think with his blunt rusty and crooked toles,
to amend the workemanshyp of the stones, and bunglyng long about them, made
them ever worse and worse, till at length they served for no purpose, touching
thente^t of the first workman. Even so did they. For the holy ghost has
wrought in the catholic church, the perfect faith and right use of the
sacrament of the altar, to be offered to the father, as a most sweet sacrifice,
in remembrance of the death of his son, and to be received of al faithful
people, in remembrance of the same death of christ. Which is both the offerer
and the sacrifice, offered in the holy mass, till these bunglers took in hand
the same, meani^g as they thought to amend it. But as their presumption was
vain so in the end it proved. For God seeing their inconstant vanities in
misusing his sacraments, brought all their attemptes to a vain effect. And
touching the order in receiving their communion, it was marvelous confuse. For
The confused ordres about this communion.
some of the co^municantes would stand, some sit, some knele, some would hold
the cup himself, some would receive it at the ministers hand, some of his
next fellow, some would have a short piece of bread, some a thine, some a
thick and thin. Some would use the ministration themselves, some were
contented too take it in the church, and some at their own tables, and after
souper, according to the institucion. Some would have the wine to be dronke in
pewter, some in silver, and some in a glass or trene dishe. Some would have a
table cloth to cover y^ board some a towel, and some neither of them both. Thus
in some they used the matter in such sundry somes, that the Total was naught
Thus were they ever learning and never able to come to the truth. But God
seeing this their Babilonicall Tower of confusion, builded against his divine
majesty, and his church, did sodeinly and miraculouslye overthrow all their
confused devises, restoring truth to her former state by the sprete of truth,
which has led and conducted his church out of many dangerous and stormy
seas, into the haven of tranquillytie, in unity of truth, the true trial of
Gods sprete. Which truth the church learning of the sprite of truth, has
ever kept, and wylll keep too the worlds end: where these truce breakers
shall be ever learning and never able to come to the truth.

Covetous they were (as it Covetous
were to be wished none were now) but whether they were so let al me^ examine
with themselves. If they were not covetous, what Purchasing Apostles and la^ded
disciples
mente they to go about to make their bastard children legitimate by act of
parliamente, and that their purchases of land might be in as good effect in
the law, as the lands of any temporal lords, or other lay men: meaning in
the end to adioyne land to land, and to accumulate one possession upon
another? Where learned they this trade? Of the primative church, whereof they
boste so much? Learned they this in the scriptures, whereof they do so much
glory? All things among the Apostles and other disciples were commen. And
did our ioly Apostles imitate them so well, that of that which was common to
make it private to serve their own bellies? A pretty imitation. They were wont
to cry out upon the liuinges of the late abbees, and monasteries, saying they
were the thieves, and spoylers of the realm. But who should have cried out upon
them, when they had so enriched themselfes, with sundry patrimonies, that their
brattes, and beggars children should have proved gentlemen? Truly if this
case be well weighed Simple fare in the houses of our wyued bishops.
of grave and sobre men, they may guess at their mark. They ought to have
been by s. Paul's rule kepers of hospitality. But what poor craftesman, or
other laborer, used less? A man might as well have brook his neck as his
fast at their houses. They kept such diete in their fare, that none could
get any relief at their doors, but Venus, and her son Cupide. And to
the intent others should be no kepers of hospitality also, they used to call the
same y^ pompouse practice of the prelates and such like. Yea but Dead men's
graves overthrown for money.
more covetous they were yet. For to find riches they would neither spare
church, nor steple, dead men's graves, or other place. What goodly monumentes
have these sacrilegers subverted too hunte after pence, the corrupter of man's
life? What graves of honorable me^, and bishops, have these men left
vnouerthrowen: to find that was none of theirs? Surely I may compare them to
Darius, that covetous Monarche: Piu^aerehus in vitis illu^riu^.
who too seek money serched the ^ombe of Semiramis the queen of Assyria,
which builded Babylon: where he found this poesy engraven upon the same.
What king soever he be that lacks money, let him open this Monumente, and
take what he will Now Darius creditynge the words of the poesy, caused the
stoone of the grave to be removed, where he found no money, but another
saying, written upon the inner part of the said stone, containing these
words. Unless thou had been an evil man, insatiable of money, thou
would never have serched the graves of the dead. O noble woman, which not
only in her life time hated this filthy vice of avarice, but also after her
death had convenient tauntes to reprove the same. I would she had seen the
robery of dead men in our time committed by a sort of hu^gry whelps gredy
after their pray. The protesta^tes were accustomed too say the papists were
massemongers, and covetous in selling masses for grotes: but they themselfes
were Gospelmongers, in making royal and noble Sermons, five or six in a day,
yea and God knows such stuff, that they provoked more laughter, then any
vice could use feats in playing of his interlude. Philippe Sannio whereof
Xenophon in Sympos.
we read in Xenophon, could not devise more toys to make Calias guestes to
laughe at, then these merry panions devised for their audience: nor yet in the
Serycusans dancing wenche was more cunning in deliting Critobulus, Socrates,
and the rest with her sundry harmonies, then in these pleasant ghospelmen was
too exhilarate their fellow disciples and brethren in Christ.

BOasters also they were, and Boasters.
replenished with all kinds of arrogant speech, reuilinge all kind of
doctrine repugnant too theirs, belying the ancient writers and general
counsayles, rauing upon the doctors of the church, comparing themselfes to the
Apostles, saying: where went Peter or Paul to schole? and why may not we have
the spirit as well as they? With such other words, presuming too affirm
themselves (having certain textes of the new or old tes^amentes) that they
were as well learned, as they that had studied divinity.xl. years. Thus they
seemed to be doctors of the law, not knowing what they did say, nor whereof
they did affirm. A marueyle it was too see the foolish arrogance of some
simple men, which would not stick out of the shomakers shop toe skippe into
the pulpet, yea and some from treading of mortar into the top of a tree to make
a collation, as they termed it: but it might have been called a collusio^, for
profaning of gods holy word, and deceiving the simple people. Besides,
whatsoever in their own conceiptes they had taken for a verity, the same
would they proudly utter and say, this is the ueriti^ and that is the verity,
crediting nothing, but their own vain expositions. Upon whom the words of
the comm^^all poet may be verifyed.

Nothing more wicked then a m^^ T^^ex^^^s ^^ ad^l^^.
indiscreet.
Unless it come of himself he thynkes it unmeet.
Proud also: whose minds Proud*
were so exalted with arrogancy, that no man was thought worthy their company,
except he were of their sects and opinions. They would hear no man, except
he would incline to favor their procedinges. No doctors interpretacion could
be admitted upon the places of scriptures, but such as were of their own
devises. The ancient fathers would not so proudely speak of their most godly
works, as our doctors argued of theirs. The oldedoctors would commit the
same to the censure and judgment of the church. But the new doctors would
prefer their works upon their own judgments. Pride the mother of heresy
begatte these her children to resist their predecessors. But god from time to
time has Jacob, iiii.
resisted the proud, and has endewed the meke with his grace. The prophet
Esaye says. Woe Esaye. ^.
be unto you which seem wise in your own eyes, and prudent before your selves.
Therefore God requires such to be ministers and interpreters of his word,
which are humble and meke. Such I say, which will mistruste their own
wits, and cry with the prophet David: Give me under Psalm. 118*
standing, O lord, and I will search thy law, to thintente I may learn thy
commandments. Doubtless the showers of that heavenly wisdom, have not
their discourse upon high mountains, but into the low valleys. Therefore they
that will be partakers of the true understanding of gods mysteries, ought not
to contempne the godly expositions of the ancient fathers, but with all
humility to submit themselfes as scholars glad too learn, and willing to
embrace such wholesome doctrine, as is taught in the church of God. And not to
play the parts of unthrifty and proud scholars (as the most part of our
heretical preachers were, who went about to correct their masters) but with
attentife ears to hear, read, peruse, and then to receive as God shall put
in mind.

CVrsed speakers also in using Curssed speakers.
their tongues after a most vile sort not only against y^ church, the spouse of
Christ, but also against our princes, the King and Queen's majesty's, and other
magistrates The kings majesty.
appointed by God, too the rule and government of this realm. And how
abominably they have from time to time ill said of the kings majesty,
reverence and shame constrayneth silence: unto whom they ought to bear al
obedience: considering it has pleased the Queen's majesty to join her self
with him in marriage, being as now one body, so that any injury or slander
done, or spoken against his grace, the same is done to them both. I can not
chose but wonder to consider what cause should provoke them to malice his
person. What vice have they hard, wherein his grace is specially noted* Unles
tempera^ce, sobriety, and devotion be counted for vices. What ill proportion
of body, or deformity of vysage, unless they will seem to correct nature*
Well, fieth the note of any special vice, or lack of natures duty, has not
moved them, what should be the cause then? With what virtue are they offended?
Not with temperance I am sure, for that is a decent quality in a king, and as
Tully says, It is the ornament Officio. lib. ^*
of man's life, and the appeaseme^t of the passions of the mind. Nor with
sobriety I dare say: for that garnisheth all other qualities. And if devotion
be the cause of offenses, they must or ought to be angrye with themselfes.
For what man is there that lives, but he has a certain zeal, or sparcle of
fear toward the power divine. Then the kings majesty being a virtuous
prince and of himself a noble personage, let us cease of all sclaunder, if not
for his own sake, yet for the Queens majesty's sake his true and laufull
wife, and our virtuous and godly soueraygne. But as the protestauntes have
uttered their uncharitable stomakes upon the temporal magistrates, so have
they used the like upon the spiritual. But these are they, mentioned in saint
Jude, which despise Rulers, and speak Jude. ^.
ill of those which are in authority. Yet Michael tharchaungell, says he,
when he strove against the deuel about the body of Moses, durst not give a
railing sentence, but said, our lord rebuke the. A wonder it is to se these
cursed speakers triumph upon their knowledge of the scriptures, and yet have
no power to follow the same. I pray God they may be less bablers, and make
both the^ and all me^ better followers. For we se manifestlye the plagues of
God imminent for misusing his grace and blaspheming his name. Yet many,
especially the proteu^a^tes, have no grace to impute it to impiety of life.
But they obiecte the said plagues of God to the cause of religion, as though
their own sins were free and unworthy punyshement: and as though the
catholic religion now used were a thing of late invented: which religion
has continued firm and steadfast sith the reign of king Ethelbert, who was
converted to embrace christianity Beda in hist. ecclesia lib. i. cap. xxii.
by saint Augustine, in the year of our Lord after the computation of Beda. D.
lxxx. vi. till within these.xxi. years. And also long before the time of
Ethelbert, the faith of Christ was yet received by one Lucius king of this
realm, who sent Ambassadors to Rome too Pope Eleutherius, that it might
please him to send some of his learned men, to preach the name of Christ,
and too minister Baptism. Who most willingly acco^plyshed the kings desire,
in the year of our lord a hundred fifty six. So that it appears the
religion now restored by the Queen's majesty, is not of new inuencion, but of
great antiquity. And so long as this Realm was in unity thereof undivided,
it continued in inspeakeable wealth, and prosperity, in marvelous love and
amity, in true dealing and honest simplicity, and in all kind of god lines
and piety. But since it fell from unity of religion, it has fallen from the
grace of God into al kinds of wickedness, skarcitie, falshode, deceyt, and
other abominable vices, and from the accustomed valiaunce in feats of arms
into effeminate minds co^taminated with horrible le^herie. The experience of
which vices piteously we daily feel, as a just reward of GOD, for breach of
the unity of his religion.

DIsobedient to fathers and mothers, Disobedient to fathers and mothers.
which vice our lord knows, is universally frequented. For what child for
the most part, does honor his parents, according to his duty? What
reverence does he use toward the^, which of their own flesh and blood has
brought him forth in to the world? A dear collope it is that is cut from the
own flesh, and yet that degenerate collope, I mean the child, unnaturally
resists and disobeieth the parents. But hereof the parents may thank them
selves, which for want of good education, nosel them up with wantonness,
suffering the raynes of youth to be let go, and unbridled, not considering the
heat of youth too be prone, and ready to al vices, as He Libro primo.
rodiane says. The minds of youth from good and honest discipline are prone
and apt to vanity and pleasures. The ancient trade of this Realm in
education of youth (before the late time replenyshed with all myschief) was to
yoke the same with the fear of God, in teaching the same to use prayer morning
and evening, to be reverent in the church, at their first enteraunce into the
same too make the sign of the cross in their foreheades, too make beysaunce
to the magistrates, to discover their heads, when they mete with men of
ancient years and of hoar hears, according to Ouides verses.

Age in time past, was had in Fa^^o. lib. ^.
great price.
And to a hoar head each child did arise.
But now clean contrary, nothing is less used then morning and evening
prayer, more irreverence in the church never more frequented, nor disobedience
too magistrates and aged men at no time more practiced. And as for repairing to
the church, is counted a thing of no importance. For how can the child put
that in practyse, which the parents themselves neglecte? The parents being
infected with heresy, the child must follow the same, and must do as the
young Crab did, where of we read a pretty tale in Esopes fables: who being
commanded of his dame, not to go so crooked, but to go more straight: O mother
(quod he) go thou before, and I will follow. In like manner, if the parents would
walk more duly in their vocation and duty, the children would do the same.

But as the fathers are, so are the children. The ill life and heretical trade
of the parents, makes such unhappy and disobedient children, who in the
end, except they be looked unto in time, will be the fathers bane. For the
child, if his father be a catholic man, will not be ashamed to say, he has a
papiste to his father, or an old doting fool to his mother. A pitiful hearing,
that heresye the regent of mischief should bear such rule without
correction, to cause such enormities in youth to rail upon the parents.
wherefore to redress the commo^vice in children of disobedience, let them with
godly perswasio^s bring them up, and chiefly in the fear of God, and reverence
too his religion. Let them follow the example of Tobias, who brynging Tob.
iiii. v.
up his son Tobie after a godly sort, had his son to prove according to
his education, and lived infinite years, too the joy of his parents. The
parents of Susanne, bringing up their daughter Daniel. xiii
in the fear of God, had their joys doubled by y^ marvelous delivery of
their daughter out of the hands of the cruel judges. Contrary wise if they
suffer their children to persist in wicked and wanton life without due
correction, they shall feel the sorrow of Hely the priest whom for wicked
education of his children, God did greatly punish. Here also were worthy of
remembrance the correction which ought too be done too apprentises and other
Appre^tises.
servants, who being noselled in liberty, are not only odiouse to the
world, but also vnthryftye toward their masters, and in manner become
masters themselves. Whose brynging up is so leude, that they be grown to
such insolency, that no good man or priest passing by the^ in the streets can
escape without mockes. But let their masters take heed, for I believe when they
see their time, they will mock them to in thend, hoping one day to have the
spoil of their goods. Besides this, their dissolute lives are such, that no
regard they have at all to repair to the church upon the holy days, but
flock in clusters upon stalles either skorning the passers by, or with their
testame^tes utter some wise stuff of their own devise. So that prayer is
seldom seen to proceed out of their graceles mouths. Therefore let all
masters take heed unto their servants, and bring them up both in the fear
of God and of themselves, lest they wyshe in time too come that they had
refrayned the^ with due correction.

Unthankful, ungodly, and Unthankful, ungodly, unkind
unkind, they be in sparing from thankesgeuing, chiefly too God the author of
all goodness, and next to the Queen's majesty our natural sovereign lady, for
the restitucion of thancient and true religion of this realm, which of late
was put to exile, and instead of the same a strange and base woman called
Heresye intertaigned, who has so polluted The protestants be bastardes by
the deuel begotten upon heresy
this country with bastardes and misbegotten children, that onles it had
pleased the divine majesty to have joined in marriage the most excellent and
virtuous Phylip our King and seueraign, now with the true inheritour and
most Godly matrone Mary our said Queen, the blood of the said basebegotten
children had uneaths been abolyshed. And yet the ingratitude of us their
subjects is such (especially the Protestants) that almost it is
intolerable. The unkindness Ingratitude.
of us in this so ample and benefit is extended so far, that in manner we
deny any benefit received at all. Yea and for the most part in recompense of
that benefit already received we render unthankfulness. But I fear me, as
Solomon says: He that does render an evil Pro. xix.
turn for a good, evil shall not depart his house. I pray God to spare that
plague from this realm, which for unthankfulness it justly deserved. I fear
me a great many in these days, for that they see not the deuyses of their
unthankful hearts come forwards, which daily they imagine against the
Magistrates, play Achitophels part, who seeing ii. Reg. xvii
that his practyses was not executed against king David according to his
cancred stomach, went home to his house and hanged him self. But in these our
ingrate doings we are much worse then the poor beasts of the earth, Brute
beasts be not ingrate.
which would remember a benefit long after they have received it. And no
marueil. For as our creacion far excedeth ye brute beast, so is our living in
some things to theirs inferior. What murmuring, grudging, slau^ders, rumors
lies, books, tales, are in these days carried abroad in the world against all
sorts of magistrates, whom we ought to obey for conscience sake, according to
the admonition of saint Paul. But if Roma. xiii.
stay might be made here to touch the particular abominations used of these
loitring lubbers, this volume would grow to an infinite bigness. May not the
king and Queen's majesty's say to these murmurers, as the valiant Themistocles
Plutarchus in vita Themistoclis.
said to the Atheniens, which murmured against his laudable feats done for
the liberty of the city. Why make you these tumultes and rumors against
them, of who^ by manifold ways you have received so many commodities? May not
our Bishops and other ecclesiastical governors, say the like to this
careless multitude, that Pompeius said too Marcellinus, whoo receiuyng
Plutarchus in vita Pompeti.
many benefytes at his hands, forsook him and ran to Caesar, that
afterward he was not ashamed to revile Pompeius openly in the Senate house at
Rome? But with a connenient and moderate taunt Po^peius said these words: Art
thou not ashamed Marcellus to speak evil of him, by whose benefit, of a domme
and spechelesse man thou art made eloquent, and of an hungry sterueling, thou
art now so well satisfied, that thou can skarce refrain vomit? What shall I
say more of this their ingratitude, which in civil life is a thing most
odious? But exhort al men to take a new purgacion, and to purge their stomakes
of this their malancolike grudginges, least the matter do grow to such
abundance, that no purgacion will serve. Let them consider the plague, which
redounded upon the murmuring stomakes of Chore, Dathan, and Abiron, who Nume.
1^. Josephus de antiq. lib. 4^ cap. 2.
for grudging against the authority of Moses, were swallowed into the earth.
And let all such as will seek for none amendment look for no less, if not the
like, yet as terrible.

TRuce breakers also be they. Truce breakers.
And concerning this breaking of truce, unity, and concord; rehearsal is made
before. For they counted that the continuance in unity of religion, was to
stale for the^ to observe, but they would seek some other truth contrary to the
truth used in all countries, to purchase unto themselves a perpetual name, like
unto Herostratus, who to win a name, caring not whether it were good or bad,
attempted many vile enterprises, and among all, he set on fire the temple of
Diana in Ephesus, which Valerius Maximus. lib. 8. Srabo in lib. 14
was the notablest temple in all the world. Even so these truce breakers, to
get them a name, perverted al godly orders many hundred years used in the
church of christ, and al other wholesome institucio^s, freque^ted in the same.
And thus in breaking of unity, the knot of man's life, they became
altogethers truce breakers, and subuerters of Gods truth.

FAlse accusars, riotous, and despisers False accusers. Ryotous. Despisers of
them that be good.
of them that be good, in slau^dering of good and virtuous men with il names,
calling them Sodomites, whoremongers, ill livers. And while they were thus
accusing of others, their themselves lived most abhominably, covering their
own offenses, in belying others, much like Pharaos wife, who to cover her
own unshamefastness, accused Joseph to her husband: and like unto the
Phariseis, which to slander Christ, ceased not daily with impudent words to
belie him, saying: He is a Samaritane, he has a devil within him, he is a
blasphemer, a glutton, a seducer of the people, he denies to pay tribute, and
such other words, to bring him out of credit with y^ people. The like words
have the Protestants Dispisers of y^ godly.
upon religious and godly men, whose holiness and austeritie of life, because
they have no wills to follow, they be not contented to suffer the^ to go or
pass quietly without their tauntes and reproaches: Yea, and some to utter forth
the wholesome fruits of their spirits, care not to put many in danger of their
lives. Was it not a gooly fruit think you for these men (which cry upon the
lord, and like the lords lambs do suffer persecution, as they term it) in
the beginning of the queen's majesty's reign, contrary to the obedience which
ought to be in subjects, and resisting the Mayor, the Sheriffs, and the
Aldermen, to make such a tumult at Paul's cross, seking means to kill the
preacher, yea and one of the^ so bold The throwing of the dagger at the precher
at Paul's cross.
to throw his Dagger at him? Was not this think you a charitable work of
their pacie^t sprites which they so boasted of, proceeding from the entrails
of their thristing stomakes, which with thursting voices cried still upon the
word of the lord? Was there not also another fine piece of work of these
charitable and meke lambs uttered: when a gunne Shotyng of a gunne at the
preacher at Paul's cross.
was shot at another preacher making a godly sermon at Paul's cross? Was not
this also, think you, a mete practice of this persecuted sheep? What I pray
you The cruel act done at Westminster upon Easterday. anno. 1555.
was the abominable fact done at Westminster in saint Margaretes church, by
the like charitable champion upon Easterdaye? Who (all the people being in a
godly quietness at our Lords table, about to receive the blessed body and
blood of Christ suddenly rose a desperate ladde and struck at the priest,
having almost slain him, and diverse other honest persons there present? Was
not this also suppose ye a godly act, mete for such a professor: who
professing the devils religion, became altogether a minister and lim^^e of the
devil? Was there not also a great learned man, and a Freer Peito hurt with a
stone.
Freer of Grenewich called Peyto almost slain with a stone passing in a wherye
by the wharfes of a lighterman, that a long time after the poor man lay sick,
scarce yet recovered? And yet for this fact the said godly man sought none
other reuengemente, but when he was demanded why he caused not the party to
be punished, said: God forbid. For now The words of Peyto touching the man
that did hurt him.
I understanding his malice, have a good cause to pray for him that he may
amend. O good man, and worthy to be had in estimation, who following his
master Christ sought no reue^gement, but prayed for his enemies.

He did not as that malicious, The reuengement of Bale upon a worshipful man
of Hampshire
and heretical Freer Bale did, who being reproved for a detestable sermon he
made in Hampshire of a worshipful man, did not only seek reuengement in
causing the party to stand upon the Pyllory, but also made a shameful book
against him, entitled An expostulation against a rank papiste in Hampshyre,
most shamefully reuilyng the said man of worship more like a filthy ruffian,
then like a man that seemed to the world to have the spirit of God? Many
other ryotous ruflynges practiced by these rakehels there be, which for
brevity I now omit. I may compare them to Silla the cruel Roman, or to
Appianus in civilly. To. bello. Salustius in coniuratione Catilinae.
Catiline that ungracious varlet, which disturbed the common wealth of Rome,
and sought means to bring the same to utter confusion.

TRAITOVRS, headdie, and Traitors Headie, highmi^ded.
hyghmynded, are these protestants, prouokyng the good to conspiracies,
alluryng the evil to put the same in practice, sondrye ways vtteryng their
traiterous stomakes. What new devises do sum of them imagine to make hurly
burlyes within this realm? But God the betrayer of all traiterous hearts,
eue^ in time discloseth what they be. And the devil the author of treason,
brings his darelinges infected with treason the handmaide of heresy, to a
shameful and vile end.

What brought Northumberlande Northumberlande.
to his deserved end, in going about to displace ye Queen's majesty of her
just title, but treason and heresy, the instruments of his deuilishe
attemptes? What brought Wyat to his shameful Wy
end, but rebellion begone for heresies sake and treason, continued till he
was overthrown? What was the cause of Crumwelles Crumwell
fall, but heresy begone with spoil of Abbeis, and treason against the king
himself? What was the cause of the deaths of The late traitors Throgmarton,
Vuedall, Stanton, and others.
our late traitors, but heresy the foundresse of their co^spiracie, and
treason intended against the King and Queen's majesty's, and the subversion of
our common wealth? What manne or woman was there ever, being heretics but
that heresy joined with treason has brought to confusion? Was not Old
castle, whereof we Old castle
spoke before, brought to a miserable end for favoring Wycklefe his opinion?
Was not Acton of Acton.
his conspiracy, and came to the like end, for favoring the same opinions? I
pray you, to what end came Cra^mer the late bishop Cranmer.
of Cantorburye, who in his first ruff sought the divorce of the most
virtuous queen Katherine, lawful wife to king Henry the Polydorus. lib. 27.
eight, and mother to our most gracious sovereign lady, and afterward
continued in promotyng of heresye, and diuorsinge this realm from a godly
wife called unity, preferryng Heresy that strumppette to match with this
noble common wealth. Immittens falsem in alienam messem Finally to the like
ends arrived all heretics and traitors in all ages. Many notable histories
might here also be rehearsed, to set forth the due reward incident to treason,
but for as much as master John Christoferson deane of Norwith has most
abundantly treated upon the same in a godly and learned work which he made,
entitled: An exhortacion against rebellion.

THEY have also a similitude of godliness, but deny the power Similitudes of
godlynes.
thereof. This vice rehesed by saint Paul was to heretics in all ages a large
cloak for every shower, though the storm were never so great. For a
similitude of godlynes is a plain dissimulation or hypocritical means to seem
to the world to be godly, although in deed quite contrary to the thing
pretended. This similitude of godliness printed so in the breasts of the
protestants, does merueilously in marvelous ways brust out to the face of
the world. Oh how they rejoice in these their similitudes? Was it not a
pretty similitude at the first chop (in the beginning of the miserable
alteration of religion) to banishe the Popes authority, which The popes
authority banished.
from the beginning was the chief of the Church here upon yerth, as is
sufficiently recorded, as well in the volumes of ancient doctors, as in all
cronicles written from the beginning. And for what purpose was this practice
begone? Doubtless to introduce heresy the guide of all mischief. Was it not a
pretty similitude of godliness to cause the king by the ungracious counsel of
Cranmer and others, to forsake his lawful The diuorcement of Queen Katherine.
and most virtuous wife queen Katherine, who for her hu^blenes and godly
demeanor toward the King her husband, in ^ye worthily be compared to Sara,
Abraham's wife, and the rest of the godly matrones in the old testament. And
here began first the occasion of all our misery and sorrow, the calamity
whereof our fathers have partly felt, and we their posterity do feel the
rest, besechyng God to spare the residue of his plagues, which this realm
has justly merited for y^ diuorcement of this noble woman from her true and
lawful husband our late sovereign lord King Henry the eight? Who can
attribute sufficient praise to this noble Queen, or whoo can pour out
sufficient tears to lament her sorrowful fate? What duty which ought to be
in marriage wanted in her breast. What obedience or humblenes of heart toward
her husband, lacked in the good education of* this heavenly woman? O what
fervent love toward the poor commons, remained in her? O what earnest
affection toward the poor members of Christ daily did she express ^^ Her
devotion toward God was inspeakeable, her zeal toward ^h^ virgin* Mary was
wonderful* her continual meditacions in the blood and passion of Christ
most apparently is known to the world. Who to the intent she might give
occasion too others; to meditate the like, erected a ^uely monument, called the
Mount, which lively work afterward pitefully was rased. O most happy
woman, to happy too reign among us: O most virtuous queen, more worthy to
be crowned in heaven, then to reign upon earth. Who most patiently (as a
woman who had given over the brunttes of this world, and had armed her self
with patience) continued to the end in the fear of God, in piety of life, in
her accustomed devotion, and in her wonted constancy, so that no adversity of
fortune could lead her out of that path, wherein she had been treaded from her
infancy. And as her life was godly, so was her death: the circumstance where
of Polydorus* Virgilius, in the last book of his cronicle* describet^. And to
the intent it shall not be thought y^ these: her worthy praises, are spoken
here for flattery or that the^be written without hoke, the words of Polidorus
Virgilius hereafter ensue. After the deuorcement (says he) this noble woman
was appointed to remain in a place in Bedfordshiere, called Kymbalton, a place
for the situacion of no salubrite or holsomnes of air: Where she being
wonderfully armed with patience, lived a holy and most godly life. After
wards for very sorrow and pensifnes of heart, she began to wax sick. Which
when the king herd, he entreated Eustace Cappucius, the Emperors Ambassador,
to go and visit her, whose commandment according too his duty, most
diligently with all expedicion he accomplyshed. But this noble Queen within
six days after, was affected with a great sickness, and feling the panges of
death begin to draw nere she caused one of her gentlewomen that was learned,
to write two letters: the one to the king, and the other to the said ambassador.
And theffect of this letter sent to the Kings Ma. ensues.

My dear and well-beloved sovereign The letter of Queen Katheryne to the king
her h^sba^d lying upon her death bed.
and husband, humble commendacio^s togethers with my duty remembered. Now
approaches the hour of my death, in the which extremity very love which I
owe too your majesty, enforces me with these few words to put you in
remembrance of the health of your soul, which you ought to prefer before
al tra^sitorie things, and in respect thereof to neglecte al other cares of
the body. For the which both me your poor wife, and also your self, you
have protruded into many cares and miseries. But I with heart do forgive you,
and as heartily I do wish God to forgive the same, as presently with my good and
devout prayers I earnestly make peticion for the same. Moreover I commend unto
you our dear daughter Marie, the comfort of us Out sovereign lady and Queen
that now is
both, to whom I beseech you, too extend your fatherly pity, according to
sundry my peticions here to fore made to your majesty. And furthermore most
instantly I desire your grace to have a respect unto my poor maidens, and as
time shall serve, to see them well bestowed in marriage, which request is not
great being but.iii. in number. And that it would please you too cause my
poor officers and servants to be paid their wages due, and that by the
space of one hoale year after my departure they may be found of your graces
liberality, to thintente they may not wander like maisterles men. Finally my
last request is, that mine eyes only wyshe to see your grace. And thus I
betake you to God. In this sort departed this godly woman from the cares of
her body, to the joys of her soul, the.viii. of January. 1535. and in
the.xxvii. year of his Majesty's reign. But when the king read her letters,
he most lovingly bedewed the same with the tears of his eyes. Thus far
writes Polydore of the lamentable state of this noble Queen Katherine: who for
her virtue exercised in this world, and her love showed too all sorts of
people, was worthily named of the^ the good queen Katherine. And so named to
this present day. Whose name not only in heaven for her virtuous behavior,
and deeds of of charity, is enrolled in the voke of life, but in earth is
registered in the maine liedger of immortality. So that to remember the
calamites which ensued this diuorcement, it would make an iron heart with
tears too lament the same, yea, if it were as hard as the stony Caucasus, or
as savage is the Tigres of Hircania. And whereof sprange this misery? Doubtless
by the similitudes of godliness, which then was pretended to the kings majesty
by certain young whelps newely crept out of the stable, who too bring the same
to pass, invented a similitude of godlynes, too banyshe the popes authority,
which with all means possible withstode the same. But here I know certain good
fellows will obiecte saying: Sir, you begin to rage to far upon us poor
protestants, and lay all this gear to our charge, as though none but we and
our skolemaisters were the doers hereof. But sir I pray you, did you never
read a book made by the bishop of Winchester deceased, entitled of true
obedience, which book inueyeth against the authority of the Pope? Yes in
deed goodman protestant, I have read the said book in latin, and of late I
read the same also in english, but how faithfully translated, I leave that
to the judgment of him which will compare them both together, before the
which is annexed a dronken prologue made by some hot spreted brother, no
doubt of as fine matter as the maker could deuyse. But forasmuch as it is
objected that the author of that book and others also inueyed against the said
Popes authority, and that they were not only protestants which sought the
abandoning of the same: Well then I would wyshe that the protesta^tes which were
then the originalles of the same, would do as the said bishop of Wynchester
and other good bishops have done since, seek all means possible to restore
the same again, and to reduce that to the old state, which the protestants
for ambicion, and the other for fear, did then seek means to displace. And as
it is well known that it has pleased god to call thautor of that book to his
mercy since, who with a repentant heart with saint Peter, lamented the denial
of gods truth, so I would it were as well known that the other (I mean
Cranmere) had repented in semblable manner, and would have acknowledged gods
truth to the end. For the one has ended his life after natures direction,
the other has shortened his life contrary to nature. The one in his bed, the
other in the fire: the one in the unity of the church, the other in the
discord of heretics: the one honorably, the other miserably: the one as a
catholyke, the other as an heretic: the one a true man to God and the crown,
the other a false man to God and the realm. Therefore I appeal to al men's
judgments, herein to consider, whether party sought y^ destruction of this
realm, or whether party more worthy to be blamed.

The one worthy of blame, but y^ other worthy condemnacio^. And therefore
pretented according to their dispositions, similitudes of godliness, but denied
the poower thereof. The^ followed subuersio^s Subu^rsio^ of monasteries.
of abbaies, being another similitude of godliness persuaded by the said
protestants, by whose pytifull spoil proceeds the decay of our common
wealth. For it was thought before their subversion that all things would be
better cheap, but they became as good cheap as things did in Rome, after the
making of the law, called Agraria. For whiles T. Liuius De^. prima.
the Senators and other rulers of the city were striving for thassignementes
Appianus lib. primo De bellis ciuilibus R^ma.
of their porcions, the hoale public state was brought to ruin by dissension
and civil wars. The lands and possessions belonging to the said abbaies,
being let slyp at liberttie from the sure bands, wherewith they were before
duly kept to the co^modite of the realm and relief of the poor, are now
neither so profitable to the owners (al things considered) nor yet comodious
to the commonwealth. It is to be thought that some which were appointed doers
about these possessions, played the part of a Roman called Quintus Fabius
Cicero Offic. lib. primo*
Labeo, who being appointed a daiesman between the Nolanes and Neapolitanes,
about the bounds of their lands, did debate the matter with either of them a
part, when they were come to the place, and to the intent they should not
enc^oche upon each other, the same was staked out indifferentlye. Now in the
mids there remained a parcel of ground untouched, which parcel of right also
ought to have been staked out to thuse of either parts, but he adjudged the
same to the people of Rome. In like manner while some were in debating the
abbaie possessions, and stakinge the same out to the kings use, some remained
in the mids, mete for their own uses. Thus these similitudes of goodlines in
reprouyng the abbaiemen of their ill lives, have brought both the abbaies and
all to utter ruin. And whiles they were tickling the kings may. in the
ear with the abuses used in the same, they themselves sought means to aspire
unto honor, not caring for the misery which might ensue, nor yet seking
reformatio^s of the said abuses. What a show of godliness was it, trowye, to
induce so many strange alteracions of Religion, after the death of king Henry
the eyghte, but only to deny the power thereof? Did not men cry always upon
gods book, the word of the lord, the heavenly fode, the spirit of truth,
and such like? But how contrary their deeds were, too these their outcries
let themselves be judges. Many other similitudes of godliness have they brought
forth, to the show of the The power of godliness denied.
world, but the power of al godliness they utterly deny with the effecets. And
to come to some particular points: have they not denied the power of gods
word, to work any thing too the justifying of man, by the water of baptism?
Have they not also denied the most manifest words of god spoken, touching
the consecration of his real body in the sacrament of thaltar, and say that
those words be spoken tropically and figuratively, and that they can work no
such effect, as bread to be transsubstanciated in to his body, although
Christ by his Evangelists, Apostles, Prophets, Doctors, Martyrs, does most
plainly affirm the same? Have they not also denied the power of God, in the
words spoken by the priest at the time of confession, being so plainly
commanded by Christ saying. Whose John, xx.
sins you forgive, the same shall be forgeuen? Have they not also denied the
power of gods word in the rest of the seven sacraments, abolishyng five quite
out of their company as unworthy thereof, yea and the other twain remaining as
they handled the^, skarce worthy the name of a sacrament? And as they have
denied the power of godlynes in these Sacraments: so have they also denied the
same in the works of GOD wrought by his grace in all godly men, to be any
means too attain to justification, contrary to the words of S. John saying.
To as many as received him, John.i.
(meaning Christ) he gave them power to be made the sons of God, even them
that believed in his holy name: some peradventure will say here, that faith
only includes so this power, that no kind of man's works after faith
received, can help him to be made the son of God. But this their saying will
not stand with S. John's words. For he says that to as many as received him,
and believed in his holy name, too such people so receiving and so believing
him, he gave to them power to be made the sons of god. Then if he gave too
them power to be made the sons God, there be works wrought after faith so
received, whereby they have power (in the merits of Christ) to be made the
sons of God. And thus by faith (and not by faith only) have they this power
too work the will of God, which works helps a man to justification, as
saint James affirms, saying: What avails it my brethren, Jacob* ii.
though a man say he has faith, if he have no deeds, ca^ faith save him? How
chances it then that the protestants with their only faith bears such
swing, and glory so in the scriptures, sith saint James so manifestly says,
that without works a man can not be saved? If a brother or a sister (says
he) be naked, or destitute of daily fode, and one of you says unto them, God
send you warmnes and fode, notwithstanding you give the^ not those things
needful to the body, what shall it help* Even so faith without works, is
dead in it self. He also says in another place, that Abraham and Raab, were
justified by works, and concludes saying, that of deeds and not of faith only
a man is justified. What more plainer words can be wished for to prove that
works avail too justification? But what shall we say unto you then (o ye
pestilent protestants) which with your sugared talk and sweet words have
begiled the poor people in such sort, that they believe verily they shall be
saved in a believing faith, without any works at al? What shall we say unto
you, (O ye betrayers of your countreye) for this your lastinious preaching of
only fayeth too exclude good works, the chief state wherefore we were borne? O
wicked men worse then the deuel your father, of whose progeny ye are lyneally
descended, What meant you herein to rob God of his glory, and to bereue from
his poor members their relief and fode? What glorious similitudes have you
used in these your practices, to begile the poor men? Hope in the blood of
Christ, trust in his redemption, he is our satisfaction, his death only can
justify us, and such like ye were wont to use to instill a zeal to the hearts
of your herers, the rather to credit your doctrine. These be sweet words
doubtless, and mete to be had in price of all men. But how? as ye mean the^?
God forbid. I may as well say. Do thou believe in the blood of Christ?
Then do what thou list, his death is sufficient. But let every catholic man
beware of this doctrine, for it is a lying doctrine, a deceitful argument, and
a doctrine of deuels. We know that our justification proceeds of God only, by
the passion of his derebeloued son Jesus Christ. But this his passion being
not to us applied by following his steps, so far as it lies in our powers,
in doing the deeds of charity, the same to us is not auailable. For although
his death is sufficient enough to attain to justification, yet if in the
merits of the same, we do not work every man according to his vocation, the
same to us yeldeth no comfort. Saint i. Cor iii.
Paul therefore says: that the hearers of the law are not just, but the
doers of the same shall be justified. Therefore according to John.iii.
the saying of Saint John: let no man seduce you, for he that does
righteousness, is justified. The Pro^er. xi. Sa^. x. Eccl. ii. vi. Psalm. 7. 11.
10. Mat v. vii. x. and.xx. Luke* vi. John.v. xi. Romans ii. ^. Cor. v. Colos.
iii. Gala. vi. T. Liuius dec. ^* lib. 5.
scriptures are full of these exhortacions, in doing the works of justice the
rather by Christ, and not by faith only to attain to salvation. Therefore
these odible persuasions of the protestants touching this opinion, ought too
be from the heart of man clearly repelled. And as Liuie rehersing the oracion
of Menippus Ambassador to Antiochus, spoken to the Romans says, that fair
persuasions in the beginning seem pleasant, but in the^de they be sorrowful,
even so the unhappy sermons and more unhappy books made by these hedgecreping
protestants, seemed at the first show pleasant stuff, but thendes thereof, god
wot, are most lamentable. For besides the ill opinions, beaten into the
heads of the careless Liberty y^ pray of y^ protesta^tes
multitude, liberty of life, has borne such swing, that good life bears
no rule. Liberty by means of these ruffians has taken such hold fast, that
it has dashed good life quite out of countenance. Liberty is rooted so in
man's heart, that to most me^ it is fra^kely retained. Liberty a roister
has such interteigneme^t that of many he receives a double welcome. Liberty
a parasite at every man's board, is choked with the fare of many dainty
dishes. Thus most sorts of men glad too have liberty, care not what haste
they make to the deuell. O deuelysh liberty, I would Apostrophe to the vice of
liberty ^ our countr^ men in Germany.
to GOD Germany might have kept the still: so England had never been troubled
with the. I would to God thou had had all our English bier too drink
drunk with Hance and Yacob in Strasborowe, upon condition London had never
retained the. I would to God thou had remained in Switherlande a
conqueror, so that thou had never had conquest in England. For sithe thy
arrival hither, many poor men by thy ungracious marchaundise are undone.
Many a good English man at the first glad to entertaygne the, for courtesy as
a stranger, would now be rydde of their gueste, but they cannot. But I trust
shortly to see the bankeroute and glad to fly the realm. I hear say thy
poor companions now in Geneua, Emden, Frieslande, Strasborough, and other
places of Gernye, ^urse the time that ever they knew the and thy haunte, if
credit may be given to the coiners from thence. Whose misery is such that a
chamber as bygge as a Swynecotte is of as good rent as the best merchants
house in London. And no marvel though our cornerkreapers be so frendely
welcomed, paying so well for their welcome. I heard say of one in Grauesende
Barge, belyke The report of a pilgrim that came from Gods church.
some pilgryme of Gods church, that the poor men of that country which
in deed were very poor, before the repair of our englishmen thither, are now
become iolye fellows. And by what means think you? By lettyng out their
cotages in the towns to our countreyme^. Who because they be glad to have
the^, use no debating of the matter, as we do, but bid them ask and have.
And they strayning small courtesy, are contented too take their offer. O
lamentable cases of a sort of thurstie souls, which for the thurst of the
lords word as they call it, do thurst after their own destruction. The Lords
word was taught here and establyshed long before your days, and the hole
land believed therein. And will you devise a new lords word to cole your
dronken stomakes? Has Germany a better lords word, then y^ wherein england
first did instruct you, and bring you up from your swadlyng cloutes? Are you
wiser the^ your fathers, or more skilful then your mothers? Think you to be
saved, more then your parents, or do you judge them already condemned? For
either of you are in hard cases. Well well, consider your cases and repent in
time. Get some of that precious root called Baaras described by Josephus, De
bello Iud. Lib. 7. cap. 25.
which for evil spirits is very medicinable, and dispatche the sprites out
of your stomakes. Midsomer moan is past, you se al your devises will take no
place. The nest is found and the burdes are taken, and in cage. Your
triformed books can bear no swing. Men regard not Turnors The books of the
brethren and persecuted flock by the^ made sith their runninge away into
Germany.
book of the wolf, nor yet the cropeared fox, Horns Apology, Bales
vocation, Poynetes folysh co^futacion against the learned treatise of doctor
Martin strande in no stead, Noxes doctrinall of the Masseboke, and your new
revived(...) lords word: and have you not herein an outward face of godliness,
and in very deed deny theffect thereof. The party which played boo pipe in
the wall, called The bird in the wall.
the Bird in the wall of Aldersgate streate, at such a time as she was
examined, wherefore she had so deluded the world, she answered: the lords word
caused her so to do. And the poor wenche afterward making an open
confession of her practice, and desyryng the people at Paul's cross to forgive
her, and to pray for her, made this exclamacion upon the^ and the like which
had procured her to do that feat, saying. Woe be unto you heretics, phy upon
you all, that thus have the Lord in your mouths, and the deuell in your
hearts. This present day have I a good cause to cry out upon you, that in
this sort have brought me to offend God and the Queen's majesty in this my
late practyse, and to be a gasyng stock to the hoale world to my great shame.
And therefore beware good people beware of these heretics, for as they have
undone me in counsailing me to atte^pte this wicked enterprise: so they will
undo you all, unless ye take heed by times of their noughty opinions: With many
other words spoken by her with weping tears against those mischeuous
persons. And there by y^ preacher that day (master Wymsley) the hole
circu^staunce of that practyse, was uttered and was of the audience very much
abhorred.

So I dare say y^ party which The Catte that was
did ha^ge up the Catte in Cheap side, in mockery of priests, and hanged up
in Cheapesyde.
delusion of the blessed sacrament of thaltar, thought that feate to be a
worthy enterprise. And I dare say, thought himself a stout champion of the
faith, especially escapyng scotfree. But let him take heed, it is an old
said saw* Qui mockat mock abitur, he may peradventure mock so long till he
be mocked himself.

And he also thought himself The disfiguring of s. Thomas picture.
a ioly fellow that did mangle the poor picture of saint Thomas, placed over
the porche of Saint Thomas of Acts by y^ worshypfull company of the Mercers.
Who could not tell* what other despite to work to the Saint, but to disfigure
the picture. But Sir, did you never hear tell of this proverb. Non-est bonum
ludere cu^ sanctis, it is not good to mock with saints: well I fear me you
will mock so long til you will mock at the gallowse. And I dare say if this
man had been demanded why he did so, his answer would have been, the lords
word provoked me. Thus of the Lords word in all their doings, they make a
shypmans hoose, to use it as they list to do good or il. The deuell in his
attemptes as well against man the excellent creature of God, as also against
Christ himself, used the titles and places of Gods word. And is it any
marvel, though his unfeigned ministers practice their masters lessons? Trow
ye that father Brown commonly called Father brown
Brown the Broker of Bedlem, could seem so pleasant a man to the protestants,
and it were not for his cloak of gods word that hydeth his shepehardes
apparel? Could his peuishe prophecies be had in such estimacion among the
warm brethren, without his dissimulate vesture and his staff like a
shepehooke? would the merchant men of London with Pet penny ale, Sympering
Sysse, and other fleeryng flurtes, their wives use their accustomed
peregrinacions and pilgrimages to visit the blissed Rode, called poor father
Brown, that has The lords gift.
the lords gifts, at Islyngton, Barnet and other places about London, were
they not moved with the sprite? In lent was.xii. month, at such time as
goodman Brown was newely crept The history of certain assemblies
out of Bedlem, and then lying at Islington, to rest his sorry bones, I hard
say of many prodigious which repaired to father brown at Isling^^*
wonders, whereof then he informed the congregation. And I being glad to here y^
prophet speak* resorted thither with two gentlemen of mine acquaintance, who
were desierous to se the manner of the simple soul. When we came thither we
understood he lay in a typlyng house, next the sign of the Mermayde. But our
inquisicion too know where he lodged was by a secret means. At our e^trie
into A ^o^^^^ prophet.
the house, there was never a word but gossep, all was whist. For privily in a
corner certain gosseps were in a marvelous secret talk with father Brown: I
trow he was tellyng their sortunes or such like. At lenght the^ brake of* Then
one gave him spices to comfort his weak stomach, Oblacions to father Broune.
another gave him salues to grease his bones, which before were anointed with
a bliss beggar, another sugar. And after their oblacions thus made, they
departed. The^ went he into a parlor where was assembled another route, who very
sore longed for his coming, partly accusynge him of his long tarriance.
Being settled to talk, the two gentlemen and I with diverse other stepped to
the door partly to hear what he said, and partly to mark the countenaunces
of thassemblye. For no man except he was of special acquaintance, could be
admitted to go in. Where secretly he was demanded questions. Gestures of one
of thassemblies.
But for the most part we could here no word, but the Lord be praised, and
saw sundry eleuacions of their eyes toward the top of the house, and such
like. In fine before he had done, comes in a poast, a prentise of London, to
tell him his maistres was come. Forth with Brown brake of from that company
and went to the pre^tyce maistres, who had bespoke^ a parlor hard by. Whom we
with diverse other followed. And at the first salutacion he called A very yo^g
mother for such an o^^ Squire.
her mother, and very joyfully greted her. And after the mother, the son and
the sisters, had with sundry blissinges and congratulacions well clawed one
another, Jack prentise and his testament.
Jack prentise was called in for his testament, who reaching the same from his
girdle, delivered it to his maistres and turning the book, she turned to a
place of S. Mathewes ghospel, where christ Math. v.
says to his Apostles. Rejoice, your reward is great in heaven, for so have
they persecuted the prophets which were before you. etc. O Brownes another
exposition upon a place of the testament.
good father Brown ( qv his mother) how have you been persecuted for the
words sake, what persecution have you suffered from time to time? But the
Lord be praised for your delivery and constancy in quiet suffering thereof.
The prophets, christ says, has been so handled. Therefore be of good chere
man and take no thought* For one day I trust we shall all The dew of y^
lords word.
be merry in the lord, and shall have the dew of the word once more be
sprinkled upon our faces, at what time I trust we shall be eue^ with these
shauelyng priests, and shave their crowns a little deper. Yes mother ( qv
Brown) I am Brownes words to his mother.
of good chere, for I have good cause so to be, for I am cheryshed of such
good women as year, that I lack nothing. And how then can I be sorrowful
having such cause to be merry in the lord In the mean time certain other
Sisterwiues I think they were, Sisterwyues or priestwyues.
for their apparayle were freese roabes and certain marchantmen tarried in the
court without, one asking another when the preaching time was. And we hearing
of some sermon toward, leaving Brownes communication with ^is mother, walked
up and down in the court. Not long after, Brown comes forth with his
mother and sister, and Jack prentise also with his testament* Brown went
into the Stable where tarrying a while belyke in doing his busynes, anon he
called in the congregation, and among them thrust we. Where Brown leaning
upon his horseback, Brown and his Jade.
which was a jade scarce worth six pence, sitting upon the maunger, he
began to allege certain places of Ecclesiastes without book, one upon
another in heaps. Brownes sermon.
Then began he to talk of three Religions. The one he termed my lord
Chauncelors religion: the other Cranmers, Latymers and Ridleys religion: And
the third he called gods Religion. My lord Chauncelors, he said, was
naught. Cranmers and the others religion not good: but Gods religion was
best. With such other vain words not worthy the time in rehearsal. And
hearing this beastly talk, we departed lamenting the great folly of the
people, which in this sort did daily spend their time too hear such lying
spirits. And going homewardes, we met diverse companies both of me^ and women,
of purpose going to Islyngton, to hear the sermon of this peltig prophet. But
within a while after I heard say, this father Brown and his brood with the
congregation, were removed from that place and were dispersed into corners.
Truly pity it is he is suffered in this sort to range the countries without
restrainte, not only for corrupting the people with ill opinions, but also for
disseminating his vain Prophecies to excite rumors. But this opinion I have of
Brown, that he had rather live a proud confessor then burn a stinking
martyr. With many such similitudes of Godliness, many of the protestants in
our time be inspired. Here might also be rehearsed the zeal that the lame man
that was burnt of late at Stratford had, The lame ma^s croche that was burnte
at Stratford.
when he called for his croche, too have the same likewise to be burned with
him, thinking without the same he could not meritie the crown of martyrdom.
And thus they have certain resemblances of godliness, and deny the power thereof.
And in using these their counterfeit zeales, they do not only mock with God,
but they deceive his poor people with ince^sing their frail natures, with a
thousand mo of these their practices, which here I omytte. And these their
folyshe deuyses are so folyshe, if they be duly marked, that nothing can be
more folishe. And if it be well considered, any Indifferent man may sone
discern to what end their purpose is to direct the same, for the end is
either to bring their conceived opinions in credit with the world, or else to
stir up wicked brutes and lies upon the magistrates, and such as please not
their fancies to make vproares and comocions within the realm. Thereby to
reedefie their co^fused church, or else to seek the destruction of this said
noble realm, and us all the people thereof.

And concerning the other vices which are of these sorts of me^, whereof saint
Paul prophesied, because they be partly described before, I purpose now to
conclude, exhorting all men that entende to aspire to salvation, to way
diligently the premises. First to consider the unity of Christ's church,
which in all things touching our faith, uniformly does agree: and to
consider the sundry factions of y^ protestants upon the faith, wherein they do
not agree. Way their falshode in alleging the places of the scriptures, only
to say evil of the church, and to misreport the same. Ponder the words which
S. Paul prophesies upon sondrye heretics, which should come, denying
marriage, and eating of meats to be utterly naught, and how maliciously they
apply the same upon the Church, which with honorable words does commend
them both. Perceive advisedly with your selves what cause the Protestants
have, to shorten their lives by fire, and what cause they have to call their
just punishementes persecutions. And consider with your selves the state of
Christ's Church in the beginning, and the state thereof at this present, which
in one unity of doctrine is all one, though not then so firm as it is now.
Way also the folly of the ungodly, which presumptuously challenge to them
selves the title of Martyrs, and more fondly offer themselves to ye fire, not
compelled thereunto as the true Martyrs were, but obstinately, as who would
say, in the despite of the Church. Examine with your selves also what faith
the church of Christ teaches, whether it denies God, refuses the son, or
contempneth the holy ghost, as Infideles and other miscreantes do Emonges
which infideles, if these men suffered, then more truly they might name
themselves Martyrs. But the church professes with more sincerity, that God
which they do, that Christ, that holy ghost that they do. The Church does
teach the sacraments to be in number vii. as the scripture leads, and as
the Apostles tradicions and holy doctors do prescribe. The Church in nothing
concerning the substance of religion does vary or altar. The church teaches
that the invisible body of Christ, sytting at the right hand of God the
father, is here in the visible forms of bread and wine, inuisibly contained
in the sacrament of the Altar, the dearest jewel which Christ left upon
earth, and offered of the Priest in a lively and pure sacrifice at Mass to God
the father, for the comfort of the whole church, according to the prophecy of
Malachie the prophet, speaking in the name of God the father these words. I
have no will and pleasure Malach. ^.
in you, and I will receive no offering or reward at your hand. From the
rising of the sun, to the setting, my name is great emonges the Gentiles, and
in every place there shall be sacrifice done, and a pure and clean oblatio^
shall be offered to my name. The church also teaches the adoration of this
most pure sacrifice, not y^ outward forms of bread and wine, but the body of
Christ inuisibly therein contained. The church teaches all kinds of lively
and wholesome doctrine, as Fasting, Prayer, Charity, Almesdedes, Amendment of
life, Penance, and all other good works mete to be observed of a christian
man. Therefore way with your selves ones more, what cause have these graceless
men thus to misreport the church, or to spend their lives against the
church. Then finally consider whether those vices rehearsed by saint Paul,
which should be most frequented in the latter time, were not most practiced
of the said Protestants. Which things duly considered I shall most humbly
exhort all men for the love of God, and in the Passion of his son Jesus
Christ, and in his name, that ye al speak one thing and that there be no
dissension emonges you, according to the counsel of saint Paul to the
Corinthians. And that ye may be a whole body of one mind, and meaning,
entreating you also in like manner, as he does in another place, saying:
Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are convenient, whatsoever things are of honest
report, if there be any virtue, if there be any praise of learning, those
same have you in your mind, which you have both learned, and received,
heard, and also seen in me, the same things do, and the God of peace shall be
with you* Which counsel if we follow, doubtless we shall be the members of one
body, not repugnant, or obstinate, but meke and obedient. Then shall we
banishe all sects and opinions, and remain in concord and unity. The^ shall
we say with the prophet^ David: Behold what a pleasant thing it is for
brethren to live in unity. Then shall we reedifie our ancient common wealth,
which by discord we have lost. Then shall the members agree with the belly,
which with discord in manner was consumed for hunger, as Menenius Agrippa
tells T. Liuius dec. prim^. lib. ii.
the histore, when he went about to reco^cile the commons, to the obedience of
the Senators. The^ shall we be invincible and without fear of foreign realms.
The shall we be impregnable without fear of any nacio^. And finally we shall be
acceptable to him, that is the author of attonemente, which is Jesus Christ
the son of the the living God. To whom with the holy ghost, be all praise
and honor for ever.

()

Amen.
An Index or Table, mencioning such special matter as is before conteigned in
this present volume.
A.
ABbotes of Reding, Colchester, and Glastonburye, and of their death. fol. 69
Abstinence how profitable a thing. fo. 27 Abstinence of the Persians. fol. 29
Acton a traitor and herete^. fol. 46. 103 Adoraci^^ of the sacrament of
thalter. fo. 128 Aeneas verses to Dido. fol. 32 Ag^amemnon and his sentence
recited out of Seneca. fol. 9 Albanus a true martyr, and died for the catholic
faith. fol. 66 Alcibiades. fol. 41 Alexander the great and his co^tine^cie. fo.
72 Almesdedes. fol. 34 Anabaptists in England. fol. 18 Anne Askewe with her
sto^tnes and behavior in the time of her death. fo. 47 Antonius an old
father. fol. 28 Anncient ordres in this realm for bringing up of youth. fo.
93. Apelles the heretic. fol. 75 Aunsweres of catholics too objections. fol.
13. 108 Apostles purchasing. fol. 84 Apostrophe to the vice of liberty and our
countrymen in Germany. fol. 116 ^pohthe^gma of Papinianus and Bassianus. fo.
31 Apprentices and their ill education. fol. 9^ Aristotels rebuke to
Calisthenes his scolle^. folio. 31 Arrius of Alexandria. fol. 61. 75 Arrogancy
and selfloue the causes why our cou^terfaite martirs do burn. fo. 48 Artemisia
queen of Caria compared to our gosseps which are in love with our merry
martyrs. fol. 6^ S. Augustine for the burning of heretics. folio. 43. 59
B.
BAaras a rote medicinable against ill spirits. fol. 11^ Bale the freer
revenged upon a worshypfull man of Hampshere. fol. 101 Bales book called his
vocation fol. 118 Beasts be not ingrate fol. 97 Bishops effeminate. fol. 80
Blandina a virgin and true martyr of Christ. fol. 47 Blind Bayarde and his
courage fol. 48 Boasters. fol. 8^ Bones of our supposed martirs of some of their
confessors preserved for relics. fol. 6^ Books of the brethr^ in Germany.
(...) A Bric^laier taking upon him the ^^^ice of preaching. fol* 19 Brown the
shepeheard, commonly called father brown. fol. (...) Brownes mother. fol. 123
Brownes mothers exposition, upon a place of scripture. fol. 1^3 Brown and his
Jade. fol. 1^4 Brownes sermon. ibide^ Brutus the first consul in* Rome. fol.
54 Burning of heretics. fol. 40 Bird in the wall in Aldersgate ^^^ete fol.
120
C.
Caius Pontius the Samnite. fol. 14 Calvin. fol. 17 Candaules king of Lydia.
fol. 6 Cranmere. fol. 17 Cranmere late bishop of Cantorbury a traitor. fol. 10^
The Catholics how they avoid the place of S. Paul to Timothe, objected by
the heretics, and the right sense thereof. fol. 23 Catholic church in all
things observes an order. fol. 29 Catholic church persuades good life*
fol. 34 Catholic relegion in this realm how long it has continued. fol. 91
The Catte that was hanged up in chepe^yde. fol. 120 Catholic church what it
is. fol. 12 Catholic church how to know it. fo. 12 Carolstadius and his (...).
fol. 16 Causes of our myseri^. fol. 10 Causes wherein men ought to spend their
lives. fol. 54 Causes why the protestants in king Edwardes time did not
punyshe the catholics by death. fol. 70 Causes wherein women ought to spend
their lives. fol. 78 Causes of Gods plagues. fol. 91 Causes why Engly^shmen
be welcomed in Germany. fol. 117 Centaur^ certain monsters. fol. 14 Chrysostom
proves that young wydowes did vow. fol. 25 Chrysostom for ye punishing of
heretics. 6 The Champion of the faith. fo. 118 Circes cups. fol. ^^ Codrus
king of Athenes. fol. 55 Communion table and procedinges about the same. fol.
80 Confused ordres about the late communion. fol. 83 Constancy wherein our
martirs triumph. fol. 5^ Master Christophersonnes book against rebellion.
fol. 103 Couetonsnes* fol. 84. 8^ Crumwell, fol. ^0^ The croche of the lame man
that was burned at Stratford. fol. 12^ Curssed speakers. fol. 89
D.
THe death of queen Katherine. fo. 107 Demosthenes tale of an asses shadow. 49
Despysers of the godly. fol. 99 The difference between the catholic and
Scismaticall church. fol. 127 A discourse touching the burning of heretics.
fol. 40 Disobedience to parents. fol. 92 The doctrine of the church. fol. 127
Donatus the heretic. fol. 75 A duche man and his opinion. fol. 19 A duche man
and his hypocrysie. fo. 46. 57 The Duke of Northumberland. fo. 102
E.
Elders and ministers and of their late wicked precepts in the church. fo. 5.
6 Emden a city in Frieslande. fol. 116 England the mother of us all. fol. 6
Essai and their abstinence. fol. 28 A text of Esaie the prophet, very mysused
of the protestants against fasting. 37 Ethelbert. fol. 9^ Example of an orator
and Emperor. fo. 39 Example of a Mason. fol. 82
F.
FAble of the Crabbe. fol. 94 False accusers. fol. 99 Fast. fol. 33 Feruencie
of She Apostles. fol. 77 Freer Peyto hurt with a stone. fo. 100 Freer Bale
revenged upon a worshypfull man of Hampshere. fol. 101 John Fissher bishop of
Rochester. fo. 68
G.
GEneua. fol. 116 Gestures of an assembly that repaired to Brown the
shepehearde at Islyngton. fol. 122 Glorious words of y^ protesta^tes. fo. 114
Gosseps and parrotes of the newefound world. fol. 74 Gosseps promoters of
heresy. fol. 75 Graves of dead men overthrown. fo. 85 Gyges tale out of Plato
applied to the protestants. fol. 6 Gyges king and the strange nature
thereof. ibidem
H.
Heresy and the definicion thereof. fo. 1^ Heresy a common woman. fo. 32. 103
Heretics in the primative church. 16 Heretics why they were not punished in
the primative church. 60 The heavens disposed to wonderful inclinacions in the
beginning of Luthers doctrine. fol. 15 Hil^ne Simon Magus winche. fol. 75 The
Heathen punished the despisers of their religion. fol. 41 A notable history of
a true martyr. fo. 52 The history of certain assemblies which repaired to
father Brown lying at Islyngton. fol. 12^ S. Hierome for ye punishing of
heretics. 62 Hoper. fol. 17 Horns apology. fol. 118 Hospitality of our late
Apostles. fo. 85 H^ssi^es a sect in Germany. fol. 17 Hydra the serpent. fol.
14
I.
Jack prentice with his testament. fol. 123. 124 Ignatius a true martyr. fol.
53 Ingratitude. fol. 96 Infidelity. fol. ^^ Ioane Butcher of kent and her
opinion fol. 19. 75 Ioane Bucher and her stoutnes when she was burnt. fol. 47.
17 John Cawode the Queen's prynter, whose name the brethren in Germany put to
some of their libelles as Imprinter thereof. fol. 118 Iulianus apostata. fol. 82
Justification not by faith only. fu. 112 Justinius martyr. fo. 53 Ixion. fol. 14
K.
Queen Katheryne deuorced. fo. 104 Queen Katherins letters written to her
husband king Henry theyght upon her death bed. fol. 106 The kings majesty
that now is king Phylip. fol. 89
L.
LAmentacion made by the people for ye death of s. Thomas of Ca^torbury. ^8
Latymers combat with sir Thomas Seamer his spirit. fol. 44 Latymers words to
prove that it is the cause and not the death that makes the quarrel good. fol.
45 London ladies. fol. 77 Lucilla. fol. 75 Lucius king of this Realm: fol. 91
Lucretia of Rome. fol. 79 Luther and his opinion. fol. 16 Liberty of life.
fol. 116
M.
MArcion the heretic. fol. 75 Marcionites people of his sect. fo. 66
Makebraies book. fol. 118 Ma^solus king of Carsa. fol. 63 Menippus words,
Ambassador to Antiochus. fol. 115 Michol king Dauides wife. fol. 78
Cou^terfayte martirs and their deaths with their toys used in the time of the
same. fol. 47 Monasteries and Abbaies subverted. 110 Montanus an heretic in
the primative church. fol. 66. 75 Monks of the charterhouse with the causes
of their death. fol. 68 Sir Thomas More. ibidem A Monster brought forth in
Germany, in the beginning of Luthers doctrine with the description thereof.
fol. 15 Musculus. fol. 17 Mutius Scaeuola and his stoutnes. fol. 54
N.
NAsturtium an herb. fol. 29 Nature contented with a little. fo. 28 Nicolaus
the heretic. fol. 75 Noxes doctrinal of the Masseboke. fo. 118
O.
OBiectio^s of y^ heretics. 13. 22. 65. 108 Obstinacy the cause of error.
fol. 10 Oblacions or offringes to Brown the shepeharde. fol. 122 Oecolampadius
and his opinion. fol. 17 John Oldecastel and the cause of his death fol.
Oldecastell a traitor. fol. 102 Order. fol. 30
P.
PAulus an ancient father. fol. 28 The Persians abstinencie. fol. 29 Peter
Martyr. fol. 17 Pet penyale. fol. 121 Phaeton and of his climming up to his
fathers chariot. fol. 7 A Pilgrym of Gods church. fol. 117 Philomena. fol.
75 Philip Sannio. fol. 86 Pompeius apohthegma to Marcellinus. fol. 97 The
parable of the Cockle objected by the protestants and the meaning thereof.
fol. 57 The Popes authority banyshed. fo. 104 Polycarpus a true martyr* fol.
53 Poynetes doctrine with his two wi^es. 24 Poynetes falshode. fol. 25 Poynetes
book against the learned treatise of doctor Martyn. fo. 118 Mointes specially
to be required in a martyr. fol. 50 Power of godlynes denied. fol. 111
Practices of the protestauntes. fol. 22 Practice of prelates new revived. fo.
118 Presumption and the reward thereof. 8 A Priest and of his strange opinion
about twenty years past. fol. 18 Priests married what women they used to
marrye. fol. 74 Prisca and Maximilla. fol. 75 Procedynges. fol. 80. 81. 82
Proud protestants. fol. 88 The Protestants how they played their parts
after they had corrupted the no bil^tie. fol. 6. and 7 The word Protestant
what it is. fol. 8 The protestants without unity of doctrine. fol. 14 The
protesta^tes how they pervert a text of S. Paul. 21. et deinceps. The
protestants in shepes app^r^t^e. 35 The protestants fa^^. fol. 36 The
protestants with one truth some to confound another. fol. 3^ The
protestants consciences. fo. 36 The protestants are bastardes. fol. 96
Prayer. fol. 34 P^tto a Tanner and his opinion. fol. 18
Q.
Queen katheryn deuorced. fol. 104 Quintus Fabius Labeo. fol. 110
R.
REmedies to avoid sin. fol. 32 A ring of a strange nature. fol. 6 Rogers
burnt in Smythfielde, and of the fond Imaginations of many in the time of his
death. fol. 64
S.
THe Sacrament of the Altar. fo. 83. 112 Semiramis poesy in reproach of
covetousness. fol. 86 Sects that did forbid meats to be eaten. fol. 26
Sermons pleasant. fol. 30 Scipio Aphricanus and his contine^cie. fo. 73
Selfloue and yelding to the flesh. fo. 71 Scriptures to prove the burning of
heretics. fol. 41. 42 Similitudes of Godliu^s. fol. ^03 Simon Magus. fol. 75
Sin^n that begiled the Troianes. fol. 65 Shoting of a gonne at the preacher at
Paul's cross. fol. 100 Sir Thomas Seymer rayled upon by Latymer before the
late kings Majesty. fol. 44 Scorye the preacher. fol. 47 Sister wives. fol.
124 Socrates. fol. 41 A spiritual hoape lo^ged for by Brownes mother the
Shepehearde. fol. 123 Stras^orou^h a city in Germany. 116 Striking of ye
priest at westminster. 100 Four Sussex men of late burnt and their opinions.
fol. 19 Syrenes whereof Homere makes mencio^. 22 Sympering Sysse. fol. 1^1
T.
TAunies which proceed out of the mouths of our martyrs. fol. 50 Th^^s the
harlot. fol. 76 Thalestris queen of the Amazones. fol. 76 Saint Thomas of
Cantorbury and his martyrdom. fol. 69 S. Thomas picture disfigured. fol. 1^0
Thaborites ^ l^te se^^^ in Germany. fo. 1^ A sort of saint Paul perverted by
the protestauntes. fo. 2^ Toys of our false martyrs in the time of their
deaths. fol. 47 Themistocles Apothegma to the Atheniens. fol. 97 Traitors.
fol. 10^ Throwyng of a dagger at the preacher at Paul's cross. fol. 100
Trucebreakers. fol. 98 Turia a Roman ma^roue. fol. 79 Turnors solemn book
of the wolf* 118 True relics contempned. fol. 6^ A Tyler and his opinion.
fol. 18
V.
Unthankful. fol. 95 Virgins of the city of Separta. fo. 79 The unity of
the church. fo. 20. 21. 126 Unity the badge of the church. fol. ^0
VV.
Weakness of women. fol. 76 Women ever learning, and never able to attain unto
the truth. fol 74 Women promoters of heresy. fol. 75 Whether it be the cause
or the death that makes a martyr. fol. 44 What time the temporal ^worde begin
to serve the gospel. fol. 60 Wives of certain men called Mi^i. fo. 79 Wyat and
his practice. fol. 7^ Wyat and his treason* fol. 102 Words of the ignorant
people upon the heretics passing to death. fol. 43 Words of father Peyloe a
freer of Grene wiche, touching the party that did hurt him. fol. 101
Y.
YAcob and ^ance of Stra^^orough. fol^o. 116
Z.
Zwynglins and his opinion. fol. 16
FINIS.
Impr^nted at London, by Robert Caly, within the precin^t of the late dessolued
house of the graye Freers, now converted to an Hospital, called Christ's
Hospital.

MENSE IV LII.

Ann^. 1556.


