THE Groundworke of Conny-catching, the manner of their Pedlers-French, and the
means to understand the same, with the cunning slights of the Counterfeit
Cranke.

Therein are handled the practices of the Visiter, the fetches of the Shifter
and Rufflar, the deceits of their Doxes, the devises of Priggers, the names of
the base loytering Losels, and the means of every Blacke-Art man's shifts, with
the reproof of all their devilish practices.

Done by a Justice of Peace of great authority, who has had the examining of
diverse of them.



To the gentle Readers Health.
GEntle Reader, as there has been diverse books set forth, as warnings for
all men to shun the crafty coossening sleights of these both men and women
that have termed themselves Conny-catchers: so amongst the rest, bestow the
reading over of this book, wherein thou shall find the groundwork of
Conny-catching, with the manner of their Canting speech, how they call all
things in their language, the horrible coossening of all these loose varlots,
and the names of them in their several degrees.

First The V^siter. 2. The Shifter, 3. The Rufflar. 4. The Rogue. 5. The wild
Rogue. 6. A prigger of Prauncers. 7. a P^llyard. 8. A Frater. 9. An Abraham
man. 10. A freshwater Mariner, or Whipiacke. 11. A counterfeit Cranke. 12. A
Dommerar. 13. A dronken Tinkar. 14. A Swadder or Peddler. 15. A Iarkeman and
Patrico. 16. a demander for glimmar. 17. The baudy Basket. 18. An Autem Mort.
19. A walking Mort. 20. A Doxe. 21. A Dell. 22. Kinchin Mort. 23. A Kinchin Co.
All the^e playing their coossenings in their kind are here set down, which
never yet were disclosed in any book of Conny-catching.

A new kind of shifting slight, practiced at this day by some of this
Cony-catching crew, in Innes or vittailing houses but especially in Faires or
Markets, which came to my hands since the imprinting of the rest.
WHereas of late diverse coossening devises and deuilish deceites have been
discovered, whereby great inconveniences have been eschewed which otherwise
might have been the utter overthrow of diverse honest men of all degrees. I
thought this amongst the rest not the least worthy of noting, especially of
those that trade to Faires and Markets, that thereby being warned, they may
likewise be armed, both to see the deceit, and shun the danger. Th^se shifters
will come unto an Inn or vittailing house, that is most used in the town, and
walk up and down, and if there come any gentleman or other to lay up either
cloak sword, or any other thing worth the having, then one of this crew takes
the marks of the thing or at least the token the party gives them: anon
after he is gone, he likewise goes forth, and with a great countenance comes
in again to the maid or servant, calling for what another left: if they doubt
to deliver it, then he frets, and calls them at his pleasure, and tells them
the marks and tokens: having thus done, he blames their forgetfulness, and
gives them a couple of pence to buy them pinnes, bidding them fetch it
straight, and know him better the next time, wherewith they are pleased, and he
possessed of his pray. Thus one got a bag of Cheese the last Sturbridge
Fair, for in such places (as a reclaimd fellow of that crew confessed) they
make an ordinary practice of the same.

TO THE READER.
Here I set before thee (good Reader) the lewd lows^e language of these
loytering lusks, and laysie lorrels, wherewith they buy and sell the common
people as they pass through the country. Which language they term Pedlers
French, an unknown tongue to all but to these bold beastly bawdy beggars and
vain Vagabonds, being half mingled with English when it is familiarly
talked, and first placing things by their proper names, as an Introduction to
this peevish speech.

Nab, a head. Nabchet, a hat or cappe. Glasiers, eyes. a smelling chete, a
nose. began, a mouth. a prattling chete, a tongue. Crashing chetes teeth. Hearing
chetes, ears. Fambles, hands. a fambling chete a ring on thy hand. quaroms, a
body prat, a buttocke. stampes, legs. a caster, a cloak. a togman, a cote. a
commission, a shir^* drawers, hoson. stampers, shoes. a mufling chete, a nap
1^. a belly chete, an a^erne. dudes, clothes. a lag of dudes, a buck of
clothes. a state or states, a sheet or sheets. Lybbege, ^ bed. Bung, a purse.
Lowre, money. Mynt, gold. a board, a shilling half a board, si^ pence.
Flagge, a groat. a wyn, a penny. a make, a halfepeny. bowse, drink. been,
good. beneship, very good. quier, naught. a gage, a quart pot. a Skew, a
cup. pannam, bread. cassan, cheese. param, milk. lap, butter milk or whey.
pek, meat. poplars, ^orrage. ruff pek, baken a grunting chete or a patricoes
kinchen, a pig. a cackling chete a cock or capon. a margerie prater, a hen. a
Roger or tyb of the buttry, a Goose. a quaking chete, or red shanke, a duck or
a drake. grannam, corn. a lowing chete, a Cow. a bleting chete, a calfe or
sheep. a prancer, a horse Autem, a church. Solomon, an altar or mass.
Patrico, a priest. nosegent, a Nun. a gybe, a writing. a Iarke, a seal. a ken,
a house. a stauling ken, a house that will receive stolen wa^e. a bowsing ken,
an alehouse. a Lypken, a house to lie in. a lybbeg, a bed. glymmar, firr. Rom
bouse, wine lage, water. a sk^pper, a barn. strommell, straw. a gentry cofes
ke^ a noble or gentleman's house. a gyger, a door. bufe, a dog. the
lightmans. the day. the dark man's. the night. Rome vile. London. dewse a vile.
the Country. Rome mort. the Queen. a gentry cofe. a noble or gentleman. a
gentry mort. A noble or gentlewoman. the quyer cuffin, the Iustice^ of peace.
the harman b^eek the Constable. the harmans, the stocks. Quierkin, a prison
house. quyr cramprings bolts or fetters. tryning, harging. chats, the gallows
the high pad, the high way. the ruffmans, the woods or bushes a smelling chete,
a garden or orchard crassing chetes. apels peers or any other fruit. to nip a
boung, to cut a purse. To skower the crampringes. to were boltes or fetters. to
heue a bough, to rob or risse a booth. to cly the gerke, to be whipped. to
cut beule, To speak gently. to cut ben whyddes, to speak or give good words to
cut quyer whiddes, to give evil words or evil language. to cut, to say.
to tower, to see. to bowse, to drink to maund, to (...) or require. to stall,
to make or ordain. to cant, to speak. to myll a Ken, to rob a house. to
prygge, to ride. to dup the gyger to open the door to couch a hogshead, to lie
down and sleep. to nyggle, to have to do with a woman carnally stow you,
hold your peace. bynge a waste, go you hence. to the ruffian, to the devil.
the ruffia^ cly thee the devil take thee
The upright Coffe canteth to the Rogue The upright man speaks to the Rogue.
Vprightman. Been Lightmans to thy quarromes in what lipkin have thou liped in
this darkemans, whether in a libbeg or in ye strumell.

God morrow to thy body, in what house have thou line in all night whether in a
bed, or in the straw.


Rogue. I couched in a hogshead in a Skipper this darkmans.

I laid me down to sleep in a barn this night.


Vprightman. I tower the strummel trine upon the nabchet and Togman.

I see the straw hang upon thy cap and coat.


Rogue. I say by the Solomon I will lage it of with a gage of been house then
cut to my nose watch.

I swear by the mass I will wash it off with a quarte of good drink then say
to me what thou will.


Vprightman. Why have thou any lowre in thy bonge to bouse.

Why have thou any money in thy purse to drink.


Rogue. But a flagge, a win and a make.

(...) halfpenny.


Vprightman. Why where is the ken that has the been house.

Where is the house that has the good drink.


Rogue. A been morte here by at the sign of the prauncer.

A good wife here by at the sign of the horse.


Vprightman. I cut it is quier house, I bousd a flagge the last darkmans.

I say it is a small and naughty drink, I drank a groat there last night,


Rogue. But house there aboard and thou shall have benshyp,

But drink there a shilling, and thou shall have very good.

Tower ye, yonder is the ken, dup the giger and maunde that is beneshyp.

See you yonder is the house, open the door, and ask for the best.


Vprighman. This is as good as Rome house.

This drink is as good as wine?

Now I tower that been house makes nase nabes.

Now I see that good drink makes a dronken head.

Maund of this Morte what been pecke is in her ken.

Ask of this wife what good meat she has in her house.


Rogue. She has a Cacling Chete, a gruntinge chete ruff pecke cassan, and
popelars of yarum.

She has a Hen, a Pigge, Baken, Cheese, and Milk porrage


Vprightman. That is beneship to our watch,

That is very good for us.

Now we have well bousd, let us strike some chete.

Now we have well drunk, let us steal some thing.

Yonder dwells aquier cuffen it were beneship to mill him

Yonder dwells a hoggish and churlish man, it were w^ done to rob him.


Rogue. Now byng we a wast to the pad the Ruffmans is by.

Nay let us go hence to the high way the woods is at han^


Vprightman. So may we happen on the harmans, and clye the Iarke, or to the
quierken, and skower quier cramprings, and so to tryon the chates.

So we may chance to sit in the stocks, or be whipped, or had to prison house,
and there be shackled with bolts and fetters, and then to hang on the Gallows.


Roge. Gerry began the Ruffian clye thee.

A turd in thy mouth the Devil take thee.


Vprightman. What stowe you been cofe and cut benar whydds and byng we to Rome
vile to nyp a bounge, so shall we have lower for the bowsing ken, and when we
byng back to the deuseuyle, we will fylche some duddes of the Ruffmans or myll
the ken for a lage of duddes.

What hold your peace good fellow and speak better words, and go we to
London to cut a purse, then we shall have money for the alehouse, and when we
come back again into the country, we will steal some lynnen clothes of
hedges, or rob some house for a bucke of clothes.

By this little ye may wholly and fully understand their untoward talk and
pelting speech, mingled without measure, and as they have begun of late to
devise some new terms for certain things: so will they in time after this,
and devise as evil or worse. This language now being known and spread abroad,
yet one thing more I will ad unto, not meaning to English the same, because I
learned it of a shameless Doxe, but for the phrase of speech I set it forth
only.

There was a Patrico and a nosegent, he took his Iockam in his famble and a
wapping he went, he dockt the Dell he pryg to praunce, he byngd a wast into
the darkemans, he fylch the Cofe without any fylch man.


THE GROVNDWORKE of Conny-catching.
The Visiter.
AN honest youth not many years since, servant in this City, had leave of his
master at whitsontide to see his friends who dwelt some fifty miles from
London. It happened at a Country wake, his mother and he came acquainted with a
precise scholar, that under color of strickt life, has bin reputed for that
he is not: he is well known in Paul's Churchyard, and has been lately a
visiting in Essex (for so he presumes to term his cosening walks: and
therefore we will call him here a Visiter. This honest seeming man must needs
(since his journey lay to London) stay at the young man's mothers all the holy
days: where as on his desert he was kindly used: at length, the young man
having received his mothers blessing, with other his friends gifts amounting
to some ten pounds, was to this hypocrite as to a faithful guide committed,
and toward London they ride: by the way this Visiter discourses how excellent
insight he had in Magic, to recover by Art any thing lost or stolen. Well to
sant Albons they reach, there they sup together, and after the carowsing of
some quarts of wine they go to bed where they kindly sleep, the Visiter slily,
but the young man soundly: Short tale to make out of his bedfellows sleeue,
this Visiter conuaid his twenty Angels besides some other od silver, hid it
closely, and so fell to his rest. Morning comes, up get this couple,
immediately the money was mist, much adoo was made the Chamberlain with sundry
other servants examined, and so hot the contention, that the goodman for the
discharge of his house was sending for a Constable to have them both first
searched, his servants Chests after. In the mean time the Visiter calls the young
man aside, and bids him never grieve but take horse, and he warrants him ere
they be three miles out of town to help him to his money by Art, saying. In
these Innes ye see how we shall be out faced, and being unknown, how ever we
be wronged get little remedy: the young man in good hope desired him to pay the
reckoning, which done together they ride. Being some two miles from the town,
they ride out of the ordinary way: there he tells this youth, how unwilling he
was to enter into the action, but that it was lost in his company, and so
forth. Well a Circle was made, wondrous words were used, many muttrings made at
length he cries out, under a ^reene turfe, by the East side of an Oak, go
thither, got thither: this thrice he cried so ragingly as the yuong man gest
him mad, and was with fear almost beside himself. At length pau^^ng quoth this
Visiter heard ye nothing cry. Cry said the young man, yes you cride so as for
twice ten pound I would not hear ye again. Then quoth he, it is all well, if ye
remember the words: the young man repeated them. With that this shifter said, Go
to the furthest Oak in the high way toward S. Albons, and under a green turre
on the hither side lies your money, and a note of his name that stole it. Hence
I cannot stir till you return, neither may either of our horses be untied
for that time, run ye must not* but keep an ordinary pace. Away goes the
young man gingerly, and being out of sight, this copesmate takes his cloke^ag,
wherein was a fair suit of apparel, and setting spurs to his horse was ere
the Nouice returned rid clean out of his view The young man seeing himself
so c^^ssened, made patience his best remedy, took his horse and came to
London, where yet it was never his luck to meet this visiter.

A Shifter.
A Shifter not long since going ordinarily booted, got leave of a Carrier to
ride on his own hackney a little way from London, who coming to the ^une
where the Carier that night should lodge, honestly set up the horse, and entered
the hal, where were at one table some three and thirty clothiers, al returning
to their several countries. Using as he could his curtes^e, and being
Gentleman-like attirde, he was at all their instance placed at the upper end by
the hostess. After he had a while eaten he fell to discourse with such
pleasance, that all the table were greatly delighted therewith. In the midst of
supper enters a noise of musitions, who with their instruments added a double
delight. For them he requested his hostess to lay a shoulder of mutton and a
couple of capons to the fire, for which he would pay, and then moved in their
behalf to gather. Among them a noble was made, which he fingring, was well
blessed, for before he had not a cross, yet he promised to make it up an angel.
To be short, in comes the reckoning, which (by reason of the fi^e fare and
excess of wine amounted to each man's half crown. Then he requested his
hostess to provide so many possets of sack as would furnish the table, which
he would bestow on the Gentlemen, to requite their extraordinary costs: and
^estingly asked if she would make him her deputy to gather the reckoning she
granted and he did so: and on a sudden (faining to hasten his hostess with
the possets) he took his cloak, and finding fit time he slipped out of doors,
leaving the guestes and their hostess to a new reckoning, and the Musicians to
a good supper, but they paid for the sauce. This test some untruly attribute to
a man of excellent parts about London but he is slandered: the party that
performed it has scarce any good quality to live. Of these sort and could set
down a great number, but I leave you now unto those which by Master Harman
are discovered.

THE GROVND-WORKE of Conny-catching.
A Rufflar.
THE Rufflar, because he is first in degree of this odious order, and is so
called in a statute made for the punishment of Vacabonds, in the xxvii. year
of K. Henry the eight late of most famous memory: he shall be first placed as
the worthiest of this unruly rabblement. And he is so called when he goes
first abroad, either he has served in the wars, or else he has been a
seruingman, and weary of well doing, and shaking off all pain, does choose
him this idle life and wretchedly wanders about the most shires of this realm.
And with stout audacitie, he demands where he may be bold, and circumspect
enough, as he sees cause to ask charity, rufully and lamentably, that it
would make a flinty heart to relent, and pity his miserable estate, how he
has been maimed and bruised in the wars, and peradventure some will show some
outward wound, which he got at some drunken fray, either halting of some
privy wound festered with a fiery f^ankard. For be well assured that the
hardiest soldiers be either slain or maimed, or if they escape all hazards,
and return home again, if they be without releef^ of their friends, they
will surely desperately rob and steal, and either shortly be hanged, or
miserably die in prison: for they be so much ashamed and disdain to beg or
ask charity, that they will as desperately fight for to live and maintain
themselves, as manfully and valiauntly they ventured themselves in the Princes
quarrel. Now these Rufflars, the outcasts of seruing-men, when begging or
craving fails, then they pick and pylfer from other inferior beggars that
they meet by the way, as Roges, Pallyards, Mortes, and Doxes. Yea if they meet
with a woman alone riding to the market, either old man or boy that he well
knows will not resist, such they ^^itch and spoil. These Rufflars after a
year or two at the furthest become upright men, unless they be prevented by
twinde hemp^.

I had of late years an old man to my tennant, who customably a great time
went twice in the week to London, either with fruit or with pescods, when time
served therefore: And as he was coming homeward on blacke-heath, at the end
thereof next W Shooters hill, he ouertooke two Rufflars, the one mannerly
waiting on the other as one had been the master, and the other the man, or
servant carrying his masters Cloak, this old man was very glad that he might
have their company over the hill, because that he had made a good market, for
he had seven shillings in his purse, and an old angel, which this poor man
had thought had not been in his purse, for he willed his wife over night to
take out the same angel, and lay it up until his coming home again, And he
verily thought that his wife had so done which indeed forgot to do it, Thus
after salutations, had this master Rufflar entered into communication with
this simple old man who riding softly beside them, commoned of many matters.
Thus feeding this old man with pleasant talk, until they were on the top of
the hill, where these Rufflars might well behold the Coast about them clear:
Quickly steps unto this poor man, and takes hold on his horse bridle, and
leads him into the wood, and demands of him what and how much money he had
in his purse. Now by my troth quoth this old man you are a merry gentleman, I
know you mean not to take away any thing from me but rather to give me some if
I should ask it of you. By and by this servant thief, casts the cloak that
he carried on his arm about this poor man's face, that he should not mark or
view them, with sharp words to deliver quickly that he had and to confess
truly what was in his purse. This poor man then all abashed yielded, and
confessed he had but just seven shillings in his purse and the troth is he
knew of no more, This old angel was fallen out of a little purse into the
bottom of a great purse. Now this seven shillings in white money they quickly
found, thinking in deed that there had been no more, yet farther groping and
searching found this old angel. And with great admiration this gentleman thief
began to bless him saying, Good Lord what a world is this, how may (quoth he)
a man believe or trust in the same, se you not (quoth he) this old knave he
told me that he had but seven shillings, and here is more by an angel, what
an old knave and a false knave have we here quoth this Rufflar? Our Lord have
mercy on us, will this world never be better, and therewith went their way,
and left the old man in the wood doing him no more harm. But sorrowfully
sighing this old man returning home declared his misaduenture, with all the
words and circumstaunces above showed. Whereat for the time was great laughing,
and this poor man for his losses among his loving neighbors well considered
in the end.

A Upright man. cap. 2.
A Upright man the second in sect of this unseemly sort must be next placed,
of these rainging rablement of rascols some be seruinge men, artificers, and
laboring men traded up to, husbandry: These not meaning to get their living,
with the sweat of their face but casting of al pain, will vvand^r after their
wicked manner, through the most shyres of this realm.

As Sommerset shyre, Will shyre, Bark shyre, Oxforde shyre, Harforde shyre,
Middelsex, Essex, Suffolk* Northfolke, Sussex, Surry, and Kent, as the chief
and best shyers of releife. Yea not without punishment, by ^ockes Whippinges,
and impriso^ment in most of these places, above said: Yet not with standinge
they have so good liking in their lewd lecherous loyteringe, that full
quiclye all their punishments is forgotten. And repentance is never thought
upon, until they clime three tres with a ladder: These unruly rascols in
their roylinge, disperse them selves, into several companies, as occasion
serves, sometimes more and sometime less. As if they repair to a poor
husba^dmans house, he will go alone or one with him and stoutly demand his
charity, either shevving how he had served in the vvarres, and their maimed,
either that he seeks service, and says he would be glad to take pain, for
his living, although he means nothing less: If he be offered any meat or
drink, he utterly refuses scornefully, and will naught but money and if he
epsy young pigs or poultrie, he well notes the place, and then the next night
or shortly after, he will be sure to have some of them, which they bring to
their stauling dens, which is their typpling houses, as well known to them
according to the old proverb (as the beggar knovves his dishe.) For you must
understand every Typpling ale house will neither receive them or their vvares
but some certain houses, in every shyre especially for that purpose, where
they shall be better vvelcome to the^ than honester men. For by such have they
most gain, and shall be conuayd either into some loft out of the way, or
other secret corner not common to any other* and thither repair at accustomed
times their harlots, which they term morts, and Doxes not with empty hands,
for they be as skillful in picking, riffling and ^^ching as the upright men,
and nothing inferior to them in all kind of wickedness, as in other places
hereafter they shallbe touched. At these aforesaid peltinge peuish places and
^nmannerly m^etings, O how the pots walk about, their ta^ling tongues talk at
large: they bowl and bowse one to another, and for the time bowsing belly
cheer. And after their rois^ing recreation, if there be not room enough in
the house, they have clean straw in some barn or back house near adioining*
where they couch comlie together as it were dog and bitch, and he that is
hardiest may have his choice, unless for a little good manners, some will take
their own that they have made promise unto, until they be out of sight, and
according to the old adage (out of mind*) Yet these upright men stand so much
upon their reputation, as they will in no case have their women walk with them,
but separate themselves for a time a month or more and meet at faires or great
markets, where they pilfer and steal from staules, shops or boothes. At these
faires the upright men use commonly to lie, and linger in high ways and
by-lanes, some pretty way or distance from the place, by which ways they be
assured that company passes still to and fro: and there they will demand with
cap in hand and comely courtesy, the devotion and charity of the people: they
have been much whipped at fairs. If they ask at a stout yeomans or farmers
house his charity, they will go strong, as some three or four in a company,
where for fear more than good will they often have relief. They seldom or
never pass by a Justices house, but have by ways, unless he dwell alone, and
be but weakly manned, thither will they also go strong after ask subtle sort,
as with their arms bound up with a kercher or list, having wrapped about the
same filthy clothes, or their legs in such sort be wrapped halting
downeright: not unprovided of good cudgels, which they carry to sustain them,
and (as they feign) to keep^ dogs from them, when they come to such good
Gentlemen's houses. If any search be made, or they suspected for pilfring of
cloths, off hedges, or breaking of houses, which they commonly do, when the
owners be either at the market, at the church, or otherwise occupied about
their business, or rob some s^^ly man or woman by the high way, as many times
they do. Then they hie them into woods, great thickets, and other rough
corners, where they lie lurking three or four days together, and have meat
and drink brought them by their Mortes and Doxes: and while they thus lie
hidden in covert, in the night they be not idle, neither (as the common saying
is) well occupied: for then as the wily Fox creeping out of his den seeks
his pray for poultry, so do these for linen and any thing else worth money,
that lies about or near a house as sometime a whole bucke of clothes carried
away at a time. When they have a greater booty than they can carry away
quickly to their stawling Kens, as is abouesaid. They will ^ide the same for
three days in some thick covert, and in the night time carry the same like
good water Spaniels to their foresaid ^ou^es, to whom they will discover where
or in what places they had the same, where the marks shall be picked out
clean, and conveyed craftily far off to sell, if the man or woman of the
house want money themselves. If these upright men have neither money nor wares,
at these houses they shall be trusted for their vittels, if it amount to
twenty or thirty shillings. Yea if it fortune any of these upright men, to be
taken and suspected or charged with felony or petie bribery, done at such a
time or place, he will say he was in his hosts house. And if the man or wife
of that house be examined by an officer, they boldly vouch, that they lodged
him ^^ch a time, whereby the truth cannot appear. And if they chance to be
retained into service through their lamentable words with any wealthy man:
they will tarry but a small time, either robbing his master, or some of his
fellows. And some of them uses this policy, that although they travail into
all these shires abouesaid, yet will they have good credit, especially in one
shire, where at diverse good Farmars houses they be well known, where they work
a month in a place or more, and will for that time behave themselves very
honestly and painfully, and may at any time for their good usage have work of
them: and to these at a dead lif^ or last refuge, they may safely repair unto
and be welcome, when in other places, for a knacke of knavery that they have
plaide they dare not tarry. These upright men will seldom or never want, for
what is gotten by any Mort or Dox, if it please him, he does command the ^ame.
And if he meet any beggar, whether he be sturdie or impotent, he will demand
of him whether he was ever stalled to the Roge or no: if he say he was, he will
know of whom, and his name that stalled him. And if he be not learnedly able to
show him the whole circumstance thereof, he will spoil him of his money, or of
his best garment if it be worth any money, and have him to the bowsing ken,
which is, to some tippling house next adioining, and lays there to gage the
best thing that he has for twenty pence or two shillings, this man obeys
for fear of beating. Then does this upright man call for a gage of bowse*
which is a quart, pot of drink, and powers the same upon his pild pate, adding
these words. IG. ^. do stalle thee W. C. to the Roge, and that from henceforh
it shall be lawful for thee to Cant* that is to ask or beg for thy living
in all places. Here you see that the upright man is of great authority* For all
sorts of beggars are obedient to his ^ests, and surmounteth all others in
pylfring and stealing. I lately had standing in my well house, which stands
on the back side of my house, a great cavvdron of copper being the^ full of
water, having in the same half a dosen of pevvter dishes, well marked, and
stamped with the conizance of my arms, which being well noted when they were
taken out were set a side the water powered out, and my caudren taken away,
being of such bigness that one man unless he were of great strength was not
able far to ca^^ y^ same. Not withstanding the same was one night within this
two years, conuayed more then half a mile from my house, into a common or
heth. And there bestowed in a great ^irbushe. I then immediately the next day,
sent one of my men to London and there gave warning in Southwarke, Kent
street, and Barines^e street, to all the Tinckers there dwelling, that if any
such Caudron came thither to be sold, the bringer thereof should be stayed, and
promised twenty shillings for a reward, I gave also intelligence to the
watermen that kept the Ferries that no such ves^ell should be either conuaid to
London, or into Essex, promising the like reward, to have understanding
thereof. This my doing was well understood in many places, so that fear of
espying so troubled the conscience of the stealer, that my Caudron lay
untouched in the thick firbush more than half a year after, which by a great
chance was found by hunters for Connies, for one chanced to run into the same
bush where my Caudron was, and being perceived one thrust his staff into the
same bush, and hit my Caudron a great blow, the sound whereof did cause the man
to think and hope that there was some great treasure hidden, whereby he
thought to be the better while he lived. and in f^rther searching he found my
Caudron, so had I the same again vnlo^ked for.

A Hooker or Angler. Cap. 3.
THese Hookers or Anglers be perilous and most wicked knaves and be derived
or proceed forth from the upright men, they commonly go in f^ize ierkins and
gally s^ops, pointed beneath the knee, these when they practice their pilfring
it is all by night, for as they go a day tunes from house to house, to demand
charity, they vigilantly mark where or in what place they may attain to their
pray, casting their eyes up to every window well noting what they see there,
whether apparel, or linen, hanging near unto the said windows, and that
will they be sure to have the next night following, for they customably carry
with them a staff of five or six foot long, in which within one inch of the
top thereof is a little hole bored through, in which hole they put an iron
hook, and with the same they will pull unto the^ suddenly any thing that they
may reach therewith, which hook in the day time, they covertly ca^ry about
them, and is never seen or pulled forth till they come to the place where
they do their feate: such have I seen at my house and have often had speech with
them, and have handled their staves not then understanding to what use or
intent they served although I had and perceived by their speech and behavior
great sign of evil suspicion in them, they will either lean upon their
staff to hide the hole thereof when they have any speech with you or hold their
hand upon the hole, and what stuff either woollen or linen they thus get,
they never carry the same forthwith to their sta^^^g ^ens, but hides the same a
three days in some secret corner, and after conuaies the same to their houses
abouesaid, where their Host or Hostis gives them money for the same, but half
the value that it is worth, or else their Doxes shall a far of sell the same
at the like houses. I was credibly informed that a Hooker came to a Fa^mers
house in the night, and putting aside a draw window of a low Chamber, the bed
standing hard by the said window, in which lay three persons a man and two
big boys, this Hooker with his staff pulled off their garments which lay
upon them for warmth, with the couerlet and sheet, and left them lying a
sleep naked saving their shirts, and had away all clean, and never could
understand where it became. I verily suppose that when they were well
vvaked with cold, they surely thought that Robin good fellovv (according to
the old saying) had been with them that night.

A Rogue. Cap. 4.
A Rogue is neither so stout or hardy as the upright man: Many of them will
go faintly, and look piteously, when they see, either meet any person,
having a cloth as white as my shoes tied about their head, with a short
staff in their hand, halting although they need not, requiring alms of such
as they meet, or to what house they shall come. But you may easily perceive
by their color, that they carry both health and hypocrisy about them,
whereby they get gain, when others want that cannot fame and dissemble.
Others there be that go sturdely about the Country, and fameth to find out
(...) ^ther of h^^, dwelling within some part of the shire, either (...) he
has a letter to deliver to some honest householder, do ^g out of another Shire,
and will show you the same (...), with the superscription to the party he
speaks (...) shall not suspect him to run idelly about the Country, (...)
have they this shift, they will carry a certificate (...) about them from some
Iusticer of the peace, with his hand and seal unto the same, how he has been
whipped and punished for a vacabond according to the laws of this Realm, and
that he must return to C. where he was borne or last dwelt, by a certain day
limited in the same, which shall be a good long day. And all this famed,
because without fear they would wickedly wander, and will renew the same,
where or when it pleases them: for they have of their affinity that can write
and read: These also will pick and steal as the upright men, and has their
women and meetings at places appointed, and nothing to them inferior in all
kind of knavery. There be of these Roges Curtais wearing short Cloakes, that
will change their apparel, as occasion serves. And their end is either
hanging* which they call trining in their language, or die miserably of the
pocks.

There was not long Athens two Roges that always did associate themselves
together and would never separate themselves unless it were for some
especial causes, for they were sworn brothers, and were both of one age and
much like of favor, these two traveling into East-kent resorted unto an Ale
house there being wearied with traveling, saluting with short curtes^e when
they came into the house such as they saw sitting there, in which company was
the parson of the parish and calling for a pot of the best ale, sat down at
the tables end, the liquor pleased them so well, that they had not upon pot*
and sometime for a little good manner would drink and offer the cup to such as
they best fancied, and to be short, they sat out all the company, for each man
departed home about their business. When they had well refreshed themselves,
then these rowsie rogues requested the goodman of the house with his wife to
fit down and drink with them, of whom they inquired what priest the same was
and where he dweit, then they faming that they had an uncle a priest, and that
he should dwell in these parts, which by all presumptions it should be he, and
that they came of purpose to speak with him, but because they had not seen
him since they were six years old, they durst not be bold to take
acquaintance of him until they were farther instructed of the truth, and began
to inquire of his name and how long he had dwelt there, and how far his house
was off from the place they were in: the good wife of the house, thinking them
honest men without disceit because they so far inquired of their kinsman was
but of a good zealous natural intent, showed them cheerfully that he was an
honest men and well-beloved in the parish, and of good wealth, and had been
there resident fifteen years at the least: but says she, are you both
brothers: yea surely said they, we have been both in one belly, and were
twins mercy God quoth this foolish woman it may well be, for ye are not much
unlike and went unto her hall window, calling these young men unto her, and
look^ng out thereat, pointed with her ^^ngar, and showed them the house
standing a^o^e, no house near the same by a quarter of a ^^le, that said she
is your uncles house: nay says one of them he is not only mine uncle, but
my Godfather also: it may well be quoth she, nature will bind him to be the
better to you: well quoth they, we be weary, and mean not to trouble our
uncle to night, but to morrow God willing we w^ll see him and do our duty.
But I pray you does our uncle occupy husbandry, what company has he in his
house? Alas says she, but one old woman and a boy, he has no occupying at
all: tush quoth she, you be mad men, go to him this night for he has better
lodging for you than I have, and yet I speak foolishly against my own profit,
for by your tarrying here I should ga^e the more. Now by my troth quoth on^ of
them, we thank you good hostess for your wholesome counsel, and we mean
to do as you will us, we will pause a while, and by that time it will be almost
night, and I pray you give us a reckoning: so mannerly paying for that they
took, they bad their host and hostess farewell with taking leave of the cup
marching merely toward this Parsons house, which they viewed well round about
and passed by two bowshots off into a young wood, where closely they lay
consulting what they should do until midnight: quoth one of them of sharper
wit and subtiller then his fellow to the other, thou see that this house is
stone walled about, and that we cannot well break into any part thereof, thou
see also that the windows be thick of mullions, that there is no creeping
in between, wherefore we must of necessity use some policy when strength
will not serve. I have a horselocke here about me says he* and this I hope
shall serve our turn: so when it was about twelve of the clock they came to
the house, and lurked near unto his chamber window, the dog of the house
barked a good, that with their noise this Priest waketh out of his sleep, and
began to cough and hem, then one of these roges steps forth nearer the window,
and makes a rufull and pitiful noise requiring for Christ's sake some relief
for the hungry and thirsty, and was like to lie without the d^^res all night
and starve for cold, unless he were relieved by him with some small piece of
money. ^here dwell thou quoth the Parson? ^ las sir says this roge, I have
small dwelling, and have come out of my way, and if I should go to any town at
this time of night, they would set me in the stocks and punish me Well quoth
this pitiful Parson, away from my house, or lie in some of my outhouses
until morning, and hold here is a couple of pence for thee. A God reward you
said this roge, and in heaven may you find it. The Parson opens his window,
and thrusts out his arm to give his alms to this roge that came whi^ing to
receive it, and quickly takes hold of his hand, and calls his fellow to him
who was ready at hand with the horselocke, and clappeth the same about the
wrest of his arm, where the mullions stood so close together for strength,
that for his life he could not pluck in his arm again, and made him believe
unless he would at the least give them three pounds, they would smite off his
arm from the body: so that this poor Parson, in fear to loose his hand,
called up the old woman that lay in the loft over him, and willed her to take
out all the money he had, which was four marks, saying it was all the money
he had in his house, for he had lent six pounds to one of his neighbors not
four days before. Well quoth they, M. Parson if you have no more, upon this
condition we will take of the lock, that you will drink twelve pence to morrow
for our sakes at the alehouse where we found you, and thank the good wife for
the good cheer she made us, he promised faithfully so to do, so they took of
the lock, and went their ways so far ere it was day, that the Parson could
never have any understanding more of them. Now this Parson sorrowfully
slumbering that night between fear and hope, thought it was but folly to make
two sorrows of one, he used contentation for his remedy, not forgetting in
the morning to perform his promise, but went betimes to his neighbor that kept
^ipling, and asked angerly where the same two men were that drank with her
yesterday. Which two men quoth this good wife? the strangers that came in when
I was at your house with my neighbors yesterday: what your neuews quoth she.
My neuewes quoth the Parson, I trow thou art mad, nay by God quoth this good
wife, as sober as you, for they told me faithfully that you were their uncle,
but in faith are ye not so indeed, for by my troth they are strangers to me, I
never saw them before. O out upon them, quoth the Parson, they be false
thieves, and this might they compelled me to give them all the money in my
house. Benedicite quoth this good wife, and have they so indeed? as I shall
answer before God, one of them told me besides that you were Godfather to him,
and that he trusted to have your blessing before he departed. What did he
quoth this Parson? a halter bless him for me: me thought by your
countenance, you looked so wildly when you came in quoth this good wife, that
something was amiss. I use not to jest said the Parson in so earnest a matter.
Why all your sorrows got with it said the good wife, sit down, and I will
fill a fresh pot of Ale shall make you merry again. Yea said the Parson,
fill in, and give me some meat, for they made me swear and promise them
faithfully that I should drink twelve pence with you to day. What did they
quoth she, now by the mass they be merry knaves, I warrant you they mean to
buy no land with the money: but how could they come into you in the night, your
doors being shut fast your house is very strong. Then he showed her all the
whole circumstance, how he gave them his alms out at the window, they made
such lamentable cry that it pitied him at the heart: for he saw but one when
he put his hand out at the window. Be ruled by me said the wife: wherein quoth
the Parson? by my troth never speak more of it, when they shall understand of
it in the parish, they will but laugh you to scorn. Why then quoth this
Parson, the devil go with it, and there an end,

A wild Roge. Cap. 5.
A Wild Roge is he that is borne a Roge, he is more subtle, and more given by
nature to all kind of knavery than the other, as beastly begotten in barn or
bushes, and from his infancy traded in tretcherie, yea and before ripeness of
years does permit, wallowing in leude lechery, but that is counted no sin.
For this is their custom, that when they meet in a barn at night every one
gets a make to lie withal although there chance to be twenty in a
company, as there is sometimes more, and sometimes less: for to one man that
goes abroad, there are at the least two women, which never make it strange
when they be called, although she never knew him before. Then when the day
does appear, he rowses himself, and shakes his ears, and away goes wandering
where he may get ought to the hurt of others. Yet before he skippeth out of
his couch, and departs from his darling, if he like her well* he will
appoint her where to meet him shortly after, with a warning to work warily for
some chetes, that their meeting might be the merrier.

Not long since a wild Roge chanced to meet a poor neighbor of mine, who
for honesty and good nature surmounteth many. This poor man riding homeward
from London, where he had made his market, this roge demanded a penie for Gods
sake to keep him a true man. This simple man beheld him well, seeing him of
tall personage, and a good quarter staff in his hand, it much pitied him as
he said to see him want, for he was well able to serve his Prince in the
wars. Thus being moved in pity, he looked in his purse to find out a
penny, and in looking for the same, he plucked out eight shillings in sliuer
and raked therein to find a single penny, and at the last finding one, does
of^er the same to this wild roge: but he seeing so much money in this simple
man's hand, being stricken to the heart with a covetous desire, bid him
forthwith deliver all that he had, or else he would with his staff beat out
his brains. For it was not a penny would now quench his thirst seeing so much
as he did, thus swallowing his spittle greedily down, spoiled this poor man
of all the money that he had, and leapt over the hedge into a thick wood, and
went his way as merely, as this good simple man came home sorowfully. I once
rebuking a wild roge because he went idly about, he showed me that he was a
beggar by inheritance, his Grandfather was a beggar, his father was one, and he
must needs be one by good reason.

A Prigger of Prauncers. Cap. 6.
A Prigger of Prauncers, be horse stealers, for to prigge signifies in their
language to steal, and a Prauncer is a horse, so being put together the matter
is plain. These go commonly in Ierkins of leather or white freeze, and carry
little wands in their hands, and will walk through grounds and pastures to
search and see horses meet for their purpose. And if they chance to be met and
asked by the owners of the ground what they do there, they feign straight that
they have lost their way and desire to be instructed the best way to such a
place. These will also repair to Gentlemen's houses, and ask their charity, and
will offer their service: and if you ask them what they can do, they will say
that they can keep three or four Geldings, and wait upon a Gentleman. These
have also their women, that walking from them in other places, mark where and
what they see abroad, and show these Priggars thereof when they meet, which is
within a week or two. And look where they steal any thing, they convey the
same at the least threescore miles off the place.

There was a Gentleman a very friend of mine, riding from London homeward into
Kent, having within three miles of his own house business, who alighted off
his horse, and his man also, in a pretty village where diverse houses were, and
looked about him where he might have a convenient person to walk his horse,
because he would speak with a Farmer that dwelt on the backeside of the said
village, little above a quarter of a mile from the place where he lighted, and
had his man to wait upon him, as it was meet for his calling: espying a beggar
there standing, thinking the same to dwell there, charging this pretty prigging
person to walk his horse well, and that they might not stand still for taking
of cold, and at his return (which he said should not be long) he would give
him a penny to drink, and so went about his business. This pelting Priggar
proud of his pray, walks his horse up and down till he saw the gentleman out
of sight, and leapes into the saddle, and away he goes a maine. This
Gentleman returning, and finding not his horses, sent his man to the one end
of the village and he went himself unto the other end, and inquired as he went
for his horses that were walked and began somewhat to suspect, because neither
he nor his man could see or find him. Then this gentleman dilligently inquired
of three or four town dwellers there, whether any such person, declaring his
stature, age, apparel, with so many lineaments of his body as he could call
to remembrance. And vna voce all said that no such man dwelt in their street,
neither in the parish that they knew of, but some did well remember that such a
one they saw there lurking and huggering two hours, before the gentleman came
thither, but he was a stranger unto them. I had thought quoth this gentleman he
had here dwelled, and so being not far from home, he marched mannerly in his
boots, I suppose at his coming home he sent such ways as he suspected or
thought meet to search for this Prigger, but hitherto he never heard any
tidings again of his Palfries. I had the best gelding stolen out of my pasture
which and had going amongst others while this book was first a printing.

A Palliard. Cap. 7.
THese Palliards he called also Clapperdogens, these go with patched Cloakes,
and have their Morts with them, which they call wives, and if he go to one
house to ask his alms, his wife shall go to another, for what they get, as
bread, cheese, malt, and wool, they sell the same for ready money, for so they
get more tha^ if they went together, although they be thus divided in the day
yet they meet ^^^pe at night. If they chance to come to some gentleman's house
standing alone, and be demanded whether they be man and wife, and if he
perceive that any doubts thereof, her shows them a testimonial with the
ministers name and others of the same parish, naming a parish in some shir^
far distant from the place where he shows the same. This writing he
carries to salve that sore: There be many Irish men that go about with
counterfeit licenses, and if they perceive you will straightly examine them, they
will immediately say they can speak no English.

Further understand for troth that the worst and wickedst of all this beastly
generation are scarce comparable to these prating Pallyards: All for the most
part of these will either lay to their legs an herb called Sperewort, either
Arsnicke, which is called Ba^s^ane. The nature of this Sperewort will raise a
great blister in a night upon the soundest part of his body, and if the same be
taken away it will dry up again and do no harm. But this Arsnicke will so
poison the same leg or sore, that it will ever after be incurable, this do
they for gain and to be pitied, the most of these that go about ^e Welshmen.

A Frater. Cap. 8.
SOme of these Fraters will carry black boxes at their gyrdle, wherein they
have a brief of the Queens majesty's letters patents given to such a poor
spittle house for the relief of the poor there, which brief is a copy of the
letters pattents, and utterly fained, if it be in paper or in parchment
without the great seal. Also if the same brief be in print, it is also of
authority: for the Printers will see and well understand before it come in
press, that the same is lawful. Also I am credibly informed that the chief
Proctors of many of these houses, that seldom travel abroad themselves but
have their factors to gather for them, which look very slenderly to the
impotent and miserable creatures committed to their charge, and die for want of
cherrishing whereas they and their wives are well crammed and clothed, and
will have of the best. And the founders of every such house, or the chief of
the parish where they be, would better see unto these Proctors, that they
might do their duty, they should be well spoken of here, and in the world to
come abundantly therefore rewarded. I had of late an honest man, and of good
wealth, repaired to my house to common with me about certain affairs, I
invited him to dinner, and dinner being done. I demanded of him some news of
these parties where he dwelt. Thanks be to God sir (says he) all is well and
good now. Now (quoth I) this same now declares that some things of late has
not bin well. Yes sir (quod he) the matter is not great, I had thought I should
have been well beaten, within this seven night, how so (quoth I) Mary sir said
he. I am Constable for falt of a better, and was commanded by the Iusticer to
watch. The watch being set, I took an honest man one of my neighbors with
me, and went up to the end of the town as far as the Spittle house, at which
house I heard a great noise, and drawing near stood close under the wall* and
this was at one of the clock after midnight, where I heard swearing, prating,
and wagers laying, and the port apace walking, and forty pence gaged upon a
match of wrestling, pitching of the Bar, and casting o^ the Sledge. And out
they go in a ^ustian fun^e into the backeside, where was a great Axel^re^, and
there fell to pitching of the Bar, being three to three. The moon did shine
bright, the Constable with his neighbor might see and behold all that was
done. And how the wife of the house was roasting of a Pigge while they were in
their match. At the last they could not agree upon a cast* whereupon they fell
at w^rdes, and from words to blows. The Constable and his fellow runs unto
them to part them, and in the parting lickes a dry blow or two. Then the noise
increased, the Constable would have had them to the stocks, the wife of the
house runs out with her goodman to entreat the Constable for her guestes, and
leaves the Pygge at the fire alone. In comes two or three of the next
neighbors, being waked with this noise, and looking round about the house,
they could find nothing therein but the Pygge well r^sted, and carries the
same away with them spit and all, with such bread and drink also as stood
upon the Table. When the goodman and the goodwife of the house had entreated
and pacified the Constable, showing unto him that they were Proctors and
Factors all of Spitt^e houses, and that they tarryed there but to break their
fast, and would ride away immediately after, for they had far to go, and
therefore meant to ride so early. And coming into their house again, and
finding the Pigge with bread and drink all gone, made a great exclamation, for
they knew not who had the same.

The Constable returning, and hearing the lamentable words of the good wife,
how she had lost both meat and drink and saw it was so indeed, he laughed in
his sleeue, and commanded her to dress no more at unlawful hours for any
of her guestes: for he thought it better bestowed upon those smell ^eastes his
poor neighbors, than upon such sturdie Lubbars. The next morning betimes the
spitte and the pottes were both set at the Spyttle house door for the owner.
Thus were these Spittle Factors beguiled of their breakefast, while one of them
did well beat an other: and by my troth (quoth this Constable) I was glad in
my heart when I was rid of them.

Why quoth I, could they cast the bar and ^ledge well? I will tell you sir
^quoth he) you know there has ^eene many games this summer, I think verily,
that it s^^ne of these Lu^bars had been there, and practiced amongst others, I
believe they would have carried away the best games: For they were so strong
and sturdie, that I was not able to stand in their hands. Well ^quoth I) at
these games you speak of, both legs and arms be tried. Yea (quoth this
officer they be wicked men. I have seen some of them since with clou^s
bound about their legs, and halting with their staff in their hands, wherefore
some of them (by God) be naught all.

A Abraham man. Cap. 9.
THese Abraham men, be those that fame themselves to have been mad, and have
been kept either in Bethlehem, or in some other prison a good time, and not
one amongst twenty that ever came in prison for any such cause: yet will they
say how piteously and most extremely they have been beaten and dealt withal.
Some of these be merry and very pleasant, they will dance and sing, some
others be as cold and reasonable to talk withal. These beg money, or when
they come at a Farmers house they will demand either Bacon, cheese, or wool,
or any thing that is worth money* and if they epsy small company within, they
will with fierce countenance demand somewhat, where for fear the maids will
give them largely to be rid of them.

If they may conveniently come by any cheat, they will pick and steal, as
the upright man or Rogue, poultry, or linen, and all women that wander, be at
their commandment. Of all that ever I saw of this kind, one naming himself
Stradling, is the craftiest and most dissemblingest knave. He is able with his
tongue and usage, to deceive and abuse the wisest man that is: And surely for
the proportion of his body, with every member there unto appertaining, it
cannot be amended. But as the proverb is (God has done his part.) This
Stradling says, he was the Lord Sturtons man, and when he was executed, for
very pensiuenes of mind he fell out of his wit, and so continued a year after
and more and that with the very grief and fear* he was taken with a
marvelous palsy, that both head and hands will shake, when he talks with
any, and that apace or fast, whereby he is much pitied, and gets greatly.
And if I had not demanded of others both men and women, that commonly walks
as he does, and known by them, his deep dissimulation, I never had
understood the same. And thus I end with these kind of vacabondes.

A Fresh Water Mariner or Whipiacke. Cap 10.
THese Freshwater Mariners, their ships were drowned in the plain of
Salisbury: These kind of Caterpillars, cou^terfet great losses, on the sea,
these be some Western men, and most be Irishe men. These will run about
the country with a counterfeit license, fayning either ship wrac^e, or spoiled
by Pirates, near the coaste of Cornwall or Deuonshyre and set a land at some
haven town there, having a large and formal writing as is abouesaide, with
the names and seals, of such men of worship at the least four or five as
dwells near or next to the place where they feign there landinge. And near
to those shieres will they not beg, until they come into Wilshyre Hamshyre,
Barkeshyre, Oxfordshyre, Harfordshyre* Middelsex, and so to London, and down
by the river to seek for their ship and goods that they never had, the^ pass
they through Surrey, Sussex, by the sea costs and so into Kent, demanding
alms to bring them home to their country.

Some time they counterfeit the seal of the Admiralti^, I have diverse times
taken away from them their lycences, of both sorts, with such money as they
have gathered, and have confiscated the same to the poverty nigh adjoining to
me. And they will not be long without another. For at any good town they will
renew the same. Once with much threatninge and fair promises, I required to
know of one company who made their license, and they swear that they bought
the same at Portsmouth of a Mariner there, and it cost them two shillings, with
such warrantes to be so good and effectual, that if any of the best men of
law, or learned about London should peruse the same, they were able to find
no fault therewith, but would assuredly allow the same.

^ight man Blunt.

The counterfeit Cranke. Nicolas Geninges.



These two pictures, lively set out*
One body and soul, God send him more grace:
This monsterous desembler* a Cranke all about,
Uncomly coveting, of each to embrace,
Money or wares, as he made his race*
And sometime a Mariner, and a seruingman:
Or else an artificer, as he would feign than.
Such shyftes he used, being well tried.
Abandoning labor, till he was espied:
Conding punishment, for his dissimulation,
A counterfeit Cranke, cap. 11.
THese that do counterfeit the Cranke, be young knaves and young harlots, that
deeply dissemble the falling sickness. For the Cranke in their language, is the
falling evil, I have seen some of these with fair writings and testimonials,
with the names and seals of some men of worship in Shropshyre, and in other
Shiers far off, that I have well known, and have taken the same from them.
Many of these do go without writings, and will go half naked, and look most
pitiously, And if any clothes be given them, they immediately sell the same, for
wear it they will not, because they would be the more pitied, and wear
filthy clothes on their heads, and never go without a piece of white soap about
them, which if they se cause or present gain, they will privily convey the
same into their mouth, and so work the same there, that they will foam as it
were a Bort, and maruelously for a time torment themselves, and thus deceive
they the common people, and gain much. These have commonly their harlots as
the other.

Upon Alhallon day in the morning last* Anno Domini. 1566. or my bo^ke was
half printed, before I stirred there came early in the morning a Counterfeit
Cranke, under my lodging at the white Friars within the cloister, in a little
yard or court where abouts lay two or three great Ladies, being without the
lyberties of London, whereby he hoped for the greater gain, this Cranke there
lamentably lamenting, and pitifully crying to be relieved, declared to diverse
there his paynfull and miserable disease* I being risen and not half ready
heard his doleful words rufull mournings, hearing him name the falling
sickness, thought assuredly to my self that he was a deep dissembler, so
coming out on a sudden, and beholding his ugly and yrksome attire, his
loathsome and horrible countinance, it made me in a marvelous perplexity, what
to think of him whether it were feigned or truth, for after this manner went
he, he was naked from the wast upward, saving he had an old Ierkin of leather,
patched and that was lose about him, that all his body lay out bare, a filthy
foul cloth he ware on his head, being cut for the purpose, having a narrow
place to put his face out with a bauer made to trusse up his beard, and a
string that tied the same down close about his neck, with an old felt hat,
which he still carried in his hand, to receive the charity and devotion of the
people, for that would he hold out from him* having his face from the eyes
downward, all smerd with fresh blood, as though he had new fallen, and bin
tormented with his paynful panges, his apparel being all be r^^d with dirt and
^^^th as though he had wallowed in the mire, surely the sight was monstrous
and terrible. I called him unto m^ and demanded of him what he ayled. A good
master quoth he I have the grievous and painful disease called the falling
sickness why quoth I, how comes thy ierken, hose, and hat so berayed, with
dirt and mire and thy s^inne also. A good master I fell down on the backeside
here in a foul lane hard by the water side, and there I lay almost all night,
and have ble^^ almost all the blood out in my body, it raind that morning very
fast, and while I was thus talking with him, a poor honest woman that dwelt
there by, brought him a fair linen cloth, and bid him wipe his face
therewith, and there being a tub standing full of rain water, offered to give
him some in a dish, that he might make himself clean, but he refused the
same, why do thou so quoth I, A sir (says he) if I would wash my self, I
should fall to bleeding a fresh again, and then I should not stop my self:
these words made me the more to suspecte him. Then I asked of him where he was
borne what his name was, how long he had this disease and what time he had
been here about London and in what place. Sir says he, I was borne at
Leycester, my name is Nicholas Gennings, and I have had this falling sickness
eight years, and I can get no remedy for the same, for I have it by kind, my
father had it and my friends before me, and I have been these two years here
about London, and a year and a half in Bedlam: why wast thou out of thy wits
quoth I? yea sir yt I was* What is the Keepers name of the house: his name is
quoth he, John Smith. Then quoth I, he must understand of thy disease it thou
had the same for the time thou wast there: he knows it well, yea not
only he but all the house beside quoth this Cranke, for I came thence but
within this fortnight, I stood so long reasoning the matter with him, that I
was a cold, and went into my chamber and made me ready, and commanded my
servant to repair to Bedlam, and bring me true word from the keeper there,
whether any such man has been with him as prisoner, having the disease
aforesaid, and gave him a note of his name and the keepers also. My servant
returning to my lodging, did assure me that neither was there ever any such
man there, neither yet any keeper of any such name, but he that was there
keeper sent me his name in writing, affirming that he lets none depart from
him unless he be set away by his friends, and that none that came from him
begged about the City. Then sent I for the Printer of this book, and showed
him of this dissembling Crank, and how I had sent to Bedlam to understand the
truth, and what answer I received again, requiring him that I might have
some servant of his to watch him faithfully that day, that I might understand
truly to what place he would repair at night, and thither I promised to go my
self to see their order, and craved him to associate me thither. He gladly
granted my request, and sent two ^oyes that both diligently and vigilantly
accomplished the charge given to them and found the same Cranke about the
Temple, whereabout the most part of the day he begged, unless it were about
twelve of the clock, that he went on the backside of Clements Inn without
Temple bar, into a lane that goes to the fields, there he renewed his face
again with fresh blood, which he carried about him in a bladder, and dawbed
on fresh dart upon his ierkin, hat, and hosen, and so came back again to the
Temple, and sometime to the waterside, and begged of all that passed by, the
boys beheld how some gave grotes, some six pence, some gave more, for he
looked so ugly and irke^omely, that every one pitied his miserable case that
beheld him. To be short, there he passed all the day till night approached, and
when it began to be somewhat dark, he went to the waterside, and took a
Skuller and was set over the water into S. Georges fields, contrary to my
expectation, for I had thought he would have gone into Holburne, or to S.
Giles in the field: but these boys with Argus and Linces eyes, set sure watch
upon him and the one took a boat and followed him, and the other went back
to tell his master.

The boy that so followed him by water had no money to pay for his Boat hire,
but laid his Penner and his ynkehorne to gage for a penny, and by that time the
boy was set over, his Master with all celeritie had taken a boat and followed
him apace. Now had they a sight still of the Cranke, which crossed over the
fields toward Newingto^, and thither he went, and by that time they came
thither it was very dark: the Printer had there no acquaintance, neither any
kind of weapon about him, neither knew he how far the Cranke would go,
because he then suspected that they dogged him of purpose, he there stayed him,
and called for the Constable, which came forth diligently to enquire what the
matter was: this zealous printer charged this Officer with him as a malefactor
and a dissembling vagabonde, the Constable would have laid him all night in the
Cage that stood in the street nay says this pitiful printer, I pray you have
him into your house, for this is like to be a cold night, and he is naked, you
keep a vittelling house, let him be well cherished this night for he is well
able to pay for the same. I know well his gains has been great to day, and
your house is a sufficient prison for the time, and we will there search him,
the Constable agreed* there unto, they had him in, caused him to wash himself,
that done, they demanded what money he had about him, says this Cranke so God
help me I have but xij. pence, and plucked the same out of a little purse, why
have you no more quoth they, no says this Cranke, as God shall save my soul
at the day of judgment, we must see more quoth they and began to strip him,
then he plucked out another purse wherein was xl. pens: Tush says this Printer
I must see more, I pray God I may be damned both body and soul, if I have any
more: no says this Printer, thou false knave here is my boy that did watch
thee all this day, and saw when such men gave thee peeses of six pence,
gr^tes, and other money, and yet thou showed us none but small money, when this
Cranke hard this, and the boy vowing it to his face, he relented, and plucked
out another purse wherein was eight shillinges and od money, so had they in the
hole that he had begged that day, xiij. shillinges iij. pence halfepeny, then
they stripped him stark naked, and as many as saw him, said they never saw
hansommer man, with a yellowe flexen beard, and fair skinned without any spot
or grief, then the good wife of the house fetched her goodmans old cloak, and
caused the same to be cast about him, because the sight should not abash her
shamefast maidens, neither loath her squaymishe sight. Thus he set him down at
the Chimnies end, and called for a pot of Bear and drank of a quart at a
draft, and called for another and so the third, that one had bin sufficient
for any reasonable man, the Drink was so strong, that I my self ye next
morning tasted thereof but let the reader uidge what and how much he would
have drunk if he had binne out of fear. then when they had wrong water out of
a flint, in spoiling him of his evil gotten goods, his passing pence and
fleeting trash. The Printer with this officer, were in gealy ielotie and
devised to search a barn for some roges, and upright men, a quarter of a mile
from the house, that stood alone in the fields, and went out about their
business, leaving the Cranke alone with his wife and maidens, this crafty
Cranke espying all gone, requested the good wife that he might go on the
backsyde to make water, and to exonerate his paunch, she bad him draw the
latch of the door and go out, neither thinking or mistrusting he would have
gone away naked, but to conclude when he was out, he cast away the cloak, and
as naked as ever he was borne he ran a way over the fields to his own house,
as he afterward said. Now the next morning betimes I went unto Newington to
understand what was done because I had word or it was day that there my
Printer was, at my coming thither, I hard the whole circumstance as I above
have written, and I seeing the matter so fall out took order with the chief of
the parish that this xiij. shillinges and three pence halfepeny, might be the
next day equally distributed by their good discretions to the poverty of the
same parish, whereof this crafty Cranke had part himself, for he had both
house and wife in the same parish as after you shall hear. But this lewd
loiterer could not lay his bones to labor, having once got the taste of this
lewd less life for all this fair admonition, but devised other subtle sleights
to maintain his idle living and so craftily cloashed himself in Mariners
apparel, and associated himself with an other of his companions: they having
both Mariners apparel* went abroad to ask charity of people, faining they
had lost their ship with all their goods by casualtie on the Seas, wherewith
they gained much. This crafty Cranke fearing to be msstrusted fell to another
kind of begging as bad or worse, and apparelled him self very well with a
fair black Freeze ceate, a new pair of white hose, a fine felt hatte on his
head, a shirt of Flaunders work, esteemed to be worth twenty six
shillings, and upon New years day came again into the white Friars to beg,
the Printer having occasion to go that ways* not thinking of this Cranke, by
chance met with him who asked his charity for Gods sake, the Printer vewing
him well did misstrust him, to be the counterfeit Cranke which deceived him
upon Alhollon day at night, demanded of whence he was and what was his name,
for s^oth said he my name is Nicolas Genings, and I came to Leicester to seek
work, and I am a ha^^^^er by my occupation, and all my money is spent, and if
I could get money to pay for my judging this night, I would to morrow seek
work amongst the ha^ters: the Printer perceiving his deep dissimulation, put
his hand into his purse, seeming to give him some money, and with fair
illusions brought him into the street, where he charged the Cunstable with him,
affirming him to be the counterret Cranke, that ran away upon a ^ha^on day
last. The Cunstable being very loath to meddle with him, but the Printer knowing
him and his deep decayte desired he might be brought before the Deputy of the
wa^^e which straight was accomplished which when he came before the deputy, he
demanded of him of whence he was and what was his name he answered as before he
did unto the Printer, ye deputy asked the Printer what he would say unto his
charge he answered and aleged him to be a Vagabond and deep deceiuer of the
people* and the counterfeit Cranke that ran away upon Alhallon day last, from
the Cunstable of Newington and him, and requested him ernestly to send him to
ward, the deputy thinking him to be deceived but nevertheless laid his
commandment upon him, so that the Printer should bear his charges if he could
not justify it, he agreed there unto. And so he and the Cunstable went to carry
him to the Counter, as they were going under Ludgate this crafty Crank take
his helees and ran down the hill as fast as he could drive, the Cunstable and
ye Printer ran after him as fast as they could, but ye Printer of ye twain
being lighter of foot, over took him at fleet bridge, and with strong hand
carried him to the Counter, and safely delivered him. On the morrow ye Printer
sent his boy that stripped him upon Alhallon day at night to veiw him because he
would be sure, which boy knew him very well, this Cranke confessed unto the
Deputy, that he had hosted the night before in Kent street in Southwark at
the sign of the Cock, which thing to be true, the Printer sent to know and
found him a liar, but further inquiring at length found out his habitatio^,
dweling in Master Hills rents having a pretty house well stuffed with a fair
joint table, and a fair Cubbard garnished with peuter, having an old ancient
woman to his wife. The Printer being sure thereof, repaired unto the Counter,
and rebuked him for his beastly behavior, and told him of his false fayning,
and willed him to confess it and ask forgiveness, he perceived him to know
his deep dissimulation, relented and confessed all his deceit, and so
remaining in the Counter three days, was removed to Bridewell, where he was
stripped stark naked, and his vglye attier put upon him before the Masters
thereof, who wondered there at his dissimulation greatly, for which offense he
stood upon the pillory in Cheapeside both in his ugly and handsome attire: and
after that went in the Mil while his ugly picture was a drawing, and then was
whipped at a Carts tail through London, and his displayed banner carried
before him unto his own boore: and so back to Bridewell again, and there
remained for a time, and at length was set at liberty on that condition he
would prove an honest man, and labor truly to get his living. His picture
remains in Bridewell for a monument.

A Dommerar. Cap. 12.
THese Dommerars are lewd and most subtle people, the most part of these are
Welsh men, and will never speak, unless they have extreme punishment, but
will gape, and with a marvelous force will hold down their tongues doubled,
groaning for your charity, and holding up their hands full piteously so that
with their deep dissimulation they get very much. There are of these many, and
but one that I understand of has lost his tongue in deed. Having on a time
occasion to ride to Dartford to speak with a Priest there, who makes all kind
of conserues very well, and uses stilling of waters. And repairing to his
house I found a Dommerar at his door, and the Priest himself perusing his
license, under the seals and hands of certain worshipful men, had thought the
same to be good and effectual. I taking the same writing, and reading it over,
and noting the seals, found one of the seals like unto a seal that I had
about me, which seal I bought besides Charing cross, so that I was out of
doubt it was none of the Gentlemen's seals that had subscribed. And having
understanding before of their peevish practices, made me to conceive that all
was forged and naught, I made the more have home for well I wist that he must of
force pass through the parish where I dwelt, for there was no other way for
him. And coming homeward, I found them in the town according to my
expectation, where they were stayed, for there was a Pallyard associate with
the Dommerar and partaker of his gains, which Pallyard I saw not at Dartford.
The stayers of them was a gentleman called Chain, and a servant of my Lord
Keepers called Woslestow* which was the chief causer of the staying of them,
who being a surgeon, and cunning in his science, had seen the like practices,
and as he said, had caused one to speak before that was dombe. I chanced to
come at the beginning of the matter: Sir (q. this surgion) I am bold here to
utter some part of my cunning, I trust quoth he, you shall see a miracle
wrought anon: for I once made a dumb man speak. Quoth I, you are well met,
and somewhat you have prevented me, for I had thought to have done no less
before they had passed this town: for I well know their writing is fained,
and they deep dissemblers. The Surgeon made him gape, and we could see but
half a tongue. I required the Surgeon to put his finger in his mouth and to
pull out his tongue, and so he did notwithstanding he held strongly a pretty
while, at the length he plucked out the same, to the great admiration of the
beholders: yet when we saw his tongue he would neither speak, nor yet could
hear. Quoth I to the Surgeon, knit two of his fingers together, and thrust a
stick between them, and rub the same up and down a little while, and for
my life he speaks by and by. Sir quoth this Surgeon, I pray you let me
practice another way, I was well contented to see the same. He had him into a
house, and tied a halter about the wrests of his hands, and hoysed him over a
beam, and there did let him hang a good while: at the length with very pain,
he required for Gods sake to let him down: so he that was both deaf and
dumb, could in short time both hear and speak. Then I took the money I
could find in his purse, and distributed the same to the poor people dwelling
there, which was xv. pence halfepeny, being all that we could find. That done,
and this merry miracle madly made, I sent them with my servant to the next
Iusticer, where they preached on the pillory for want of a pulpit and were well
whipped, and none did bewail them.

A dronken Tinkar. Cap. 13.
THese dronken Tinkers, called also Prigs, be beastly people, and these young
knaves be the worst: they never go without their Doxes, and if their woman
have any thing about them, as apparel or linen that is worth the selling,
they lay^ the same to gage, or sell it outright for been bouse at their bousing
ken, and full soon will they be weary of them, and have a new. When they
happen to work at any good house, their Doxes linger alooft, and tarry for
them in some corner, and if he tarrieth long from her, then she knows he has
work, and walks near, and sits down by him. For besides money he
looks for meat and drink for doing his dame pleasure. For if she have
three or four holes in a pan, he will make as many more for speedy gain.
And if he see any old Kettle, cha^er, or Peuter dish abroad in the yard where
he works, he quickly snappeth the same up, and into the budget it goes round*
and thus they live with deceit.

I was credibly informed by such as could well tell, that one of these tippling
Tinkars with his dog, robbed by the high way four Pallyards and two Rogues,
six persons together, and took from them above four pound in ready money, and
hid him after in a thick wood a day or two, and so escaped untaken. Thus with
picking and stealing, mingled with a little work for a color, they pass
their time.

A Swadder oe Peddler. Cap. 14.
THese Swadders and Pedlers be not all evil, but of an indifferent behauiour^
these stand in great awe of the upright men, for they have often both wares and
money of them, but forasmuch as they seek gain unlawfully against the laws
and statutes of this noble Realm, they are well worthy to be registered amongst
the number of vagabonds: and undoubtedly I have had some of them brought before
me when I was in commission of the peace, as malefactors for briberie and
stealing. And now of late it is a great practice of the Upright man, when he
has gotten a booty, to bestow the same upon a packefull of wares, and so
goes a time for his pleasure, because he would live without su^pition.

A Iarkeman and a Patrico* Cap. 15.
FOrasmuch as these two names, a Iarkeman and a Patrico be in the old brief
of vagabond, and set forth as two kinds of evil dooers, you shall understand
that a Iarkeman has his name of a Iarke, which is a seal in their language,
as one should make writings and set seals for licenses and pasports. And for
truth there is none that goes about the country of them, that can either
write so good and fair a hand, or indite so learnedly as I have seen and
handled a number of them: but have the same made in good towns, as what cannot
be had for money (as the proverb says) Omnia venalia Romae, and many has
confessed the same to me. Now also there is a Patrico, and not a Patriarcha,
which in their language is a Priest that should make marriages till death
depart, but they have no such I am well assured, for I put you out of doubt
that not one amongst a hundred of them are married, for they take lechery for
no sin, but natural fellowship and good liking love, so that I will not blot
my book with these two that be not.

The groundwork A Demaunder for glimmar. Cap. 16.
THese Demanders for glimmar be for the most part women, for glymmar in their
language is fire: these go with famed licenses and counterfaited writings,
having the hands and seals of such Gentlemen as dwells near to the place
where they feign themselves to have been burnt, and their gooddes consumed
with fire. They will most lamentably demand your charity, and will quickly
shed salt tears they be so tender hearted. They will never beg in that
Shire where their losses (as they say) was. Some of these go with states at
their backs, which is a sheet to lie in a nights. The upright men be very
familiar with these kind of women, and one of them helps another.

A Demaunder for glymmar came unto a good town in Kent, to ask the charity
of the people, having a fained license about her* that declared her misfortune
by fire done in Somersetshire, walking with a Wallet on her shoulders, wherein
she put the devotion of such as had no money to give her, that is to say Maite,
wool, bakon, bread and cheese* and always as the same was full, so was it
ready money to her when she emptied the same, wheresoever she traveled. This
harlot was (as they term it) snowt fair, and had an Upright man or two
alwais attending on her watch (which is on her person) and yet so circumspect
that they would never be seen in her company in any good town, except it were
in small villages where typlyng houses were, either traveling together by the
high ways: but the truth is, by report she would weekly be worth six or
seven shillings, with her begging and bitcherie. This glymmering Mort
repairing to an Inn in the said town, where dwelt a widow of fifty winter
old of good wealth, but she had an unthrifty son, whom she used as a
Chamberlain to attend guestes when they repaired to her house. This amorous
man beholding with ardent eyes this glymmering glauncer was presently piteously
pierced to the heart, and sewdly longed to be clothed under her liuerey, and
bestowing a few fond words with her, understood straight, that she would be
easily persuaded to liking lechery, and as a man mased, mused how to attain
to his purpose, for he had no money. Yet considering with h^mselfe that wares
would be welcome where money wants, he went with a wanton to his mothers
chamber, and there seeking about for add ends, at length found a little
whistle of silver that his mother did use customably to wear on, and had
forgot the same for haste that morning, and offers the same closely to this
mannerly Marian, that if she would meet him on the backeside of the town, and
courteously kiss him without constraint, she should be mistress thereof and it
were much better, well says she you are a wanton, and beholding the whystell,
was farther in love there with, then ravished with his person, and agreed to
meet him presently and to accomplish his fond fancy: to be short and not
tedious, a quarter of a mile from the town he merrily took measure of her
under a bawdy bush (so she gave him that she had not) and he received that he
could not, and taking leave of each other with a courteous kiss, she
pleasantly passed forth on her iournay, and this untoward lycorous Chamberlain
repaired homward. But ere these two Turtles took their leave the good wife had
missed her whistle, and sent one of her maidens into her Chamber for the same
and being long sought for, none could be found, her mistres hearing that
dilligent search was made for the same, and that it was taken away, began to
suspect her unblessed babe, and demanded of her maidens whether none of them
saw her son in her Chamber that morning, and one of them answered that she saw
him not there, but coming from thence: then had she enough for well she wist
that he had the same, and sent for him, but he could not be found. Then she
caused her Hostier, in whom she had better affiance for his truth, and yet not
one amongst twenty of them but have well left their honesty (as I hear a great
sort say) for to come unto her, which attended to know her pleasure, got seek
out says she my untoward son, and bid him come speak with me: I saw him go
out says he half an hour since on the backeside, I had thought you had
sent him of your errand, I sent him not quoth she go look him out.

This hollow Hostler took his staff on his neck and trudged out apace that
way he saw him before go, and had some understanding by one of the maidens
that his mistres had her whistle stolen, and she suspected her son for it: he
had not gone far but he espied him coming homward alone, and meeting him
demanded where he had been. Where have I been quod he and began to smile, by
the mas thou have been at some baudy banquet, thou have even told truth quoth
this Chamberlain, surely quoth this hostler, thou had the same woman that
begged at our house to day with a license for the harms she had by fire,
where is she quoth he, she is almost a mile by this time quod this
Chamberlain, where is my mistres whistle quoth this Hostler, for I am well
assured that thou had it, and I fear me thou have given it to that harlot
Why is it missed quod the Chamberlain, yea quod the Hostler and showed him all
the whole circumstance what was both said and thought on him for the thing.
Well I will tell thee quoth this chamberlain, to be plain with thee I had it
in deed, and have given the same to this woman, and I pray thee make the best
of it, and help now to excuse the matter, and yet surely and thou would
take so much pains for me as to overtake her for she goes but softely and is
not yet far of and take the same from her, and I will be ever thy assured friend.
Why then go with me quoth this hosteler, nay in faith quoth this chamberlin
what is freer than gift, and I had pretty pastime for the same, had thou so
quoth this hostler now by the mass and I will have some to, or I will lie in ye
dust ere I come a gain. Passing with have to overtake this paramour within a
mile from that place where he departed he ouertoke her, having an upright man
in her company a strong and a sturdy vagabond, some what amassed was this
hosteler to se one familiarly in her company, for he had well hoped to have had
some delicate dalliance as his fellow had, but seeing the matter so fall out,
and being of good corrage, and thinking to himself that one true man, was
better than two false knaves, and being on the high way, thought upon help if
need had binne, by such as had passed to and fro. Demanded fersely the
whistle that she had even now of his fellow, why husband quoth she, can you
suffer this wretch to slander your wife, avaunt varlot quoth this upright man
and lets drive withal his force at the hostler, and after half a dosen blows
he strikes his staff out of his hand, and as this hosteler stepped back to have
taken up his staff a gain, this glymmering Morte flinges a great stone at
him, and strak him on the head, that down he falls with the blood about his
cares, and while he lay thus amassed the upright man snatches away his purse,
wherein he had money of his mistresses, as well as of his own, and there let
him lie and went away with speed, that they were never heard of more. When
this dry beaten hosteler was come to himself, he faintly wandered home, and
creeps into his couche, and rests his idel head, his mistress hard that he
was come in, and laid him down on his bed* repaired straight unto him, and
asked him what he ayled, and what the cause was of his sudden lying on his
bed, what is the cause quoth this hosteler, your whistle your whistle, speaking
the same pyteouslye three or four times, why fool quoth his mistrisse take no
care for that, for I do not greatly way it, it was worth but three shillings
four pence, I would it had bin burnt for four years agon: I pray thee why
quoth his mystres, I think thou art mad, nay not yet quoth this hostler but I
have bin madly handled if you knew al, why what is the matter quoth his
mistress? and was the more des^erous to know the cause: and you will forgive
my fellow and me. I will show you, or else I will never do it, she made him
presently faithful promise that she would: then says he, send for your son
home again which is a shamed to look you in the face, I agree there to says
she, well then quoth this hosteler your son has given the same Morte that
begged here, for the burning of her house, a whistle, and you have given her
five shillings in money, and I have given her ten shillings of my own: why
how so quoth she, then he sadly showed her of his mishap, with all the
circumstances that you have heard before, and how his purse, was taken away,
and xv. shyllings in the same, whereof v. shyllings was her money, and x.
shil^ings his own money, is this true quoth his mistress, I by my troth
quoth this hostler and nothing greues me so much* neither my beating neither ye
loss of my money, as does my evil and wretched luck: why what is the matter
quoth his mistres? your son says this hostler had some cheer and pastime
for that whistle, for he lay with her, and I have bin well beaten, and have had
my purse taken from me, and you know your son is merry and plesaunt, and can
keep no great counsel and then shall I be mocked and laughed to scorn in all
places, when they shall hear how I have bin served. Now out upon you knaves
both quoth his mistrisse and laughes out the matter, for she saw it would not
otherwise prevail.

The Baudy Basket. cap. 17.
THese Baudy baskets be also women, that go with baskets and Capcases on there
arms, wherein they have Laces, pynnes, needles, white inkell, and round sylke
girdles of all colors. These will buy conneyskinns, and steal linen clothes
off hedges. And for these trifles they will procure of maiden servants, when
their mistress or dame is out of the way, either some good piece of beef,
baken, or cheese, that shall be worth xij. pence: for ij. pence of there toys.
And as they walk by ye way, they often gain some money with their instrument,
by such as they suddenly meet withal. The upright men have good acquaintance
with these, and will help and relieve them when they want. Thus they trade
there lives in lewd loathsome lechery. Amongst them al is but one honest woman,
and she is of good years, her name is Ione messinger, I have had good proof
of her, as I have learned by the true report of diverse There came to my gate
the last summer. 1566. a man much deformed and burnt in the face, blea^e eyde,
and lame of one of his legs that he went with a crouch, I asked him where he
was borne and where he dwelt last, and told him thither he must repair and
be relieved and not to range about the Country, and seeing some cause of
charity, I caused him to have meat and drink, and when he had drunk I
demanded of him whether he was never spoiled of the upright man or Rogue, yes
that I have quoth he and not this seven years (for so long I have gone
abroad) I had not so much taken from me, nor so evil handled as I was within
these four days, why how so quoth I? in good faith sir quoth he, I chanced
to meet with one of these baudy baskets which had an upright man in her
company, and as I would have passed quietly by her, man says she to her make,
do you not see this ill-favored windshaken knave, yes quoth the upright man,
what say you to him, this knave owes me two shillings for wares that he had
of me half a year ago, I think it well says the upright man, syrra says
he, pay your debts: says this poor man I owe her none, neither did I ever
bargain with her for any thing, and as I am well advised, I never saw her
before in all my life, mercy God quod she, what a lying knave is this, and if
he will not pay you husband beat him surely, and the upright man gave me
three or four blows on my back and shoulders, and he would have beaten me
worse had I not given him all the money in my purse which was just fourteen
pence: why says the baudy basket have thou no more? then thou owe me ten
pence still, and be well assured I will be paid the next time I meet with
thee. And so they let me pass by them: I pray God save and bless me and all
other in my case from such wicked persons: why whither went they then quoth I?
into East-Kent, for I met with them on this side of Rochester: I have diverse
times been attempted but I never lost much before this unhappy time. Well quod
I thank God for all, and repair home into thy native Country.

A Autem Mort.
THese Autem Morts be married women, for Autem in their Language is a Church,
so she is a wife married at the Church, and they be as chaste as a Cow which
goes to Bull every moon, with what Bull she cares not. These walk most
times from their husbands company a month or more together, being associate
with another as honest as her self. These will pilfer clothes off hedges, some
of them go with children of ten or twelve years old, and if time and place
serve for their purpose, they will send them into some house at the window to
steal and rob, which they call in their language, Milling of the ken, and will
go with wallets on there shoulders and slates at their backs, there is one of
these Autem Mortes she is now a widow of fifty years old, her name is Alice
Milson, she goes about with a couple of great boys, the youngest of them is
about twenty years of age, and these two lie with her every night and she
lies in the mids, she says that they be her children, but beetleheaded be
the babes borne of such an abominable belly.

A walking Mort. cap. 19.
THese walking Morts be not married these for their unhappy years does go as
an Autem Mort, and will say their husbands died either at Newhauen, Ireland, or
in some service of the Prince. These make laces upon staves and purses that
they carry in their hands, and white vallance for beds. Many of these has had
and have children: when these get ought, either with begging bychery or
bribery, as money or apparel, they are quickly shaken out of all by the
upright men. Wherefore this policy they use, they leave their money with some
trusty friend or other being householders either man or wife, sometime in one
shire, and then in another as they travel: this have I I known that 4. s. or
5. s. yea, 10. s. left in a place, and the same will they come for again
within one quarter of a year, or sometime not in half a year, yet it is to
little purpose, for if they buy them any garments either linen or woollen they
are taken from them and worse given them, or else none at all.

The last Summer An. 1565. being in familliar talk with a walking Mort, that
came to my gate, I learned by her what I could for my purpose, and then I
rebuked her for her lewd life and beastly behavior, declaring to her what
punishment was prepared for her in the world to come. God help me quod she
how should I live, none will take me into service, but I labor in harvest time
honestly. I think but a while with honesty quod I. Shall I tell you, the best
of us all may be amended, but yet I did one good deed within this tweluemonth,
but i^ words of it, and you shall hear all. So it be necessary to be kept
secret it shall lie under my feet. What mean you by that said she? why never
to discover it to any, She began to smile, saying if it were disclosed to any
by me, she swore never to tell me any thing hereafter, and began thus. The last
Summer said she being great with child, and traveling into East-kent by the
seacoast, and lusting greatly after Oisters and m^scles and having gathered
many, opened them and eat them up, till at last seeking after more, I slipped
into a hole up to the wast and stuck fast in mud, so that if the tide had come
I had been drowned: but espying a man far off, cried out as loud as was in
my power for help, he heard me, and repaired as fast to me as he could, being
come I required for gods sake his help, and whether it was with striving and
forcing my self out, or for joy I had of his coming to me. I had a great
^uller in my face and looked red and well cou^^ered. And to be p^me with you he
liked me so well (as he said) that I should there lie s^l, and I would not
grant him, that he might lie with me. and by my troth I will not what to
answer I was in such a perplexetie, for I knew the man well, he had a very
honest woman to his wife and was of some wealth and on the other side, (...) I
were not help out I should there have perished, and I granted him that I
would obey to his will, then he plucked me out. And because there was no
convenient place nere hand, I required him that I might go wash my self and
make me some what cleanly, and I would come to his house and lodge al night in
his barn, whither he ^^ght repair to me and accomplish his desire, but let it
not be quoth she before nine of the clock at night for the^ there will be ^^all
styrring: And I may repair to the town q. she to warm and dry my self, for
this was about two of clock in ye after none, do so quoth he for I must be
busy to look out my cattle here by before I can come home. So I went away
from him and glad was I, and why so quoth I? because quoth she his wife my good
dame is my very friend, and I am much be holding to her. And she had done me so
much good ere this, that I was loath to harm her any way, why so quoth I? what
and it had bin any other man and not your good dames husband. The matter had
bin the less quoth she. Tell me I pray thee quoth I who was the father of thy
child she studied a while, and said that it had a father but what was he quoth
I? Now by my troth I know not quoth she, you bring me out of my matter so you
do, well say on quoth I, then I departed straight to the town and came to my
dames house. And showed her of my misfortune, also of her husbands usage in all
points and that I showed her the same for good will and bid her take better
heed to her husband, and to her self, so she gave me great thanks and made me
good cheer and bid me in any case that I should be ready at the barn at ye
time and hour we had appointed for I know well quoth this good wife my husband
will not break with thee. And one thing I warn thee that thou give me a
watch word a loud when he goes about to have his pleasure of thee, and that
shall be fie for shame fie and I will be hard by you, with help. But I charge
thee keep this secret until all be finished, and hold says this good wife
here is one of my peticots I give thee. I thank you good dame q. I, and I
warant you I will be true and trusty unto you, So my dame left me sitting by a
good fire with meat and drink and other good cheer, and then she went
straight and repaired unto her gossipes dwelling thereby, and as I did after
understand she made her moan to them what a lecherous husband she had, and how
that she could not have his company for harlots, and that she was in fear to
take some filthy disease of him, he was so common a man, having little respect
whom he had to do with all, and q. she now there is one at my house a pore
woman that goes about the country that he would have had to do withal
wherefore good neighbors and loving gossyps as you love me and as you would
have help at my hand a another time, devise some remedy to make my husband a
good man, that I may live in some safty without disease, and yt he may save his
soul that God so derely bought. And after she had told her tale they cast
there per^^ng eyes all upon her, but one stout dame amongst the rest had these
words. As your patient bearing of troubles, your honest behavior among us your
neighbors, your tender and pitiful heart to the poor of the parish, does
move us to lament your case, so the insatiable carnality of your faithless
husband does in^tigate and st^r us to devise and invent some speedy redress
for your cause and the amendment of his life: Wherefore this is my counsel and
you will be ruled by me. I say to you all, unless it be this wife who is
chiefly touched in this matter I have ye next cause, for he was in hand with me
not long a go, and if company had not bin present which was by chance, he
had I think forced me, for often he has bin tempting me, and yet have I
sharply said him nay, therefore let us assemble into the place where he has
appointed to meet this gyllot yt is at your house and lurk in some corner til
he begone about his business, And the^ me thought I hard you say that you had a
watch w^^de, at which word we will al step forth being five of us besides you,
for you shall be none because it is your husband, but get you to bed at your
hour. And we will carry each of us a birchen rod in our laps, and we will al be
muffeled for knowing, and se that you go home and acquaint ye Mo^te with the
matter for we must have her help to hold, for always four must hold and two
lay on. Alas says this good wife, he is too strong for you all, I would be
loath for my sake you should receive harm at his han^: fear you not q. these
stout women let her not give the w^tch word until his breeches be about his
legs: And I t^owe we all will be with him to bring before he have ^ey^^re
to pluck them up again, then they all with one voice agreed to the matter
that the way she had devised was most convenient and fittest to accomplish such
a matter withal, so she went home but before she departed from her gossips
she showed them at what hour they should priui^y come in on the backeside and
there to tarry their good hour, so by that time she came in it was almost
night and found the walking Mort still sitting by the fire, and declared to her
all this new devise abouesaid, which promised faithfully to fulfill to her
small power as much as they had devised, within a quarter of an hour after in
comes the good man who said that he was about his cattle, why who have we
here wife sitting by the fire, and if ^hee have eat and drunk send her into
the barn to her lodging for this night, for she troubles the house, even as
you will husband says his wife, you know she comes once in two years into
these quarters. Then he called to his wife for his supper sitting down very
pleasant, nothing understanding of the banquet that was prepared for him after
supper, and according to the proverb (that sweet meat will have sour sauce)
thus when he was well refreshed, and his spirits revived, he entered into
familiar talk with his wife of many matters how well he had spent that day
to their great profits, saying some of his cattle were like to be drowned in
the ditches, driving other of his neighbors cattle out that were in his
pastures, and mending his fences that were broken down. Thus profitably he had
consumed the day, nothing talking of his helping the walking Mort out of the
mire, neither of his request nor yet of her promise. Thus feeding her with
friendly fantasies consumed two hours and more. Then fayning how he would see
in what case his horses were in and how they were dressed, repaired covertly
into the barn, where as his friendly foes lurked privily, unless it were this
mannerly Mort, that comely couched on a bottle of straw. What are you come q.
she? by the mass I would not for a hundred pound that my dame or any of your
house knew you were here. No I warrant thee says this good man they be all
safe enough at their work, and I will be at mine anon He lay down by her,
and straight would have had to do with her, nay fie says she this order is
unseemly, if you lie with me you shall surely untruss you, and put down
your hosen for that way is most easiest and best, say thou so quoth he,
now by my troth agreed, And when he had untrussed himself he began to assalt
the insatiable fort: why quoth she that was without shame, saving for her
promise, are you not ashamed: never a whit says he, lie down quickly. Now
lie for shame fie, says she aloud, which was the vvatchvvord: vvherat these
five furious sturdy muffled gossips flinges out, taking sure hold of him,
plucking his hosen down lovver, and binding the^ about his feet, then binding
his hands, and knitting a handkercher about his eyes that he should not see,
they laid him on until they were windles: be good says this Mort unto my
master for the passion of God, and laid on as fast as the rest, and still
ceased not to beat him till the blood burst plentifully out in most places,
then they let him lie still bound, with this exhortation, that he should from
that time forth know his own Wife from other men's, and that this punishment
was but a fle^biting in respect of that which should follow, if he amended
not his manners. Thus leaving him blowing and foming for pain and melancholy
that he could not be revenged of them, they vanished away and had this Mort
with them, safely conuaying her out of the town. Soon after comes into the
barn one of the good man's boys to fet some hay for his horse, who finding his
master fast bound and grievously beaten with rods, was suddenly abashed, and
would have run out to call for help, but his master bid him unbind him, and
make no words thereof, for I will be revenged well enough, yet after better
advise he thought it meeter to let the same pass, than (as the proverb is)
to awake a sleeping dog. And by my troth (quoth this walking Morte) I come
now from that place, and was never there since this part was played, which is
somewhat more than a year: and I hear a very good report of him now, that he
loves his Wife well, and lives honestly: now tell me was not this a good
act. It was pretely handled quoth I, is this all? yea quoth she, here is the
end.

A Doxe. Cap. 20.
THese Doxes be broken and spoiled of their maydenhead by the upright men, and
then they are called Doxe, and not before: afterward she is common for any that
will use her, as h^ mo is a common name to all men. Such as be fair and
somewhat handsome, keep company with the walking Morts* and are ready alwais
for the upright men, and chiefly mantained by the ^t the other inferior sort
will resort to noble men's places, and Gentlemen's houses, standing at the gate,
or lurking on the backside in some out house, or under some hedge or thicket,
expecting their pray, which is, for the uncomely company of some courteous gest
that will refresh them with meat and some money, where exchange is made ware
for ware: this bread and meat they use to carry in their great hosen, so that
these beastly bribing breeches serve many times for bawdy purposes. I chanced
not long since familiarly to commune with a Doxe that came to my gate, and
surely a pleasant harlot, and not so pleasant as witty, and not so witty as
void of all grace and goodness* I found by her talk that she had passed her
time lewdly eighteen years in walking about. I thought this a necessary
instrument to attain some knowledge by, and before I would grope her mind, I
made her both to eat and drink well: that done, I promised her some money if
she would open and discover to me such questions as I would ask of her, and
never to bewray her, nor disclose her name. And you should says she* I were
undone: fear not that quoth I, but I pray thee say nothing but truth. I will
not q. I: Then first tell me quoth I, how many upright men and Roges do thou
know, or have thou known and been conversant with, and what their names be:
she paused a while, and demanded of him why he did ask. For nothing else said
I, but to know them when they come to my gate. Now by my troth quoth she then
are you never the near, for all my acquaintance for the most part are dead.
Dead quoth I, how dyed they, for want of cherishing, or of painful diseases?
Then she sighed and said they were hanged. What all quoth I, and so many walk
abroad as daily I see? By my troth said she, I know not past six or seven by
their names and named them to me. When were they hanged quoth I? Some seven
years ago, some three years, and some within this fortnight, and declared
where they were executed, which I knew well to be true by the report of others.
Why q. I, did not this fearful sight much grieve thee for thy time long and
evil spent. I was sorry quoth she, for some of them were loving men: for I
lacked not when they had it, and they wanted not when I had it, and diverse of
them I never did forsake till the gallows parted us. O merciful God quoth I,
and began to bless me. Why do you so quoth she? alas you know that every
one must have a living. Other matters I talked of, but this now may suffice to
show the Reader as it were in a glass the bold beastly life of these Doxes.
For such as have gone any time abroad, will never forsake their trade to die
therefore, I have had good proof thereof. There is one a notorious harlot of
this affinity, called Besse Bottomley, she has but one hand, and she has
murdered two children at the least.

A Dell. Cap. 21.
A Dell is a young wench able for generation, and not yet broken by the upright
man. These go abroad young, either by the death of their parents, and no body
to look unto them, or else by some sharp mistress that they serve, do run
out of service, or else she is naturally borne one, and then she is a wild Dell:
these are broken very young, when they have been layen withal by the upright
men, then they be Doxes and no Dels. These wild Dels being traded up with
their monstrous mothers, must of necessity be as evil or worse than their
parents, for neither we gather grapes from green briars, neither figs from
thistles: but such buds, such blossoms* such evil seed sown, well worse being
grown.

A Kinching Morte. Cap. 22.
A Kinching Mort is a little Girl, the Morts their mothers carry them at their
backs in their slates, which is their sheets, and brings them up sauagely
till they grow to be ripe, and soon ripe, soon rotten.

A Kinching Co. Cap. 23.
A Kinching Co is a young boy, traded up to such peevish purposes as you have
heard of other young ympes before, that growing to years, are better to hang
than to draw forth.

They. usage in the night. Cap. 24.
NOw I think it not unnecessary to make the Reader understand, how and in what
manner they lodge a nights in barns and backhouses, and of their usage there,
for as much as I have acquainted them with their orders and practices in the day
time: The arch and chief walkers that has walked a long time, whose
experience is great, because of their continual practice, I mean all Morts
and Doxes, for their handsomnes and diligence for making of their couches. The
men never troble themselves with that thing, but takes the same to be the duty
of the wife. And she shuffels up a quantity of straw or hay into some pretty
corner of the barn, where she may conveniently lie, and well shakes the same,
making the head somewhat hie, and drives the same upon the sides till it be like
a bed, then she lays her wallet or some other little pack of rags or scrip
under head in the straw, to bear up the same, and lays her pettycote or
cloak upon and over the straw, so made like a bed, and that serves for the
blanket^ then she lays her s^ate, which is her sheet upon that, if she have
no sheet (as few of them go with out) then she spreads some large clou^s or
rags over the same, and makes her ready, and lays her drowsily down. Many
will pull off their smocks, and lay the same upon them in stead of their upper
sheet, and all her other pelt and trash upon her also, but many lie in their
smocks: and if the rest of her clothes in cold weather be not sufficient to
keep her warm, then she takes straw or hay to perform the matter. The other
sort that have no slates, but tumble down, and couch a hogshead in their
clothes, these be still lousy and shall never be without ver^ unless they
put off their clothes, and lie as is abouesaide. If the upright man come in
where they lie, he has his choice, and creeps in close by his Doxe, the Roge
has his leauings. If the Morts or Doxes lie or be lodged in some farmers barn,
and the door be either locked or made fast to them, then will not the upright
man press to come in unless it be in barnes and out houses standing alone,
or some distance from houses, which be commonly known to them. As S.
Quintens, three Cranes in the Vintrey, S. Tybbes, and Knapsbury, These four be
within one mile compass near unto London. Then have you four more in
Middlesex: Draw the pudding out of the fire, in Harrow on the hill parish, the
Cross ^e^es in Cranford parish, S. Iulians in Chistleworth parish, the house
of pity in North hall parish. These are the chief houses near about London,
where commonly they resort unto for lodging, and may repair thither freely at
all times. Sometime shall come in some Roge, some picking knave, a nimble
Prigge, he walks in softly on nights when they be at rest and plucketh of as
many garments as be ought worth, that he may come by, and may easily carry,
and runs away therewith, and makes port sale at some convenient place of
theirs* that some be soon ready in the morning for want of their Casters and
Togemans: where in stead of blessing, is cursing: in place of praying,
pestilent prating, with odious oaths and terrible threatenings. The upright men
have given all these nicke names to the places abouesaid. Yet have we two
notable places in Kent, not far from London: the one is between Detford and
Rothered, called the Kings Barn, standing alone, that they haunt commonly:
the other is Ketbroke, standing by Black heath half a mile from any house.
There will they boldly draw the latch of the door, and go in when his family
be at supper, and sit down without leave, and eat and drink with them, and
either lie in the hall by the fire all night, or in the Barn, if there be no
room in the house for them. If the door be either bolted or locked, and be not
opened unto them when they will, they will break the same open to his further
cost. And in this barn sometime do lie forty upright men with their Doxes
together at one time. And this must the poor Farmar suffer, or else they
threaten to burn him, and all that he has.

FINIS.

