THE Third and last part of Conny-catching.

With the new devised knauish art of Foole-taking.

The like coosnages and villainies never before discovered.

By R. G.



Printed by T. Scarlet for C. Burby, and are to be sold at his shop under S.
Mildreds Church in the Poultrie. 1592.

TO ALL SVCH AS HAVE received either pleasure or profit by the two former
published books of this Argument: And to all beside, that desire to know the
wonderful sly devises of this hellish crew of Conny-catchers.
IN the time of king Henry the fourth, as our English Chronicles have kept in
remembrance, lived diverse sturdie and loose companions in sundry places about
the City of London, who gave themselves to no good course of life, but because
the time was somewhat troublesome, watched diligently, when by the least
occasion of mutiny offered, they might pray upon the goods of honest
Citizens, and so by their spoil enrich themselves. At that time lived likewise
a worthy Gentleman, whose many very famous deeds (whereof I am sorry I may
here make no rehearsal, because neither time nor occasion will permit me)
renown his name to all ensuing posterities: he, being called sir Richard
Whittington, the founder of Whittington College in London, and one that bare
the office of Lord Mayor of this City three several times. This worthy man
well noting the dangerous disposition of that idle kind of people, took such
good and discreet order (after he had sent diverse of them to serve in the
kings wars, and they loath to do so well returned to their former vomit)
that in no place of or about London they might have lodging, or entertainment,
except they applied themselves to such honest trades and exercises, as might
witness their maintaining was by true and honest means. If any to the
contrary were found, they were in justice so sharply proceeded against, as
the most hurtful and dangerous enemies to the commonwealth.

In this quiet and most blissful time of peace, when all men (in course of
life) should show themselves most thankful for so great a benefit, this famous
city is pestered with the like, or rather worse kind of people, that bear
outward show of civil, honest, and gentleman like disposition, but in very
deed their behavior is most infamous to be spoken of. And as now by their
close villainies they cheat, cosen, prig, lift, nippe, and such like tricks now
used in their Conie-catching Trade, to the hurt and undoing of many an honest
Citizen, and other: So if God should in justice be angry with us, as our
wickedness has well deserved, and (as the Lord forfend) our peace should be
molested as in former time, even as they did, so will these be the first in
seeking domestical spoil and ruin: yea so they may have it, it skilles not
how they come by it. God raise such another as was worthy Whittington, that in
time may bridle the headstrong course of this hellish crew, and force them live
as becomes honest subjects, or else to abide the reward of their looseness.

By reading this little tratise ensuing, you shall see to what marvelous
subtle policies these deceivers have atteyned, and how daily they practice
strange driftes for their purpose. I say no more, but if all these forewarnings
may be regarded, to the benefit of the well minded, and just control of these
careless wretches, it is all I desire, and no more then I hope to see.

Yours in all he may R. G.



The third and last part of Conny-catching with the new devised knauish Art of
Fooletaking.
BEing by chance invited to supper, where were present diverse, both of worship
and good account, as occasion served for intercourse of talk, the present
treacheries and wicked devises of the world was called in question. Amongst
other most hateful and well worthy reprehension, the woondrous villainies of
loose and lewd persons, that bear the shape of men, yet are monsters in
condition, was specially remembered, and not only they, but their accomplices,
their confederates, their base natured women and close compacters were noted:
Namely, such as term themselves Conny-catchers, Crosse-biters, with their
appertaining names to their several coosening qualities, as already is made
known to the world, by two several imprinted books, by means whereof, the
present kind of conference was occasioned. Quoth a Gentleman sitting at the
Table, whose deep step into age deciphered his experience, and whose gravity
in speech reported his discretion, quoth he, by the two published books of
Cony-catching: I have seen diverse things whereof I was before ignorant,
notwithstanding had I been acquainted with ^he author: I could have given him
such notes of notorious matters that way intending, as in neither of the
pamphlets are the like set down. Beside, they are so necessary to be known,
as they will both forearme any man against such treacherous vipers, and
forewarne the simpler sort from conuersing with them. The Gentleman being
known to be within commission of the peace, and that what he spoke of either
came to him by examinations, or by riding in the circuits as other like
officers do: was entreated by one man above the rest (as his leisure served
him) to acquaint him with those notes, and he would so bring it to pass, as
the writer of the other two books, should have the sight of them, and if their
quantity would serve, that he should publish them as a third, and more
necessary part then the former were. The Gentleman replied al such notes as I
speak, are not of mine own knowledge, yet from such men have I received them,
as I dare assure their truth: and but that by naming men wronged by such mates,
more displeasure would ensue then were expedient, I could set down both time,
place, and parties. But the certainty shall suffice without any such offense.
As for such as shall see their injuries discovered, and (biting the lip) say to
themselves, thus was I made a Conny: their names being shadowed, they have no
cause of anger, in that the example of their honest simplicity beguiled, may
shield a number more endangered from tasting the like. And seeing you have
promised to make them known to the author of the former two Books, you shall
the sooner obtain your request: assuring him thus much upon my credit and
honesty, that no one untruth is in the notes, but every one credible, and to
be justified if need serve. Within a fortnight or thereabout afterward, the
Gentleman performed his promise, in several papers sent the notes, which here
are in our book compiled together when thou have read, say, if ever thou
heardest more notable villainies discovered. And if thou or thy friends receive
any good by the^, as it cannot be but they will make a number more careful of
themselves: thank the honest Gentleman for his notes, and the writer that
published both the other and these, for general example.

A pleasant tale how an honest substantial Citizen was made a Connie, and
simply entertained a knave that carried away his goods very politickly.
WHat laws are used among this helish crew, what words and terms they give
themselves and their copesmates, are at large set down in the former two
Books: let it suffice ye then in this, to read the simple true discourses of
such as have by extraordinary cunning and treachery been deceived, and
remembering their subtle means there, and slye practices here, be prepared
against the reaches of any such companions.

Not long since, a crew of Conny-catchers meeting together, and in conference
laying down such courses as they severally should take, to shun suspect, and
return a common benefit among them: the Carders received their charge, the
Dicers theirs, the hangers about the court theirs, the followers of Sermons
theirs and so the rest to their offices. But one of them especially, who at
their woonted meetings, when report was made how every purchase was gotten,
and by what pollycie each one prevailed: this fellow in a kind of priding
scorn, would usually say.

In faith Masters these things are prettily done, common sleyghts,
expressing no deep reach of wit, and I wonder men are so simple to be so
beguiled. I would feign see some rare and artificial feate indeed, that some
admiration and fame might ensue the doing thereof: I promise ye, I disdain
these base and petty paltries, and may my fortune iumpe with my resolution,
ye shall hear my boys with in a day or two, that I will accomplish a rare
stratagem indeed, of more value then forty of yours, and when it is done shall
carry some credit with it. They wondering at this words, desired to see the
success of them, and so dispersing themselves as they were accustomed, left
this frollicke fellow pondering on his affairs. A Citizens house in London,
which he had diligently eyed and aimed at for a fortnights space, was the
place wherein he must perform this exploit, and having learned one of the
servant maids name of the house, as also where she was borne and her kindred.
Upon a sunday in the afternone, when it was her turn to attend on her master
and mistres to the garden in Finsbury fields, to regard the children while they
sported about, this crafty mate having duly watched their coming forth, and
seeing that they intended to go down S. Laurence lane, stepped before them,
ever casting an eye back, least they should turn some contrary way: but their
following still fitting his own desire, near unto the Conduit in
Aldermanbury, he crossed the way and came unto the maid, and kissing her said.
Coosen Margeret, I am very glad to see you well, my uncle your father, and
all your friends in the Country are in good health God be praised. The Maid
hearing herself named, and not knowing the man, modestly blushed, which he
perceiving, held way on with her amongst her fellow apprentises, and thus began
again. I see Coosen you know me not, and I do not greatly blame you, it is
so long since you came forth of the Country, but I am such a ones son,
naming her Uncle right, and his sons name, which she very well remembered, but
had not seen him in eleven years. Then taking forth a bowed groat, and an
old penny bowed, he gave it her as being sent from her Uncle and Aunt, whom
he termed to be his Father and Mother: Withal (quoth he) I have a Gammon of
bacon and a Cheese from my Uncle your Father, which are sent to your Master
and Mistress, which I received of the Carrier, because my Uncle enioynde me to
deliver them, when I must entreat your mistres, that at Whitsontide next she
will give you leave to come down into the Country. The Maid thinking simply
all he said was true, and as they so far from their parents, are not only
glad to hear of their welfare, but also rejoice to see any of their kindred:
so this poor Maid, well knowing her Uncle had a son so named as he called
himself, and thinking from a boy (as he was at her leaving the Country) he was
now grown such a proper handsome young man, was not a little joyful to see
him: beside, she seemed proud, that her kinsman was so neat a youth, and so
she held on questioning with him about her friends: he soothing each matter
so cunningly, as the maid was confidently persuaded of him. In this time, one
of the children stepped to her mother and said, Our Marget (mother) has a fine
coosen come out of the Country, and he has a Cheese for my Father and you:
whereon she looking back, said: Maid, is that your kinsman? yes forsooth
mistress quoth she, my Uncles son, whom I left a little one when I came
forth of the country.

The wilye Treacher, being master of his trade, would not let slip this
opportunity, but courteously stepping to the Mistress (who loving her maid
well, because indeed she had been a very good servant, and from her first
coming to London had dwelt with her, told her husband thereof) coined such a
smooth tale unto them both, fronting it with the Gammon of Bacon and the Cheese
sent from their maids Father, and hoping they would give her leave at
Whitsontide to visit the country, as they with very kind words entertained
him, inuiting him the next night to supper, when he promised to bring with him
the Gammon of Bacon and the Cheese. Then framing an excuse of certain business
in the town, for that time he took his leave of the Master and Mistress, and
his new Cosen Margaret, who gave many a look after him (poor wench) as he
went* ioying in her thoughts to have such a kinsman.

On the morrow he prepared a good Gammon of bacon, which he closed up in a
soiled linen cloth, and sewed an old card upon it, whereon he wrote a
superscription unto the Master of the Maid, and at what sign it was to be
delivered, and afterward scraped some of the letters half out, that it might
seem they had bin rubd out in the carriage. A good Cheese he prepared
likewise, with inscription accordingly on it, that it could not be discerned,
but that some unskillful writer in the country had done it, both by the gross
proportion of the letters, as also the bad ortographie which amongst plain
husbandmen is very common, in that they have no better instruction. So hiring
a Porter to carry them between five and six in the evening he comes to the
citizens house, and entering the shop, receives them of the Porter, whom the
honest meaning Citizen would have paid for his pains, but this his maids
newfound Cosen said he was satisfied already, and so straining courtesy
would not permit him: well, up are carried the Bacon and the Cheese, where God
knows, Margaret was not a little busy, to have al things fine and neat
against her Cosens coming up, her mistress likewise, (as one well affecting
her servant) had provided very good cheer, set all her plate on the Cubboorde
for show, and beautified the house with Cusheons, carpets, stools and other
devises of needle work, as at such times diverse will do, to have the better
report made of their credit amongst their servants friends in the Country,
albeit at this time (God wot) it turned to their own after-sorrowing. The
master of the house, to delay the time while Supper was ready, he likewise
shows this dissembler his shop, who seeing things fadge so pat to his purpose,
could question of this sort, and that well enough I warrant you, to discern the
best from the worst and their appointed places, purposing a further reach then
the honest Citizen dreamed of: and to be plain with ye, such was this
occupiers trade, as though I may not name it, yet thus much I dare utter, that
the worst thing he could carry away, was above twenty nobles, because he
dealt altogether in whole and great sale, which made this companion forge this
kindred and acquaintance, for an hundred pound or twain was the very least he
aimed at. At length the mistress sendes word supper is on the Table, where
upon up he conducts his guest, and after diverse welcomes, as also thanks for
the Cheese and Bacon: To the Table they sit, where let it suffice, he wanted
no ordinary good fare, wine and other knackes, beside much talk of the
Country, how much his friends were beholding for his Cosen Margaret, to whom
by her mistress leave he drank twice or thrice, and she poor soul doing
the like again to him with remembrance of her father and other kindred, which
he still smoothed very cunningly. Countenance of talk made them careless of the
time which slipped from the^ faster then they were aware of, nor did the
deceiuer hasten his departing, because he expected what indeed followed, which
was, that being past ten of the clock, and he feigning his lodging to be at
Saint Gyles in the field, was entreated both by the goodman and his wife to
take a bed there for that night, for fashion sake (though very glad of this
offer) he said he would not troble them, but giving the^ many thanks, would to
his lodging though it were further. But wonderful it was to see how earnest
the honest Citizen and his wife labored to persuade him, that was more willing
to stay then they could be to bid him, and what dissembled willingness of
departure he used on the other side, to cover the secret villainy intended.
Well, at the length with much ado, he is contented to stay, when Margaret and
her Mistress presently stirred so make ready his bed, which the more to the
honest man's hard hap, but all the better for this artificial Conny-catcher, was
in the same room where they supped, being commonly called their hall, and
there indeed stood a very fair bed, as in such sightly roumes it may easily
be thought, Citizens use not to have any thing mean or simple. The mistress,
least her guest should imagine she disturbed him, suffered all the plate to
stand still on the cupbord: and when she perceived his bed was warmed, and
every thing else according to her mind, she and her husband bidding him good
night: took themselves to their chamber, which was on the same floor but
inward, having another chamber between them and the hall, where the maids and
children had their lodging. So desiring him to call for any thing he wanted,
and charging Margaret to look it should be so, to bed are they gone: when the
Apprentises having brought up the keys of the street door, and left them in
their masters chamber as they were wont to do, after they had said prayers,
their evening exercise, to bed go they likewise, which was in a Garret backward
over their masters chamber. None are now up but poor Margaret and her
counterfeit coosen, who^ she loath to offend with long talk, because it waxed
late: after some few more speeches, about their parents and friends in the
country, she seeing him laid in bed, and all such things by him as she deemed
needful, with a low courtesy I warrant ye, commits him to his quiet, and so
went to bed to her fellows the maidseruants. Well did this hypocrite perceive
the keys of the doors carried into the good man's chamber, whereof he being not
a little glad, thought now they would imagine all things sure, and therefore
doutlesse sleep the sounder: as for the keys, he needed no help of them,
because such as he go never unprovided of instruments fitting their trade, and
so at this time was this notable trecher. In the dead time of the night when
sound sleep makes the ear unapt to hear the very least noise, he forsakes
his bed, and having gotten all the plate bound up together in his cloak, goes
down into the shop, where well remembering both the place and percels, makes up
his pack with some twenty pou^ds worth of goods more. Then settling to his
engine, he gets the door off the hindges, and being forth, lifts close to
again, and so departs, meeting with in a doozen paces, three or four of his
companions that lurked therabouts for the purpose. Their word for knowing each
other, as is said, was Quest, and this villains comfortable news to them, was
Twag, signifiyng he had sped: each takes a fleece for easier carriage, and so
away to Belbrow, which as I have heard is as they interpret it, the house of a
thief receiver, without which they can do nothing, and this house with an apt
porter to it, stands ready for them al hours of the night: too many such are
there in London, the masters whereof bear countenance of honest substantial
men, but all their living is gotten in this order, the end of such (though they
escape awhile) will be sailing westward in a Cart to Tiborn. Imagine these
villainies there in their iollitie, the one porting point by point his cunning
deceit, and the other (fitting his humor) extolling the deed with no mean
commendations. But returning to the honest Citizen, who finding in the morning
how deerly he paid for a gammon of bacon, and a cheese, and how his kind
courtesy was thus trecherouslye requited: blames the poor maid, as innocent
herein as himself, and imprisoning her, thinking so to regaine his own:
grief with ill cherishing there shortens her life: And thus ensues one hard
hap upon another, to the great grief both of master and mistress, when the
truth was known, that they so wronged their honest servant: how it may
forewarne others, I leave to your own opinions, that see what extraordinary
devises are now adays, to beguile the simple and honest liberal minded.

Of a notable knave, who for his cunning deceiving a gentleman of his purse:
scorned the name of a Conny-catcher, and would needs be termed a Foole-taker,
as master and beginner of that new found Art.
A Crew of these wicked companions, being one day met together in Paul's Church
(as that is a usual place of their assembly, both to determine on their drifts,
as also to speed of many a booty) seeing no likelihood of a good afternoon,
so they term it either forenoone or after, when ought is to be done: some
dispersed themselves to the plays, other to the bowling allies and not past
two or three stayed in the Church. Quoth on of them, I have vowed not to
depart, but something or other I Will have before I go: my mind gives me, that
this place yet will yield us all our suppers this night, the other holding
like opinion with him, there likewise walked up and down, looking when
occasion would serve for some Cash. At length they espied a Gentleman toward
the law entering in at the little North door, and a country Clyent going with
him in very hard talk, the Gentleman holding his gown open with his arms on
either side as very many do, gave sight of a fair purple velvet purse, which
was half put under his girdle: which I warrant you the resolute fellow that
would not depart without some thing, had quicklye espied. A game, quoth he to
his fellows, mark the stand, and so separating themselves walked aloof, the
Gentleman going to the nether step of the stairs that ascend up into the
Quire, and there he walked still with his client. Often this crew of mates met
together, and said there was no hope of nipping the bong because he held open
his gown so wide, and walked in such an open place. Base knaves, quoth the
frolic fellow, if I say I will have it, I must have it, though he that owes
it had sworn the contrary. Then looking aside, he spyed his trugge or queen
coming up the Church: away, quoth he to the other, go look you for some
other purchase, this wench and I are suffient for this. They go, he lessons
the drab in this sort, that she should to the Gentleman, whose name she very
well knew, in that she had help to coosen him once before, and pretending to
be sent to him from one he was well acquainted with for his council should
give him his see for avoiding suspicion, and so frame some wrong done her as
well enough she could: when her mate (taking occasion as it served) would
work the mean, she should strike, and so they both prevail. The queen
well inured with such courses, because she was one of ye most skilful in that
profession, walked up and down alone in the Gentleman's sight, that he might
discern she stayed to speak with him, and as he turned toward her, he saw
her take money out of her purse, whereby he gathered some benefit was toward
him: which made him the sooner dispatch his other clyent, when she stepping to
him, told such a tale of commendations from his very friend, that had sent her
to him as she said, that he entertained her very kindly, and giving him his
fee, whch before her face he put up into his purse, and thrust under his girdle
again: she proceeded to a very sound discourse, whereto he listened with no
little attention. The time serving fit for the fellows purpose, he came behind
the Gentleman, and as many times one friend will familiarly with another, clap
his hands over his eyes to make him guess who he is, so did this companion,
holding his hands fast over the Gentleman's eyes, said: who am I? twice or
thrice, in which time the drab had gotten the purse and put it up. The
Gentleman thinking it had been some merry friend of his, reckoned the names of
three or four, when letting him go, the crafty knave dissembling a bashful
shame of what he had don, said: By my troth sir I cry ye mercy, as I came in
at the Church door, I took ye for such a one (naming a man) a very friend of
mine, whom you very much resemble: I beseech ye be not angry, it was very
boldlye done of me, but in penance of my fault, so please ye to accept it, I
will bestow a gallon or two of wine on ye, and so labored him earnestly to go
with him to the tavern, still alleging his sorrow for mistaking him. The
Gentleman little suspecting how who am I had handled him, seeing how sorry he
was, and seeming to be a man of no such base condition: took all in good part,
saying: No harm sir, to take one for another, a fault wherein any man may
easily err, and so excusing the acceptance of his wine, because he was busy
there with a gentlewoman his friend: the trecher with courtesy departed, and
the drab (having what she would) shortning her tale, he desiring her to come
to his Chamber the next morning, went to the place where her copes-mate and she
met, and not long after, diverse other of the crew, who hearing in what manner
this act was performed, smiled a good thereat, that she had both got the
Gentleman's purse, her own money again, and his advise for just nothing. He
that had done this tall exploit, in a place so open in view, so hardly to be
come by, and on a man that made no mean esteem of his wit: bids his fellows
keep the worthles name of a Conny-catcher to themselves: for he hence-foorth
would be termed a Foole-taker, and such as could imitate this quaint example
of his, (which he would set down as an entrance into that art) should not
think scorn to become his scholars.

Night drawing on apace, the Gentleman returned home, not all this while missing
his purse, but being set at supper, his wife entreated a pint of Sack, which
he minding to send for: drew to his purse, and seeing it gone, what strange
looks (beside sighs) were between him and his wife. I leave to your
supposing, and blame them not: for as I have heard, there was seven pound in
gold, beside thirty shillings and od white money in the purse. But in the
midst of his grief, he remembered him that said, who am I? Wherewith he
brake forth into a great laughter, the cause whereof his wife being desirous
to know, he declared all that passed between him and the deceiuer, as also how
sone afterward the queen abreuiated her discourse and followed: so in troth
wife (quoth he) between who am I and the drab, my purse is gone: let his loss
teach others to look better to theirs.

An other Tale of a coosening companion, who would needs try his cunning in
this new invented art, and how by his knauerie (at one instant) he beguiled
half a dozen and more.
OF late time there has a certain base kind of trade been used, who though
diverse poor men, and doubtless honest, apply themselves only to relieve their
need: yet are there some notorious varlets do the same, being compacted with
such kind of people, as this present treatise manifests to the world, and
what with outward simplicity on the one side, and cunning close treachery on
the other, diverse honest Citizens and day-labouring men, that resort to such
places as I am to speak of, only for recreation as opportunity serves, have
been of late sundry times deceived of their purses. This trade, or rather
insufferable loytring quality, in singing of Ballets, and songs at the doors
of such houses where plays are used, as also in open markets and other places
of this City, where is most resort: which is nothing else but a sly fetch to
draw many together, who listening unto an harmless dittie, afterward walk
home to their houses with heavy hearts: from such as are hereof true
witnesses to their cost, do I deliver this example. A subtle fellow, belike
imboldned by acquaintance with the former deceit, or else being but a beginner
to practice the same, calling certain of his companions together, would try
whether he could attain to be master of his art or no, by taking a great many
of fools with one train: but let his intent and what else beside, remain to
abide the censure after the matter is heard, and come to Gracious street, where
this villainous pranke was performed. A roging mate, and such another with the^
were there got upon a stal singing of balets, which belike was some pretty toy,
for very many gathered about to hear it, and diverse buying, as their
affections served, drew to their purses, and paid the singers for them. The
sly mate and his fellows, who were dispersed among them that stood to hear
the songs well noted where every man that bought, put up his purse again, and
to such as would not buy, counterfeit warning was sundry times given by the
roge and his associate, to beware of the cutpurse, and look to their purses,
which made the^ often feel where their purses were, either in sleeue, hose, or
at girdle, to know whether they were safe or no. Thus the crafty copesmates
were acquainted with what they most desired, and as they were scatred by
shouldring, thrusting, feining to let fall something, and other wily tricks fit
for their purpose: here one lost his purse, there another had his pocket
picked, and to say all in brief, at one instant, upon the complaint of one or
two that saw their purses were gone, eight more in the same company, found
themselves in like predicament. Some angry, others sorrowful, and all greatly
discontented, looking about them, knew not who to suspect or challenge, in
that the villains themselves that had thus beguiled them, made show that they
had sustained like loss. But one angry fellow, more impacient then all the
rest, he falls upon the ballad singer, and beating him with his fists well
fauouredly, says, if he had not listened his singing, he had not lost his
purse, and therefore would not be otherwise persuaded, but that they two and
the cutpurses were compacted together. The rest that had lost their purses
likewise, and saw that so many complain together: they iump in opinion with
the other fellow, and begin to tug and hale the ballad singers when one after
one, the false knaves began to shrink away with the purses, by means of some
officer then being there present, the two Roges were had before a justice, and
upon his discreet examination made, it was found, that they and the cut-purses
were compacted together, and that by this unsuspected villainy, they had
deceived many. The ^^ne Foole-taker himself, with one or two more of that
company, was not long after apprehended: when I doubt not but they had their
reward answerable to their deserving: for I hear of their journey westward, but
not of their return: let this forewarne those that listen singing in the
streets.

Of a crafty mate, that brought two young men unto a Tavern, where departing
with a Cup, he left them to pay both for the wine and Cup.
A Friend of mine sent me this note, and assuring me the truth thereof, I
thought necessary to set it down amongst the rest: both for the honest
simplicity on the one side and most cunning knavery used on the other, and
thus it was. Two young men of familiar acquaintance, who delighted much in
music, because themselves therein were somewhat expert, as on the virginals,
bandora, lute and such like: were one evening at a common inn of this town (as
I have heard) where the one of them showed his skill on the virginals to the no
little contentment of the hearers. Now as diverse guests of the house came into
the room to listen, so among the rest entered an artificial Cony-catcher, who
as occasion served, in the time of ceasing between the several toies and
fancies he played: very much commended his cunning, quick hand, and such
qualities praiseworthy in such a professor. The time being come, when these
young men craved leave to depart, this politic varlet stepping to them,
desired that they would accept a quarte of Wine at his hand, which he would
most gladly bestow upon them: besides, if it liked him that played on the
Virginals to instruct, he would help him to so good a place, as happily might
advantage him for ever. These kind words, delivered with such honest outward
show, caused the young men, whose thoughts were free from any other opinion,
than to be as truly and plainly dealt withal as themselves* meant, accepted
his offer, because he that played on the Virginals was desirous to have some
good place of service: and hereupon to the Tavern they go, and being set, the
wily companion calls for two pintes of wine, a pint of white, and a pint of
claret, casting his cloak upon the table, and salling to his former
communication of preferring the young man. The wine is brought, and two cups
withal, as is the usual manner: when drinking to them of the one pint, they
pledge him, not unthankful for his gentleness. After some time spent in
talk, and as he perceived fit for his purpose, he takes the other cup, and
tastes the other pint of wine* wherewith he finding fault, that it drank
somewhat hard, said, that Rose Water and Sugar would do no harm: whereupon he
leaves his seat, saying he was well acquainted with one of the servants of the
house, of whom he could have two pennyworth of Rose Water for a penny, and so of
Sugar likewise, wherefore he would step to the bar unto him, so taking the
cup in his hand, he did: the young men never thinking on any such treachery
as ensued, in that he seemed an honest man, and beside left his cloak lying on
the table by them. No more returns the yonker with Rose Water and Sugar, but
stepping out of doors, unseen of any, goes away roundly with the cup. The
young men not a little wondering at his long tarrying, by the coming of the
servants to see what they wanted, who took no regard of his sudden departure,
find themselves there left, not only to pay for the wine, but for the Cup
also, being rashlye supposed by the master and his servants to be copartners
with the treacherous villain: but their honest behavior well known, as also
their simplicity too much abused, well witnessed their innocence:
notwithstanding they were feign to pay for the cup, as afterward they did,
having nothing toward their charge but a thread bare cloak not worth two
shillings. Take heed how you drink wine with any such companions.

Of an honest householder which was cunningly deceived by a subtle companion,
that came to hire a Chamber for his Master.
NOt far from Charing Cross dwells an honest young man, who being not long
since married, and having more rooms in his house than himself occupyeth,
either for term time, or the Court lying so near, as diverse do, to make a
reasonable commodity, and to ease house-rent, which (as the world goes now
is none of the cheapest) lets forth a chamber or two, according as it may
be spared. In an evening but a while since, came one in the manner of a Serving
man to this man and his wife, and he must needs have a Chamber for his
Master, offering so largely, as the bargain was soon concluded between
them. His intent was to have fingered some booty in the house, as by the
sequel it may be likeliest gathered: but be like no fit thing lying abroad,
or he better regarded then happily he would be, his expectation that way was
frustrate* yet as a resolute Conny-catcher indeed, that scorneth to attempt
without some success, and rather will pray upon small commoditye, then return
to his fellows disgraced with a lost labor: he summons his wits together, and
by a smooth tale ouer-reached both the man and his wife. He tells them, that his
Master was a captain late come from the Sea, and had costly apparel to bring
thither, which for more easy carriage, he entreats them lend him a sheet to
bind it up in, they suspecting no ill, because he required their boy should go
with him to help him carry the stuff, the good wife steps unto her Chest,
where her linen lay finely sweetened with Rose leaves and Lauender, and lends
him a very good sheet in deed.

This success made him bold to venture a little further, and then he tells
them, his master had a great deal of broken Sugar, and fine spices that lay
negligently abroad in his lodging as it was brought from the Ship, all which
he was assured his Master would bestow on them, so he could devise how to get
it brought thither.

These liberal promises, prevailing with them that lightly believed, and
withal were somewhat covetous of the Sugar and spices: The woman demanded if a
couple of pillow-beeres would not serve to bring the sugar and spices in? yes
marry (quoth he) so the Sugar may best be kept by it self, and the spices by
themselves. And (quoth he) because there are many crafty knaves abroad*
(greeuing that any should be craftier then himself) and in the evening the
linen might quickly be snatched from the boy: For the more safety, he would
carry the sheet and pillow-beeres himself, and within an hour or little more,
return with the boy again, because he would have all things ready before his
master came, who (as he said) was attending on the Council at the court. The
man and his wife crediting his smooth speeches, sends their boy with him, and
so along toward Iuie-bridge go they. The Conny-catcher seeing himself at free
liberty, that he had gotten a very good sheet, and two fine pillow-beeres:
steps to the wall, as though he would make water, bidding the boy go fair
and softly on before. The boy doubting nothing, did as he willed him, when
presently he stepped into some house hard by fit to entertain him: and never
since was he, his Master, the Sugar, spices, or the linen heard off. Many
have been in this manner deceived, as I hear, let this then give them warning
to beware of any such unprofitable guests.

Of one that came to buy a knife, and made first proof of his trade on him
that sold it.
ONe of the cunning Nippes about the town, came unto a poor Cutler to have a
Cuttle made according to his own mind, and not above three inches would he
have both the knife and the haft in length: yet of such pure metal, as
possibly may be. Albeit the poor man never made the like before, yet being
promised four times the value of his stuff and pains, he was contented to
do this, and the day being come that he should deliver it, the party came,
who liking it exceedingly, gave him the money promised, which the poor man
gladly put up into his purse, that hung at a button hole of his wascoate before
his breast, smiling that he was so well paid for so small a trifle: the party
perceiving his merry countenance, and imagining he gest for what purpose the
knife was, said, honest man, whereat smile you? By my troth sir (quoth the
Cutler) I smile at your knife, because I never made one so little before: and
were it not offensive unto you, I would request to know to what use you will
put it too? Will thou keep my counsel (quoth the Nip?) yea on mine honesty
(quoth the Cutler.) Then hearken in thy ear said the Nip, and so rounding with
him, cut the poor man's purse that houng at his bosom, he never feeling when he
did it: with this knife (quoth the Nippe) mean I to cut a purse, marry GOD
forbid (quoth the Cutler) I cannot think you to be such a kind of man, I see
you love to jest, and so they parted.

The poor man, not so wise as to remember his own purse, when by such a
warning he might have taken the offendour doing the deed, but rather proud
(as it were) that his money was so easily earned: walks to the Alehouse, which
was within a house or two of his own, and finding there three or four of his
neighbors with whom he began to jest very pleasantly: swears by cock and pie
he would spend a whole groat upon them, for he had gotten it and more,
clearly by a good bargain that morning.

Though it was no marvel to see him so liberal, because indeed he was a good
companion: yet they were loath to put him to such cost, nothwithstanding he
would needs do it, and so far as promise stretched, was presently filled in and
set upon the board. In the drinking time often he wished to meet with more such
customers as he had done that morning, and commended him for a very honest
Gentleman I warrant you. At length, when the reckoning was to be paid, he
draws to his purse, where finding nothing left but a piece of the string in
the button hole, I leave to your judgment, whether he was now as sorry as he
was merry before.

Blanck and all amort fits the poor Cutler, and with such a pitiful
countenance, as his neighbors did not a little admire his solemn alteration,
and desirous to know the cause thereof, from point to point he discourses the
whole manner of the tragedy, never naming his new customer, but with such a
far fetched sigh, as soul and body would have parted in sunder. And in midst
of all his grief, he brake forth into these terms. I Will believe a man the
better by his word while I know him, the knife was bought to cut a purse
indeed, and I thank him for it, he made the first proof of the edge with
me. The neighbors greeuing for his loss, yet smiling at his folly to be so
ouerreached, were feign to pay the groate the Cutler called in, because he had
no other money about him, and spent as much more beside to drive away his
heaviness.

This tale, because it was somewhat misreported before, upon talk had with the
poor Cutler himself, is set down now in true form and manner how it was
done, therefore is there no offense offered, when by better consideration, a
thing may be enlarged or amended, or at least the note be better confirmed. Let
the poor Cutlers mishap example others, that they brag not over hastily of
gain easily gotten, least they chance to pay as dearly for it, as he did.

Of a young Nip that cunningly beguiled an ancient professor of that trade, and
his queen with him, at a play.
A Good fellow that was newly entered into the nipping craft, and had not as
yet attained to any acquaintance with the chief and cunning masters of that
trade: In the Christmas holy days last, came to see a play at the Bull within
Bishops gate, there to take his benefit as time and place would permit him. Not
long had he stayed in the prease, but he had gotten a young man's purse out of
his pocket, which when he had, he stepped into the stable to take out the
money, and to convey away the purse. But looking on his commodity, he found
nothing therein but white counters, a thimble and a broken three pence, which
belike the fellow that ought it, had done of purpose to deceive the cutpurse
withal, or else had plaide at the Cards for counters, and so carried his
winnings about him till his next sitting to play. Somewhat displeased to be so
overtaken, he looked aside, and spied a lusty youth entering at the door, and
his drab with him: this fellow he had heard to be one of the finest Nippers
about the town, and ever carried his queen with him, for conueiance when the
stratagem was performed: he puts up the counters into the purse again, and
follows close to see some piece of their service. Among a company of seemly
men was this lusty companion and his minion gotten, where both they might best
behold the play, and work for advantage, and ever this young Nip was next to
him, to mark when he should attempt any exployte, standing as it were more
then half between the cunning Nip and his drab, only to learn some part of
their skill. In short time the deed was performed, but how, the young Nip could
not easily discern, only he felt him shift his hand toward his trug, to conney
the purse to her, but she being somewhat mindful of the play, because a
merriment was then on the stage, gave no regard: whereby thinking he had pulled
her by the coat, he twicht the young Nip by the cloak, who taking advantage of
this offer, put down his hand and received the purse of him: then counting it
discourtesie to let him loose al his labor, he softly plucked the queen by the
coat, which she feeling, and imagining it had been her companions hand:
received of him the first purse with the white counters in it. Then fearing
least his stay should hinder him, and seeing the other intended to have more
purses ere he departed: away goes the young Nip with the purse he got so
easily, wherein (as I have heard) was xxvii. shillings and odd money, which did
so much content him, as that he had beguiled so ancient a sta^der in that
profession: what the other thought when he found the purse, and could not guess
how he was coosened: I leave to your censures, only this makes me smile,
that one false knave can beguile another, which biddes honest men look the
better to their pursses.

How a Gentleman was craftily deceived of a Chain of Gold and his pursse, in
Paul's Church in London.
A Gentleman of the country, who (as I have herd since the time of his mishap,
whereof I am now to speak) had about half a year before buried his wife, and
belike thinking well of some other Gentlewoman, whom he meant to make account of
as his second choice: upon good hope or otherwise persuaded, he came up to
London to provide himself of such necessaries as the Country is not usually
stored withal. Besides, silks, veluets, cambrickes and such like, he bought a
Chain of Gold that cost him fifty and seven pounds and odd money, whereof
because he would have the maiden head or first wearing himself, he presently
put it on in the Goldsmiths shop, and so walked therewith about London, as his
occasions served. But let not the Gentleman be offended, who if this Book
come to his hands, can best avouch the truth of this discourse, if here by
the way I blame his rash pride, or simple credulity: for between the one and
other, the Chain he paid so dear for about ten of the clock in the morning,
the Cunny catchers the same day ere night shared amongst them, a matter whereat
he may well grieve, and I be sorry, in respect he is my very good friend: but
to the purpose. This Gentleman walking in Paul's, with his Chain fair
glittering about his neck, talking with his man about some business: was well
viewed and regarded by a crewe of Conny-catchers, whose teeth watered at his
goodly Chain, yet knew not how to come by it hanging as it did, and therefore
entered into secret conspiration among themselves, if they could not come by all
the Chain, yet how they might make it lighter by half a score pounds at the
least. Still had they their eyes on the honest Gentleman, who little doubted
any such treason intended against his so late bought bargain: and they having
laid their plot, each one to be assistant in this enterprise, saw when the
Gentleman dismissed his servant, to go about such affairs as he had appointed
him, himself still walking there up and down the middle Isle. One of these
mates, that stood most on his cunning in these exploytes, followed the serving
man forth of the Church calling him by diverse names, as John, Thomas, William,
etc. as though he had known his right name, but could not hit on it: which
whether he did or no I know not, but well I wot the serving man turned back
again, and seeing him that called him seemed a Gentleman, booted and cloaked
after the newest fashion, came with his hat in his hand to him, saying: Sir, do
ye call me? Marie do I my friend quoth the other, do not thou serve such a
Gentleman? and named one as himself pleased. No truly Sir, answered the
seruingman, I know not any such Gentleman as you speak of. By my troth replied
thr Conny-catcher, I am assured I knew thee and thy Master, though now I
cannot suddenly remember my self. The seruingman fearing no harm, yet fitting
the humor of this treacherous companion, told right his Masters name whom he
served, and that his Master was even then walking in Paul's. O Gods will (quoth
the Cony-catcher, repeating his masters name) a very honest Gentleman, of such
a place is he not? naming a shire of the Country: for he must know both name,
Country and sometimes what Gentlemen dwell near the party that is to be over
reached, ere he can proceed. No in deed Sir (answered the seruingman, with
such reverence as it had been to an honest Gentleman indeed) my Master is of
such a place, a mile from such a Town, and heard by such a knights house: by
which report the deceiuer was half instructed, because though he was ignorant
of the fellows Master, yet well he knew the Country, and the knight named. So
craving pardon that he had mistaken him, he returns again into the Church,
and the seruingman trudgeth about his assigned business. Being come to the rest
of the crew, he appointes one of them (whom he knew to be expert in deed) to
take this matter in hand, for him self might not do it, least the seruingman
should return and know him, he schooled the rest likewise what every man should
do when the pinch came, and changing his cloak with one of his fellows, walked
by himself attending the feate: and every one being as ready, the appointed
fellow makes his sally forth, and coming to the Gentleman, calling him by his
name, gives him the courtesy and embrace, likewise thanking him for good
cheer he had at his house, which he did with such seemly behavior and
protestation, as the Gentleman (thinking the other to be no less) used like
action of kindness to him. Now as Country Gentlemen have many visiters both
with near dwelling neighbors, and friends that journey from far, whom they
can hardly remember, but some principal one that serves as countenance to the
other: so he not discrediting the cunning mates words, who still at every
point alleged his kindred to the knight neighbor to the Gentleman, which the
poor serving man had (doubting no ill) revealed before, and that both there
and at his own house in hawking time with that knight and other Gentlemen of
the country he had liberally tasted his kindness: desiring pardon that he had
forgotten him, and offered him the courtesy of the city. The Conny-catcher
excused himself for that time, saying, at their next meeting he would bestow
it on him. Then seeming to have espied his chain, and commending the fairenes
and woorkemanship thereof: says, I pray ye sir take a little counsel of a
friend, it may be you will return thanks for it. I wonder quoth he, you dare
wear such a costly Jewel so open in sight, which is even but a bait to
entire bad men to adventure time and place for it, and no where sooner then in
this city, where (I may say to you) are such a number of Connycatchers,
Cossoners and such like, that a man can scarcely keep any thing from them,
they have so many reaches and sleights to beguile withal: which a very
especial friend of mine found too true not many days since. Heerevpon he
told a very solemn tale, of villainies and knaueries in his own profession,
whereby he reported his friend had lost a watch of gold: showing how closely his
friend wore it in his bosom, and how straungely it was gotten from him, that
the gentleman by that disc^urse waxed half afraid of his chain. And giving
him many thanks for his good warning, presently takes the Chain from about
his neck, and tying it up fast in a handkercher* put it up into his sleeue
saying. If the Conny-catcher get it here, let him not spare it. Not a little
did the tretcher smile in his sleeue, hearing the rash security, but in deed
simplicity of the Gentleman, and no sooner saw he it put up, but presently he
counted it sure his own, by the assistance of his accomplices, that lay in an
ambuscado for the purpose: with embraces and courtesies on either side, the
Conny-catcher departs, leaving the gentleman walking there still: whereat the
crewe were not a little offended, that he still kept in the Church, and would
not go abroad. Well, at length (belike remembering some business) the
Gentleman taking leave of an other that talked with him, hasted to go forth at
the furthest west door of Paul's, which he that had talked with him, and gave
him such counsel perceiving, hied out of the other door, and got to the
entrance ere he came forth, the rest following the gentleman at an inche. As
he was stepping out, the other stepped in, and let fall a key, having his hat so
low over his eyes, that he could not well discern his face, and stooping to
take up the keye, kept the Gentleman from going backward or forward, by reason
his leg was over the threshold. The foremost Conny-catcher behind, pretending
a quarrel unto him that stooped, rapping out an oath, and drawing his dagger,
said: Do I meet the villain? Nay, he shall not escape me now, and so made
offer to strike him.

The gentleman at his standing up, seeing it was he that gave him such good
counsel, and pretended himself his very friend, but never imagining this
train was made for him: stepped in his defense, when the other following tript
up his heels: so that he and his counselor were down together, and two
more upon them, striking with their daggers very eagerly, marry indeed the
gentleman had most of the blows, and both his handkercher with the chain, and
also his pu^sse with three and fifty shillings in it, were taken out of his
pocket in this struggling, even by the man that himself defended.

It was marvelous to behold, how not regarding the Villains words uttered
before in the Church, nor thinking upon the charge about him (which after he
had thus treacherouslye lost unwittingly): he stands pacifiyng them that were
not discontented, but only to beguile him. But they vowing that they would
presently go for their weapons, and so to the field, told the Gentleman he
labourd but in vain, for fight they must and would, and so going down by
Paul's Chain, left the gentleman made a Conny going up toward Fleetstreet,
sorry for his new Counselor and friend, and wishing him good luck in the
fight: which in deed was with nothing but wine pots, for joy of their late
gotten booty. Near to Saint Dunstones church the Gentleman remembered himself,
and feeling his pocket so light had suddenly more grief at his heart, then ever
happen to him or any man again. Back he comes to see if he could espy any
of them, but they were far inoughe from him: God send him better hap when he
goes next a wooing, and that this his loss may be a warning to others.

How a cunning knave got a Truncke well stuffed with linen and certain
parcels of plate out of a Citizens house, and how the Master of the house
help the deceiuer to carry away his own goods.
WIthin the City of London, dwells a worldly man, who has very great
dealing in his trade, and his shop very well frequented with customers: had
such a shrewd mischance of late by a Conny-catcher, as may well serve for an
example to others least they have the like. A cunning villain, that had long
time haunted this Citizens house, and gotten many a cheat which he carried
away safely: made it his custom when he wanted money, to help him self ever
where he had so often, diverse things he had which were never mist, especially
such as appertained to the Citizens trade, but when any were found wanting,
they could not devise which way they were gone, so pollitiquely this fellow
always behaved himself, well knew he what times of greatest business this
Citizen had in his trade, and when the shop is most stored with Chapmen: then
would he step up the stares (for there was and is another door to the house
besides that which enters into the shop) and what was next hand came ever
away with. One time above the rest, in an evening about Candlemas, when day
light shuts in about six of the clock, he watched to do some feate in the
house, and seeing the mistress go forth with her maid, the goodman and his
folks very busy in the shop: up the stairs he goes as he was wont to do,
and lifting up the latch of the hall portall door, saw no body near to
trouble him, when stepping into the next chamber, where the Citizen and his
wife usually lay, at the beds feet there stood a handsome truncke, wherein was
very good linen, a fair gilte Salt, two silver French bowls for Wine, two
silver drinking pots, a stone Judge covered with silver, and a doosen of silver
spoones. This truncke he brings to the stayres head, and making fast the
door, again, draws it down the steps so softlye as he could, for it was
so big and heavy, as he could not easily carry it, having it out at the
door, unseen of any neighbor or any body else, he stood struggling with it
to lift it up on the stall, which by reason of the weight trobled him very
much. The goodman coming forth of his shop, to bid a customer or two farewell,
made the fellow affraide he should now be taken for all together: but calling
his wits together to escape if he could, he stood gazing up at the sign
belonging to the house, as though he were desirous to know what sign it was:
which the Citizen perceiving, came to him and asked him what he sought for? I
look for the sign of the blew bell sir, quoth the fellow, where a gentleman
having taken a chamber for this term time, has sent me hither with this his
Troncke of apparel: quoth the Citizen I know no such sign in this street,
but in the next (naming it) there is such a one indeed, and there dwells one
that lets forth Chambers to Gentlemen. Truly sir quoth the fellow, that's
the house I should go to, I pray you sir lend me your hand, but to help the
Trunck on my back, for I thinking to ease me a while upon your stall, set it
short, and now I can hardly get it up again. The Citizen not knowing his
own Trunk, but indeed never thinking on any such notable deceit: helps him
up with the Trunk, and so sends him away roundly with his own goods. When the
Truncke was mist, I leave to your conceits what household grief there was on
all sides, especially the goodman himself, who remembering how he helped the
fellow up with a Trunk, perceived that hereby he had beguiled himself, and
lost more then in haste he should recover again. How this may admonish
others, I leave to the judgment of the indifferent opinion, that see when
honest meaning is so craftily beleagerd, as good foresight must be used to
prevent such dangers.

How a Broker was cunningly ouer-reached by as crafty a knave as himself, and
brought in danger of the Gallows.
IT has been used as a common byword, a crafty knave needs no Broker,
whereby it should appear that there can hardly be a craftier knave then a
Broker. Suspend your judgments till you have heard this Discourse ensuing, and
then as you please, censure both the one and the other.

A Lady of the Country sent up a servant whom she might well put in trust,
to provide her of a gown answerable to such directions as she had given him,
which was of good price, as may appear by the outside and lace, whereto
doubtless was every other thing agreeable: for the Tailor had seuenteen yards
of the best black satin could be got for money, and so much gold lace, beside
spangles, as valued thirteen pound, what else was beside I know not* but let
it suffice, thus much was lost* and therefore let us to the manner how.

The satin and the lace being brought to the Tailor that should make the
gown, and spread abroad on the shop board to be measured, certain good
fellows of the Conny-catching profession chanced to go by, who seeing so rich
lace, and so excellent good satin, began to commune with themselves how they
might make some purchase of what they had seen: and quickly it was to be done
or not at al. As ever in a crew of this quality, there is some one more
ingenious and politic then the rest, or at least wise that couets to make
himself more famous then the rest: so this instant was there one in this
company that did swear his cunning should deeply deceive him, but he would
have both the lace and satin, When having laid the plot with his companions,
how and which way their help might stand them in stead, this they proceeded.

Well noted they the seruing-man that stood in the shop with the Tailer, and
gathered by his diligent attendance, that he had some charge of he gown there
to be made, wherefore by him must they work their treachery intended, and use
him as an instrument to beguile himself. One of them sitting in a seat nere
unto the Tailers stall, could easily hear the talk that passed between the
seruing-man and the Tailor, where among other communication, it was concluded
that the gown should be made of the self same fashion (...) every point, as
another Ladies was who then lay in the city, and that measure being taken by
her, the same would fitly serve the Lady for whom the gown was to be made:
now the seruingman intended to go speak with the Lady, and upon a token
agreed between them (which he carelessly spoke so loud, that the Conny-catcher
heard it) he would as her leisure served, certify the Tailer, and he should
bring the stuff with him, to have the Ladies opinion both of the one and the
other.

The seruingman being gone about his affairs, the subtle mate that had
listened to all their talk, acquaints his fellows both with the determination
and token appointed for the Tailers coming to the Lady. The guide and leader
to all the rest for villainy, though there was no one but was better skilde in
such matters then honesty: he appoints that one of them should go to the
tavern, which was not far off, and laying two fagots on the fire in a room
by himself, and a quarte of wine filled for countenance of the treachery:
another of that crew should give attendance on him, as if he were his master,
being bare headed, and sir humbly answering at every word. To the tauern goes
this counterfeit gentleman, and his servant waiting on him, where every thing
was performed as is before rehearsed. When the master knave calling the drawer,
demanded if there dwelt near at hand a skillful Tailer, that could make a
suite of velvet for himself, marry it was to be done with very great speed.

The Drawer named the Tailer that we now speak of, and upon the drawers
commending his cunning, the man in all have was sent for to a gentleman, for
who^ he must make a suit of velvet forthwith. Upon talk had of the stuff,
how much was to be bought of every thing appertayning thereto: he must
immediately take measure of this counterfeit gentleman* because he knew not when
to return that way again, afterward they would go to the Mercers. As the
Tailer was taking measure on him bare headed, as if he had bin a substantial
gentleman indeed, the crafty mate had cunningly gotten his pursse out of his
pocket, at the one string whereof was fastened a little key, and at the other
his signet ring: This booty he was sure of all ready, whether he should get
any thing else or no of the mischief intended, stepping to the window he cuts
the ring from the pursse, and by his supposed man (rounding him in the ear)
sendes it to the plot-layer of this knauerie, minding to train the tailer
along with him, as it were to the mercers, while he the mean time took order
for the other matter. Afterward speaking alowde to his man, sirrah, quoth he,
dispatch what I bad you, and about four of the clock meet me in Paul's, by
that time I hope the tailer and I shall have dispacht. To Cheapside goes the
honest Tailer with this notorious dissembler, not missing his pursse for the
space of two hours after, in less then half which time the satin and gold
lace was gotten likewise by the other villain from the Taylers house in this
order.

Being sure the Tailor should be kept absent, he sends another mate home to
his house, who abused his servants with this devise: that the ladies man had
met their master abroad, and had him to the other Lady to take measure of her,
and least they should delay the time too long, he was sent for the satin and
lace, declaring the token appointed, and withal giving their masters signet
ring for better confirmation of his message, The servants could do no less
then deliver it, being commanded (as they supposed) by so credible testimony:
neither did the leasu^^ of any one serve to go with the the messenger, who
seemed an honest young Gentleman and carried no cause of distrust in his
countenance: wherefore they delivered him the lace and satin folded up
together as it was, and desired him to will their master to make some speed
home, both for cutting out of work, and other occasions.

To a Broker fit for their purpose, goes this deceiuer with the satin lace,
who knowing well they could not come honestly by it, nor any thing else he
bought of that crew, as often before he had dealt much with them: either gave
them not so much as they would have, or at least as they judged they could
have in another place, for which the ringleader of this coosnage, vowed in his
mind to be revenged on the Broker. The master knave who had spent two hours
and more in vain with the Tailer, and would not like of any velvet he saw,
when he perceived that he mist his purse, and could not devise how or where he
had lost it, showed himself very forrie for his mishap, and said in the
morning he would send the velvet home to his house, for he knew where to speed
of better then any he had seen in the shops. Home goes the Tailer very
sadly, where he was entertained with a greater mischance, for there was the
Ladies seruingman swearing and stamping, that he had not seen their master
since the morning they parted, neither had he sent for the satin and lace,
but when the servants justified their innocence, beguiled both with the true
token rehearsed, and their masters ring, it exceeds my cunning to set down
answerable words to this exceeding grief and amazement on their part, but
most of all the honest Tailer, who sped the better by the Brokers wilfulnes, as
afterward it happened, which made him the better brook the loss of his purse.
That night all means were used that could be, both to the Mercers, brokers,
goldsmiths, goldsiners, and such like, where happily such things do come to
be sold: but all was in vain, the only help came by the inuenter of this
villainy, who scant sleeping all night, in regard of the brokers extreme
gaining, both by him and those of his profession: the next morning he came to
the Tailers house, at what time he espied him with the Ladies seruingman,
coming forth of the doors, and into the tauern he went to report what a
mishap he had upon the sending for him thither the day before.

As he was but newly entered his sad discourse, in comes the party offended
with the broker, and having heard all (whereof none could make better report
than himself) he takes the tailer and seruing-man aside, and pretending great
grief for both their causes, demands what they would think him worthy of that
could help them to their good again. On condition to meet with such a friend,
offer was made of five pound, and after sundry speeches passing between them
alone, he seeming that he would work the recovery thereof by art, and they
promising not to disclose the man that did the^ good, he drew forth a little
book out of his bosom, whether it was latin or english it skilled not, for
he could not read a word on it, then desiring them to spare him alone a
while, they should perceive what he would do for them. Their hearts
encouraged with some good hope, kept all his words secret to themselves: and
not long had they sitten absent out of the room, but he called the^ in again,
and seeming as though he had been a scholar in deed, said he found by his
figure that a broker in such a place had their goods lost, and in such a place
of the house they should find it, bidding them go thither with all speed, and
as they found his words, so (with reserving to themselves how they came to
knowledge thereof) to meet him there again in the evening, and reward him as he
had deserved.

Away in have goes the Tailer and the seruing-man, and entering the house with
the Constable, found them in the place where he that reueald it, knew the
broker alwaie laid such gotten goods. Of their joy again, I leave you to
conjecture, and think you see the broker with a good pair of bolts on his
heels, ready to take his farewell of the world in a halter, when time shall
serve. The counterfeit cunning man, and artificial conny-catcher, as I heard,
was paid his five pounds that night. Thus one crafty knave beguiled another,
let each take heed of dealing with any such kind of people.

FINIS.

