THE BLESSED'ST BIRTH THAT ever was: OR, The Blessed Birth of our Lord and
Savior JESUS CHRIST. Preached at the Fleet, the 25. of December: A. Dom. 1627. By
HENRY GREENVVOOD Preacher of the Word of GOD.

ESAIAS 9. 6. To us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given. LONDON, Printed by
Elizabeth ^urslow for H. Bell and M. Bell. 1634.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Sir Henry Lello Knight, and Mr. James Ingram
Esquire, Wardens of his Majesty's Prison of the Fleet, be this fleet and
shallow Tractate commended.
RIGHT Worthy, and Worshipful, I (having received from you in my present
afflictions so great favors, such tender compassions, and knowing how base an
evil ingratitude is, that it is, inimica animae, dispersio virtutum etc.)
cannot but show my grateful heart, in presenting that to your worships eyes,
that lately has been sounded in your ears: a subject most comfortable, and
so necessary to be known, delighted in, and rested on, as without it no
salvation: for this is life eternal, to know God, and him whom God has sent,
the Lord Jesus.

The Lord (of his infinite mercy) give you the saving knowledge of Christ
Jesus, to embrace him as your chiefest Lord and King: for to so many as receive
him, gives he power, privilege, prerogative, to be called and be the sons of
God.

The Lord give you to know him in his
Person. Office. Power. Merit. Spirit.
In his Person
God. Man.
In his Office
King. Priest. Prophet.
In his Power
Mortifying corruptions. Sanctifying affections.
In his Merit
Redeeming to God by his blood the elect of God. Intitling by his
righteousness the elect to bliss.
In his Spirit
Discovering error. Conducting into all truth. Persuading by faith, confirming
by holiness salvation of your souls.


Blessed are you both, being so, ten thousand times happy are you, if you have
thus the Lord for your God.

All these (the very ground of all true comfort and happiness) are lively set
forth in this small present: therefore let me entreat you to peruse the same at
your best leasures.

Now the Lord make this and all other holy helps profitable and comfortable to
your own souls: that sanctity may be your portions in this life, and
salvation in the life to come, for Jesus Christ's sake,

Amen.
Your Worships for ever to be commanded in the LORD, HENRY GREENVVOOD.
From my house in Finsburyfields Ian^. 20. 1627.
THE BLESS ED'ST BIRTH THAT EVER WAS.
LVKE 2. 10, 11. Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy that shall be to
all people: that is, that unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a
Sa^iour, which is Christ the Lord.
THe Lord our God has only given us a Christ for our redemption and salvation,
but (blessed be his Majesty) he has also discovered him to the world by many:

1 By himself, Mat. 3. 17. This is Mat. 3. 17.
my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.

By John Baptist, Ioh. 1. 29. Behold John 1* 2^.
the Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world.

By a Dove, Ioh. 1. 33. Upon whom John 1. 33.
thou shall see the Spirit descending, and tarrying still upon him, that is he
that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost.

By a Star, Mat. 2. 9. And lo, Mat. 2. 9.
the star which they had seen in the East went before them, till it came and
stood over the house where the Babe was.

And here by his Angel he discouers him to the Jewish shepherds feeding their
flocks by night, and that in full and ample manner by two notable
circumstances; of the place where, of the time when, this blessed Babe was
borne: Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy that shall be to all
people: that is, that unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a
Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

Which words as they are couched in two verses, so will they afford two things
obseruable:

1 A merry message: Behold I bring, etc. 2 An admired cause: That unto you is
borne, etc.
This mirth is amplified by two
1. By the magnitude. 2. By the multitude.
1. By the magnitude of it: Great joy.

2. By the multitude of the sharers in it: That shall be to all people.

In which heavenly message I observe these three:

First, the messenger: and that is an Angel: Behold I bring you good tidings.

Secondly, the message; and that is, of great joy: Of great joy.

Thirdly, the extent; or the parties to whom this joy appertains: and that is
to all people: That shall be to all people.

Behold I bring you good tidings: behold I bring you good tidings of great joy:
behold I bring you good tidings of great joy, that shall be to all people.

But before I deal with this high and Heavenly Instrument, a word or two of
the word Behold.

Behold: It is a note of attention, six hundred times used in holy writ:
always placed before matters of great weight and moment; sometimes before
inutterable judgments, as Amos 8. 11. Behold I will send a famine among you etc.

Sometimes before inexpressible mercies: as Esaias 7. 14. Behold a Virgin shall
conceive, and bear a Son, and his Name shall be called Immanuel.

And here also in the words of my Text: Behold I bring you good tidings of
great joy, etc.

Hereupon Bernard calls it Notam stelliferam, a starry note: a note that does
point out some rare matter to be revealed, as the Star stood over the house,
and pointed to the Wife-men where the Babe was.

For the exposition of the word, do but compare Mat. 6. 26. with Luke 12. 24.
there the Lord has given it.

Saint Matthew speaking of the providence of God over the fowls of the air,
uses the word Behold: Behold the fowls of the Heavens, etc. Saint Luke
speaking of the selfsame subject, uses another word, the word, Consider;
Consider the Ravens: So that Behold, is as much as Consider, and seriously
perpend what God will have now delivered to your selves.

I; that is, an Angel, as it appears in the beginning of the Verse: I.
Then the Angel said unto them, Be not afraid, for behold I bring you good
tidings, etc.

Angel; it is as much as Messenger: it is Nomen officij, non naturae; a name
of office, not of nature: as you may read, Hebr. 1. 7. He makes the Hebr. 1.
^.
Spirits his Angels, or Messengers: The Spirits, there is their name of nature:
His Angels, or Messengers, there i^ their name of office.

These high and heavenly Instruments were Messengers sometimes of Gods frown,
sometimes of Gods favor.

First, of Gods frown: as was that Angel that slew of Senacherios Host, in
one night one hundred fourscore and five thousand.

And as were those Angels, that Genesis 19. 13
destroyed the City of Sodom.

Secondly, of Gods favor: as were those Angels that ministered to Christ in the
Wilderness: For the Angels came and ministered to him. Mat. 9. 11.


And as was that Angel that comforted Christ in the Garden: For an Angel came
from Heaven, and comforted Luk 22. 43
him.

And as was this Angel, that brings blessed news of the Birth of the Lord
Jesus: Behold, I bring you good tidings, etc.

The point of this part, office of Angels, is the last Verse of the first
Chapter to the Hebrews: Angels are ministering Spirits, sent forth to minister
for their sakes, that are and shall be heirs of salvation.

And this their office they have Obser.
most frequently performed, witness the forenamed places of Scripture, and
many other places also: As an Angel bade Eliah fly from Iezabei; and an
Angel here brings excellent news from Heaven of the Birth of a Savior:
Behold I bring, etc.

That Angels are present with us, it is plain by that of Saint Paul to the
Corinths: Let the women be covered, because of the Angels. The Angels behold
the behavior of man and woman in the Congregation, in the worship of God. If
therefore women should be shorn as man (to whom God has given the hotter and
stronger brain) it would be a confusion of Sexes, and a great displeasure to
the Angels.

Again, the office and presence of Angels is seen in this: A man takes his
Horse, and trauelleth him, his Horse falls upon him, no bone broken; how
comes this to pass? By the providence of God, in the watch of Angels.

This first shows the rare mercy of God to mortal and miserable sinners,
that he will vouchsafe such high and heavenly instruments to attend us in our
out goings and in commings, that we dash not our foot against a stone. Psalm.
91. 12


Lord, what is man that thus thou Psalm. 8. 4.
should regard him, or what is the best of the sons of men, that thus in
mercy thou should visit him?

Secondly, here note the prerogative of the children of God; though they be in
base esteem of ye reprobate worldlings, yet they are great in the favor of the
most high: yea the heavenly Angels are appointed of God their waiting men: as
for the wicked, it is not so with them, but the black guard of Hell dogs them,
here to sin, hereafter to sink them to perdition.

Thirdly, here is matter of consolation to the people of God: though man and
devil be against us, we need not be afraid: the Angels of God shall fight
our battles for us: as in Eighty Eight, and as Elisha told his servant, upon
the host of Angels perceived, Fear not, for there are 2 Kings.
more with us, than are or can be against us.

The second thing obserueable in 2
this merry message, is the message it self:

wherein I note
1. The matter: Joy. 2. The measure: Great.
Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy.

First Joy.

This Angel brings not a brandisht sword, as once against Adam: Genesis 3. 14.


This Angel brings not burning Genesis 19. 24
fire, as once against Sodom:

This Angel brings not consuming 2 Samuel 14. 16.
pestilence, as once against David:

This Angel brings not sudden death, as once against Herod: Act. 12. 23.


But this Angel brings tidings of joy, and of great joy that shall be to all
people.

Oh blessed day is Christ's Birthday; the blessedst day that ever came, a day of
glad tidings, a day of great joy that shall be to all people: O blessed be the
womb that bare this Babe, and the Paps that gave this Babe suck: for this
blessed Birth day of Christ Jesus, brings Joy and nothing but Joy to all people.

Pharaohs banqueting birthday Genesis 40.
yielded much sorrow, for then he hanged up his chief Baker.

Herod's banqueting birthday yielded Mat. 14. 6. 10.
much sorrow: for then he cut off John Baptists head.

Jeremy (though an holy man) cried Ier. 20. 14.
out of his birthday: Maledictus dies, etc. Cursed be the day wherein I was
borne, and let not the day of my birth be blessed.

Job (though a just man) cried out Job 3. 3. 6.
of his birthday: Pereat dies in quo natus sum, etc. Let the day perish
wherein I was borne, and let it not be joined to the days of the year.

But Christ's Birth* day brings joy, great joy, and nothing but joy to all
people.

And as joy in Christ's Birth is here by an Angel proclaimed, so let us know,
that we can have no peace with God, no joy in soul, no hope of Obser.
bliss, but in, through, and from this Lord Jesus.

Had not CHRIST come and assumed our nature, what should have become of us* oh
we had been all everlastingly condemned.

Let us therefore rejoice in the Use 1.
Lord always, again let us rejoice: let our souls magnify the Lord, let our
spirits rejoice in Christ our Savior: Let us keep this Feast with joy and
thanksgiving, lauding the Lord for his sweet Christ, not with revel rout,
gaming and profaneness, knowing that Christ came not to make us profane or
libertines, but to sanctify our natures and save our souls, that we should
serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life.

Again, if it be such joy to see Christ Use 2.
poor, needy, and lying in a cratch oh what joy shall it be to see him in
glory, triumphant in Heaven at the right hand of the Father? This joy who can
comprehend, this joy the Lord vouchsafe us all? when we shall bid these our
mortal corpse farewell

Secondly, as joy, so great joy does Christ's Birth afford: (...) you tidings of
great joy. H^^ (...) nato properanit gaudia tellus, coelestis risit seeds, and
gestijt orbis: Great joy: Joy in Heaven, joy on earth: joy to Angels, joy to
men: joy to Jew, joy to Gentile: joy to rich, joy to poor: Behold I bring you
tidings of great joy. Great joy
Quia caeteris praefuturum: Quia multos consolaturum. Quia perpetuo duraturum:
Great for the excellency: great for the universality: great for the
sempiternity: Behold I bring you tidings of great joy.

First, Great for the excellency.

So excellent is this joy, as it passes Phil. 4. 7.
all understanding.

So excellent is this joy, as it ravished Mat. 17.
Peter on the mount:

So excellent is this joy, as it even 2 Cor. ^.
filled Paul with consolation.

So excellent is this joy, as if it be perfected in us, I know not what it
should be but life everlasting: great therefore is this joy.

Secondly, Great for the universality.

It reaches to all times, past, present, and to come: to all people, Jews,
Grecians, Romans, French, English: to Moses in flags, to Joseph in Egypt, to
Daniel in Babylon, to Job in Huz, to Simeon in Jerusalem, to the Canaanite in
Sidon, to some in Rome under the Popes nose: for the Church of God dwells
where Reu. 2* 13.
the throne of Satan is: great therefore is this joy.

Thirdly, Great for the sempiternitie.

The joy of hypocrites and worldlings is short and momentanie: it droops in
adversity: and droops in death: as Job speaks: They rejoice Job*
in the sound of Organs and suddenly go down to Hell: But this joy is
permanent and lasting; it stands in adversity, and mounts to perfection in
death: This your joy no man John 16.
nor devil shall take from you: for as the world cannot give it, so the world
cannot take it away: great therefore is this joy; so great, as it cannot be
numbered, so precious, as it cannot be valued; so lasting, as it is everlasting.

Thus much for the Message.

The third thing obseruable is the Extent: That shall be to all people.

The Angel says not, That shall be 3
to many: as once an Angel said of John Baptist, Many shall rejoice at Luke 1.
14.
his birth: But* Omni populo, To all people: Jews, Gentiles of what condition
soever they be.

This happy report agrees with that sweet old Covenant: Benedicentur Genesis 22.
18
in ^emine tuo omnes gentes terra: id est, All nations shall be blessed in thy
seed: that is the Elect of all nations, both Jews and Gentiles.

For this particle (All) must not be taken for every Indiuidium, every person
of mankind: Non pro singulis generum, sed pro generibus singulorum: Not every
man, but for some of every kind, whether Jew or Gentile: for Christ was the
fall of many in Israel; and a tear Luke. 2. 34 Mat. 2. 3.
to many in Jerusalem: and to many of the Gentiles he became foolishness* 1
Cor. 1, 23
For though Christ be borne, and dead for all, yet all receive him not: John 1.
But as many as receive him, to them he gives power to be the sons of God.

That Saint-like Song of Heaven makes good this present point: Thou have
redeemed us to God by thy Revel. 5. 9
blood; Ex omni Tribu, Populo, Lingua, Natione; that is, Out of every Tribe,
People, Language, Nation. They do not say, Redemisti omnem Tribum, sed ex omni
aliquos; that is, Thou have redeemed every Tribe, but out of every Tribe and
Kindred some: For though Christ's death to save all be sufficient; yet is it
only to the faithful efficient.

This Nouerint vniuersi should Use*
comfort us Gentiles at the very heart, because we are not excluded the common
salvation by Jesus: For he is a Light to enlighten the Gentiles Luke 1.
of England, as well as once he was a glory to Israel.

Thus much concerning the extent of this Message.

Now follows the admired cause 2
of this proclaimed Joy; and that is, the blessed Birth of the Lord Jesus: Unto
you is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

Wherein I observe these five particulars:

1. The Person: a Savior, Christ the Lord. 2. His Birth: is borne. 3. The
parties for whom: unto you. 4. The time: this day. 5. The place: in the City
of David.
Unto you: Unto you is borne: Unto you is borne this day: Unto you is borne
this day in the City of David: Unto you is borne this day, in the City of
David, a Savior; which is Christ the Lord.

But of the words, as they lie in order.

Unto you: Vobis.

This Vobis, by way of exposition, will afford a fourfold observation.

1. Vobis, To you: that is, Vestrum singulis, To your particular persons.

Words of comfort indeed: For had the Angel reported the Birth of a Savior,
and not applied him to their particular consolations, it would have pleasured
them little: For, what if in general I know Christ is borne, if in particular
I find him not borne to me, alas what comfort have I?

Whence I note, that it is not a Obser.
general report of a Savior that makes us happy; but a particular applyance,
that makes us happy and blessed.

For as Luther says; Sweet is the name of Jesus, but the life of all lies in
those little pretty Pronounces, Meus, tuus, suus: when we can say, he is my
Jesus, thy Jesus, his Jesus, her Jesus. Worthily therefore does the Confession
of our Faith run in the singular number; with an, I believe in God; and, I
believe in Jesus Christ, etc.

The Lord then make the Birth Use.
of the Lord Jesus salutiferous to every particular soul of us; to me, to
thee, to every soul here present: Oh, that we could all say with Thomas; Thou
art my Lord, and Ioh. 20. 8.
my God.

2. Vobis, To you: that is, Vobis hominibus, To you men, not to the Angels
fallen.

We see then, that the Lord loved Obser.
man more than Angels fallen: He sent a Savior, in our nature, to help us;
but not in an Angelical, to help them: They are therefore damned, without
recovery.

Yea, we are more beholding to Christ, than the Angels that stand: for he gave
them but Confirmation, but to us both Redemption and Confirmation.

Nay, we are nearer to Christ than the Angels themselves; even as an arm of
flesh is nearer to man, than an arm of Gold: we are Christ's arms of flesh,
the Angels (though they be of a more excellent nature) are but as arms of Gold.

To you therefore especially Christ is borne.

3. Vobis, To you: that is, ad vestrum commodum, to your benefit and good:
Nobis natus, nobis passus Christus; Christ was borne to us, for us he suffered,
for us he fulfilled the Law; all that he did, he did for us: his tears are
ours, his cries and groans, ours; his stripes ours; his perfection, ours; all,
ours; he was not borne for himself, but for us: nay more, he had never been
borne, but for us; as in the Epistle to the Corinths: He is made of 1. Cor. ^.
30.
God to us wisdom, to us righteousness, to us sanctification, to us
redemption.

This should teach us all this notable Obser.
Lesson; to be for the good of others, and not all for our selves: He can be no
good Christian, that is no good Commonwealths man.

The Sun in the Heavens shines not to himself, but to the whole World: the
Candle on the Earth wastes it self for the good of others: So (if we be right
Professors) with the members of the body, let us be for the good of our
brethren.

Infaelix ille qui sibi soli natus: he is a base cullion that is borne for
himself alone: some are such miserable miscreants, as they only aim at their
own good: he that lives thus, is no better than if he were unborn; nay such
are rather a burden to the earth than a bliss: such make the creatures groan,
such make the poor man groan, yea Hell it self groans for such muck-wormes.

Imitate Christ Jesus then this good time, do good to the poor now and ever
to your powers; succor them, relieve them, help them: be you thus perfect,
as your Heavenly Father is perfect.

4. Vobis, to you: that is, vobis humilibus, pauperibus a mundo despectis
pastoribus: to you poor and despised shepherds, to you a Savior is borne.

Christ is not borne to the proud, Obser.
to the covetous, to the adulterous, to the profane: Christ is no Savior to
such kind of persons; but to those that are faithful, and fear the Mal. 4.
Lord.

Witness else that Scripture in Job: Where is wisdom to be found? Job 28.
the sea says not in me: the depth says not in me: the land of the luxurious
says not in me: Christ quaints not with proud Peacockes, covetous carles and
luxurious livers, but resides in the hearts of the humble. Even as water
forsakes the hill, and rests in the valley; so God gives grace to the humble,
and waters their souls with the dew of salvation: To you therefore a Savior
is borne.

Is borne. II.

An old prophecy here fulfilled: To Esaias 9. 6.
us a Child is borne, to us a Son is given.

Is borne: words full of admiration: words full of consolation.

Words full of admiration: Christ to be borne of a Virgin, without an earthly
father, a birth most admirable.

Three things especially reported

are miraculous,
Christ's Incarnation. Christ's Resurrection. A Christians Regeneration.
And as they are words full of admiration, Obser.
so they are full of consolation: for (if we be wise and learned Christians) we
must know, that the mercy of God could not save us unless in every respect his
justice were satisfied. Now that his justice might be satisfied, man offending,
true man must satisfy: in the same nature that God was wronged, in the same
nature must his Law be righted: And Christ satisfied in humane nature both the
command of the Law by his life, and the curse of the Law by his death.

Christ therefore of necessity must be borne of a woman, and must be like to
man in every thing, sin only excepted.

Now the proprieties of our humane

nature are three,
Essention: as Dimension, Circumscription, Termination* Accidental: as
Sanctification, Resurrection-Glorification. Natural: as Mortality,
infirmity, Iniquity.
All these were in Christ Jesus, only Use 1.
iniquity set aside.

All such Heretics are here refuted that deny the humane nature of Christ,
affirming his body to be a phantastike body: but for their pains, I will
allow them a phantastike salvation.

O miranda bonit as, o miranda humilitas Use 2.
Christi: Oh the wonderful humility of the Lord JESUS, that being eternal and
without beginning, would of a poor Virgin take flesh unto him, be borne and
have a beginning: Who being equal Phil. 2. 7.
with GOD, would take upon him the form of a servant, and be found in the
shape of a man: blessed be his goodness for this his love to man, for
evermore, Amen.

This day. III.

The Angel did not say, This night, though it was in the night, for the
shepherds were feeding their flocks by night, but this day: and the reason
was, quia laetam rem nunciabat, because he delivered joyful news.

He says this day,
Non pro qualitate temporis. Sed pro qualitate rei.
Not for the quality of the time, but for the quality of the thing.

So we find in the holy Scriptures, when heavy reports are mentioned, the
night is named: but when joyful tidings are told, the day: as Ambrose well
notes upon the 22. of Luke.

Peter's denial was in the night: Mark. 14.
But his confession was in the day.

The friendly coming to Abraham John 21.
of the Angels was in the day at Genesis 18.
noone: but their fearful coming to Sodom was at night, in the evening.
Genesis 19.


The four Lepers going in their famine to the tents Aramiticall (the Aramites
being gone, fearing Isreal's pursuit) finding meat, drink, and gold, and goodly
refreshing, called it a good day, though indeed it was night: This day (said
they) is a day 2 King. 7. 9
of good tidings.

That fool in the Gospel threatened with death, had the night, not the day,
accompanying his sorrows: Thou fool, this night shall thy soul Luke 12.
be taken from thee, etc.

So here, an Angel bringing sweet and joyful news (the day naturally being
cheerful, and the night fearful) uses the word Day, not Night: To you is
borne this day, etc. As it is in the Corinths also: Ecce 2 Cor. 6. ^
nunc dies salutis: Behold now the day of salvation.

Worthily called a day, because then the true light was come into the world,
and turned the night of all fear into the day of all joy and salvation.

In the City of David: which was IV.
Bethleem.
It is called the City of David for two respects,
1. for Distinction. 2. for demonstration.


1. For Distinction: there were two Bethleems, one in the Tribe of Zabulon,
Ios. 19. 15. one in the Tribe of Judah where David's father dwelt, and where
David himself was borne: So the Prophecy is fulfilled, Mich. 5. 2.
And thou Bethleem Ephratah, that art little among the thousands of Judah, out
of thee shall he come that shall rule in Israel.

2. For Demonstration: To show that he should come of the seed of Ioh. 7. 4. ^
David.

He was conceived and lived in Nazareth, but was borne in Bethleem David.

Bethleem signifies the house of Bread: the Bread of life is borne in the
house of Bread: not in a Palace there, but his house was a thorowfare, and his
bed a cratch. Luke. 2. 7.


This makes not only for the Jews refutation, that would not receive him,
though the Prophets thus rightly had pointed him out: but shows also both the
truth of all Prophecies concerning Christ, and the Lords faithfulness in their
performance.

A Savior which is Christ theLord. V

A Savior: Oh heavenly word, whose worth and comfort pass all expression.

A Savior: not a temporary, but Hos. 13. 4*
an everlasting Redeemer, and there is no Savior besides this Savior, as the
Prophet speaks.

Here is another sweet Prophecy fulfilled: Behold your God will come and save
you. Esaias. 35. ^.


He saues us from sins, guilt, and punishment; and that by his imputative
passions.

He saues us from sins regiment, and that by grace derived upon us: for out of
his fullness we receive grace John 1^
for grace.

And by his imputative holiness he presents us spotless, to life and glory
everlasting.

Christ: that is, Anointed:

For the work of our Redemption, Jesus was anointed into a triple Office; to
be a King, a type whereof was Solomon; to be a Prophet, a type whereof was
David; to be a Priest, a type whereof was Melchisedech: Melchisedech, not
Aaron: Aaron a Priest, but not a King; David a King, but not a Priest;
Melchisedech both King and Priest, therefore a notable type of Jesus.

Anointed to be a King; to rule his Elect, and protect them.

Anointed to be a Prophet; to teach his Elect, and direct them.

Anointed to be a Priest; to ransom his Elect, and redeem them.

If Christ be thy Christ as King: then the Devil reigns not in thee, but
Christ:

If Christ be thy Christ as Prophet: then his Word, not thy will, is the rule
and square of all thine actions:

If Christ be thy Christ as Priest: then thine affections are slain concerning
sin, and thy whole man sacrificed to God.

Our Lord. Lord, a name of power, giving to God his essence and being, showing
that the Lord has his being from none, but from himself alone, as all things
else have their beings from him: for in him we live, and move, and have our
being. Acts:


Here is his Deity described: and here is another sweet prophecy fulfilled;
Behold, a Virgin shall conceive Esaias 7. 14*
and bear a Son, and his Name shall be called Immanuel, that is, God with
us.

God with man conjoined. A necessary and as happy a conjunction.

Our blessed Savior must not only be Man, but also God, and that for two
causes.

1. To overcome and deliver his humanity from death and misery.

2. To dignity and make meritorious whatsoever act done in his humanity for
the salvation of his Elect.

This title of dignity is given our Savior by David: The Lord said to my Lord,
sit thou at my right hand Psalm. 110. 1
until I make thine enemies thy footstool.

And by Thomas: Thou art my Lord Ioh 20. 28.
and my God.

Christ is our Lord by
Power: Purchase.
He has bought us with his own blood; and therefore called Dominus Deus,
Dominus Electorum: The Lord of the Elect.

A comfort and honor to all true Use 1.
Christians, that we have so able, so omnipotent a Savior: Against those vile
Heretics, that mock us for making account of salvation by a crucified man.

If he be our Lord, where is then Use 2.
his fear? Mal. 1. 6.

Many would have him their Jesus, but few will endure him their Lord.

The Lord give us to follow him in piety, in patience, in grace, in cross:
that so we may be admitted to follow him in joy and glory everlasting.

Now this Jesus, this Christ, this Lord, knocks at the door of our hearts,
let us not shut him out with the Bethleemites, nor bid him pack out of our
country with the Gadarens: but be ye open ye everlasting doors, that this
King of glory may come in: that you having admitted his heavenly counsels into
your consciences in this life, he may one day intertaine you all into his
Fathers mansions of glory hereafter: and that for the alone merits of the same
our Lord Jesus: to whom with the Father and Holy Spirit be returned all Glory
and Power, Praise and Dominion, this day and for evermore

Amen.
A PRAYER for a blessing upon this Sermon.
MOST holy and heavenly LORD GOD, for as much as thou have taught us from thy
holy and heavenly Word that Paul may plant, Apollos water, yet all in vain,
unless thy grace be annexed thereunto: good Lord therefore we most humbly
beseech thee in the Lord Jesus, to bless this portion of thy holy Word to
every soul of us, making it the savor of life to salvation to every of us,
and to none of us the savor of death to damnation: now if we reverence thy
Word, delight in thy Word, and make it the rule and square of all our actions,
then it is the savor of life to heaven; but if we remain in wilful ignorance*
notwithstanding thy Word, if we prefer the corrupt counsels of our vain
hearts above the sacred commands of thy Word, then is it the witness of death
to damnation: therefore we beseech thee give us thy grace* that we may follow
not our own ways, or our own wills, for the end of this way will be death;
but grant that we may follow the motions of thy blessed Spirit, and the
doctrines of thy holy Word from this time forth for evermore into all truth.

O Lord God, we most heartily bless thy heavenly Name, for that thou have
appointed thine holy and heavenly Angels to guard us, safeguard us, attend us,
defend us, from the malice and mischief of men and devils: especially (O God of
all goodness) we thank thee for the gift of the Lord Jesus, the only hope and
help of our salvation; had not Christ Jesus assumed ou mature, and satisfied
for us thy Justice, we had all been everlastingly condemned: ten thousand
times blessed be thy holy name, for that thou have thus visited and redeemed
thy people.

Now (good Father) seeing none are saved by the Lord Jesus, but such as believe
on his Name, and walk after his Spirit: we pray thee then, give us grace to
embrace him with the arms of our souls, that we may receive out of his
fullness grace for grace: for to so many as thus receive him, gives he power,
privilege, prerogative to be called, and to be thy sons, O God.

And as we are thus hopefully and happily redeemed by the blood of Christ
Jesus, so grant, we may consider the end of this our redemption, which is to
serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives.

As we are called and professed Christians, so grant we may evermore walk
worthy of this glorious Name and title: Lord make us careful to imitate this
immaculate Lamb, in whom was found no guile: that we may follow him in
innocence, piety, humility, patience, obedience, temperance, love: that it may
be our greatest glory, our nearest resemblance of him, that we following him in
holiness in this life, may be admitted to follow him in everlasting happiness
in the world to come.

The mark (most gracious Lord God) of the sheep of Christ is to follow
Christ, making the holy life and doctrine of the Lord Jesus, the only pattern
of all our actions: therefore keep us (holy Father) from profanenes, pride,
worldlines, drunkenness, fornication, and all manner of ungodliness: though we
be in the world, yet grant we may not be of the world, but let our thoughts,
words, actions, evermore be holy and heavenly.

Thus (good Lord) give us thy might of grace against sin, that Satan may not
deceive us, nor corruption besmeere us, but beautify us with the graces of thy
holy Spirit, that thy name and Gospel may be honored, many things among us by
our holy examples converted, the mouths of the wicked stopped, and in the end
the souls and bodies of us all everlastingly saved, and that for the alone
merits of thy dear Son, our blessed Savior and Redeemer Jesus Christ, blessed
for ever. To whom with thee (holy Father) and thine al-glorious Spirit, be all
glory and thanksgiving ascribed and returned heartily and thoroughly now and for
ever more. Amen.

FINIS.

