ARTICLES accorded for the Truce general in France.

Faithfully translated out of the French Copy: Printed by Frederick Morel:
Ordinarye Printer to the King.

I W
printer's device of John Wolf

Printed by John Wolf for Andrew White, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Gunne, at the little North door of Paul's. 1593.

ARTICLES ACCORDED FOR THE Truce General. Faithfully translated out of the
French Copy: Printed by Frederick Morel: ordynary Printer to the King.
THat there shall be good and loial Truce and ceasing from Arms general: by all
the realm, cuntry, lands and Signeuries of the same: and of the protection of
the crown of France: for the time and space of three months to come: vz. in
the Isle of France the day of the publication which shall be made of it at S.
Dennis: in the same day and from the day after these present articles shall be
stayed and signed: In the gouernementes of Champaigne, Picardie, Normandy,
Chartres, Orleans and Berry, Touraine Aniou and le Maine eight days after the
date of the same: In the gouernements of Bretaigne, Poictou, Angomois,
Xaincttoge, Lymosin, high and low march, Burbonois Auuergne, Lyonnois and
Bourgongne, 15. days after: in the gouernements of Guyenne Languedoc,
Prouence, and Dauphinne 20. days after the conclusion of the said present
treaty and yet notwithstanding shall end every where at like day.

II All persons Ecclesiastical, nobility, inhabitants of towns of the
plain cuntry and others, may duringe this present truce gather their fruits
and revenues, and enjoy them in what part soever they are situate and being:
and shall reenter into their howses, and castles of the feeldes and those which
with hold them shall be bound to restore them and leave them free from all
hindrances: upon the charge nevertheless that they may not there make any
fortification, duringe the said truce: and here are excepted the howses, and
castles: where garrisones are employed in the estate of the war, which shall
not be restored: nevertheless the Proprietares shall enjoy the fruits and
revenues which belong to them: the whole notwithstood the guiftes and seysures
which should have been made, the which may not impeach the effect of the
present accord.

III. It shall be lawful to all persons, of what quality or condition soever
they be, to stay freely in their own howses which they hold at this present
with their families, except in the towns and strong places which are guarded in
with those which are absent from them by occasion of the present troubles shall
not be received to stay there without leave of the governor.

IIII. The labourees may in all freedom do their labors and accustomed
works without hinderance or molestation in what manner soever: upon pain of
death to them which shall do the contrary.

V. The Carriage and conuayence of all sort of vituals, and the commerce and
traffic of all merchandices: except arms and munitions of war shall be free
as well by water as land in the towns of the one party and the other: in
payenge the peages and impositions as they rise at this time in the Tole houses
which for the same effect are established and following Pancartes and tables
hereupon before stayed: except in regard of Parts: which shall be paid according
the particular treaty of the same: the whole upon pain of confiscation in
case of fraud: and without that those which shall find them shall be hindered
to bring back the merchandise and horses which shall conduct them unto the
Tolehouses where they shall have so offended: And where violence shall be used
against such, there Justice shall be excecuted as well of the confiscation as of
the excess, by those which shall have commandment over the persons which
shall have committed it: and yet nevertheless the said merchandyses, horses,
victuals nor those which shall conduct may not be stayed within the Balieue of
Paris, although they have not accquitted the said Impositions. But upon the
complaynte and pursuit, right shall be done to whom it appertains.

VI. The said impositions or any other new erected during the said truce may
not be augmented, nor any other Tolehouse erected but those which are alredye
established.

VII. Every man may freelye travel thorough all the Realm without constraint
of taking pasporte: And yet nevertheless no man may enter into Towns or
strong places of the contrary part^ without other arms then the footeman
with his sword and the horseman with his sword, Pistolle, or Harquebuse: and
that not without sending before to advertise those which shall have
commandment there: the which shall be enjoined to give permission of their
entrance, if it be not that the quality and number of persons should give just
cause of jealousy: of the scarcety of the place where they shall command, the
which is remittted to their judgment and discretion. And if any of the
contrary part were entered into any of the said places without being declared
such, and to have the said permission: They shall be lawful Prise. And to
prevent further disputes that might be inferred upon this point, those which
command in the said places according to the said permission, shall be bound to
give it in writing without any defray.

VIII. The money of Taxses and Assesments shall be levied as they have been
heretofore according to the departments made, and commissions sent from one
part to another at the beginning of the year: except in regard of the places
taken since the sending of the said conditions in which ye Governors and
Officers of such places shall accord particularly, and without prejudice
likewise of other particular accordes and treaties already made for leauy of
the said Taxes and Assesments which shall be entertained and observed.

IX. Yet notwithstanding such may not be leauyed by anticipation of the
quarters, but only the quarter running on, and that by Officers of the
Election: the which in case resistaunce be made shall have recourse to the
Governor of the next town of their side to be assisted of forces: and yet
nevertheless shall not for this cause be exacted for the defray but after the
rate of one shilling in the pound for the Sums for which the constraintes
shall be made.

X As touching the Arrerages of Taxes and Assesments there shall be none
leuyed of either part, further then the said quarter, running on and during the
time of the same. if it be not an other quarter which is due above the already
passed.

XI. These which at this time be Prisoners of the war and have not compounded
for their Ransom shall be delivered xv. days after the publication of the
said Truce viz. the common Soldier without ransom, the other men of war
having pay of either side procuring one quarter of their pay: except the
Leaders and chief of Horsemen the which together with other Gentlemen not
bearing charge, shall be acquitted for the half years worth of their
Reuenewe: and also other persons shall be used as touchig their ransom as
cuteouslye as may be respecting their faculties and calling: And if there be
either Woman or Maid Prisoner they shall be presently set at liberty without
paying Ransom, and also Children under the age of sixteen and from sixty
upward not bearing Arms.

XII. That there shall not be during the time of the said Truce any enterprise
or attempt upon any place of either part, nor any other Act of Hostility:
And if any one should in this point, the chief and Governors shall see
amends made or punish the Offenders as troublers of public quiet: yet so
that nevertheless the said punishments may not be cause of breach to the
said League.

XIII. If any shall refuse to obey the contents of the said Articles: the
chief of that party shall do all his endeavor and use what means possibly
he may to constrayne such thereunto: And where within fifteen days after the
requisition which shall be made, execution should immediately follow: it shall
be lawful for the chief of the other party to make war on him or them
which so should refuse to do instice, without any assistaunce of his own,
partly in any kind howsoever.

XIIII. It shall not be lawful to take of new any places during the present
Truce to fortefie them, notwithstanding they were not held of any body.

XV. All men of war of either side shall be put in garrison not being
permitted to range and forage the cuntry to the harm of the people ane ruins
of the plain cuntry.

XVI. The Prouostes of the marshals shall perform their charges, on al prays
in the fields or cuntry, and punishing wrongs without destruction of parties,
upon pain of sendinge them to the Judges to whom the knowledge thereof ought
to belong.

XVII. It shall not be lawful to pick quarrelles anew by assembling any
friends for differences happened by reason of these present troubles be it for
taking of any person, house, castelles or other occasion whatsoever during the
time of this truce.

XVIII. The governors and lieutenantes general of both sides shall assemble
themselves in every province presently upon publication of the present trety
where they shall depute commissaries of their part to see unto what soever
shall be necessary for the excecution thereof for the profit and good of such as
they have under them, and where it shall be thought good and necessary to ad any
thing more, to correct or deminish any thing for the particular good of the
said province they shall advertise their cheefes or governors to provide
accordingly.

XIX. These present Articles are accorded without intention of prejudice to the
accordes and particular agreements made between the governors and lieftenants
general of the provinces which have been confermed and approved by the chief
of both parties.

XX. No enterprises shall be made duringe the present Truce by one or other
side upon the Countries, goods and Subjects of ye Princes which have assisted
the^: as again the said Princes shall not on their part enterprise any thing
against this Realm and Country being in the Protection of the Crown of
France. But the said Princes shall retire out of them presently (upon the
conclusion of this present treaty) their forces which are in the Field and
shall not make any re-enter of them during the said time: And as touching
those which are in Britain they shall be sent back or separated, and put in
garrison in such places as may not give matter of suspect, and as for other
Provinces or places where there be strangers in Garrison, the number of the
said strangers being in pay of the said Princes it may not be augmented during
the time of the said Truce: the which the Chief of both parties promise
respectively for the said Princes, and thereunto bind their faith and honor:
And yet notwithstanding the said promise may not extend to the Duke of Sauoye:
but if he will be comprisd in the same tretye sending his declaration within
one monthhe then shall be resolved to the common good of both parties.

XXI. The Ambassadors Agents and leggers of foraine Princes which have assisted
either party, having pasporte from the chief of the said party which they
have assisted may freely return and in all surety without having need of any
other pasporte then this present treaty: So nevertheless that they shall not
enter into any town or strong place of the adverse part but with license of
the governors,

XXII. That on either side pasportes shall be given to such as respectively
shall be sent to bear the said Treaty into every of the said provinces where
it shall be requisite.

Made and accord in the little town between Paris and S. Denis the last day
of July 1593. by sound of the trompet and proclamation in places accustomed.
And is signed in the original: Henry and Charles de Lorrayne and Below: Ruse
and Baudouin.

FINIS.

