A DECLARATION OF HENRY MARC DE Gouffier Marquise of Boniuet, Lord of
Creuecoeur, etc.

Made in the Consistory of Rochell, in the presence of the Pastors and Elders
of the said Town; as also of Monsieur de la VIOLETTE and THEVENOT, Pastors of
the Churches of Marans and Benet, on Wednesday being the third of August, 1616.
The which very same protestation likewise has been made by the said Lord
Marquise in the presence of the whole Church of ROCHEL, on Sunday being the
seventh of the said month, after the morning Sermon in the great Church.

At ROCHELL, Printed for H. HAVLTIN, by CORNELIS HERTMAN. 1616.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter, dwelling near S.
Austens gate, at the sign of the Pide-Bull. 1616.

The French Printer to the Reader.
BEcause that otherwise this page had been left empty, I have thought good to
set in it the Epitaph of the late Lord of BONIVET, Admitall of France, as I
have found it in Du-Bellay.

LA France and le Piemont, and les Cieux, and les arts,
Les Solduts, and le Monde ont faict comme six parts
De ce grand Boniuet: Car vne si grand chose
Dedans un seul tombeau ne po^uoit estre enclose.
La France en a le corpse qu'elle auoit es^ene,
Le Piemont a le coeur qu'il auoit espro^^e,
Les Cieux en out l'esprit, and les Arts la memoire,
Les Soldats le regret, and le Monde la Gloire.
The English whereof is the very same which we find to be the Epitaph made
upon the death of our Countryman the noble and thrice-worthy Knight Sir Philip
Sidney: and therefore I have thought good to leave it as it was (mutatis
mutandis) the names only altered.

FRANCE and PIEMONT, the Heavens, and the Arts,
The Soldiers, and the World, have made six parts
Of noble BONIVET, for none will suppose
That a small heap of stones can BONIVET enclose.
His body FRANCE has had, for she it fed;
And PIEMONT his blood in her defense shed:
The Heavens have his soul, the Arts have his fame,
All Soldiers the grief, the World his good name.
THE TRANSLATOR to the READER.
COurteous Reader, I have made bold after this former Treatise yet a while to
trouble (or rather to delight) you with this ensuing shorter, yet no less
zealous, discourse. The neerenesse of both their arguments may in some sort
challenge a neerenesse of place, and I hope shall obtain at your hands a like
acceptance. I will say no more: only give me leave to add this observation
of Gods continual watchfulness over his Church. We have seen of late what
troubles, what broiles, what fears of a general deuastation have been (and
it is to be feared are scarce yet ended) in that our neighbor Country. Many
small Treatises and Pamphlets (that were daily thronged as it were to the
Press) do give hereof a sufficient testimony: so that we might in a manner
say (as it is in the first chapter of Job Job 1.
often repeated) Whiles he was yet speaking, another came, and said, etc.
While one book of bad news was yet a printing, another came and brought us
worse news. Whilst the matters of their Commonwealth stand thus, see how God
on the other side prouides for his Church, and daily adds to it such as shall
be saved. Not many Act. 2. 47.
months since we have heard of the happy conversion of the Duke de Candale,
one of the Peers of France, and with him of a many likewise that were of his
retinue. This news was scarce down, but behold this other Treatise coming
forth, declaring the conversion of a Gentleman, though not equal to the former
in birth, yet (if we may believe the Romanists) as far above him in
regeneration, as they esteem a spiritual vocation to exceed the temporal.
And whiles he was yet speaking, another came, I mean, whilst this book (at
least the translation thereof) was yet in the Press, another came, namely this
present Declaration of Marquise Boniuet, etc. So that we have cause still to
bless God for his goodness, who though (with those builders in Nehemiah) he
has for a while had his sword girded Neh. 4. 18.
on his loins, for to strike by way of punishment his people, yet at the same
time he kept in the other hand the hammer and chizell for to square and fit
these living stones to the building of his spiritual Temple. But what do I? I
must conclude, lest mine observation should prove to be longer then the text it
self. In the mean time accept of that which is done for you, and be
thankful to God for that which he has done for his Church: and in particular
cease not to pray continually for the peace of the distressed Jerusalem which
he has in France. Farewell. London, this last of August, 1616.

Yours, E. M.

A DECLARATION OF HENRY MARC DE GOVFFIER, Marquise of Boniuet, Lord of
Creuecoeur, etc.
IF so be that piety and the knowledge of God were things hereditarie, and of
that nature that they could descend from the parents to the children, as well
as do the goods and possessions of this world; then should not I need at this
time to declare what I am, what is my belief, and what God has put into me:
for my baptism, mine education and bringing up would testify it; I having
been descended from such persons, whereof some have had the feeling of Gods
truth within them, and others the very confidence of professing it openly. But
the public calamities, which for so many years have afflicted this estate,
have brought to me in particular for my part this loss, (more to be lamented
then any other) that I could never have a taste of that good affection which
parents are wont to bear toward their children; and that those, from whose
care I might have looked for a faithful instruction in matters of salvation,
having been taken out of the miseries of this world, as soon almost as I came
unto it, there was left unto me no other light then for the body, and my soul
still continued in darkness and the shadow of death, and that in such manner,
that accordingly as I grew in age, so I daily proceeded in error, and straying
from Jesus Christ and his Gospel, I strayed likewise from mine own
happiness, and had been likely miserably to continue in that lamentable and
deplorable estate even unto this day, and so forwards, if God, who knows who
are his, and whose names he has written in his book of life, had not had
pity of me: and if the goodness of him, who shows mercy to whom he
shows mercy, had not prevented me, and formally opposed it self to the
mischief which was pleasing unto me, and to that curse, which being to me the
greatest of all, yet above all others was hugged and liked of by my soul. And
if the kindness of God toward me has been eminent in regard of the thing
it self, in that he has vouchsafed to deliver me from the power of darkness,
for to translate me to the kingdom of his well-beloued son; the means also
which it has pleased him to use for to bring to pass this happy effect, are
no less worth the considering, in that God of the means of my total
perdition (atleast as they might seem likely to be) has made as many means
of my conversion to him, according as he is wont to draw sweetness out of
bitter things for his children, and generally to make all things to turn to
the Romans 8.
best for those who are called according to his determined purpose.

It is now twelve years ago when I was at Rome: (I will say no more) there
mine eyes saw wonders, but such as were quite of another nature then those
which heretofore the Apostles (being directed and animated by the holy Spirit)
brought forth for to authorize and confirm the doctrine of grace. And how
carefully and industriously soever I was nurtured in ignorance, and brought up
in the hatred of the Religion, and the love of Idolatry, yet I could never be
hindered from perceiving that there was a great disproportion between the state
of those, who at this day do domineere over the Church, and the condition of
them, who formerly did feed the flock of Christ that was committed unto them.
Yet that was scarce any more, then if I should have beheld the darkness of the
night, without being able to discern the brightness of the day: or if I did
begin to take notice, it was in that manner as men begin to see at the
break of day. That beginning, how small soever it was then, did not continue
unprofitable: the rising of the Sun drew nigh, the light increased, and was
strengthened in mine understanding; the abuses of Popery appeared unto me both
grosser and more; God left not in me his work imperfect, he did put me in
mind of inquiring a little further, and to be informed truly by himself in
his own word, whether of the two Religions that are received in this Kingdom
might have the upper hand in regard of the truth, or had more conformity unto
this word. This inquiry did make me to resolve about some three years since,
to forsake the service which I find condemned in the Scripture, and to embrace
that which I find therein commanded, and to come forthwith out of Babylon, for
fear that partaking longer of her known crimes, I should bring my self into
a manifest danger of partaking of her unknown plagues. Whilst I had this
resolution, which came to me from God, behold on the contrary many
considerations, which came from elsewhere: on the one side were presented to
mine eyes the luster, the pomp, the dignities, the greatness, the hopes of
the earth, and with all this ostentation of the glories of the world, as it
were a certain voice well-neere like to that which said sometimes to our Lord,
I will give thee all these things, if thou fall down and worship me: on the
other side, the poverty, the miseries, the ruins of houses, the hatred, the
contempt, and all what is most able to cause a distaste, which should be mine
assured lot in case of change. These two tentations, the one on the right, and
the other on the left hand, did make me suspend the effect of that will which
the spirit of God had insinuated into my spirit; I looked behind me a good
while, I withheld the truth in unrighteousness. I made my Romans 1. 18.
self believe that by doing much evil I should have good done unto me; I fled
from the presence of God, but God did make me at length feel that he deceiues
himself, which thinks to escape by swiftness from before him: he prepared for
me a Whale for to swallow me, but yet not for to destroy me; I was chastened by
his hand, and that through the same things in the which I had sinned: he took
away out of mine hands both that which I had, and that which I had not. And now
my hopes were cut off even at the root, now many things by me possessed were
lost for me, now my liberty (more precious then all the rest) was taken from
me: but God be praised, who having taken from me so many things, yet has
given me so many, that if he has sent me any evil, it was only for to
send me some good; if he has made me poorer, it was for to make me richer
then ever I was before, and that in better riches, in those namely that are the
only true ones: if he has made my body to be cast into prison, it was for
to make my soul to come out of thrall: if he has suffered me to fall into
the hands of such men as hated me, it was for fear that I should fall into his
hands, yea into his hands as he is a rigorous Judge, and yet to the end that I
might fall into his hands, as he is a kind and merciful Father, and that I
might learn to my cost (being I could not do it by the example of others) to
fear him, to reverence him, to give him the glory, and to consecrate to him
whatsoever belongs to me, without any reservation, as I acknowledge my self
truly and after an infinite number of sorts to be bound to do, and acknowledge
likewise, that it was the pure mercy of God that I was not consumed, because
that his compassions did not fail me. And seeing that God has done me that
favor, that his word does serve me at this day in stead of a lamp for my
feet, and of a light for my steps, to this word and to this Scripture, divinely
inspired, I purpose to keep me, without ever any more repairing to the
traditions of men, seeing that God has given Jesus Christ for to be the head
to his Church (of the which I am a member) for to be the only Mediator
between him and men, and our Advocate toward his Father; for to be the only
Priest for ever, for to have an everlasting Priesthood, and for to offer (as
he has offered) one only sacrifice for sins, for to be the Lamb of God,
whose blood does cleanse us from all sin, for to sit for ever at the right
hand of God, and to be held in the heaven until the time of the
re-establishing of all things, and until that he shall come from thence for
to judge the quick and the dead: I acknowledge from henceforth no more (to the
prejudice of him) any ministerial head of the Church on the earth, nor
Advocate, taken from among either men or Angels, nor any Priest sacrificing his
body, nor Mass serving for a propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the
living and the dead, nor Purgatory after this life, nor real presence of the
body and blood of Jesus Christ in the Sacrament under the kinds of bread and
wine. And because that the Spirit of God does teach me, that no flesh is
justified by the works of the Law, but only by faith in Jesus Christ, I will
no longer forge unto my self any merit of good works, and much less of
supererogation; and I will account the good works of the faithful to have
been prepared by God, to the end that we may walk therein, and will esteem
them to be the way to the Kingdom of heaven, and not the cause of reigning.
And it is in this truth, and in the profession thereof, that I desire, and that
I promise here before God, his Angels, and his Church, to be willing to live
and to die, detesting with all mine heart all Idolatries, superstitions and
errors, which are contrary to the confession of faith of the Churches of this
Kingdom, and protesting to submit my self wholly to that which concerns the
order and discipline of the Church. Thus signed, Boniuet.

FINIS.
THE COPY OF A LETTER, SENT from PARIS by an English Gentleman to his friend
in England, Wherein are briefly touched those occurrences which lately fell out
in Paris, about the Prince of CONDE, on the 22. of August, this present year,
1616.
Laus Deo, August, 22. 1616.
I Have with the first conueniency sent over unto you, the newest, and (here)
most known news, dated, as before; having received no letters from you since
the tenth of the same. And whereas, not only in many before, but especially in
your last, you seriously importuned me (knowing what winds blew here) to
give you intelligence of French present occurrences, as they shall happen; I
have done so, rather to satisfy your mind, desirous of novelties, than to
please my self in setting down the troubles of others, that have too many of
mine own. France (as you know) is to me nothing, in regard I am an Englishman
and a stranger to her factions. She is as one of her Vineyards, robbed by
Frenchmen in my sight, which stelth is no loss to me. I stand safe on the
shore, and behold her sides beating upon a rock, the wrack I feel not; yet
am I bound, in common humanity, to compassionate my neighbors sorrow, seeing
his house burning about his ears: And do therefore protest to you, that I
suffer as much, as if I were a natural Frenchman borne, in being present
within so goodly a City as Paris is, when she is full (at least looking
howrely to be so) of turmoiles, vproares, and civil combustion: and to see so
many thousands of the French (I mean the Parisiens) walk up and down with
such amazed, wild, and distracted faces; that if ten be in a troop
together, not three of them can safely swear, that a fourth man is his friend.
In every street, yea at every corner, the people flock in heaps, muttering
and murmuring, and whispering one to another; and nothing is more expected,
(nay more desired by some) than that a sword may be drawn, to the end that
pell mell they may fall to cutting of throats. The Towns of France are rich,
and spoils would now taste sweetly, especially to the Pesant, who wishes to
build upon his countries ruins, and to set an edge upon his fury, this
occasion gave advantage. For upon the twenty two of August, now present, (even
this day, in which I write unto you) the Prince of Conde being in Paris, well
accompanied, came to the Court, where he had not been long, but he was
surprised and carried prisoner to the Louure, why he came, and whether of
himself or sent for, is not in my knowledge, and if I should set down all
which I hear touching the causes of this surprizall (of whose true notice I
desire not to be guilty) you might think me, either very idle, to call
every shadow a substance, or else very busy to be so inquisitiue in the
affairs of a kingdom, when mine own are altogether private. I had rather
walk up and down the streets of Paris (albeit with some fear of danger) than
thrust my head into their Council chambers, and to meddle with Princes
matters, which no whit concern me. And therefore do I sparingly deliver you
these vproares, not searching into the ground and reaches of them, as hearing
various and inconstant reports: I give ear to many, but credit few, and dare
not (albeit I might) utter my own opinion, because I am as loath to wrong you
by this of mine, as that you should do the like to your friends in England, by
a second relation. The Prince of Conde being taken, the Duke of Vandosme
escaped. Others likewise fearing the same danger, met with the same happy
means of safety: For the Duke of Bouillon, with Tremouille, and many other
personages of note being at a sermon, having notice given, as they came from
Church, fled; and to make their side the stronger, the Duke Du Maine is joined
with them. How these Noblemen came to the knowledge of the Prince of Condees
surprizall, is (even here) doubtful. Some say by a French Page, who saw him
carried away, and that he was demanded to deliver up his sword, which he
refused to do: others otherwise: But howsoever it happened, it seemed a good
and miraculons deliverance of the rest, (who hold with him) if at least they
turn not that preservation of themselves, to the confusion of others. Which
the rather is to be feared, for that having (to avoid the blow) turned their
backs for safety, they now (as it is thought) arm their hands with weapons,
assembling themselves, and friends with all their forces at Soissons, to make
their party (for defense) as strong as they can. Now, whether in love to the
Prince of Conde, or in hate for any private respect they bear the Marquess d'
Ancres; a man famous enough in England and else where for exceeding favors,
done him by the Queen mother in France; or whether (as often it so happens)
a desire of doing something (though never so ill) set the common peoples
fingers on itching, I know not: But presently upon surprizall of the Prince (it
being noysd through Paris, that he was sent prisoner to the Louure) they ran
in heaps and height of fury to the Marquesses house, assaulted, entered, and
rifled it; making spoil of all that was in it, and when no other prey could
feed them, they spent their malice on the insensible walls (tearing and
beating the building down) which (if he could have been gotten) they swore
to execute upon himself. In this wavering estate the Kingdom still stands.
What the event of these troubles will be, lies in the hands of God only: the
occurrences whereof (as hereafter time shall deliver) I will (as these) send
unto you, expecting a return (by way of exchange) from you of some news out
of England. And so with wishes of your health, I bid you farewell, from Paris,
the 22. of August, 1616.

Resting yours most assured, R. M.

THE EXTRACT of another Letter bearing date the 26. of August: Written from
PARIS.
SIR, the broiles of France go on: The Prince still in the Louure, removed to
a more inaccessible room of the Kings Pauilion. Proclamations are come forth
here very strict, both for driving away all the Dukes and Princes servants from
the City on pain of death, and restraint of tongues. There are rumors of
preparations of both sides: The Duke of Guise is joined with the Dukes, and
they say his brother Cardinal, turned now military, shall be President of
their Counsel, and himself General of the Field. Look not to know all by
Letters: these times allow it not safe.

Yours assured, R. M.


