LADENSIVM YTOKATAKPISIS, THE CANTERBVRIANS SELF-CONVICTION.

OR An evident demonstration of the avowed Arminianisme, Popery, and tyranny
of that Faction, by their own confessions.

With a Postscript to the Personate Jesuit Lysimachus Nicanor, a prime
Canterburian.

Written in March, and printed in April, 1640:

COR VNVM VIA VNA
Summa Capitum. THE Preface shows the unreasonablenesse of this new war:
That we have committed nothing against the late pacification: That compassion,
hope, and all reason call now for peace at home; that at last we may get some
order of our enemies abroad: That the Canterburian faction deserve^ not so well
of England, that arms in their favor ought to be taken against Scotland: We
offer to instruct their insupportable crimes by their own writs: If arms be
needlessly taken in so evil a cause, they cannot but end in an untimous
repentance: In this nicke of time very poor wits without presumption may
venture to, speak even to Parliaments: The obstinate silence of the English
Divines is prodigious. CHAP. I. The delineation of the whole subsequent
Treatise. OUR Adversaries decline to answer our first and chief challenge: The
scope of this writ: All our plea is but one clear syllogism, the Major
whereof is the sentence of our Judge, the Minor, the confession of our party,
the conclusion a clear and necessary consequence from these two premises.
CHAP. II. The Canterburians avovved Arminianisme. ARminianisme, is a great and
dangerous innovation of our Religion. King James his judgment thereof; The
great increase of Arminianisme in Scotland, by Canterburies means. King
Charles his name stolen by Canterbury, to the defense of Arminianisme. The
Irish Church infected with Arminianisme by Canterbury. The Canterburians in
England teach the first and second article of Arminius. Why King James styled
Arminians Atheists: They teach the third and fourth article; also the fifth.
The Arminians in England advanced: Their opposites disgraced and persecuted.
Canterbury and his fellows contrary to the Kings Proclamation, go on boldly
to print, let be to preach Arminian tenets. A demonstration of Canterburies
Arminianisme in the highest degree. They make Arminianisme consonant to the
articles of England, and so not contrary to the Proclamation. CHAP. III. The
Canterburians professed affection toward the Pope and Popery in gross. ONce
they were suspected of Lutheranisme, but at last Popery was found their mark:
To make way for their designs, they cry down the Popes Antichristianisme, they
are content to have the Popes authority set up again in England. Their mind
to the Cardinalat: They affect much to be joined with the Church of Rome as
she stands. CHAP. IV. The Canterburians Join with Rome in her grossest
Idolatry. IN the mids of their denyalls, yet they avow their giving of
religious adoration, to the very stock or stone of the altar; As much adoration
of the Elements they grant as the Papists require; In the matter of Images
their full agreement with Rome. About relicts they agree with Papists; They
come near to the invocation of Saints. CHAP. V. The Canterburians avovv their
embracing of the Popish heresies and grossest errors. THey join with Rome in
setting up traditions in prejudice of Scripture; In the doctrine of faith,
Justification, fulfilling of the Law, merit, they are fully Popish; In the
doctrine of the Sacraments behold their Popery; They are for the reerection of
Monasteries, and placing of Monks and Nuns therein as of old; How near they
approach to Purgatory and prayer for the dead. CHAP. VI. Anent their
Superstitions. FEW of all Romes superstitions are against their stomach; They
embrace the grossest not only of their private, but also of their public
superstitions. CHAP. II. The Canterburians embrace the Mass it self. THey cry
down so far as they can all preaching. They approve the Mass, both for word
and matter. The Scottish Leiturgie is much worse then English; Many alterations
into the Scottish, specially about the offertorie, the consecration, the
sacrifice, the Communion. CHAP. ULT. The Canterburians maxims of tyranny* THE
tyrannous usurpation of the Canterburians, are as many and heavy as these of
the Romish Clergy: King Charles hates all tyranny: The Canterburians flatter
him in much more power then ever he will take: They enable the Prince without
advice of the church, to do in all Eccelesiasticall affairs what he thinks
meet: They give to the King power to do in the State what ever be will without
the advice of his Parliament: In no imaginable case they will have the greatest
tyrants resisted: What they give to Kings, is not for any respect they have to
Majesty, but for their own ambitious and covetous ends.
The Chief vvitnesses which in the follovving action are brought into depone.
WIlliam Laud Archbishop of Canterbury in his speech before the
Star Chamber, in his relation of his Conference with Jesuit Fisher, as it
was the last year amplified and reprinted by the Kings direction: In Andrews
opuscula posthuma set out by him, and dedicated to the King. B. White of Eli,
in his treatise upon the Sabbath, and his answer to the lawless Dialogue. B.
Montagu of Chichester, in his answer to the gagger, in his appeal, in his
antidiatribae, in his apparatus, in his origenes. B. Hall of Exeter, in his
old Religion set out with his own apology, and the apologies of his Friends
M. Chomley, and M. Butterfield: In his remedy of profanesse. Peter Heylen
Chaplan in ordinary in his answer to Burton set out, as he says, by the
command of authority as a full and only Reply to be expected, against all
^he exceptions which commonly are taken at my Lord of Canterbury his actions,
in his antidotum Lincolinense subscribed by Canterburies Chaplane. D. Pottar,
Chaplan in ordinary, in his charity mistaken, as he prints, at the command of
authority. D. Laurence, Chaplan in ordinary, in his Sermon preached before the
King, and printed at the command of authority. D. Pocklingtoune, in his Sunday
no Sabbath, in his Altar Christianum, both subscribed by Canterburies
Chaplane. Christopher Dow, in his answer to Burtoune, subscribed by
Canterburies Chaplane. Couzine in his devotions, the fourth Edition, subscribed
by the B. of London, my Lord high Treasuror his own hand. Chounaeus in his
Collectiones Theologicae; dedicated to my Lord of Canterbury, and subscribed
by his Chaplane. Shelfoord in his five pious Sermons, printed at Cambridge, by
the direction of the Vice Chanceler D. Beel, set out with a number of Epigrames
Latin and English, by diverse of the University fellows, defended yet still
by Heylene, and Dow, in their books which Canterbury has approven. Antonie
Stafford, in his female glory, printed at London, and notwithstanding of all
the challenges, made against it, yet still defended by Heylene and Dow in their
approven writs. William Wats in his Sermon of apostolical mortification. Giles
Widows in his Schismatic Puritan. Edward Boughen in his sermon of order and
decency. Mr. Sp. of Queens College in Cambridge, in his sermon of
Confession. Samuel Hoards in his sermon at the metrapolecall visitation. Mr.
Tedders in his sermon at the visitation of the B. of Norwitch, all subscribed
by the hands of my L. of Canterburies Chaplane, Bray, Oliver Baker, or some
others.
THE PREFACE.
IT is fallen out much beside our expectation, We did expect nothing less
then war.
that the storm of war should now again begin to blow, when we did esteem
that the mercy of GOD and justice of our Prince had settled our Land in a firm
peace for many generations, at least for many days and ever, while some
appearance of provocation should have arisen from us, for the kindling of the
wrath of our enraged enemies, whose fury, though we know well, not to be quite
extinguished, yet we did surely think it would not break forth in haste in any
public and open flame, til some new matter had been furnished, or some
probable color of a new quarrel could have been alleged against us.

When we have scattered that cloud of calumnies, We have committed nothing that
can be pretended with any goodly color for the breach of the late
pac^fication.
which by their tongues and pens they had spread abroad of our rebellion, and
many other odious crimes, when by our frequent supplications, informations,
remonstrances, declarations, and other writs, we have cleared abundantly the
justice of our cause, the innocence of our proceedings to all the ingenuous
mind of the Isle, and to so many of our neighbor nations, as have been
desirous to cognosce of our affairs, when our gracious and just Prince, in the
very heat of his wrath, raised alone by their mis-informations, even while
arms were in his hand, has been moved with the unanimous consent of all his
English Counsel of all his Commanders, and whole army, to acknowledge us good
and loyal Subjects; And after a full hearing of our cause in his Camp, to
profess his satisfaction, to pronounce us free of those crimes which before
were falsely blazed of us, to send us all home in peace, with the tokens of his
favor, with the hearty embracement of that army, which came against us for
our ruin: When we in a general Assembly of our Church, with the knowledge and
full consent of his Majesty's high Commissioner and whole Counsel have
justified our opposition to the innovation of our Religion and Laws by the
Prela^es, our excommunication of them therefore, the renewing of our Covenant,
and all the rest of our Ecclesiast^call proceedings, when our States in
Parliament were going on in a sweet harmony, to confirm the weaknesses, and
set right the disorders of our Estate, and that no farther then clear equity,
reason, law, yea the very words of the pacificatorie Edict did permit, when our
whole people were minding nothing but quietness, having cast their necks
under the feet of our reconciled king, put all their Castles and Canons in his
hand, without any security, but the royal Word, and received heartily all
those fugitives, who had taken arms in the Prelates cause against their
Country, having no other mind but to sit down with joy, and g^e about our own
long neglected business; praising God and blessing the King. The martial
minds among us, panting for languor to be employed over sea, for the honor of
the Crown; in spending their blood against the insolent enemies of his
Majesty's house: While these are our only thoughts; It was more then marveilous
to us, that first the dumb and obscure whisperings, and at once the loud
blasts, the open threats of a new more terrible and cruel war then before
should come to our ears, that our Castles should be filled with strangers, be
provided with extra ordinary victuals and munition, as against a present
assault, or long siege: Many of our Nobles tempted to leave our cause; numbers
of assayes made to break the unity of all our Estates; and at last our
Parliament commanded to arise, the Commissioners thereof, after a long and
wearisome journey to Court, for the clearing of some surmised mistakes about
moods and forms of proceedings, refused presence; a Parliament in England
indicted (as the rumor goes) to persuade that Nation, our dearest neighbors,
with whom our cause is common, to employ their means and arms against us,
that so our old national and immortal wars may be renewed to make sport to
Prelates, and a bridge for the Spainyard or French to come over Sea, and sit
down masters of the whole Isle, when both Nations by mutual wounds are
disabled for defense against the force of an enemy, so potent as either France
or Spain are this day of them selves without the assistance which too like
shall be made them by the Papists of the Isle, and many more, who will not
fail to join for their own ends with any apparent victory.

We admire how it is possible that intestine arms without any necessity
should be taken up at this season, Compassion hope, and all reason call now for
peace at home, that at last we may get some order of our enemies abroad.
when all the Forces the whole Isle can spare, are most earnestly called for, by
the tears of his Ma. only sister, by the blood and long desolation of her most
miserable Subjects, by the captivity and banishment of all her hopeful
Children, Prince Charles, lying daily under the hazard of the French hang man
at Paris, and Prince Robert of the Austrian at Vienne, the rest of that royal
blood, lying so many years with their Mother, banished in a strange Country:
Piety would command us to put up all our homeward quarrels, though they were
both great and many, let be to forge any, where none real can be found; Yea,
hope would allure us to try now, if ever, our Arms on those spiteful Nations,
the hereditary enemies of our Religion and of our Isle, when God has made them
contemptible by the clear success he gives daily to every one that rises
against them: Banier with a wing of the Swed^sh Army, dwelling in spite of the
Emperor all this year in the heart of his Countries, a part of Weymers forces
with a little help from France triumphing on the Rhene, for all that Baviere,
Culen, the Emperor, or Spainiard can do against them: That very great and
strong Armado all utterly crushed in our eyes by the Hollanders alone, without
the assistance of any. The very French, not the best sea men, having lately
beaten oftener then once the Spanish navies in the Mediterrian. Shall we alone
sit still for ever? shall we send always naught but base contemptible and
derided Supplications to these intractable Princes? shall we feed our selves
still with their scornful promises, which so often we have found to our great
disgrace most false? yea, rather then to beat them, by that abundance of
power which we have, if God will give us an heart to employ it, rather then to
pull down those tyrants, who have shed rivers of Protestants blood, who has
long tred on the persons of our nearest friends, and in them, on our honor; Is
it now meet we should choose to go kill one another alone for the bearing up
of Prelates tails, and that of Prelates as unworthie of respect as any that
ever wore a Mytre. Let our kindred, let our friends, let all the Protestant
churches perish, let our own lives and estates run never so evident an hazard,
yet the Prelates pride must be borne up, their furious desire of revenge must
be satiate; all their Mandamus in these dominions must be execute with greater
severitie and rigor then those of their brethren are this day in Italy or
Spain, or those of their grandfather at Rome.

To us surely it is a strange Paradox, that a Parliament of England, The
Canterburian faction deserves not so well of England that arms in their
favor ought to be taken against Scotland.
so wise, grave, equitable a Court, as in all bygone times it has ever proven,
should be thought in danger at any time, let be now to be induced by any
allurement, by any terror, to submitt themselves as Varlets and Pages to the
execution of the lusts, the furies and outrageous counsels of Canturberrie and
his dependars, for they know much better then we, that the maine greevances
both of their Church and State, have no other original, no other fountain on
earth but those men. Who other but they have keept our most gracous Prince at a
distance from the Country almost ever since he came to the Crown? For whose
cause have Parliaments these many years been hindered to meet, and when they
have met, been quickly raised, to the unspeakable grief and prejudice of the
whole land, and of all our friends abroad. By whose connivence is it that the
idolatrous Chapels of both the Queens in the most conspicuous places of the
Court are so gorgeous and much frequented? Whose tollerance is it that at
London three Mass Priests are to be found for one Minister, that three
hundredth of them reside in the city in ordinat, and six thousand at least in
the country. If ye trust the Jesuits Catalogue to Rome? Whence comes their
immunitie from the Laws, who have set up Cloisters for Monks and Nuns, let
be houses for open Masses in diverse cities of the Kings dominions? Why is our
correspondence with the Pope no more secret, but our Agents avowedly sent to
Rome, and his Holiness Nuntioes received here in state, and that such ones as
in public writs have lately defamed with unspeakable reproaches the person and
birth of that most sacred Queen Elizabeth. Such actions, or at least long
permission of such abominations do they flow from any other but his Grace, the
head and heart of the Cabbine Counsel. Did any other but he and his
creatures, his legs and arms hinder always our effectual alliance with the
Sweeds and French, when their armies did most flourish in Germany for the
relief of the oppressed Churches. Why was that poor Prince the king of Boheme
to his dying day keept from any considerable help from Britain? How was these
young Princes the other year permitted to take the fields with so small
forces, that a very mean power of a silly commander beat them both, took the
one captive, and put the other in his flight to an evident hazard of his life.
Who moved that innocent Prince after his escape to take so strange a counsel
as the world now speak off, and when he was engadged, who did betray both his
purpose and person to the French king, could any without the Cabbine understand
the convey of such matters, and within that Cabbine does any come without his
Graces permission? Is not that man the evident author of all the Scottish
broils? Are not his Letters extant, his holy hands interlynings of the Scottish
service to be seen, his other writtes also are in our hands, making manifest
that the beginning and continuance of that cursed work has no spring without
his brain.

When the King himself after ripe advertisement and all about him both English
and Scots had returned in peace, who incontinent did change the face of the
Court, and revive that fire, which in the heart of the Prince and all his good
Subjects was once closse dead.

That a Parliament of England will not only let such a man and his accomplices
go free, We offer to instruct by the writ^ of our party their unsupportable
crimes.
but to serve his humor, will be content to ingadge their lives and estates
for the overthrow and inslaving of us their best neighbors, that over our
carkases a pathway may be made for Bishops now, and at once for the Pope and
Spaniard, ^o ^red on the neck both of their bodies and souls, we can^^t
believe. Yet if any such things should be prop^unded (for what dare not
effronted impudence attempt) we would require that sage Senate before they pass
any bloody sentence of war against us, to consider a little the quality of that
party for whose cause they take arms, we offer to instruct to the full
satisfaction of the whole world of free and imprejudicat minds, not by flying
reports, not by probable likelihoods, not by the sentences of the gravest and
most solemn judicatories of this land, our two last general assemblies and
late parliam: who at far greater length and with more mature advisement did
cognosce of those causes then ever any assembly or parlia: among us since the
first foundation of our Church and kingdom did resolve upon any matter
whatsoever; All those means of probation we shall set aside and take us alone
to the mouth of our very adversaries. If by their own testimony we make it
evident that beside books, ceremonies, and Bishops which make the proper and
particular quarrel of this national Kirk against them, they are guilty of
gross Arminianisme, plain popery, and of setting up of barbarous tyranny,
which is the common quarrel of the Kirk of England of all the reformed Kirks,
and of all men who delight not to live and dye in the fetters of slavery. If we
demonstrate, not so much by their preachings and practices amongst us, as by
their maxims, printed with privilege among your selves, which to this day,
though often pressed thereto, they have never recanted. If we show that yet
still they stiffly avow all the articles of Arminius, a number of the grossest
abominations of popery, specially the authority of the Sea of Rome, that they
urge conclusio^s that will force you without any reluctance, so much as by a
verbal protestation, not only to give way unto any iniquity whatsoever,
either in Kirk or State whereto they can get stolen the pretext of the kings
name, but also to lay down your neck under the yoke of the king of Spain, if
once he had any sitting in this Isle, without any further resistance, though in
your Church by force that Tyrant should set up the latin Mass in place of the
Bible, and in your State, for your Magna-Charta and acts of Parliament, the
Laws of Castile, though in your eyes he should destroy the whole race of the
royal family, though the remainder of the Nobility and Gentry in the Land
should be sent over by him, some to work in fetters in his Mines of Peru,
others in chayns to row all their days in his gallayes in the Mediterrane, for
all these or any other imaginable acts of tyranny that could escape the wicked
head of any mad Nero, of any monstrous Caligula; these men do openly take upon
them to persuade that no kind of resistance for defense can be made by the
whole States of a Land, though sitting in Parliament, with a most harmonious
consent, no more then the Jews might have done against Nabuchadnezar, or the
Christians of old against the Pagane Emperors, or the Greek Church this day
against the grand Signieur in Constantinople, that all our forbeares both
English and Scots in their manifold bickerings against the misleaders of their
Prince; against the tyrannizing factions of Court, were ever Traitors and
Rebels, and ought to have loosed their head and Lands for their presumption to
defend their Liberties, against the intolerable insolences of a pack of
runnigate Villanes for their boldness, to fasten the tottering Crown upon the
head of their Kings, all such Services of our Antecessours to King and
Country, were treacherous insurrections.

If for all these their crimes I make speak before you no other witnesses then
our own tongue, Arms needless taken in so evil a cause, can not but end in
an untimeous repentance.
I trust they shall not remain in your minds the least shadow of any
scruple, to believe my allegations, nor in your wills the least inclination to
join with the Counsels of so polluted and self-convicted persons.

And if to men whose open profession in their printed Books, let be secret
practices leads to so wicked ends, so far contrary to the glory of God, to
the honor and safety of our King, to the well of us all, whether in Soul,
Body, Estate, Children, or any thing that is dear to us, ye would lead your
arms against us; we believe the Lord of Hosts, the righteous judge would be
opposite to you, and make hundreds of your men in so evil a cause flee before
ten of ours. Or, if it were the profound and unsearchable pleasure of the God
of Armies, to make you for a time a scourge to beat us, for our manifold
transgressions; yet when ye had obtained all the Prelates intentions, when we
for our others sins were tred under your feet, we would for all that hope to
die with great comfort and courage, as defenders of the truth of God, of the
Liberties and Laws of our Country, of the true, good, and honor of the Crown
and Royal Family; All which as we take it, one of the most wicked and
unnatural faction that ever this Isle did breed, are manifestly oppugning; yet
certainly, we could not but leave in our Testament to you our unjust oppressors
the legacy of an untimous repentance; for when ye have killed thousands of us,
and banished the rest out of the isle, when on the back of our departure, your
sweet Fosters the Bishops have brought the Pope upon you and your Children; or
when a French and Spanish invasion does threaten you with a slavish conquesh;
Will ye not then all, and above all our gracious Prince regrate, that He has
been so evil advised, as to have put so many of his brave Subjects to the
cruel sword, who were very able and most willing to have done him noble
service against these foreign usurpers? Would not at such a time, that is too
likely to be at hand, if our Prelates advises now be followed, both his
Majesty, and all of you who shall remain in life, be most earnest recallers;
not only of your own Countrie-men, (many thousands whereof ye know have
lately by Episcopal tyranny been cast out from their homes, as far as to
the worlds end, among the savadge Americans,) but also the relics of our
ruin from their banishment, with as great diligence as in time of Fergus the
second, the inhabitants of this Land did recall our ancestors, when by the
fraud and force of a wicked faction they were the most part killed; and the
rest sent over sea in banishment.

It were better by much, before the remeedilesse stroke be given, to be well
advised, then out of time to sigh, when the millions of lost lives, when the
happiness of our true Religion, when the liberties of both the nations, once
thrown away by our own hands, can not again be recovered.

To the end therefore that such lamentable inconveniences may be eshewed, In
this nick of time very poor wits without presumption may venture to speak
to Parliaments.
and your Honors the more animate to deny your power to those, who now
possibly may crave to have it abused against us, without cause, beside numbers
of pressing reasons, wherewith I doubt not every wise man amongst you is come
well enough instructed by his own considerations, and which I trust shall be
further presented in plenty by these of our Nation, who have ever been at the
head of our affairs, whom God has still enabled to clear the justice and
necessity of all our proceedings hitherto, to the minds of all, save our
infatuat adversaries, whom superstition and rage has blinded. If it might be
your Honors pleasure, when all the rest has ended, I could wish, that even
unto me a little audience were given, my zeal to the truth of God, to the
peace of this Isle, to the honor of our dear and gracious Sovereign,
imboldneth me to offer even my little myte of information. This is a period of
time, when the obstinate silence of those who are most obliged by their places
and gifts to speak, must open the mouth of sundry, who are not by much so
able; very babes, yea stones must find a tongue, when Pharisees deny their
testimony to Christ: Dumb men will get words when a Father, when a King, let
be a whole Kingdom, by the wickedness of a few is putt in extreme perrill of
ruin; An Ass will find language when the devouring Sword of an Angel is
drawn against the Master; Nothing more common then the speeches of very Oxen,
before any calamity of the Commonwealth; The cl^iking of Geese did at a time
preserve the Capitol; Amicla was lost by too much silence; The neglect of the
voice of a Damsel, the contempt of Cassandraes warning, the casting of her in
bands, for her true but unpleasant Speech, did bring the Troyane Horse within
the walls, and with it the quick ruin both of the City and Kingdom.

I hope then that the greatness of my undertaking may purchase me a little
audience; An offer deserving a little audience.
For I offer to make you all see with your own eyes, and hear with your own
ears the Canterburians to declare by their own tongues, and write down under
their own hands their clear minds, to bring into our Church Arminianisme,
and compleet Popery, and in our State a slaverie no less then Turkish.

If ye find that I prove my offer, I trust I may be confident of your
wisdoms, that though Cicero himself, and with him Demosthenes as a second,
and Orpheus with the enchantments of his tongue and harp, as a third marrow,
should come to persuade, yet that none of you shall ever be moved by all their
oratorie, to espouse the quarrels of so unhappie men.

If I fail in my fair undertaking, let me be condemned of temeritie, and no
hour of your leisure be ever again employed, in taking notice of any more of
my complaints; But till my vanity be found, I will expect assuredly from your
Honors one hearing, if it were but to waken many an able wit, and nimble pen,
in that your venerable House of Convocation; Numbers there, if they would
speak their knowledge, could tell other tales then ever I heard in an
out-corner of the Isle, far from the secrets of State, and all possibility of
intelligence, how many affairs in the world do go.

It is one of the wonders of the world, how many of the English Divines The
silence of the English Divines is prodigious.
can at this time be so dumb, who could well, if they pleased, paint out
before your eyes with a Sun-beame all the crimes I speak off in that head and
members.

It is strange that the pilloring of some few, that the slitting of Bastwick^^
and Burtowns nose, the burning of Prinnes cheek, the cutting of Lightouns
ears, the scourging of Lilburne through the city, the close keeping of
Lincoln, and the murdering of others by famine, cold, vermin, stink, and
other miseries in the caves and vaults of the Bishops houses of inquisition,
should bind up the mouths of all the rest of the Learned. England wont not in
the days of hottest persecution, in the very Marian times, to be so scant of
faithful witnesses to the truth of Christ, we can not now conjecture what is
become of that Zeal to the true Religion, which we are persuaded lies in the
heart of many thousands in that gracious kirk; we trust indeed that this long
lurking, and too too long silence of the Saints there, shall break out at once
in some hundreths of trumpets and lamps, shining and shouting, to the joy of
all reformed Churches, against the camp of these enemies to God, and the King;
that quickly it may be so, behold I here first upon all hazards do break my
pitcher, do hold out my Lamp, and blow my trumpet before the Commissioners of
the whole Kingdom, offering to convince that prevalent faction by their own
mouth, of Arminianisme, Popery, and Tyranny.

THE MAINE SCOPE And Delineation of the subsequent TREATISE.
CHAP. I.
OUR Adversaries Our Adversaries decline to answer our greatest challenge.
are very unwilling to suffer to appear, that there is any further debait
betwixt them and us, but what is proper unto our Church, and do arise from the
Service Book, Canons, and Episcopacie, which they have pressed upon us with
violence, against all order Ecclesiastical and Civil; In the mean, least
they become the sacrifices of the public hatred of others in a subtle
Sophisticatio^, they labor to hide the notable wrongs and effronts which they
have done openly to the Reformed Religion, to the Churches of England, and all
the Reformed Churches in the main and most material questions debated against
the Papists ever since the Reformation; for such as profess themselves our
enemies, and are most busy to stir up our gracious Prince to arms against
us, do wilfully dissemble their knowledge of any other controversy between
them and us, but that which properly concerns us, and rubbeth not upon any
other Church.

In this their doing the Judicious may perceive their manifold deceit, whereby
they would delude the simple, and many witty worldlings do deceive themselves.

First, they would have the world to think that we obstinately refuse to obey
the Magistrate, in the point of things indifferent: And therefore
unnecessarily, and in a foolish preciseness draw upon our selves the wrath of
the King.

Secondly, when in our late Assemblies the order of our Church is made known,
and the seeds of superstition, heresy, idolatry, and antichristian tyranny
are discovered in the Service-Booke and Canons, they wipe their mouth, they
say: No such thing is meant; and that we may upon the like occasion blame the
Service-Booke of England.

Thirdly, when by the occasion of the former quarrellings, their palpable
Popery and Arminianisme are set before their eyes, and their perverse
intentions, desires, and endeavors of the change of Religon and Laws, are
upon other grounds then upon the Service-Booke and Canons objected against
them: they stopp their ears, or at last shut their mouths, and answer
nothing. This Challenge they still decline and misken; they will not let it be
heard, let be to answer to it; And for to make out their tergiversation, and to
dash away utterly this our process, they have been long plying their great
engine; and at last have wrought their yond most mine to that perfection, that
it is now ready to spring under our walls. By their flattering calumnies they
have drawn the Prince again to arms, for the overthrow of us their
challengers, and for the affrighting by the terror of armies on foot of all
others elsewhere, from commencing any such action against them.

As for us, The scope of the Treatise.
truly it were the greatest happiness we do wish for out of Heaven, to live
peaceably in all submission and obedience under the wings of our gracious
Sovereign, and it is to us a bitterness as gall, as wormwood, as death to be
necessitated to any contest, to any contradictorie terms, let be an armed
defense, against any whom he is pleased to defend; Yea certainly it were the
great joy of our heart, to receive these very men, our mortal enemies, into
the arms of our affection, upon any probable signs in them, of their sincere
grief, for the hudge wrongs they have intended, and done to their
Mother Church and Country. But when this felicity is denied, and nothing in
them, does yet appear but induration, and a malicious obstinacy, going on
madly through a desperate desire of revenge, to move a very sweet Prince for
their cause to shed his own blood, to rent his own bowels, to cut off his
own members, what shall we do but complain to GOD, and offer to the worlds
eyes the true cause of our sufferings, the true grounds of this Episcopal
war, or rather not Episcopal, but Canterburian broyle: for we judge sundry
Bishops in the isle to be very free of these mischiefs, and believe that diverse
of them would gladly demonstrate their innocence, if so be my Lord of
Canterbury and his dependants, were in any way to receive from the Kings
justice some part of their deservings.

Howsoever, that we may give a testimony to the truth of God, which we are
like at once to seal with our blood, we will offer to the view of all
Reformed Churches, and above the rest to our acer^st and sibbest sister of
England, as it were in a table, diverse of these errors, which our party first
by craft and subtilitie, but now by extreme violence of fire and Sword, are
laboring to bring upon us; to the end that our dear Brethren, understanding
our sufferings in the defense of such a cause, may be the more willing at this
time to contribute for our assistance from God, the help of their earnest
Prayers, and for ever hereafter to condole with the more hearty compassion, any
misery which possibly may befall us, in such a quarrel.

All our plea is but one clear syllogism.
Albeit truly our hopes are yet greater then our fears, if we could become so
happy as once to get our plea but entered before our Prince; for we can
hardly conceave what in reason should hinder our full assurance of a favorable
decision from that Sacred mouth, whose natural equity the World knows in all
causes whereof he is impartially informed, since our whole action is ^ u^ht
but one formal argument, whereof the M^j r is ^he verdict of our judge, the
Minor shall be the open and ^^^w^d Testimony of our party, need we fear th^^
either our judge or party will be so irrational as to v^nture upon the
denial of a conclusion, whereof both the premises is their own open
profession.

Our Major is this: The Major thereof.
Who ever in the Kings Dominions spreads abroad Popery, or any Doctrine
opposite to the Religion, and Laws of the Land, now established, ought not to
be countenanced, but severely punished by the King. This Major the King has
made certain t^ us in his frequent most solemn asseverations, not only at
his coronation both here and in England, in his proclamations both here and
there, Neither shall we ever give way to the authorizing of any t^^ng, whereby
any innovation many steal or creep into the Church but shall preserve that
unity of doctrine and disc^pline, established ^n Q. Elizabeth's reign, whereby
the Church of England have stood and flou^ s^ed since. Proclam. dissolving the
Parl of England, 1628. and therefore o^ce for all we have thought fit to
declare, and hereby to assure all our good people, that we neit^er were, are,
nor ever (by the grace of God) shall be slained with popish superstition, but
by the con^tarie, are resolved to maintain the true Protestant Christian
religion, already professed within this our ancient Kingdom. We neither intend
innovation in religion or laws, proclam. ^une 8. 1638. to free al our good
subjects of the least su^pition of any intent on in us, to innovate any thing,
either in religion or laws, and to sati fie not only their desires, but even
their doubts. We have discharged, etc. proclam: September 22. 1638. and to give
all his Maj. people full assurance, that he never intended to admit any
al^eration or change in the true religo^, pofessed wi^^in this kingdom, and
that they may be truly and fully satisfied of the realitie of his intentions,
and integrity of the same, his Maj. has been pleased to require and command
all his good Subjects, to subscribe the confession of Faith, formerly signed by
his dear Father, in anno 1580. and it is his Maj will, that this be insert and
registrat in the books of Assembly, as a testimony to p^steritie, not only of
the sincerity of his intentions to the said true religion, but also of his
resolution to maintain and defend the same, and his Subjects in the pro^ession
thereof, proclam. December. 18. 1638.
but also in his late large declaration, oftimes giving out his resolution to
live and die in the reformed protestant religion, opposite to all Popery; to
maintain his established laws; and in nothing to permit the enervating of
them: Yea, this resolution of the king is so peremptor, and publicly avowed,
that Canterbury himself dare not but applaud thereto; If any Prelate would
labor to bring in the superstitions of the Church of Rome, I do not only
leave him to Gods judgment, but if his irreligious falsehood can be
discovered, also to shame and severe punishment from the State, and in any just
way, no ma^s hands should be sooner against him then mine.
in his Star chamber speech, who can seem more foreward then he for the
great equity, to punish condignlie all who would but mind to bring in any
Popery in this Isle, or assay to make any innovation in Religion or Laws.

We believe indeed that my Lord Canterbury does but juggle with the world in
his fair ambiguous generalities, being content to invegh as much against
popery and innovation as we could wish, upon hopes ever when it comes to any
particular of the grossest popery we can name, by his subtle distinctions and
disputations to slide out of our hands: But we are persuaded what ever may be
the juggling of sophisticating Bishops, yet the magnanimous ingenuitie, the
royal integrity of our gracious Sovereign is not compatible with such
fraudulent equivocations, as to proclaim his detestation of popery in
generals, and not thereby to give us a full assurance of his abhorring every
particular, which all the orthodox Preachers of this Isle since the reformation
by Queen Elizabeth and King James allowance has ever condemned as popish
errors. Our Major then we trust may be past as unquestionable.

We subjoyne our Minor; The Minor.
But so it is that Canterbury and his dependars, men raised, and yet
maintained by him, have openly in their printed books, without any recantation
or punishment to this day spread abroad in all the Kings Dominions, doctrines,
opposite to our Religion and Laws, especially the most points of the grossest
popery. In reason all our bickering ought to be here alone. This Minor I offer
to instruct, and that by no other mids then the testimony of their own
pens. If J do so to the full satisfaction of all, who know what are the
particular heads of the reformed Religion, and what the Tenets of Popery
^pposite thereto; what are the Laws standing in all the thr^e Dominions, and
what the contrary maxims of the Turkish Empire, wherewith Matchivelists this
day every where are laboring to poison the ears of all Christian Princes, for
enervating the Laws and Liberties of their Kingdoms: I hope that reason and
justice which stand night and day attending on either side of King Charles
Throne, will not fail to persuade the cheerful embracement of the conclusion,
The conclusion.
which follows by a clear and natural necessity, from the forenamed
premises, to wit, that Canterbury and his dependars in all the three
Dominions ought not to be countenanced by the King, but severally punished: Let
be that for their pastime a bloody and hazardous war, should be raised in so
unseasonable a time, for the undoing of that country, and church, which God
has honored with the birth, and baptism, both of his Majesty's own person,
and of his renowned Father, and to the which both of them as all their hundredth
and six glorious Predecessors, are endebted before God and the World, all
their Prerogatives both of nature, grace and estate, so much as any Princes
were ever to their mother church, and native Country.

CHAP. II. The Canterburians avovved Arminianisme.
ARminianisme how great and dangerous an inn^^ation of the Reformed Religion it
is, Arminianisme ^ great and dangerous innovation o^ Religion.
we m y learn by the late experiences of our neigh^ours, when that weed began
to spread among (...). The States of Holland have declared in many p^ssages of
their Dordracen Synod, that they found it a more ready mean to overthrow both
their Church and State, then all the engines, Policies, arms which the Pope,
and Spaniard, in any bygan time had used against them.

The Church of France the other year, when Amir^t, and Testard, and some few
of their Divines, were but surmised to incline a little toward some small
twigs of one article of Arminius, was so affrighted, that they rested not till
in a general assembly at Paris, they did run together for the extinguishing
of the first sparks, as it were of a common fire.

When Barrow in Cambridge began to run a little on this rock, how careful was
my Lord of Canterbury and the Bishops than in the meeting at Lambeth, for the
crushing of that Cokatrice in the egg; when that Serpent again in the same
place began, to set up the nose in the writtes of Thomson, how careful were
the Bishops then by the hand of their brother of Salisburie Doctor Abbots to
cut off the head of that monster.

But what speak we of the Churches Reformed? The very Synagogue of Rome,
whose conscience is enlarged as the Hell to swallow down the vile^^ morsels of
the most lewd errors that Antichrist can present, yet did they stick much at
this bone, when the Jesuit Molina began to draw out these dreggs of
Pelagianisme from the long neglected pitts of some obscure Schoolmen, what
clamours were raised there, not only by Alvarez and his followers but ulso by
numbers of Prelates and some great Princes, till the credit of the Jesuits in
the Court of Rome, and the wisdom of the Consistory prognosticating a new
Rent in their Church, did procure from the Pope a peremptory injunction of
silence to both sides, on all highest pains: hoping if the Dominicans mouths
were once stopped, that the Jesuits by their familiar arts, and silent
Policies, would at last work out their intended point, which indeed since that
time, they have well near by fully gained.

But to King Charles eye no evidence uses to be so demonstrative as that
which comes from the learned hand of his blessed Father. Would we know how
gracious a Plant Arminianisme and the dressers of it will prove in England, or
any where else, advise with King James, King James judgment of Arminianisme.
who after full trial and long consultation about this emergent, with the
Divines of his Court, especially the late archbishop Abbots gave out at last
his Decree in print, and that in Latin, not only for a present declaration
to the States of Holland of his mind against Vorstius, and a clear Confession
of his Faith in those points to the Christian World, but above all to remain
a perpetual Register for his heirs and successors, of his faithful advise,
if after his death their Kingdoms should be ever in danger to be pestered
with that wicked seed.

In that treatise, his Majesty does first Declarat. contr. Vorst. page 15. Non
erubescit ita crasse mentiri, ut affirmet haereses libro suo expressas a
professione Ecclesiae Anglicanae non dissentire.
avow all them to be gross liars, who do not blush to affirm that any of the
Arminian articles, even that most plausable one of the Saints apostasy are
consonant with the Doctrine or articles of the Church of England. Ibid. page
12. Gnaviter impudens and ferreioris.
He styles Bertius for such a slander, a very impudent and brazen faced man.
2. Ibid. page 18 Detestandae haereses novitor, exortae mature exstingue^dae,
and ad usque inferos unde manarunt relegandae.
He pronounces these Doctrines of Arminius to be heresies lately revived and
damnable to the hells, from whence they come. 3. Ibid. page 12. Sola inscriptio
clamat igni damnandum.
That Bertius for the very title of his book, The Saints apostacy, deserved
burning. 4. Ibid. page 14. Inimicus Deo Arminius* cujus discipuli pestes,
arrogantes, haeritici, (...) sectarij.
That A^minius and his Scholars were to be reputed pests, enemies to God,
proud, schismatic, heretical, Atheists. 5. Ibid. page 15. A Deo
maledictionem, apud. Ecclesias omnes infamiam, in Republicam perpetuam,
distractionem.

The great increase of Arminians in Scotland by Canterburies means.


He affirms that their tolleration would not fail to bring upon the heads
of their toleraters let be favorers, Gods malediction, an evil report,
slander and infamy with all the Churches abroad, and certain Schism,
division and tumults at home.

Shall we then make any doubt of King Charles full contentment that we avow
Arminianisme to be such a dangerous innovation in our Religion as the Reformed
Churches abroad, and his Father at home has taught us to count it where ever
it is found.

Notwithstanding this bitter root amongst us was setting up the head of late
very boldly in all the prime pl^ces of our Kingdom; we have had since the
reformation many bickerings about the Church government and Ceremonies, but in
matters of Doctrine never any controversy was known, till some years ago a
favorable air from the mouth of Doctor Laud at Court began to blow upon these
unhappie seeds of Arminius. No sooner was those south-winds sensible in our
climate, but at once in S. Andrews, Edinburgh, Aberdeen, and about Glasgow that
weed began to spring amain.

Doctor Wederburne in the new College of S. Andrews did stuff his dictates
to the young Students in Divinity with these errors. This man upon the
fears of our Churches censure, having fled the Country, was very tenderly
embraced by his Grace at Court, and well rewarded with a fair Benefice in
England for his labors; But to the end his talents should not lie hid,
although a man very unmeete either for preaching or government, he was at once
sent down to us, without knowledge of our Kirk, by Canterburies only favor
to be Bishop of Dumblane, for this purpose mainly that in the Royal Chapel,
whereof that Bishop is always Dean, he might in despite of all our
Presbyteries weive out the web he had begun in S. Andrews. So at once there
was erected a society of twenty four Royal Chapplains, who were thought
fittest of the whole Clergy of the Kingdom, to be allured with hopes of
favor from Court, to preach to the State, the Deans Armiminian tenets.

In Edinburgh M. Sydserfe did partly play his part, and for the reward of his
boldness, had cast in his lap in a trace the Deanrie of Edinburgh, the
Bishopric of Brechan, and last of Galloway, with full hopes in a short time of
an Archbishops cloak.

In the North, Doctor Forbes the only Father of the most of those who fell
away from the doctrine of our Church, came to good speed in his evil labors
and for his pains was honored with the first seat in the new erected chair
of our principal city.

Others about Glasgow made their preaching of the Arminian errors the pathway
to their assured advancement.

In our general Assembly we found that this cockle was coming up apace in
very many furrows of our field; Some of it we were forced, albeit to our
great grief, to draw up and cast over the dike, which at once was received and
replanted in England in too good a soil.

We confess that it happened not much beside our expectation, that our
Arminians The Kings names stolen by Canterbury to the defense of Arminians.
after the censure of our Church should at Court have been to graciously
received and sheltered in the sanctuary of his Grace at Lambeth; But this
indeed did and does astonish us all, that any should have been so bold as to
have stolen King Charles name to a printed Declaration, wherein not only our
general Assembly is condemned for using any censure at all against any for the
crime of Arminianisme; Large declar. page 74. According to their weak and
poor power they did determine controversies concerning predestination,
universal grace irresistibilitie of grace, concurrance in grace, and other such
like intricate points, that some me^ would be loath to live so long as they
could make them understand them.
But also Arminius articles are all utterly slighted and pronounced to be of so
obscure and intricate a nature, that both our Assembly was to peart to make any
determination about them, and that many of our number were altogether unable by
any teaching ever to win so much as to the understanding of the very
questions: Some Mininisters were dedepr^ved for Armini^^isme, a course never
heard off ^n any p^ace where any rule of justice was observed, that a Min ster
should be deprived for holding any Tenet, which is not against the doctri e of
that Church wherein he lives, and that before it be prohibited and condemned by
that Church. Now there is nothing in the confession of that Church against
these Tenets.
Yea, those articles are avowed to be consonant, and in nothing to be opposite
to the Confession of our Church, and are freely absolved of all Popery.

Page 303. They could no answer when it was told them th se Tenets, could not
b^e counted Popish, concerning which, or the chief of which as learned Papists
as any in the world, the Dominicans and Jesuits did differ as much as the
Pro^estants, and tha^ those which do adhere to the Augustine confession, did
hold hat side of those Tenets. which the Arminians did hold, and yet they were
very far rom being Papists, being the first Pro^estants, and there ore it was
against all sen^e ^o condemn that for P perie wh c^ was held by many
Pro^ella^ts Churches, and reject by many learned Papists.
Because indeed (for this is the only reason) some learned Papists find
diverse of Arminius points to be so absurd, that their stomachs cannot away
with them, and some of the Lutherian divines agree with the Arminians in
certain parcels of some of their articles. They must be strangers in these
questions, who are ignorant in how many things the Dominicans and all Papists
agree with Arminius, and in how many the Lutherans disagree from him. However
we were and are amazed to see Canterbury so malapeart, as to proclaim in the
Kings name, beside many other strange things, the articles of Arminius, to be
so far above the capacity of our general Assembly, that it deserves a
Royal reproof for minting to determine any thing in them, and that they are
no ways contrary to the doctrine of our Church, neither any ways Popish, and
that for a reason, which will exeeme from the note of Popery every error
which is so grossly absurd, that some learned Papists are forced to contradict
it, or some gross Lutheran can get his throat extended to swallow it down.

This boldness can not in any reason be imputed to our gracious Sovereign;
For how is it possible that he upon any tolerable information, should ever
have suffered himself to be induced to write or speak in such a strain of
these things which so lately by his learned Father was declared in print, and
that in Latin to be no less then heresies, worthy of burning; yea, damnable
to the very infernal pit; whence as he says, they did first come up. Neither
is it like that these Sentences come from the heart of D. Balcanquell the
penman of them; For he was a member of Do^t Synod, and brought up in the
Church of Scotland, the man is not unseene in the Popish Tenets; How is it
p^ssible that his conscience should absolve the Arminian errors of all
Popery, and all contrariety to the Scottish confession.

May any be so uncharitable, as to suspect his late promotion in Durhame, has
altered so soon his mind? Sure not long since, both in England and Scotland,
he did desire to be esteemed by his friends, one of those whom Canterbury did
malign, and hold down for his certain and known resolutions, and reputed
ability to oppose his Graces Arminian, and Popish innovations.

His Majesty being certainly clear of this imputation, and readily also
Balcanquell, the amanuense, on whom can the fault lie but Canterbury, the
directors back? For the world knows, that on his shoulders for common alone,
the King does devolve the trust of all Bookish and Ecclesiastical affairs
that concerns him, that at his commandment he has written in the Kings name
that part at the least of the declination, which patronizeth the Arminians
persons and cause, we do not conjecture, but demonstrate by the constant and
avowed course of his Graces carriage, in advancing Arminianisme at all
occasions, in all the Kings Dominions.

That this may appear, consider his practices, not so much among us, as in the
Irish Church, The Irish Church infected with Arminianisme by Canterbury.
where yet his hand is very nimble, to set these ungratious plants, and to
nippe off all the overspreading branches of any tree that may overtop them; For
who else in a moment, has advanced D. Bramble, not only to the Sea of Derrie,
but to be the Kings Vicar General?

Who sent D. Chapel first to the Universitie of Dubline, and then to his
Episcopal Chair?

Who holds down the head of that Orthodox P^imat, and of all who have any
zeal there to the truth of God?

Who caused not only refuse the confirmation of these Antiarminian articles of
Ireland, in the last Parliament, but threatened also to burn them by the hand
of the hangman? Whose invention are these privy articles, which his Creature
my Lord of Derry presents to diverse who take Orders from his holy hands?

We will pass these and such other effects, which the remote rays of his
Graces countenance do produce in so great a distance; Only behold! How great
an increase that unhappie plant has made there in England, where his eye is
nearer to view, and his hand to water it. The Canterburians in England teach
the first and second article of Arminianisme.


In the 25. year, at the very instant of King James death, D. Montagu, with D.
Whites approbation, did put to the press all the articles of Arminius in the
same fearmes, with the same arguments and most injurious calumniations of the
Orthodox doctrine, as Spalato and the Remonstrants had done a little before,
but with this difference, that where those had dipped their pens in ink, D.
Montagu does write with venegar and gall, in every other line, casting out the
venom of his bitter Spirit, on all that comes in his way, except they be
fowls of his own feather; for often when he speaks of Jesuits, Cardinals,
Popes, he annoynts his lips with the sweetest honey, and perfumes his breath
with the most cordial tablets. If any do doubt of his full Arminianisme, let
them cast up his Appeal, and see it clearly, Appeal, p. 60. I profess my
through and sincere dissent from the faction of novellizing Puritans, but in no
point more the^ in the doctrine of desperate predestination. Ibid. p. 70. I see
no reason why any of the divines of our Church present at the Synod of Dort,
should take any offense at my dissenting, who had no authority that J know of
to conclude me, more then I do at them, for d^ffering from me in their
judgment, quisque abundet in suo sensu. Ibid. page 71. I am sure the Church of
England never so determined in her doctrine. Ibid. page 72, at the conference
of Hamptoun-court, before his Majesty, by D. Bancroft, that doctrine of
irrespective predestination was styled against the articles of Lambeth, then
urged by the Pur^tans, a desperate doctrine, without reproof or taxation of
any. Ibid. page 50, your absolute, necessary, determined, irresistible,
irrespective decree of God, to call, save, and glorify S. Peter, for instance
infalliblie, without any consideration had off, or regard unto his faith,
obedience, repentance: J say it truly, it is the fancy of some particular men.
in the first and second Article of Election and Redemption, he avoweth his
averseness from the Doctrine of Lambeth and Dort, which teaches, that God from
eternity did elect us to grace and salvation, not for any consideration of our
faith, works, or any thing in us as causes, respects, or conditions,
antecedent to that decree, but only of his mere mercy; And that from this
Election all our faith, works, and perseverance do flow as effects. He
calls this the private fancy of the Divines of Dort, opposite to the
Doctrine of the Church of England; For this assertion he slandereth the Synod
of L^mbeth, as teachers of desperate doctrine, and would father this foul
imputation, but very falsely on the Conference at Hamptoun Court.

Ibid. page 61, 64. I shall as I can briefly set down what I conceive of this
of Gods decree of predestination, se^ting by all execution of purpose: this
far we have gone, and no word yet of predestination, for how could it be in a
paritie? T^ere must ^e first conceived a disproportion, before there can be
conceived an Election or dereliction: God had compassion of men in the mass of
perdition, upon singulos generum, and genera singulorum, and out of his love,
motu mero, no o^herwise stretched out to them deliverance, in a Mediator the
Man Jesus Christ, and drew them out that took hold of mercy, leaveing them
there that would none of him.
Again he avoweth positively, that faith goes before Election, and that to
all the lost race of Adam alike, Gods mercy in Christ is propounded till the
parties free will, by believing or mis-beleeving, make the disproportion
antecedent to any divine either election, or reprobation.

One of the reasons why King James styled Arminius disciples A^heists, Why King
James styled them Atheists.
was, because their first article of condi^ionall Election did draw them by an
inevitable necessity to the maintenance of Vorstian impiety; For make me once
Gods eternal decree posterior and dependant from faith, repentance,
perseverance, and such works, which they make flow from the free will of
changeable men; that decree of God will be changeable, it will be a separable
accident in him; God will be a composed substance of subject, and true
accidents, no more an absolute simple essence, and so no more God. Vorstius
ingenuitie in professing this composition is not misliked by the most learned
of the Belgic Arminians, who use not as many of the English, to deny the clear
conseque^ces of their doctrine, if they be necessary, though never so absurd.
However in this very place Montagu maintains very Vorstian Atheism, as
expressly as any can do, making the divine essence to be finite, his
omnipresence not to be in substance, but in providence, Appeal p. 49. the
Stoics among others held that paradox of old, Deum ire per omne terras
tractusmaris, coelumque profundum. They meant it subst^ntially, and so
impiously. Christians do hold it too, but disposively in his providence.
and so making God to be no G^d. This, though long ago by learned Featlie,
objected in print to Montagu, lies still upon him without any clearing.
Certainly our Arminians in Scotland were begun both in word and writ to
undertake the dispute; for all that Vorstius had printed; I speak what I know,
and have felt often to my great pains.

Arminianisme is a chain, any one linck whereof, but specially the first will
draw all the rest, yet see the other also expressed by Montagu. In the articles
of grace and freewill, They teach the third and fourth article.
not only he goes clear with the Arminians, teaching that man's will has
ever a faculty to resist, and oftimes according to the Doctrine of the Church
of England, actually does resist, reject, frustrate, and overcoms the most
powerful acts of the spirit and grace of God, even those which are employed
about regeneration, sanctification, justification, perseverance. Appeal. p. 89.
S. Steven in terminis has the very word (...), you resist, nay, fall cross
with the holy Ghost, not suffering him to work grace in you. If the Counsel
meaned it de gratia excitante, praeveniente operante; I think no man will deny
it de gratia adiuvante, subsequente, cooperante; there is without question in
the natural will of a regenerate man so much carnal concupiscence, as may make
him resist and rebel against the Law of the Spirit. And if a man justified may
fall away from grace, which is the doctrine of the Church of England, then
without question your selves being judges, he may resist the grace of God
offered.
Not only does he thus far proceed, but also he avowes, that all the
difference which is betwixt the Church of England and Rome, in this head of
freewill, to be in nothing material, (a) and reallie long ago to be ended and
agreed amongst the most judicious and sober of both the sides.

Ibid. p. 95. Thus having with as great diligence as I could examined this
question inter parts of free will, I do ingenuously confess, that I can not
find any such material difference between the Pontificians, at least of
better temper, and our Church.
For the fifth Also the fifth.
of perseverance, he is as gross as any other Remonstrant or Molinean Jesuit,
professing, that no man in this life can have more assurance not to fall away
both totally and finally from all the grace he gets, then the devils Antigag.
p. 161. Man is not likely in the State of grace to be of an higher alloy then
angels were in the state of glory, then Adam was in the state of innocence.
Now if Adam in paradise, and Lucifer in heaven did fall and loss their
original estate, the one totally, and the other eternally, what greater
assurance has any man in the state of proficiencie, not of consumatio^
had once in heaven, and Adam once in paradise.

Behold the Arminian ensign fairly now displayed in England by the the hands
of Montagu and White, under the conduct of D. Laud, Bishop of S. David's, even
then the President and chief of Ecclesiastical affairs, of the Duke of
Buckinghames secret Counsel. At the first sight of this black banner, a number
of brave Champions got to their arms; pulpits over all England rang, presses
swat against the boldness of that, but small hand full then of courtizing
Divines. Their crafty leader seeing the spite of opposition, and finding it
meet for a little to hold in, and fold up his displayed colors, did by the
Duke his Patron persuade the expediency of that policy, which the Jesuits
had immediately before, for that same very design moved the Roman consistory
to practice. He obtained a Proclamation, commanding silence to both sides,
Silence by proclamation enjoined to both sides.
discharging all preaching, all printing in these controversies, a stricting to
the clear, plain and very grammatical sense of the articles of England in
these points, without all further deductions. By this means his intentio^s were
much promoved, open avowers of Arminianisme were by public authority so
ex^emed from any censure, a real Liberty was thus proclaimed over all the
Land, for any who pleased to embrace Arminianisme without opposition.

Hereby in two or three years the infection spread so far and broad, that
the Parliament was forced in the 28. to make the increase of Arminianisme The
Arminians in England advanced.
their chief grievance to his Majesty; But at that time D. Laud was grown
greater. He had mounted up from the Bath to London, and to make a show there in
Parliament of his power, in the eye of all the complainers, he raised up
Montagu to the Episcopal Chair of his own Diocesan, D. Carletoun, who had
lately chastised him in print for his Arminian appeal. D. White his other
chiftane, that all great spirits might be encouraged to run the ways which D.
Laud pointed out to them, in despite of these Parliamentarie Remonstrants, was
advanced from Bishopric to Bishopric, till death at the step of Elie did
interrupt the course of his promotion, that to Wren a third violent follower of
his Arminian Tenets, way might be made for to climb up the remaining steps of
the Ladder of his Honors.

Now to the end that the world may know, that my lord of Canterbury does
nothing blush at the advancement of such men, hear what a public Testimony
of huge worth and deserving, he caused his Herald Peter Heylen to proclaim
to that Triumvirat, not only at his own directions, (for that moderate answer
of Heylens is the Iusto volumine, which his G. did promise to the World in his
Star Chamber-speach) but also in name of Authority; If Heylen lie not, who
says: He writes that book at the commandment of the state: There after the
cryasse of Canterburies own extraordinary praises A moderate answer, page 78.
you will be troubled to find Canterburies equal in our Church, since K.
Edwards reformation, whether ye look to his public or pr^vate demeanours.
the renown of his three underleaders, is loudly sounded as of plain
non-suches. Ibid. page 84. White, Montagu, and Wren, whom you so abuse, are
such, who for their endeavors for this Churches honor, fidelity in their
service to the King, full abilities in learning, have had no equals in this
Church, since the Reformation.


All these his Graces favors to his followers, Their opposites disgraced and
persecuted.
would have been the more tolerable if he would have permitted his orthodox
opposites to have had some share in their Princes affection, or at least have
lived in peace in their own places. But behold, all that crosses his way must
down, were they the greatest Bishops in the Dominions. For who else wrought
the late Archbishop so far out of the Kings grace, that he remained some
years before his death well near confined to his house at Lambeth? Who has
caused to be caged up in the tower that great and learned Bishop of Lincoln?
what ever else may be in the man. What fray makes that worthy Primate Usher
to foretell often to his friends his expectation, to be sent over Sea, to dye a
pedant teaching boys for his bread, by the persecution of this faction, whose
ways he avowes to many, does tend to manifest Arminianisme and Popery. This
their resolution to persecute with all extremity, every one who shall mint to
print or preach any thing against Arminianisme, they avow it openly, not only
by deeds (for why else was poor Butter cast by Canterbury in the Fleet for
printing of B. Davenants letter to B. Hall against some passage of A^minianisme
at the Authors direction as we see it set down by Huntly in his Breviate) but
even in open print, for when Burton complains to the King that he was silenced
by Canterbury for expounding of his ordinary text Romans 8: Whom God had
predestinate those he has called, and applying it to the present Pelagianisme
and Popery of the Arminians, Christopher Dow Chr. Dow. Answer to Burton. Mr.
Burton did preach on the highest point of predestination in a controverted way
with disputes and clamarous invectives against those who dissented from him in
opinion, his questioning and suspending for this cause, was nothing contrary to
his Majesty's declarations. Ibid. page 40. Be it so that the doctrine of
election, effectual vocation, assurance o^ perseverance, are by the Kings
declaration suppress^d, rather then the peace of the Church should be
disturbed, we might truly say of that time when his Majesty's declaration was
published, that men were incapable of these doctrines, when men began to chyde,
and to count each other Anathema, as it was with our neighbors, it began to be
with us, was it not time to enjoyne both sides silence? By this means you say,
there is no Minister, not one among thousand that dare clearly preach of these
most comfortable doctrines, and so soundly confute the Arminian heresy.
Blessed be God that there are so few who dare, and I wish those few who dare,
had showed more obedience to his Majesty.
approven by Canterburies Chaplane, and P. Helen directed to speak for
Canterbury himself does not stand to affirm, that this was a cause well
deserving all the sufferings he complained off.

Canterbury and his followers contrary to the proclamation, go on still to
print, let be to preach their Tenets.
Could any here but expect of his Graces wisdom and loyalty, when his
solicitude appears to disgrace and punish without respect of persons all who
in contempt, as he says, of the Kings proclamation will not desist from the
public oppugning of Arminianisme, that on the other hand the preachers and
printers for Arminianisme according to that same proclamation should be put to
some order; yet this is so far neglected, that all who are so affected,
Cousins, Colin^s, Beel in Cambridge, Potter and Iackson in Oxfoord, and many
more prime Doctors in both Universities in the city, in the Court, and over
all the Land, boldly give out their mind to all they meet with, for the
advancement of the new way, yea boldness in running those paths has been
known to have been the high way in all the three Dominions these years
bygone to certain promotion in many men who to the worlds eyes had no other
singular eminency of any good parts.

But that his Graces tramping upon the Kings Proclamation may be yet the more
evident, behold how he does daily dispense both with his own pen and those
also of his friends to write and print for Arminianisme what they please.

White being taxed by Burtoun for his subscription to Montagous appeal, is so
far from the least retractation, that the fifth article of Apostacy and
uncertaintie of salvation, which Burton did single out of all Montagous
errors, as most opposite to Christian comfort, he maintains it in his own
answer to the Dialogue; but as the custom now is under the covert of some
Fathers name, at great length with much bitterness, and casts out without
provocation in his Treatise of the Sabbath, the first and second article P. 82.
The benefitt of redemption, by the antecedent will of Christ is intended to all
men living, though all men by reason of their own demerits do not actually
receive the Fruit of it. Voluntas antecedens est voluntas primaria and
beneplacitum Dei ex eius nativa propensione existens, nullamque sumans
occasionem ex nobis.
Mr. Dow and Schelfoord use the same plainness. Yea, in the 31. year that
faction was so malapeart, as to set out the historical narration, by one M. A.
Ileward, wherein all the Articles of Arminius at length, with these false and
bitter calumniations of our doctrine; Which are usually chanted and rechanted
by the Remonstrants, are not only set down as truths, but also fathered upon
the first reformers and Martyrs of England.

That book when it had been out a while, was called in, not because the
Doctrines were false, not because the story was forged, as that learned Knight
S. Vmphrey Line by the ocular inspection of the original manuscript did since
demonstrate, but the only reason of the calling of it back, as his Grace makes
Heylen declare to us, was, the dinne and clamor which Burtown, then one of the
Ministers of London, made against it. Moderat answer, p. 121. The Historical
narration was called in also for your pleasure.


Canterbury himself is nothing afraid to lend his own hand to pull down any
thing that seems cross to Arminianisme. The certainty of salvation, the
assurance of election, is such an eyesore, that to have it away, he stands not
with his own hand to cut and mangle the very Lyturgie of the Church,
otherwise a sacred peace, and a noli me tangere in England in the smallest
points, were they never so much by any censured of error: Yet if any clause
cross Arminianisme or Popery, his Grace does not spare without dinne to
expurge it, did it stand in the most eminent places thereof in the very morning
prayers for the Kings person:

Here there was this clause fixed since the reformation (who art the Father of
thine Elect and their Seed) this seemed to be a public profession, that it was
not unlawful for King Charles to avow his certainty and persuasion that God
was his Father, and he his adopted Child, elect to salvation. His Grace could
not endure any longer such a scandalous speech to be^ uttered, but with his
own hand scrappeth it out. Being challenged for it by Burtoun, and the
outcries of the people, he confesses the Fact; Only for excuse, brings
three reasons, of which you may judge: Star Chamber speech, p. 28 It was put
out at the Ks. direction, in my predecessors time when the king had no
children.
First he says, It was done in his predecessors time; Does not this make his
presumption the more intolerable, that any inferior Bishopp, living at the
very lugge of the Archbishop, should mint to expurge the Lyturgie. Secondly,
He pretends the Kings command for his doing.

Does not this increase his guiltiness, that he and his followers are become
so wicked and irrespective, as to make it an ordinare pranke, to cast their
own misdeeds upon the broad back of the Prince. Dare he say, that the King
commanded any such thing motu proprio? Did he command that expunction without
any information, without any man's advise? Did any King of England ever assay to
expurge the public Books of the Church, without the advice of his Clergy?
Did ever King Charles meddle in any Church matters of far less importance,
without D. Lauds counsel?

The third excuse: That the King then had no Seed. How is this pertinent? May
not a childlesse man say in his prayers, that God is the Father of the Elect,
and of their Seed, though himself as yet have no Seed? But the true cause of
his anger against this passage of the Leiturgie, seems to have been none
other then this Arminian conclusion; that all faith of election in particular,
of personal adoption or salvation, is naught but presumption:

That this is his Graces faith, may appear by his Chaplans hand, at that base
and false story of Ap-Evan by Studly, wherein are bitter invectives against all
such persuasions as puritanik delusions, Satan like an Angel of Light stirring
up in the heart of immortified persons a spiritual pride in a high conceit of
their gifts, the assurance of their Election, illumination, conversio^,
imaginary sense of their adoption, etc.
yea, he is contented that Chounaeus should print over and over again his
unworthie collections, not only subscribed by his Chaplane, but dedicated to
himself, wherein salvation is avowed to be a thing unknown, and whereof no man
can have any further, or should wish for any more then a good hope. Page 82.
Salus eorum satis certa quamvis ipsis ignota, ex gratia and infinita sua
misericordia det Deus hanc spem and sua vissiman huius spei plerophoriam,
ampliore^ non expectamus,
And if any desire a clearer confession, behold himself in those oposcula
posthuma of Andrews, which he sets out to the world after the man's death,
and dedicates to the King: avowing that the Church of England does maintain no
personal persuasion of predestination, which Tenet Cardinal Pirroun had
objected to them as presumption. Stricturae, we think it not safe for any man
peremptorily to presume himself predestinat.
White also in his answer to the Dialogue, makes man's election a mystery,
which God has so hid in his secret counsel, that no man, can in this life
come to any knowledge, let be assurance of it, at great length from the 97.
page to the 103. and that most plainly.

A demonstration of Canterburies Arminianisme in the highest degree.
But to close this Chapter, passing a number of evidences, I bring but one more,
which readily may be demonstrative, though all other were laid aside. By the
Laws and practickes of England, a Chaplans licencing of a book for the press
is taken for his Lord the Bishops deed; So Helen approven by Canterbury
teaches in his Antidotum, Page 3. Or if you be so dull as not to apprehend
that, yet must the publishing of this Libel rest in conclusion on my Lord high
Thesauror the Bishop of London at whose house the book was licentiate, which
is so high a language against authority, against the practice of this Realm,
for licenciating of books against the honor of the Star Chamber, on whose
decree that practice is founded, etc.
and for this there is reason, for the Laws give authority of Licencing to no
Chaplane, but to their Lords alone, who are to be answerable for that which
their Servant does in their name. Also the Chaplane at the Licencing receives
the principal subscrived Copy which he delivers to his Lord: to be laid up
in his Episcopal Register.

William Bray, one of Canterburies Chaplanes subscrived Chounaei Collectiones
Theologicae, as consonant to the doctrine of the Church of England, and meet
for the press. The Author dedicated the Treatise to my L. of Canterbury, it
was printed at London 1636. In this book, the first article, which by the
confession of all sides draws with it all the rest, is set down in more
plain and foul terms then Molina or any Jesuit; sure I am then A^minius,
Vorstius, or any their followers ever did deliver, Page 18. Non vidio rationem
in contrarium quare cum quae est ex Deo per unam eandemque actionem bonitatis a
seipso emanantem, recta ordinatio fidei in Christum resipiscentiae,
obedientiae, perseverantiae, sit causa salvationis perversa quae ex hominibus
est damnationis, non in eadem unitatis ratione, electionis and reprobationis
etiam causa agnoscantur.
teaching in one These those three gross errors.

1. That men's faith, repentance, perseverance, are the true causes of their
Salvation; as mis-beleefe, impenitencie, apostasy, are of damnation: Does
Bellarmine go so far in his Doctrine of Justification and merit?

2. That those sins are no less the true causes of reprobation then of
damnation.

3. That men's faith, repentance, perseverance, are no less the true causes of
t^eir eternal Election, then mis-beliefe, or other sins of their temporal
damnation. Let Charity suppone that his Grace in the midst of his numerous
and weighty employments has been forced to neglect the reading of a book of
this nature, though dedicate to himself, albeit it is well known that his
watchful eye is fixed upon nothing more then Pamphlets which passes the press
upon doctrines now controverted, yet his Grace beelng publicly upbraided, for
countenancing of this Book, by D. Bastwick in the face of the Star Chamber,
and being advertised of its dedication to himself, of the errors contained
in it, yea of injuries against the King of the deepest stain, as these which
struck at the very root of his Supremacy and that in favor of the Bishops:

When in such a place Canterbury was taxed for letting his name stand before a
book that wounded the Kings Monarchick Government at the very heart, and did
transfer from the Crown to the Miter, one of its fairest diamonds, which the
King and his Father before him did ever love most dearly, no charity will
longer permit us to believe, but his Grace would without further delay lend
some two, or three spare-houres to the viewing of such a piece which did
concern the King and himself so nearly. Having therefore without all doubt
both seen and most narrowly sifted all the corners of that small Treatise, and
yet been so far from reproving the Author, from censuring the Licencer, his
Chaplan, from calling in the book, from expurging any one jot that was in it,
that the Treatise the second time is put to the press at London with the same
license, the same dedication, no letter of the points in question altered; May
we not conclude, with the favor of all reasonable men, that it is my Lord of
Canterburies express mind to have his own name prefixed, and his Chaplanes
hand subjoyned to the grossest errors of Arminius, and so to profess openly
his contempt of the Kings proclamation, for the pretended violation whereof be
causes stigmatize, mutilat, fine excessively, imprison for time of life, very
virtuous Gentlemen, both Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, and of other faculties.

What here can be said for his Graces Apology, nothing comes in my mind,
except one allegation, that the point in hand crosses not the proclamation,
discharging to proceed in those questions beyond the grammatical construction
and literal sense of the articles of England. Arminianisme is consonant to the
articles of England, and not contrary to the proclamation.


The Author indeed in his Epistle dedicatorie avowes to his Grace that the
These alleged, and all the rest of his book does perfectly agree with the
English Articles in the very first and literal sense, whereof the proclamation
speaks.

Nec videantur sensum articulorum ecclesiae Anglican^ in literali and
grammaticali nedum in affixo verborum sensu transgredi.
And to this assertion the Licencers hand is relative as to the rest of the
book; But of this miserable apology, which yet is the only one which I can
imagine possible, this will be the necessary issue, that the gross lie, which
good King James put upon the bold brow of impudent Bertius, for his affirming
that one article of the Saints apostasy, let be other more vile Arminian
Tenets, was consonant with the articles of England, must be thrown back from
Bertius on the Kings face, and that in as disgraceful a way as it was first
given; Montagew and Whit^, with his Graces permission, did give that venerable
Prince long ago the lie at home in English, affirming the perfect agreeance of
the Arminian Apostasy with the doctrine of England.

But this affront contents not his Grace, except this barbarous medecin, under
the shelter of his Archiepiscopall name be lie his Majesty over-sea, and over
the whole world, where the Latin is understood.

Beside this shameful inconvenience, another dangerous evil will necessarily
follow from this Apology, to wit: That the Arminian Doctrine may not only be
tolerated in England, which yet, if King James may be trusted, cannot fail to
draw down upon England a curse from God, shame from abroad, horrible shisme at
home, but also, since their grossest articles are declared in print and in
Latin, under the shadow of Canterburies name, to be fully consonant to the
very litterall sense of the Articles of England, all the members of that Church
may be compelled presently without more delay to embrace those doctrines; and
that any man is permitted in England to believe in peace the Antiarminian
Articles, wherein Queen Elizabeth and King James did live and dye, it is of
mere favor and the Princes mercy, who readily by the Archbishops
intercession is diverted from pressing the profession of those articles,
according to the first and most litterall sense, which now is clearly avowed
to be after Arminius; yea, Molina his mind.

CHAP. III. The Canterburians professed affection toward the Pope and Popery
in gross.
The faction once suspected of Lutherianisme.
IT was the opinion of many among us for a long time, that the innovating
faction did mind no more then Arminianism, But at once, those who touched
their pulse nearer, did find a more high humor working in their veins. With
Arminius errors, they began incontinent to publish other Tenets, which to all
mere Arminians were ridiculous follies.

The Elements of the Lords Supper began by them to be magnified, above the
common phrase of Protestant Divines, a corporal presence of Christ's humanity,
in and about the Elements to be glanced at, a kind of omnipresence of Christ's
flesh to be preached, a number of adorations before those Elements, and all
that was near them, both the Altar, Basin, Challice, and Chancell to be urged,
many new Ceremonies, which for many years had been out of use, to be taken
in, a great bitterness of spirit, against all who ran not after these new
guyses to appear.

This made us think they intended to step over from Arminius to Luther. In
this conception we were somewhat confirmed, considering their earnest
recommendation, to the reading of young Students the late Lutheran Divines,
such as Hutter, Meisner, Gerard, with their crying down, both in private and
public of Calvine, BeZa, Martyr, Bucer, and the rest of the famous writers,
both ancient and late of the French and Belgic Churches.

Their giving it out also, that their martyred Reformers, Crammer, Ridley,
Latimer, were of Luthers School, and from him had learned those things, wherein
the English church did differ from the other reformed of Calvin's framing. But
most of al, by my lord of Canterburies great diligence under hand, to promove
and reward that late negotiation of M. Duries with the Churches over Se^, for
the extenuating of the Lutheran errors, and procuring with their Churches, not
only a Syncretisme, which all good men did ever pant for, but also a full
peace in terms so general, so ambiguous, so flidderie, that were very
suspicious to many, otherwise very peaceable minds.

But at last Popery was found their mark.
Those considerations moved us to think* that the factious motion might
possibly end at Lutheranisme without any further progress. But it was not
long, while every common eye did observe their bowl, to roll much beyond that
mark. They published incontinent a number of the Romish errors, which to the
very Lutherans were ever esteemed deadly poison, the Popish Faith, the
Tridentine justification, merit of works, works of Supererogation, doctrinall
traditions, Limbus Patrum, the Sacrifice of the Mass, adoration of images,
monastic vows, Abbeyes and Nunries, the Authority of the Pope, a reunion
with Rome, as she stands.

Finding it so, we were driven to this conclusion, that as ordinarily the
Spirit of defection does not permit any Apostates to rest in any middle term,
but carries them along to the extremes of some palpable madness, to some
strong delusion for the recompense of the first degrees of their fall from the
love of the Truth, so also our Faction was carried quite beyond the bounds
both of Arminiu^ and Luther, yea of their own so much once beloved Cassander
and Spalato, and all the lists of that which they were wont to call moderation,
to drink of the vilest abominations, and the lowest dregs of the golden Cup of
that Romish Whore: For now my Lord Canterbury and his followers, are not
ashamed to proclaim in print their affection to Popery both in gross and
retaile. Let no man in this cast up to me any slander till he have heard and
considered the probation of my allegations.

Popery is a body of parts, if not innumerable, To make way for their
designs, they cry down the Popes Antichristianisme.
yet exceeding many. There is scarce any member great or small in this monster,
whereto the faction has not kythed too passionate a love. But for shortness,
I will show first their affection to the whole Mass of popish errors, their
respect to the Church of Rome, and to the Pope the Head thereof, than in
particular to the most princip^ll and abominable parts of that Chaos. As for
the whole of that confused lump, that they may win the more easily, to the
embracement of it, they cast down in the entry the chief wall, they remove
the maine impediment, whereby Protestants were ever kept therefrom.

What ever we speak of some very few private men, yet all Protestant Churches
without exception made ever the Popes Antichristianisme, their chief bulwark
to keep all their people from looking back toward that Babilonish Whore.

No Church did make greater state of that fort then the English, and no man in
that church more th^n King Charles blessed Father. He was not content himself
to believe and avow the Pope that great Antichrist, but also with arguments
invincible drawn mainely from some passages of the Revelation, cleared now as
light, by the Commentary of the Popes practices, to demonstrate to all
Neighbor Princes and States of Christendom in a monitorie Treatise this his
belief, for that express end, that from this truth clearly proved, they might
not only see the necessity he had to keep himself and his Subjects for
evermore from returning to Rome, but they also by this one argument might be
forced to cast ^ff the yoke of the Pope, when they saw him clothed with the
garments of Antichrist.

It was the continual song of all the Bishops and Clergy in England, till D.
Laud got absolute credit with the Duke of Buckinghame, that the Popes
Antichristianisme was an engine of such efficacy as was able of it self
alone, if well manadged to overthrow the walls of Rome.

For this I give but two witnesses, two late English Bishops both of them
deponing before all England to King James, and he accepting their testimony,
Caeterum agendo quam nihil agant, and ambitioso magnorum voluminum apparatu non
nisi lituras scriba^t, disputatione ista de antichristo, liquido constare
poterit; quia si causam hanc obtinuerimus esse romanum pontificem antichristum,
de reliquae contraversia dubitandi, non erit relictus, locus, quia de
Antichrists doctrina, quin pernitiosa sit and impia dubitari non potest.
Abbots of Salisburrie in his dedicatorie Ep^stle to king James before his
Treatise of Antichrist, and Downame of Derry in the first paragraph Illa mihi
imprimus question, quae est de antichristo, dignissima semper est visa, in qua
decti determinandi omnes tum ingenij, tum industriae nervos contenderent; illa
enim de veritate quam nos in hac causa singulari Dei benificio tenemus, si
inter omnes semel conveniret de reliquis statim contraversijs actum esset,
debellatumque, neque aliquid in p^sterum periculi fores, quemquam ^mnino
Christianum, cui sua ca^ esset salus, detecto jam antichristo, agnitoque
adhesurum.
of his book dedicated also to K. James upon that same subject.
Notwithstanding my lord of Canterbury, For making the way to Rome more smooth,
spares not to cause raze down to the earth this fort. Montagu and White his
non-such divines, as we heard them styled at his Graces direction by his
Herald Heylene, will have the kings unanswerable arguments proponed by him
even to foreign Princes; not only counted weak but plain frensies. This
word does Featlie cite from their Appeal. Pelag. redi. v. 2* tab. page 39. As
for the Protestant arguments taken out of the Apocalypse, to prove the pope to
be the Antichrist. Bellarmine calls them deliramenta, dotages: And the
appealer to show more zeal to the Popes cause straineth further, and terms
them apocalypticall phrensies.
Christopher Dow is licentiat by Canterbury, to affirm that howsoever our
Divines at the beginning of the Reformation in the heat of dispute did upbraid
the Pope with Antichristianisme, yet now that heat being cooled, the matter to
men in their sober blood appears doubtful. P. 53. Many learned in our church
especially when the greatest heat was stricken between us and Rome, have
affirmed the Pope to be the Antichrist, yet to them that calmely and seriously
consider it, it may not without good reason be disputed as doubtful
his Graces Herald appointed to speak for his lord by the State, does correct
this simple Dow, and puts the matter out of all doubt, assuring by good
scripturall proof, by a text miserably abused, that the Pope is not, was not,
and can not be Antichrist. Page 128. I have yet one thing more to say to you in
this point, S. John has given it for a rule, that every spirit that confesses
not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God, but is that spirit
of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard. So that unless you can make good (as I
think you can not) that the pope of Rome confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, you have no reason to conclude that he is that Antichrist.
And that in this matter there may hereafter betwixt the Canterburians and
Rome remain no shadow of Controversy, their man Shelfoord, comes home to
Bellarmine, well near in omnibus, making Antichrist one single man; a Jew
preaching formal blasphemies against Christ natures and person three years
and an half, killing by his hands Enoch and Elias. And least any footsteppe of
this belief should ever appear in the church of England, Canterbury
confesses that the place of the public lyturgie wherein it was imported, was
changed by his own hand. Star Chamber speech, page 32. the first place is
changed thus, from, Root out that Babylonish and Antichristian sect, which say
of Jerusalem, into this form of words, Root out that Romish and Balylonish
sect, of them, which say, This alteration is of so small consequence that it
is, not worthy the speaking: or if there be any thing of moment in it, it is
answered in the next, where the chief thing he says, is, that he was
commanded to alter it by the King for to remove scandal from the Papists.

They are content to have the popes authority set up again in England




This scarre-crow being set aside, at once the Pope, the Cardinals and all
their Religion began to His fifth sermon through the whole.
look with a new face. Anent the Pope they tell us first, Montag. antigage,
page 41. Gens abium unaquaeque tandem suas sibi plumas repetendo surtivis
coloribus denudatam, propriis etiam quod non oportuit, improbantque vehementer
(...) circumcisa^, nudam, ridendum, exsibilandam cornicula^ exposuerunt.
that the reformers did him pitiful wrong in spoiling him, not only of those
things he had usurped, but of many privileges which were his own by due
right, and should have been left to him untouched. Again they will have us to
believe, that the Sea of Rome was truly Peter's Apostolic chair, that Peter
was truly a Prince among the Apostles, that the Pope is Cant. relat. of the
confess. page 183 A primacie of order was never denied to S. Peter, that Rome
had potentioren principatum then other Churches: the Protestants grant, and
that not only, because the Roman Prelate was ordine primus, first in order and
degree, which some one must be to avoid confusion, but also, etc. Ibid. page
154. Austen says indeed, that in the Church of Rome there did ever flourish
the principality of an Apostolic Chair, this no man denies. Ibid. page 133.
No man of learning doubts but the Church of Rome had a powerful principality
within its own patriarchat. Montag. Antigag. page 51. Damus a Petro ad aetatem
Augustini in Ecclesia Romana Apostolicae cathedrae semper viguisse principatum.
Ibid. page 57. Quae ratio erat olim singulorum in suis (...) Episcoporum, eadem
erat in provinciis Metrapolitarum, in terrarum orb patriarcharum, recte autem
(quis negat) consultum eratolim, and cautum per canones vetustae Ecclesiae, ut
Romanus ille primus (nec hoc negatur) Episcoporum, cui tot per occidentem
suffraganei adherebant, suam sententiam rogatus adhiberet, ubi fides Ecclesiae
universalis, aut (...) in rebus ad (...) spectantibus agitabatur, and quicquid
sanciretur suo suffragio confirmaret, priusquam ratum firmum fixumque legis vim
and efficaciam per Ecclesiam universalem obineret. Ibid. page 80. Monarchae
sunt Episcopi in suis (...), monarchae in suis (...), Metropolitae Monarchae
Patriarchae augustiores, sed plures per unam Ecclesiam Catholicam: Praecipuae
olim parti Chistiani orbis hoc est, cunctis ad occidentem regionibus cum
authoritate quadam non illa suprema praefuit Pontifex, etsi non obstaret illa
perdita ambitio etiam hodie preesset.
Petets only successor, that within the bounds of his own Patriarchat he is
a Prince, he is a monarch. Thirdly, that order and unity do necessarly
require one Bishop to have the inspection and superiority over all Bishopes,
and that this prerogative by good Ecclesiastical right is due to the Pope.
Cant. relat. p. 183. The Roman Prelate was ordine primus, first in order or
degree, which some one must be to avoid confusion. Montag. antid page 116.
Certum est ratione vinculi communis inter Christanos ratione ordinis
praecedentis inter Patriarchas universalis Ecclesiae curam ad Petri sedim
confluxisse. Ibid. page 51. Eclesia acies ordinata multitudo, (...), costituta.
Vbicunque multi and multiplicitas, ut ordo eluceat, and harmonia conservetur,
ab uno arcessenda est origo omnis. Vnde autem melius origo omnis quam ab
Ecclesia principali, loco debetur haec praeminentia, loci primatum, and illum
ordinis, and propter utrumque praestantiae habeat, si voluerit Romanus
pontifex. Inter Ecclesiae sacerdotes communio and societas ejusdemque fidei
integrae and illibatae professio, quoad ordinem and interdum executionem non
potuit nisi ab uno aliquo fieri and derivari; Inde autem per consensum
Christianae orbis derivabatur, hoc est, a cathedra and sede Petri Romano
scilicet Episcopatis. Ibid. page 158. Illi certe principatum sacerdotii super
omnes antiquatas tribuit, neque nos hunc abnuimus principatum, fontem esse
sacerdotti, and summi Pontificatus apicem nos non reluctamur, est and sit.
Fourthly, that all the authority which the English Bishops have this day,
specially his Grace of Canterbury, is derived to them from the Pope and Peter's
chair, That if this derivation could not be clearlie demonstrat, the Clergy of
England might justly refuse all obedience to their Bishops jurisdiction.
Pokling. alt. page 50 Miserable were we, if he that now sits Archbishop of
Canterbury, could not derive his succession from S. Augustine, S. Augustine
from S. Gregory, S. Gregory from S. Peter. What a comfort it is to his Grace,
that he can say, Ego sum haeres Apostolorum, I, and my predecessors have kept
possession. Pokling. Sunday at the beginning. Our Diocesian can derive himself
the successor of an apostle, otherwise we should have taken his call for the
vocie of a stranger, and not have here appeared. It is S. Augustins resoluto^,
Successio Episcoporum ab ipsa sede Petri, is that which among other things by
him named, keeps us in the bosom of the Church, and subjects us to our
Bishops jurisdiction.
Fifthly, that diverse of the late Popes have been very good men, yea, among
the best of men, that those of them who have been very monsters of men, yet
for that veneration which their high and eminent place in the Church of God,
does require all the styles of honor in justice is due to them, even holiness
it self in abstracto, that to refuse them this, or their other titles is but
brainsick puritanisme. Montag. oreg. Eccles. p. 114. Patrum nostrorum vel
avorum memoria dua summi Pontifices virri optimi and doctissimi, Hadrianus
sextus, and Bellarmini avunculus Marcellus secundus. Antid. page 47. Romanus
Episcopus Pontifex maximus quidni dicebatur, scio vocatum benedictum, scio
Papam and Pastorem nominari^, quid si haec omnia nomina usurpabat. Orig. page
417. Certis quibusdam titulis, and elogiis homines (...) constitutos ab omni
retro antiqualite viti prudentes etiam and religiosi honorant, istos honorum
lemnistos, non est cujusvis conculcare, sed nec palam reprehendere, aut iisdem
derogate, id quod solent (...), Puritani Pontificem Romanum suam sanctitatem
indigitare certissimus est character Antichristianismi: Non tibi, sed religioni
dicebat olim Isidis adorator, cum asinus portans mysteria se putaret veneratum,
honorem pari modo non Paulo alicui quarto Alexandro Sexto, Ioanni duodecimo and
caeteris, si qui sunt prodigia and propudia honestatis, sed religioni
exhibendum contendimus, hoc est, eminenti dignitati, qua ultra alios in
Ecclesia Dei praediti sunt, sed est haec pbrenesis hominum solummodo
phanaticorum.


6 That the dignity of the Episcopal office, specially the Bishop of Rome his
eminency, was as far above the dignity of the Emperors and Kings, as the soul
is above the body, or God above the creature; yea, that the style of God was
but the Popes due: Montag. antip. page 166. Est quidem sacerdotium, ut recte
observat Pbil. (...) and (...), itaque ut (...) Jesus Christi, ut Dei atque
hominum (...) summus a C ristianis omnibus, Divino instituto debetur honor and
reverentia singularis. ibid. p. 40. Fatetur ultro sacerdotium aliquo modo in
quibusdam supra regiam dignitatem eminere, cum vetustis and orthodoxis patribus
(...) (inquit Chry^ostom) (...) (regem prius dixerat) (...), and Nazianzen, in
apologi a (...). ibid. p. 162. Allusum est a piissimo rege ad illud Exodi,
Constitui te Deum Pharaonis, communicate Deus (...), seu Pontificio seu civili,
sui ipsius (...) and (...) dii vocantur quis ringatur ob hanc (...), and merito
quos locu^ ille suum voluit inter homines sustinere.
7. That Emperors and Kings did but their duty in giving reverence; yea,
adoration unto the Pope with great sums of money by way of tribute: Montag
antid page 40. Non est mirum si Constantinus olim Pipinus, Carolus, and alii
occurrerent, de equis descenderent, venientes exceperint, religionis antistites
Christianae venerationemque exhibuerint. Quid mirum Turcarum Caliphis non ita
pridem tot Sultanos tantam observantiam exhibuisse tam ampla vectigalia
persolvisse: Non minora quondam principes and populi Christiani Christianis
sacerdotibus imprimis Romany pontificibus exhibuerint, exhibebunt etiamnum ad
pristinos illos mores si tantum revertatur, and exempla pietatis maiorum. ibid.
page 158. Adoravit Ioannem Justinius, sic and Constantinus inferiores Ioanne
sacerdotes, adoravit aut^m dicit author ille tuus dans gloriam Deo.
8 That the temporal principalities which the Pope enjoys this day in
Italy, or elsewhere, are but his just possessions, which none ought to invy
him: Montag. antid. page 95. Habeat ille suas sibi opes and facultates, fundos
habeat and latifundia, principatum and dominium per Ecclesia terras, and Petri
possessiones obtineat, dummode contentus vetuctiorum principum liberalitate,
alienam non invadat possessionem.
9. That the restitution of the Popes ancient authority in England, and
yielding unto him all the power that this day he has in Spain or France,
would be many ways advantageous, and in nothing prejudicial to the King:
Cant. relat. page 202 He that is not blind may see if he will, of what little
value the popes power in France and Spain is this day further then to serve
the turns of their Kings therewith, which they do to their great advantage.
10 The old constitution of the Emperor, whereby all the western clergy is
so far subjected to the Bishop of Rome, that without him they are disabled to
make any Ecclesiastical law, and obliged to receave for laws what he does
enjoyne, was very reasonable: Yea, if the King would be pleased to command all
the church men in his dominions to be that far subject to the Pope they would
be unreasonable to refuse present obedience: Montag. antid. page 156. Quod e
codice allegatur Theodosiano decernimus, ne quid tam Episcopis Gallicanis qua^
aliarum provinciarum, contra consuetudinem veterem liceat, sine viri
venerabilis Papae urbis alternae authoritate tentare, sed illis omnibusque
legis loco sit, quicquid sanxit sanxeritve sedis apostolicae authoritas.
Quicquid hic pontifici ( says Montagow) arrogatur id totum edicto debetur
Theodosiano vel vetustae consuetudini, quicquid autem per rescriptum tribuitur
imperatoris ad occidentales credo solos pertinebat* and nec omnes, quibus juxta
veterem consuetudinem Pontifex praesidebat ut Patriarcha: Decernat imperator de
G^rmanis episcopis, Rex Angli^ de Britannis suis, Francorum de Gallicanis, quod
olim Theodosius decrevit, dicto erunt omnes obedientes.
Only by all means my Lord of Canterburies prerogative behoved to be
secured, his ancient right to the patriarchat of the whole Isle of Britain
behoved to be made clear, that to his rod the whole clergy of the Isle might
submit their shoulders, as to their spiritual head and Monarch, from whom to
Rome there could be no appeal, Cant. relat. page 171. It is plain, that in
these ancient times, in the Church government, Britain was neever subject to
the Sea of Rome, for it was one of the six diocies of the West Empire, and had
a p^^mat of its own: Nay John Capgraw, and William Mabinnesburrie tell us, that
Pope Vrb^n the second, in the Council at Bari in Apuleia, accoun^ed my worthy
predecessor S. Anselme as his own Compeer, and said, He was as the patriarch
and apostolic of the other world, quasi comparem, and veluti Apostolicum
alterius orbis and Patriarcham. Now the Britains having a primate of their own,
which is greater then a Metropolitan; yea, a patriarch, if ye will, he could
not be appealed from to Rome.
in any cause which concerned only the churches of the Kings dominions; for in
causes more universal of the whole catholic Church, willingly they are
contented that the Patriarch of Britain and all others should submit to their
grand Apostolic father of Rome. Montag. Antid. page 57. Recte cautum erat
olim per canones vetustae Ecclesiae, ut Romanus ille primus Episcoporum, cui
tot per occidentem suffraganei adherebant, suam sententiam rogatus adhiberet,
ubi fidei Ecclesiae universalis, vel (...) in rebus ad politiam spectantibus,
agitabatur supra.
Every one of these pontifical positions since the midst of Henry the eights
reign, would have been counted in England great paradoxes, yet now all of
them are avowed by Canterbuerie himself, in that very book which the last
year at the Kings direction he set forth, for to satisfy the world anent
their suspicion of his Popery, or else by D. Montagu in his books yet
unrepealed, and cleanged of all suspicion of Popery by M. Dow, under the seal
of his Graces licencing servant.

This much for the Pope. About the Cardinals they tell us that their office is
an high and eminent dignity in the Church of God; Their mind to the
Cardinalat.
for the which their persons are to be handled with great reverence and honor,
Montag. ap. page 56 Penitere non potuit Baronium eruditissimu^ and
laboriosissimum virum, industriae suae ac deligentiae, Cardinalitiame: niminde
and merito quidem suo adeptus suscepit dignitate^. ibid. page 75. Virum
illustri adeo nominis celebritate and eminentissima dignitate co^stitutum,
honestum, probum, preterea in vita privata rigidem severum ac tantum non (...)
nusquam nisi honorificentissime compellavi.
that their office is a reward due to high graces and virtues, that some of
them though the greatest enemies that ever the reformed Churches have felt,
such as Baronius that spent all his time in opposing the truth and advancing
Antichristianisme, and Barromaeus Pokling. Alt. page 34. The Linchonshire
Minister it his jearing vein flouteth Cardinal Baromaeus, whereas, if he list
to read his life he may not be ignorant that the Cardinal was a man of
exemplarie holiness and spent the greatest part of his life in fasting,
prayer, almsdeeds, preaching, exhoration, and doctrine, and did detest both
impiety and vanity both in word and deed. Me thinks his conscience should
check him for his scornful usage of a man who had the report of so virtuous
and pious a Bishop.
a bloody persecutor of our religion and one of the fathers of Trent, that even
such men are so full of grace and piety, that it is a great fault in any
protestant to break so much as a jest on their red hattes.

Where the head and shoulders are so much affected it is hard to restrain
charity from the rest of the body. These good men vent their passion no less
toward the body of the present Church of Rome, then toward the Pope and the
Cardinals. For first his grace avowes over and over again that the Papists
and we are of one and the same religion, They affect much to be joined with
the Church of Rome, as she stands.
that to speak otherwise, as the Liturgy of England did all King James days,
were a matter of very dangerous consequent, and therefore he confesses his
helping that part of the liturgy which puts a note of infamy upon the popish
religion, least that note should fall upon our own religion which with the
popish is but all one Cant. relat. p 36 The Church of Rome and Protestants set
not up a different Religion, for the christian Religion is the same to both,
but they differ in the same Religion, and the difference is in certain gross
corruptions to the very endangering of salvation, which each side says the
other is guilty. of Star Chamber speech, page 36. My second reason is, That
the learned make but three Religions to have been of old in the world,
Paganism, Iudaisme, and Christianity and now they have added a fourth which
is Turcisme Now if this ground of theirs be true, as it is generally neceived,
perhaps it will be of dangerous consequence sadly to avow that the popish
religion is rebellion, though this clause passed in the ^iturgie through
inadvertrance in King James time, this reason well weighed is taken from the
very foundation of Religion it self. ibid. page 34. His Majesty expressly
commanded me to make the alteration, and to see it printed.
2 They will have us to understand though we and the papists differ in some
things, yet that this very day their is no schism betwixt papists and
Protestants, that protestants keep union and communion with the Church of Rome
in all things required for the essence of a true Church and necessary for
salvation, that though they communicate not with some of her doctrines and
practices, yet this marres not the true union and communion of the two Churches
both in faith and charity. That these who pass harder censures upon Rome are
but zelots in whom too much zeal has burnt up all wisdom and charity.
Pottar p. 3. 66. We darre not communicate with Rome, either in her public
Liturgy which is manifestly polluted with gross superstition, or in these
corrupt and ungrounded opinions, which she has added to the faith. These make
up the popery, but not the Church of Rome. In them our communion is dissolved,
but we have still a true and real union with that and all other members of
the Church universal in faith and charity. ibid. page 74. To depart from the
Church of Rome in some doctrines and practices, we had just and necessary
cause though the Church of Rome wanted nothing necessary to salvation. There
is great difference betwixt shisme from them and reformation of our self. It
is one thing to leave communion with the Church of Rome, and another to leave
communicating with her erros, whosoever professes himself to forsake the
communion of any one member of Christ's body, must confess himself
consequently to forsake the whole. And therefore we forsake not Romes
communion more nor the body of Christ whereof we acknowledge the Church of
Rome to be a member, though corrupted. If any Zelots has proceeded among us
to heavier censures, their zeal may be excused, but their charity and
wisdom can not he justified. Cant. relat. p. 192. The Protestants have not
left the Church of Rome in her essence, but in her errors, not in things which
constitute a Church, but only in such abuses and corruptions which work toward
the dessolution of a Church.
3 Thar the points wherein the two Churches do differ are such as prejudge not
the Salvation of either party, that they are not foundamentall, and albeit
they were so: yet the truths that the papists do maintain are of force to
hinder all the evil that can come from their errors. Cant. relate. page 249.
The foundation is and remains whole in the mids of their superstitions.
Heylens answer. page 124. Suppose a great Prelat in the high Commission Court
had said openly, That we and the Church of Rome differed not in
fundamentalibus, yet how comes this to be an innovation in the doctrine of
England. For that church tells us in the 19. article, That Rome does err in
matters of Faith, but it has not told us that she does err in
fundamentalibus. Halls old religion after the beginning: It is the charitable
profession of zealous Luther, that under the popery there is much Christian
good, yea, all, that under the papacy there is true Christianity, yea, the
kernel of Christianity? Neither do we censure that Church, for what it has
not, but for what it has. Fundamental truth is like the Maronian wine which
if it be mixed with twenty times so much water, holds his strength. Rome as
it is Babylon, we must come out of it, but as it is an outward visible Church,
we neither did nor would, Butterfields Maskell. Popery is poison, but
fund^mentall truch is an antidot. A little quantity of antidot that is
sovereign, will destroy much poison. Pottar page 62. The most necessary and
fundamental truths which constitute a Church, are on both sides unquestioned,
ibid. By fundamental points of Faith we understand these prime, and capital
doctrines of Religion, which make up the holy Catholic Faith, which
essentially constitutes a true Church and a true Christian. The Apostles Creed
taken in a Catholic sense that is as it was further opened in some parts by
occasion of emergent heresies in the other catholic creed of Nice,
Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon and Athanasius is said generally by the
Scholemen and Fathers to comprehend a perfect catalogue of fundamental truths,
and to imply a full rejection of fundamental heresies. ibid. page 109. It
semeed to some men of great learning and judgment, such as Hooker and Morton,
that all who profess to love the Lord Jesus, are brethren, and may be saved,
though with erros, even fundamental truths, and to imply a full rejection of
fundamental heresies. ibid. p. 109 It seemed to some men of great learning and
judgment, such as Hooker and Morton, that all who profess to love the Lord
Jesus, are brethren, and may be saved, though with errors, even fundamental.
Heretics do embrace the principles of Christianity, and err only by
misconstruction. Whereupon their opinions, albeit repugnant indeed to Faith yet
are held other wise by them, and maintained as consonant to the Faith.
4 That the popish errors, let be to be fundamental, are of so small
importance as they do not prejudge either faith, hope, or charity, let be
salvation.

Cant, relat. page 361 Holcat. Non omnis error in his quae fidei sunt est aut
infidelitas, aut haeresis. In things not necessary though they be divine
truths if about them men differ, it is no more then they have done, more or
less in all ages, and they may differ and yet preserve that one necessary
Faith entire, and charity also, if they be so well minded, for opinions which
flattereth about that one souls saving Faith, there are dangerous differences
this day. Pottar page 38. It is a great vanity to hope or expect that all
learned men in this life should absolutely consent in all the particles of the
divine truth, so long as the Faith once delivered to the Saints, and that
common faith containing all necessary verities is kept. So long as men walk
charitably according to this rule, though in other things they be otherwise
minded, the unity of the Church is no wise violated: for it does consist in
the unity of faith, not of opinions, in the union of men's hearts by true
charity, which easily tolerateth unnecessar differences. Some points of
religion are primitive articles essential in the object of Faith. Dissension
in these is pernicious, and destroys unity. Other, are secundary probable
obscure and accidental points: Disputations in these are tolerable. Unity in
these is very contingent and variable. As in musical consort, a discord now
and then, so it be in the discant, and depart not from the ground, sweetens
the harmony: So the varitie of opinions and rites in diverse parts of the
Church, does rather commend then prejudice the unity of the whole. Montag.
Antigog. page 14. Truth is of two sorts among men, manifest and confessed
truth, or more obscure and involved truth. Plainly delivered in Scripture are
all these points which belong unto Faith, and manners, hope and charity. I know
none of these contraverted inter parts. The articles of our creed are
confessed on both sides, and held plain enough. The contraverted points are of
a larger and inferior allay. Of them a man may be ignorant without any danger
of his soul at all. A man may resolve or oppose this way or that way with out
perrell of perishing. Cant. relat. about the end. The coruptions of Rome
materially, and in the very kind and nature, are leaven, dross, hay and
stubble, yet the Bishop thought that such as were misled by education, or long
custom, or overvalving the Soveraignity of the Roman Church, and did in
simplicity of heart embrace them, might by their general repentance and Faith
in the Merits of Christ, attended with charity and other verues find mercy
at Gods hands. Shelfoord page 235. Though there be some difference among us in
ceremonies and expositions, which destroy not, yet still our head Christ by
Baptism stands upon our body, and the substance of the Gospel is entire and
whole among us by retaining the articles of the Faith, the volume of the
New Testament, and the practice there of by Faith and good works. ibid. page
239. There be differences which hinder our agreement. What then? Among the
Greeks there were diverse Dialects, and yet they had but one language, they
held together in the maine. So though Papists have a letter more then we, and
we one letter for another, yet we hold together in the radix. Paul could
bear with differences, expecting Gods reformation. If you be otherwise minded
God shall revaile. For the present let us be patient, and afterward God will
show where the error lies. Why should we presume so much of our skill, while
we are in our none-age, and know but in part? Have not better men then we
been deceived? Have not dissenting Fathers and slyding Schoolists been always
borne with in points of Religion?
Fifthly, That a general repenrance for all unknown sins is sufficient to
secure the salvation not only of these who have lived and died in the popish
tenets before the council of Trent, but even to this day not only their
people, but their most learned Clergy, Popes, Cardinals, Jesuits, living and
dying in their bitter oppositions and persecutions of protestants, are in no
hazard of damnation, though they never come to any particular acknowledgement
of their sinful opinions or practices following thereupon. Pottar page 77. We
hope well of these holy souls, who in former ages lived and died in the church
of Rome, for though they died in many sinful errors, yet because they did it
ignorantly through unbelief, not knowing them either to be errors or sins,
and repented in general for all their unknown trespasses, we doubt not, but
they obtained pardon of all their ignorances. Nay, our charity reaches
further to all these that this day, who in simplicity of heart believe the
Roman religion, and profess it. But we understand only them who either have
no sufficient means to find the truth, or else as after the use of the best
means they can have, all things considered, find no sufficient motives to
convince their consciense of errors. Chomley his defense of Hall, I dare be
bold to say that the church of Rome had not for many hundredth years before the
council of Trent, so good a form of doctrine as the Tridentin catechism does
contain.
Sixtlie, They teach us that papists may not in reason be styled either
idolaters, or heretics, or schismatics. His Grace in that great large folio
set out the last year, to declare to the world the fartherst that his mind
could be drawn for to oppose popery, is not pleased, to my memory, in his
most verhement oppositions to lay to their charge any of these three cirmes,
neither do I remember in all the search my poor lecture has made, that any
of his favorites in their writtes these twelve years bygone has laid to the
charge of Rome in earnest, either idolatry heresy or shisme, but by the
contrary has absolved them clearly in formal terms of al those three cirmes.
Shelfoord. p. 300 I am not in the mind that all images are idols, but only
when they are worshipped for gods. This the word idolatria signifies the
wotshipping of images, with latria, that is divine worship, as it is used by
Divines. Cant. relat. page 299. They keep close to that which is superstition,
and in the case of images come near to idolatry. Montag. apar. page 79. Et
certe quamdiu palam non deficiunt, a pietate and cultu Dei proprio ad
idolatriam, etiam moribus impii, vita contaminati, tolerantur in Ecclesia non
minus quam milvus and corvus immunda animalierant in arca Ecclesia (...)
singulari. At nullus in arca erat idololatres, quia Christianam pietatem
quatenus Christianam idololatres execratur. Montag. page 309. Dei cultum
latriam quam appellant nec possumus alicui creaturae, nec debemus sive humanae
sive angelicae quamvis excellentissimae impendere. Hoc fatibitur Bullingerus
Pontificius and tota schola non insanientium adversariorum, nolunt enim illi
quovis modo cuicunque creaturae latriam nequidem cultu relativo exhiberi.
Montag. Antigag. page 319. You say, that images must not have latria: so we:
let your practice and doctrine go together, and we agree. Dow against Burton
obiecteth that my lord Canterbury did raze out the public book of fasts,
this sentence, Thou have delivered us from superstition and idolatry wherein
we were utterly drowned, his chief answer is, That men may be good
Protestants, and yet not damn all their forefathers, who lived before the
reformation, as he must do, who says of them, they were wholly drowned in
idolatry which though M. Burton perhaps will not, yet some men may think it
to be a reason sufficient for the leaving out of that sentence.
Of idolatry, because they teach not the giving of latria to any image or any
creature.

Cant relat. page 306. Non omnes error in his que fidei sunt est aut
infidelitas aut heresis. Pottar, page 102. Every sect has some zelots so
passionatly in love with their own opinions that they condemn all other
differing from them to be heretical, so there lives not a Christian on earth
who in the judgment of many other is not an heretic, ibid. page The Giant in
Gath was a true man, though much deformed with superfluous fingers and toes,
but if one lose any vital part, he is a man no longer, there is not so much
danger in adding superfluities, as is in detracting, what is essential and
necessary, that the Church shall never be robbed of any truth, necessary to
the being of the Church, the promises of Christ assures us, but that she
shall add no unnecessarie truth we have no warrant.
Of heresy, because their errors takes no part of the fundation away, but are
only excesses and additions consisting with all fundamental truth Cant.
relat. page 316. If any will be a leader and teaching heretic, and add
shisme to heresies, and be obstinate in both, he without repentance must
needs be lost, while many that succed him in the error only, and no
obstinacy may be saved: I say, those howsoever misled, are neither
schismatics nor heretics before God and are therefore in a state of
salvation. Monag. Apar. page 28. Sectam and haeresin non faciunt ii qui
constanter retinent doctrinam traditam, nec enim ille haereticus dicetur, qui
per omnia Romanam fidem integerrime profitetur. ibid. p. 389. Schismatici and
singularitate rapti in transversus quales Scaliger, Calvinus, Pareus, and alii
opinatores, quaero autem an quis ferendus sit homo novis terrae filius, qui
contempto spretoque consensu majorum suas phreneticas observationes obtruserit
Of shisme, because they go on in the practice of their forbeares without
introducing any late novations. 7. They declare it were very good we had
present peace with Rome as she stands, her errors being but in opinions which
charity ought to tolerate, that the Church of England would gladly embrace
this peace, that Cassander and the like who further this reconciliation are the
men of the world most worthy of praise, that the Jesuits and Calvinists both
purytanes who hinder this peace, are the most flagitious and intolerable
Shelford page 238. Let us Christians leave off our divisions, the papists and
we call upon one God, our Father, upon one Christ, our Savior, one holy
Ghost, our sanctifier, and we have but one mean to unite us to this holy
Uni-trinitie, which is Baptism, How then should we not be brethren? O
blessed Jesus, raise up one to bid the people return, blessed be that peace
maker among men, Nulla salus bello pacem te poscimus omne. ibid page 296. Why
judge we so eagerly others for holding of errors, ane asy without them? Some
errors we may bear with, charity teaches me to judge that errors of
Christians are not of intention but ignorance. For I believe that willingly and
willingly, neither Papist, Protestant nor Lutheran would wrong their Head
Christ, whom daily they profess. Montag. apar. page 45. Citius inter
digladiantes Philosophos de summo bono, quam inter Protectantes and Papistas
inaudita nomina superioribus saeculis, and subintroducta nuper inauspicato de
controversis inter ipsos quaestionibus conveniet, sed viderunt posteri de
dissidiis istis quae pene nihil sani, sancti nihil, in vita and moribus nobis
reliquerunt, cum profani homines and politici sub praetextu and simulatione
religionis suas improbas actiones, enormia desideria soleant palliare. Post
mota haec certamina inter parts odiis decertatim vatinianis, atque eo deventum
est utrinque insaniae and excessus ut far eos nequeant zelotae and furiosi
plerique utrinque theologi qui non una cum ipsis velint insanire. Quam indignis
modis Cassander vi^ usque ad miraculum eruditus ipsissima modestia and pro
bitatis anima, exceptus fuerit ab importunis utrinque Consoribus, Calvino
nimirum propter editum illum aureum libellum de officio viri pii, and pluribus
inter Iesuitas propter consultationem Paulo liberiorem ignorant nemo, quam
fortunae aliam subire Andreas Tricius aliique qui impudenter noluerunt essa
contentiosi. ibid. page 78. Hoc tempore tituli insilices protestantium and
papislarum variantibus de fide ae pietate sententiis distraxerunt in diversum
Christianum orbem, si qui sint qui bellum malint aeternum, qui velint odia
exerceri immortalia traducant illi nostram quae solet odiosius exagitari
tepeditatem vel (...): Ego filius illius pacifici and pacificatoris qui fecit
utraque unum desiecta macerie separalionis; neque certe arbitror ab hac (...)
ab horret nostrae Anglicanae Ecclesiae suffragium and voluntas, quod nonnulli
putant and vehementer contendunt, ibid. page 245. In Pharisaeis ad vivum
depictas imagines intueamur eorum hominum qui Pharisaica nobis insituta in
Christianismum retulere, puritanos intelligo and Iesuitas, sive ut verius dicam
utrumque puritanos honestatis etiam civilis reduviae pietatis carcinomata,
Christianismi dehonestamenta pacis and concordiae alastoras and pernities.
persons of this age. All this and much more of such stufe you may see printed
not only with allowance but with applause by the chief of that faction his
Grace himself. Montagow the first of the three none suches, Pottar in that his
much beloved piece put out as he says at the command of authority. Pottars
Epistle to the King, it was undertaken in obedience to your Majesty's
particular commandment.
Shelfoorde in his pious Sermons printed by the University of Cambridge press
at the direction of the Vice Chancellor D. Beel dedicated to the Lord Keeper
of England, adorned with many triumphing Epigrammes both latin and english by
a number of the fellows, and although called in, yet no censure to this day for
all the complaints against it, to our hearing has been put either on the
author or printer, or licencer, or adorners or any Doctrine contained therein,
but the worst that Burton could pycke out of it is all defended by Dow and
Heylen at his Graces special direction and subscribed license as we shall
hear anon.

I hope now that all true protestants pondering the passages I have brought,
beside many mo, wherewith themselves from their own readings are acquainted,
will not only absolve my alledgeances of rashness and slander, but also wonder
at the incredible boldness of those men, who in these times wherein the Prince
and state are by so many and deep ties obliged, and according to their
obligations has so often declared themselves possionatly zealous for the
maintenance of protestant orthodoxie that yet they should be so peart as to
print in the royal city, and after long and great grumblings of the people and
formal challenges of diverse of the learned to reprint their clear affections to
the pope and Cardinals and the whole Romish religion, albeit truly this their
ventorious boldness seems not more marveillous then their ingenuitie
commendable: For they have said nothing for the pope or Rome, but that which
conscience would pouse any man upon all hazards to avow, who was so persuaded
in the particular heads of controversies betwixt papists and protestants as
they profess themselves to be, to the end therefore that we may see the
former strange enough passages not to have dropped from their pens by any
inadvertance, but upon plain design and deliberate purpose* we will set
down in the next rowme the affection they profess to the special heads of
popery very consonant to that which they have already said of that which we
count the whole lump and universal mass of Antichristianisme. The special
heads of popery are more then I have leisure to relate, or you can have
patience to hear enumerate. Take notice therefore but of some pryme articles
which Protestants use most to detest in papists, four by name their
idolatries, their heresies, their superstitions, their abomination of
desolation the mass. If from their own mouth I make clear that in these four
they join with Rome against us, it is like none hereafter shall wonder of any
thing that yet they have done or said for the advancement of the popish party,
and the subverting of the protestants Churches either at home, or over sea, but
rather embrace their sobriety and moderation who being minded, as they
profess, do not break out in many more both words and deeds, for the
destroying of the protestant schism, and bringing all back to the Catholic
Apostolic mother Church of Rome, and unto the feet of his holiness the Vicar
of Christ, the successor of Peter, under whose obedience our holy and blessed
antecessors did live and die.

CHAP. IIII. The Canterbuerians join with Rome in her grossest idolatries.
THE acts of Romes Idolatry be many and various: None more open to the eye of
beholders then these five, their adoration of altars, images, relicts, In the
midst of their denial, yet they avow their giving of religious adoration to
the very altar.
sacramental bread, and Saints departed: For the first, their worshipping of
the stock or stone of the altar, if we would impute it unto the
Canterburians, they will deny it allutterlie, and avow, that they may well
worship God before the altar, but to worship the altar, it self, to give to it
that worship which is done before it, to give to it any religious worship any
cultus, any (...), any (...), any adoration, they do detest it, as palpable
idolatry. So his Grace, so Pocklingtoune, so Heylene, so Lawrence, so Montagu
do often profess: But that you may see how little faith those men's Protestations
do deserve, and that all may know either their desperate equivocating, or else
their spirit of giddiness, which makes them say and unsay the same things, in
the same pages; consider all of the five named authors, for all their denial,
printing with approbation and applause as much worshipping and adoration even
of the altar, as any Papists this day living.

Begin with his Grace, you shall find him in his Star Chamber speech, for all
his denial, yet avowing within the bounds of two pages, once, twyse, thryse,
Page 47. A great reverence is due to the body, and so to the throne where his
body is usually present. Ibid. page 49. Domino and altari ejus, to the Lord
your God, and to his altar, for there is a reverence due to that too. Ibidem
page 45. Therefore according to the Service Book of the Church of England the
priest and the people both are called upon, for external and bodily worship of
God in his Church; Therefore they which do it not, innovat, and yet the
government is so moderat, God grant it be not too loose, that no man is
constrained, no man questioned, only religiously called upon, venite adoremus.
the giving of worship to the altar, and that such worship, which is grounded
upon that place of Scripture, Venite, adoremus, which we suppose none will deny
to be Divine adoration, But we must understand, that the King, and the Church
of England here, as in all things must bear the blame of his Graces faults,
that the King and his most noble Knights of the garter must be patrones to this
practice, and the English Lyturgie the enjoiner of it: But his Grace and those
that have the government of the church must be praised for their moderation,
in not urging this practice upon all their brethren. Pockling. altar page 160.
I shall entreat the pious and judicious reader, to consider with meet
reverence, what is recorded among the statuts of that most noble order; non
satis been Deo atque altari reverentiam exhibuisse visi sunt, ut Deo and ejus
altari proni facti debitum impenderent honorem, quoties praetergredietur summum
altar in honorem Dei, debita genu flexione, reverentiaque consalutabit. Idem,
in his Sunday no Sabbath at the end, If we do not only bend or bow our body
to his blessed board, or holy altar, but fall flat in our faces before his
footstool so soon as ever we come in sight thereof, what Apostle or father
would condemn us for, and not rather be delited to see the Lord so honored.
D. Pocklingtoune with his Graces license, proclaimed the bending of the body
and the Prostration even to it. Heylene comes up at last to his Masters back,
and tells us that the adoration before the altar is the honor of the altar it
self, and that filling down and kissing of the altar; for the honoring of the
altar was a very commendable practice. Antidot Lincoln preface to the King,
altars were esteemeed so sacred, that even the barbarous soldiers honored
them with affectionat kisses. Ibid. Page 86. The altar being thought to be more
sacred, had a far greater measure of reverence and devotion conferred upon it
(...), a reverend salutation of the table, (...), he and Pocklingtoun both page
142. commends that exhortation of the patriarch of Constantinople, in the fifth
counsel, Adoremus primum sacrasanctum altar. Idem, in his answer to
Bourtoun, page 137. If you look higher unto the use and practice of the ancient
Church, you can not miss a (...), an honor to the altar a (...), ad ad
geniculationem aeris Dei.
Laurence as he prints with Canterburies license, but undoubtedly by an
impudent lee, at the Kings special commandment, does maintain not only
veneration, but religious worshipping adoration, (...) and all, page 25. We
find in Ignatius (...), a honor due to the altar, and in Tertullian ad
geniculari aris a kneeling to the altars: and in the council, (...), an
adoration of the altar; and in the synodals of Odo reverentian altaribus
exhibendam, and in Damascene (...); and in another divina altaria, and in the
life of Marie the Egyptian (...), casting my self to the earth, and
worshipping the holy ground, and the Grecians triple prostrations tria (...)
before the altar in the old Liturgies.
not only by a relative and transient worship as he speaks, Ibid. Although they
gave a religious reverence to these places, yet they terminat that religious
reverence in God not in the places: The throne is honored for the King; he
that respects the house for the owners sake, respects not the house but him.
but also, which is a degree of madness, beyond any thing that I ever have
marked in any Papist, he will have a Divine adoration given to the altar it
self without any relation, or mental abstraction, because of the union of
Christ's body with it which sits there as in a chair of estate even as without
scruple or relations, or mental abstractions* we give to the humane nature of
Christ, for that personal union of the godhead with it Divine adoration,
whereof in it self it is not capable. Ibid. page 30. So much they said, but to
justify the practice of our Church: I need not say so much, for as although
the humane nature of Christ receive all from the Divine, yet we adore the
whole suppositum in gross, which consists of the humane as well as of the
Divine. So because of Gods personal precense in the place, we adore him
without abstraction of his person, from the place, to wit, the altar. Pockling.
alt page 153. Altars have been in allages so greatly honored because they are
the seats and chaires of Estate, where the Lord vouchsafes to place himself
amongst us. Quid est enim altar (as Optatus speaks) nisi seeds corporis and
sanguinis Christi.


For the adoration of the communion elements, As much adoration of the elements
they grant as the Papists require.
which Protestants count an Idolatry so horrible, that for it alone they would
not fail to separate from the church of Rome, though she had no other fault,
Apology des Eglises reformes par Joan Daile chap. 20.
their mind is plain by the practice which his Grace makes Heylene in his
State answer defend, we do pass their adoration in the act of communicating,
albeit we think it strange to see men who once were counted moderat and wise,
by the touch of his Graces patron, to become so insolent, as to hiss and hout
at the doctrine and practice of the best reformed Churches, as vile and
monstrous, Hale remedy of profainnesse, page 128. away with these monsters of
opinion and praictise, in this sacrament Christ Jesus is here really tendered
to us, and who can, who dare take him but on his knees.
who in the act of receaving has thought meet to sit or stand, rather than to
kneel, we spoke only of these their new adorations, which against the
constant practice of the English church they are now begun to use, without the
act of receaving, a number of low cringes toward these elements, when they
take the paten in their hand, a low inclinabo before the bread, when they set
it down, another; when they take up the chalice, a third; when they set it
down a fourth, Heylens moderat answer, page 237. if bowing toward the
communion table be offensive to you at the administration of the Sacrament, I
would feign know upon what reasons you stomach, that men should use their
greatest reverence in so great an action think you it fit the Priest should
take into his hands the holy mysteries with out lowly reverence, or that it is
an innovation so to do?
That these avowed adorations before the element, without the act of receaving,
are directed by them, not only they say to the person of Christ, whom they make
their essentially present, but also unto the elements themselves; we prove it
by no other reason but their former confession. Their adoration before the
altar is done as they confess unto the altar, much more their adoration before
the elements, without the act of receaving must be unto the elements: For I
hope they will be loath to affirm, that there is in the altar any worthiness
or aptitude or any other cause imaginable, which can make it capable of
adoration, but the same causes are in the elements in a far higher degree:
The relation to Christ's Body and Person, which they make the only foundation of
those worships being much more true, more near, more clear in the elements,
then in the altar, howsoever the Popish prostrations, and adorations, before
the hostie; which to all Protestants is so abominable idolatry, are absolved by
these men, not only by the clearing of Papists of all idolatry every where,
but particularly by their impatience, to have the adoration of the elements to
be called Popish. For in our book of Canons when in the copy sent up to the
King, the adoration of the bread, Chap. 6. Was styled by our Bishopes the
Popish adoration, my lord of Canterbury on the margin with his own hand
directs to scrape out the word Popish, as we can show in the authentic
manuscript of that book now in our hands.

Concerning images, In the matter of images their full agrean^e with Rome.
behold their assertions, first they tell us that the pullers down of images,
out of their churches, were but lownes and knaves, pretending only religion to
their profane covetousness, that they were truly iconoclasticke and
iconomachiam heretics. Montag. orig. page 162. Imagines illa per Ecclesias
constituta quae furorem effugerunt, iconoclastarum. ibid. page 174 sub
praetextu reformatae pietatis, Deum, Ecclesiam, pietatem, per nefandissima
sacrilegia eversis ubicunque monasteriis, templis, sacrariis, and redactis in
fiscum maximis reditibus emunxerunt causantur sc. religiosi nebulones, etc.
2 That those who do pull down or break, or offers any indignity to a
cross to a crucifix, to a Saints image; are but madfools, that those injuries
reflect upon Christ and the Saints, and are revenged sundry times with plagues
from heaven; Montag. antid. page 28. Verissimum est omninoquod affirmas (...),
ut Caesaris imago in numismate, ut Miletii character in pala annuli, quod si
quis Caesarem in charactere suo and numismate (...) in archetypum transit ea
contumelia, quo modo si quis sancti alicujus imaginem dedecore afficiat, illum
ego and (...) optaverim, and suae temeritatis paenas dare. Studley in his
glass for schismatiks about the end, tells us, that he knew a Churchwarden for
the taking down of a cross, which he conceived to have been by his neigbours
idolized, to have al his swine stricken with madness, and thereafter the man in
desperation to have drowned himself: Whence he exhorts all men to beware so
much as to censure their antecessors of idolatry, for erecting such monuments
of their devotion
3 That the church of England (they take that church commonly by a hudge
mistake, for their own prevalent faction therein) does not only keep
innumerable images of Christ, and the Saints in the most eminent and
conspicuous places of their Sanctuaries, but also daily erect a number of new,
long, and large ones, very curiously dressed, and that herein they have reason
to rejoice and glory, above all other reformed Churches; Montag. antid. page
24. Haeretici nequaquam a te censeri debemus (...) asservamus enim deligenter,
and cum cura Petri, Pauli, beatae virginis, sanctorum aliorum innumeras
imagines, praesertim vero Jesus Christi redemptoris crucifixi, etiam in
templorum cryptis, and larariis in parietibus, and fenestris quas tamen non
adoramus. Ibid. page 26. (...) ut cum Theodoreto loquar, impugnamus (...). Sunt
apud nos quod aliquoties dicendum frequentissimae imagines in Ecclesiis per
stallos, ut vocant, Canonicorum, per fenestras, ambones, vasa, vestimenta, and
ipsa (...). Pokling. altar page 87. In my lord of Lincoln private chapel,
are to be seen beside the altar, most richly furnished closse to the wall
under the east window, many goodly pictures which can not but strick the
beholders with thoughts of piety, and devotion at their entrance into so holy
a place, as the picture of the passion, and likewise of the holy apostles,
together with a fair crusifix, and our blessed Lady, and S. John set up in
painted glass in the east window, just over the holy table, or sacred altar;
So that I must say, That who so lives in this diocese, must be condemned of
great impiety, that will desert his Lord, and not follow him giving a
precedent of such devotion, so conformable of the rubric of our Church.
Heylens answer, page 174. For your particular instances, in the cathedrals of
Durhame, Bristou, Paul's, etc. the most that you except against, are things of
ornament, which you are grieved to see now more rich or costly, nor they have
been formerly. Pokling; altar page 24. Our Churches (by Gods mercy) are a
glory to our religion, beautified with goodly glass windows. Ibid. page 87. A
fair Crucifix, and our blessed Lady, and S. John set up in painted glass in
the east window, just over the sacred altar.
4. That these their manifold images, they use not only for ornament, but also
to be books to the Laics, both for their instruction and kindling of their
affections to piety, zeal, charity, imitation of the Saints; Widows
Schismatic Puritain, p. 10 Church pictures are an external beauty of the
Church, a memory of honor to the dead, and S. Gregory calls them Laymens
books. Poklin alt. page 87. There are to be seen many goodly pictures, which
can not but strike the beholders with thoughts of piety and devotion. Montag.
antig page. 318 The pictures of Christ, of the blessed Virgin, and Saints, may
be made, had in houses, set up in Churches, respect and honor may be given to
them the Protestants do it, and use them for helps of piety, in rememoration,
and effectual representing of the prototyp. Ibid. page 3^0. Images have three
uses, assigned by our schools, Instruction of the rude, commone faction of
story, and stirring up of devotion, these you and we also give unto them.
5. That toward the images of Christ and the Saints, the hearts of the Godly
ought to be affected with a pious devotion, with a religious reverence, and
that this reverence may very lawfully be expressed, with an outward religious
adoration; yea, Prostration before the image, as well as before the altar, with
the eyes of the adorer fixed upon the image; Montag. adtid. page 30. Christiani
omnes adoramus Christum, imagini and simulachro, non prosternimur coram imagine
sorsan, quid ad rem vero? Invitatio est ad pietatem, ex intuitu toll
scandalum, ita si velis prosternaris, etiam oculos defigas in crusifixum ante
mensam Dominicam inclinamur, in genua procumbinus, venerationem exhibemuss, non
tamen mensam adoramus.
6. That the Popish distinction of duleia and latreia is good, and well
grounded, that the only abuse of images is the worshipping of them with
latreia; that the Papists are free of this fault, that all their practice here
is but iconoduly, not idolatry, that all our contraversie with them about the
worshipping of relicts, and so much more of images, (for to images, they
profess a far less respect then to relics) is but the toying of children,
the striving about shadows, that long ago both sides, are really agreed,
though some for their own pride and greed delight to keep this contraversie
about ambiguous words still upon foot. Montag. antid. page 16. Lateriam, illum
cultum soletis appellare, neque ego nomen aut nominis rationem, vel subiectum
improbavero, tum a duleia soletis distinguere, non alio fine, quam quod rerum
subjectarum rations, secundum magis and minus inter se distinguanur. page 27.
Tantummodo taxumus in imaginibus (...) usu and utilitatem non sollicitamus ullo
pacto. page 24. Pergamus ad, Ecclesiae Romanae (...). Montag. orig. page 40.
Nolunt illi quovis pacto creatura cuicunque lateria^ ne quidem cultu relativo
exhiberi sed non constat quis sit ille cultus latreiae soli Deo precise and
peculiariter, debitus quibus terminis circamscribatur: quis ille qui solus
creaturis debetur, quis ejus modus, gradus, mensura, parts, conditio,
limitatio, omnia vacillant vel ignorantur, nec illud agitur ut constare p^ssint
lusum diu est in hac questione and illusum per ambiguitates e privatis nempe
vel contendendi vel ditescendi; respectibus constet autem hoc, and facile
conveniet inter nos Magnam certe graciam ab Ecclesia Christi, and partibus
inter se contendentibus iniverint, qui docerent quousque progredtin hoc
sanctorum cultu, and (...) possumus sine justo scandalo, animae pereulo,
pietatis and religionis naufragio interim quod pueri solent, in hac re, ut in
multis (...).


About relics they agree with Papist.
Concerning relics they teach first that the carrying of them about in clothes
by devout people is tolerable. Andrews stricturae For their relics were we
sure, they were true we would carry to them the regard that becomes. It was
rashness and nudiscreetly done of Vigilantius so to a base his terms
concerning them, had they power of doing miracles we would have esteemed them
so much the more, but in their own degree: yet the caring of them about in
linen clothes, and kissing which Vigilantius did object, if he did it truly,
we would rather bear with it, and excuse it is as proceeding from popular and
private divotion which will many times overshut it self then commend it.
Next that those bones or that dust of the deceased Saints ought justly to be
put in a casse of silk or of gold that they may be well hung about our neck
and often kissed; that they may be laid up amongst our most precious jewels.
Montag. antid. page 17. Ossa sanctorum cineres, reliquias vase aureo, velamine
precioso convolvebant. Ego certe cum Constantino, illas reliquias fasciis
involuam, auro includam circumgestendas, admovebo labiis ac collo suspensa
manibus oculisque crebo usupatas intuebor, vel in apothecas condam, and
recludam inter preciofissima cermelia censendas.
3. That in those relics there is often found so much grace, holin^sse, ^^rtue,
that all who touches them are sanctified by that touch. Montag. antid. page 16.
Magnus Basilius ait (...) Martyris ossa quicunque tetigerit ob gratiam illi
corpori infidentem, fit quadam tenus particeps sanctificationis.
4. That to these relicts a great honor yea a relative worship is due albeit
not a latria or divine adoration Montag. antid. page 16. Agnoscimus ecclesiam
veterem sanctoru^ reliquiis and cineribus magnum honorem detulisse, and
veneratione quadam relativa coluisse.
Fifthly, That pilgramages to the places where those relicts stand are very
expedient, that protestants do reprove only these pilgramages toward the
Church of the Saints which are made for greed or superstition, that papists do
disallow all such as well as we. Montag. antid. page 44. Neque peregrinationem
religiosam ad loca ut appellant sancta quisquam improbaverit qui in rebus
ecclesia Christiana veteris non est hospes; improbat Molinaeus and meritio
peregrinationes ut appellant malas, inventas vel ad superstitionem, vel ad
questum, vel ad tyrannidam, quas and ipsas nemo sanus inter catholicos Romanos
non improbaverit.
6. That all the contraversie which here remains betwixt papists and
protestants is about just nothing even about goats woll and the shadow of ane
Ass. Montag. orig. page 45. ut de lana caprina, vel (...) hic rixare videantur
contendentes.

They come very near to the invocation of Saints.




About the invocation of Saints whereof the learned of the papists are so
ashamed that they disavow their own practice thereof, Andrews structurae page
57. The Cardinal freely confessed to M. Causabon that he had never prayed to a
Saint in all his life save only when he happened to follw the procession, and
that then he sung ora pro nobis with the Clerks butelse not.
yet our men tell us first that the Saints in heaven are truly our meditators
with God of intercession, as Christ is of redemption. Montag. antid. page 20.
Non anuerim sanctos esse orationis and intercessionis ut loqu^ soletis
mediatores, sed universum universos: precibus suis apud Deum interveniun^ and
orationibus mediantur, Cbristus solus and absque aliis est mediator
redemptionis and quoad meritum passionis sua (...) intercessionis mediator.
Again, that we ought carefully to keep the Saints festivalls, to this end
that we may be partakers of their intercession. Andrews strictura. page 8. We
agree with S. Augustine, we celebrat the memories and hold the feasts of the
blessed Martyrs as well for imitation, as that we may be partakers of their
intercession. Schelfords first sermon page ^4. Upon the Saints days the Saints
in heaven join with us, now if the Saints in heaven after their manner aid us
with their prayers, shall we be so base minded as not to pray with them? Ibid.
page 27. In observing Saints dajes and in dedicating remples to God in their
name; these who neglect this holy followship have a great loss, which none can
see but they who have spiritual eyes
3. That albeit for common their intercession be universal, yet that sundry
times they descend to particulars, They remember the estates of their friends
and acquaintance as they left it at their death, they are informed of many new
particulars by the Angels which has been upon earth, and by the Saints which
after their death has newly come to the heaven, and that accordig to their
particular informations they frame their intercession. Andrews answer to
Cardinal Pirron. 20 chap. We will hope well that Theodosius might interceed
with God for his children, we see no cause to the contrary. Montag. antid.
page 22. Meminerunt amicorum suorum and rerum ase quondam in terris gestarum
quoeirca ad Christum in coelo recollecti poterint devia ordinaria per Iesum
Christum apud Deum patrem amicos, familiares (...) precibus commendare and
adiuvare.
.

4. If we were certain that the Saints in heaven knew our estate it were no
fault at all but very expedient to make our prayers to them that they might
interceed with Christ for us. And though we be not certain of their
knowledge, yet all the fault that is in our prayers to them is only some
idleness and curiosity but no impiety at all. Montag. antid. page 229. Save
all other labor in this point. Prove only their knowledge of any thing
ordinarily I promise you straight I will say holy S. Mary pray for me. Ib, antid.
page 23. Tu mihi proba and demonstra posse me certum esse de scientia sanctorum
particulari quocunque tandum modo ac quisita ego certe quod ad me ipsum attinet
sanctos defunctos beatam puta virginem, sanctissimos Apostolos, gloriosissimos
Martyrs non verebor adire interpellare, alloqui, supplicibus precibus
deprecari habeant me commedatum and adiutum suis intercessionibus apud Deum
patrem per filium. Idem antid. page 200. Perhaps there is no such great
impiety in saying holy S. Laurence pray for me.
5. That none ought to reprove our prayers unto our Angel keeper. Montag.
invocation of Saints page 99. If thus my self resolved to do infer (holy Angel
keeper pray for me) I see no reason to be taxed with point of Popery or
superstition much less of absurdity or impiety. Ibidem author. page 203. The
case of Angels not guardians as being continually attendant always at hand,
though invisible, and therefore though we may say S. angel keeper pray for me,
it follows not, we may say S. Gabriel pray for me.
The Saint in heaven which the papists do most idolize is our blessed Virgin
to whom it is well known they give much more false worshipe, then true to the
whole Trinity, Concerning her the Canterburians affirm first, that she is
created in another way then any of the race of Adam, that God did meditate
fifty ages upon the work of her perfect creation, that she did live all her
days without mortal sin yea without all actual sin, yea without all
original. Anthony Stafford Female glory. page 3. Others of these first and
purer times not without admiration observe that God was almost fifty ages in
the meditation of the structure of this stately palace. Montag. apar. page 301
Magno procul dubio opere templum illud (...) aparabatur, nec una de multis
matter Domini in hunc mundum processit e materno utero. Ibid. page 338. Vicunque
conceptam in originali peccato, vixisse tamen immunem a mortali peccato cum
Augustino putaverim. Staffords Femal glory in his proemiall verses, for Eves
offense not hers she did begin to learn repentance ere she knew to sin. Idem
page 20. She sent forth many a sigh for sin not having committed any, and
bewailed that of which she was utterly ignorant idem page 8. The apostles
sometimes were obscured with the fog of sin, but her brightness nothing
vicious could lessen, much less alutterly extinguish.
that she is now advanced above all the Angels to the highests created
perfection that is possible to the daughter, mother, and spouse of God and that
her very body is already translated to the heavens. Femal glory page 28.
Nothing in her was wanting but the Dietie it self. Idem in the preface, Whether
we regard her person or her divine gifts, she is in dignity next to God
himself. Ibid. Great Queen of Queens, daughter, and mother, and the spouse of
God Idem. page 210. Her assumption by many of the Fathers, by all the Romish
Church, and some of the reformed is held for an undoubted.
3. That God has made her to be true Lady and empress of the Catholic
Church of all the earth, and of the heaven, and that all these honors she has
abtained by her due deservings and merits. Montag. apar page 312. Dominam
profecto indicat Mariae nomen, nam revera facta est domina omnium creaturarum,
Damasaenus ait, cum conditoris omnium effecta fuerit matter. Ibid. page 302.
Certe nulli Sanctorum dedit Deus plura, nulli majora, nullum ne omnibus quidam
Sanctis, tanta, hoc est elogia matris Dei Deus impertivit qui titulus (...)
omnes omnium creaturarum dignitates illud unicum privilegium supergreditur.
Recte ait. B Thomas, beata virgo ex hoc quod est matter Dei habet quandam
dignitatem infinitam. Ex his licet colligere (inquit Baradas) sanctissimam
virginem infinitam habere quondam dignitatem ex Deo, qui and e Bonaventura
recitat, majorem mundum Deus facere potest majorem autem matem quam est matter
Dei Deus facere non potest Fem gl. page 21. She undoubtedly deserved to be rapt
up, if it were possible, a story higher than was S. Paul. Ibid. page 80.
Certainly all the ancient Fathers with one consent affirm that she deserves to
be Empress of all others who humbled her self below them all.
4. That all the Angels and Saints in heaven, let be men upon earth are
obliged to adore her and bow their souls unto her. Femal glory. In the
Panegyrirk, To whom do bow the fouls of all the just, whose place is next to
Gods, to whom the hierachie do throng, and for whom heaven is all one song.
Ibid page 3. Truly our belief may easily digest this that his omnipotency
would make her fit to be Empress of this lower world. Ibid. page 17. There
were no doubt some of Gratitudes children, who lay prostrat before, and did
homage to their dearest Lady. Ibidem page 32. The Saints glorious Empress.
5. That she knows all things perfectly here beneath upon the earth: For in
the face of God in the glass of the Trinity she does behold all creatures.
Femal glory panegyric. Whose place is next to GOD, and in her face all
creatures and delytes do see as darling of the Trinity.
6. That it is but profane puritans who refuse to say the Ave Mary's, and to
follow the example of their pious predecessors who wont so to pray. Ibid. page
220. The Puritans of this land are those I mean, they reject all testimonies of
her worth as hail Marie full of grace, etc. They abhor to hear her called
Domina, because forsooth they challenge to themselves a greater measure of
knowledge but a lesser of piety than did their antecessors by disclaming words
and phrases familiare to antiquity. Of one thing I will assure them till they
be good Marians they shall never be good Christians.
7. That the devotions of the present Monks, Nuns, and Princes who have
enrolled their names in the sodality of the virgin Mary is worthy of imitation.
page 23. My arithmetic will not serve me to number all those who have
registrate their names in the sodality of the rosarie, of this our blessed
Lady. The Princes of this Isle have not been defective in doing her all
possible honor, and in consecrating chapels and temples to her memory. Many
holy orders also are of this sodality as the Benedictins, the Cistertians, the
Franciscans, the Cartusians, and many others. If all those testimonies and
examples of great worth and pious people will not move us to honor her, we
shall be judged both unworthy of this life here and ignorant of that better to
come.
8. That the old pious ceremony of burning of wax candels in all the Churches
of England through the whole clear day of her purification ought to be
renewed. Ibid. page 153. This day the celebration whereof is instituted by the
Church is called Candlemas, as much as to say, the day of lights, on which
while mass was singing very many tapers were burning in the Church. Montag.
orig. page 157. Diem ab illa solemnitate celebrem vocant praesentationis: nos
angelice the purification of our Lady, vel communi sermon potius. Candlemasday
adistributione vel gestatione cereorum ardentium. Couzins did put all this in
practice in the cathedral of Durham mede burn in day light some hundreths of
wax candles. Peter Smart for preaching against him was deposed and imprisoned,
but Couzins for his devotion advanced from a poor prebend to a Provost of a
College and a royal Chaplain in ordinar.


9. That the Christians obtained that famous victory over the Turks in Lepanto
by her intercession at their prayers with Christ her Son. Femal glory page
226. The original of the sodalitie of the blessed virgin is derived from the
battle of Naupactum gained by John of Austria and the Christians, which
victory was attributed to her intercession with her Son.
All this his Grace has permitted under his eye to be printed at London
without any censure, and when this doctrine was challenged by Burtoun, he was
rewarded with the loss of his ears and perpetual prison. The book which he
inveighed against let be to be recalled, is openly excused in print at his
Graces direction as containing no evil but only innocent retorications.
Heylens answer. page 123. As for the book in tituled the Femal glory you find
not in it that I see by your collections any thing positively or dogmatickly
delivered contrary unto any point of doctrine estabished and received in the
Church of England. Some swelling language there is into it and some
Apostrophees I perceive by you to the virgin Mary which if you take for
invocations you mistake his meaning, no invocation hitherto in point of
doctrine.
Yea M. Dow with his Graces license pronounces that book to be free of all
popery and that upon this reason, because the author professes his tracing
the steps of Doctor Montagow whom all England must know to be above all
suspicion of popery. M. Dow page 54. In all these panegyric strains of
Rhetoric (for such for the most part they seem rather than positive
assertions) Stafford has not deviat so much to the one extreme as M. Burtouns
marginall has to the other in scoffing and calling her the new great goddess
Diana. And if it be true that he has not digressed in any particular from D.
Montagu the B of Chichester as M. Burtoun makes him affirm, I dare boldly say
M. Burtoun will never be able too find the least point of Popery in it: For
it is well know, that Bishop has approved him self such a champion against
Rome, that they who have tried his strength durst never yet come to a second
encounter.


CHAP. V. The Canterburians avovv their embracing of the popish heresies and
grossest errors.
THE nature of heresy is so subtilized by our faction, that so far as in hew
lies it is now quite evanished in the air, and no mo heresies are to be found
on the earth. With the Socinian Remonstrants, they exeeme all tenets
controverted this day among any Christians, from being the Subject of heresy:
For they tell us, that the belief of the doctrines uncontraverted by all is
sufficent for salvation. Pottar cites from Causabon these words: Put by
controversies these things, wherein al sects universally do agree, are
sufficient for salvation.
And howsoever some of them will be content to count the Sociniam Arianisme,
and Macedoniansme to be true heresies; yet, as we show before, all of them do
clear the Popish errors of this imputation. Always not to strive for words,
our assertion is, that the grossest of the Roman errors which in the common
style of Protestants, wont to go for heresies, are maintained by the
Canterburians for catholic truth. For to clear this, cast over the books of
Bellarmine, and see if his grossest tenets be not by them embraced. In his
first tome, his errors about the Scriptures imperfection, and doctrinall
traditions, seems to be most weighty. In his second, beside these already
named, his defense of the monastic vows of, Limbus Patrum and Purgatory are
very palpable. In the third, his ascribing too little too the Sacramenst of
the Old Testament, and too much too the Sacraments of the New, his making all
infants in baptism too be regenerat, and all non-baptized too be damned, his
corporal presence of Christ's body on the altar, his sacrifice of the Mass,
auricular confession, extreme unction, are very gross corruptions. In the
last tome, his errors about faith, justification, merit, free will, are among
the chief. In all those, consider how far our party is long ago declined
to the left hand.

Begin with Scripture and traditions: The reformed churches in the harmony of
their confessions lay all down one common ground, They join with Rome in
setting up traditions in prejudice of Scripture.
for their mutual consent; the Scriptures absolute perfection, wiehout the
help of any doctrinall tradition: Hold me once this pillar, the whole edifice
of the reformation must fall. To batter down this fort, the Papists plant two
engines: One, that there is diverse Apostolic and ancient traditions, both
rituall and dogmaticall, which, beside Scripture with a divine faith must be
firmly believed: An other, that Scripture must not be taken in any sense by
us, but that wherein the ancient fathers of the church have understood it, or
the present church do take it. In both these very dangerous corruptions our
party joins with Rome: They glory Heylens antid. Lincoln page 8^. sect. 2.
Things that have been generally in the Church of Christ, are generally
conceaved to have been derived-from Apostolical tradion, without, any special
mandat left in Scripture for the doing of them. Praying directly toward the
East is conceaved to be of that condition, why may we not conclude the like
of setting up the altar along the wall. Many things come into our mind by a
successionall tradition, for which we can not find an express command, which
yet we ought to entertain, ex vi Catholicae consuetudinis; of which traditions
there are many, which still retain their force among us in England. This
Church (the Lord be thanked for it) has stood more firm for apostolical
traditions, than any other whatsoever of the reformation. Samuel Hoards sermon,
page 15. We yield that there are apostolical traditions rituall and
dogmaticall, which are no where mentioned or enjoined in the Scriptures, but
delivered by the word of mouth, by the apostles to their followers, for some of
which these are reputed, the number of Canonciall books, The Apostles creed the
baptism of infants, the fast of Lent, the Lords day, the great feastivals of
Easter and Whitson day, beside these, we confess, there are and have been many
ancient Ecclesiastic traditions, from which as foundations grew those noted
practices of not fasting on the Sunday, of adoring toward the East,
prostration before the altar, of signing the baptized with the cross, of
exorcifing the party baptized, and putting a white garment upon them, of
receiving the Eucharist fasting, of mixing water with the wine, of sending it
to such as were absent, of eating the consecrat bread in the Church, or
carrying it home, of crossing themselves when they went out, or when they went
in, when they went to bed, or when their ose, when they sat down to meat, when
they lighted Candles, or had any business of moment, to do, that ceremonies
and rites of this nature are under the power of the Church to ordain we
generally grant to our adversaries. White on the Sabbath, page 97. The reformed
Churches reject not all traditions, but such as are spurious, superstitious,
and no consonant to the holy Scripture, but genuine traditious, agreeablee to
the rule of faith, derived from the apostolical times by a successive current,
and which have the uniforme testimony of poins of antiquity, are received and
honored by us. Now such are these which follow the historical tradition,
concering the number, integrity, dignity, and perfection of the books of
Canonical Scripture, the Catholic exposition of many sentences of Scripture,
the apostles creed, the baptism of infants, the observation of the Lords day,
and some other feastivals, as Easter Pentecost, etc. baptizing and
administration of the Supper in holy assemblies the service of the Church in a
known language, the delivering of the Communion to the people in both kinds,
the superiority of Bishops over Priest and Deacons in Jurisdiction, and power
of ordination.
and triumph above all other reformed churches, that they do embrace doctrinall
traditions, for which in Scripture there is no ground; And of this kind they
reckon out some of great importance; such as are, the baptism of infants, the
sanctifying of the Sabbath, the Apostles Creed, the giving of the cup to the
people, praying in a known tongue, our knowledge of Scripture to be Scripture,
the names and number of the Canonical Books and their distinction from
Apocrypha, of this kind they maintain large as many as Rome. For at the first
word the^ speak to us of six hundredth Montag. orig. pa. 396. Vbi iubentur in
Scripturis infantes baptizori, aut in coena Domini sub utraque specie
communicantes participare. 600. sunt ejusmodi in rebus sacris a deo institutis,
ecclesiae mandatis, and usurpaatis ab ecclesia, de quibus possumus profiteri,
nihil tale docet Scriptura, Scriptura haec non praedicat.
among these traditions, which we must embrace with an undoubted faith; They
reackon up the authority of the Bishopes above the Priests, prostration before
the altars, worshipping toward the East, cross i^ Baptism, crossing of our
faces at all occasions the standing of a crucifix upon the altar, and wha^ else
they please to urge, for which they can get no Scripture warrant. To this head
they refer the very customs of the Popish church in latter times, for which
they have no scribe in any written let be in any Father: Montag. orig. page 276.
Nihil est memoriae proditum, quod ego quidem sciam hac dei apud vetustiores,
sive historicos sive patres, prohabile tamen est hanc receptam ecclesiae
consuetudinem de traditione vetustiore, ant scriptis etiam patrum vetustiorib^
nunc deperditis dimanasse. Montag. apar. page 389. Ad me quod attinet, quid a
sanctis patribus per illa tempora inventum, primo and usurpatum, nulla
traditione priore commendatum, nullo usu veterum, ne quidem vestigiis leviter
impressis, consignatum per tot aunorum decursum ad nostra usque tempora sine
contradictione descenderit, non video cur non (...) and (...) vim suam obtineat
and authoritatem. Absit enim ut universalis ecclesia vel in rebus de facto, and
ecclesiasticis ritibus tam diu aberraverit. Ibid. page 382. Meminerimus
Tertullianum olim statuisse cum applausu de hujusmodi consuetudinibus, si legem
expostules scriptam, nullam invenies, sed traditio a praetenditur auctrix,
consuetudo confirmatrix, and fides observatrix. Et Irenaeus, quid autem si
neque Apostoli reliquiss^nt nobis Scripturas, nonne oporteret ordinem sequi
traditsonis. Idem antig. page 42. That author says no more then is justifiable
touching traditions: for thus he says, The doctrine of the Church is two
ways delivered unto us; first by writing, then by tradition from hand to hand.
Both are of alike value of force unto piety.
Yea, all the injunctions of the Bishopes must be Ecclesiastic traditions,
whereto the conscience must submit no less then to the precepts of God. White
in his examination of the dialogue presses not only this testimony of
Austine, Etiamsi Scripturae authoritas non subesset, totius tamen orbis in hanc
partem consensus, instar precepti contineat, nam and alia multa quae per
traditionem in Ecclesiis observantur, authoritatem sibi scriptae legis
usurpaverunt, but also that of Eusebius, Quicquid in sanctis Episcoporum
consiliis decernitur, id universum divinae voluntati debet attribui: And this
of Bernards, Sive, Deus sive homo vicarius Dei mandatum quodcunque tradiderit,
pari profecto obsequendum est cura, pari reverentia suscipiendum, ubi tamen Deo
contraria non praecepit homo.
In the mean time Scripture must be styled the book of heretics Montag.
orig. page 353. Eusebius de Severianis hereticis loquens, ait, Hilege,
Prophetis and Euang^liis utantur socrarum Scripturarum sensus and sententias,
ut nostri salent purtani and novatores pro suo arbitratu interpretantur.
Chounaei Colect. page 31. Sensum Scripturarum ex patribus ecclesiae deductum,
traditum and conseruatum in ecclesia, and approbatum, quidni pro tali
traditione agnoscamus, in cujus veritate acquiescendum, and a qua minime
discendendum sit. Montag. orig. page 318. Neque enim insanire solent sine
Scripturis haeretici and mirifice easdem ad suos (...) solent applicare
defendendos persuadendosque.
a Lesbian rule. Montag. apar. page 382. Non ut nostri novatores de^dirant
quibus quicquid est (...) respit and (...) and ideo refigendum est ^ vel ut
amant loqui reformandum ad Dei verbum, hoc est ad Lesbiam plane regulam
^ipsorum cerebrositatem amussitandum.
In no controversies no not in Sermons any use may be made of it, except so
far as we can back our deductions from Scripture, by consent of the ancient
Fathers or present church. Pocklingtoun altar. page 129. The godly and
learned Fathers of our church, give strict charge to private preachers, that
they preach nothing in their preachings which they would have the people
religiously to believe and observe, but that which is agreeable to the doctrine
of the old and new Testament, and that which the catholic fathers, and ancient
bishops have formerly taught and collected from thence. White upon the Sabbath,
page 12. The holy Scripture is the fountain and living spring, containing in
all sufficiency and abundance whatsoever is necessary to make Gods people
wise unto salvation. The consentient and unanimous testimony of the true
Church of Christ in the primative ages thereof is the canalis, or a conduit
pipe to derive and convoy to succeding generations the celestial water
contained in the holy Scripture. Ibid. From Meisnerus he says, Iniuriam
nobis facit Beeanus scribendo, nos docere solam Scripturam esse normam and
iudicem contraversiarum fidei, imo and spiritum sanctum, seu judicem supremum
praesupponimus, and ecclesiam ceu iudicem inferiorem libenter admittimus;
ideoque soli Scripturae officium iudicandi absque omni distinctione non
assignamus. Idem page 14. The ecclesiastical story reporterh of Nazianzen and
Basille, that in their studying the holy Scriptures they collected the sense of
them, not from their own judgment or presumption, but from the testimony and
authority of the ancients, who had received the rule of the true intellegence
of Scripture from they holy apostles by succession.


In the doctrine of faith, justification, fulfilling of the Law, merit, they
are fully popish.
In our most important controversies anent faith, justification, fulfilling of
the Law, merit, etc. they teach, first, that faith is no more but a bare
knonwledge, and naked assent, that in the nature of it there is no confidence,
application at all, that the souls confidence and application of Gods promises,
are the acts only of hope and charity, that justifying faith is the catholic
faith, a general assent to the articles of the Apostolic Creed, that
particular personail applying faith, but presumption and fantasy. Shelfoord
page 36 This one faith is called by Divines the Catholic faith, contained in
the three Creedes of the apostles, Nice and Athanasius. The false faith is
contrary too this, the private faith, or fancy rather, by which men believe
to besaved by them, that which is the mother and nource to vice, an enemy to
all good life; and that this is no the Catholic faith, shall appear, because
that faith has not a special object, as a man's self, or Gods special favor
to this or that particular man, which is hopes object, but a catholic object,
which is the whole first truth, and every member of Gods books, as the school
to acheth, this faith goes but to the truth and esse of divine things. Fait
gives those truths a being and substance in our mind, but after hope lays
hold on them in the will and affections, and applies them to our selves, and
charity goes in unto them. The apostle says, That he who comes to God
must believe that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him, not a
rewarder of me or thee, as if the article of faith were personal.

Idem page 106. In the love of the heart lies the greatest apprehension. The
greatest mean of our apprehending of him is by charity, which lays hold on
him in the will and reasonable affections, Chounai Collect. 82. Applicatio ex
part hominis, non ex alia ratione procedit, quam ex amplexu amoris and
desiderii. Ibid. page 97. Det Deus hanc spem, and suavissimam hujus spei
plerophoriam.


Again, they teach that justification is ascribed by the Apostle to faith
only, by way of beginning inchoative, because the assent to the truth of God,
is that first vetue which the chain of all other virtues, whereby we are
compleet lie justified, for common, does follow. Chonnaei collect, page 69.
Inchoative per fidem iustificat Deus, dat sc. propter Christum cognitionem, ex
cognitione fidem, ex fide spem sive fiduciam, ex fiducia charitatem, ex
charitate adhaesionem obediendi and complacendi defiderium, ex isto desiderio
meritorum Christi salubrium applicationem, ex ista applicatione
sanctificationem, seu observantiam mandatorum, ex istis omnibus in actu
scilicet consummato justificationem, ex illa salvationem quae omnia tum
efficaciter per canalem Dei gratiae, ex fide tanquam ex principio seu radice,
per connaturalitatem omnium ad fidem, and ad se invicem effluere videantur,
quaecunque ab aliquibus horum proveniunt ad fidem, tanquam ad omnium originem
referenda sunt, and in hoc sensu arbitramur Apostolum, 3. ad Romans verse. 28.
loquutum fide homines justificatum iri scilicet per fidem elicituram ex
consequentiis suis operationem.
3. That charity is the form of faith, and that to it, the act of
justification is much more reasonably ascribed then too faith. Shelfoord page
102. Charity is called of school Divines grace it self. It is thar law of
the Spirit which freeth from death and sin. It is the maine refuge of a
distressed conscience. It covers a multitune of sins. It will not suffer them
to appear: Without charity works are dead, as well as faith and other
virtues. Hence the School calls charity the form of virtues. Ibid. page
106. Faith converteth the mind to God, but it is love that converts the heart
and will to God, which is the greatest and last conversion; for we never seek
any thing till we desire it. Our conversion is begun in the mind by faith,
but it is only half conversion, yea no conversion of the whole man, except the
love of the heart (where lies the greatest apprehension) follow it: we see
salvation by faith, but we obtain it not, till we seek it by charities
desire. Wherefore I conclude, that for as much as charity is the most near
and immediate cause of our conversion, that it is also the most precious grace
of God for our good, and the greatest mean of our apprehending him is by
charity, which lays hold on him in the will and reasonable affections,
therefore this must be the greatest mean of our justification. Ibid. page 109.
The fulfilling of the law justifies, but charity is the fulfilling of the
law, where the apostle prefers charity to justifying faith, he compares
them in the most excellent way, and it is most manifest that the most excellent
way, is the way of our justification and, conversion to God,
4. That S. Paul's justification whereby we stand before the bar of God is
naught, but our conversion and sanctification by our inherent righteousness.
Shelfoord page 107. Justification and conversion to God is all one. Idem page
10^. Charity is the maine refuge of a distressed conscience. Montag. antid.
page 142. A sinner is then justified when he is transformed in mind, renewed
in soul, regenerate by grace. Chomley in his answer for Hall to Burtoun, is
not only content to exeeme the Popish justification from all blot of a
fundamental error, but seems also to make all our contraversie in this point
to be but a juggling about words; yea, at last he seems to join with the
Council of Trent in anathematizing our, doctrine: For thus, if I remember
well, does he speak. If any man shall say that men are so justified by the
sole imputation of Christ's righteousness, or by sole remission of sins, that
they are not also sanctified by inherent grace of charity, or also that the
grace whereby we are justyfyed is only the favor of God, let him be accursed,
and let him be so indeed for me. You will say this is nothing but mere
juggling, I grant it, but yet it is not the direct denial of the foundation,
for here is both remission of sins, and imputation of Christ's righteousness
included, which though it be sufficient to justification in the Protestant
sense, yet in the Popish sense, wherein sanctification is also required, it is
not sufficient.
5. That the fulfing of Gods Law to us in this life is both possible and easy,
that if God did command us any thing which were impossible, he should be both
unjust and a tyrant. Shelfoord page 121 That there is fulfilling of the Law in
this life: James teaches, if you fulfill the royal law, you do well. Were
Gods Law not possible to befulfilled, the supposition should be idle, unfit for
Gods word, a caption unbeseeming a writing by divine inspiration. To the
keeping of this we must strain our soul, we must nor flee to a naked
imputation, where is required our confirmation. He has predestinate us to be
conform to the image of his Son. He has fulfilled the Law, and so must we
too. Ibid page 127. Christ has merited, that the rigteousnesse of the Law,
should be fulfilled in us, not by faith only, or by sole imputation, as the
ignorant understand it, but by our actual walking in the divine precepts.
Ibid. page 136. To bind a man to things impossible, were a wrong both to
nature and grace therefore the school verse says.

Vltra posse viri non vult Deus alla requiri. God can no more in equity now
require impossibilities at our hands, then he could at first at Adams: Neither
does he, if we believe S. Paul, who says, I can do all things by Christ,
who has loved me. Ibid. page 139. If God should command things impossible,
then should he be more cruel then a tyra^t, who will not offer to exact of his
Subjects such a tribute which he knows can not be paid: It is tyrannical and
cruel, and therefore impossible to God to require the ability which he
himself took a way, and of those too that are his friends, and in league with
him. Ibid. page 147. To say that the very best works of the Saints are
unclean, impure, mortal sins, is extreme blasphemy. Can the works of the
holy Ghost be impure? The least addition of evil in a good work makes it
sinful, because Bonum est ex integra causa, malum ex quolibet defectu. White
on the Sabbath, page 157. urges those sayings, as from S. Austine, Neque
impossible aliquid imperate potuit Deus quia justus est; neque damnaturus est
hominem proeo quod vitare non potest, quia pius est. Execramur blasphemiam
eorum qui dicunt aliquid impossible homini a Deo esse praeceptum.




6. That not only many do fulfill the Law without all mortal sin, but
sundry also do supererogat by doing more then is commanded, by performing the
counsels of perfection, of chastity, poverty, and obedience: Shelfoord. page
184. By his preceps he informs us of all the means that leads toward life
eternal by his counsels, which go beyond his precepts (because GOD has given
man freewill to get what he can in the state of grace for the state of glory)
he shows some exceeding means to grow to this life's perfection, and to
improve the common reward of glory for the next life, as sell what thou have
and give it to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven; here we have
counsel to change temporal riches for eternal, which are better. 2. We are
counseled to change permitted fleshly pleasures for heavenly pleasures, where
it is said; qui potest capere capiat. 3. We are counseled to deny our selves
and our lawful liberties, (to follow Christ through the worlds difficulties;
these are Gods counsels which in the primitive church were) put in practice,
but in our times they are put of with a non placet ibid p. 129. Of the counsels
of the gospel which go beyond the counsels of the Law. S. Chrysostom, says
(...). Christ has commanded nothing impossible; yea, many have gone above his
commandments.
7. That our good works do truly deserve and merit eternal life: M^ntag.
appeal p. 233. The wicked go to enduring of torments everlasting, the good go
to enjoining of happiness without end; thus is their estate diversified to
their deserving. Shelfoord p. 120. seteth down the commensment verses of
Cambridge which in merit goes as far a Bellarmine, Virtutu^ sancta and
spesinsa caterva. salute^ divino ex pacto quam meruere dabu^t. Chomneus p. 18.
goes yet further, that our works are the as true efficie^t cause of our
salvation, as our wickedness can be of our damnation, as we heard before
Montag. antig. p. 153. That a work may be said to be meritorious, ex condigno,
these conditions are required, that it be morallie good, that it be freely
wrought by a man in this life in the estare of grace and friendship with God,
which have annexed Gods promise of reward. All which conditions I can not
conceave that any Protestants does deny to good works.
8. That our obeying the counsels of perfection do purchase a degree of glory
above the ordinar happiness, Shelforod p. 198. In that blessed estate there
are degrees of joy and glory, a star differs from another in glory, some
ground brings forth thirty, some sixty, some a hundred fold. To this
agrees. S. Gregory, Quia in hac vita nobis est discertatiorum, erit procul
dubio in illa discertio dignitatum, ut quo hic alius alium merito superat,
illic alius alium retributione transcendat. And S. Cypriam in pace, coronam
vincentibus candidam pro operibus dabit in persecutio ne purpuream pro passione
geminabit Certent nunc singuli ad utriusque honoris amplissimam dignitatem,
accipiant coronas vel de sanguine purpureas. Here shines Gods justice in
distributing rewards according to the variety of his own grace in this life
bestowed, and Christians works by their own free will to the best, end
employed, and because their are certain excellencies of works in overcomming
the greatest difficulties, therefore the school after the former demonstration
argues privileged crowns which they call aureola to be due to them which
have conquered best to Martyrs for overcoming persecutions, to virgins for
conquering the flesh, and to Doctors for putting the Devil to flight from
their floks:
All this lately is printed by the faction, neither that only, but (which to
us seems mervellous) when great popular grumblings and sundry public
challe^ges has been made against the authors of such writs. These whom
Canterbury has employed to apologize for the worlds full satisfaction, has
not yet been pleased to disavow any of those writers, nor to express the
least sign of their indignation against any of their abominations, Heylens
answer p. 127. For Shelfoords book whatever is in that mentioned should not
trouble you, if he ascribe a special eminency unto charity in some certain
things, it is no more then was taught to him by S. Paul who does prefer it, as
you can not but choose to know, before faith and hope, nor does he attribute
our justification thereunto in any other sense then was taught him by S. James.
M. Dow p. 52. And I believe if M. Shelfoords justification by charity be well
examined, it will prove no other then that which S. James says, ye see how
that by works a man is justified and not by faith only, and I would demand of
any reasonable man, whether the express words of that Apostle may not without
aspersion of popery be even openly and publickely maintained, if there be no
sense obtruded upon them which may cross S. Paul's doctrine, which M. Burtoun
can never prove that they did whom he charged with that assertion.
but rather by swetning all with excuses seem to vent their desire to have all
swalllowed down.

In the doctrine of the Sacraments, In the doctrine of the Sacraments see their
Popery.
from Bellarmins third tomb, they tell us first, that the sacraments of the
old testament differ from the new, that the one confers grace, the other
fore-signifies grace to be conferred, that the same distinction must be holden
betwixt John's, and Christ's baptism. Montag. orig. p. 72. de circumcisione quae
ritur quam gratiam conferat and primo ponitur non eo quod sit verum sacramentum
veteris politiae in statu legis and naturae, ideo esse operativu^ illius
gratiae qua ab luuntur peccata ut sit in baptismo novae legis. 2 Si quaeratur
an ut baptismus sic and circumcisto quae figurat baptismum olim peccata visua
sacramentali ex instituto divino opere operato, vel opere operantis aut alio
quovis modo abolere and mundare poterat, qua de resunt diversae sententiae.
Hereafter he has brought at length the Fathers, to prove that Sacramenta
veteris testamenti non causabant gratiam sed eamsolum per passionem Christi
dandam esse significabant, nostra vero and gratiam continent and digne
suscipientibus conserunt, he closes, manes sunt illa disputiones and acerba
contentiones nonnullorum, qua apud scholasticos and doctores nonnullos
ventilantur, quas sopitas optamus nos, Ibem p. 390. Baptismus Ioannis
rudimentarius ait Damascenus imperfectus, and isagogicus, Cyrillus ut and lex
vetus itaque novum baptisma post illud necessarium inquit Augustinus, post
Iohannem baptizabat Paulus, post haereticos non baptizat Ecclesia, Christi
baptismo actu remittebantur peccata, non remittebantur actu post Iohannis. Then
in his own words, quid ergo? An dabat gratiam baptismus ille; sic visum non
nullis perperam omino, nam ubi tum (...) baptismatis Christi and Sacramentorum
novifederu, quibus (...) gratiam confer quam significant, preparatiore hoc
agebat non (...) in spectantum cum re ipsa in Domini baptismo illud fiat, ab
hac sententia quae est communis omnium antiquorum, si Calvinus recesserit cum
sequacibus, aetatem habent, ipsi respondeant; privati cujuscunque hominis (...)
non est communi protestantium sententiae ascribendum. Obtineat ergo per me
Tridentinae synodi canon primus sessionis septimae: Si quis dixerit baptismum
Iohannis habuisse eandem vim cum baptismo Christi anathemasit.
2. They tell us that all baptized infants as well reprobat as elect are in
baptism truly regenerat, sanctified, justified, and put in that state wherein
if those who are reprobat and there after damned should die, they would be
infalliblie saved. Montag. apeal. p. 35. We are taught in the Liturgi earnestly
to believe, Jest it should be left to men's charity, that Christ has received
favorably these infants that are baptized. And to make this doctrine the more
sure against novellists, it is again repeated in the Catechism, that it is
certainly true by the word of God, that children being baptized have all things
necessary for salvation, and if they die before actual sin, shall be
undoubtedly saved, according whereunto all antiquity has also taught us. Let
this therefore be acknowledged to be the doctrine of our Church. Whit against
the dialogue. p. 95. avowes it as the doctrine of England, that all infants
baptized have the holy Spirit, and are made the children of God by adoption,
pressing that of S. Austine of all infants baptized. Quid dicturus est de
infantibus parvulis qui plerique accepto in illa aetate gratiae sacramento, qui
sine dubio partinerent ad vitam aeternam regnumque coelorum, si continuo ex hac
vita emigrarent, sinuntur crescere and nonnulli etiam apostatae sunt. Albeit
this same Whyt makes this tenet in his conference with Fisher to be the
judgment only of Papists and Lutherans p. 176. They differ from Lutherans and
Pontificians first, in that they restrain the grace of sanctification only the
elect. 2. In that they deny external baptism to be always effectual at the
very instant time when it is administrate.
And on the other hand they avow that all those who die in their infancy
without baptism, by whatsoever miss, by whosoevers fault, are certainly
damned so far as men can judge: For baptism is the only ordinary mean which
God has appointed for their salvation, which failing, salvation must be lost,
except we would dream of extraordinary miracles of the which we have no
warrant. Cant. relat. p. 56. That baptism is necessare to the salvation of
infants in the ordinare way of the church (without binding God too the use and
means of that Sacrament to which he has bund us) it is express in Saint John
chap. 3. Except a man be born again by water he cannot enter, no baptism, no
entrance, nor can infants creep in any other ordinary way. And this is the
received opinion of all the ancient Church, infants are to be baptized that
their salvation may be certain, for they which can not help themselves must not
be left only to extraordinary helps of which we have no assurance, and for
which we have no assurance, and for which we have no warrant at all in
scripture. Shelfoord p. 66. I can show you of none saved ordinarily without the
sacraments in regard of our Saviors exception in the 3 of John. Except a man
be born again of the water and the spirit, he can not enter into the kingdom
of heaven. Montag. orig. p. 397. Adeo huic usui inserviunt aquae ut si tollatur
lavacrum aquae alieni a Deo and faedere promissionis aeternae excludantur illi
in tenebras exteriores, cum edicto divino statutum sit nisi quis renatus fuerit
ex aqua and spiritu sancto non introibit in regnum coelorum. Scio hoc elusum a
novatoribus, sed and Christi divinitatem ab haereticis negatam scio utrumque in
contemptum Dei and dispendium animarum.
3. That the manifold ceremonies of papists in baptism and all other
sacraments are either to be embraced as pious ancient rites, or not to be stood
upon as being only ceremonial toys. Samuel Hoards sermon supra, puts cross
in baptism and sundry other ceremonies of it among his rituall traditions.
Montag. antid. p. 16. vestis alb, aoleum, sal, lac, chrisma, additamenta
quaedam sunt ornatus causa. Ib. p. 15. Cum concilio quodam nupero non veremur
profiteri ceremonias a maioribus hominibus religiosissimis usurpatas quod
advarios pietatis usus valiant and exercitia quedam sunt quibus men's externarum
rerum sensu and significatione ad divinum cultum ipsumque Deum attrahitur in
Ecclesia retinendas and ubi abrogatae fuerant restituendas esse statuimus.
Andrews stricturae p. 13. Chrisme, salt, candles, exorcismes, sign of the
cross ephata, and the consecration of the water, those being all matters of
ceremony, are therefore in the Church power on good reasons either to retain
are to alter.
For their tenets in the sacrament of the supper, we shall speak anon of them
in the head of the mass. 4. They tell us that our dispute about the five
bastard sacraments is a plain logomachie. Andrews stristurae. p. 11. The whole
matter about the five Sacraments is a mere. (...)
5. They tell us that not only infants after their baptism but even men
baptized in perfect age who before baptism gave sufficient count of their
faith, yet they may not be esteemed full Christians while they have received
confirmation by the imposition of hands, and that alone by a Bishop. pokling.
altar. p. 165. And because the competentes were persons of full age they
received also consumation by imposition of hands ut pleni Christiani
inveriantur.
About the orders, they tell us that they agree with the papists in their
number, that the reason why they want their Acolits, subdeacons and the rest,
is but their Churches poverty: Andrews stricturae. p. 12 The five orders is a
point not worth the standing on, while the revenues of the church were able to
mantaine so many degrees it can not be denied but that there were so many, but
by the Churches own order neither by commandment nor example of Scripture,
but what is this to the present estate of the Church scarce able to mantaine
twon?
Which can scarce well mantaine the two orders of priests and deacons. But which
in their questions is worst of all, they side here with the papists in giving
to all the protestant Churches a wound which our enemies proclaim to be
mortal, fatal, incurable. They tie the conferring of ordours by a full divine
right to the office of bishops, they avow that the lawful use of all
ordination and outward ecclesiastic jurisdiction is by God put in the hands of
their persons alone. Other reformed Kirks therefore wanting bishops, their
ministers must preacu, celebrate the sacraments, administer discipline not only
without a lawful warrant, but also against the ordinance of God. When they are
put in mind of this great wound given by them to all other reformed Churches,
they either strive to cover it with the fig-tree-leaffs of an imagined case of
necessity which never was, or else plainly to pass over it as immedicable.
Heylens antid. sect. 3. page 8. Let the bishops stand alone on Apolicall right,
and no more then so, and doubt it not but some will take it on your word and
then plead, accordingly, that thing of apostolical institution may be laid
aside. When Bishop Andrews had learnedly asserted the episcopal order too be
of Christ institution, I have heard that some who were there in place did
secrerly interceed with King James to have had it altered, for fear forsooth of
offending our neighbor Churches. Andrews resp. ad epist. 3. Molm p. 195. Dixi
abesse ab ecclesiis vestris aliquid quod de jure divino sit, culpa autem vestra
non abesse sed injuria temporum, non enim tam propitios habuisse Reges Galliam
vestram in Ecclesia reformanda quam habuit Brittannia nostra: Interim ubi dabit
meliora Deus, and hoc quoque quod jam abest per Dei gratiam suppletum iri.
Relatum inter haereticos Aerium qui Epiphanio credat vel Augustino necesse est
fateatur, and tu qui damnes Aerium quo nomine damnas? An quod se opposuerit
consensui universalis ecclesiae. Idem quisentit an non itidem se opponit ac eo
nomine damnandus erit. Montag. antid. page 138. Ordinationis jus and
autoritatem ita credimus annexam episcoporum personis ut a nemine non episcopo
ordinato and consecrato possit aut de beat adhiberi, irritam ordinationem omnem
pronunciamus quae non a legitimo and canonico more proficiscatur, quod si a se
oriantur aliqui and non missi ingerant caelesti huic muneri and functioni
manus, viderint ipsi quid sint responsuri olim summo sacerdoti cujus parts
usurpant, nos nostras non aliorum tuemur vocationes. Yea not only they ty
ordination and jurisdiction to the person of bishops, but of such bishops who
must of necessity show the derivation of al their power, from the Pope as was
shown before
6. In matrimony they will keep not only the popish sacramental words and
signs, the popish times of lent and other dysmall-dayes, except the bishops
give their dispensation, but also they will have the whole matrimonial causes
ruled by the popes cannons, yea, which is more, they avow that the Cannon-law
by acts of parliament yet unrepealled, stands in vigor amongst them. Dow p.
184. By his favor I must tell him, that neither the law of God nor of the King
does disallow the use of the old canons and constitutious, though made in the
time of popery and by the pope or popish prelates, which are not contrary to the
law of God or the King. If he desire proof of this, let him consider whether
the statute. 25. Hen. 8.19. do not say as much as I affirm, which having
regulated diverse things touching the exercise of ecclesiastical jurisdiction.
At last the statute concluds with this proviso (provided also that such Canons,
constitutions, ordinances, and synodals provincial being already made not
repugnant to the laws and customs of this Realm, nor to the hurt of the Kings
prerogative royal, shall now still be used and executed as they were before the
making of this act, till such time as they be viewed, searched, or otherwise
ordered by the said two and thirty persons or the more part of them according
to the tenor of this present act. It follows then that till these thirty two
persons determine otherwise, old Canons may be still executed and retain their
ancient vigor and authority, and when that will be I know not, but as yet I
am sure it has not been done.


Except in some few things which are directly opposite to some late laws of the
land and that Cannon-law they will have extendid as far down as the very
council of Basil. Femal glory page 128. With this pious and grateful
ordinance, I conclude the visitation of our incomparable Lady, he means the
act of the late Council of Basile, which ordained a festival fo that
visitation.
And as far up as the constitutions of the first Popes. Pocklingtoun altar.
page 52. There is mention made of the dedication of churches under Euaristus
anno 112. and under Hyginus, 154. under Calixtus 221. And before them all in S.
Clemence his epistles. These testimonies of Roman Bishops the Centurists do
suspect: Where the doctrine and decrees of Popes, and those in the first and
best times are confirmed by the doctrine and constant practice of the holy
catholic church, it seems great boldness in trhee or four men to condemn
and to brand their authority with the mystery of iniquity.
Which diverse of the papists themselves acknowledge to be supposititions, yet
our men will defend them all, and with them the Canons of the apostles, the
constitutions of Clemence and all such trash. Laurence, Sermon p. 18. the
Apostles in their Canons, and these to, which are undoubtedly theirs. Montag.
apar. p. 390. Ex antiquissimis illum facile principem and primariae
authoritatis, quia erat Apostolorum (...) and (...) clementem nimirim (...) non
preteribo, quem licet delicatuli nescio qui, ex utraque part contendentium
falsi postulant, and tanquam falsarium (...): Nos tamen ipsius tanquam (...),
contra quosvis suscipere patrocinium audemus, post doctissimum virum Turrianum.


In the sacrament of penance they teach first, that auricular confession was
evil abolished, and was very expedient to be restored. White on the Sabbath in
the preface. There might also my reverend good Lord, be a very profitable use
of some private form of pasturall collation with their flock, for their
direction and information in particular spiritual duties, such as was, private
confession in the ancient Church: Now the Presbyterian censures by their
paralogisme taken from abuse, have with such loud and impetuous declamations,
filled the ears and prepossessed the minds of many people, that they are
exceeding averse from this sovereign and ancient medicine of consolation,
prevention, and curing of the maledies of the soul. He approves that of
Gerardus, Privata coram Ecclesiae ministro confessio, quam auricularem vocant,
quamvis non habeat expressum and peculiare mandatum ac proinde non fit
absolutae necessitatis, tamen cum plurimas praestet utilitates and disciplinae
Ecclesiasticae pars, sit non postrema publico Ecclesiae consensu recepta, ideo
nequaquam temere vel negligenda vel abolenda, sed pie and in vero Dei timore,
praesertim ab illis qui ad sacram synaxin accedunt usurpanda. M. Sp, Sermon
printed with approbation. p. 18. Confess as the church directs, confess to
God, confess also to the Priest, if not private in the ear since that is out
of use. Male aboletur, says a devout Bishop, it is almost quite lost, the
more pity.
2. That God has given a judicial power of absolution to every priest, which
every one of the people is obliged to make use of, especially before the
communion by confessing to the priest all their sins without the reconcilement
of any. Dow p. 35. It can not be denied, but that the Church of England did
ever allow the private confession of sins to the Priest, it were very
strange, if our church ordaining Priests and giving them power of absolution,
and prescribing the form to be used for the exercise of that power upon
confession, should not also allow of that private confession. M. Sp. Sermon p.
16. Since the Priest can in the name of God forgive us our sins, good reason
we should make our confession to him: Surely God never gave the Priest this
power in vain, he expects we should make the best use of it we can. He
requires we should use the means we can to obtain that blessing; now the
only means to obtain this absolution is our confession to him Ib. p. 19 If
we confess in humility with grief and sorrow for them, if we confess them
faithfully not concealing any.
3. That God in the heaven will certainly follow the sentence of the priest
absolving on earth. Ib. page 15. There is another confession that would not be
neglected. He that would be sure of pardon, let him seek out a priest, and
make his humble confession to him: for God who alone has the prime and
original right of forgiving sins has delegat the priests here upon earth his
judges, and has given them the power of absolution, so that they can in Gods
name forgive the sins of those that confess to them. But is not this
popery, would some say, Now take the counsel that is given in the eight of
Job, Ask the Fathers, and they shall tell thee: ask then S. Chrysostom on
Esaias, and he will tell thee, that heaven waits and expects the priests
sentence here on earth: For the priests sits judge on earth, and the Lord
follows the servant, and when the servant binds or louses here on earth,
clave non errante, the Lord confirms it in heaven, words, says he, so clear
for the judicial and formal absolution of the priest, that nothing can be
said more plain.
4. Beside a private confessor, it were very expedient to have in every
congregation a publik penitentiarie, who in the beginning of Lent on
ashe-wednesday might in the Kirk sit in his reclinatorie, and sprinkling dust
on the head of every parishioner, enjoin them their lent-pennance, whereby they
may truly satisfy Gods judgment for their sins, and in the end of lent or
Shrif-thursday before Pasche give his absolution to those who have fully
satisfied, Pockl. alt. page 57. The bishops made an addition to the
ecclesiastic canon, that in every church a penitentiarie should be appointed
to remit penitents in the church, after they have done public penance. This
kind of confession Nectarius abolished in the church of Constantinople,
howbeit the confession, whereof Tertullian and Cyprian speaks, was never
abolished, but did ever continue in the Greek church, and in the Latin
likewise: And to this purpose a solemn day was set apart for taking of public
penance, for open faults, by imposition of hands, and sprinkling of ashes,
namely Ashwednesday. This is the godly discipline whereof our church speaks,
and wishes that it might be restored. And as Ashwednesday was appointed for
putting notorious sinners to open penance, so Thursday before Easter is
appointed for penitents to receive absolution. This absolution they took upon
their knees by the imposition of the priests hands. Ib. p. 63, and 67. The
Competents beginning on Ashwednesday in sackcloth and ashes to humble
themselves, they were all Lent long purged with fasting and prayer: They were
to stand barefoot on sackcloth, and watch on good Friday all night Howfond a
thing it is, says Tertullian, to think to carry away with us the pardon of
sin, and not first of all to pay for our commodity. The merchant before he
deliver his wares will look to your coin, ne sculptilis, ne rafus, that it be
neither washed nor shaved; and do not think but the Lord will look well to
your repentance, and turn it over and over, before you receive tantum mercedem
perennis vitae. The Church caused those to take so strict penance, that by
their great humilitiation they might make some amends for that liberty which
some took to sin. Ib. p. 24. Our churches are a glory to our religion. To the
chancels belongs the vestrie lavatorie and reclimatories, for hearing
confessions. Shelfoord p. 125. If the Just shall transgress while they are
within the law, they are bound to make satisfaction by penance, which is,
secunda tabula post naufragium: Ibid. page 129. The law is often brooken by sins
of omission and commission. I answer, as it is often broken of us, so it is as
often repaired and satisfied, and so all is made whole again, and so he is in
statu quo prius: he rises again so often as he falls; either in number or
virtue our sins of commission are repaired by repentance, our sins of omission
are supplied by prayer.
Extreme unction, if reports may be trusted, is already in practice among
them, but how soever, they avow in print their satisfaction with the Papists in
this point, if so be the ceremony be not made absolutely necessar. Montag.
antig. page 267. That sacramental unction is not to be used. Let the sick use
it if you will, we hinder you not, nor much care or enquire what effe^^^ ensue
upon it, but obtrude it not upon us as in sensu of the Sacram. in the time of
grace.


Anent the Monastic life, They are for the reerection of monasteries, and
placing of monks, and nuns therein as of old.
consider how far our men are from Popery, they tell us first, that the
putting down of the Monasteries in England by Henry the eight, let be by other
Protestant Princes elsewhere, was a work exceeding impious, and very
prejudicial both to the church and crown: Montang. orig. p. 303. In ecclesia
Anglicana sacerdotes licet magis gaudere, and solent and debeant immunitatibus,
tamen and frequentius and exuberantius, and libentius quam laici decimarum
decimas, subsidia, annatas, primitias solvunt principi, ut vel inde facile
discerni possit quantum detrementi regiis accesserit vectigalibus per illam
desolationem monasteriis invectam per importunum Henrici octavi rigorem, and
per parliamentarias impropriationes. Ibid. p. 384. Quales quales reformare
potius, and ad normam veterum reducere debebant, (...) non quod factum facinore
flagitioso and (...), araefuerunt ad haras, altaria ad lupanaria transferenda,
sed reprimam me. Ibib. page 174. Sub praetextu reformatae pietatis, Deum,
Ecclesiam, pietatem, per nefandissima sacrilegia, eversis ubicunque
monasteriis, etc.
2. That the Monks for the pattern of their orders have the Prophets and the
Apostles, and specially John the Baptist: Montag. orig. p. 370. Ioannes primus
hanc viam insistebat, illum deinceps ut in aliis sequebantur ascetae and
solerogagitae. Ibid. p. 382. Ejusmodi vitae genere Ioannem jecisse fundamenta
monasticae vitae, cum illustrissimo Baronio non abnuerim.
3. That their habits to their very tree-shoone has Scripture warrant: Montag.
orig. p. 369 Ioannes and interula and tunica and quocunque amictu vestiebatur,
de Camelorum pilis id gestabat vestimentum, ut ipsa asperiias ad virtutem
patientiae animum exerceret, nec princeps hoc institutum usurpabat Johannes: ab
omni retro antiquitate Prophetarum filii Elias, Eliseus alii eodem amictu
utebantur, quin and positum in more qui rem quamcunque persuadere vellunt,
habitu ipso se componerent ad illam rem efficacius insinuandam. William Wats
sermon, p. 20. The sackclouth and ashes they received from Daniel and the
Ninivites, and to live according to a strict rule, and order from S. Mark, and
other apostles: so says Cassian. Ibidem. page 28. Those if you censure for
will worship superstition take heed ye condemn not the authors of them, even
our blessed Savior, with his Prophets and Apostles. Ibid. p. 44. Whereas our
blessed Savior has forbidden shoes to his disciples, he was herein obeyed
by the primitive montifiers, sandals were mere solls tied on with strings.
4. That the Virgin Marie was truly a Nun, and that the Nuns this day
are much to be commendid for the following of her pattern: Femal glory p. 22.
The same author affirms that she there lived a^^rettie Nun. Ib. 23. Let us
then imagine that this holy recluse confined her body to this sacred solitude,
that she might the more freely enjoy the inco^ceavable pleasure she took in
her vowed virginity. Ibid. page She was a votarie never to know man. Ibid.
page 148. You who ply your sacred Arithmetic and have thoughts cold and clear
as the cristall beeds you pray by. You who have vowed virginity, mental and
corporal, approach with comfort, and kneel down before the grand whyt
immaculat Abbess of your snowie Nunries, and present the alsaving babe in her
arms with due veneration.
5. That the present Carthusians, Franciscans, and the rest of the Fraternities
are very good and holy people, worthy in their very orders of Monastic life
of our imitation: Ibid. p. 236. Many holy orders also are of this sodality as
the Benedictus, the Citertians, the Franciscans, Cartusians and many other. If
these examples of pious and worthy people will not move us, etc.
6. That their barefooted processions through the streets, That their
Canonical hours of devotion, at midnight in their Closters, that in great
Festival Eves their goeing at Midnight, with confluence of people to
town-churches is all commendable service. William Wats Sermon. page 3. Mamertus
Bishop of Vienne did not uncannonicallie, to appoint a solemn mortification of
three days fast, and to make a Letanie to be sung in a barefoted procession.
Ibid page 20. To go barefooted, they received from David and from Esaias Ibid.
page 45. Nazianzen makes goers barefoote to be imitators of Apostolical
spirited people. Ibid. page 48. In the third, fourth and fifth ages, are
examples plentiful of the nightly processions of the Christians; yea, they
went from their houses in the cities to some of their churches in the fields,
singing Psalms all the way through the streets in the hearing of the Gentiles.
Ibid. Minutius Faelix mentions nocturna and oeculta sacra. For this purpose
the night was divyded into Cannonicall hours or certain times of rising to
prayer, whereof midnight was one, the morning watch was another Canonical
hour, I hope that notwithstanding our devotion serves us not to imitate the
Prophets and Apostles, and the Primitives, yet we will forbear to take part
with the old heretics in reprehending them. Ibid. Before a greater Festival
all the devouter sort of Christians constantly repaired to their Churches at
midnight.


In the head of Purgatory and Prayer for the dead, thus far long ago are
the proceeded, first, How near they approach to purgatory, and prayer for the
dead.
they avow openly Limbus patrum telling us, that the Saints before Christ were
not only not in heaven, but truly in an infernal place, even in a lack,
where in one nook the Godly were in peace, and the wieked in torments, that
Abraham's bosom was here, between which and hell a certain gulf made, but a
tolerable distance. that Jacob, Samuel, and David, and other of the ancients
were mourned for at their death, because their souls went not to heaven, but
truly to a kind of hell: their mind in these things, as their custom is,
they propone in the words of some Father, that by the shelter of their
authority they may keep off their own head the indignation of the people:
Montag. orig. page 286. His qui in carcere erat spiritibus, hoc est defunctis,
suo fato and inferno addictictis praedicavit quo in loco Puritani, and
novatores spiritum, non animam Christi intelligunt. Ibid. apar. p. 476.
Communem esse patrum sententia^, aliorumque doctissimorum scriptorum nostrae
aetatis and confessionis sanctorum, animas ante Christi resurrectionem non
fuisse in Coelo. Olim (inquit Chrysostomus) ad infernum deducebat mors, sed
nunc assumit ad Christu^ Ideo dicebat olim Jacob, Deducelis senectutem meam ad
infernum cum lachrymis. Ideo olim lugebantur mortui, at nunc cum Psalmis and
hymnis efferuntur. Hyeronimi testimonia sunt innumera, ante adventum Christi
omnes ad inferos ducebantur: inde Jacob ad inferos discensurum se dicit, and
Job pios and impios in inferno queritur retineri, and Euangelium docet magnum
chaos interpositum apud inferos, and revera antequam flammeam illam ratam, and
igneam rompheam ad paradist fores Christus cum la^rone reseraret, clausa erant
coelestia, Nota quoque ut Samuelem vere quoque in inferno fuisse credas, and
ante adventum Christi, quamvis sanctos inferni lege detentos locum esse ait,
qui lacus vocatur and abyssus, in qua non erant aqua in qua animo recluduntur,
sive in refrigerio, sive ad poenas.
Again they tell us that Christ before he opened heavens gate to any soul, he
went first down, and loosed the souls in prison; yea, if ye believe M.
Maxwell (who has written much for the drawing of our Church the factions way)
he went down to the lowest hells, and delivered thence a number of Pagans
such as Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, and a world of mo: Montag. apar. page 476.
Postquam eo descendit Christus, inferorum claustra perfodit, deripuit,
vastavit, spoliavit, vinctas inde animas liberando M. Maxwels demonstration,
page 9. Whether the places of Scripture wherein mention is made of our Saviors
spoiling of hell, and leading captivity captive, may perhaps be understood of
his powerful and merciful delivering from hell of some of the souls of
virtuous Pagans, as of their philosophers, Lawgivers, governors, kings,
queens, and other private persons renowned for their wisdom prudence,
fortitude, temperance bounty, chastity, justice, mercy; and generally for
their civil carriage, and moral conversation, such as were Hermes,
Trismegistus, Zoroaster, Socrates, Plato, Aristoele, Pithagoras, Homer,
Phocilides. Theogrus, Epictetus, Cicero; and such as were Hercules, Theseus,
Cyrus, Solon, Lycurgus, Aristides, Simon, Timotheus, Epaminondas, Tarrina,
Camilla, Nicaula, Panthea Penelope, Artemisia, and others the like: for my own
part, I do profess such love to those virtuous wights, for their virtues
sake, as I had rather condemn twenty such opinions as that of Limbus patrum,
then to damn eternally the soul of one Socrates, of one Cyrus.
. Our maine pillars against purgatory they hew down with the popish axes,
when we reason that Scripture makes no mention of any third place betwixt Hell
and Heaven; they reply, that there are many things whereof Scripture makes no
mention. When we reason that Scripture makes mention expressly of two places
for Souls after death, they use the popish distinction, that after the
resurrection there is but two eternal places, but that before the resurrection
there may be three temporal: Montag. apar page 135. Obiiciunt, nullus tertius
locus indicatur in Scriptura praeter infernum damnatorum and coelum. R^sp.
Licet non indicaretur in Scripturis esse alium locum tertium, non tamen inde
sequeretur non fuisse tertium, quia multa sunt quae non indicantur in
scripturis. Locus ille Matthaei 25. Loquitur non de loco aut statu animarum
ante Christum, sed de statu and loco finali post finem saeculi, cum duae tantum
erunt absque dubio hominum societatis sempiterna.
4. When Papists urge upon us prayer for the dead, they will not contradict
them; yea, they commend oblations in the Lords Supper, and prayers there for
the dead in particular. Andrews stristurae, p. 56. Anent offering and prayer
for the dead, there is little to be said against it, it can not he denied but
it is ancient. Dow, p. 56. That the ancient Church had commemorations,
oblations, and prayers for the dead, the testimonies of the Fathers,
ecclesiastical stories and ancient liturgies do put out of all question.
P^kling. alt. p. 83. Commends that Canon whereby a priest after his death was
ordained to be punished, for making another priest his executour, with this
pain, that at the altar for such a One non offeretur, noc sacrificium pro
dormitione ejus celebraretur.


CHAP. VI. Ament their Superstitions.
IN the church of Rome, the Canterburians use to profess corruptions of two
kinds, Few of all Romes superstitions are against their stomach.
errors and superstitions, as for heresies or Idolatries, they are loath any
such crimes should be laid to the charge of their mother church, how many and
how grievous errors they find Rome guilty of they had need to declare; for
in the most of those, werein the Protestants place the chief of the Romish
errors, you have heard them plainly take their part, readily it will prove
no otherwise when we come down to try them in the particular heads* wherein
Papists are reputed most superstitious.

The superstitions which in Papists are most remarked in their private carriage
are these four: In their frequent signing of themselves with the sign of the
cross: In wearing about their neck a crucifix or some such toy of an image or
relic: In saying their prayers on their beads: In abstaning from flesh on
friday, wednesday, lent; or some great feastivalls Eave; Our men are far from
disproving of any of these practices. For the first, they avow that signing
with the sign of the cross at rising or lying down, at going out or coming
in, at lighting of candles, closing of windows, or any such action is not only
a pious and profitable ceremony, but a very Apostolic tradition. Samuel
Hoards Sermon. p. 15. Reckons out among his traditions, the crossing of
themselves when they went out, or when they came in, when they went to bed, or
when they rose, when they set down to meat, or lighted candles, or had any
businesses of moment to do Montag. apeal page 286. What hinders but that I may
sign my self with the sign of the cross in any part of my boody, at any time
when I go to bed, in the morning when I rise, at my going out, at my returning
home, the ancient Church so used it, and so may we (for ought I know) without
just scandal or superstition.
2. They avow expressly the carrying of these holy trincats about their neck, in
caisses of silver or gold. Montag. antid. p. 17. Ego certe illas reliquias
fas^iis involvam; auro includam, circumgestandas, admovebo labiis ac collo
suspensas manibus, oculisque crebro usurpatas intuebor. Ibid. p. 24. Imagines
praesertim Christi crucifixi asservamus diligenter and cum cura: sunt apud nos
per fenestras, ambones, vasa, vestimenta.
3 The saying of their prayers; yea, their Ave mary's upon their beeds is to
them an holy Arithmetic worthy of praise and imitation. Female glory, page
148. Among the other praises of his holy Nuns, this is one, You who ply your
sacred Arithmetic, and have your thoughts cold and clear as the crystal
beeds ye pray by: And in his proemials, Omnis terra revibrat aeve
4. Wednesday, friday, and Lent-fasts, are to them not only lawdable practices
of the ancient church, but also traditions come from Christ and the Apostles
which for religions cause all are oblidged to embrace. Montag. antid. p. 164.
Quadragesimale jejunium libenter ego concesserim ab Apostolis constitutum, and
apud vetissimos Ecclesia proceres usurpatum. Ibid. p. 9. Doceatur esse aliquid
ab ipsis Apostolis institutum, utpote jejunium quadragesimale; Causam non
dicamquin haereseos accuser, si non ut ab Apostolicae authoritate sancitum
propugnavero. William Wats sermon, page 50. Most precise and severe observers
were they of Lent-fast, which the whole primitive Church did believe to be of
Apostolical institution, so that they had their Saviors and his Apostles
example for that strictness. I pass their observation of Wednesdayes and
Frydayes fast weckly, which Epiphanius among many others assures to be of
Apostolical institution, Couzins devotion: It had also been an ancient and
religions custom, to fast all the Frydayes in the year, except those which
fall within the twelve days of Christmasse. The Lent which now is, and ever
has been reputed an apostolical constitution, and we add out of
Chrysologus, that it is not an humane invention, as they call it, but it comes
from Divine authority that we fast our fouritie days in Lent, p. 221.


They embrace the grossest not only of their private, but also of their
public superstitions.
The popish public superstitions are very many, but of these which that whole
Church does allow, very few comes to my mind which stand much against the
stomach of our men: Those that come first to my thoughts are all pleasently
digested; Protestants wont to deride the popish conceat of their holy ground,
of their consecrat walls, and the sanctuary of their Chancels, their turnings
toward the East, their manifold toies in baptism and the Lords supper joined
with the sacramental elements, their hallowing above the Sabbath a multitude
of Festivals, their pilgr^mages, their processions and many such their
practices. In this behold the mind of our men, they tell us first that
Kirkyards by prayers and conspersion of holy water must be made holy ground;
that before these episeopall consecrations, no Christian burial may be made
therein, but after that the bishop has used the pontifical ceremonies
thereupon, no Heretic, no Schismatic, no Excommunicat person may be brought
there, no worldly, no common action there performed without the profanatio^ of
the holy place. Laurence sermon p. 9. Christians distinguished their oratories
into an aetriu^, a Church yard, a sanctu^, a Church a sanctum sanctorum a
Chancell, they did conceive a greater degree of sanctity in one of them, than
in an other, and in one place of them than another, churchyards they thought
profained by sports, the whole circuit both before and after Christ was
privileged for refuge, none out of the communion of the Kirk permitted to lie
there, any consecrate ground preferred for interment before that which was not
consecrat, and that in an higher esteem which was in a higher degree of
consecration, and that in an higher which was nearest the altar. Halls sermon
at the consecration of a burial place p. 38. Out of the consideration of the
holy designation of these peculiare places came both the tittle and practice of
consecration of cemiteries, which they say is no less ancient than the the
days of Calixtus the first who dedicated the first Cemmiteries, albeit it was
decreed by the counsel of Arles, that if any Church were consecrated the Church
yard of it should require no other hallowing but by simple conspersion. p. 40.
It is mere and necessary that those places should be set aside to this holy use
by a due and religious dedication, by prayers and holy actions tending
thereunto. if the Jews used these dedications how much more we. Ib. in the
preface, an act worthy both of this common celebration and of that episcopal
service of mine.
Again they show us that the church by the bishops anointing some stones
thereof with oil and sprinkling others with water, and using from the Roman
pontifical some mo prayers, some mo ceremonies upon it, becomes a ground more
holy: That before these consecrations though the people of God for many years
have meet into a Church for divine service, yet it is no more holy then a barn,
a tavern, a tolbooth; but after these consecrations there is such holiness in
the walls, that even when there is no divine service, men at their coming in,
and going out must adore and all the time of their presence stand discovered,
and never so much as sit down, were the service never so long, except upon
great infirmity. Tedders sermon p. 8. It is the consecration that makes them
holy and makes God esteem them so, which though they be not capable of grace,
yet receive by their consecration a spiritual power whereby they are made fit
for divine service and being consecrate, there is no danger in ascribing
holiness unto them, if we believe S. Bernard. quis parietes istos sanctos
dicere vereatur, quos manus sacratae Pontificum tantis sactificavere mysteriis.
When we come to Church says the holy Fathers of the devotion of those
primitive times, corpora humi sternimus, they that showed the least devotion
did bow all the time that they were there, none presumed so much as to sit as
being too bold and lazy a posture in Gods house; but only for infirmity or
some other cause were dispensed with. There were some that would not have their
shoes on their feet in the temple, a shame to them that have their hats on in
Gods hoase. Shelford. p. 51. Some profaine Gods house by going out with heads
covered as if God were not present and it were not his house when service was
ended. Pokling. altar. p. 141. Churches when they were made they were
consecrate, for a man may as lawfully and Christianly administer the sacrament
in a barn or town hall as in any place that is not consecrate to such holy
uses, Queenscoale p. 223. S. Giles Church in the fields being newly repaired
after two years service, sermon and sacraments in it in D. Montany B. of
Londons time, was required to be consecrat by his successor D. Lad, the people
refusing the bishop, caused sequester and lock up the house for a month, and
forces the Parish after fifty pound fies to put up a crucifix upon the east
window and receive the other orders of consecration. The fundation stones of
the repair of Paul's were solemnly blessed by the bishop, his main reasone for
the urging of the visitation of Cambridge was, that two chapels there was not
yet censecrat, notwithstanding of divine service in them for some score of
years bygone.
3. That the Chancell and the Altar must not only be dedicat with prayers and
unctions, but with lighted candles, burning in-cense, and many other such
toies; that it must be divided from the Church with vailes to keep not only the
bodies, but the eyes of the Laics from beholding the arc and throne wherein
the body of the Son of God does sit, as in a chair of state, that none but
priests must enter there and that with their triple low adorations at their
approaching: That it is a favor for the King or the Empetour to win near that
place for the short time of his offering. Pokl. alt. p. 141. Was not the altar
the chiefest place which with most ceremony and devotion was hallowed? was
there not a feast annual kept in joyful remembrance of the dedication of
every Church. Does not S. Austine say. Novit sanctitas vestra fratres,
consecrationem altaris celebramus in quo unclus vel benedictus est lapis, as he
cites the place in his Sunday Quenscoale. p. 198. In the collegiat Church of
Wolverhampton in the country of Stafford, the altar and clothes thereof were
consecrat 11. October. 1635. As soon as the priests come to the Church each of
them made a low congie at their first entering in the Church door and after
that three congies a piece toward the altar, so they went unto the chancell
where a basin with water and a towel was provided for the priests to wash in,
where also was incense burning; after they returned making three congies
apeece. After the sermon every one of them had a paper in his hand which they
termed a censer, and so they went up again to the altar: As they went they
made three congies apeece, the communion being ended they washed their hands
and returned giving three congies as before. Ib. 220. There are diverse high
altars solemnly dedicated of late in diverse colleges of Combridge and Oxford
adorned with tapers, candlesticks, crucifixes, basins, crosses, rich altar
clothes, crimson, cushons, rich hangings. Pokling. alt. page 24. Optatus says
that erant ecclesiae ex auro and argento quam plurima ornamenta. ibid. page 80.
At the upper end of the Chancell was a place railed in, whereunto none were
permitted to enter but the priests. The Canon is clear. Nulli omnium qui sit
in Laicorum numero liceat intra sacrum altar ingredi. A dispensation indeed
there was for the Emperor to enter in hither when he would Creatori dona
affer^^ but stay there he might not Laurence p. 10. Beyond these railes duo
cancelli which distinguished the body of the Church from the Oracle, none out
of orders came. A more awful reverence was commanded to this part being barred
from common view. Ibid. page 29. We have the Grecians triple prostrations from
their liturgies, (...) Ibid. p. 12. The same God is through all the parts of
the Church, but not in the same manner through all the parts thereof, for as
they are different degrees of sanctiry in them, so is there a different
dispensation of his presence in them, Ibid. p. 15. This follows upon the
consecration, as there was a greater communication of the divine presence in
those places than in others, so was there a greater communication of the same
presence in some parts of the temple of Solomon than in others. And as that
distinction in holy places continued after Christ so did the reason of that
distinction too. The whole indeed is the house of God, for albeit the Lord be
without these walls yet is he more within, as we are not presumed to be so much
abroad as at home, though the Church conceived him to be present in all parts
of this house, yet it conceived him to be present more in one part of it than
another, in respect of that peculiar dispensation of his presence to that place
of the Church, as of old to that place of the temple which was within the
veil, having an altar here answerable to a mercy seat there, as also in
respect of that union betwixt this place and his humane nature. Cant. Star.
Chamber speech p. 47. The altar is the greatest place of Gods residence upon
earth. I say the greatest, yea greater than the pulpit, for there it is hoc
ectcorpus meum, but in the pulpit it is at most hoc est verbum meum, and a
greater reverence no doubt is due to the body than to the word, and so in
relation answerable to the throne where his body is usually present then to the
seat whence his word uses to be proclaimed.
4 That none of the ceremonies of the popish baptism, neither their salt, their
spitle, nor exsufflation are superstitious. Vide supra cap. 5. (x).
5. That a number of the Mass toies which yet are not in practice in England,
yea all the guises of the Mass which can be proven to be ancient are all to be
embraced. Lincolneshere Minister p. 163. I was showed a latin determination
read in one of out Universities, aiming to prove, that look what ceremonies
were used about the altar before the reformation by power and force of any
general custom, though past over in deep silence by our liturgy, are
notwithstandig commanded us by a kind of implicit praecept, even unto us, that
live under the discipline of the English liturgy. Heylene in his Antidot.
lect. 2. p. 63. does confess the fact and does not disclame the author
therein, only leaves that Kings professor D. Colines as a man most able to
justify that writ. These are his words, as for your Sally on the author of the
latin determination, I leave him to himself: He is of age to do you reason
in this, as well as in that other quarrel you have against him.
6. That who ever in the public prayers has their face toward the North,
South, and West must be publicly called upon to turn themselves ever toward
the East. Vide supra, cap. 5. B.
7. That in the Church not only in the time of prayer, but at the reading of
the ten commands, all must fall on their knees, but when the creed is read all
must stand upright on their feet, when the epistle comes, all may sit down,
but when the gospel begineth, all must again arise, during the time of sermon
all must stand uncovered. That to these and all such pious practices we are
oblidged by the sole example of the bishops or some few of them, even before
the inacting of any law either of Church or state. Edward Bugheus, sermon. page
9. We may not think it enough that we stand at the Creed, except we say it also
with the Minister audibly with a loud voice, nor is it enough for us to stand
up at the gospel, but we must also bow at the name of Jesus, not as if we were
ashamed of what we did, but with due and lowly reverence, neither is it
sufficient to be bare in time of divine service, except we also reverently
kneell on out knees when the commands and letanie are read. Shelfoord p 20. Let
us learn of our Cathedral Churches, for there our reverend Fathers, the
prelates, make their reverence to God in this wise, both at their entry and
their return, wherefore to follow their good and holy pattern we are to do the
like both at our coming in to Gods house and at our going out. Ibid p. 22. The
fifth office of holiness is to rise up from our seats when the articles of our
faith are read, we also do more reverently to stand up at the reading of the
psalms before, after, and behind the holy lessons. We are also to stand at the
reading of the gospel. The reason that the old Lytargick writters gives of
this superstitious standing at the Creed and gospel more then at the reading of
the lessons and epistles is, because these epistles among which they put the
revelation the penteteuch and sundry other parts of the old testament,
contains more base doctrine then the gospel which comes behind them, as the
Master comes after his servant which goes before to make way.
8. That the conscience is oblidged not only to keep religiously the greater
festivities of Yule, pasch, pentecost, and the rest which are immediately
referred to the honor of the Trinity, but also a number of the festivals of
the blessed Virgin, of the Saints and Angels: Those must not be polluted with
any work or seculare affair, as we desire to be helped by these glorified
persons intercession. Cousins devotions they offend against the fifth command
that obeyes not the precepts of the ecclesiastic governors. The precepts of
the Church are first to observe the feastivals and holy days appointed in the
Church calendar vide supra cap.
Yet Christ's Sunday must be no Sabbath; bowling, balling, and other such games
may well consist with all the holiness it has, yea, no law of God, no ancient
Canon of the Church does discharge shearing of corn, taking of fish, or much
other husband labor upon that day; but by the contrary acts both of church and
State do warra^d such labor; yea, there is so great Jewish superstition in the
land about Christ's Sunday, that all preachers must be oblidged in their very
pulpits to proclaim the new book of sports, for incouragment of the people to
their gamings, when the short hour of divine service is ended, and that under
no less pain than ejection from the Ministere. Whits examinat p. 118. The
injunction makes no difference betwixt Sunday and the other holy days
concerning working, in harvest no special privilege is given it more then the
rest. For King Edwards statute repeated by Queen Elizabeth says, It shall be
lawful to every husband man, labourer, fisherman etc. upon the holy days
aforesaid in harvest or at any other time of the year when necessity shall
require, to labor, ride, fish, or work any kind of work at their free wills
and pleasure. Ibid. on the Sabbath p. 217. In the new testament we read of no
prohibition concerning abstinence from secular actions upon the Lord day more
then upon other days. Et quod non prohibetur ultro permissum est. The
Catholic Church for more than 6^0. year after Christ, gave license to many
Christian people to work upon the Lords day at such hours as they were not
commanded to be present at the public service by the precept of the Church. In
S. Ieromes days the devotest Christians did ordinarily work upon the Lord-day.
In Gregory the greats time it was reputed antichristian doctrine to make it a
sin to work on the Lords day. Helens answer. p 111. His Majesty having
published his declararion about lawful pastimes on the Sunday gives order to
his bishops that publication thereof be made in all their several diocesses,
the bishops hereupon appoint the incumbent of every Church to read the
declaration to the people, and finding opposition to the said appointment,
press them to the performance of it by virtue of that Canonical obedience
which by their several oaths they were bound to yield unto their ordinaries,
but seeing nothing but contempt upon contempt after much patience and long
suffering, some of the most perverse have been suspended as well a beneficio as
officio for an example to the rest.
9. Pilgramages to Sants, relics, and barefooted processions to their
Churches are preached and printed. Vide supra caput. 5. w.
Those throats which are so wide as to swallow down all these, it seems they
will not make great bones in all the other trash which in the Romish Church we
challenge as superstitious.

CHAP. VII. The Canterburians embrace the Mass it self.
OF all the pieces of Popery, there is none so much beloved by Papists, nor so
much hated by Protestants, as the Mass, since the reformation of Religion, the
Mass has ever been counted the great wall of division, keeping the parties
asunder, who ever could free that ditch, whose stomach could digest that
morsel, no man of either side was wont to make any doubt of his name, but that
with consent of all, he might pass for a true Papist; and no ways in any
reason stand for a moment longer in the catalogue of Protestants: If then I be
able to demonstrate the Canterburians mind to be for the Mass, I hope no man
of any understanding and equity will require of me any further proof of their
popery, but with good leave of all I may end my task, having set upon the head
thereof this cape-stone.

In the mouth of both sides reformed and Romish, preaching and the Mass go for
real opposites, the affection of Papists to their Mass makes them value our
preaching at the lesser rate; They cry down so far as they can all preaching.
the affection of Protestans to preaching makes the Mass to them the less
lovely: Our faction to make rowme for the Mass so far as they dare, so fast as
they can, are crying down preaching. They tell us first, that much of the
preaching which now is at London, and over England is not the Word of God, but
of the Devil, Cant Starchamber speech, page 47. But in the pulpit it is at
most, Hoc est verbum meum, and God hold it there at his word: for as too many
men use the matter, it is, Hoc est verbum diaboli, this is the word of the
devil in many places, witness sedition, and the like to it.
because indeed the best and most zealous preachers in their sermons do often
tax Arminianisme and Popery, and the ways, whereby his Grace is in use to
advanee both: This to him and his followers is doctrinall Puritanisme, much
worse than disciplinary; yea, it is sedition taught by the Devil: 2. They tell
us, that the most of preachers, though void of the former fault, are so
ignorant, idle, impertinent, clamorous fellows, that their silence were much
more to be wished than their speech. And posthuma, page 32. Ex quo nuper hic
apud nos vapularunt canes muti exclusi sunt clamatores isti odiosi ac molesti,
ex quo pessimus iste mos invaluit, ex quo pruriginoso cuipue odious, patefactus
hic quicquid libet effutiendi, Ecclesia in tonstrinam versa est, non plus ibi
inepti^rum quam hic, Theologia in battologiam, banes non latrantes mutari in
catulos oblatrantes, haud fere scias quid optandum sit illud, ne si lentium, an
hilatratus absoni, illud ne j^junium, an haec nausea.
Because indeed grave and gracious Ministers are not either able or willing to
stuff their sermons with secular learning, and employ extraordinar pains for
to gather together a Mass of tinkling words, as Andrews was, and his admirers
are wont to do, for to spoil preaching of that life, spirit, and power, which
ought to shine into it. 3. That the preaching which them selves approve and
praises, is but sermonizing in pulpits, no necessar part of the Ministerial
charge, but a practice to be used of some few of singular learning and
eloquence, and that only at rare and extraordinar times, as the Bishop, or the
Star-chamber-court shall be pleased to give license. Shelfoord, page 91. Beside
these ten kinds of preaching which are able to stop the mouth of all itching
eared professors, there is yet another kind of preaching not fit for every
Minister, but for extraordinary and excellent men, called by God and the
Church, to reform errors and abuses, to promulge to the world new Laws and
Canons. And as this kind is to be performed by extraordinary men, so it is
not always so needful, but when necessity required: for when things are
settled there needs no more settling, but only preserving, We ought not to have
many Moseses, or many Evangelists, nor many Apostles; Were people now to be
called and converted to the Gospel, then not only this kind of preaching, but
miracles also were needful, when much needless and some unsound teaching by
tract of time had sued into the ark of Christ's Church, by the Prelates and
Priests thereof: Then in the 19. year of King Henry the eight began licenses to
be granted by the Court of Starchamber, to preach against the corruptions of
the time; but now the corruptions are removed, the ancient and true doctrine of
the primitive Church by settled articles is restored; Therefore this
extraordinary kind is not now so necessary, except it be upon some
notorious crimes, breaking forth among people.
4. That the only ordinar, profitable, and necessar preaching which God has
appointed, and the Church laid upon the back of Pastors, as their charge for
which their tithes and stipends is due to them, is nothing but the distinct and
clear reading of the Service Book. Shelf. p. 35. The principal part of the
Ministers office is the true understanding, distinct reading, and dece^t
Ministry of the Church service, contained in the book of Common Prayer. This
is the pith of godliness, the heart of religion, the spina or vertebrae, the
backbone of all holy faculties of the Christian body. Ib. p. 39. Were these
read as the Canons directs aptly, that is, by just distinctions, and by a
sensible Render, observing all the rules of reading, with pronunciation fit for
the matter, and with due attention of the hearer, there would be much profit
and edifying. Ibid. page 76. Gods Minister is thy Preacher, and the divine
service of the church Book is his sermon. In this service and this sermon is
contained whatsoever is necessar for salvation. Ibid p. 78. The very reading is
preaching; yea, a lively and effectual kind of preaching.
As for sermonizing in pulpits, when so it is permitted, it ought to be very
short, and after the popish form, without any prayer at all, either before or
after: That the custom of English preachers, who before Sermon pray for the
help of the Spirit of God to themselves and their hearers, or after Sermon
crave grace to practice what has been spoken is all but idle; yea,
intolerable novations to be abolished: Heylans answer, page 165. Whereas
formerly you used to mangle and cut short the service, that you might bring the
whole worship of God to your extemporarie prayers and sermons, now you are
brought again to the ancient usage of reading the whole prayers, without any
diminishing in regard of preaching. As for your other cavils about the using of
no prayer at all after Sermon, the innovation here is on your part, who have
offended all this while, not only against the Canon, but act of Parliament, by
bringing in new forms of your own divising. As for the forbidding of any
prayer before the Sermon, if any such be, it is but agreeable unto the Canon,
which has determined so of it long ago. The Preachers in King Edwards days
used no form of prayers, but that exhorting which is now required in the Canon.
Neither this only, but that the most able Pastors are not to be suffered so
much as in their private studies to recommend their Souls to God in their own
words, but in their very private prayers, are to be tied precisely to the words
of the Service Book. Couzins devotions in the preface. Let no prayers be used
but these which are allowed by the Church, what prayers so ever any man had
framed for himself, let him first acquaint these that are wise and learned
with them, before he presume to use them: and that men may not think those
rules are to be applied to public prayers only, and not to private, let them
weigh those words in the council of Carthage, Quascunque sibi preces, etc
When we speak to the awful Majesty of God, we would be sure to speak in
the grave and pious language of the Church, which has ever been guided by the
holy Ghost, and not to loss our selves with confusion in any sudden abrupt
or rude dictats, which are framed by private spirits, and ghosts of our own in
regard whereof our very priests and deacons themselves are in their private and
daily prayers injoined to say the morning and evening devotions of the Church,
and when at any time they pray, there is a set form of words prescribed to
them to use, that they also might know it is not lawful for them to pray of
their own heads, or suddenly to say what, they please themselves.
5. That the sermonizing which themselves permit, must be in the greatest
towns in the most solemn times but once a day, that the practice of hearing
two Sermons in one day is to be corrected, that one in a month is abundant, and
all the English Canons do require. Pokling. Sunday. Our Savior in Capernaum on
the Sabbath, preached but once a day, for immediately after he went to dinner,
Heylens answer, Page 168. If in the great cities and universities, sermons are
limited to the same time of the day, or as your own phrase is, to an hour
only, assuredly it is neither new nor strange, nor need you be offended at it,
if by that means the people in those places can not hear but one sermon in the
day, it being not many, but good sermons; not much but profitable hearing,
which you should labor to commend. Shelfoord, page 93. Better were it for our
Church and people to have but one Sermon well premeditated, in a month, which
is insinuated by the Canon, then two on a day, proceeding from a rolling brain
and mouth, without due preparation. Heylens answer, page 166. Your afternoon
sermon on the Sunday, if performed by Lecturers, are but a part of your new
fashion, and having no foundation in the Church at all, it can not be any
innovation to lay them by, and if the Curate perform his duty in
catechizing, you have no reason to complain for want of sermons in the
afternoon.


6. That over all England, Lecturers whose sermons wont to be the far best,
must be presently silenced, as those whose calling the Canons Ecclesiastical
of England can not permit. Heylens answer, 163. Why count ye the suppressing
of Lectures for an innovation, whereas the name of Lecturers and Lectures are
in themselves a new and late invention, borrowed from the new fashions of
Geneva.
In a word, that Sermons are the great occasion of the divisions and
heart-burnings, which now trouble the Church and State, of the presumption and
pride, and most sins among the people: That therefore it were very good to
return to the old fashion in the days of popery, before the 19. year of
Henry the eight, where there was none, or but few preachings, that this is the
only means to reduce the land to that old honest simplicity, equity, piety
and happiness, which was in our antecessors days; Schelfoord, page 71. When
men had more of inward teaching, and less of outward, then was there far
better living, for then they lived always in fear of offending; and as soon
as they had done any thing amiss, their conscience by and by gave them a nip,
and a memento for it; then they confessed their sins to God and their Minister,
for spiritual comfor and counsel; then they endeavored to make the best
temporal satisfaction they could by alms, prayers, and fasting; and other
good works of humiliation; but now outward teaching not being rightly
understood, has beaten away this. Ibid. page 82. The besotted negligence of
our delicat Puritans, is that which makes them to run so after Sermons: what
does this singularity work in them, but a contempt of government? As weak
stomachs, can not well digest much meat, so the common people can not govern
much knowledge; and when they can not digest it well, they vomit it up, they
wax proud, and will contest with their Ministers. At what time were most
heresies broached? Was it not in the primitive Church, when there was most
preaching, therefore thereafter they did slake it. Ibid. page 99. Preaching by
reading is the ordinaire preaching ordained by God himself, and his Church,
and this was the ordinary preaching in our Church before King Henry the eight.
even to that old blindness, wherein of necessity, we must give our soul to
be led by the light of Sr. John the Priest, our Father Confessor, for all this
behold on the margin their express declaration.

Preaching being thus far cried down, They approve the Mass both for word and
matter.
there will be the less ado to get up the Mass: For the word of the Mass is
so lovelie to them, that they are delighted to style their Service Book by
that name. Pokling, Sunday, Missam facere cepi, says S. Ambrose, he began the
second service as our church calls it, quidam cogunt sacerdotem ut abbreviet
Missam, says S. August. that is, they make the priest to curtaile divine
service.
And least we should think that it is but with the word of the Mass, that
they are reconciled, they show us next, that they find no fault with the very
matter of the Mass, if you will give unto it a charitable and benign
interpretation. Montag. antid. Page 10. Missam ipsam non damnamus, quoad vocem,
quin nequit Missae (...) sano and recto sensu intellectum.
Neither here do they stand, but go on to tell us, yet more of their mind,
that if transubstantiation only were removed from the Mass, they would make no
question, for any thing it has beside. And this, but most falsely, they give
out for King James judgment. Pokling al, page 138. The King would like well
enough of the Mass, if the priests would shrive her of Transubstantiation.
Yea, they go on further to embrace transubstantiation it self, so far as
concerns the word: And how much the matter of it displeases them we shall
hear anon. Montag. antid. page 10. De vocibus, ne Missae quidem, imo ne
Transubstantiationis certamen moveremus.


But to show their mind more clearly toward the Mass, consider the Scottish
liturgy; This unhappie book was his Graces invention: If he should deny it,
his own deeds would convince him. The manifold letters which in this
pestiferous affair have passed betwixt him and our Prelates are yet extant. If
we might be heard, we would spread out sundry of them before the Parliament
house of England, making it clear as the light, that in all this design his
hand has ever been the prime stikler; so that upon his back mainly, nill he
will he, would be laid the charge of all the fruits good or evil which from
that tree, are like to fall on the Kings countries. But of this in time and
place; only now we desire to be considered that to this hour, his Grace
has not permitted any of his party to speak one cross word against that
book, but by the contrary lets many of them commend it in word and writ for the
most rare and singular piece, that these many ages has been seen in any
church, for all gracious qualities that can be found in any humane writ. Hear
you the personat Jesuit Lysimachus Nicanor, that is, as we conjecture by too
probable signs his Graces creature, Lesty of Dun, and Conner, extols that
book above the skies: Page 28. think no Church can celebrate the Sacrament
with more purity, sincerity, gravitie, and none with more majesty then by
this Book: Certainly it is purged from all stuff, which you call Superstition,
or the essentialls of the Mass, it is restored to the ancient integrity, the
least thing that might tend to superstition, being thurst out of doors, as
Ammon did Tamar, without hope of return: And if any superstitions would dare to
enter, the door is so fast shut, that they must despair of any entry. What
needs all such uproare then without cause? I shall oblidge my self to made
good these particulars: First, that you shall never be able to find any thing
in that book, contrary to the Word of GOD.

2. That it contains nothing contrary to the practice of the primitive
church, but which is most agreeable thereto.

3. That all the points which you condemn are not contraverted between our
Classical Divines and papists but agreed upon in both sides.

4. That there, is nothing in it, contrary to our Confession of Faith in
Scotland; yea, which is much, ye shall not show me a Protestant Divine of any
note, who ever did condemn this Book of the least point of popery, but on
the contrare, did defend and commend it.


And yet we did undertake to show into it the maine, yea all the substantial
parts of the Mass, and this undertaking to the satisfaction of our nation was
performed in our general Assembly; but to those men the judgments of
national churches are but vile and contemptible testimonies. I have seen a
parallel written by a preacher among us, comparing all and every particular
portion of the Mass, as they are cleared by Innocent, Durand, Walfrid, Berno,
and the rest of the old Liturgick Rationalists, with the parts of our Liturgy,
as they may be cleared by the late writs of the Canterburians, which ends not,
till all the parts great and small of the Mass be demonstrat in our Book
either formally, in so many words, as the most considerable are, and that in
the very popish sense, If you will join to our book the Canterburian
commentars: or virtually a necessity being laid upon us, upon the same grounds
which perswads to embrace what in those book is formally expressed, to embrace
also what of the Mass is omitted, whenever it shall be their pleasure in a
new edition to add it. This parallel is ready for the public when ever it
shall be called for.

For the present, The Scottish Liturgy is much worse then the English.
because those men make our gracious Sovereign believe, and declare also to
the world in print, that what we challenge in that book, does strike alike
against the liturgy of England, as if the scots liturgy were altogether one
with the English, and the few small variations, which possibly may be found in
the Scottish, were not only to the better, but made for this very end, that
this new book might better comply with the Scots humor, which now almost by
birth or at least by long education is become naturally antipathetick to the
mass, to make this their impudent fraud so palpable that hereafter they may
blush (if it be possible for such foreheads to blush at any thing) ever again
before our King to make any such alledgance, passing all the rest of that book
for shortness, we shall consider some few lines in some three or four leafes
of it at most, wherein the world may see their malapert changing of the English
liturgy in twenty particulars and above, every one whereof draws us beyond
all that ever was allowed in England, and diverse of them lead to those parts
of the mass which all protestants this day count most wicked. If this be made
clear, I hope that all equitable men will be the more willing to free our
opposition thereto, of all imputations, and specially of al intentions to
encroach upon any thing that concerns the English church. For albeit we are
confident the world would have excused us to have opposed with all vehemency
the imposition upon us (a church and kingdom as free and independent upon any
other nation as it is to be found this day in christendom) without our
consent, or so much as our advice, the heavy burden of four foreign books,
of liturgy, canons, ordination, homelies, of a number of strange judicatories,
high commission, episcopal visitations, official courts, and the like, though
they had been urged in no other words, in no other sense then of old they wont
to be used in England: For it is well known that those things have been the
sole ground and only occasion of the grievous shismes and heavy troubles
wherewith almost ever since the reformation, that gracious church has been
miserably vexed. But now all those things being laid upon us in a far worse
sense as they are declared by the Canterburian imposers in their own writs, yea
in far worse words, as all who will take the pains to compare, may see: we
trust that our immovable resolution to oppose even unto death all such violent
novations shall be taken, by no good man, in evil part, let be, to be thrown,
far against our intentions, to the disgrace of our neighbor church, or any
well minded person therein. We have with the English church naught to do but as
with our most dear and nearest sister, we wish them all happiness, and that
not only they, but all other Christian churches this day were both almost, and
altogether such as we are, except our afflictions. We have no enemies there
but the Canterburian faction, no less heavy to her then to us. What we have
said against the Scots liturgy may well reflect upon them, and so far as we
intend, upon them alone, and that for three of their crimes chiefly. First
their forcing upon us, with whom they had naught to do, so many novations even
all that is in England at one draught, and that by mere violence. 2. Their
mutation of the most of those things to a plain popish sense, which in the
best sense that ever was put upon them, did occasion always to England much
trouble. 3. Their mutation of the English books not only to popish senses but
even to popish words, and that in a number of the most important passages of
the mass. This last here we will show, holding us within the bounds of our few
forenamed leafes, by which, conjecture may be made of the rest.

Of all the limbs of the mass the most substantious for many evil qualities
are those three, which ly contiguous together, the Offertorie, Our alteration
in the Offertorie.
the Canon, the Communion: The English at the reformation, howsoever for
reasons of their own, thought meet to retain more of the mass words then our
church could ever be induced to follow, yet in those three portions of the
mass they were very careful to cast out what they knew Protestants did much
abhor in the church of Rome. But at this time, the Canterburians having
gotten the refraiming of the liturgy in their hands, for to manifest their
affection openly to Rome, do put in expressly that, which the English reformers
put out, as wicked scandals. That this may be seen consider severally the
three named portions.

The Popish Offertorie in it self is a foul practice, even a renovation in the
Christian church of a Jewish sacrifice, as Durand confesses. Durand. lib. 4
fol. 65. Ritus igitur synagogae transivit in religionem ecclesiae and
sacrificia carnalis populi translata sunt in observantiam populi spiritualis.
But as it stands in the Mass, it have yet a worse use, to be a preparatorie
peace offering making way for that holy propitiatory, which in the Canon
follows. It is pretended to be a sacrifice for the benefit both of quick and
dead, for the good of the whole church universal, for the help of these in
Purgatory; but it is really intended to be a dragge, a hook to draw in money
to the Priests purses. This piece of the Mass the English did clean abolish,
but behold how much of it our present reformers are pleased to replant in our
book: First, they profess in plain terms the reduction of the Offertorie,
and that not once alone, but least their design should pass without
observation, they tell us over again of the Offertorie: 2. In the very fore
front of this their Offertorie, they set up unto us whole five passages of
Scripture, whereof the English has none, all directly in the literal sense
carrying to a Jewish oblation. 3. For the wakning of the Priests appitite
(which of it self uses to be sharp enough) Upon the hope of present gain to
sing his Masses with the better will, they set up a rubric, seasing and
infefting the officiating Priest in the half of all the oblations, which he
can move the people to offer, and giving a liberty to him with his
churchwarden, to dispose on the other half also as he thinks good, expressly
contrare to the Englsh, which commands all the alms of the people to be put
up in the poores box. 4. They will not have us to want the very formalitie of a
Jewish offering, for they ordain the Deacon to put the basin with the peoples
devotions in the hands of the Priest, that he may present it before the Lord
upon the altar, just as the Papists in this place ordain to bring the paten
with their oblations unto the Priest; that he may set it upon their altar.
Durand. lib. 4. fol. 64. Subsequens diaconus ipse patinam cum hostia pontifici
representat, and pontifex seu sacerdos hostiam collocat super altar.

Ibid fol. 66. Sacerdos oblatione? manu tangit, repraesentans illud Levitici,
14.4. ponetque manus suas super caput hostia, and acceptabilis erit, and
inexpiationem proficiciens.


5. The Priest is ordained to place and to offer up the bread and wine upon the
Lords table, that it may be ready for that service, just the Popish offering,
in that place of the Mass of the bread and wine, as a preparatory sacrifice
for the propitiatory following. 6. The English prayer for the catholic church,
is in our book cast immediately at the back of the offering of bread and wine,
and that we may know it must be taken for the Offertorie prayers that stands
there in the Missall, and that for the benefit not only of the living, but
also of the dead. The Mass clauses for the honor of the Saints, and help of
those who are in Purgatory, which the English scraped out, they put in again:
For as the Papists say, these Offertorie prayers for the honor of the Saints,
especially of the blessed Virgin, and Apostles, and Martyrs, so they in this
their Offertorie prayer commemorat all the Saints, who in their several
generations were the lights of the world, and had wonderful grace and virtue,
they might have put in particularly, as Couzins in his devotions does, page
371. The blessed Virgin Mary, the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs: also they mention among the dead not only these glorious Saints, but
the rest of Gods servants, who have finished their course in faith, and now do
rect from their labors, the best description that can be, if Bellarmine may be
believed, of the Souls in purgatory, for whom not only thanks is given, but
also prayers made, as Couzins, who is suspected to be one of the maine penmen
of our book, does comment this passage in his devotions, page 372. That at the
last day, we with them, and they with us may attain to the resurrection of the
Just, and have our perfect consummation both of Soul and Body in the kingdom
of heaven: There is no footstep of any of these things in the English Book.

Our changes in the consercration.
The piece which follows the Offertorie in the Missall, and in our book also,
is the Canon, no less detested by all Protestants, then admired by Papists, as
Bellarmine tells us; De missa lib. 2. cap. 17. Sacrum canonem ut summa
reverentia se^per Catholici retinuerunt, ita in^redibili furore ^^retici huius
tempori^ lacerant.
Many of the Prefaces and prayers thereof we have word by word, and what ever
we want, these men in print are bold to justify it all, as in nothing opposite
to the truth or Protestant doctrine: So the appendix to D. Fields third Book,
Chap. 1. But we must consider the time wherein D. Field is made to utter such
speeches, it is in the twenty eight year, long after the death of that learned
and reverend Divine: It is in that year when his Grace sitting in the chair
of London, had gotten now the full superintendence of all the presses there,
and could very easily (for the promoving of his designs) put in practice that
piece of policy among others, to make men after their death speak in print,
what they never thought in their life; or at least, to speak out those
thoughts which for the good and peace of the church, they keept close within
the doors of their own breast, and withdrew from the notice of the world; it
would then seem reason to father these strange justifications, of the Mass,
which are cast to Fields book so long after his death, as also many passages in
these posthume works of Andrews; which his Grace avowedly sets out in the
twenty ninth year, and those new pieces never heard of, which in the thirty
one year, are set out by M. Aylward, under the name of the English Martyrs, as
also that writ of Overall, which Montagu puts out with his own amplifications,
in the thirty six year. These and the like pieces, must in reason be rather
fathered on those who put them forth, then upon their pretended authors, who
readily did never know such posthume children, or else did take them for such
unhappie bastards as they were resolved, for reasons known to them selves, to
keep them in obscurity, and never in public to avow them as their own.

In this Canon there are two parts most principal, which the papists call the
Heart, and Head thereof. Innocent lib. 4. cap. 1. Ecce nunc ad summam
Sacramenti verticem accedentes, ad ipsum cor divini sacrificii penetramus.
The prayers of consecration and of oblation, this head the English strikes
off, this heart they pull out of their book, that the wicked serpent should not
have any life among them. But our men are so tender and compassionat toward
that poor Beast, that they will again put in that Heart, and set on that Head,
The consecration and oblation they will be loath to want. Consider then these
men's changing of the English book toward both those, the two incomparably
worst parts of the whole Mass. First, the English scrapes out all mention of
any consecration: for however we delight not to strive with the papists any
where about words, yet in this place while they declare expressly, that by
consecration of the elements they do understand not the sanctification of the
elements by the word and prayer, but a secret whispering of certain words upon
the elements, for their very Transubstantiation. Durand. lib. 6. Dicimus illud
non conserari; sed sanctificari, differt autem inter haec, nam consecrare, est
consecratine transubsta^tiare, sancti ficare est; sanctum and
reverendumesficere, ut patet in aqua benedicta.
Consecration in this place being so taken by the papists, the English rejects
it, and will have nothing to do therewith; but our men being more wise, and
understanding their own ends, put up in their rubric in capital letters
formally and expressly their prayer of consecration. 2. The Papists to the end
that their consecratorie words may be whispered upon the elements for their
change, and no ways heard of the people, who perchance if they heard and
understood them, might learn them by heart, and in their idleness might
pronunce them over their meals, and so, which once they say was done,
transubstantiat their ordinary food into Christ's body: For the eshewing of
these inconveniences they ordain the consecration to be made in the outmost
corner of the church, so far from the ears of the people as may be; and for the
greater security, they ordain their priests in the time of consecration, both
to speak low, and to turn their backs upon the people: For to remeed their
wicked follies, the English expressly ordained their communion Table to stand
in the body of the church, where the Minister in the mids of the people might
read out openly all the words of the Institution. But our men to return to the
old fashion, command the table to beset at the East end of the Chancell, that
in the time of the consecration, the priest may stand so far removed from the
people, as the furthest wall of the church can permit, and as this distance
were not enough to keep these holy words of consecration from the profaine
ears of Laics, our book has a second Rubric, injoining expressly the
priest in the time of consecration to turn his back on the people, to come
from the North end of table, and to stand at such a place where he may use
both his hands with more decency and ease, which is not possible but on the
Westside alone; for on the South side the commodity is just alike as in the
North. On the East none can stand, for the Table is joined hard to the Wall,
and whosoever stands at the West side of the Altar, his back is directly to the
people that are behind him. They say for this practice many things, first,
That in the good holy Liturgy of Edward the sixth, the priest was ordained to
stand with his back to the people. Heylens antid. page 45. and 46. The Church
of Rome injoyneth the priest to stand in medio altaris, with his face to the
East, and back to the people; But the Church of England at the north side of
the Table, albeit in King Edwards Lyturgie the priest was appointed to stand at
the mids of the altar.
Again, that always in the ancient church the priests stood in the uppermost
end of the church, divided from the people behind them, with railes, and
vailes, and other distinctions. Supra saepe.
3. That Scripture is the ground of this practice, for so it was in the Jewish
church, the priest when we went into the Sanctuary to pray, and offer incense
for the people, they stood without and never did hear what he spoke, nor saw
what he did. P^kling. alt. page 99. The people might see the priest going into
the Sanctuary, they might hear the noise of his bells; himself, his gesture,
his actions they saw not, yet all this was done in medio Ecclesiae, but not
among the people in the outward or inward Court, whereunto only the people were
permitted to come.
If from this practice we would infer with Bellarmine, that the Priest in the
consecration might speak in latin or in a language unknown to the people,
since God to whom he speaks understands all languages, the elements upon which
the consecratorie words are murmured, Scottish service the words of
consecration may be repeated again over more either bread or wine.
understands none, and the people for whom alone the vulgar language is used,
is put back from the hearing of the consecration; we know not what in reason
they could answer; But this we know, that the maine ground whereupon we press
the use of the vulgar language, not only in the consecration as they call it,
but in the whole service of God, I mean the warrant of Scripture, they openly
deny and for it gives us no ground, but the old tradition of the church. White
on the Sabbath, page 97. Such traditions are those that follow the Service of
the Chruch in a known language.


3. When our priest is set under the East wall within his rail his back upon
the people, he is directed to use both his arms with decency and ease, what
use here can be made of the priests arms, except it be for making of large
crosses as the mass rubricks at this place does direct, We do not understand:
only we have heard before, that they avow the lawfulness of crossing no less
in the supper then in baptism. 4. The prayer which stands here in the English
book, drawn from the place wherein it stood of old in the mass to countenance
the transubstantiation of the bread and wine into Christ's body and blood, but
standing in this place before the consecration it is clear of all such
suspicion: Our men are so bold as to transplant it from this good ground to the
old wicked soil at the back of the consecration where it wont to stand before
in the old order of Sarum. 5. In the next English prayer we put in the words of
the mass whereby God is besought by his omnipotent spirit so to sanctify the
oblations of bread and wine, that they may become to us Christ's body and blood,
from these words all papists use to draw the truth of their transubstantiation,
wherefore the English reformers scraped them out of their book, but our men put
them fairly in, and good reason have they so to do: for long ago they professed
that about the presence of Christ's body and blood in the sacrament after
consecration, they are fully agreed with Lutherans and Papists in all things
that is material and needful, as for the small difference which remains
about the formalitie and mode of presence, it is but a curious and
undeterminable question, whereabout there would be no contraversie, did not the
devilish humor of the Puritans and Jesuits make and entertain it. Mont.
apeal. page 289. If men were disposed as they ought unto peace, there neded be
no difference in the point of real presence: for the disagreement is only de
modo praesentiae; the thing it self, That there is in the holy Eucharist a
real presence is yielded to on either side. For Andrews professes to
Bellarmine, nobis vobiscum de obiecto convenit, de modo lis est. Praesentiam
inquam credimus non minus quam vos, verum de modo praesentiae nil temere
definimus. There is no such cause therefore says he why in this point of the
sacrament we should be so distracted seeing we both confess that which is
enough. This is my bedy, and contend merely about the means how it is my body,
a point of faith undeniable though it be unsearchable and incomprehensible:
From Hooker he pronounces that there is a general agreement about that which
is alone material, for the rest he avoweth himself to be for peace and
reconciliation and all to be so but Puritans and Jesuits whom the devil does
nourish up in a faction. Lawrence page 18. I like S. Ambrose, Lombard.
Rosfensis and Harding who advise in this argument to forbear the determination
of the manner of presence and to cloth our rancie with indefinite and general
expressions. As I like not those that say he is bodily there, so I like not
those that say his body is not there. For S. Paul says, it is there, and the
Church of England faith it is there, and the Church of God ever said, it is
there, and that truly, substantially, essentially. We must believe it is
there. We must not know how it is there. It is a mystery they all say. The
presence they determined, the manner of his presence they determined not. They
said he is there, but the Lord knows how.
Yea they seem to have come a step further to the embraceing of the very modde
of the popish presence, for they tell of a corporal presence ibi that the body
is there on the altar, and that essentially, yea so grossly, that for its
presence there, the altar it self, let be the elements must be adored. 6. They
make an express rubric for the priests taking of the paten and chalice in his
hand in the time of consecration, which taking not being either for his own
participation or distribution to others, why shall we not understand the end of
it to be that, which the mass there enjoynes the paten and chalice their
elevation and adoration, for the elevation was long practiced and professed by
some of our bishops, and the adoration when the chalice and paten are taken in
the priests hands is avowed by Heylene. Heylens answer p. 137. Think you it
fit the priest should take into his hands the holy mysteries without lowly
reverence, and that it is an novation to do so.
7. In an other rubric of our consecration we have the cautels of the mass,
anent the priests intention to consecrat, expressly delivered unto us.

As for that wicked sacrifice of the Mass, Our changes about the sacrifice.
which the Canon puts at the back of the consecration, the English banisheth it
allutterly out of their book; but the faction to show their zeal in their
reforming the errors of the English church, their mother, puts down here in
our book, first, at the back of the consecration their memento and prayer of
oblation. 2. That prayer of thanksgiving which the English sets after the
Communion in a place, where it can not be possibly abused, as it is in the
Mass for a propitiatory sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, they transpose
and set it just in the old place where it stood in the order of Sarum, at the
back of the consecration before the Communion. 3. The clause of the Missall,
which for its savor of a corporal presence, the English put out of this
prayer (may worthily receive the most precious Body and Blood of thy Son Christ
Jesus) they have here restored. 4. That we may plainly understand, that this
prayer is so transplanted and supplied for this very end, that it may serve as
it did of old in the missall for a prayer of oblation of that unbloudie
sacrifice by the priest for the sins of the world. Behold the first eighth
lines of it, which of old it had in the missall, but in the reformation was
spread out by the English, are plainly restored, wherein we profess to make and
over again to make before Gods divine majesty a memorial as Christ has
commanded. This making not only the Papists, but Heylene speaking from
Canterbury, expones far otherwise than either Andrews, Hooker, Montagu, or
the grossest of the English Divines for a true proper corporal, visible,
unbloody sacrificing of Christ, for which first the Apostles, and then all
Ministers are as truly Priests though Evangelical, and after the order of
Melchisedeck, as ever the Sons of Aaron were under the Law, and the Communion
Table becomes as true and proper an Altar, as ever was the brazen Altar of
Moses. Heylens antid. page 6. sect. 2. The passion of our Savior, as by the
Lords own ordinance, it was prefigured to the Jews in the legal sacrifices a
part ante: So by Christ's institution, it is to be commemorat by us Christians
in the holy Supper, a part post. A sacrifice it was in figure, a sacrifice in
fact, and so by consequence a sacrifice in the commemorations, or immediately
upon the post fact a sacrifice there was among the Jews, a sacrifice there
must be amongst the Christians: and if a sacrifice where upon to do it: For
without a priest and an altar there can be no sacrifice. There was a bloody
sacrifice than; an unbloudy now, a priest derived from Aaron then, from
Melchisedeck now; an Altar for Mosaicall sacrifices than, for Evangelical now.
The apostles in the institution were appointed priests by Christ, where they
received a power for them, and their successors to celebrate these holy
mysteries. Hoc facite, is for the priest, who has power to consecrat; Hoc
edite, is both for priest and people. Ibid. page 17. He maintained at length
that in the Lords Supper there is a true, proper, corporal, visible, and
external sacrifice.
5. After the consecration and oblation they put to the Lords prayer with the
Missals Preface, audemus dicere. Here the Papists tell us, that their Priest
by consecration having transubstantiat the bread, and by their memorial of
oblation having offered up in an unbloody sacrifice the body of Christ, for the
reconciliation of the Father, does then close his quiet whisperings, his poor
pipings, and becomes bold to say with a loud voice, having Christ corporally in
his hands, Pater noster. The English to banish such absurdities, put away that
naughty preface, and removed the prayer it self from that place: But our men
to show their Orthodoxie, repone the prayer in the own old place, and set
before it in a fair Rubric the whole old preface. 6. The first English prayer
which stood before the consecration, where the passages of eating Christ's body
and drinking Christ's blood, could not possibly, by the very Papists themselves,
be detorted to a corporal presence, yet now in our book, it must change the
place, and be brought to its own old stance, after the consecration and
oblation, immediately before the communion, as a prayer of humble access.

The third part of the Mass I spoke of, was the communion; Our changes in the
communion.
see how here out men change the English Book: The English indeed in giving
the elements to the people, retain the Mass words, but to preveene any
mischief that could arise in the peoples mind from their sound of a corporal
presence, they put in at the distribution of both the elements, two golden
sentences, of the hearts eating by faith, of the Souls drinking in
remembrance. Our men being nothing affrayed for the peoples belief of a
corporal presence, have pulled out of their hands and scraped out of our Book
both these antidots. 2. The Mass words of Christ's body and blood in the act of
communion, being quite of the English antidots against their poison, must not
stand in our Book simply; but that the people may take extraordinar notice of
these phrases, there are two Rubricks set up to their backs, oblidging every
communicant with their own mouth to say their Amen to them. 3. The English
injoines the Minister to give the people the elements in their own hand; ours
scrapes out that clause, and bid communicate the people in their own order,
which imports not only their removal from the altar, their standing without
the rail, as profaine Laics far from the place, and communion of the Priests,
but also opens a fair door to the popish practice, of putting the elements
not in the profaine hands, but in the mouths of the people. 4. The English
permit the Curate to carry home the relics of the bread and wine for his
private use, but such profanity by our Book is discharged: The consecrat
elements are injoined to be eaten in the holy place by the Priest alone, and
some of the Communicants that day, whose mouths he esteems to be most holy:
Yea, for preventing of all dangers the cautele is put in, that so few elements
as may, be consecrat. 5. Our Book will have the elements after the
consecration covered with a Corporal, the church linnings were never called
Corporals any where, till transubstantiation was born, neither carried they
that name in England, till of late his Grace was pleased by the pen of his man
Pocklingtoune and the like, to disgrace them with that style. 6. The English
will have the Ministers and people to communicate in both kinds; our book
injoines the Priest to receave in both kinds but the people only in due
order: This due order of the people, opposite to the communion of the Priest in
both kinds, may import the removal of one kind from the people, so much the
more may we fear this sacrilege from their hands, since they tell us, that
our only ground for communicating of the people in both kinds is stark naught,
that for this practice there may well be tradition, but Scripture there is
none. Whit on the Sabbath, page 97. Such traditions are those that follow the
deliverie of the communion to the people in both kinds. Montag. orig. page
396. Vbi iubentur in Scripturis infantes babtiZari, aut in caena Domini
subutraque specie communicantes participare; de his possumus profiteri, Nihil
tale docet Scriptura, Scriptura haec non praedicat. Andrews stricturae p. 5. It
can not be denied but reserving the Sacrament was suffered a long time in the
primitive church, in time of persecution, they were permitted to carry away
how great a part they would, and to keep it by them, and to take it at times to
comfort them; but for the sick, it was always sent them home, were the
distance never so great, and against the time of extremity, it was thought not
amiss to have it reserved, that if the priest should not then be in state to
go to the sick party, and there to censecrat it for him, yet at least it might
be sent him, as in the case of Cerapion. Pokling, as we have heard, made it one
of the matters of that Churches glory* that they yet do retain in their
Chanchels the old Repositories.
Also that in diverse cases the ancient church did lawfully give to the people
the bread alone, that the Sacrament after the public communion, was often
reserved to be sent to the sick, to be taken at private occasions, and laid
up in the church in a public repositorie. Now it is well known, and the
Papists press this upon us, when they would rob the people of the cup; that
the wine was not sent to the sick in a far distance from the church, nor
taken home by the people to be used with the bread in the times of strait, nor
set up in the Church in the ciboir or repositorie. These changes of the English
Liturgy, which the Canterburians have made, in some few pages lying together
of the Scottish service, if they be either few or small, your self pronunce the
sentence.

The last Chapter, containing the Canterburian maxims of Tyranny.
ONe of the great causes of Protestants separation from Rome, is the tyranny
of the Romish Clergy, whereby they press upon, the very conscience of their
people, a multitude of their own devices, with the most extreme and rigorous
censures which can be inflicted either upon bodies or souls. And for the more
facilitating of their purposes, they advance the secular power of Princes, and
of all sovereign Estates above all, that themselves either crave or desire;
alone for this end, that their clerks may ride upon the shoulders of
Soveraignitie, to tread under the feet of their domination; first the Subjects,
and then the Sovereigns themselves.

The tyrannous usurpation of the Canterburians, are as many and heavy as these
of the Romist Clergy.
How much our men are behind the greatest tyrants that ever were in Rome, let
any pronounce, when they have considered these their following maxims: They
tell us, first, that the making of all Ecclesiastic constitutions does belong
alone to the Bishop of the Diocese, no less out of Synod then in Synod: That
some of the inferior clergy may be called (if the Bishops please) to give
their advice, and deliberative voice; That the Prince may lend his power, for
confirming and executing of the constitutions made; but for the work of their
making, it is the Bishops privilege, belonging to them alone by Divine right.
Samuel Hoards sermons. page 7. By the Chruch I mean the Churches Pilots, who
sit at the stern. Heads and members divide all bodies Ecclesiastical and
civil, what ever is to be done in matters of direction and government, has
always been, and must be the sole prerogative of the heads of these bodies,
unless we will have all commonwealths and churches broken in picees. Ibid.
page 8. The key of jurisdiction, which is a power of binding and lousing men,
in foro exteriori, in the coutts of justice, and of making laws and orders,
for the government of Gods house, is peculiar to the heads and bishops of the
church. Ibid. p. 31. what was Ignatius and Ambrose, if we look at their
authority, more than other bishops of the church: That liberty therefore which
they had to make new orders, when they saw cause, have all other prelates in
their churches. Edward Boughanes sermon. Page 17. Submit your selves to those
that are put in authority by kings, so then to Bishops, because they are put
in authority by Kings, if they had no other clame. But blessed be God; they
hold not only by this, but by a higher tenor, since all powers are of God, from
him they have their spiritual jurisdiction what ever it be. S. Paul therefore
you see assumes this power unto himself of setting things in order in the
kirk, before any Prince become Christian, 1 Cor. 11.34. The like power he
acknowledges to be in Titus 1.5. and in all bishops, Heb. 15.17. Ibid. page
18. Kings make laws, and bishops make canons. This indeed it was of necessity
in the beginning of Christianity, Kings made laws for the State, and bishops
for the kirk, because then there was no Christian Kings, either to authorize
them to make such laws or who would countenance them when they were made. But
after that Kings became nourishing fathers to the Church in these pious and
regular times, bishops made no Canons, without the assent and confirmation of
Christian Kings, and such are our Canons, so made, so confirmed, Chounei
collect. page 53. Reges membra quidem and filios. Eccesiae se esse habitos,
reiecisse, contempsisse nonnunquam audivimus, obediunt, simulque regnant: Iura
quibus gubernari se permittunt, sua sunt, vitalitatem nativam ex praepositis
Ecclesiae, tanquam ex cord recipient, and vivacitatem ex ipsis tanquam ex
capitibus derivant. Samuel Hoards page 9. Nor did they exercise this power,
when they were in Counsel only, but when they were asunder also: Speaking of
apostles as they are paterns to all bishops.
2. That in a whole Kingdom, the Bishops alone, without the privitie of any of
the clergy, of any of the laity, may abolish all the Ecclesiastic
judicatories, which the standing and unrepealled laws, which the constant
customs ever since the reformation had settled, and put in their rowme new
foreign courts, which the kingdom had never known, scarce so much as by
their name. Our Chrurch Sessions, our weekly presbyteries, our yearly general
Assemblies, whereof by our standing laws we have been in possession, are
closse put down by our book of Canons, and in their rowme Churchwardens,
official courts, synods for Episcopal visitation, and general Assemblies to
be called when they will, to be constitute of what members they please to
name, are put in their place.
That at one stroke they may annull all the Acts of three or fourscore National
Afsemblies, and set up in their room a Book of Canons of their own devysing.
So is their book entitled, Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical gathered,
and put in form, for the government of the Church of Scotland, and ordained
to be observed by the clergy, and all others whom they concern.
That they may abolish all the forms used in the worship of God, without any
question for threescore years and above, both in the public prayers, in the
administration of the Sacraments, in singing of Psalms, in preaching the Word,
in celebrating of Marriage, in visiting the sick, and in ordination of
Ministers: Neither this alone, but that it is in their hand to impose in place
of these accustomed forms, four new Books of their own; of Service, of
Psalms, of Ordination, of Homilies. All this our Bishops in Scotland have
done, and to this day, not any of them to our knowledge can be moved to
confess in that deed, any fail against the rules either of equity or
justice, what ever slips of imprudence there may be therein. And all this they
have done at my lord of Canterburies direction, as we shall make good by his
own hand, if ever we shall be so happy as to be permitted to produce his own
authentic autographs, before the Parliament of England, or any other
Judicatorie that his Majesty will command to cognosce upon this our
alleadgance. Readily Rome it self can not be able in any one age, to parallel
this work which our faction did bring forth in one year. It is a bundel of
so many, so various, and so heavy acts of tyranny. Certainly, England was
never acquaint with the like; we see what great trouble it has cost his
Grace, to get through there one poor ceremony of setting the Communion table
altar-wayes; for there themselves dar not deny, that it is repugnant to the
established Laws of their church and state for any Bishop; yea, for all the
Bishops being joined, to make the poorest Canon without the voices of their
convocation-house, or National Assembly; yea, without the Parliaments good
pleasure. VVhites examination of the dialogue, page 22. By the laws of our
kingdom, and Canons of our Church, many learned persons are appointed to be
assistants unto bishops, and in our national Synods, in which all weighty
matters concerning religion are determined, nothing is, or may be concluded,
but by the common vote and counsel of the major part, of the convocation which
consists of many other learned Divines, besides Bishops. Andrews sermons of
Trumpets, dedicated to the King by Canterbury. As for the Churches laws,
which we call Canons or rules, made to restrain or redress abuses, they have
always been made at Church assemblies, and in her own Councels, not
elsewhere, Heylens antidot. page 29. I trow you are not ignorant that the kirk
makes canons, it is the work of Clergy men in their Convocations, having his
Majesty's leave for their conveening, and approbation of their doings. His
Majesty in the declaration before the articles has resolved it so, and the
late practice in King James reign, what time the Book of Canons was composed
in the Convocation, has declared it so to.
3. They avow that all their injunctions though so many and so new, yet they
are so holy and so just, that the whole kingdom in conscience must embrace
them all as the commands of God. VVhites examination, page 20. tells us as it
were from Eusebius, Quicqued in Sanctis Episcoporum conciliis decernitur, id
universum Divina voluntati debet attribus. And from Bernard, Sive Deus, sive
homo vicarius Dei mandatum quodcunque tradiderit, pari profecto obsequendum est
cura, pari reverentia suscipiendum: ubi tamen Deo contraria non praecepit homo.
That whoever will be so peart as to affirm in any one of them, the least
contrariety to the Word of God, he must have no less censure then the great
excommunication, from which he must never be relaxed but by the Bishops own
mouth, after his public repentance and revocation of so vile an error. Book
of Canons, page 8. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the form of
worship contained in the book of Commoun Prayer, that the rites and ceremonies
of the church, that the government of y Church by archbishops, bishops and
others, that the form of consecrating archbishops, bishops, presbyters, and
deacons, as they are now established under his Majesty's authority, do
contain in them any thing repugnant to the Scriptures, or are corrupt,
superstitious or unlawful in the service and worship of God, let him be
excommunicate, and not restored, but by the bishop of the place, or archbishop
of the province, after his repentance, and public revocation of such his
wicked errors.
That his bodily and pecuniall penalty shall be at the free will and
discretion of the Bishop. Book of Canons, page 37. In all this book of Canons
whersoever there is no penalty expressly set down, it is to be understood,
that, so the crime or offense be proved, the punishment shall be arbitrarie,
as the ordinary shall think fittest.
That the worthiest men of any liberal profession get savor to loss but
their ears, to have their noses slit, and cheeks burnt for contradicting their
innovations. Canterburies Star chamber speech in his epistle to the King, I
shall rather magnify your clemency, that proceeded with those offenders,
Burtoun, Bastmijck, Prinne, in a Court of Mercy, as well as Justice; since as
the reverend Judges then declared ye might have justly called the offenders
into another Court, and put them to it in a way that might have exacted their
lives.
That the furthest banishments for term of life, is a privilege which their
indulgence may grant but to few. The world knows, that numbers who have been
flying from episcopal tyranny out of England, to the very new found lands,
never to return, have been by violence kept back, and cast in their prisons:
and we see daily, that numbers not only of men, but even of silly women are
drawn back in Ireland from their flight, out of the kingdom to close prisons.
That the vilest dungeons, yrons, whippings, bread and water, chaining to posts
without all company, day or night in the coldest and longest winters, is but a
part of their opposers deserving. Huntly in his Breviat reports, as a known
case among many other, this one also, that M. John Hayden a poor Devonshire
Minister for preaching at Norwich a Sermon, wherein he let fall some passages
against setting up of images, and bowing at the name of Jesus, was apprehended
like a traitor, with the Constables bills and halberts by D. Harsnet then
Bishop, and brought manacled to him like a fellon, and committed to the common
Iayle close prisoner, above thirteen weeks, where he was like to sterve; the
Bishop having taken from him his horse, papers, and all, thereafter he was sent
by a pursevant to London, and kept two full terms. At last, by the high
Commission he was deprived of his orders, thereafter the high Commissionars
imprisoned him in the Gate house common dungeon, and Canterbury sent him to be
whipped in Bredwall, and there kept him all the long extreme cold winter in
a dark cold dungeon, without fire or candle light, chained to a post in the
mids of the room, with heavy yrons on his hands and feet, allowing him only
bread and water with a pad of straw to ly on: And since on his relief has
caused him to take an oath, and give band to preach no more, and to depart the
Kingdom within three weeks, without returning; and all this for preaching
after his first unjust deprivation, though no exception was taken against his
doctrine.
That the greatest Nobles of the Land, ought in Law to for-fault their Life and
Estate, if they be so bold as to put their hand to a supplication unto their
gracious Prince against their practices. Sundry of our prime Earls and Lords
did present a supplication to our King, after his Coronation, wherein the
matter of their greatest complaint was, so far as ever we heard, their
challenging of the Bishops for what they had done, and were likely to do. The
copy of this privy supplication being privily convoyed by an unfriend, some
two or three years thereafter, out of my Lord Balmerinochs chamber, was a
dittay for which he was condemned to die, for an example to all other Noble
Men to beware of the like rashness, especially his Fellow-supplicants, who are
all declared to have deserved by that fault the same sentence of death. Large
Declaration, page 14. Nor could they have found the least blemish in our
justice, if we should have given warrant both for his sentence and execution,
whose life was now legally devolved into our hands. Ibid. page 13. We were
graciously pleased that the fear and example might reach to all, but the
punishment only to one of them, to pass by many, who undoubtedly had been
concluded, and involved by our Laws in the same sentence, if we had proceeded
against them.
That all this is but just severitie, and the very expedient mean to advance
their cause, which they glory have well near already close undone their
opposites, Studley about the end of his wicked story avowes, that since by
severe punishment the number of the unconformists have decayed, that their
cause can not be from God.
and which they boast shall still be used, Canterbury in his epistle to the
King before Starchamber speech, having magnified the Kings mercy, for saving
the life of Bourtoun and his companions, is bold to advise the King not always
to be so merciful, in these words, Yet this I shall be bold to say, that
your Majesty may consider of it in your wisdom, that one way of government
is not always either fit or safe, when the humors of the people are in a
continual change, especially when such men as those shall work upon your
people, and labor to infuse into them such malignant principles, to introduce
a paritie in the Church or Commonwealth. Etsi non satis sua sponte insaniant
instigare. Heylen in his moderat answer, page 187. has many reasons and
examples, to prove that Burtoun and his like deserved no less than public
execution: And yet these men are so gentle to Papists, that they glory in their
meekness toward them, professing that to the bitterest of the Jesuits they
have never given so much as a course word. So Canterbury in his Epistle the
other year to the King, before the relation of the conference, God forbid that
I should ever offer to persuade a persecution in any kind against the Jesuits,
or practice it in the least, for to my rememberance I have not given him or his
so much as course language.
But alas it is gone now beyond boasts, when they are the second time upon
the very point to kill millions of the Kings best Subjects, to dash together
all his dominions in a bloody war, as pitchers one upon another for the
confirmation of their intolerable tyranny, where long it has been
tottering, and the reerection of it where its own unsupportable weight has
caused it to fall.

As for the power of princes, King Charles hates all tyranny
the most of those this day who are Christians, and especially our gracious
Sovereign, are very well content to be limited within the bounds of the laws
which themselves and their predecessors have settled in the church and state of
their dominions, to make the preservation of those laws and of their subjects
liberties ecclesiastic and civil according to them, the greatest glory of
their prerogative royal. His majesty's speech in Parliament 28. p. 75. The
peoples liberties strengthen the Kings prerogative, and the Kings prerogative
is to defend the peoples liberties.
To give assurance of their resolution never to abolish any old, or bring in
any new act either in church or state without the concurrence of Assemblies and
Parliaments. (p) Neither to impose any taxation on their subjects goods without
their free consent there to given by their Commissioners in Parliament,
Proclam. at Yorck April 25. 1639. We heartily declare and faithfully promise
that, although we be now in arms, they shall be no ways used either to force
upon that our native Kingdom any innovation of religion, or to infringe any of
the civil liberties or the laws thereof, accounting it our glory to preserve
liberty and freedom among them according to their laws Therefore we do once
again by this renew our former promises for the mantenance of religion and
laws, and this we do in all sincerity of heart, we take God the searcher of
all hearts to witness that as we are defender of the true Protestant religion
which we from our heart profess; so we trust, we shall by his goodness
continue in the same, and never shall permit any innovation to creep in this or
any other of our kingdoms. One of the articles of Dunce pacification is this.
We are further graciously pleased, that according to the petitioners humble
desires all matters ecclesiastical shall be determined by the Assemblies of
the Church, and matters civil by the Parliament and other inferior
Iudicatories established by law; which accordingly shall be kept once a year,
or so often as the affairs of the Church and kingdom shall require.
the extending of the prerogative to the making of new laws or abolishing of
old, to the imposing of taxes by simple proclamation without Parliament our
Prince does so far abhor, that he condemned a certain writ for importing his
Majesty's intertainment of such motions; Yea his Majesty by his Attorney
general called the Earl of Bedfoord and other noble personages to censure, for
keeping such a writ wherein did ly so pernicious positions. The which seditious
discourse and writting the authors thereof intended should be dispersed, as if
the same had been entertained by your Majesty with purpose to put it in
execution, and to alter the ancient laws of this kingdom, and to draw all
things to your Majesty's absolute will and plessure, and to dispose of your
Subjects goods without their consent, and to make and repeal laws by your
Maiestise proclamation only with out consent of parliament, which if it should
be believed by your people, could not but raise infinite coffeehouse amongst
them, the consequence whereof might be of extreme and almost inevitable
danger to your Majesty's person and to the whole frame of the kingdom.
Where some Princes misled through passion and misinformation have deviat so
far from the path of justice, as to intend by violence and arms the overthrow
of the true religion and ancient Cant. relat. p. 112. In some kingdom there
are diverse businesses of greatest consequence which cannot be finally and
binedingly ordered but in, and by Parliament, and particulary the statute laws
which must bind all the Subjects can not be made or ratified but there, the
supreme Magistrate in the civil state may not abrogat laws made in Parliament,
though he may dispense with the penalty of the law quoad hic and nunc.
liberties of their subjects, the opposition which the subjects are forced to
make in this case against the oppression of their Prince, our gracious
Sovereign has been so far ever from counting of it rebellion, of which crime
the greatest royallists in England wont always to absolve it, Bilson of
subjection page 280. Neither will I rashly pronounce all that resist to be
rebels: Cases may fall out even in Christian kingdoms where people may plead
their right against the Prince and not be charged with rebellion: As for
example, if a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom to a foreign
realm, or change the form of the common wealth from imperie to tyranny, or
neglect the laws established by common consent of Prince and people, to execute
his own pleasure; In those and other cases which might be named, if the nobles
and commons join together, to defend their ancient and accustomed liberty,
regiment, and laws, they may not well be counted rebels. Ib. By superior powers
ordained of God, we do not mean the Princes private will against his laws but
his precepts derived from his laws and agreeing with his laws; which though it
be wicked, yet may it not be resisted by any subject with armed violence, but
when Princes offer their subjects no justice but force, and despise all laws to
practice their lusts, not any private man may take the sword to redress the
prince; but if the laws of the land appoint the nobles as next to the King to
assist him in doing right, and withhold him from doing wrong, then be they
licenced by man's law and so not prohibited by Gods law for to interpose
themselves for the safeguard of equity and innocence, and by all lawful and
needful means to procure the prince to be reformed, but in no case to deprive
him where the scepter is inherited. Ib. page 54. Spoils, m^ssacres,
conspiracies, treasons, even to the destruction and murder of Princes by their
own se^vants, if a priest say the word, you count in your selves to be just,
honorable, and Godly war: if others do but stand on their guaird to keep their
lives and families from the blinded rage of their enemies, seeking to put whole
towns and provinces to the sword against all law and reason, and to disturb
Kingdoms in the minority of the right governors, or if they defend their
Christian and ancient liberties, covenanted and agreed upon by those princes to
whom they first submitted themselves, and ever since confirmed and allowed by
the Kings that have succeeded. If in neither of these two cases the Godly
require their right and offer no wrong neither impugn their princes, but only
save their own lives, you cry rebellious Heretics, rebellious Calvinist,
fury, frenzy, mutiny and I know not what, ye may pursue, depose, muther
princes when the B. of Rome bids you and that without breach of duty, law, or
conscience to God or man as you vant. And that when neither life nor limme of
you is touched, we may not so much as beseech princes that we may be used like
subjects not like slaves, like men, not like beasts, that we may be convented
by laws before judges, not murdered by inquisirours in corners, but
incontinent the fume of your unclean mouth is ready to call us by all the names
you can devise.
that his Majesty has thought meet before all Europe after the example of his
glorious Father, and renowned predecesrix Elizabeth, to give his countenance,
aid, and powerful assistance to them all, when their just grievances and fears
were laid out before his throne. If so be King Charles had esteemed the late
wars of France of the Protestants against their king, the present wars of
Holland and of the high Duchess against the Spaniard and Emperor an unlawful
defense let be a traitorous insurrection of subjects against their Sovereigns,
We presuppone his Majesty's justice would have been loath ever to have defiled
his scepter by supporting them all with men and moneys, as often he has done,
and yet does avow the deed.

The Canterburians flatter the King in much more power than ever he will take.
And enable him without advice of the Clergy, to do in the church what he
pleases.
While our gracious Prince is so far inflamed with hatred against all tyranny,
yet behold this wicked faction how carefully they go about by all the means
they can, to draw his royal mind to that which naturally it does so much
abhore: For they tell us first, that the power of all true Kings is so simply
absolute and illimitate, that for any man to reason what they may not is a
crime no less than treason; that they are far above all law Heylens moderat
answer page 28. What spirit leads you that you are grieved with illimitat
power which men of better understanding than you have given to princes. Ib.
page 32. Princes are Gods de puts, of whom should they be limited, if ye say
by the laws of the land those themselves have made, a prince in abctracto is
above the laws though in concreto a just Prince will not break the laws which
himself has promised to observe otherwise we say of princes: Principi lex non
est posita that they do not govern only by the law but are above it, that he
is sure and has an absolute authority Ibid. p. 179 I will be bold to tell you
that as it is a kind of Atheism to dispute pro and contra what God can do and
what he can not, though such disputs are raised some times by unquiet wits; so
it is a kind of disobedience and disloyalty to determine what a king can, and
what he can not. Lysimachus. p. 3. Hence it is that princes being Legislators
are above their laws, and dispense with them as they think expedient. A prince
is not bound to his own laws because no man can impose a law on himself.
Aberdeen duplyes p. 22. The king is above the law as both the author and giver
of strength thereto.
2. That the oath which a prince makes to keep the laws is but a personal
deed, which can not oblidge his successor, that his oath and promise at his
coronation to keep the laws, is to be exponed of his resolution to make his
laws to be kept by others: That all the oath and promises he makes at his
coronation are but of his mere free will and arbitrament, that by the^ all no
true covenant or paction ca^ be inferred betwixt the King and his subjects.
Dominus Ioannes Wemius de Craigioun a man advanced by our bishops to be a lord
both of Council and Session in his book de primatu Regis printed in Edinburgh
1623. And going among them to this day with applause p. 18. Sed quid si
princeps leges statuat adhibito etiam iurisiurandi sacramento, velin sua
inauguratione promittat, se leges non laturum absque populi ordinumque non modo
consilio, sed etiam consensu ac determinante sententia, siquidem non fuerit
haec in prima regni constitutione conditio and imperii coaeva ac fundamentalis
regni lex non sit (quo casu dicerem non proprie esse regnum, sed aristocratiam,
vel democratiam) sed post regni constitutionem pactum tantummodo sit regis
alicuius voluntarium, etiamsi forsan pollicentum ipsum obliget quoniam
praestanda est sides dat a ne sine fide licet non sine iure regnet: successores
tamen in regno quomodo constringet vix intelligimus, etiamsi inhonesta quoque
sit ut ait quidam and illegittima omnis ea pactio quae inter patrem and filium,
maritum and uxorem, dominum and servum, regem and subditum celebratur, quod
dicto oportet hos audientes esse Ib. p. 39. Audemus dicere in monarchiis Reges
supra leges esse iisque solutos, nemo enim sibi legislator, vindex aut iudex,
distinctio non probanda principem quoad vim Legum directivam Legum non
coactivam legibus subditum esse, non enim magis derigere quam cogere seipsum
potest quis, cum actio onmis sit inter agens and patiens. Ib. 41. Si leges suas
se observaturum pacto obligaverit princeps. Quod raro aut nanquam fit, etiamsi
soleat princeps quisque legum suarum observationem hoc sensu promittere id est,
ut a subditis observentur se effecturum, ad earum observationem teneri eum
confitemur, sed religionis potius quam iustitiae legalis observatione.
3. That the prince alone is the lawgiver both in church and state Johannes
Wemius page 26. Legum latio praecipuum est supremae dominationis ac maiestatis
caput. Ib. page 74 Legum ecclesiasticarum principes latores sunt, nec
differunta civilibus ecclesiastica natione cause efficientis.
4. That in matters ecclesiastical they themselves alone without the advice of
any of the Clergy may lawfully make what canons they please, and compel
their Clergy to embrace them Johannes Wemius page 59. Potestatem in
ecclesiasticis (...) posse a princibus iure suo extra concilia exerceri docent
quas ita tulerunt leges imperatores atque iis Regis legibus Ecclesiasticis quae
legi devinae non repugnant nequit quit bona cum conscientia obedientiam
detrestare, quamvis non accessent ad earum constitutionem Pastorum ecclesiae
consensus. Ib. p. 93. Etiamsi extra concilia jubendi autoritatem habeat
Princeps, tamen libentius obsequuntur subditiillis principum statutis, quibus
pastorum in conciliis honorantur iudicia.
5. That it is a part of the Kings prerogative to have power to impose upon all
his subjects such confessions of faith, such liturgies, such canons as he
thinks meetest without the advice of any church Assembly Large declaration p.
222. Did not we and our Council be equal authority command these innovations
of canons and liturgy? Was not then ye Prelates practice of then as well
warranted as this confession of faith, and the band annexed, which were never
brought in by acts of Parliament or Assembly, but merely by our royal Fathers
prerogative, and put in execution by the authority of his council?
6. When it is his pleasure to call an Assembly, the members of that
ecclesiastic court are only such as he is pleased to call, whether of the
Clergy or of the Laity. Johannes Wemius page 66. Laicos saepe a principibus
advocatos in Concilia videre est; quibus non modo consultivam sed and
definitivam vocem permitterent. Iste fuit electionis mittendorum ad Concilia
modus, ut Ecclesiarum presulibus quos vellent mittendi liberam plerumque
potestatem permitteret princeps, quod illis exploratius quam sibi esset qui ad
eam provinciam aptiores: Non quod principi penitus neganda sit, quod autum aut
nonnulli, particularis personarum quae consilio eum leges Ecclesiasticas
laturum adjuvent designatio. Istud enim esset principum juri detrahere. Ex
singulis diaecesibus moderatus aliquis numerus eruditorum ac prudentiorum
Presbyterorum, Diaconorum, and Laicorum a principe aut metropolita principis
delegate eligebatur.
7. That when they are called only the Princes voice is decisive, the voice of
all the rest at most but consultive, or if any of them become decisive, it is
by the Princes favor or at least permission. Johannes Wemius page 89.
Consultivam habent vocem Pastores tanquam juris divini consulti, definitivam
princeps ut judex; dante illis consilii, his judicii potestatem Legis latore
Deo, penes quem solum summa in spiritualibus imperii residet. Ib. page 70.
Vocem. habere qui congregantur Presbyteros non qua Presbyteri, sed qua
Ecclesiarum sunt legatia principe vocati. Ib. page 74. Definitiva sententiae
dictio little est, qui a principe summo moderatore eos consulente, vocemque
decisivam iis dante vocantur. Ib. Asserimus non agitato in conciliis fuisse
saltem quae majoris momenti essent negotia, nisi quatenus ea princeps per
legatos proponeret aut patribus descripta traderet.
8. That church Assemblies are only politic conventions not grounded upon any
devine right, and so to be used or disused as the prince shall think expedient.
Johannes Wemius page 126. Nullo in scriptura mandato nititur concilia.
celebrandimos; sed a principibus Ecclesiae curam suscipientibus, and cum non
essent principes, a pastoribus ipsis volentibus ortum habuit.
9. That it is in the power of all Sovereigns whihher Monarchick,
Aristocratick, or democratick, to appoint for the government of the church in
their dominions such officers and spiritual courts as they find most meet and
agreeable to their temporal estates, to erect bishops, and put down
Presbyteries, to erect Presbyteries and put down bishops. Johannes VVemius p.
78. and 79. Officiorum Ecclesiae modus (...) est, and a principe pastoros
Ecclesiae non consulente praescribi posse affirmamamus, putantes cum
serenissimo nostro Rege, summis quibusque imperitantibus concessum esse
externam in Ecclesiasticis regiminis formam suis praescribere, quae ad civilis
administrationis modum quam proxime accedat, dummodo a fidei veraeque
religionis fundamentis ne tantillum abscedat.
10. That all this power to conclude every ecclesiastic affair which can be
subject to the jurisdiction of any ecclesiastical synod does belong alike to
all sovereigns whether Turkish, Jewish, Pagan, heretical or Christian and
Orthodox. Johannes VVemius page 124. Regi omni confertur Ecclesiasticae
jurisdictionis potestas per regium quod a Deo habet munus; licet Regi tantum
Christiano aptitudo ou recte utendi Christi gratia donetur Tamet si primatus
ecclesiastici ius perfectius administret Rex Christianus: Primatus tamen ius,
officii seu vocationis non facultatis aut exercitii ratione Rex obtinet. Quae
Regi supervenit gratia regiam in eo potestatem perficit, non facit potestatem,
non repellit, gratiae interna, nedum professionis externae defectus.


Concerning the Kings power in matter of Stat, They give to the King power to
do in the State what ever he will, without the advice of his parliament.
they teach first, that a Parliaments is but his arbitrarie Council, which in
making or annulling of his Laws, he may use or not use as he pleases.
Ioannes VVemius, p. 17. Neque vero putan dum est, quia solet rex ex modesta and
prudenti virium suarum diffidentia non nisi de ordinum consensu leges far,
absolutam ideo ei imponi, eiusque successoribus necessitatem illorum obtinendi
consensus, ac si nullo modo iis liceret perse, sine eorundem suffragiis, bonas
edere constitutiones, quibus qua quaeso conscientia non parebunt omnes. Ibid.
page 19. In Monarchia Regis sola voluntas de substantia legis est: praevia cum
populo consultatio, and si utilis imo ultilissimae sit, necessaria tamen non
est. Itaque cum imperatore Iustiniano dicendum videtur; explosis ridiculosis
ambiguitatibus, verum conditorem and interpretem legum esse solum principem,
and legem legislatoris, non Consiliarii esse, non ex vi consensus and consilii
habiti, sed ex regia legislatoris ^i obligantem. Ibid. page 38. Non erubescimus
Iuristaturum reiicere opinionem, qui volunt in monarchiis non obligare legem
nisi a populo acceptetur, cum monarcha sit legislator, and lex lata qualex
obliget, adeo ut ad eam acceptandam, cogendi sint subditi post legis a
monarchae lata publicationem, temporisque quoad populi notitiam pervenat
sufficientis lapsum, potest sine ulla acceptatione publica legis observatio
praecisem ingeri. Heylyns antid. page 66. The declaration of his Majesty's
pleasure in the case of S. Gregory is to be extended to all other cases of the
same nature. It is a maxim in the civil law, Sententia Principis, ius dubium
^eclarans, ius facit quoad omnes. Item Quodcunque imperator per epistolam
constituit, vel cognoscens decrevit, legem esse constat. Id. in his moderate
answer, page 29. Only these commands of the King are to be refused, which are
directly against Scripture, or include manifest impiety. He learned this from
his opposite the Lincobishire Minister, page 68. I say that all commands of the
King that are not upon the clear and immediate inference without all
profylogismus, contrary to a clear passage of the word of God, or to an
evident Sun-beame of the law of nature, are precisely to be obeyed; nor is it
enough to find a remote and possible inconvenience that may ensue.
2. When he is pleased to call a Parliament, it is his due right by his letter
to ordain such Barrons to be Commissionars for the Shires, and such Citizens
to be Commissionars for Burrowes as he shall be pleased to name. Ioannes
Wemius page 23. Baronum ut and civium ad Comitia delegatos non ita absolute a
Baronum vel Civium delectu pendere volumus, ut non possit rex, quos ille maxim
idoneos censuerit eligendos nominare, praesertim cum pro legibus ferendis
ijsque quae administrationis sunt publicae statuendis Comitia indictae sunt, in
quibus liberum denegare regi arbitrium, quos aestimarit prudentissimos
quibuscum deliberet sibi in Concilium asc^scendi, esset ex rege non regem eum
facere, statuumque voluntati ad regiae depressionem eminent a nimis subjectum.
3. That he may lawfully exact when he has to do what portion of his Subjects
goods he thinks meet, and by himself alone, may make such Laws for exactions
in times to come, as seems to him best. Joannes Wemius, page 19. Omnia fatemur
quae in regno sunt regis esse, qua rex est, id est, qua paternus regni dominus,
adeoque qua postulat ipsius qua rex est, aut publica regni conditio: posse
regem de singulorum bonis disponere, praesertim ubi omnes in regno terrae in
feuda concessae fuerint a rege, aliquod penes se dominium retinente. Id. page
17. Licet non de jure omnium bona exigendo, tamen de jure in omnes leges
ferendo, sine omnium consensu statuere potest. Montag. orig. page 320. Omni
lege, divina, naturali, vel politica licite semper reges and principes suis
subditis tributa and imposuerunt, and licite quoque exegerunt, cum ad patriae
and reipublicae desensionem tum ad ipsorum and familiae honestam procurationem.
Hanc doctrinam accurate tuetur Ecclesia Anglicana, in qua sacerdotes licet
magis gaudere and soleant, and debeant, immunitatibus tamen and frequentius,
and exuberantius, and libentius, quam Laici decimarum decimas, subsidia,
annatas primitias solvunt.
4. That no Subject of his Kingdom can have any hereditarie jurisdiction, but
any jurisdiction that either any of the Nobility, or any other Magistrate or
officer possesses, they have it alone during his pleasure; that at his
presence, the power of all others must cease, and at his death evanish and be
quite exstinguished, till by his successors by new gift it be renewed. Joannes
Wemius, page 136. Cum regis sit in suo regno judices, and magistratus
constituere, qui ipsius sint in judicando, and jubendo vicarli, potest tex
jubendi, judicandique jus ac magistratus judicesque constituendi potestatem
inferioribus concessam, prout regno utile esse visum ei fuerit abutentibus
auferre, and nulla proprie est sub. Rege patrimonialis and haereditaria
jurisdictio, rege solo jurisdictionem tanquam propriam habente, aliisque quibus
eam non dat, sed communicate, tanquam depositam accipientibus. Igitur non ut
terras, ita and jurisdictionem simpliciter, and ut loquuntur privative, rex
alienare potest, nisi rex esse desinat. Ibid. page 157. Si judices sint
principum vicarii, nulla est eorum principe present potestas, cum solius
absentis teneat quis locum: and si quae est alicubi, and aliquando videatur,
non nisi jus est, ^^dicium regium volente Rege declarandi; ut ita ex judicam
ore proferatur Regis sententia. Ibid. page 17. In statuum caetu non tam
judicantibu^ ipsis quam assistentibus imperium exercet rex, quandoquidem
praesente jurisdictionis sent, evanescat aboram omnium jurisdic^^o derivata,
ut fluviorum perditum nomen and potestas, cum in mare discenderint, Ibid. page
143. Principus occasis evanescit judicum omnium tam ordinariorum quam
delegatorum jus. Negari non potest tam apud Romanos quam alios in usu fuisse,
ut qui in demortuorum succederent locum reges, quamprimum regnorum gubernacula
capesserent, magistratuum judicumque jurisdictionem confirmarent, ut
ostenderetur extinctis regibus nullam esse inferiorum authoritatem, nisi
successorum edicto confirmentur, saltem patientia tacit approbentur.
5. That Scotland is a subdued Nation, that Fergus our first King did conquer
us by the sword, and establish an absolute Monarchy for himself and his
heirs, giving to us what Laws he thought meetest Corbet p. 45. There was no
law in the Kingdom of Scotland before the kings gave it: For before Fergus his
days we were genus hominum agreste, sine legibus, sine imperio. He and his
successors gave laws. Ibid. Fergus did conquer us.
6. That all the Lands in Scotland were once the Kings property, and what
thereof has been given out for service, yet remains his own by a manifold
right. Corbet, page 45. Fergus and his successors divided the whole land which
was their own and distinguished the orders of men, and did establish a
politic government: This is clear ex archivis regiis, ubi satis constat regem
esse dominum omnium bonorum directum, omnes subditos esse ejus vassallos, qui
latifundia sua ipsi domino referant accepta, sui nempe obsequii, and servitii
praemia.
7. That to deny any of the named parts of this power to the King, is to
destroy his Monarchike government, to dethrone him and make him no King, to
subject him to his people and make them his masters, or at least collegs in the
Empire. Joannes Wemius, page 18. Quo casu dicer^m non proprie esse regnum, sed
aristocratiam vel democratiam. Ibid. page 23. Hoc esset ex rege non regem eum
facere. Ibid. p. 38. Quod si alicubi non habeat rex potestatem leges serendi,
nisi ex populi in comitiis consensu, and sic fundamentaliter limitato, proprie
Rex non est, ac non tam acceptans est populus, quam cum Rege, ut collega Regem
ferens. ibid. page 53. Non est imperium illud vere Monarchicum, sed principatus
quidam, and imperans ille, non Monarcha aut Rex, sed tantum Princeps, and ut
Venetorum dux residente in optimatibus, aut populo imperii summa.
But thanks be to God, that our gracious Prince has so often declared himself
to be far from all such thoughts; yea, that my lord of Canterbury himself,
is forced whiles to let drop from his fingers clean contrare maxims. Relat.
of the Conference. page The statute Laws which must bind all the Subjects can
not be made but in, and by Parliament: the supreme Magistrate in the civil
state, may not abrogat Laws made in Parliament. Ibid. page 158. Tiberius
himself in the cause of Silanus, when Dolabella would have flattered him into
more power than in wisdom he thought fit then to take to himself, he put him
off thus: No, the Laws grow less when such power enlarges, nor is absolute
power to be used, where there may be an orderly proceeding by Law.


Even in no imaginable case, they will have tyrants resisted.
Lastly, they teach us in the matter of resistance, first, that do the Prince
what he will, he may never be resisted by any or all his Subjects, that not
only a private man must give over all defense, though most innocent of his own
life against the Prince, though his most unjust violence; Ioannes VVemius. p.
21. Teneri videtur subditus seipsum fame perimere, ut principem salvaret
propter conservationem boni publici, singulis a dempta est adversus principem
quae naturalis dicitur iuris defensio, seu iniuriae depulsio.
but the whole state can do naught without rebellion against God, but flee or
suffer, when the Prince, whether by him self or his officers does destroy the
true religion, established by all Laws and the liberties of the land, dear
bought of old and peaceably brooked in many ages, also the lives of many
thousands of the best Subjects without the pretense or color of any just
cause. Canterb. relat. Page 205. where the foundations of the faith, are
shaken by princes there their ought to be prayer and patience, but no
opposition by force. Aberdeens duplys. page 25. The way for all Christian
Subjects to conquer tyrants, and the remedy provided in the New Testament
against all persecutions, is not to resist powers which God has ordained, lest
we be damned, but with all meekness to suffer that we may be crowned, It is
evident by Scripture, that it is unlawful for Subjects in a Monarchical
estate, to take arms for religion, or for any other pretense, without warrant
from the Prince. The renowned Thebaean legion of 6666. Christian soldiers
without making resistance as they had strenth to have done, suffered themselves
rather to be slain for their Christian profession by the Officers of
Maximinian, the Emperors executors of his cruel commandments against them.
Corbet. page 42. For your examples from reformed churches, since we live not by
examples but by Laws, I will not stand upon them, from facts to prove the
lawfulness of resisting is ridiculous; none of those by resisting, gained so
much as by suffering, as experience too late does show.
Again, that all this subjection must be used, not only to our native King,
but to any foreign usurper who can get footing among us, and it were the Kings
of Spain, as their predecessors the heretical Gothish Kings got footing in
the Roman Impyre. Aberdeens Duplys. page 29. Such was the doctrine and
practice of many other great lights, which shined in the days of Julian the
Apostate, and in the days of the Arrian Emperors, and Gothic Arrian Kings.
That even against them, the States of a Land with a good conscience could use
no defense, though before their eyes, they should see them execut the cruel
tyrannies of Nebuchadnezar, put out the eyes of the King, kill his children,
lead himself and his Nobles away to a far land in fetters: Though with Nero,
Corbet. page 26. Qui Mario, Cajo Casaeri, qui Augusto, ipse and Nerom, qui
Vespasianis vel patrivel filio, ipsi Domitiano crudelissimo; and ne per
singulos ire necesse sit, qui Constantino Christiano, ipse and apostatae
Iuliano. Ibid. page 36. If the Jews in the days of Assuerus had been of this
new Scottish humor, when an utter extirpation was intended by Haman, both of
themselves and their religion, they would have taken Ames: but their prayers
and tears were their defense in their greatest extremity.
for their mere pleasure, they should set the royal city in a fair fire, or
execute the plot of Haman by murdering all the seed of the Jews, all zealous
Protestants up and down the Land in one day. Such maxims exceedingly opposite
to the honor of God, the safety of the Kings person and crown, the welfare
of the people, these men cause to be printed and let them go about without any
censure at these times, when by royal decreers, they have pulled into their
hands the full commandment of all the Presses, and the absolute jurisdiction
over all the Booksellers shops in the Kingdom, and kythes frequently their
zeal against any Books that give but the least touch to their mitres, by
inflicting no less censure then fire upon the Books, pilloring and
nose-sliting on the Authors, and whipping through the streets on the carriers.

All these extraordinary prerogatives, VVat they give to Kings, is not for any
respect they have to Majesty, but for their own ambitious and covetous ends.
whereby the faction advances supreme Magistrates so nere unto God, and their
favorits so far above the skies, Ioannes VVemius in his preface to the Duke of
Buckinghame, Reges in diviniorem sortem transcripti* cute and specie tenus
homines, reipsa boni genii censendi sunt, in quos ut humanos loves divini
honoris offines pene and consortes, oculos animosque nostros defigi convenit,
Tu Heroes nobilissime coruscas, velut inter ignes Luna minores, quem in summo
augustioris gloriae solstitio divina prorsus virgula constitutum nemo potest
diffiteri.
seem to flow not from any love they carry, either to their crowns or the
royal heads that bear them, but meerlie out of their self-respect to their
own ambition and greed, that Soveraignitie being advanced to an numerasurable
hight, may be a statelier horse for them to ride upon, in their glorious
trivmphings above all that is called God. For otherwise, ye may see how far
they depresse all Sovereigns when they are laid in the balance with them
selves. they tell us, that the King can be no more the head of the church,
then the boy that rubs their horse heels, Smart Sermon, page 1. M. CouZins
uttered these traiterous speeches in an open and affirmative manner; that the
Kings highness is no more supreme head of the church of England, then the boy
that rubbs his horse heels, and this as we are credibly informed has been
proved against him by the oaths of two sufficient witnesses.
2. That the heart whence the native life and vigor of the Ecclesiastic Laws
does flow, is alone the Bishops and not the King. Chounaei collect. supra cap.
ult. A
3. That Kings and Emperors ought to reverence; yea, to adore Bishops and to
pay them tributes. Montagsupra cap. 3. O.
4. That every Bishop is a Prince and a Monarch, as far in dignity above the
greatest secular Prince, as the soul above the body, or God above man. Montag,
supra cap. tertio.
(z)


FINIS.
Revised according to the ordinance of the general Assembly, by Mr. A.
Ihonston Clerk thereto:

Edinb. 1. of Aprile 1640.
A Postscript for the personate Jesuit Lysimachus Nicanor.
GOod Father Lies-maker, It is the common stratageme of the Canterburia^s to
slander all their opposites with Iesuitisme.
you do no new thing to parallel the Scottish Covenanters with Jesuits, it is
the old and often rechanted song of your fellows, to put Jesuits and Puritanes
(which name all must be content to bear, who will not under your conduct be
led back to Rome) in one categorie, to make them but two singulars under one
spece, both most furious rebels, and by open prof^ssion most seditious
traitors, yet with this difference; that the one, because more opposite to
you, must partake more of the nature of the spece; The Puritan (as ye must
have leave in this season of your Kingdom to play the nomenclat^rs) is grown
so big a traitor, that scarce any room is left for the Jesuit to stand
beside him: Not long ago it was the equity of your brother Montagu, to grant
the Jesuit the favor to march with the Puritan under the same colors, in
the same rank, as devils equally furious unhappily borne and fostered to keep
Rome and England asunder.

Supra chap 7. A. A.
But now it is the wisdom of your grandfather Laud to marshall them much
better, the Puritan must be far advanced, the Jesuit must stand at his
back, that so all strokes, all darts, may light in the body of the one, while
the other escapes without any wound, so much as of a word.

In the very face of that honorable court of the Star Chamber, his Grace dare
be bold to avow his advice to the King to go with the Puritanes beyond
nose-slitting, cheek-burning, fining above their worth, perpetual prisoni^g;
But for the Jesuits, his moderation, his Christian patience must be proclaimed
to the world, he must glory before the King, that he counts it unbeseeming
his Grace, to serve them with so much as course ^^guage, let be to inte^d their
persecution in the least measure.

Chap. L.M. N.

For hatred to the Puritanes, the Canterburians are content to turn Jesuits.


Ye must therefore Master Lies maker be content to want the honor of the
invention, of this parallel, for the strategeme is old, and now become
trivial, only in this, the rare quickness of your wit is to be applauded,
and the glory of some new invention here, is not to be denied to the singular
dexterity of your engine; Ye are the first of the Canterburiane I know, who
for the hatred of their party was content avowedly to enter the Jesuits order,
and put on their habit, that from under the mask of their broad hatt, might
be spewed out on the face of the Covenanters, such a spet of pestiferous
venom, as none would suspect could flow from any other fountain, then the
heart of a very Jesuit: Surely ye act the Jesuits part so well, tha^ it
seems ye have much more of him then his hatt and habit: By too curio^s
imitation of his behavior, ye are so habituate in his nature, that ye are not
like in haste, though ye would, to lay it aside.

In this your pamphlet ye ^ent so much impudency, so many lies and slanders,
so much spite and cruelty, so high and disdainefull pride, so salt and bitter
scoffings, mockings, raisings, and which is worst of all, so profane and
blasphemous abuse of holy Scripture, for ye make it always the channel where
through your wicked humors must run, for the overwhelming of your enemies;
In these Iesuiticke arts ye prove so excelent, that in the very first ye are
of your noviciat, ye may put in for promotions per saltum: Sundry Provincials
have not all their days showed such cunning as you already, if ye make a
proportional progress, a few years may make you general of the order, if so
be your mind can serve you to change your nation the third time; And as ye
have turned from Scottish to English, from English to Irish, ye can be content
to swear your self full Spaniard, at least a devoute Servant to Philip the
fourth, The deciphering of the name Lisimachus Nicanor.
for advancement of his Catholic Monarchy, though never so much to the
prejudice of your old. Master K. Charles, and all Christendom beside.

Your name demonstrates your vanity and pride, qualities familiar to your
order: Ye must be no less then the c^^der of the plea, and that by a
victory; Truly ye come in good time to the Canterburian troops, no Christian
can be so welcome to them as you, if a Lysimachus will convoy them, and break
the battle of the poor Covenanters without stroke; or if some strokes must
be distribute, yet it Nicanor be on their side, it is the top of their desires.
But things are not always correspondent to their names; Etymologies are
sometimes antiphrastick: who before the fight, must needs stamp their ensigns
with styles of victory and triumph, are compelled sometimes to see their too
precipitat joy and gloriation end in disgraceful displeasure.

Or is this only your vanity in hiding of your name to proclaim it, in
Lysimachus to tell us you are D. Leslie, in Nicanor, that ye are B. of D^nn
and Conor, though this had not been put in the Frontispiece of your book, yet
any who had perused your former schenick writs, that comedy of your seven
Sages, that tragic harrang to your silly priests, which for the glory of
your name behoved to walk over-sea in a Latin gown, might easily have guessed
at your style and humor in this your last writ: Your professed abode over Sea,
your impotencie even without all occasion to keep your self off the Irish
oath, ^ff these Scottish Ministers whom ye did banish from Ireland, off the
excessive praises of your patron the Deputy.

These and such other passages of your book, lift up your mask, and lead any
who will, under the shadow of the Jesuits heart, to behold D. Leslies head,
that upon it, without mistaking, may be cast all the garlants of honor, which
the penning of so brave a piece in so necessary a time does deserve.

But whoever you be, whether Leslie, or Maxwell, or Michell, The lands grief
is the Canterburia^s joy.
or who else of the faction, certainly ye are a mirrie man in a very
unseasonable time; When the whole Isle is in sadness and dule, in fear and
trembling, ye are upon your congratularie Epistles; And why not? These are the
days ye have panted long for, fire and Sword is your Element, rather then
Episcopal honor should lie in the dust; fire and water, heaven and hell must
all go through other: yet who knows but your singing in so foul weather may
end in mourning to you, and jot to all those who now are weeping for that black
storm which ye and his Grace your Prince, have raised in our clemat.

If we in one point our adversaries in an hundredth are Iesuited.
The only point wherein ye make Covenanters, draw near to Iesuitisme is in
their doctrine of the civil Magistrate, which ye branch out in 16 particulars;
Is it not then your mind that whoever leaves the Protestants in one head of
doctrine, does give to the Jesuits matter of congratulation, and a good ground
to expect their total apostasy to the popish religion; This is the only
scope of your whole book: What then do you think of your fellows, whom I
have assayed to convince by their own testimonies of a defection from the
Protestant^ to the worst of the Jesuits, not in one head, but so exceeding
many, that very few contraverted heads do remain, wherein they are not joined
long ago with the Jesuits: Shall partiality so far predomine with you,
that we Covenanters for conformity with Jesuits in one point alone, must be
reputed Apostates from the reformed church of Rome, yet ye Canterburians though
ye declare your conformity with Rome in twenty, in an hundredth, yea, well
near in all the contraverted heads of Doctrine, yet no man without a great
dash to a charity, may begin so much as to doubt of your full Protestanisme.

That one point wherein ye make us Iesuited, is the doctrine of the Magistrate:
This to you is the head of the Protestant Faith, and all their other teners but
members following that head, your practice is very consonant to this your
profession; for your new doctrine of the Magistrate is the first and most
beloved article of your Creed, which above all other ye preach and press with
extreme violence: Your new stamped oath of alleadgeance and Supremacy whereby
ye would set up the King in a place so far above the ty of all Laws, divine
and humane, as his royal heart has ever abhorred to be ma^e such an idol.
Good Princes in this are like the Saints in glory, all which gives to them a
degree of honor, exceeding the Sphere of man, and entrenshing upon Gods proper
glory, they esteem them as they are indeed, nothing but flattering effronters
of their sacred persons.

That which ye call the head of all Protestant Religion, The bounds of Princes
power, and peoples subjection are points of state, not o^ Religion.
readily does not concern Religion at all: Religion indeed does oblige the
conscience to give unto all Magistrates their due honor and obedience, but the
bounds and limits of that obedience, which is the only point ye speak off,
Religion meddleth not with them till the civil Laws of States and Empires
have clearly defined them.

No Religion will oblige a Spaniard to be so far subject to King Philip, as a
Grecian slave must be to the Great Turk, neither does any Religion equal the
Polonish Subjection to their King, with the Spanish to theirs.

Does any Religion oblige the Electours of Germany to be so much subject to
their Emperor, as the Nobles in Pole are to their King, or so little subject
as the Venetian Senate is to their Duke, or the States of Holland is to the
Prince of Orange?

The civil Laws and Customs, set down the limits both of the Sovereigns
commanding, and the subjects obedience: Religion causes these march-stones
conscienciously to be kept when once Policy has fixed them.

It seems ye intend to make England quit their Priviledg^, and burn their
magna charta; to make Scotland bury their Assemblies and Parliaments, that a
blank may be put in Canterburies hand to write down what Laws he will for the
Church and State of both the Nations: But thanks be to God that King Charles
does live, to be judge betwixt you and us in so material a question.

Ye tell us further in your preambles, The present danger of this Isle to fall
in hands of the Pope and Spaniard.
before ye come to your first parallel of Pope Vrbans hope, to make Scotland
return to Rome, ye might have told us further from your companion Con, who is
more acquainted with Vrbans secrets then other men, that the Pope has a pretty
confidence to join England to Scotland, that so the reduction of the whole
Isle, and your I^eland with it, to the Sea of Rome, may be set up as an eternal
trophee to the honor of this p^pes family; Surely the ground-stones of this
hope are laid on so deep plots, that except the hand of God and the king in
this present Parliament pull them up, Pope Urban for all his age, may yet live
to putt the triumphall cope stone upon that building.

We grant you also, that the Pope and Jesuits, as ye say, ^re hovering above
the head of us all, to fall upon the prey of ^ll Britain, when both parties,
which your malice will compel to fight, are wearied with mutual wounds; in
this prophecy we think you but too true divines, specially if ye will add,
which all without the gift of prophecy may see to be consequent, that when the
Pope has gotten the souls of those who outlive this war for his part, his
Sons the French or Catholic King, will not be quiet, except for their share
they get the bodies, The most hated of the covenanters proceedings, their
covenant it self, is approved by the king.
the goods, and liberties of all this poor Isle.

Your other gybes at the Covenanters proceedings ye might have holden in, if
the honor of the King had any ways been dear unto you; the worst of all our
actions, even that which ye were wont to proclaim our most vile, and hellish
rebellion, Sedition, Treason, and what else ye could devise, is now by our
gracious Prince after a full search of it to the very bottom, not only
absolved of all crime, but so far approved, that by act of Assembly,
Counsel, articles of Parliament, it is commanded to be subscribed by the
hearts and hands of all in this Kingdom without exception; So that new there
stands at the back of that long blasphemed Covenant among the first and most
conspicuous hands, not only Roxburgh, Lawder-dale, South^ke, and others of the
prime Counselors, but also Traquair the Kings great Commissioner for that
effect; We hope then that you and your like, if there remain any spark of
reverence in your breast toward that authority, which often ye pretend to
adore, will not only for ever hereafter bridle your very loose tongues, but
also eat in again, or at last cover so far as ye can, for hidding of your
shame, these most false lies, and unchristian railings, which these two years
bygone in word, writ, Print, ye have vomitted out against our proceedings,
especially that most hatred and slandered passage of them, the renewing of our
Covenant.

The fi st point wherein ye parallel us with Jesuits, 1. parallel We are for
Monarchy, but against Monarchical tyranny.
is in our opposition to Monarchical government. By Monarchical government
ye expresl^ enough declare that ye understand such an absolute and illimitate
power, as exeemeth the Prince from the tie of all Law* and puts in his hand the
full liberty to make what Laws he w^ll, without the advice, let be consent
of Parliament, of Counsel, or of any others, and takes absolutely all Liberty
from his Subjects, though met together in Parliament to defend them elves by
Arms in any imaginable oppression, even such a M^narchie as the great Turk,
or the M^gor of I^dia, or the Ch^m of Ta^tarie, this day does enjoy over their
slaves even that strange kind of government, which in my last Chapter I
descrived in the words of your brethren. We confess freely; that our heart is
much opposite to such a M^narchie; yet no more then our gracious Prince king
Charles and his glorious Father king James give us express warrant: The one in
his forecited writ of his Attorney Supr^ chap 8. Q.R.
abhorring these injurious flatterers, who would impute unto him the making of
Laws without his Parliament; the other in his Parliamentary Speech Page 531. A
king governing in a settled kingdom, leaves to be a King, and degenerateth in
to a tira^t as soon as he leaves off to rule according to his Laws.
Therefore all Kings that are no tyrants, or perjured, will be glad to bound
themselves within the limits of their Laws: They that persuade them the
contrary, are vipers, and posts* both against them and the Commonwealth.
making that Prince a perjured tyrant, who would not gladly bound himself
within the limits of his laws, and these men to be taken for vipers, pests, and
common enemies to Princes and people, who would assay by their flatteries to
loose Princes from their pactions made with their people at their Coronation,
and the settled laws of their Kingdom, yea, we show that your own great Bishop
Laud (possibly as great a Royalist as is needful) goes before us with his own
mouth, what ever he directs you and many other of his followers to the
contrary, to teach that no statute Supra. Cap. ^. Q
Law can be made any where but in Parliament, even in England, let be
^cotland, where to this day never any conqueror did dwell.

But as for true Monarchy so high as the lowable laws any where do make it,
we are in nothing opposite thereto, for what have we to do to condemn the
settled state and Laws of any other Nation? Certainly the royal authority of
our own gracious Sovereign, so far as the lowable laws of our Kingdom do
extend it, we are sworn in our Covenant heartily to the uttermost of our power
to maintain.

As for the lawfulness The lawfulness of defensive Arms
of resistance in the present case of our invasion, I may not enter in this
short postscript in any such question; only ye may, if ye please understand,
that it has been the tenet of our Church since the reformation, it has been
the right and practice of our Kingdom since the first foundation, a number of
instances thereof are approved in our standing acts of Parliament unrepealed to
this day, it has been the practice of all the reformed Churches abroad,
wherein, by Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles they have been all
allowed, and the most of them countenanced with powerful assistance of men and
money. Your self cannot deny, but in the judgment of reformed Divines,
resistance in many cases is lawful, even in Kingdoms where the Prince is tied
in the fundamental laws by paction to his people: That this is the State of
the kingdom of Scotland, though ye may deny it, yet King James, who is like to
have as great understanding in the rights of the Crown and Kingdom of
Scotland as you, or your like, gives us assurance that by a fundamental law
the King of Scotland is obliged at his coronation to paction under his great
oath the preservation of the established Religion, of the Laws of the
Kingdom, of the Liberties, and privileges of the Subjects. P. 105 In the
Coronation, our Kings give their oath, first to maintain the Religion
presently professed, and punish al those that should alter or disturb the
profession thereof: and next to maintain the lowable and good laws made by
their predecessors; and lastly, to maintain the whole Country and every state
therein. And this oath in the Coronation is the clearest, civil and
fundamental Law, whereby the Kings office is properly defined.
However we love your ingenuity, who do not dissemble but profess openly your
mind, that when a faction about a Prince by divine providence is permitted to
take courses for the evident overthrow both of the Religion, of the Laws, of
the Liberties, of the goods, of the lives, and all that is dear to an whole
kingdom; that in those or any other imaginable cases of tyranny, whole
Parliaments may not proceed for their defense one step beyond tears, prayers,
and flight: That what ever is done more by whole and consentient nations
against a faction of Court misleading the Prince, is simply unlawful.

Your scoffs about the questions of Bishops and Elders deserve no answer; Our
Tenets about bishops and ruling Elders, the king has approved.
nothing do we maintain in them but what the assemblies of our church at our
first reformation ordained, and was in peaceable practice among us ever, till
men of your coat by fraudulent and violent ways for their own ambition and
avarice, set up their novations: We have no other mind in those questions then
the Church of Holland and France: All our tenets are so well cleared by that
Learned Hollander, Gersome Bucerus, as none of your party, has yet been
bold, after 22. years advisement, to make any reply; yea, we maintain no more
in these questions then that wherewith our gracious Prince by his Commissioner
and act of Counsel in our last general assembly has declared himself to be
well pleased; but ye are a notable deceaver, while ye would make the world
believe that the great questions betwixt you and us are alone about Bishops and
Elders, while as ye are very like (if ye be not marred) by the hands of Bishops
to bring in upon us the whole body of Popery, and to overthrow the whole
civil Privileges of both the Nations without any possible remedy as your
self in this same place does too evidently declare.

Upon your first parallel we make but one other remarke: The Canterburia^s in
all their lectures of tyranny, have the Jesuits for their Masters.
Ye wrong much the Jesuits in denying them the honor to be your adjuncts in
the re-erection of a tyrannick and turkish Monarchy in Christendom: Your
ambition herein is too great, it were better to admit these pregnant wits to
be copartners in your glory, then to venture you alone upon so high a design.

The opposition, which that work can not but suffer, may make it break in
your hands, if ye be not supported with their effectual assistance, in this
art they are your Masters, ye are but mere novices; it is unjustice to
dissemble from whom ye have learned, if ye deny your theifts from them, the
world about you is not blind, they see and laugh at your poor and ill
contrived cunning, for who now is ignorant, that the Jesuits above all men
living, have obtained long ago the privilege to sit in Machiavels chair,
that from thence they may teach every where their lectures of tyranny, for the
re-erection of a spiritual Monarchy in the whole Church for the pope, in
their own society for the general, in the whole universe, in things
temporal, a Catholic Monarchy for the Spaniard; And while these furthest
ends may be gotten and compassed, an absolute Monarchy for the Prince in
every country where they can get footing. What ever pains of old the Pope
did take to weaken Emperors and Kings, for the promoting of his own
greatness, yet now, being fully assured of their constant affection to bear
his Yoke, he has this last age been as busy as lay in his power, in lifting
up of their head by the hands, chiefly of the Jesuits, to the top of all
Tyranny, with the extreme prejudice of their Subjects, Liberties and Laws.

Who else were the prime Counselors of Philip the second, for to spoil his
ancient Kingdom of Arragon of their great privileges, and to bring them down
to the same baseness of Subjection, wherein his great grand father Ferdinand
had putt the M^ores of Granada? Who else did stir him up to begin that course
of tirannie with Flanders, which has cost him more money already, then this
day all Europe can command, and more men then are living Spaniards?

Who else were the advisers of King Lues the 13. to spoil his ancient Kingdom
of Navarre, and his Fathers best friends the Protestants, of these privileges
which they had long enjoyed peaceably under former Kings?

Who wakened the late King of Pole, to present the Yoke of tirannie to the
neck of his ancient Subjects in Swain?

Had the late Emperor any other movers to these cruel oppressions, which
first in his own hereditarie Estates, then in the Kingdom of Boheme, and last
in the whole Empire, he did practice to the very evident hazard of his Crown,
to the infinite and unspeakable afflictions of Germany, through the mids and
all the four corners thereof; was not the maine and graund quarrel of all
these Troubles, the too great affection of a Monarchick tyranny, of an
absolute domination without tie of Laws, Oaths, Covenants, wherewith the
Jesuits inspired the heart of that man, otherwise not the worst of Princes?
Though therefore it be your craft for your better lurking to profess your
Separation from the Jesuits in this your great enterprise of erecting in
Britain a new Monarchicke tirannie; Yet the world is not so blind as you
suppose, but sees you clearly linked hand in hand, the Jesuits leading the
ring, and you but following and dancing to their measures.

Your second parallel is wholly Jesuitick, 2 Parallel. We are far from
subiecting the Crown of our King, to will of his people.
the throwing of holy Scriptures unto your wicked Scoffs at the gracious
Servants of God, the laying to our charge imputations, which never entered in
our thoughts; Did any of us ever teach that royal authority did depend upon
the multitude, and that it was in their power to give Crowns to whom they
would? When these men are bold to put in print before the Eyes of the world
such slanders of us, what do they instill in the ears of our King and his
Servants in their privy Conferences? Shall any wonder that so long as such
men get leave to spread, without a reply, such horrible calumnies of us, that
the heart of our gracious Prince, and many about him should be much inflammed
to our hatred?

What he speaks of divine institution of Kings, we do believe it, that by
God Kings do reign, it is plain Scriptures; as also that all advancement is
neither from the East, nor the West, but from the hand of the most High: So
that all who deny to any Superior the obedience which is due to their Lawful
commands, must sin against God: We grant that some of our Opposites have here
a conceit which we do not well understand, they seem to teach that royalty
alone, and that most absolute, without any limitation, is of divine
institution, that all other governments whether of republic or aristocracies
are but humane inventions, opposite to the Law of nature and the first
institution of God; This state-speculiation seems to us a curiosity,
wherewith we have nothing to do; it is enough for us to believe that our King
is set over us by God as his Deputy; that since the time our old ancestors did
choose Fergus for their King, oblidging themselves by their oath to be ruled by
his race alone, according to the laws made, and to be made with public
consent, yea, since the days of King Kenneth the third, to be governed by his
nearest heir: Our subjection to the nearest heir of that race is now simply
unchangeable:

The least motion of any such change has as little come in the mind of our
Nation in these days of King Charles, as in any age of the last two thousand
Years, wherein our Fathers have showed more constant affection to the service
of his Antecessours, then any other Nation under the Heaven this day to their
royal families. What here ye rechant of our mind to a resistance and
defensive war in some cases, is nothing contrary to this our profession;
Many bickerings have our predecessors had with misleading factions, to which
the Prince for a time has given his countenance, but they were ever willing to
distinguish betwixt the Prince and his misinformers, 3. Parallel, The
Canterburia^s give to the Prince much more power over the Church, then the
Jesuits give to the Pope.
to see them punished when their insolent tyranny become intolerable; but the
Prince settled in the full strength of his authority, which for a time the
cloud of these grassehoppers did eclipse in the hearts of his people.

The third point wherein ye join us with the Jesuits is our denying to the
King the government of the Church: In this ye do us wrong, as in all the rest,
for we reject the Popish doctrine here; They make Princes mere sheep, they
command them to follow the Pope their pastor, where ever he leads, were it to
the bottom of Hell, without asking so much as Domine quid facis, but we
esteem it to be a chief part of the Magistrates office to command all
Churchmen to do their duty, and when they will not be persuaded with clear
reasons, to compel them by force to reforms the corruptions in the worship of
God; But ye skift out here much further to an extravagance, wherein ye have no
approved divine to be your patron.

Ye teach, that all Sovereigns are the true heads of the Churches in their
Dominions; Such styles the Bishops of England since the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, have ever denied to their Princes, with their own
contentment; Ye will have not only the Magistrate to command that which is
right in the service of God, as Austine and we do gladly grant, but also ye
make it his right, were he a professed heretic, or Pagan, to give what laws
he will to the Church, without her consent, or so much as advice: Ye give to
the Prince much more, then the Jesuits will grant to the Pope, to do in the
Church even without a Counsel, what he thinks meetest, and if it be his
pleasure to call a Counsel, ye make it his only right to call either of the
laity or the Clergy, whom he will, to be members thereof, and when these
members are conveened, ye give to the Prince alone the power of judging and
deciding, and to all others but of mere advice; Except so far as the Prince
is pleased to communicate to so many of them as he thinks meet his own
decisive voice. In such a Counsel, or without it, ye make it the Princes
right, to destroy at his pleasure all Church-Canons, Church-judicatories, and
forms of divine worship, which by Laws and long customs have been
established, and to impose new Confessions of Faith, new Ecclesiasticke
judicatories, new Books of Canons, Leiturgie, Ordination, Homilies, Psalms,
by mere authority.

All this by your persuasion ye moved our Prince to assay, but upon better
information his royal justice is now pleased to reject all such your designs,
for his Majesty has given to us assurance, not only at his Camp, but by his
Commissioner in our last Assembly; and we hope also that at once this
assurance shall be confirmed in Parliament, that no ecclesiastic novation shall
over be required by his Maj: but that whereto a free general Assembly shall
give their full assent. In this point therefore betwixt us and our Prince there
is no discrepance, neither here had we ever any difference with any reformed
Divine:

4. Parallel. About convocation of Synods we have no question with the king.
Your fourth challenge, that we deny to the King power to convocate Assemblies,
yet know the contrary, that we give to all Christian Sovereigns so much
interesse in the affairs of the Church as to convocate Assemblies where and
whenever they please: But we grant that we are no ways of your mind in this
point, that the Church may never lawfully mere in any case, though Heresy and
Schism were eating up her life, and drinking her heart blood, without the call
of the Magistrate, that no Church meeting at all is lawful, no, not for prayer
or Sacraments without the Magistrates permission: That all Churches must lie
under an interdict and no public meeting in them must be, till the
Magistrates, license be first obtained.

Is all opposition to you in these things Iesuitisme? what ever difference we
have here with you, yet with our Prince in this point we are fully agreed.

Your gracious Brethren and Fathers when we had been in possession continually
after the reformation, for common, of two general Assemblies yearlie, by their
wicked dealing spoiled us of all that Liberty, so that for 38 Years space we
had no general Assembly to count of but two, both which were thrust upon us
against our heart for the advancement alone of their evil purposes: Yet now,
thanks be to God, our Prince being well informed of the mischivous wrong your
party did to us in this matter, has granted our reasonable desires, if so be
the like of you, make not this grant fruitless unto us, as ye truly intend;
The old act of Parliament for yearlie general Assemblies, and ofter pro re
nata, is acknowledged by the Kings Commissioner to be very reasonable, and with
his consent has past the articles of our late Parliament, so that our Prince
now is very well content that from the general Assembly the highest
Ecclesiastic Court, being so frequently to be keept, should come no appeal
at all to him.

Your fifth and sixth parallel are cast together, The 5. and 6. Parallel. We
have no question with our Prince, about his presidencie, and supremacy in
counsels.
the Kings Presidencie in general Assemblies, and Supremacy in Ecclesiastic
affairs ye handle these so confusedly with so many wicked scoffings and
scurrilous abusing of scripture, that your meaning can scarce be understood.

We are so fa^re from denying to the Prince the place of royal presidencie
and moderation in our Assemblies, as Constantine used it at N^o^, and King
James often in Scotland, that it is one of the things our hearts m^st desire to
see King Charles possessing in his own person that privilege. His royal
S^premacie we willingly yeel^ (...), so far as the fundamental Laws of our
Church and Kingdom extend it, yea we make no question that in that sense
Bilson, and the old Bishops of England understood it. But your late Commentary
of the Kings Supremacy, whereby ye ascrive to every Sovereign much more then
any Jesuit ever gave to the Pope, we do reject it with the Kings good leave,
as before was said,

Your repeated cavills at our Elders, Sessions, Presbyteries, and Assemblies is
not worth the answering: The frame of our Discipline established by the Laws
of our Church and State, in Holland and France, practiced peaceably in the
happiest times of our Church, and in daily use since the first reformation
without any quarrel is now ratified by our Prince: 7. Parallel. We are much for
there then our opposites from the doctrine of the churches infallibility.
So your mouth should be stopped and your tongue silent what ever boiling be
in your breast.

In your seventh parallel, ye lay upon the Jesuits and our back, that which
is your own burden, ye might have known that the Jesuits ascrive to no
Counsel any infallibility without many distinctions: And as for us, none is
ignorant that we believe all meetings of men since the Apostles days to be
fallible and subject to error. We did indeed in our Covenant promise to
abstain from the practice of these novations, whereby ye had long keept our
poor Church in a flaming fire, till a general Assembly has brought them to
the touch stone of a new trial: When the Assembly of Glasgow had passed this
trial upon them according to our desire, we embraced the Synodick Sentence,
and resolve to adhere thereto, because we find it agreeable to clear reason,
else be sure, that all the Assemblies of the world should never have obliged
our consciences to have believed any thing which to us did appear erroneous.

Such an inslaving of men's consciences was a part of your tyranny among us: No
orders from your hands could be extorted, till a man had sworn and subscribed
simple obedience to all your decrees, not only past, but to come: An expression
of any condition of consonancie to the word of God, or any other such
limitation, was a certain note of Puritanisme and disaffection to the present
government. Yea such an infallibility ye wont to ascribe to a few of your
Bishops, let be general Assemblies, that ye made a Canon for the
excommunication of all, who should be bold to affirm the least error in any
of their works, whether of Canons, Leiturgie, Homilies^ or any thing else, The
Service-booke, Episcopacie, and other corruptions, which the King has
commanded us to abjure, are still defended by our opposits.
that came through their holy hands.

What here ye cavil at our reiection of your manifold corruptions of the
doctrine and discipline of our Church, as if we did set up so many new articles
of Faith, as ye did lately, errors which now we do reject, is not worth a
reply: But that open declaration which here ye make of your great affection
toward the articles of Perth, Episcopacie, books of Service, and Canons, and
great disaffection to the very confession of Faith, made by King James, we
cannot pass without observation. The inclination of your mind to these
articles, we did truly suspect by many probable signs; But that with your
patron, Canterburies permission, ye should so soon have been licenced to put
these, your thoughts in print we did not expect: Ye will we hope hereafter
esteem it no calumny nor want of charity in us, to avow, that
notwithstanding our Assemblies ordinance, and the Kings Majesty's command with
the consent of his Counsel, to all this Nation, to subscribe the abjuration of
these novelties, yet that our poor Church is in great danger to be pestered
again with them all, since the like of you are countenanced to print, even to
this day, such ample defenses of all these corruptions, and to give to the
Service-booke so high a commendation, that if it be true, our refusing of it
cannot be but a high sin against God, and as you told us before, an
intolerable insolence before the King, whom ye teach, to discipline us for
that fault with a strange punishment; Ye will have that rejected Book resumed
and stuffed with a new supplement of more Romish stuff, and then quickly
thrust upon us with this peremptour alternative, either quietly to bear that
Yoke, or presently to be banished the Land.

As for Episcopacie, ye will have us embrace it with as great faith as we do
the Books of Canonical Scripture. Ye allege, that Scripture is for neither
of the two, that Tradition is for both; and that Tradition is to be received
with no smaller assent then a divine and undoubted faith, albeit Canterbury
your patron permit you to print all these things, yet upon your word in this
place, we must take him for an arch-enemie to all popery.

In your eight parallel, 8. Parallel. The Canterburia^s offer many more
disgraces to Kings, the^ their opposits.
ye object to us the excommunication of Kings; This is but your slander; We go
not so far in following of Ambrose course with the Emperor Theodosus, as
Bilson allows. Of our moderation in this point we have given good proof; For
in all the troubles which your faction first and last has moved our Princes to
bring upon us, ye cannot say without a manifest lie, that ever any of us had
the least thought of putting upon them any Church censure: What ye might do,
if Kings were turned your enemies, we know not, only now when they are your
benefactours, far above your deserving, we see how coursly ye serve them;
they must as profaine laics be kept far aback with railes from that holy
place, where ye, the Lords priests with your consecrate and anointed bodies do
stand at the Altar: Emperors must light down from their horse and adore you,
they must acknowledge their Crowns to be so far subject to your Miters as a
body is to the Soul, or a man to God.

Supra cap. 3. M. N.
Readily so base persons might get a whip of your Spiritual rod, if once ye
were firmly established in your Episcopal Thrones, as long ago ye would have
been, if these turbulent Puritanes, who still have been rocking and keeping
your Chaires in motion, had been put out of the world.

What thorns Bishops have been in the sides of Kings, especially in England,
the Chronicles of that Nation do record, and above all other Bishops, these of
Canterbury, the mischivous conspiracy of one of them with Henry of Darbie
against his great Benefactour Richard the second, ought never to be out of King
Charles eye: No passage of the English story is more worthy of his meditation.

9. Parallel. We are nothing opposite to the power of Parliaments, but we make
Parliaments to be mere ciphers.
In the ninth Parallel, your scoffing and railing vein flows after the old
manner; ye object our annulling of the acts of Parliament by the decrees of our
Assembly, and the extending of the power of our Synods to many secular
affairs: Doubtless ye are the men, who by your shoulders most carefully will
under-prop the decaying power of Parliaments: It grieveth much your Souls to
see Parliaments slighted in any of their due rights; Always remember your
own, and your brethrens Tenets, whereby ye make all Parliaments but mere
ciphers the arbitrarie Counsels of the Prince, to which by his Letters he has
right to call what Commissioners he will, and hold back whom he pleases; with
whom or without whom as he thinks meet, it is his own only right to make, to
interpret, to abolish Laws, to publish them by himself alone, and command
them by a mere Proclamation to be received by all the Subjects, without the
consent or advice of any man, further then is his pleasure to crave:

This your brethren often in formal terms, Supra cap. 8. E. E. F. F. G. G, etc.
and your self in the same page sets down in effect. What ye speak of our
encroaching upon Parliaments, is no ways true, only some evil acts of your
evidently corrupted Assemblies, whereto ye had obtained by your familiar arts
of fraud and force: the ratification of some Parliaments, we did recognosce,
and that alone in their Ecclesiastic part, with the good leave of the Kings
Commissioner: As for the civil sanction of Parliament, according to the
ordinary Ecclesiastic proceeding of our Church in all by gone times, we did
appoint Commissioners from our Assembly, to supplicate the Parliament for the
abolition thereof. Neither do we meddle at all in our Synods with secular
affairs, remember what your self in your Canons do pronounce, to be the due
and lawful Subject of Ecclesiastic jurisdiction, ye will find that our
general Assemblies did never take in so much matter as ye appropriate to any
of your official Courts.

Our act anent the going of Mills and Salt-pans upon the Sabbath Day, was but a
renovation, and that with the Commissioners consent, of an old act in a former
Assembly, whereat King James was present; It seems it grieveth you to see
the Sabbath sanctified among us, that ye are but like your brother, to whom
Sunday is no Sabbath, but a day wherein games of all kind, also diverse kinds
of Husband labor should publicly be allowed, for the crossing of that Jewish
Superstition, whereby Puritanes abuse that Festival. What further here ye
object of our unwillingnesse to subscribe at the Counsels direction the
Covenant, at it was dated in the year 1581. without the application of it to
your later corruptions, which addition we had sworn before, ye will find
that we had good reason so to do, your self being judge; for ye tell us that
all these your corruptions, even the Service-Booke it self, are very consonant
with that Covenant, and that the main end why the Subscription thereof was
urged, was the clean quiting of these additions formerly sworn, and now by
the mercy of God fully approved by the King, by his Commissioner, by his
Counsel, by the Assembly, by the articles of Parliament, and all, but men of
your stuff, who resolve to die, let all the world about you be never so
fickle, with the untainted glory of constant obstinacy.

In your tenth Parallel, Ye act the Jesuit so perfectly, 10. Parallel. Both
out Covenant and posteriour proceedings show us no ways to be opposite to the
oath of allegiance.
that few hereafter will hope for the praise of going beyond you in their arts:
your pen drops so many Sentences, so many cursed lies, so many blasphemous
wrestings of men's words and writs. Deny we the Oath of alleadgeance, the words
of our Covenant and mutual defense, whereupon ye would build that denial,
let be that they are approved by our King as said is, do not they stand
expressly in King James Covenant, yea in the vesy first Confession of our Fait^?

Is not our late Covenant an express renewing of our oath of alleadgeance in
so strict terms as is possible?

Did our armed defense, in that desperate extremity which your faction put us
unto, import any danger to the Kings person or Crown? Did we not then before
all the world give a sufficient proof of our humble loyalty and practice of
our Covenant?

At the very hight of all our advantages and your too well known unreadinesse
at that time for fighting, at the least appearance of his Maj^sties mind, to
lay by arms, to leave the prosecution of your bloody desires, were we not
content to cast our selves at his feet, to put our Munition in his hand, and
all our Castles in his power, to be stocks to our feet, and roaps to our
necks; had our hearts been in the least measure so treasonable as you slander,
would these have been our actions?

What ye speak of our Forfathers actions in Queen Regent and Queen Mary's
days, ye are into it, but answerable to your name a true Jesuit. The defense
of the Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom against the Guisian usurpations
in the minority of our Queen, and our Queens voluntary dimission of the
government to her Son King James, after many unspeakable misaccidents: These
and such like proceedings of our Forfathers, confirmed by our standing acts of
Parliament, Jesuits of old wont to blaspheme, but all the reformed, and none
more then the Bishops of England, especially Doctor Bilson, do vindicate from
their wicked aspersions, which yet ye have a stomach to resorbe; to spew them
out once again upon our face: But ye^ are privileged to speak all your
pleasure, for ye are here on a Stage under the mask of a furious phrentick
Jesuit, at the back of this curtain, ye may belch out what ye will, all is
conform to the person ye sustain.

In your eleventh, twelve, and thirteenth parellel, 11. 12, 13. Para. Blind
obedience to men's Laws, binding of the conscie^^e by them, works of
Supererogation are not ours, but your tenets.
ye do but toy; the three faults ye object to us of blind obedience, of
binding the conscience, works of Supererogation, we are free of them all: But
see if ye can free your own faction of any one thereof, for your brethren
teach, that all men must give quick obedience unto all their injunctions, not
only in the midst of their deepest ignorance of any reason for these
injunctions, but also in the midst of never so many doubts and perplexities and
strong inclinations to think your acts most unlawful. Ye will admit neither
ignorance nor the greatest doubtings to be any impediment to the present
obedience of your Episcopal injunctions, how far is this from that ye
pronounce in us, blind obedience.

Again, ye make all the commandments of the Church to be branches of the
fifth command, and to be obeyed as the precepts of God, which we suppose do
bind the conscience.

For the third, ye teach more merit of works then Bellarmine, yea, ye
proclaim that the following of the counsels of perfection, that the keeping of
the three Monastic vows does deserve an augmentation, as ye call it, an
Aureola above common happiness.

In your fourteenth also ye cast upon us your own domestic fault of
Equivocation: 14. Parallel. No equivocation used by us in any of our
proceedings.
Are you ignorant how your brethren the Bishops of Scotland did swear their
famous caveats: In the very time while they were dressing for our Church, their
Canons and Leiturgie, which the large declaration tells us, were always in
hand from the 16 year to the 38, how often did they swear to many who proponed
to them their fears of their underminding practices, that they were utterly
ignorant of all further novations to be brought into our Church: As for these
matters, wherein ye make us equivocators, we were far in any of them from
that Crime.

We truly without any equivocation do think our Covenant to be for the King,
and no ways against either his person or authority, we think in our mind,
that in some cases resistance to Princes is much better service, and one day
will be so acknowledged, then present obedience: How often have Princes professed
at last themselves much more beholden to those who with displayed banners has
come against their Camp, then to others, who by their flattering service and
wicked persuasions, moved them to take up their unjust arms.

Ye do well by the passages of King James writs which he let fall in passion
against some few persons as himself professes to incite King Charles to
destroy the whole generation of your opposits.

For that equivocation which ye object to some in their subscribing of the
Covenant at the Commissioners and Counsels direction; sufficient satisfaction
is given long ago to all reasonable men by published writs: The matter shortly
was this, one of your factious ingines, to draw us subtilie from that Covenant,
wherein we did abjure Bishops, Books, and the rest of your novations, which
were contrary to the doctrine and discipline of our Church, was, a new
subscription to the first part of this Covenant, as it was first set down in
the year 1580, without our late addition, wherein it was applied to your newly
obtruded novations: Upon hope by this new subscription, that not only, the
formerly subscribed addition and abjuration of these novelties expressed in
that addition, should be forgotten; but also that means should be gotten to
persuade that these once abiured novations were in nothing contrary to the
Kings Covenant, yea that all of them were so much conform to it, and virtually
contained therein, that all the subscrivers should find themselves oblidged by
that oath and subscription, to embrace the articles of Perth, the Canons, the
Leiturgie, and all the intended novations, at least, without all doubt
Episcopacie, the Fountain whence the rest had proceeded; and from which they
knew they would flow again in due time, if it alone could be gotten preserved.

This was the true intention of the Commissioner in pressing that new
subscription, as his Grace did publish thereafter in print, but in the first
proposition of that new oath, all such design was carefully concealed, yet
wise men among us, fearing and foreseing the plot, did carefully diswade that
new subscription, as a dangerous master piece, invented for the utter
destruction of the true sense of our first subscribed Covenant.

Their advice was heard by the most part, who thereupon refused that new
subscription, yet some knowing perfectly well, that the Covenant in the 1581,
did not include Episcopacie, or any of the late novations, but clearly enough
excluded them; Since the Commissioner his Grace in the proponing that
subscription, did make no declaration at all, neither of his own, nor of his
Master the Kings mind, to have Episcopacie, or any of these novations included
in that Covenant, they were content at his desire to subscribe it, but with
this express declaration, which they required and obtained to be acted in the
Counsel Books (so far were they from any Equivocation) that they did
subscribe that Covenant in that same sense and no other, wherein it was
understood at the first framing in the 1580.

What that sense was, we had for a time too much dispute, but at last the
Registers of our Church in the general Assembly, being carefully cast over, it
was found that the doctrine and discipline of our Church in that 80. year, did
run so cross to Episcopacie, to Perth articles, to the Leiturgie, and all
the rest of our troublesome novelties, that whosoever did heartily subscribe
the Covenant of our Church in that sense, it behoved to have in the year of
his first framing, did stand no less oblidged thereby to renounce the
posteriour novations, then those who had subscribed the other Covenant with the
addition, wherein all these novations were expressly named: It was found even
in our last Assembly, whereto Traquaire according to his commission from the
King did consent, that both these Covenants, that with the application, and
that without the application were but both one. So that your equivocation,
whereupon your brethren also have too much tinkled, is cleared without the
disgrace of any, but the like of you, who were the authors of all the mistake
that for a time was in this matter.

15. Parallel.
The fifteenth parallel of your piae frauds is but like the rest, the ground of
this great commotion could not be the malcontentment of any man, for loss of
what they possessed in the tyths, or any thing else of the Church patrimony,
or for want of such favor they desired to have with their Prince: All these
are but silly fables: These whose hand has been prime in this high affair
from the beginning, has had very little, or no entresse at all in any part of
the Church patrimony, ye may know that the most of the tithes were in the
hands of the not covenanting Lords, and that the small portion which remained
with Covenanters, was made so sure to them as the King and his Laws were able
to make it.

Also it is very well known that the chief in the Covenant had so much favor
of their Prince, as their heart could wish, which they constantly did brook,
till their zeal unto this cause did crack their credit: Ye are exceedingly
injurious to say, that we did ever slander our King with any idolatry, with
any popery; Our thoughts of that gracious Prince^ are far more considerate,
and our words of so sacred person more full of due regard: But indeed though we
both say, preach, and print that so long as the like of you get leave to
possess his ear, we can have little hope that any true Protestant, so far
as ye are able, shall ever get living in quiet in this I Will, and though we avow
that by the Service-booke and other novations ye intended, to make us all trot
back again unto Rome, believe us, that in those Speeches we wrong not our
mind, that we speak no other then we think, and we hope now have given
tolerable evidence for these our thoughts and Speeches, though ye and the Pope
both should laugh in the Sardonian fashion, when ye are like to lose your game.

In your last parallel The last parallel. The pattern of a perfect Jesuit.
your motion that it may appear to be natural, is swifter then at the
beginning, ye ^ere overcome your very self, and any Jesuit J have ever read
in vileness of lies, slanders, filthy Speeches, railings, sc^ffings, and
blasphemous abuse of the holy Scripture to all this stuff.

Ye prove a good Scholar to your Masters Petroneus Arbiter, Lucian, Rabelais,
none that come in your way whether men or w^men, whether living or dead,
Nobles, Pastors, Commanders, People may escape the fire and filth of your
envenomed tongue: All your opposites, if the King can be persuaded to follow
your advice, must quickly be packing out of these dominions, as the vilest
straitours, but to our nobles and leaders ye will not show such favor; they,
as ye, tell us, with R^villiack and Coppinger must be hanged, drawn, quartered,
and buried with the burial of an ass. That Jesuit Abernethy should have
become Protestant, ye can not abide with patience, for so is the doctrine of
your Society, that separation from Rome is needless.

That noble gentleman General Leslie General Leslies vindication.
cannot escape the scrapes of your empoysoned pe^; Ye are on a stage playing
the part of a Fu^ioso, who ever comes in your way, the first dirt and stones
ye can grip must fly at their faces. When ye have searched that great
personage from his birth, to his old age, nothing can ye espy in all his life
whereupon to fasten your tuske, but that which among all Nations, as well
barbarous as civil, has ever been reputed a mark of honor and matter of
gloriation: When ye have curiously eyed that excellent piece, from top to toe,
your malice can espy no blemish, but a skar of an old most honorable wound,
which makes him the more glorious, with all who understand the terms of true
honor, and the dearer to every one who has any spark of affection toward that
service wherein that wound among many more was received by him: But ye and your
like cannot hold in the passion of your soul, but must vent your hatred and
malice, your disdainful indignation against all the valarous acts of any in
the reformed religion, against the popish party, whether in these days, or
the days of our forfathers. Ye cannot dissemble your passionate affection to
the side of Q. Marie at our first reformation; rather ere your loyal heart had
played the pranks of the rebellion, the treason, and what not of our
ancestors, ye would have joined with the enemies of our Church and State, for
the cutting off of the blessed root of King Charles race, for the settling upon
the throne of Britain after the dispatch of Q. Elizabeth and K. James, these
heretical Schismatics, the posterity of John of Austria, of the Duke of
Northfolke, or of any whom it should have pleased the Pope, the Catholic King,
and the Duke of Guise to have matched with Q Marie: Thus d^e ye and your
faction stand affected toward the former age, neither is your mind any better
toward this present: The D^tch Princes and the head of their league that true
Hero^, that wonder of the world, the K. of Swain, must all be to you but
villanes and traitors, who for their zeal to the reformed Religion and
Liberties of Germany, durst be so peart as to lift up arms to stop that very
far advanced reformation of Ferdinand: The wounds that famous Lesl^e did get in
this cause, must be slandered and made a matter of reproach to you and your
like; but it is good that men of honor do think of you and your language as
it is. Who is acquainted with the world abroad, they know full well that
Leslies most valarous, very wise, and happy deportments in the wars over Sea,
have brought more true glory to our Nation then the carriage of any man, who
went out of our Land these many ages; Certainly, this brave Soldiers late
conduct of our Nation in the time of the greatest danger that our land did see
this hundredth years, was so full of wisdom, stoutnesse, moderation,
success, that his memory will be fragrant and blessed in all generations to
our posterity. This sight of that man's virtues, did draw to him so much love
from all that followed his Camp, and so much honor from all the English
Nobility, that served in the opposite army, that we may say truly, There
lives not in this Isle a gentleman of comparable reputation with all sorts of
men, except alone of you in the faction, by whose hearts to be hated, by whose
pens to be defamed, it is an increase of contentment and praile of all honest
men.

But being unable to stand any longer upon your dung hill, least I be suffocat
with the stink thereof, I must turn my back, and fly, leaving you to dwell upon
these your excrements; and if so be ye cannot be drawn from them, to die and be
buried; therein only my parting a little of one purpose which so often in your
whole writ ye inculcate.

Ye will have us in the doctrine of Episcopacie we agree in our Tenets of
Episcopacie with all the reformed abroad.
to differ from all other reformed Churches, yet it will appear to those who
go not beyond the very passages, your self does bring in this matter, that
betwixt us and any reformed Church there is no discrepance at all. For that
Episcopacie which ye maintain, beside the manifold unhappy accidents that use
to hang both upon the persons and office which your self will scarce defend,
has into it essentially, the power of ordination and all Ecclesiastic
j^risdiction annexed, and that by a divine right to the person of one man in a
whole diocese: that ever any reformed divine, except some few, and that but
lately in England, did approve let be commend such an office, it is so false as
any thing can be: That kind of episcopacie, whereof the divines ye allege
speak off, is so far from the present English and late Scottish one, as light
is from darkness, as reformed doctrine from gross Popery, contrary both to
the word of God, and all sound antiquity. Beside, even that kind of
Episcopacie which they seem not much to oppose, is such an office as they make
to be no way necessary in any Church but removeable out of all, to which they
thought never meet to give any footing in their own churches, but at the
beginning did cast it out, and to this day have carefully holden it at the
door; This, ye cannot be ignorant, is the known practice let be the doctrine of
all the reformed churches over Sea, and of all their divines without the
exception of one man. Do ye think that any of them will be offended with us
for following their own example for casting out that which they have rej^cted
before us upon less occasions; For it is certain that Episcopacie is no way so
opposite to the discipline of any reformed church, as to that discipline which
many Assemblies and Parliaments have settled in our land; it is certain that no
church over Sea, has ever been half so much grieved with that unhappie
office, as ours often times has been; we all know that from it alone has
flowed all the miseries schisms dangers wherewith our church since the
reformation has been vexed, none of us is ignorant that this ^ffice was the
only horse whereupon our later novations of Perth articles, high Commission,
Leiturgie, Canons came riding unto us; And now the world may see that it is
only Bishops that threaten this whole Isle with the danger of the most cruel
war it saw these 500 years. That any reasonable man will blame us for our
firm resolution to oppose their re-entrie among us for ever, we do not ^ear,
for beside that our whole land is al utterly impatient of their but the^, our
last two general Assemblies, and articles of our late P^rliament, with our
Princes approbatio^, have ordained their office to be abjured by our whole
nation with solemn oa^h and subscriptio^. As for our neighbor churches in
Eng^a^d and Ire^a^d, though hitherto we have been m^st sparing to meddle with
any thing which concerns them, yet now since ye put us so hardly to it we
cannot dissemble any longer our hearty wishes, that since the bishops there,
beside the manifold evils, that is in the ^ffice, which they do use and
defend, and the needlesnes of i^; since I say, their bishops have been the
first fountain of all our churches trouble, since they are the prime
instruments, which now infect this Isle with Arminianisme and popery; since they
have raised, and yet do further, so hot a persecution against our whole nat^o^
in I^land, as no reformed church to this day has ever bee^ acquainted with;
since after our full agreement with our gracious king, and neighbor nation of
Eng and they without any cause, that yet we know or can hear tell of, have been
the bellows to kindle the wrath of our king against us, to stir up a most
blodie war for the undoing (if God prevent it not) first of the most
flourishing churches in these dominions, and the^ of the whole reformed
el^where; we profess it our wish to God, that the king and his present
parliament might seriously consider, if it were not for the good of the crown
for the welfare of their nation, for the peace of their church, that England
after the example of all the reformed should rid themselves at least of their
bishops trouble, as they did of old, without any repentance to this day, of
their Abbots and Monks: This we conceive would much increase the joy and
prosperity of all the three Dominions.

FINIS.

