THE DISCOVERY of A NEW WORLD or A Description of the South Indies. Hitherto
unknown By an English Mercury

Imprinted for Ed: Blount and W. Barrett.

TO THE TRVE mirror of truest honor, WILLIAM Earl of Penbroke.
IF IT BE an offense (my noble LORD) to show our Affections unto those we
honor in any object of dutyfullnesse whatsoever: then have I offended, and must
kneel for remission. But if love and gratitude be law dable effects, in what
form soever they appear, then have not I broken any condition of decorum, in
consecrating this work to your illustrious honor. It bare the badge of an
honorable Patron in the original: and I could make it do no less in the
translation. And for mine election, the worlds general decay of the esteem of
learning, in those breasts that have best means to support it, and the
farre-spread fame of your glory, by that Phoenix-bounty that has left all the
land to build her nest in your bosom, these motives have more then induced me
to approache so near that bright luster your Honor lights the world with, as
to bear one part in the Hymns of your praises, by this dutiful dedication*
And (good my Lord) herein be* you my seauen-sold shield against the shout of
all those blistered mouths, whose most felicity is to mis-interprete most
maliciously: Or do but give me foote-holde, and then let me alone to beat
all their disgraces about their own ears, and the whole worlds, in a true
Satyrick fury; in an Ariostoes Swanne, that shall snatch their names from
times all-wasting skirt, and bear them up, to euer-lasting record in the
Temple of Infamy. But for my duty to your sacred virtues, let this express
me: I will be that Bolognian dog, whose faith purchased him this Epi^aph:
that he did always Latrai a ladri, and a gli amanti tacqui, etc.
Bark loud at thieves, and make them ever fail:
But when friends came, lay down, and wagd his tail.
Such am I: consecrated to your Lordships service: and under the protection of
this mine own zeal, adventure to present you with A discovery and no
discovery, of a world and no world, both known and unknown, by a traveler
that never traveled. Written first in Latin, and no Latin, and now
translated, and yet not translated, by the same man, yet not the same man that
first of all pend it.

Your Honors most zealously devoted: I. H.

To the Readers, Instructions for their voyage into this new world.
THere are diverse inquisitiue Sceptiques (impartial reader, for such I would
have thee to be,) who since this new Discovery of the South Indies, upon some
ouer-sight of mine own, in not giving sufficient intimation of the grounds
whence I had the first light of the said Discovery, as also of the manner
wherein I have proceeded upon the said grounds have out-runne their own
judgments in descanting far otherwise of this work, then a favorable
censure would ever have held it to deserve, and being either lead with too much
zeal to the well deserving virtues of that Reverend man that long ago laid
the first project of this Discovery, or with (it may be a true) observation of
some imperfection in me that now of late have raised this new building upon
that old foundation: have taken occasion both to think him less worthy of
their good conceits, and also to proclaim me a just deseruer of the seuerest
and most exemplary censures. Which wrong done unto him (whom I must ever
reverence) has bound me to make an ingenuous acknowledgement of mine own
forgetfulness in the first edition of this present work, rather then to sit
still and see his reputation exposed to the misconstructions to which my
negligence is (and in some judgments, justly) imagined to have given the first
and original cause. But let this protestation be (if it may be) sufficient to
remove the weight of siniste imputations from his gravity, and lay them upon
mine own youthfulness, that I dare engage my life, there is no man in the
whole world, who has either conuersed with himself in person, or his works
in print, that ever will surmise this present copy to have had any testimony of
his acknowledgement, or approbation to be any way befitting his place, or
(which is more) his profession. Wherefore to give a full answer unto that
gross misprision of theirs, who imagine the work it self to have been of
his writing and publishing in the form wherein it now passes; whereby they
take occasion to tax him of diverse (in their judgment) immodest, light,
scurrilous, and ridiculous passages therein. I do here absolutely auerre, and
give notice to all that shall hereafter take view hereof, This work was never
his, he never saw it, never dreamed of any such matter, until he met it in
the hand of another man. There was indeed a little book some 8. or 9. years
ago that came from Franckford, which some few (I know not upon what
illumination more then ordinary) affirmed to have passed the file of his muse,
which if it be true, it can be no way in the world either prejudicial to his
learning, (seeing it has all perfection fitting an absolute poem) nor to his
gravity or profession, seeing it was a birth of his youth; wherein
nevertheless I will a vow that he has towred above the capacities (at least
above the imitation) of all those ouer-weening judgments that dare any way
presume to traduce his original. In just defense of which worthy work, I cast
defiance in the teeth of all that malice or traduce him, that it is neither any
way scurrilous, immodest, light, nor ridiculous: and I will give the proudest
Critique that lives, as many years as he and his fellows have bin fools,
either to parallel it, or to pick any the least touch out of it, which cannot
be defended even till his wits that shall oppose, be drawn as dry as ever
Dutchman left cup.

But as touching this present pile of English, it is mine, it has no further
allia^ce to his, then chalk has to cheese, for as these have no cohaerence in
their nearest proprieties (which translations should never want) but only in
their general kind of essence as they are both corporeal substances; no more
does this work any way resemble his in fashion, style, or discourse, but only
in the invention and project. As for the passages in it, which some pretend to
be scurrilous or immodest, there may perhaps be some indeed that carry not
that pondrous respect in them which an ancient judgment, or retired gravity
may seem to require: I grant it, what would ye have more? they are flashes of
youth: semel insaniuimus omnes; And I pray ye (that censure me so ruthlesly)
which of you all is there, but one time or other in the forenoone of your
days, has had his vagaries in the world, and has flowne out sometimes as
well as I? Oh but, not inprint, says some seuerer Critique! Alas yet had Ovid
his Amores, Seneca his Lusus in Claudium, and others as grave as he, their
exorbitances now and then as vnguirt as others! But that these weaknesses (for
so I confess they are) in me, should be made as stains to the reputation of
another, of one whose learning, life, and works now extant may serve as
purging fires whereat all those that hence have taken occasion to wrong him
thus, might long ago have lighted their ignorance were it never so immense;
that my lightnesses should be reputed as births of his worthiness! Oh that my
pen (whereby since I have ignorantly injured him, I do thus willingly and
freely clear him) could but make them see what an unjust construction they
have made of an ignorant (and I protest utterly unwilling) offense! But since
mine own unwariness gave first occasion of those unkind, and more then
foolish callumniations which ignorance draws from mine error, to stain his
goodness with; all the satisfaction I can give him, is to show my self
willing to make a fair way again for his deserts, in the bosoms of such as
hence take their occasion of dislike, by proclaiming this truth to all that
shall read it, that this present Discovery of the South-Indies is none of his,
but had this form given it, without his knowledge, by one who will ever
acknowledge his worth and gravity to have been utterly ignorant of any unfit
phrase whatsoever included in the whole book. He whom my contrition, and this
satisfaction (COLLATERALLY) cannot content, is without mercy, and I assure my
self will dye without merit, if he be not quickly shipped away for this new
Continent, with letters of commendation to all our friends in Cockscombaya.

As for you (gentlemen and frinds) whose judgments have given gracious
acceptance to this our Imaginary world, I will ever endeavor to further your
contentments with the best inventions that the labors of a young scholar can
produce. You, (right Iouiall spirits) and none but you, are they to whom I
consecrate these my travels, since none but you can discern the sense which
they include. Only in one thing I must entreat your favorable Censures, and
that is, in my allusions here and there unto the names of some cities of fame
and respect, both of our own, and others: assuring you (as your true
examination of the particulars may assure you better) that I had no intent to
intimate any collation or reference of the state or manners of those I describe,
unto theirs to which I allude. Let this protestation therefore clear me from
sinister imputations, and you from all untrue suppositions.

And know all you that have not yet seen these Lands, but intend to take a
view of the^ hereafter, that you must first of al take one of that French
Doctors pills, Despouillez vous de tout affection, and this will enable you
fully to endure the alteration of all airs in this clime. Secondly you must
never travel single, but two, or three in a company, for one you know may
apprehend more then another can, and those before, that have miscarried in this
voyage, as you have heard, incurred their misfortunes only by neglecting this
direction, and by too much conuersing with those of the Foolianders nation.
Thirdly, you must go over the country thrice, ere you shall be able to make any
exact platform of it: Once for Strabo, once for Socrates, and once for Merlin
Cocaius; The first for the Geography, the second for the Morality, and the
third for the Language, and Etymology. No more at this time, but aboard when
you please and a good gale of wit go along with you.

His, that is his. JOHN HEALEY.

A Table of the chapters.
The first Book.
THE discovery of the land of Tenter-belly part of the South Indies bordering
upon Tierra del fuego, and the situation thereof. liber 1. chapter 1. Eat-allia
and Drink-allia. chap. 2. Dressem-bourg the first Canton of Eat-allia. cap. 3.
Banquetois the second Canton of Eat-allia. cap. 4. Pewter-platteria the third
Canton of Eat-allia. cap. 5 The metropolitaine City of Eat-allia and the
peoples conditions. cap. 6. The wars of the Eat-allians. cap. 7. Of
Idle-bergh an Imperial free town. cap. 8. The laws of the land. cap. 9.
Their religion. cap. 10. The election of the great Duke. cap. 11. Of
Starue-ling Island, or Hungerland. cap. 12.
Drinke-allia the second Province of Tenter-belly and the conditions of the
Inhabitants. Chap. 1. THE shires of their country. cap. 2. The description of
Carousi-kanikin the chief city of Drink-allia, as also of the fashions and
conditions of the Drink-alls. cap. 3. Of the Knights of the goulden Tun, and
of the laws of the City. cap. 4. The arts, and millitary discipline of the
Drink-alls. cap. 5. The funerals of one of the chief Quagmyrists, and the
sacrifices of Bacchus. cap. 6. Of Hot-watria or Lycor-Ardent, and of the
Pilgrimage to Saint Borachio. cap. 7. And last of the first book.
The second Book.
THE description of Shee-landt, or Womandecoia and of the situtation thereof.
cap. 1. How the Gossipingo-esses used the author of this descouery. cap. 2.
Their forms of government, and elections of persons of State. cap. 3. The
original of the Shee-landresses. cap. 4. Of Gigglot-tangir. cap. 5. Of
Double-sex I Will, otherwise called Skrat or Hermophrcodite Island. cap. 6. Of
Srews-bourg. cap. 7. And last of the second book.
The third Book, or the descouery of Fooliana and the Situation and
populousness thereof. Chap. 1. THE parts of Fooliana and the peoples
conditions in general. cap. 2. Of Fooliana the fickle. cap. 3. Of the peoples
conditions and attires. sect. 1. Of the Duke and Inhabitants of Solitaria the
sad. sect. 2. 3. 4. Of Cholericoy the other Duchy of Fooliana the craggy.
cap. 5. Fooliana the fond. cap. 6. Of Ass-sex. sect. 2. Of the Cities of
Cocks-combria, and Asssex and of Blocks-foord the metropolitan sea. sect. 3.
Of the Bourgue-maisters of Blocks-foord. sect. 4. Of the Marquisate of
Spendal-ezza. sect. 5. and 6. Of Fooliana the fat. cap. 7. The quality and
condition of the people. sect. 2. The paradise of Fooliana the fat. sect. 3.
Of Fooliana the devout. cap. 8. Sectorioua the second Province of Fooliana the
devout. sect. 2. The State politic of Fooliana, in general. cap. 9. And last
of the third book.
The fourth Book, or the descouery of Thee-uingen and the description thereof.
Chap. 1. THE conditions of the Robbers-walders. cap. 2. The pirates, and
Sea-borderers of Robbers-walder. cap. 3. How the author got into this country
of the Harpies. cap. 4. Of Lyers-buy plains; The natures of the
Leger-demanians of Free-purlogne, and Bags-death. cap. 5. Of Lurtch-thrift a
Country in Legerdemaine. cap. 6. Of Still-moore. cap. 7. And last of the forth
book.
FINIS.
The occasion of this travel, and the pre-instruction for it.
MINE acquaintance with travelers of all sorts, is both well known to our
University men, and recorded by the courteous correspondence that have been
ever held between strangers and me: whether this of Homer moved me to this
humor, (...)
(...):
Or were it that mine unquenched thirst and desire of knowledge, together with
the applausiue carriage I found in these men, were the motives to these
effects, I know not. I was already fully acquainted with all the rarities of
mine own Nation: and falling into a discourse of the profit of travel with
two Aliens of my near acquaintance (Peter Beroaldus, a Frenchman, and Adrian
Cornelius Droge, a Dutchman) wherein we had many delightful passages about
comparisons of languages, conditions, and cities; at last, In troth (quoth
Beroaldus) I know not as yet what travel means, if he that leaves his native
soil to pass but into a neighbor country, or over a neighbor river (admit
it be the Rhine, or the Tweed) deserve this name (as vulgar opinion seems to
allow) whereas he never changes either sky, air, or soil: I see not (if
this be true) any profit or worth in the world, contained in travel. My
parents and friends at Montauban, have written very often for my return, as
though I were far from them: whereas I (believe me) have imagined my self
all this whole two years at home: for how little a way is it from Mount-auban
to Paris, from Paris to Callis, from Callis to Dover? Truly when I think of
the land, it seems about an elle: in the Map a finger-breadth: in the form
of the heavens, just nothing. Nor see I any reason why that France should he
held my native soil more then all Europe: for if you stand upon diversity of
language, how many languages (I pray ye) have ye in Europe quite different
from the French? If the conditions of the nations move ye, view not Europe,
but view the whole world, and every Province thereof, leaning to the qualities
of those that adioyne upon it, as the Polipus turns into the color of every
stone she comes near! O Beroaldus (quoth I again) but we do envy at the
license you have to contemn travel: we (wretches) that like Tortoyses, are
bound to our own houses, whilst you have taken survey of all the worlds
singularities, and now that you are filled with their knowledge, you set them
at naught thus. Might I but view the Snowie Alps, or the shady Pyrenes, oh how
much should I think my self beholding to mine eyes at my resting time, when
all that I had seen should turn to my benefit, and store mine understanding
with a fresh fraught of knowledge! Ah how much (quoth Beroaldus) does absence
promise him that would be present, and how vain are the hopes that attend on
ignorance! friend, when I was at home, unexperienced, I thought as you do; but
trial has now taught me to see mine own simplicity. A travel of so small
toil yields easy satisfaction: and in this, your expectation shall exceed
your experience in all those novelties. Foreign parts are so like ours, that
you cannot think them strange to ye, though you never saw them before. And
what is there in all the known world, which mapps, and authors cannot instruct
a man in, as perfectly as his own eyes? your England is described by Cambden:
what understanding man is there, that cannot, out of him, make as perfect a
description of any city, river, monument, or wonder in all your I Will, as well
as if he had viewed it in person himself? What part of Europe is there that
affoords more to a strangers eye then is related by one penman or other? The
several conditions of the people are all described already: as far as either
pen or experience can set down: but neither can give any universal knowledge.
The French are commonly called rash, the Spaniard proud, the Dutch drunken; the
English the busi-bands; the Italians effeminate; the Swethen timoroas, the
Bohemians inhumaine; the Irish barbarous and superstitious: but is any man so
sottish, as to think that France has no staid man at all in it; Spain, no
meacock; or Germany none that lives soberly? They are fools (believe it) that
will tie men's manners so firm unto the stars, that they will leave nothing
to a man's own power, nothing to the parents natures, nothing to nurture and
education. View this Pernassus here, whereon we live: Suppose here were a
College of Italians, Spanish, French, Danes, Dutch and Polacques? do you
think to find more variety of dispositions in this company of Students, then
you may do amongst your own English?

Turn ye therefore which way ye will, I cannot see how this half a foot
travel can benefit us any way, excepting that we may reap some annimation
to learning by the sight of such great Scholars, as Whitaker, Raynolds,
Bellarmine, Beza, Iunius, Lipsius, and such like as those were. Indeed I
hold, that your Drake and your Candish were travelers, as also Sebastian
Delcano, the Portughesse, because their voyages put girdles about the whole
world: Nay I will allow Chrystopher Colono that name also, for his discovery
of the West Indies, Francesco Piccaro, and Almagro for Peru, Hernando Magellano
for the Moluccaes, and Sir Hugh Willoughbye for his Northren discoueries:
together with all such as either have first found out unknown regions, or have
brought them to order. And truly (I will tell you two plain) my mind does
prompt me with some noble enterprise of this kind, such as the world might
gaze at, and all posterity record with admiration. With that he blushed, and
held his peace, as if he had blabd some bold secret. Yea Beroaldus (quoth
Drogius to him) and dare you not speak it out? do you imagine to torture our
minds with setting them on work upon doubtful inquiries, or is your modest
secret (hitherto so closely suppressed) afraid to adventure upon so many ears
at once? Nay speak what ere it be, we have clear brows (look you) open
ears, and faithful hearts: nor can your unknown enterprise come to light
either with more security, or fitter occasion. Well Drogius well, (quoth
Beroaldus) you take my silence in no good sense, but mix it with your
conjectures, that though great matters never go but (like as Princes do with
their numerous trains) with a great preamble of ambiguous terms; yet that I
should not do so, but vent a pondrous conceit, a birth that my brain has
trauelld a year with, all naked, without any praemonitions. In truth I
resolved at the first to let you know it: marry not without some graduall
proceedings, and material preparations, without which, I know well how fond
the vvisest project does commonly seem: but now I see my self chayned to a
headlong discovery mauger my beard, unless I should give you just cause to
call my love to you both, in question. Wherefore you shall know it: sooner (I
assure you) then I did intend, but with no less willingness: Only imagine
you, that you have already heard mine intended premonition.

It has ever offended me to look upon the Geographicall mapps, and find
this: Terra Australis, nondum Cognita. The unknown Southern Continent. What
good spirit but would grieve at this? If they know it for a Continent, and for
a Southern Continent, why then do they call it unknow? But if it be
unknown; why do all the Geographers describe it after one form and site?
Idle men that they are, that can say, this it is, and yet we know it not: How
long shall we continue to be ignorant in that which we profess to have
knowledeg of? Certe si nemo vnquam
-- vv -- Fragilem truci
Commisisset Pelago ratem


If none had ever beeen So bold as to expose the slender bark unto the Oceans
teene

Then we might have had some excuse for our obstinate (we may even as well
confess it) and notorius idleness: But seeing all is opened now; seeing there
is not a ship-boy but knows all the vvindes, creekes, shelfes and harbors of
the whole world; sly upon this sloth of ours, this more then female fear,
this vain carelessness, that vvittingly and willingly robbes us of another
world. What color have we for it? what fear we? shadows, or our selves?
there is heaven, there is earth in that continent, and there is men, perhaps
more civil then we are. Who ever expected such wit, such government in China?
such arts, such practice of all cunning? we thought learning had dwelt in our
corner of the world: they laugh at us for it and well may* auouching that they
of all the earth, are twoey'd men, the Europians the one eyd, and all the world
else, stark blind. But admit there be no men in this climate: it is a shame
for a wise man either to fear or complain of solitariness.

These thoughts have fired my breast full often: and whilst others neglect
them, have kindled a bold attempt in me, beyond the rest. I see the land lie
unknown; no man dreams of it; I will assay to discover it. Your enterprise
Beroaldus (quoth I) is great, and almost more then mortal power can execute.
Howeuer it succeed, I applaude your generous spirit, as like your own: but as
you said, great matters, as they require many praemonitions, so do they more
premeditations. Have you therefore cast your full account of the dangers,
labors, hopes, expenses, and all other such accidents as must attend this your
attempt? There is heaven you say: there may be so, and yet you be kept from
the sight of it by perpetual darkness.

There is earth; but you may be driven out of that by beasts and serpents:
There are men: but perhaps you had rather want their company, when you know
them, then have it. If one of you Patagonian Giants should catch your and eat
you quite up, where are you then my fine discouerer? It is good thinking of
those things, but it is dangerous trying. O sir (says Beroaldus again) you
know not that the Cape of good hope lies over against this land. We must hope,
and we must dare. Those bug-beares of dangers at fit to fright babies: but
they anymate bolder spirits. If we should stick at them, we should never
look out at our own doors. That was the cause America lay so long unknown,
and had done still (for ought I see) but that GOD sent a Dove from Heaven,
which plucking of an Olive branch from this Continent, taught us by that, that
there was yet more land, and less sea then we dreamed of: O how sacred shall
his name beheld with all posterity! His statue shall be advanced, for us al to
gaze upon, whilst earth keeps her foundation. It is as great a glory (think
I) to be called The new worlds discouerer, as her conqueror. And why may not
we have that success, and the like glory? I am the more excited to this, by
that ancient, and famous prophecy of Seneca, which remains unto us to fulfill.

Seneca in Mcdea.
-- Venient annis
Secula seris, quando Oceanus
Vnicula rerum laxet, and ingens
^ateat Tellus.
-- When certain years are spent Hereafter; shall the spumy Ocean show ^is
secret store, and open to mortals view -- A larger continent.

What can be spoken more plain, to point out this discovery? Here did Drogius
reply: What Man? beware how you raise so great a building on so weak a
foundation. Your Dove has fulfilled your Poets conjectures, all of them,
already. The sum of years is now run: America is that large continent.
Dream you of any other either age, or discovery? I know the generality of your
opinion (quoth Beroaldus) but I doubt of the truth, for Prophecies are always
de futuro: and what if I prove the country America to be known to former
ages? If I do, Senecaes words are no presage, but an intimation of a thing
done. Now I am fully persuaded that some part of these west Indies was that
Ophir, where Salomons and Hirams navy had their gold. For whereas there are
five several opinionists touching this, viz. 1. Rabanus, Maurus and Nicholaus
de Lyra, affirming that Ophir was in the East Indies. 2. Volateranus, and
Ortelius, auoutching it to be an Island in the Ethiopian Ocean, from an
apocryphal relation of one Lewis Venetus; 3. Gaspar Varerius, who affirmed all
that was contained in Pegu, Malaca, and Sumatra, to be whilom called by this
name. 4. Francis Vatablus whom Colonus also (as P. Martyr says) did follow:
who said that Hispaniola was Ophir. 5. William Postelius, Goropius Becanus, and
Arias Montanus, all which auoutch directly that Ophir was this continent in
which Peru lies. Of these the two last, and likeliest, make for us, I care not
which you take. The first two, Varerius has overthrown, horse and foot: to
ad more were too superfluous. Suffices only that I prove him erroneous, in
putting Pegu, Sumatra and Malaca for Ophir. And first, holy writ says plain,
that those two nauies were two years out, in each of their voiages to Ophir:
but ye space of 10. months, or 12. at the most, will serve to pass and return
from the red sea to Sumatra: how then can this proposition of time agree with
his opinion? what can Varerius say to this: that navigations was not exact then,
as the Portugalls have made it since, and therefore in such a vast room for
ignorance, the nauies might spend the more in a wrong course.

Well sir, but how came Solomon to the knowledge of this far distant land?
From God you say, I believe ye. So then, he that taught him that there was
such a land, and that there was gold in such a land, and advised him to send
thither, would not he (think you) show him the right way thither? Again, the
time of their being out is always set down but one: at the end of which they
evermore returned, neither staying longer, nor coming sooner: which proves the
distance of the place, and not the error of the sailers. Lastly, the very name
speaks for us as plain as may: (...) and (...) do but transpose one letter,
and they are all one. Let me therefore hold you for incredulous obstinates if
you confess not that America was known long before Senecaes time. You are
victor Beroaldus, quoth I, and may now lawfully triumph: But admit that it was
known to Solomon, and his nauigators; does it follow therefore that it was
discovered to the whole world besides, and such as had no commerce at all with
the Jews? or might not the memory of it be utterly extinct before the later
times of the Romans? Which if it were, your opinion and Senecaes presage are
both overthrown. Nay nay, quoth Beroaldus, I am not so easily disheartened
with shadows of reason. This sit doubt of yours, gives me the stronger
foote-hold. History is not silent in this discovery, but preserues the memory
of it even unto the last posterities of the Romans. For you know that from
Solomon to the building of Carthage was little less then 150. years. But the
Carthaginians (as Aristotle witnesses, nor can I believe that they did this in
their Cities infancy) after a tedious navigations did find an Island beyond
the Gades, (which can be none but this) situate in the Atlantike sea;
whereupon they made a law (which is a true sign that neither did they people
it, nor the rest of the world, as then, commonly knew it) that none should ever
sail thither again; fearing least the wealthy and pleasant soil should
allure the Citizens to leave Carthage and go dwell there. Now the Grecians
having this knowledge of it from Carthage, how should it be ever kept from
Rome? But sirs, kick against the truth as long as you list, or yield to it as
I do: I am most firmly persuaded that Senecaes large continent is yet
undiscovered, and stays to yield us this glory, if we dare venture on it. For
my self; I am coming (my world) after so many vows, and delays, now I come
at last, all freight with hope and confidence, either to unmask thee to
Europe, or to lay my bones in thee. And you (my friends and fellows) if there
be any true virtue, or love of glory in your breasts, go and share with me
in my fortunes in this great enterprise. Shame go with those frozen bosoms
that affect nothing but security and in glorious estate; that like no sepulcher
but of the nations earth where they first breathed. We shall thirst, we shall
be sick, we shall perish, O base hearing! unseemly for a Philosopher once to
think upon! And shaming the thoughts of travelers, of such as seek out a new
world, and scorn this old one. There wants nothing but a good will. If ye
be men take that will unto ye, arm your selves against weak opinatiuenesse,
and let us undertake that journey which may be perhaps, delightful, and cannot
but prove glorious unto us howsoever it may seem laborious. If not, lusk at
home with vigor without honor: I will find some that shall bear me company
in this famous enterprise, whose after renown you may perhaps envy too late.
Here he stopped his speech, and beheld us with an eye somewhat disturbed. His
pithy speech (whereof I cannot rehearse the tenth part) moved us much, and so
did our desires of nouelty and glory: briefly, we assented, and resolved all
to assay this great discovery, and embarked our selves in a ship called The
Fancy, taking our leaves of all our friends and acquaintance.

After three days we arrived on the Belgique shores, and at the weeks end in
Aquitane: but Drogius stayed behind at Delfe, and Beroaldus left me here and
departed unto Monutauban, against both their wills: exposing me to the
derision of all mine acquaintance, after their great expectation of this our
discovery unless I would proceed, and adventure upon all those unknown
perils alone. Yet this unexpected departure of theirs did not overcome my
resolution, but I would needs forwards, and having (after two years) passed
the Canaries, the coasts of Africa, and Monomotapa: At last I arrived at that
promontory of Tenter-belly, which is called Il Cabo Negro.

The discovery of the land of Tenter-belly, a part of the South Indies,
bordering upon Terra del fuego.
THE FIRST BOOK,
Of the situation thereof.
THe land of Tenter-belly is a region far extending both in longitude and
latitude, bounding on the North upon the Ethiopian Ocean, on the East upon For
Gluttony is the induction unto lechery.
Letcheritania and Shee-landt: on the South, upon A fat belly makes a lean
brain.
Fooliana the fat: and on the West upon Filtching-fennes. It lies in that
undiscovered Continent, where that huge and monstrous Bird called This birds
picture is to be seen in the largest maps of the world, with an Elephant in
his pounces. And for his insatiate greediness, is held to be the Regions
Genius.
RVC, snatcheth up (now and then) a whole Elephant at a stoop, and swappes him
up at a bit. This is not incredible, for what I auerre, most of our Geographers
in their modern discoueries do confirm.

Touching the soil, the fertility is most worthily admirable: the air most
delicately temperate: o how I have pitied, that so bad husbandmen should
possess so happy an habitation. In latitude it lies full sixty degrees, and
in longitude seventy four from Cabo de bona speranza, and is situate almost
directly opposite unto the Southern frontiers of Africa. Such Cosmographers
as write hereof, divide it generally into two Provinces, Eat-allia (called
otherwise in the natural idiome of the inhabitants Gluttonia) and Drink-allia,
or (in the same language) Quaffonia: the former, situate in the same longitude
and latitude (God save the sample) with our England and the later, with the two
Germanies. Both have one Prince, both one law: and a little reformation would
make them concur both in Prince, law, habit and manners.

Eat-allia, or Gluttonia. CHAP. 1.
EAt-allia, is in form triangulare, like the Greek letter Delta, which
bears this form: [D] It is And so are most of you Belly gods, the
inhabitants thereof.
as broad as long, and resembles the figure of the old Egypt; being full of
high sky towering hills, and yet so fertile, that the very Birds (that flock
thither from all places to feed) if they stay but one three months at the
mangery this soil affords them, are so ladened with the luggage of their own
fatned bodies, that they cannot possibly get wing so high as to ouer-toppe one
of the meaner mountains, but become sworn inhabitants of this fat country
all their lives after. Fat? why your Italian Ortolano, or Beccafico is but
carrion to them. No. they are rarely fed. This may seem a fiction, but he
that has seen the works of nature in Scotland, where the leaves that fall
from certain trees, lying but a while to rotte, become a goodly kind of foul
called Hector Boethius, Hollingshead, etc.
Barnacles, (which are a kind of wild-geese) or in Scythia, where (as an
honorable ambassador of ours has given an approved testimony) there are
certain creatures grow out of the earth in the shapes of The Dukes of Muscouie
have the skins of these creatures kept for their own uses: they grow in
Horda zauolh a plain in Scythia, and are called the skins of Samarchand. Of
this lamb you may read in Scaliger, Excercit. 59. cardan. Baro Heberstin. and
Libau. tract de agno vegetab.
Lambs, which being fast joined unto the stalk they grow upon, do
notwithstanding eat up all the grass about them: he (I say) that has
assurance of these rare effects, cannot but assent unto mine assertions as most
authentical. But (to leave digressions, and to return to our purpose) The
fishes of the Eat-allian shores (and fish they have in great abundance) are
naturally so ravenous and greedy, that (whether they partake of the nature of
the nation, or like Iunenal. Satyr. 4.
Nero's Turbut, presage their honorable Sepultures) you can no sooner cast out
your angle-hooke amongst them, but immediately, (like the souls in Lucian about
Charons boat, or Cole-miners about the Rope when the candles burning blew tells
the dampe comes) you shall have hundreds about the line, some hanging on the
hook, and some on the string besides it, such is their pleasure to go to the
pot, such their delight to march in pomp from the dresser. Besides, the land
has diverse good havens, but they serve for harbor to no ship but such as
comes fraught with good fare, and is laden with delicious viands. If any
parcel of their freight have taken Salt Water, or be otherwise offensive to
the judgment of the Whose name when I was there, was Sir Spacious Mouth.
master of the custom house, it comes not a shore by any means. The soil
bears no tree that bears no fruit: Ashes, Oaks, Willowes, and such
fruitless fill-roomes, such saw I none, for none were there to be seen. But
all the hedges (and so it is also in Drink-allia) were stuck thick with Hops:
and surely in my conceit, the Shropshire and Worcestershire.
western English and the Lumbards had this custom (at first) from the
Drink-alls.

This territory of old, was (unless their chronicles do mistake) under the
government of the Thriuingers (inhabitants of Only Fooliana lies betvveene
Tenter-belly and Thriuingois: for if men were not fools they would follovv
thrift and fly luxury.
Thriuingois (a nation lying a good way further into the maine land) for their
Annals report, how in the days of old Saturn, the Thriuonian Princes bare
sway over all this continent, and had their principal seat in that part now
called Eat-allia, and that because the men of those times lived most part upon
Garlic (called in Latin Allium) therefore was this region called Allia: but
foreign invasions ensuing, and those ancient worthies being hereby chased from
their places of sovereignty, the conditions of the people grew to a great
alteration, and to proportionate the name of the country to the natures of the
inhabitants, they added Eat unto the ancient name, Allia, and so from that
change, it bears the name of Eat-allia unto this present.

Dressembourg, the first Canton of Eat-allia. CHAP. 3.
DRessembourg, For meat must first be dressed and then eat.
is the first part of this great land of Eat-allia, and fittest for us to begin
with in our intended discovery. This Canton (were it not for a greater instinct
of natural inclination) is in too hot a climate for any true Eatall to
inhabit: for the uttermost corner of it, (which some Geographers name the South
cape,) lies under the same latitude with the most Southern point of Castile,
and is about two and forty degrees distant from the Aequinoctiall. The
inhabitants be of a swartie tawnie, and most of them have their skins all
riuelled and withred, and for their conditions, they affect deliciousness
rather then excess. Upon the foresaid point of this Canton which we named the
Swarty cape, (as the whole country is wondrously ouer-clowded with smoke,
partly because the soil is very Fennish, and partly because of the neerenesse
of Terra del fuego, the land of Fire, which lies as all the discouerers
thereof do with one voice affirm, immediately upon the right hand thereof)
stands the city Kitchen, the buildings of which town are generally very
lofty, and yet as generally smoakie and evil sented: I imagine that Cochin in
the East Indies, was a colony sent at first from this city. In the midst of
this city stands a goodly temple, dedicated to Of him here-after. chap. 11.
God All-Panch, a vaste and spacious building, wherein there are a thousand
altars, burning with continual Incence (excepting from Shrouetide unto
Easter-euen) unto the foresaid Deity. In the midst of this temple is a tower
erected, of incredible altitude, no work made with man's hand ever came near
it, the Pyramides of Memphis are but mole-hils to it: the inhabitants called it
Chymney-turret, and from the height thereof the whole region round about it
have the usual signal of warte given them; for whereas we use to give notice
of such ensuing dangers by fyring a tarre-barrell on the top of a beacon,
they on the contrary side have their information from the ceasing of the
smoke, for when-so-euer that eternal fume cease to ascend in caliginous
clouds, it is a sure warning that the foe approaches: and this invasion is
most commonly attempted by the inhabitants of the Starueling Isles, (otherwise
called Hunger-landers,) for these are the most formidable enemies that the
Eat-alls have, or can be annoied by.

Near unto the said City Kitchen, are certain villages that are all within
the liberties thereof: and first, there is Cole-house, a large town truly,
and all consisting (a strange form of building) of caves under the ground:
then is there Ashe-ton, and that stands upon the top of Cole-house, on a most
droughty and barren soil. Tonges-worth, another little village and this
Ashe-ton, are both in one parish, and so is Fyer-pan and Otherwise called
vvarming-pan.
Ayre-bumme, two goodly sweet farms: On the left hand you have three others,
Three villages where spits, kettles and spounes were first invented.
Spit-stead, Kettle-drop, and Spoones-by, all pretty towns, and marvelous
well peopled. Kettle-drop has a fair river passes through it, called In
English Moisture.
Ture-mois, which (they say) boyleth every 24. hours, not much unlike the
fountain of the In Darbyshire.
Peake, in England.

Banquet-ois, the second Canton of Eat-allia. CHAP. 4.
PAssing out of Dressembourg, the next Canton ye enter is the very garden of
all Eat-allia, it is called Banquetois, and is as it were a continual forest
of nothing but Dates, Almonds, Figs, Olives, Pomegranates, Cytrons, and
Nutmegs: and the river of Oylebrooke has his course through the heart of all
this goodly territory. The City of March-paine is the chief town of note in
this Canton, being built after a stately manner with turrets, and obeliskes
all guilt over, but indeed it is but of a slender kind of fortification, and
lies very open to the enemies cannon, a little above this City are certain
mines, called the Sugar-hills, whence they dig a certain oar in color
whitish, in touch hard, and in taste sweet, a substance Galen knew it not.
unknown of old, and since having bin counterfetted by art, and drawn by
Alchymy Plin. lib. 12 chap. 8.
out of the Arabian and Indian Reeds. This City has very few inhabitants of
any years that have any teeth left: but all, from 18. to the grave are the
natural heirs of stinking breaths. Next unto this, lies another little
corporation called Drugges-burge, and here they have a law, that none must be
made free of the City but Apothecaries, Grocers and Boxe-makers. The
Shee-landresses use much traffic unto this place, but more unto
Letcheri-tania, where they use to make exchange by bartering christaline
glasses, for unguents and Pomanders. Now for these Drugges-burgers, the very
heavens seem to conspire with the places fitnes, to increase their trading:
for at certain times of the year, you shall have the whole country covered
quite over with Aromaticall trochisches, comfits and confections, that fall
from the air in as great abundance That is always in the Greek Calends.
never but then.
(at those times when they do fall) as ever fell shower of Hail: Now I hold this
to be nothing really, but that same hony-dew which we shall find now and then
upon the leaves of the Oak in a kindly spring: the only difference is in the
solidity, for where as ours falls in small dewy drops, theirs is congealed
by the cold of the airs middle region, and so falls in round balls, that
rebound in their fall through this their accide^tall induration.

Pewter-platteria, the third Canton of Eat-allia. CHAP. 5.
AS we passed under the 55. degree beyond the line, we entered into a spacious
plain, the inhabitants named it Pewter-platteria, and we for breuity sake,
entered it in our map under the name of Platters-plaine: it lies in the very
heart of Eat-allia, and the first City that we met within this tract was Built
in the same fashion that Cambalu is, if you were ever there.
Victullu, through the midst of which there passes a river called From this
river only the Eat-alls have all their water wherewith they do dress their
meat.
Sauce, whose water is somewhat tart in the taste. In the market place of this
town we beheld a tomb, which as far as I could guess by the weather-worne
inscription, contained the bones of the Roman Apicius. Volaterr.
It was no rare piece of work but it was of a most ancient model, Autropol. l.
13.
and the tombestone was cut in form of a Sea-crab. And surely (let Seneca say
what he please) it might very well be that this famous Gurmo^d having bestowed
a great deal of lost labor in seeking bigger Crabbes on the African shores
then the French afforded, turned his course unto this country, (or else was
forced hither by tempest) and so here laid his bones, upon some deadly surfeit.
Let the College of Critiques be judge.

I do here purposely omit the fruitful plains of Goblet the great, and
Fat-land Forest: together with the goodly city Like unto Cartaegena in
Spain, but far better seated.
Sausagiena: oh there is a town rarely seated, only it stands a little too
near the salt water: I over pass that stinking Two ports where our Hollanders
have much traffic.
Cheese-mongeria also, and Two ports where our Hollanders have much traffic.
Butterkin the fennie, the last town of all Eat-allia, and situate upon the
very borders of Quaffonia, these I pass over slightly, only because I would
feign be at the metropolitan City of the whole region, for that very place
alone, in structure of houses, manners of inhabitants, and formality of
discipline, is worth all the rest to one that wayeth it well.

The Metropolitan City of Eat-allia: The peoples conditions. CHAP. 6.
HEreabouts are but few villages, no more then in other places of the land, so
that one may easily discern that the And reason good the land is called
Eat-allia.
Cities have eaten up all the boroughs. Neither are their Cities so abundant
in number as they are in riches and inhabitants, but of them all, the prime
and mother City is that famous Flesh-pasty-nople.

Their old records do report, that in former ages there were two rich and
potent Cities, Fleshton, and Py-nople, between whom (as is usual amongst
great men, and great places, in so much that the Cambridge and Oxford.
two best universities of the world, both of them my mothers, and one of them
my nurse also, and both sisters, yet can scarely for-beare this froward
contention) there was long and vehement altercation about the soueraignity.

Py-nople stood upon hie antiquity: and assuredly in old Saturnes time, the
world afforded not her parallel. But Flesh-ton counterpoised the others
continuance, with her own glory, pleasant situation and powerfulness: well,
a Parliament was called, and finally, the whole house with one consent gave the
supremacy unto Flesh-ton. Such is the vileness of this deprived age, that
though it be gray headed with decay, yet will it prefer proud and unripe (or
rather to soon ripe nouelty) an hundred degrees before pure simple antiquity.
This was Py-nople the plain: but Oyster pynople, and Potato-py-nople are
Cities in Letcheritania, that flourish until this day: being both founded by
Hercules, upon his copulation with 50. women upon one night. Georg Cap.
current. de punct. Aretinens. lib. 27.
Py-nople being thus disgraced, decayed to nothing, it is at this day almost
impossible to know where it stood that was whilome a goodly City never had
Spencer in his ruins of time.
Poets, Saint Albones iuster cause to accuse the malice of man and of time,
then this poor ruined pile has to condemn it. Now grew Fleshton into more
and more luster, and both to add a magnificence to the name, as also to past
the foil of Py-nople upon the forehead of all posterity, it left the last
syllable of the old name, and assumed the two last of Py-nople for it, joining
them, together with the cement whereof the ancient walls were made (called in
their language, Payste) and so was thence-forth called Flesh-pasti-nople.
Touching the form of it, it is rather vast in compass then comely in
buildings: and has a ditch (or rather a riueret) of spring water running
almost through every street, in which water, you shall see a thousand several
impayled Fish Ponds, wherein also they keep Swannes; Duckes, Diue-dappers,
Herons, Teales, and all water fowls whatsoever, (as they do now at Auspurg,
upon instruction from hence) and this current is called If a pasty have no
grauy in it, it is not worth a doite^*
Grauy-ditch. It is double walled about, with the bones that remained of their
carniuall reuellings, and these bones were most artificially disposed each in
his due place, the great bones standing underneath as pillars to the whole
work; the mid-most were next in order above them, and the smallest were ranked
in the highest place, and all very well fastened together with mortar made of
the whites of eggs; in good sadness most artificially, and with full
judgment. Their houses with-in, were neither too stately nor too lofty, they
needed no Strabo. Geog. lib. 5*
Augustus to forbid the building above 70. foot high, nor any Satyra. 3.
Iuuenal, or Contro. lib. 3.
Seneca to complain of their stories upon stories. No (faith) they kept a very
good course for that.

They love no ascents by stairs up to their doors, for two causes; partly
because it is toilesome to climb up them when their bellies are bum-basted,
and partly because it is dangerous to come down them when their brains are
thoroughly moistened, (as they must be most commonly upon a great forfeiture):
Instead of lead, tile, and states, their houses are all rooft with beasts
shoulder-bones, very cunningly knit together I assure yea: Their City
consists not of any save such as have one dependence or other upon the good
fellows rack and manager. The husbandmen, Carpenters Millers and Butchers have
each their habitations assigned the^ in the suburbs: who notwithstanding if
they can bring their bellies unto a certain set size, are presently carried to
Gurmonds hall, and there made free of the Wide-throates, or Large-weasands: but
no stranger can have his freedom at first, unless he be either a Cook, a
Baker, or an Inkeeper: the city is governed by a set number of gratie
Senators, peculiarly enstiled Alder-guts, who are not elected (as our European
Burgomaisters are) for their wisdom, their wealth, or their horse-taile
beards, but by the circumference of their natural tankards (their pau^ches)
which at a sollemn set feast are every year measured once: and the more that
each man's rotundity of corpulence is found to be enlarged; unto the higher
place is he presently (...): so that I have seen some come sneaking out of
the fagge end of the suburbs, who had held their A diminutiue of shops you
shall find the word in Antony Mundaies discourse of ^he ref^rmation of Redfaces.
Shappikino^e in the verges of the Cities Bodex; food knows how many winters,
iustle notwithstanding at length, into and honorable place in the City, and at
lasticome to be a principal Sire of this famous Commonweal. But now (...) all
hear or (...) her sickness, (as it often falls out) or age, do chance to
make these Alder-guts cast their Colloppes afterward, they are immediate put
off the Bench and loose both grease, and grace (...) one clap: this is hard now
but it (...) as hard as it is I can (...) that. The (...) (which) admired in a
City otherwise so regardlesse of curiosity) are al paued with fair large
marble stones: because (as I imagine) othewise the inequality of pebbles lay
the^ never so even, would have bin a troble to the Gourmonds and other citizens
in making them lift their feet too high, whereas (...) they are both eased of
that encombranced, and their Coaches have less occasion to shake their
distended Guts: for they never go abroad on foot, nor on hors-back, nor in
Litters, but are carried about the streets in great foure-wheeled Coatches,
that they may have the quieter means to sit and spaule when they are carried
home from Wheeleing-in. The Geometrical proportion of the city is Circular,
and has four gates at which there do sit daily (course by course) 4
Alderguts selected, and properly instiled of that office Superuisors of the
Paunshery: and these are (like the Guales guard in a town of garrison) to
examine al Ingredients, and Egredients: the fatter, to see that they go not out
fasting (which their long and grave experience in the extension and contraction
of gutts makes them able most exactly to discover, and where they find the
person defective, his Mulct is to eat two suppers) and the first, to see that
they come not in emptie-handed: for not to go out fulbellied and not to come in
ful-handed, is an heinous contempt of the cities right health-ful government.
Every month, they are bound by their law, (and would be so were there no such
law) to celebrate a sollemne feast, where every Aldergut of the whole society
must prefent himself, all excuses and delays set apart what soever, to consult
(after dinner, for before it is unlawful for any one to give his voice) about
the public good. The place where they meet is Gourmonds hall: Every one
knows his seat, and has his Iourdan or chamber pot standing by him in a
little coffer made for the purpose. Well being met, and having turned their wine
into water, and their oysters into shells, every one takes his chair and to
dinner they go. Their daintiest dishes, are evermore the first sacrifices unto
their stomakes, for they hold it fit that the best meat meets fittest with
the best appetite. Now they may not in any case have their Boares, Sheep,
Goats, lambs etc. served up in parcels and joints, as we of Europe use, but
they must have all whole (the old Romans taught them that) you shall see the
waiters come sweating with an whole Hog, or an whole Calfe upon a great
pewter Engine, you would bless ye to behold it. He that rises before six
hours be fully ruin, runs his head under a rigorous fine and all this while
they eat and drink by little and little only (for that cause that made In
Ethic. his name was Philoxenus.
Aristotle's Parasite with himself the neck of a crane) to take the more
delight in the delicacies. But for the breaking up of the feast, they have this
order. They have a door in their hall, large enough (...) the greatest
Gut-monger that lives, and take him fasting. At this door, the Alder-guts enter
when they come to the feast, which being ended, he that offers to pass the
same way he came, and cannot get his belly through, is let forth another way:
but he that passes as easily as he came in, is staid by an officer appointed
for that purpose, called The Serieant of the Mawe, and brought back again
(will he nill he) where he must settle him to a renewed Rouse, until his
belly be able to kiss both the cheeks of the door at once, and then he is
dismissed. (I cannot be fully persuaded but the creeping through Which was
whilom to be seen in Beuer castle.
Saint Wilfrids needle was a devise brought by some ancient Pilgrim from this
more ancient Alder-guts custom). The townsmen of this place have the hugest
gardens of the world, but they are all out of order, nothing like the gardens
of Adonis, Alcinous, no nor Where Lipsius pretends that Langius and he had
that discourse De Constantia.
Langius-his neither, no sir, come not thither to look for your arbours, your
alleies, or your conceited flowery knots, mary if you look for your radish,
your garlike, your cabbidge, your muske-melon, or so, they are for you: Italy
her self had most of her more delicate roots from hence: an hundred
Carthusians might have a Christmas dinner from hence at an hours warning.

Martial Epig. lib. 3. chap. 47.
The goodly Colewort there you soon should find,
The Lettuce, and the Onions double kind:
And Beetes, for him that would be loose behind.
Nay mark but whether these men have a care of the Cities credit. They have
a common hospital (and that, I may tell you, a large one) wherein al such as
have got the dropsy, the gout, the cough of the lungs, or any such malady by
too much gour-mandizing, are maintained of the public charge. But al such as
have lost their teeth by age, or by eating their broth too hot, are forth with
provided for very conveniently and sent away Isles in the Atlantike sea like our
Orades, where they that have the fewest teeth are held in highest respect, and
he that has none, is made a Clarissimo of Suppington, the chief city of the
whole teritorie.
into Spone-meat Islands: there are many belonging to this city that live in
form of slaves, and those are appointed to till the fields, and sow the
gardens. Every rich Gurmond keeps diverse of these laborers, who
notwithstanding when the guts are at sufficient growth, have their freedom
given them gratis. If any of the nobility chance to die of a surfeit (as there
does assuredly, more, then of any other death) his Statue is presently forged
of most select and delicate dishes, and so he is laid forth for his slaves and
His hang bits.
his p^ndentes per, to tire upon: nor is it lawful for them to be so idle as
to refuse immeditate execution of this honorable ordinance.

The, whole sort of al these citizens are generally of an unmeasurable
grosenesse (and seemed to me when I saw them walk just like so many tons,
moving each upon two pottle pots): nor is that man worthy of any (the meanest)
salvation in the world, that is not Like him whose Epitaph this was: Here lies
sir John of Redcrosse street: he was beard to the belly, and belly toth' fecie.
all cheeks to the belly, and all belly to the knees: and such shapes do the
women of this city walk in also: (The German Frowes do prittily well in
imitation of these Fusty-lugs, but the Barbarians come very near them). The
young women may not mary till such time as before a bench of Matrons, they make
a public demonstration to their husbands that shall be, that their dugges
and chinnes may meet without any forcing of either. They go for the most part
all naked, only their Alder-guts may wear gowns; mary those must be only
the skins of such beasts as they are able to devour alone at one sitting.
Yet there is no freeman of the town but wears a large knife, and a spoone as
big as a ladle bound to his right arm. Before; upon the breasts, each one
wears a poke of hayre-cloth to save the gobbets that chance to fall besides,
and to wipe their mouths with-all, but those they use so long in this greasy
employment, that whether their shining exceed their blackness, or their
blackness their shining he had need be well sighted that should judge. They
are naturally dull of wit, and slow of apprehension, and yet notwithstanding
most perfect in all the arts they respect. Their schools have no lectures read
in them, but only For some such books he wrote, witness Suidas.
Apicius his Institutions of the Art of Muncherie: and there are all the young
fry taught the Sciences of Caruing, chewing and swallowing, oh most profoundly:
the Muncherie lecturer (when I was there) was one Doctor Full-Gorge, a man most
rare in his profession, and instead of his Grammar, he read the first section
of the foresaid Institution of Apicius. Their library is a large room, rancked
full of potts and kannes of all sorts, every sort being enseamed in their
several classes: so the scholars have also, each one his full pott and his
laden plat^er, We have some Vniuer side men that are too well read in these
authors, yet verily, some study them so sore that they bring themselves of on
their legs by it, says Panurg. in his Le Tric-trac clericorum.
for his book: the freshmen have lesser measures, the sophisters larger, and
so up to the Graduates. The first perhaps has his pint and his pullet, the
next his quart and his Goose, the third his pot^^^ and his fat Lamb, or his
gammon of Baton, and so upwards: nor may any leave his task, or have leave to
play till he have made an end of what was enjoined him. If any one stay seven
years in these schools, and benefit nothing, he is forthwith banished for
ever into the Starueling Isles, to Hunger-land is he sent away immediately, to
deal upon Spanish dinners, furnished with half piltchers. Thither also they
thrust all Physicians and prescribers of diers: if any of the^ be ill at ease
(let Asclepiades swagger and hang if he list) he presently eats a raw radish,
drinks a little hott water, spewes a while, and within a quarter of an hour,
Viah, he lets fly upon Ajax, and rises from his roast as sound as a bell. Now
all the what you will, that the voids at either end during this purging time, is
immediately confiscate unto the Dukes treasury and Not strained through a
colander you must think, but seized upon by those inquisitors.
strained upon in such a case, by certain surueyors, especially appointed for
such commodities.

They love venison dearly well, yet can they not tell how to catch it: only
such Dear as comes willingly amongst them, those they entangle in netts and
soyles and so take them. But the noble Swine, oh they prize that beast above
all that ever nature produced; but whether it be because of their sympathy of
natures, being both fatally consecrated to the table, or by reason that the
swine will feed on the coursest meat and yet be soonest fed, this I leave
to a more judicious Censor to determine. What man is he now would think, that
in this inundation of profuseness their should be any dry hillock left for
Parsimony to inhabit? yet (sooth) there is many have an unfit dwelling among
such Gulp-thrifts: Certainly I have observed an exceeding care they have in the
reserving of the smallest bit-bone, and fragment that remains after their
banquetings; whereupon they neither keep dog, catte, hawke, nor any creature
whatsoever that will eat flesh: Nay which is more, in the fatting of their
Pigeons, and Capons, they will take them and make them vn-gorge the corn that
they have already half disgested, and give it for meat unto the others. The
Venetians have learnt this pretty trick of them already, and So can our
Poulters here in London, yea and worse, as some report, the devil con them
thank for it.
can do it very neatly. Now as for the men themselves, if any one keep any
victuals by him until they stink, he is forthwith condemned of high
treason, and spitted upon a stake. Only two reseruations this law agreeeth
unto, the first is, they may keep their. Venison until it be all hoarie, and
mouldie quite over, and the second is, they may lay up (foh, nasty!) their
cheese where they think good, so long, until it be ready to creep quite away
with Maggots, and then they take these worms (the very putrification of a most
putride meat) and scraping a little sugar on them, crash them up with
spoones as if they were Almond-comfites. Out upon them; I wonder our Low Dutch
would be such logger-heads as to follow them in this filthy fashion.

This region abounds with rivers, whose course is (most of them) uncertain,
because of the abundance of ordure that stops them, sometimes here, and
sometimes there, but generally (take this for an infallible rule) At Christmas
and at Shrouetide all the ^akesf^rmers terms
at the beginning of January, and the ending, or about the ending of February,
they are sure all of them to ouer-slow the banks, and (if the breatches be
not stop in time) to do much harm in the pastures adjoining.

The wars of the Eat-allians. CHAP. 7.
THe Eat-allians have unreconcilable wars with Gluttony is a deadly enemy
both to hunger and good husbandry.
two other nations, the Hunger-landers of the Starueling Island, and the
Thriuingers of Thriuingois: the first, inhabit certain western Isles in the
Atlantike sea, not far from Eatallia: but the later lie somewhat further of
it, by reason of a great part of the tertorie of Fooliana, and some parcel
also of For an whore will ever stand between thrift and thee.
Shee-landt, that puts in between them: their historical monuments relate
that the Plienger-landers being confederate with the Theeuing-arians, have made
many terrible invasions up on the Eat-allians borders: and one time gave them a
sore foil, insomuch that the poor inhabitants were feign to hide themselves
in hores and causes under ground: until at last their gods guardions pitied
them, and made their foes own chappes their full destruction; for they did so
ingorge them selves after this sudden change, that growing hereby all diseased,
there was not a man left of them in three years, if you would have given a
Spanish real for a man: not a man to cast at a dog. The Thriuingers also, the
ancient inhabitauts of this land, have made many attempts to regaine their lost
possession, but (as fortune lightly lea^eth to the wrong side) have been
continually beaten back by the Eatall an^ good success. They march unto
battle, armed only before, for what-neede any fence behind, se^ing they
cannot turn themselves to run away?) with Oxe-hides, sheepe-skins, and
swines pelts,that you would imagine, seeing them go to war, that it were a
heard of cattle that were a driving to the watring place: their weapons
commonly are spits, and fire-forkes, mary some of them have, gunnes, and
crossebowes made of the bones of the largest oxen they kill: But the very truth
is (I may tell it here to you in private, but it is a rare point of policy.)
The Drink-allians give them their best assistance, for had not they been, the
Eat-allians had been down the wind long ere this: and there is And so it is:
for give one his liquor soundly first, and then set him on to sight, and he
will rush upon dangers, the very thought whereof were enough to kill him, were
he sober.
the maine of all the matter.

Of Idle-bergh, an Imperial free town. CHAP. 8.
But I have somewhat to say of Idleness has a great sway among Gluttons.
Idle-bergh, though I have said nothing of it yet; it may not pass me so
being so famous and free a state as it is. It has a large territory under
command, and is situate in ye farthest confines of Pewter-Platteria, toward
Fooliana. There is not a town either of more antiquity, or worthy more
admiration in all Eat-allia then this is: The Citizens live in far more happy
estate then ever Monk did: for they have all things they can desire, in
abundance. For first the town is so strongly situate, that it is utterly
impregnable, and may justly mock at all the enemies enterprises, being built
upon a rock It Is no less, believe it: if you will not, go and see your self,
and trust your own eyes. But we have Englishmen enough that have been in
Idle-bergh, and can avouch this to be true. O Anglia quam segnis, quam
insignis? Bucer.
ten German miles in height, and withal so steep, that it is utterly
inaccessible: At the foot of this cliffe runs the river of Idle, whereof the
town takes her name: runs said I? nay it seems rather to creep: being more
like a lake then a river. There is but one way up to the town, and that is not
by mounting the rock by degrees, and windings, as we see in other forts of
this situation, but the townes-men let down a roape and a basket, like the
bucket of a Well, and so hale up the passengers. They live all upon certain
birds naturally bred amongst them, I never saw any of them elsewhere, the
inhabitants call them We have store of them here in England, and most of your
beds in court are stuffed with their feathers. I have seen many of them
together flying in companies from one tavern figne to another, for the space
of an whole month together
Gulls, and they are not much unlike to our bald Cootes. They serve the cities
use with three sorts of meats, flesh, eggs, and fish; flesh, from their own
carcasses, eggs from their nests, where they lay them in great abundance, and
fish which they bring for the feeding of their young ones, in huge excess: and
besides, the sticks of their nests find the citizens perpetual firing. What,
would ye more? and more ye shall have. Their feathers serve the citizens for
stopping of their beds, yea and some to spare also, for transportation. The
grounds within the walls bring forth both whole vintages of delicate grapes,
and whole haruests of the purest wheat. Nor is there any other thing
whatsoever that the Idle-berghers esteem, but they enjoy it within themselves.
The people do live an vncurious life, and in Apuleius his sense (who called a
fat Lamb, an vncurious one) selves are truly vncurious. Dauies in Fuscnm
Epig. 39.
They sup, they sleep, they rise, they dine, and they sup, and so round in a
ring, (unless a little whoring now and then chance to add one dance more to
ye round.) They have a law (and that I think they had from the The most
luxurious nation that ever was.
Sybarites) that barreth all Eunuchs, and all Artificers from dwelling amongst
them. Their swine serve for their plow-men (as they did whilom in Aegipt) they
use no other husbandry: yet the ritcher sort have attendants: one to open the
masters eyes gently when he awaketh: another to fan a cool air whilst
he eats, a third to put in his viands when he gapeth, a fourth to fit his
girdle to his belly, as it rises and falls, the master only excerciseth
but eating, disgesting, and laying out.

There are diverse other cities that hold of this Idle-bergh in capite, and
under protection of her, enjoy the same privileges with her, namely The two
twins of Idleness.
Sleepe-on, and Snort-apace: yet here the citizens are seldom or never awake,
but (as lib. 8. cap. 36
Pliny writes of the Bears) do generally lie so soundly a iouking, that a man
may wound them ere he awake them: and it is strange to see how fat they grow
by this drowsy lethargy.

The Laws of the Land. CHAP. 9.
GOurmonds hall is a very fair, large house, statefully set forth with arched
bay windows, and upon the front of the entrance are these words fairly
engraven in letters of gold, TO, REVELL, AND TO, METHOD. And under it were
these verses engraven. Frolic fatness here does dvvell: Keep leanesse out
and all goes well.
And within, there hung a table chained to a Marble pillar, containing these
sacred and inviolable laws.

BE IT ENACTED.
1. THat eating but one meal a day, be henceforth held for a capital
transgression. 2. That he that ouer-throwes a full dish or a cup rashly, or
howsoever, be forthwith by virtue of this statute enjoined to stand upright on
his feet, and having a dish of broth set between his heels, to eat it all
up with a thimble. 3. That none eat alone, nor violate the laws of the table
by any private suppers: but that every Citizen do eat either in the streets
or in an open window, upon pain of eating his next meal with his heels
upward. 4. That whosoever forbeareth to sleep or eat four hours together,
do satisfy the state by eating two suppers. 5. Yet if the mouth be full, it
shall be sufficient to give an answer by holding up the finger. 6. That
conspiratours be forthwith starued to death, and other malefactors punished
by the loss of a tooth. 7. That all Cooks that dress not their meat
according to the judicious palate, be immediately bound unto stakes, and flesh
half roasted hung by them, until some pitiful and hungry spectator take
compassion on them, and eat it all up. 8. That to belch be held not only
lawful, Sueton. in Claud.
but honorable also: and that the government of the next future feast be
assigned unto him that broke wind the strongliest at the last. 9. That The
reason of this law is to be read in the next chapter.
if any one hold his breath whilst his belly is a measuring, he be forthwith
made incapable of all advancement, and condemned to fast one whole day in a
grate, where he may behold the rest of the Alder-guts at dinner and supper. 10.
That every man's weekly maungery be brought in a billa vera by his fellow
Gurmond unto the Register to be recorded, and withal that if he have not
fulfilled the law in that case enacted, he may be accordingly fined.
Signed All-Paunch.



Those that are the least offenders, are put for four and twenty hours into
the Temple of Famine, a prison directly contrary unto our Beth-lehem in Hebrew,
is the house of bread in English
Bedlem. It stands without the City as Aesculaps temple stood without Rome:
but not for healths sake (as Plutarch says how that did) but only least such
as are condemned unto that jail should so much as once sent the air of the
Kitchen. The walls of it are all painted about with all manner of good
victuals, only to excite the prisoners appetite unto his greater plague, and
verily one Jesuit or other has seen these walls, and there-vpon devised
pictures for their Chambers of meditation. They use no money: what have we to
do, say they, with these saplesse and unsavory metals? no, they follow that
ancient custom that In Politic.
Aristotle records, and barter goods for goods by way of exchange. Two
sparrowes is the price of a stare, two stares for a blackbird, two black-birds
for a hen, two hens for a goose, two geese for a lamb, two lambs for a calfe;
two calfes for a goat, and two goats for a cow: and thus they do also in fish
and roots, at a set price: the towle-mens especial care being this, that
neither their stuff be too bad, nor their price too great.

Their Religion. CHAP. 10.
THey cannot endure Jupiter, for he, when he thunders, sowres all their wines,
and ouer-wets their plants with unseasonable showers. They have a good devotion
unto God Trine, because he eats up althings before him, and shows himself
herein a true Eat-all. They have built a goodly temple unto him, in which I saw
the picture of Saturn eating up his children, passing artificially portrayed.
On Shroue-tuesday, they offer sacrifice unto the Genius of the place, whom they
hold for their chief Deity, and almost for their only deity: Every year
once does this power appear unto them in form of a monstrous Foul, most huge
and most ravenous, (the inhabitants call him RVC) and accepts the offerings of
his servants, and they for their parts are not behind hand with him, but
present him with whole Hecatombes of raw-flesh, thus ordered.

In Pewter-platter-ia (of which you heard before) there is a large plain,
lying toward the South, circled in with mountains on each side. Unto this
plain do all the inahbitants flock at a certain day appointed, bringing with
them an ocean of victuals, Elephants, Rhinocerots, Camells (all which they feed
for this purpose, for other-wise they would never keep such unprofitable
creatures) Oxen of the largest size, Boares, Sheep, Goats, together with a
whole army of Birds, all with the feathers plucked off: all these they put as it
were into this large cage; which being done, they get them up on the mountains
sides, as if they took their seats in a playhouse, and with bended knees do
there expect the coming of this great Deity, old Ruc of Rucs hall. At length
sir, you shall see him come a far off, with a noise, able to deaf the whole
nation three hundred miles about, with a great crooked bill as big Almost,
not fully so big: it wants some 359. degrees. 59. min. 60. seconds.
(almost) as half the Equinoctial circle, with a pair of tallants, like two
broad spread Oaks, with two eyes in his head like two towns that were on fire,
and such an inundation of Harpies, Ravens, Vultures, and Hawks, about him,! O
strange! stupendous sight, for man to see! with a cry, able to procure an
earthquake they approach the plain, and by and by, their wings eclipse the
Sun, and bring a midnight over the whole valley, they are so huge a multitude.

Three times they flagge about the plain, while the people power out their
very bladders in tears, and all that is in their bellies in hearty prayers
unto this route of religious birds. By this time, General RVC, the leader of
this starued regiment has spied his pray, for he out of all that Folio
Catalogue of Carcasses, must choose what pleases his tooth first, supose he
take some five Elephants, or half a score oxen, he is to be first served, and
then every one to his sharke, tagge and ragge there ye should see one fly away
with a Calfe here another with a Lamb, ther^ one with a Boar and here another
with a Swanne, every one fitting his luggage to his strength, and thus with a
reverent and religious applause of all the lookers on, Into the forests of
Theuegen, whereof read the 4. book. chap. 4.
they depart every one with his carriage, and leaves the rest behind them: all
which (and that is an huge deal of meat) the people are bound in conscience
to get ready and eat up ere they go, whereby their bellies are so
ouer-stuffed, that they loath flesh almost forty days after, during which
space they live all upon fish (but that is costly dressed with sirrups and
sauces) and with the dainties of Banquet-ois: both to refresh themselves with
the delicacy thereof, as also to return to flesh again which the sharper
appetite, having thus long forborne it. Sure as death the Pope had his Lent
sent him out of this country, upon the granting them some odd indulgence, or
upon dispensing with them for Ember weeks.

The Election of the Great Duke. CHAP. 11.
NOw we come to the Great Dukes Place, and thither by good chance came I, the
very same day that a new Duke was elected, according to the custom of the
country. There is a Stately Palace stands upon a narrow ledge of land lying
just between Eat-allia and Drink-allia, which also joins them both together:
This palace was built (as their most ancient Chroniclers avouch) by a Giant
called (in the said Chronicles) All-Paunch: who was of an incredible height of
body; not like him whose picture the Scholars of Cambridge go to see at
Hogmagog hills: but rather like him that ought the two aple-teeth which were
dug out of a Well in Cambridge that were little less then a man's head, (yet
was not the tooth that was found on the shore of Vtina any way comparable to
these) Plinyes Who was 7. cubits high. Plin lib. 7. chap. 16.
Orestes, or Who was 16. cubits in height.
Plutarches Orion were but dwarfes in respect of this same great All-Paunch.
Suppose rather that you saw Antaeus that was threescore cubits heigh, or him
whose carcass being dug up at Drepano, was, (as Boccace affirms the
Symetrians to have gathered by his thigh bone) two hundred cubits in length,
this later I think might be brother to him we speak off.

This All-Paunch was the first that conquered this country from the
Thriuingois, drove them all out of the land, brought in a new people, and gave
them new laws: and his soul they imagine (as Pythagoras his opinion affirmed)
to be entered into that huge bird RVC, in which shape (as I said) they do
yearly adore him. The silly people have this fellow in as great reverence as
the Turks have Mahomet. He lies buried in the midst of the Palaces Base
Court: Where for a sacred memorial of him, there is a Statue erected, far
higher then Lisippus his brazen colossus, near unto which his tomb is, upon
which I discerned some marks of letters, but antiquity had so eaten them out,
as Ovid says. Old time that razeth all and spares none,
And age that eats through the hardest stone
had so defaced the inscription, that I could scarcely make any good sense of
it.

The fragments stood in this manner.

I ALL PANCH DUKE OF TENTERBELLY LY HERE A LORD A VICTOR A PRINCE A DEITY. LET
NONE GO BY ME FASTING NOR NAME ME HVNGRY. NOR SALVTE ME SOBER. BE MINE HEIR
HE THAT CAN. MY SVBIECT HE THAT WILL MINE ENEMY HE THAT DARE. Farewell Bellies
and be fat. Now I imagine it should contain these words; Judge I pray the
Gentle reader, and if thou can restore the fragments to their true contents
better then I have done here, thou may do the Antiquaries much pleasure
herein: I think it is thus.

I ALL-PAVNCH, DVKE OF TENTER-BELLYE, LY HERE ENTOMBED. DYING A LORD, A VICTOR,
A PRINCE, A DEITY. LET NONE GO BY ME FASTING, NOR NAME ME HVNGRY, NOR SALVTE
ME SOBER. BE MINE HEIR HE THAT CAN, MY SVBIECT HE THAT WILL, MINE ENEMY HE
THAT DARE. FARE-WEL BELLIES AND BE FAT.

This tomb is to be seen in the palace of the Duke, who has his regalitie
according to this first Dukes institution, not by succession, but by election,
for there are four chief linages, or families in the land: The Treble-chins,
the Bacon-choppes, the Woolsacks, and the Nimble-iawes: any one of these four
houses may stand for the Dukedom, and upon desert obtain it. This now is the
order of the election: there is a yearly tilting ordained (not any tilting
with spears, but a tilting of barrells) whereunto every one comes armed with
his teeth, all new sharpened, and to it they go, where he that vnhorseth most
meat, and lifts most measures of wine out of their pewtersaddles, is not
only honored with a crown of clustered vines, but furthermore is made Lord
high Steward of the Land, the Dukes next inferior: which done, and the
tournament ended, each one arises (if he can) and laying his hand on the
sacred tomb of dead Duke All-Paunche, takes an oath by the deities of
Bacchus, Saturn; and the reverend All-Paunch to perform his duty in this
election without any partial dealing whatsoever.

Then they depart unto the Theater which is prepared for that days use (not
too high for fear of being tired ere they got up stairs) and there they take
their places to behold this future election. Then first comes forth the new
chosen Lord high Steward, and he brings in his hand a golden girdle, all
enchased with Pearls, Diamonds, Rubies etc. and this they call The holy belt
of State: and upon it, I espied these words, set in perfect Rubies; NOTHING, IF
NOT BEYOND.

Now first, the last years Duke puts it on, and takes the exact measure of
his own Souse-tub, and then all the rest of the Nobility do so after him, and
he that can set it on the tenters (without stretching of his belly, or
holding of his breath) so stiff, that it need be letten out one hole more;
He is the man that with great acclamations is proclaimed High Duke of
Tenter-belly. And then presently comes his Cup Bearer, and upon his knees
presents him with a silver tankard of some dozen quartes, and intreates his
Grace to drink a health unto the people.

He takes it, and lifting up the Lidde, begins an oration to the people
befitting occasion, or if he be no good orator, yet he gives them as kind
a congratulation as he can.

Truly I was very attentive to it Ye know that the fettest Geese have the
smallest wind-pipes.
but they do all speak so in the throat, that I could neither like the sound
nor learn the sense, until mine interpretour told me how it was: and thus it
was indeed.

After he had yielded thanks (quoth he) to Bacchus, The God desse of all
shambles and flesh-markets whatsoever.
Carnea, and all those favorable deities, especially to his own Great Mawe,
the giver of such high honors, and had given gramercie to his eyes, that had
beheld him the best man in all Tenter-bellie The honester they, to stick so
revel to him.
ere they fell out, he turned his speech unto the people, and in most
excellent and Rhetorical good terms, took a fresh oathe by Saint
All-^aunche, The Dukes Oration to the people after his election.
that he would be a Bulwark to our liberties, a drudge to our businesses, a
terror to our enemies, a child to our aduises; a follower of our counsels, a
preserver of our studies, a father to our desires, an enlarger of our Weasands,
and an increaser of our measures: finally, he would preserve us as we were
now, and make us as we would be. And then he denounced himself a professed
foe to Hunger, Abstinence, Diet, Naughty Ale and Meagernesse of wine, beer,
and body, and swore once more (to assure us) that while he bare that royal
belt, none should either fast unpunished, or be drunk unrewarded.

Go on my good subjects (quoth he) I adjure you by the sacred weight of your
well distended wombes, go on, be ye all and always free and frolic! O the
royalty of reuells! O honorable helter skelters! Let never this goodly formed
Goblet of wine (quoth he, and took up his pot of twelve quartes) go
Jovially through me, (and then he set it to his mouth, stole it off every
drop save a little remainder which he was by custom to set upon his thumbes
nail and lick it off, as he did, and then proceeded) unless I do from the
bottom of mine heart, will and wish you continually dronken heads, full
bellies, and fat fortunes.

Then having made an end, the audience made all ring with their applause, they
gave it him so fully and so faithfully: Long live Bounsingut, Wool-sack,
Caesar, Emperor of Tenter-belly, long live he, long reign he, long grow he;
this they rattled ye up, at least a dozen times over.

Then were the arms of the Dukedom given him, which was the Rampant Estridge,
swallowing of an Iron horshooe: the word Digest, and Do best. For his sword
and scepter, the Lord High-Steward presented him with a great knife, and a
pretty golden Tun, and in delivering them (according to custom) pronounced
these words, Use and enjoy them. But then for the Coronation dinner and
supper! Oh merciful Heavens! what Castles of platters and chargers, what
mountains of flesh and banquetry, what deluges of Wine Ale and Vsquebath did I
see there! I will never stand upon perticulars: only this I cannot ommit, the
streets that night were strowed so thick with drunken carcasses that I think
in conscience there was never more memories left in the field, of the greatest
massacre that ever this modern age was witness of.

There are diverse Cities besides in this dominion, as Swallow-all, Hogges-den,
Tickle-Chere, and Lickingoa is a colony, sent from Goa in the East Indies,
says Pantagruel in his Merda Geographica. lib. 7 chap. 39. Sect. 594.
Lickingoa, but their forms of government are peculiarly declared in the
description of Flesh-Pastinople, and so need no particular rehearsal.

The Starueling Island, or Hungerland. CHAP. 12.
But we had quite forgotten the remembrance of Starueling Island, take it
therefore with you now, as a penance for your tedious abode in Eat-allia. It
lies under three and thirty degrees of longitude, and four and fifty of
latitude, being on the North, directly opposite unto Cabo Bianco, and on the
South, unto Filtching-Fennes. It is a stony, swartie, barren, Grass-lesse,
sandy soil: there are some trees in it, but they have never an inch of bark
left, nor blossom, nor budde: nay the plenty of all places, the weed, cannot
find in his heart to make any (the smallest) residence in these quarters.

The Lands natural barrenness affordes no distinction either of Summer or
Winter, whether it be because the inhabitants snappe up there herbs as
soon as ever they peep out of the Ground, or that it be the effect of Ceres
curse, (who sailing about the world to seek her Daughter, made ship-wracke on
the craggie shore of this I Will, and thereupon, they say, laid her malediction
upon it) it lies not in me to resolve you.

There is none that dwells in this soil willingly, but all the inhabitants
are Exiles: and their hew is naturally between a pale and a swartie, their
skins crumpled like half burnt partchment, and puckered like the hide of an
Elephant: The Sun did never see more meager creatures, you would swear they
were Anatomies covered with fresh skin, or else one of Athenodorus his
apparitions, they look so ghastly. You shall have one laying a plotte how to
intrappe the flies: another, contriuing a conspiracy against the worms; nay
there be they that sit shauing of the Earthes (GOD knows already near
shorn) beard, to discover the roots of the vngrowne grass: nay they will lie
in ambushes one for another (like so many Otherwise (although improperly)
called Cannibals.
Bald-Cannyes in a dead vacation of butcherie) yet notwithstanding they have a
good excuse for this out of Aristotle, for you know that the greater number of
strangers arriving, the greater scarcity of Belly-timber must needs ensue. By
this means no stranger escapes them unless he be either too strong for their
assaults, or too lean for their stomachs.

They are (most of them) Blacksmiths, notwithstanding that the Eatealls banish
all their Philosophers and Physicians hither, and so do the Spaniards all
their slaves that have served out their time.

They have a strange and fierce wild Beast rangeth continually in the night
all about the deserts of this Island, and they give it the name of We have of
these beasts here in England, Duke Humphrey keeps a kennell of them
continually.
An Emptie-Maw: It will keep such a terrible barking, that it makes the hollow
air echo again: and he of this land that hears it not bark once in twelve
hours, grows deaf immediately, but he that hears it thrice in six and
thirty hours and gives it nothing to devour ere twelve hours more be run
Provided always, that he can live no longer.
dies presently, without all auoidance. Touching other beasts, I saw none in
all this whole Island, but a sort of Wolves, and some A Munkey will eat the
own tail for hunger.
Monkeyes that had eaten of a great part of their own tails. Not any else
could I epsy, Indeed I durst not make any long aboade in so lean a land, it
was no wisdom, was it think ye?

Thus far of Eat-allia, and the adjacent Isles; now come we to Drink-allia,
and so good night.

Of Drink-allia, the second province of Tenter-belly. CHAP. 1.
The Conditions of the Inhabitants.
LEt none expect any exact description of Drink-allia in this place, for I
durst not for mine ears offer to go into any City of the whole Province,
until it was dark night, that all the citizens were wrapped in wine and warm
clothes, and then (you know) how was it possible to discover any thing? you may
perhaps say, what should you fear? faith I Will tell ye: hark in your ear! I
feared the Burgomaisters bounty: for their fashion is, as soon as any one
settes foot in at the City gate, to give him, by my troth I wotte near how
many lifts of Wine for his welcome; oh they receive him in pomp; and all of
the common purse of the City: now so many stoopes must he pull of, or else
he is held an ungrateful, unmannerly fellow, and which is worse, a direct foe
to the common good of the City. Now I feared both this honor and this
danger, and now I hope you are answered. To our purpose.

This Province is somewhat larger then Eat-allia, and what that has in
wealth, this has in intemperancie. It is as broad or rather broader then both
the Germanies: nor is there any nation under the cope of heaven so fortunate,
nor so abundant in the delicate juice of the grape, as this is. The peculiar
wines of all our kingdoms of Europe, the Germans Rhenish, the Frenchmans
White and Claret, the Spaniards Xeres, Malaga, and the Canaries, tush, they
have them all here in excess. The temperature of their bodies are somewhat
different from the Eat-alls, for these delight in the qualities of heat and
drought, whereas the Drink-alls especially affect heat and moisture: so that
the bordering neighbors do ieastingly call the Eat-alls, Blackmen, and
Kitchin-Tenter-bellyes, but the Drink-alls they name Read-men, and
Cellerian-Tenter-bellyes. But their bodies and their wits hold both one key
in difference: for the Drink-alls as they are more ingenious then the Eat-alls,
so are they much more lascivious: In their young years they are generally very
quick witted, but being come to a more grauer age (especally old age) they grow
so forgetful, that you shall not have one amongst twenty that can remember his
own name.

The Shires of the Country. CHAP. 2.
THe Inhabitants affirm the whole Province to be divided into three Counties:
the county of Wine-cester, the county of Vsque-bathe, and the county of
Hoppe-Sack, or Strong-biera.

The first of these, Wine-shire, is parted from Eat-allia, upon the western
verge thereof by the river Piss-on, a salt current that ebbes and flows. This
river runs round about the Dukes Palace, and as for the saltness, the
Philosophers of this country say it has it not from the sea, but from an
ayrie humor that oftentimes falls upon it. The first town that I came unto in
this region, was called Vine-spring, and was in form of a fiue-angled
trencher: it lay down as far as Vine-prophils, and so some of it became part
of the suburbs of Cluster-beg, a pretty fine City, walled about with stones
of the color of brick, but somewhat deeper of dye. This City stands in the
bottom of Pressing-dale, (a valley so called) through the which runs a
delicateriuer called Juice, which passes along by three or four pretty
cities, (seated upon the banks thereof, most iudiciously, and to the founders
eternal commendations) their names as I remember were Tankards-bridge, that
was the first, then Tunning-trie, then Broachingford, and lastly,
Carousi-kanikin. Tunning-try I remember was fotified with a wall of wood, and
Broaching-ford had never but one gate open at once, and that when it was shut,
was made fast with nothing but the end of a faggotstick. There is not in all
the world any one river comparable to this that runs through these cities;
Donaw, Thames, Volga, Seyne, or Sir Walter Rawleys river of Guiana, put them
all in, they are but kennells to this: for besides the pleasing Meanders that
he makes in his wanton course, the water is so sweet and delicate, that
neither the best Europes wine, nor the Turks delicious A drink made of honey
and water.
Zerbeth can possibly go beyond it. This worthy son of the Ocean, has one
peculiar fish belongs unto it, called a Tappe, and this fish will sometimes
lie by the shore, and spoute a huge deal of the water aloft, (mary the
remaining of it in his belly has made it somewhat more pleasing to the taste
then it was before) and this the inhabitants watch for in boats, and when they
get it, make great store of it. This river (as I told you) passes through
Tuning-try: mass I had fotgotten one town, it goes from thence to
Celleridge, ere it come to Broaching-ford, and so by Broaching-ford passes
directly unto Carousi-kannikin, the prime City of the whole Province.

The description of Carousi-kanikin, chief City of Drinke-allia, as also of
the fashions and conditions of the Drink-alls. CHAP. 3.
CArousi-kanikin, is a name that I understand not, further then that I have a
little light of it from the German tongue, but as for the city, it is built
upon an hill, and carries the form of a Tankard, from what quarter soever you
behold it. It is of ancient renown, and one of the best seated ports for
traffic in all the whole land. On the East part it is strongly fortified with
Barricadoes, and Bulwarks built all of Barrels, and the roofes of the houses
are most of one and the same manner, tiled with the boords of broken Caskes. In
the entrance of the gate, from morning until night there is placed a double
canon of Pewter, (for their law commands this to be duly observed) the
citizens call it the Flaggon of Hospitality, and round about it, are these
words engraven, (...), such an inscription is upon the Dolphin in Cambridge.
Aut bibe, aut abi: Drink or be gone. He that ariueth, must either lift it
all of, or else he is carried before the Magistrate, to render account of his
contumacie. The arms of the City are advanced over the Gate, and they are the
three horse-leaches upon three naked feet, in a bloody field; the word,
Plaenae, quiescimus. Being full, we rest. Here by a fortunate chance, did I
meet with another stranger, a Letcheri-tanian borne, who was bound for the
City as well as I, his name he told me was An Italian word expressing the
noise that the wine makes in running from the tap.
Cinciglion. He (being acquainted with their fashions) brought me secretly by
night into the town, and showed me such things as I should never have
discovered of my self. Their buildings are not much unlike the Eat-alls, but
that the fronts of their houses are so wholly hid with spreading Vines, that
had I not seen the signs hang out on every side, I would have sworn I had
been in a Vineyard and not in a City: in sadness it was a pleasant
spectacle. In the Market place are all the measures hung up in chains, sealed
with the Dukes stamp on their tops, and by them, hangs a table of the laws
of the land, which you shall have truly set down hereafter. The inhabitants
go all naked, but for a wreath of Vines about their foreheads. But their skins
are all carved with figures, and painted after the manner of the ancient Picts,
and Brittons. One has himself drawn into the form of a Centaure, another of
a A beast that is half like a Goat, and half like a Stag.
Tragelaphus, a third of a Pidgeon (a terrible drinking byrd) and you shall
have some painted so perfectly like a flaggon, that if he set but his hands on
his sides you would swear it were a living flaggon. I did see one also so
directly in the shape of a Whale, that when he vomited, no man in the world
but would have taken him for a live Whale, spewing up the Ocean. I had a great
affection to see the manner of their public feasts, and yet not be seen by
the citizens. So mine host at last agreed to perform my request, and satisfy
my longing, mary he gave me, withal, certain cautions of danger, that might
ensue if I were discovered, and likewise informed me in some necessary points
of behavior: so having mine instructions about me, I and mine honest host, my
leader, got us into the Towns hall, in the evening, vnspyed of any. By and by
come the feasters, and take their places, just as the Eat-alls do (as you have
heard) only they had more drink and less meat. Every one had his purueyance
at either elbowe, a pisse-pott for his urine on one side, and a bowl for his
vomit on the other.

At first, they begin a sacrifice to Bacchus, their General God: not as the
Romans did of old, with pouring a little wine upon the ground; no, no, far
more religiously, and with more stately ceremonies. At the upper end of the
table stands a statue of Bacchus, holding in his right hand a monstrous great
Goblett of such weight, that (as Virgill said once) the left hand is now and
then feign to help her sister. Into this Goblet or standing Cup, the master
of the ceremonies in the name of the whole company, powers an hoggs-head of
wine, (it holds no less I can assure ye) which passing in pipes as if it were
in veins unto his mouth, and his the other thing both at once, makes a pretty
show as he both pissed wine and spewed it, all in one moment. And this is the
houre-glasse proportioning the continuance of the feast, for when he leaves
pouring out, they must all leave pouring in, and that upon pain of sacrilege.
Then sir comes me up a service of shooing-hornes (do ye see) of all sorts,
salt-cakes, red-herrings, Anchoues, and Gammons of Bacon (Westphalia may go
pipe in an Iuie leaf, if it seek to equal these) and abundance of such
pullers on. Here is no use of the ol^ Roman caution, used in their meetings,
Drink three potts, or five, but never four. Plutarch. Sympos. Acad. 3.
Athanae. l. 10 Plaut. in Stich.
And then begins the full potts to go round about the table, and the empty
against the walls, so that you cannot possibly tell whether they are sooner
filled to be emptied, or emptied to be filled; but (as Plautus says of one)
the drink is sure to go, be it out of Can, A Quoniam is a glass as well
known in Drink-allia, as Chaucers old Queynt is in Letcheri-tania.
Quoniam, or Iourdan. Now when one of them will drink to another, he first
challenges him with a solemn The relics of some ^auerne ca^ch.
ceremonial song. and then they join hands fast together, and giving a sound
shake or two, the challenger aduanceth his moistened weapon, and blows it
dry: he may puff a little, or talk a few gentle words among hands, but the
pott is disrobed of his liquor, ere it be severed from his gripe: and then the
the other answers him at his own weapon. The second course is not very dainty,
but howsoever, they moysten it well with redoubled rouses. Then comes the
fruit with the third course, and that in truth is very rarely furnished, which
being almost finished, and the cloth being now thrust upon an heap, the
master of the ceremonies cries Healths, three times with a loud voice. I
imagined that this had been a summons to the breaking up of the company and
was a going hence; when mine host pulled me by the sleeue, why how now ye
sleepie spectator (quoth he) and the feast is scarcely begun? stay and see the
conclusion of it I pray ye: do ye not see how fast God Bacchus his
houre-glasse runs? So I satte down again and stayed. Then steps me out one
of the company, and taking of his wreath, down upon his knees he goes, (I
thought he had been going to his prayers) and presently calls for a quart
pott. An health (quoth he) unto Great Bousing-gut; Woolsack, Archduke of
Tenbelly, and presently the pot stops his mouth: he drinks, he puffes, he
belches, he talks, until within a while he had gulpd down as many quartes
as his name had letters, and when he had done, he falls a spewing, till all
cried twang again, and dies (as Horace said) The pauement where he stood, Mero
tingit pauimentum superbo.

With proud Lyaean blood.
Well, they all follow in order from the highest to the lowest, each one with
the same pott, execution, and eiection: proouing himself hereby a faithful
citizen, and (which is more) a strenuous Emptykan. This past, vpstarts another,
with this catch, A health to you and us, this day, and health to all
Drink-allia, seasoning his song with many a goodly belche, and so down upon
hi^ mary-bones, and up with the pott hand-smooth, the devil a bone finds he
in the drink. After him they must all follow woe be to him that hangs anarse.
This shower ouer-blowen, out steps a third, and he aduanceth a quarte of
plumpe Lyaeus to the health of all the Quagmirists (which is the general name
of the Nobility) of the most famous and eternal City of Carousi-kanikin;
briefly, after him they go, and thus every man in order brings in his
foundation of a new Round. Now every man having his share, they must each one
in his order (poxeon't, that madded me) go play the Of one of these might
Horace have truly said, Aut insanit homo, aut versus facit, the man is mad, or
else he makes verses.
Poet, out of the inspiration of Bacchus only (the Muses may go hang for any
room they have here) and herein according to the old manner that Plutarch
speaks of, every one sings his song, and instead of his Harp, he had a knife
and a quart pot, and truly they played fine music on it. One, in his song
commended his mistress, another, the goodness of the wine, a third related
all the passages betwixt him and his wife at home, so that it m^de me remember
that old saying of Laberius: Ebriulati mentem hilarem accipiunt. When wines
effect the brain does bind,
Then mirth does caper in the mind.
An other rimed all in Satyr against one that was not at this drinking: and
every one (me thought) kept He was a drunken Poet and dyed of a surfeit. Ask
Francis Meres in his VVitts Common wealth if you will not believe me.
Anacreons measures; (Like will to like quoth the devil to the Collier.) But
in the mean time, while these songs were a singing, it was a world to see
their several behauiours, every man had his humor to himself: you should see
one, for very pure love, weeping in his fellows bosom, and another sit a
kissing of his companion, one setting his mouth on the rack with laughter
(wise were the man that could tell at what,) another down upon all four in
devotion to Bacchus, a third swaggering and swearing godts hundred thousand
tufels, because the bowl of wine was brought him no sooner; a fourth arguing
of religion and matter of state: and here in a corner you should have a fifth
sit nodding and slauering, it would do a blind-mans heart good to see him. But
now at the beginning of the feast, because they are generally so slippery of
memory that they quickly forget what they have to do, they have a public
Notary, whom they call The windpipe office there, is far greater then the
Pipe office here in England.
Clarke of the windpipe, and he registers every particular carouse, and so
files them up for common records: what each man has drunk, and unto whom;
which done after supper he reads them to the company (if any man be awake to
hear them)

Pottle-gulp. unto Swolne-gut. -- iii. Gallons. Swolne-gut. unto Gultche. --
iiii. Gallons Dry-mouth. unto Lurtch-cup. -- iii. Pottles. Draw-large. unto
Broken-belt. -- vii Pottles Sup-it-off. unto Full-brink. -- half an hogshead
Concordat cum originali. P. Skinker.



If any one have failed in the taking of his liquour, he must forthwith make
present satisfaction, (if he be able) otherwise, at the next meeting he is
sure to pay sound interest for his forbearance. Well the roll being read, and
the houre-glasse run all out: Mary quoth I to mine host but how will they get
home now? that marvel I at most. Oh well enough sir (quoth he) fear ye not.
Do ye not see those ropes there in the court, that are fastened unto them Iron
rings? These, their servants (who may not touch a drop of wine till the feast
be done) being so sober as to know every one his own rope, do take hold of,
and the other end of it being fastened to their masters door, so draw
themselves and their Masters both in one cart, directly home, for these ropes
are as good unto them as a thread in a labyrinth. Mass you say true (quoth I)
but what if one should come in the meane-time and tie the ropes further end to
a wrong door? Why do you think (quoth he smiling) that any one wakes this
night? Yet I have known it done, and the cart go to a wrong house and the man
to another man's wife; who perhaps being as drunk as he, never discouers the
matter until next day at noone; and then, that which they ignorantly
committed, they do wittingly laugh at: for it is a principle here, that a
drunken man can never offend, for it is the effects of Bacchus, that he is but
instrument unto, and nothing else. But I remembered that place of Lucian; In
Dialog.
Bacchus never biddes them drink more then they need.

Of the Knights of the Golden Tun, and of the laws of this City. CHAP. 4.
IN the towns Hall, (properly called Gulpers Court) there hangs up that
ancient emblem of the order of their Knights, the Golden ^unne; He that can
drink this vessel thrice off and go his ways without indenting, for this
good service is presently knighted by the great Duke himself, and has a
chain of extraordinary value bestowed upon him besides. These knights have a
large Charter, and are allowed many goodly privileges; they have absolute
command in all Tauernes, and at al Tables. They may furnish so many soldiers
in pewter-coates out of any man's celler in the town, Gratis; and besides they
have full authority to set what limmets they please unto every man's
pot-licking. These hardy men have great conflicts at every sollemne meeting (as
the Or as the Helots had with the Lacedaemonians.
sword-plaiers had in Rome) their weapons are full charged cups, and he that
carries most of them away clear, is conqueror, and leads the rest about the
town (if they can go) in triumph. And this is their trial of the victory. If
he can put his finger just into the flame of the candle without playing
hit-I-misse I, let him spew whole fish ponds, he is held a sober man.

Now gentle Reader will I present thee with the laws both of Carousi-kanikin,
and of all Drink-allia: read and if thou will not laugh, choose.

IT IS DECREED, AND ABsolutely enacted, by the high and mighty Duke of
Tenter-belly, and the whole States both of Eat-allia and Drink-allia.
1. THat all promises, oaths, bills, bonds, indentures or any other conueyances
whatsoever, made, or caused to be made in the afternoon, be utterly void
and of none effect. 2. That no man of what state or degree soever he be, have
his cups private unto himself, upon pain of drinking two days, after in a
fire-shouell? 3. That if any one cast away any snuff, but mere froath, he be
forthwith enjoined to go down upon his knes and lick up the otherwise
perrishing liquor. 4. That every one pledge his challenger in the same cup, and
on the same fashion, upon pain of being debarred from drink two days after.
5. That the Pottes in banquets be either always full, or empty: the waiter
that presents a pot half filled, and the person that takes it shall be both
guilty of breach of goodfellowship. 6. That he that being sober shall strike
him that is drunk, be immediate disabled for ever giving testimony in any cause
whatsoever: but the drunken man striking the sober shall be acquitted. 7. That he
that being sober shall rob him that is drunk, be forbidden wine for ever:
and if he kill him, he shall be put to death by thirst. 8. That he that shall
speak evil of the Duke of Tenter-belly, as in saying, God send him a dry
health, or so, be held guilty of high treason. 9. That he whom either nature
or sickness has made abstinent; be banished the land. 10. That he that
goes from any public meeting, without staggering, be accounted a malefactor
in the highest degree. 11. That all that stay three days in the City, do
offer sacrifice unto Bacchus. 12. That the calling of a Citizen thief or
whore-maister, bear no action, that to call him abstayner, shall be liable to
the law. 13. That he that mixeth water with his wine, be sent to suppe
amongst the dogs. 14. That he that swears by Bacchus, and keeps not his
word, be utterly disabled from making any will, and bearing any witness. 15.
That he that strikes with a pot* and either spilleth the wine, or breaks
the pot, be enjoined to touch neither pot nor wine for four and twenty hours
after.
Over the portall of the hall were these verses written.

The house of youthful mirth, and lusty cheer:
Peace, wine, sport, rest, have al their mansions here.
Subscribed STILLYARD.



The arts, and Military discipline of the Drink-alls. CHAP. 5.
THe people of this Province are almost all bleere-eyed, and troubled with the
palsy, with goodly Chowles about their necks and chinnes whereof the
mountainers of the Alps and the Pyrenaeian hills are so proud. They are very
good Painters, when drink and age has made their hands to quiver, that you
would think verylie (as Lucian says) that he were sober that did it, when
indeed he is as foxt as forty beggars. They have also some Poets amongst them,
whom their principal never crowns with laurel (because that tree is a foe
unto the vine) but all with iuye: these Poets are the very off-scum of the
basest rascally rabble, I am as much grieved that they should bear that so
sacred a name, as Antigenides in Apuleius was, that horne-blowers should be
called Cornetiers. They are the veriest Lacklatines, and the most
Vn-alphabeticall raggabashes that ever bred lowse: they cannot make two rimes
in their mothers tongue in two hours, and yet these shake-ragges live by other
men's trenshers, filling all the tauernes in the town with Epithalamiums,
Elegies, and Epitaphes, your ears would blister to hear them, these are they
that have the managing of maskes, and the disposing of Pageants and have the
same sway over the uses of balets that the knights of the tun have over the
barrells. They had but one good Poet (as it is said) in an whole age, and he
was starued to death for telling truth out of season. They go often to war,
in assistance of the Eat-alls; but they never go armed, not so much as with an
Irish steel-coate, a shurt on their backs; their lances are sapplins of Elmes,
sharpened and dried at the ends in the fire, but yet notwithstanding (for stand
well they cannot) it is admirable to behold both their valor in fight and
their fortune in conquest. Indeed they have a law that none must go sober to
the field, so that the wine makes them as bold and valiant as Lions, and you
know full well, Audaces Fortuna iuuat, fortune helps the forward.

The funerals of one of the chief Quagmyrists: and the Sacrifices of Bacchus.
CHAP. 6.
THE same night that I was a spectator of their more then rambling reuells, one
of the Quagmyrists, whose house was of some height, being loose in the breech,
intending to go thither whether neither Pope nor Emperor can send an
Ambassador, and being truly tapp-shackled, mistook the window for the door,
so stepping rashly on, down he came with the wrong end forward, and in plain
English, broake his neck. His funerals were very ritchly set forth: I can
tell, for I was at them. Every man was died, all over with black, and for that
day ware a cypress wreath, in steed of his vines. The body was not laid in a
coffin, nor upon an hearse, as we use, but being put into a caske half full of
wine was so borne to the grave, and when he came there, it was to lie rather
in a cesterne of sack, then in a grave of earth, and to be drowned rather
then buried. For whereas the Romans used to cast balls of frankincence upon
the pile wherein the body was burnt, they did not so here, but each one powered
his kanne of wine into the grave, and bidding thrice Adieu most sweet and
corpulent countriman, put finger in their eye, wept some quart of Rheum and to
it they went, hand in hand to the Tavern. This Quagmirist it seems was well
esteemed amongst them, for he had a statue erected him in Bacchus his court,
and under it these two verses in fair Roman letters.

Although he took his window for his door
His valiant death shall make his honor more.
And upon his grave they set up a pretty obeliske, and a brazen flaggon on the
top of it, with these verses carved round about it. Three such Epitaphes in
Lattine are to be seen at Siena, two in San Domingo, and one in S. Spirito.


By wine I lived, and wine me killed, men say:
For being sober, I could nere see day.
Gone is my flesh, yet thirst lies in the bone:
Give me one rouse my friend, and get thee gone.
Farewell fellow tosse-pots.
Now had I staid too days in this town, without ever being demanded what I
was, but then mine host came and told me, my friend quoth he, you have had a
fair reign; if you stay one day longer, you must perforce do sacrifice unto
god Bacchus: I may not conceal you further unless you would have me
forsworn. No, quoth I? what custom is that I pray you that you are so
strictly bound unto? Tell me the course, and I Will either perform it and stay
longer, or else I Will get me presently gone, and rid us both from future
danger. Well sir (says he) saw ye not the statue of Bacchus yesterdaie in
Gulpers Court, and the huge goblet he holds, wherein they powered the wine
that runs out at two passages? yes that I did. Well then, you must set your
mouth to one of them (choose you which) and suck until ye be able to stand
no longer, but fall flat to the ground, and so must you lie under the spout,
wallo-wing in the wine, until all be run out upon you. How like you this?
Faith not altogether so delightful (quoth I) but I pray tell me, was there
ever any strangers that offered this sacrifice? All, all, (quoth he) not a man
nor a man's tail escapes it, but to it he must, maugre his beard; some will
come spiritfullie to it, but others are feign to be haled to their teate, like
a Bear to the stake.

Well sir (quoth I) but I Will be iogging hence: Only I would entreat ye to
inform me which country in this tract is next in dignity unto this of yours
and worthiest of travel. So faith he told me: Hot-waters quoth he) is the
best, some call it Liguour-ardente, it is under the government of Sir Limbeck
Stillitorye, a knight of the noble family of the King-Cuppes: and so led me
forth, showed me the way, as plain as Dunstable road, and then courteously
gave me the Bascio los manos, and I thankt him heartily for his Valienado, and
parted.

Of Hot-watrea, or Licor-ardente, and of the pilgrimage of Saint Borachio.
CHAP. 7
NOw began I all alone to take my way toward the North, leaving the river of
^roath, behind me, until I came at If Bucklersbury stood alone it were very
like this town. Sure as death there is some affinity between them*
Spewers-burie, the filthiest town that ever I saw since my mother cradeled my
head. Well I staid not long there (I had not need) but on I passed until I
came to Coopers-nor-ton, a pretty well seated village, but not a drop of
water was to be got in it for love nor money: the reason is (as I heard
afterward) least they should mix it with the wine and so prove evil
commonwealths men. Only this I must tell the reader: by the way, for I
promise ye it put me often to a shrewd putther, I was as much troubled with
pottes and flaggons in my journey, as the traveler that has far to go, is
with the Spanish and Italian Crosses: I could never go three miles to an end,
but I should find a bouncing tankard: kenneld under an arch, and drink I must
needs, no gainsaying the laws of the Lands holy hospitality: at last I
ouertooke a traveler, in an old tatterd Cassocke of haire-cloath, bare-foote
and bare-head. I demanded whether he went so fast. Sir (quoth he) I have
undertaken a long Pilgrimage unto Saint Borachio of Bottles-brooke.

I wondered at this new name, and this as yet undiscovered Pilgrimage, so I
questioned him at large of the country, of this towns situation, and
discipline, and finally of the virtues of this Borachio. Bottles-brooke sir
(quoth he) is seated in the confines of Hot-watria, and Let cheritania, and is
of great fame through out both the soiles. Besides diverse other ancient
monuments in the town there is a temple of Bacchus Fiery-face, they call it
the Chapel Ardent, where a rich and rare statue of his is erected, not like
a grown man as elsewhere it is, but of an informed birth, just as his father
took him from the burning womb of Semele, so is it, having been long ago so
cut, out of the hard Rock of Rubies. The top of this temple is al set with
Carbunickles* and golden sparks, most rich to behold, and from the embowed
arch there drops they say, a kind of hot fuming liquour (as the Hackluits
voyages affirm as much.
Cataracts do in some places of Mar del zur) and is received into a Borachio
that stands placed accordingly, whose virtue is such, that if one drink a
large draught of it with good devotion, he shall never in all his life after be
either drunk before noone, or a thirst before midnight: both which helps may
do me much good, for I am a man so employed in my country, that I can never
lie in my bed until midnight for thirst, nor never rise in the morning but
before noone I am drunk and fast a sleep again. Therefore have I gone this
three days without drinking at all, (save that I drank one dish of water this
morning) because I would merit the more of this holy Saint Borachio when I
come there; nor dares any man importune me to drink, or any in my company as
long as I wear this weed. Bir-lady sir you must think I was not meanly glad
of so good a privilege, and therefore I entreated both his company and
patronage. Well, we went chatting on, until I observing the soil altered,
asked him where we were now. This country (quoth he) ever since we came over
the Lake Metheglin, is called the Our ordinary pass to Ireland is through
Wales.
County of Vsquebath, being the first shire of Hott-watria: It is not so well
husbanded, but it is far more fertile then our country of Winecester,
exceeding both in fatness of soil and pureness of air. So when I heard the
name I understood presently both ye original and the definition thereof.
Vsquebathia, because they drink there Vsque ad (...), even to the bottom:
there are other deriuations thereof, but those I leave unto the six wits to
censure of. The people of this nation are generally fulsome and slouenly, and
of a continual fearce and terrible aspect (unless they be drunk) yet they
used me very kindly for my religious pilgrims sake (as they are very much
given to superstition) who lodged with me the first night in the common
hospital of an obscure little city (I forgot the name) yet we lay very
quietly, for we found all the town dead drunk at our coming, and left them
so at our parting, much other matter past us, but I leave it as unworthy of
regard. At length through many craggie, fennie, woody passages, we arrived at
a famous port town, called Puerto d' Aqua forte. Now quoth I (being as weary
as a dog) whether go we now? is not this Bottlesbroke? O Lord no quoth he: but
cheer up your self, we have not a foot of ground more to pass until we be
there, all the rest of our journey lies by water: which when we have passed, we
shall coast a little by the pleasant shores of Hott-watria, and presently we
are at Bottlesbroke: (this country is like Denmark parted into two by the sea,
and that was the cause of our crossing the water. Well, to ship we went, and
away: By this time imagine us in the midst of the sea: well, my heart is cold
yet to think but what a danger we escaped there: for look ye sir, our
Mariners were all drunk to a hair, not a man could guide himself, if he
might have a kingdom. One was a sleep at the stern: another going about to
row, had Palinures destiny, and fell ouer-boord, who^ two more seeking to hale
up again, had not we two held the^, had both fallen after. A third falls into
choler, and lays a fourth over the pate for not helping his fellow: he
st^ikes again, and to it they go, fight Bear fight dog: and all the rest
divided themselves on two sides. Now flew the pondrous oars about their ears,
and clubbs and pumpe-staues, all their arms appears, the water was quiet, and
every one used his oar in the air. But indeed they are easily knocked down,
whose ham-strings Bacchus has already cut in two. Flat they lay, all but a
couple of conquerors, who being too late weary of the massacre, fell upon us
two, laying all the blame upon us. But we two, scorning to be put down by
two walking tankards, got up a couple of cudgels, and gave them their due,
disarmed them, bound them fast to the Mast, and plaide the sailers our selves.
But our boat (sympathizing belike with her ancient masters the drunkards) did
so welter from side to side, that had not Aeolus sent us a strong gale, and
forced the boat on against her will, we had laid our bones in the bottom of
those seas, for ought that I saw, and my religious fellow had never seen Saint
Borachio. As we sailed on, I descried a far of, on the left hand, a certain
high Island covered with snow, and asking him how he called it, It is (quoth he)
the Frozen Island, where Bacchus lived for fear of his step-dames wrath, when
he was young: and the inhabitants using him churlishly, and at length chasing
him by force from thence, his father being offended, laid a plague of
perpetual snow and darkness upon them. But whence is that smoke I see a
far of? That smoke comes out of Mount Denis, Dionysius is Denis, and Bacchus
both.
wherein the souls of such as either lived too soberly, or killed themselves
desperately, are purified by fire; and there they burn, until some of their
living friends go in Pilgrimage to Chapel Ardent for a bottle of St.
Borachios water, and pouring that upon their tomb, they are freed. I smiled at
this, and thought, now surely I have found the original of Purgatory; let
Abbat Odilo, and his Monks of Corunna tell me never so many tales of mount
Aetna, and many good morrows: it is here or it is no where.

Well, at length we came a shore, and found it a pretty sweet town in truth
(to give it the due) marry it was both paued with bottles, and roofed with
letherne bougets. I do not remember I saw any attificer in all the town but
letherne Iack-makers, and tailors for Bottle-cases; so that now I saw what
utterance the Eat-alls had for their hides. The reason is, the men of this
town and country, use no pure wine, as the other Drink-alls do, but certain
distilled waters mixed with the strongest grape they can get, which are so
forcibly hott, that the brittle glass cannot hold them, and therefore they are
driven to fortify their bottles with letherne Ierkins, riuerted together with
pitch and rosen. The citizens are fiery of face, and choleric of condition,
envious, suspicious, paralitique, and of a staggering manner of pace in their
going: but that which is most terrible of all, they drink and they breath
nothing but mere flames. As much cold water, or scarr-gut, as one of us will
drink, so much fire will one of them take: that a man would verily imagine
when he saw them, that they were so many fire-drakes, or Saint Georges
dragons. I was in danger of water before, but now I feared nothing but that I
should be stifled with fire. So that I left my companion in his orisons unto
Bacchus (I loved him well, but I loved my self better) the very next morning I
got me out of this Vulcans shop, for so it was, and a very Cyclops forge,
rather then a City of Bacchus. Now being upon my way, I began to resolve with
my self to pass by the verges of Lecheritania back again, and so to see
somewhat of the fashions of the Otherwise called Strong^ieros.
Hop-sackers, the third county of Drink-allia; but just as I was plodding on
with this thought in my head, rushes me forth an Ambush of armed
Sheelandresses (you heard of Shee-landt before) besette me, took me, and
carried me prisoner (the more unfortunate I) a long and toylesome journey,
even to the chief city of the land, called Gossipingoa.

I would not have the reader take any unkindness at my hands for omitting ye
rest of Drink-allia, for as my Pilgrim told me, it is the basest part of the
land, this county of Hop-sack; and but that it is more beast-like, different
in nothing from the others which you heard described before.

Finis lib. 1.
The second Book.
The description of Shee-landt, or Womandecoia.
Of the situation and the parts thereof. CHAP. 1.
THE new discovered Womandecoia, (which some mistaking both name and nation)
call Wingandecoia, and make it a part of Virginia) otherwise called Shee-landt,
lies in that part of the Southern continent, which our Geographers of Europe
Over against Moleture and Beach.
called Psytacorum Regio, the land of Parrots. On the North side it boundeth
upon Letcheritania (a nation that is a great enemy to it) on the South, upon
Thriuingois: on the East, upon the two Fooliana's, the Fickle and the Fat.
The soil thereof is very fruitful, but Twere pity it should be otherwise,
being so shrewdly wiued.
badly husbanded: It is divided into many Provinces, both large and rich, yet
all of several conditions, habites and languages. The principal of them are
these; Tattlingen Scoldonna, Blubberick, Gigglot-angir the high and the low;
Cockatrixia, Shrewesbourg, and Blackswanstack, otherwise called Modestiana. Not
far from these is also an Island called I Will Hermaphrodite, or more properly,
Double-sex. Many of these Provinces did I pass through, sore against my will
I Will be sworn. But to speak the truth, Tattlingen is the best country of all
the rest, and has many fair cities in it, as Pratlingople, Tales-borne, and
Lyps-wagg, through the last of which there runs a great river called Slauer,
which sometimes will ouer-flow the banks, and drown all the lower part of
the country, which they call Chinn-dale, but the countrymen have now devised
very strong rampires of bones and bend lether, to keep it from breaking out
any more, but when they list to let it out a little now and then for scouring
of the channel. But of all the cities of Tattlingen, or of all Shee-landt,
Gossipingoa is the principal. Thither was I brought, and detained a great
deal longer then stood with my good liking: I will (for passing away a little
time until the Capon be enough, we have nothing else to do) discourse the
whole progress of their dealing with me here, and then I Will go on with the
conditions of this new nation.

How the Gossipingoesses used the Author of this discovery. CHAP. 2.
AS soon as these cruel conqueresses had taken me upon the borders of
Lecheritania, they brought me away to their chief city, and so to the court,
told a bell and presently all the inhabitants came flocking thither in a trice,
and began to pry more narrowly upon me who stood bound sure enough (god wot)
for offering them any false measure. At length, one of the rout, (their
Captainesse it seemed she was) gave a sign to the rest to be silent (as she
had need) and then bespake the company thus. What, or of whence this fellow is,
I do not know, only we took him in the confines of yonder damned country
Letcheritania, and seeing they have offered us so much injury, I hold it very
fit now (if it be not too late) to begin to take revenge of them, and first
with this prisoner. Now she having made an end, I got leave (with much a do
for noise) to speak, and so declared my nation, and the cause of my wandering
as well as I could, and told her Womanship that for my part I had not any
acquaintance at all in Letcheritania, I was one that wished her Madam-hood and
all her sex all the good I could, and that it would derogate much from her
nature, clemency, and from the honor of her just government to condemn an
Innocent pilgrim, and one that had not offended, without hearing of his cause.
Well these good words I can tell ye wrought so prettily well, that the poor
young wenshes began many of them to weep: yet the old countesses were not so
much ouer-swaied by mine oration, but that I must to prison to a great house in
the market place called Cold and comfortless, until my country and cause of
travel were truly manifested unto the Shee-counsell. Well to ward I went,
and but that my countries name (the It is a proverb in France that England is
the paradise of women, the purgatory of servants, and the Hell of horses.
true Paradise of women) pleaded for me, I had never come home alive, for all
the Lecheritanians that they take, they either fair hang up, or else put them
unto most slavish offices in this prison. Herein plaging them for their
iniuryes offered; for that Nation, although it be most lascivious, yet it
runs a madding eirher after whore, or else in bestiality, either neglecting
their wives utterly, or else keeping them continual prisoners through
mad-braind jealousy. O how many noble captains did I see here wearing out
their lives in spinning, carding woll and knitting? faith at length, for my
countries sake, I had my liberty, but not without an oath for I was brought to
Iunos Altar, and there laying my hand on the same, took a sollemn oath to
observe all these conditions following.

1. That I should never go about to iniure this noble sex by word nor deed.
2. That I should never interrupt a woman in her tale. 3. That wher-soeuer I
lived, I should leave the rule of the house to my wife. 4. That I should never
more come in Letcheritania, for it is the common phrase here, Many go thither
good men, but come away again evil husbands. 5. That I should never aim at
more then the love of one. 6. That I should never bewray my wives secrets. 7.
That I should never deny my wife any woman's ornaments. 8. That I should
continually give women the prick and praise for beauty, wit and eloquence, and
defend it against all men.
This oath I I believe ye sir with a little aequiuo^cation.
willingly took, and would have taken one ten times stricter, rather then have
stayed there. So therefore you see my tongue is tied by mine oath, not to tell
all the fine Conundrums that I saw among these mad wenches. Somewhat I may say,
but no harm, no more I would in truth, if I had not been sworn at all.

Their forms of Government, and elections of persons of state. CHAP. 3.
THeir state (for ought that I could observe) is popular; each one seeking
superiority, and avoiding obedience. They have no laws at all, but do every
thing by the numbers of voices. But the giving up of their voices struck me
into a wonder, being unacquainted therewith for they set up a erie all
together, none gives ear, but each one yells as if she were horn mad. Is not
this able to abash a good man's spirit.

They hold a continual parliament about their more weighty affairs of state,
In Collo qui
so that Erasmus were he alive now, would be able to give a strong testimony of
women's turning suitors. Now this continuance is necessary because of their laws
uncertainty: for the decrees of this day, may be all disanulled to morrow, but
the same day they cannot, least their law-giuers should seem unconstant in
their edicts. Every ones voice is alike in worth, the whole city through, but
not every ones dignity, for they have a set number of chosen women, they call
them Grauesses, and these have the authority of most honor in each particular
city: But they are not borne to this dignity, but elected either for their
beauty, or their eloquence, for by these two are all elections ordered. They
had once a custom to elect these Grauesses by voices, but afterward, every
one giving her voice only for her self, it bred a confusion, and so made them
abolish that manner of election: and then they made a decree yt only those
should have the sway in this envious contention, who would profess themselves
neither fair nor eloquent. But this brought all to such a pass that in the
whole multitude of them, you should not find one that would be Electresse, the
elder sort holding that they had the eloquence, and the younger standing as
firm in it that they had the beauty. At length they all agree to pass over
these places of Electresses unto twelve of the most aged matrons of Old
Mumpington (a ruinous village hard by) and so they did, giving them the
glorious title of The chief of whom when as I was there were these, The
Duchess of Cackletout, The Countess of Banne-alleyla the Arch-pressbyteresse
of Slauersperg, the Countess Pratline of Twitlecome and eight more Subordinate
Electresses.
Electresses Grauessiall, to set them the more a gogge to perform their
charges. And besides this honorable style, the honey of age, wealth and
abundance, comes continually upon the^; for the ambitious young wenshes will so
bribe and ply them with gifts, to have their voices at the day of election,
that I hold there is not a court either more corrupt in giving voices, or more
wealthy in given riches. In stead of scepters and swords, the Grauesses have
fannes and glasses borne before them: huge Crystal glasses, and still as they
pass through the streets, they pranke up their attires by the said glasses,
and set all their gew-gawes in order as they go along.

The original of the Shee-landresses. CHAP. 4.
THere are few Shee-landresses borne in this Nation, but such as either will
needs wear their husbands breeches, or else such as their husbands jealousy
will needs either banish or make prisoners, those run flocking from all parts
hither. Now all such as are their husbands masters, and are thereupon banished
for their unjust claim unto sovereignty: these are assigned to inhabit the
frontiers of Shee-landt especially in the countries of Shrewes-bourg, and there
they are all put in garrison. But as for those that are voluntary exiles, they
are generally of meek and unmanly spirits, and these are seated in the heart
of the Land, to become Votaresses to Peace and to Beauty, and yet you need
never dream that this weale-publike (how ever weakly founded) should go to
ruin for want of particular members: and I Will tell you why: there are so many
voluntaries, (especially free women) come to this camp, that the fear is that
rather here will want room for new inhabitants, then otherwise. Truly I am in
a great perplexity least my country women should have any understanding of this
state: For if they have, we may go snicup for any female that will bide
amongst us, but all will away, we should not have one big belly left to lay
the foundation for a future age by, and therefore I pray you sir (whosoever you
be) as you love the preservation of our lineage and the general multiplication
of mankind, be silent in this so important a secret: for it lies us all upon
to keep it undiscovered from our giddie females, unless we can find a better
means of generation.

Of Gygglot-tangyr. CHAP. 5.
AT Gossipingoa, I got (besides my freedom) the Cities letters, for my
passe-port, and so from thence I took my way toward Giglot-tangire, a country
lying upon the South part of Womandecoia, toward Letcheritania; The Land of
it self in this part, is the worlds paradise: I was not many leagues from
Loues-den, the first town of this County, when I entered into an air as
delicatly sented, as if all the perfumers in England (do ye see) had lately
played their prizes there for eternal sovereignty: the whole country round
about is so stuffed with Apothecaries, and The states Magnificoes.
Pomendrificoes. The rest I omit. The women of this wapentake are generally
tall, gracefully adorned, and (were it not that they practice the art of
Cheeke-oyling over much) very beautifully. They wear nothing on their faces,
nor on their breasts: as for the rest of their habit, it is fair in show,
light in weight, and easy to mount, as is the air. But their naked parts are
so crusted over with ouer-grosse painting, (as they use in Muscouia) that you
would verily imagine, you saw some statue on a Westminster tomb, rather then a
living creature, such a cart load of false colors ensconce their fairest
beauties.

The women of The Sepulcher of Modesty is in this town.
Shames-graue, (for so they call the shire town of Gigglot-tangire) have their
houses made all of Muscouia glass, as transparent as air: And it is labor
lost to seek any of them at home, unless you make your inquest immediately
upon their dressing time, or some what before: But lay your plot to seek them
at a Playhouse, or in a Tavern, or so, and it stands upon a good foundation:
for there you are sure to find your femall, either a laughing, a singing,
Dancing is here taken in the largest sense, including both the modern, as
galiard, pauan ^ig etc. and the ancient, called the beginning of the world vide
Rab. Apodemat. 17. chap. 3.
a dancing, or upon some such employment in state. You never saw spider
contriue a more artificial net for a fly, then these women do for the
Lecheritanians (how ever their countries deadly enemies) yet some of these men
serve their desires as voluntaries, for prouant, and preferment. Others, they
lay their ambushes for, and fetch them in first by loose allurements, then by
prayers, and then by pence, and if none of these means will work, they
compel them to serve their wanton desires by force. And when they have done
so, just as you see stallion horses kept for breed, so are they stowed into
custody, dieted with Eringo's, Potatoes, Cullises, and other dishes of lusts
devising, until Venus send her second summons. This I no sooner heard, but I
hated, and no sooner hated it, but I avoided it as neither daring presume of my
learning, nor policy, but that I knew my self neither for proper young man,
nor very fine Gentleman (none dispraised) I otherwise durst not have hazarded
mine honesty upon so slight foundations. But you may see; It is sometimes good
to want a good face: and those things with many a man does oftentimes blame
nature most for, may at one time or other stand him in more stead then her
greatest benefits in ordinary estimations.

Of Double-sex I Will, otherwise called Skrat or Hermophradite Island. CHAP. 6.
NOt far from Guaon, the last I Will of the Moluccaes, between Cape Hermose,
and Cape Beach, lies Double-sex I Will, much like unto our I Will of Man on the coast
of Lancashire. In this I Will nature has so orderly disposed all things to one
form, that I could find no one plant in all the soil but was of a double
kind; no tree, but bear two kind of fruits or one fruit of two several
kinds and names: there was your Peare-apple, your Cherry-damsen, your
Date-alimond, your Chestnut-fylberd, and a thousand of these conclusions of
nature. Yea in so much that the very inhabitants of the whole Island wore all
their habits as Indices of a coaptation of both sexes in one. Those that bare
the most man about them, wore spurs, boots and britches from the heels to
the hanshes: and bodies, rebatoes and periwigges from the crupper to the
crown: and for those that were the better sharers in woman kind, they wear
doublets to the rumpe, and skirts to the remainder. Nay their very names bare
notes of their perticipations of either side: There was Mary-Philip,
Peter-alice, Iane-andrew, and George-audry, and many more that I remember not.
All of their own nation that have not shown themselves perfect both in
begetting, and bringing forth, are made slaves to the rest: and when they take
any that are but simply of one sex, Lord what a coile they keep about the^,
showing them as prodigies and monsters, as we do those that are borne
doubleheaded, or other such deformed birthes. Their only glory which they
esteem most, is that in their conceit they have the perfection of nature
amongst them alone, of all the world besides them. For seeing nature (say they)
has bestowed two hands, two feet, two eyes, two ears and two nosthrills to
every meaner perfect body, why should not the most excellent creature of all
be perfect in two sexes also? And again: the ancient sacrificers to Cybele,
and the Pathiques of old Rome were feign to use forced means for that which
we have given us by nature. Thus are they wont to protect their deformities:
and truly you may observe in them all, The Mule is held both to conceive and
to beget, in Syria, Arist. and some hold the like of the Hare.
besides their shapes, both a man's wit, and a woman's craft. They have no Cattle
in this country but Mules nor any wild beasts but Hares. They live most upon
shelfish, for that is their best and most ordinary sustenance.

Of Shrewes-bourg. CHAP. 7.
IN my return from the confines of Gigglot-tangia, being now upon the most
western angle of the same, I light (just as my staff fell) into the Country
of Shrewes-bourg, the only garrison of this feminine government, and the only
defense it has against foreign incursions. Now the country fearing no foe
but the Letcheritanians (for the Thriuingois are a quiet nation and never will
offer to molest them, and the Foolianders cannot though they would) do
therefore place their fortes and towns of garrison upon the Eastern frontiers
of Letcheritania.

Here was I truly guld; for espying persons in the habites of men, mass
thought I, this is good, I am now gotten out of Womendecoia: but when all came
to all, I was flat cousned with a borrowed shape: for in this country women
wear britches, and long beards, and the men go with their chinnes all naked,
in kirtles and peticoates; spinning and carding wool, whilst their wives
discharge the maine affairs of the state.

In this tract is an ancient and ample town seated, generally called Pepuzia,
and I do not think but Arist. de haeres.
Pepuzian Heretics were of this original, who held that women should be both
Princes and Priests as well as men. The Barbarians in Aristo-Polit. lib. 1. 5.
1.
Aristotle's time never used their women half so imperiously as the men are
used here: I had great compassion upon their slavery: Yes verily had I: The
poor snakes dare not so much as wipe their mouths unless their wives bid
them: not so much as (saving your presence) go piss, nor pass a word with
their best friend, but they must first come to their wives with a writ of
Quaeso Magistra, good Mistress give me leave to go etc. I observed this
custom to be more strictly looked unto upon one certain day whilst I was
there, then at other times by far: and the reason was, because that while some
of the better spirited husbands disdayning to be chained in this unmanly
subjection by their wives, had laid a plot amongst themselves to rise on a set
night (as it might be this night) in open arms upon the sudden against wives,
and so shake off this infamous and disgraceful servitude.

This plotte had come to very good effect had not misfortune crossed it: for
one cowardly fellow of their confederacy, being threatened by his wife to be
soundly cudgelled for some other private escape that he had made; to procure
himself a pardon, went and revealed all the whole plat-forme of the
conspiracy, just the evening before the night appointed.

The women sit at meat and the men attend, the women sleep and the men
watch; so do they scold and fight, whilst the men are feign to bear off with
ears, head and shoulders.

Happy may they call that day whereon they are not lambeaked before night. I
imagined my self amongst the Turkish slaves, but that these distinction of
habites assured me this was a more base kind of captivity.

Ah what a beastly sight was it to see a distaffe and a spindle in a man's hand,
and a sword and buckler in a woman's* Yet I concealed my dislike as well as I
could, desiring but to see without suffering.

If any woman use her husband somewhat gentlier then ordinary (as some of them
be tender hearted) she is presently informed against, cited to appear before
the Court Parliament of Shrewes-bourg, and there endited of high treason
against the state. Her next neighbors give evidence against her with such
noise and fury, that it is strange to see how far they are ouer-borne with
impatience. If she be but convicted by the smallest evidence that is, she is
condemned to this punishment. She must first change attires with her husband,
and then shave off all her hair, and so being led through the market place
must stand for one whole day upon the pillorie, as an object unto all the
fleering scoffs of the beholders, nor shall the man escape scot-free, for
being so audacious, as to take the favors offered by his wife without a modest
refusal: but when the woman comes home (be she all covered with dirt,
grains, rotten-egges, etc.) she may not put off her vesture until she bring
a cudgel into the Court, all died with the fresh blood of her husbands broken
pate. He that out-liueth his wife, must either marry his maid and be sworn
to her service as he was to his former wives, or else he must become slave to
the next neighbors wife. For no man may be the ruler of his own house, in
this country: when the wife goes forth, either to wars, consultations, or
for pleasure, she leaves her keys, and therewithal her government unto her
maid, or her daughter: Either of which if the husband but once mutter against,
his shoulders are sure to pay for it soundly at his wives return, unless he
can either beg or buy the silence of the deputy gouernesse. They ^ust court
fashion in England.
never lie with their husbands but when prouander pricks them: For that (they
hold) would procure too much familiarity, notwithstanding if the husband arise
not out of his cabin in the entry before the wife be warm in her bed, and
coming up stairs bare-foote, knock thrice gently at her Chamber door, and
offer her his service in a soft voice he is sure to have on the rubbes the
next day.

The women of this tract observe a fashion directly contrary unto ours, for
they That there may be less ho^d taken by their assailants, and more by
themselves.
clip their hair and let their nails grow long. There are also certain
amongst them that are Proffessitrixes of the Noble Science, and keep free
schools, wherein the rest are taught all the wards offensive and defensive,
both of heels, nails and teeth: as also the most exact and judicial method
of clawing off the skin of men's faces, pulling out eyes; biting of arms,
wringing of ears, and tearing of beards: These lectures they are instructed in
both by precept and practice.

Now you would think it incredible if I should tell you of the neatenesse of
their houses, yet the men are all their drudges to wash, wipe, scour and
sweep all that is done: yea and dress all the meat besides: so that I
imagine that it is but man's esteem of the vndecencie of such businesses, (not
any of his unableness to discharge them) that makes him eschew such
employments. There is no foul spot to be found in any house here, saving on
the men's clothes, but those are so filthy that they are true notes how they
neglect themselves as much as the women neglect them; Notwithstanding go but
abroad into the fields (which are the women's charge to see to) and there you
shall find all most beastly: The very walls of the Cities are half down
and that which stands is so disgracefully framed, that the very stones
seem to beg to be at man's dispose, and to abhor the ordering of
womankinde.

I know gentle Reader thou maruelest much how I got safely away from such a
dangerous place, and from so mischievous a form of government. Faith I Will tell
thee truly, mine age, my habit, and good advise were my patrons in all this
perrilous adventure. My habit was manlike, my face womanlike (for I had yet no
beard) and besides I met a many of my own countrymen (a strange chance in a
region so unknown) whom I knew by sight as well as the beggar knows his dish*
verily I did, and these (like true friends at need) gave me such good
directions, Aeneid. 6.
that (as Aeneas did by Sybilla) I following their aduises got at length
(though with much toil and danger) through all the dirty fennes of Where the
women will fall a weeping upon any wager, even when they list.
Blubber-ick, over the Mushrumpallian Mountains, and so finally into the
confines of Fooliana.

But now you may come upon me with another question, and ask me why I
traveled not in that part when the Modestinians, the women of Black Swan-mark
had their habitation. Truly I hold my self unfortunate in that one thing
alone, that I could not come to see their state as well as the rest, seeing
that my mind presageth unto me, that it excels all the forenamed. There is
such a people my friend I tell thee plain: but the region wherein they inhabit
I could never come to discover, only the name I brought from their ancient
chronicles of the other states, and that as I said is A chaste and modest
woman, is Rara anis ia terris, nigroque simillima cigno Iuuenal.
Black-Swan-marke. Indeed there are some of them that live as Anchoresses, and
Hermitesses in the craggie deserts of some other parts of Shee-landt, but their
habitations are generally unknown, and almost inaccessible: these
notwithstanding are the monestaries, whether (as it is reported) the fairest,
chasest, and most zealous of the Sheelandresses do voluntarily retire
themselves: he that will take the pains to search those vast deserts, may
questionless meet with some of those holy Votaresses: I light by chance of
one or two of them, whose variety of virtues, beauties and behauiours have left
me in an ecstasy until this very hour: but our young travelers being too
idle to enter upon so hard an inquest, that is the cause why they have no other
color to cover their slothfulness by, but by unjustly alleging the
smalnesse of the number of honest women.

Finis lib. 2.
The third Book.
The Discovery of Fooliana. The situation and populousness of Fooliana. CHAP.
1.
FOoliana is the most Stultorum plena sunt omnia.
vast and ill-husbanded region that ever mine eyes beheld, and yet withal, the
most populous. If a man should but go into the Burse of any town of traffic
in this whole nation, he would swear, (as one did once of Paris) that the
whole world came to trade thither. I am not ignorant of the number of the
people that are imagined to be in all Europe, take it therefore as from the
Historiographers, and not from me. Italy is said to contain 9000000, more or
less: Spain, a number somewhat lesser; England, 3000000; the Low Countries as
many; both the Germanies, 15000000; France as many; Sicilia 130000: We know
also what they (that use to amplify upon all things) say of the number of the
inhabitants of China, that they do amount unto ^0000000. That country
paralelld with the whole country of Fooliana, is rather an uninhabitable desert
the^ a peopled nation: it lies just under the Antarctike pole, as the Mercator
in his Atlas Geograph, affirms as much.
Pigmey-land lies under the Articke: and hence do I gather (as any man else
may) that the extremity of cold in both these opposed regions, is cause both of
the Pigmees littleness, and the Foolianders blockishnesse ^ nature so well
gracing her self by effecting the defect of body in one place, and
counterpeysing it with as great a defect of wit in another. To confirm this,
do we not see that such as inhabit the temperate Zones are generally perfect
both in body and mind: But let this be removed unto the cloisters of the
Philosophers, I must proceed with my purpose.

Fooliana, on the South butteth upon Tenter-belly, on the East upon Shee-landt,
and the farthest corner of Thriuingois, and finally on the West, upon
Theeues-wijck.

The parts of Fooliana: the peoples conditions in general. CHAP. 2.
FOoliana the great, is divided into five lesser Fooliana's, as namely there is
Fooliana the fickle, in the Eastern frontires: Fooliana the craggie, just
under the Pole: Fooliana the fat, toward the South-west, Fooliana the fond,
between both: and Fooliana the devout, toward the West. Now the inhabitants
of all these five, are generally tall of body (for all the vehemency of the
cold climate wherein they live) their hair a pale flaxen, their heads As Homer
says of Thersi^es, (...).
like sugar-loues; their lips bigg like a Moors, and their eare^ thick and
spacious. But their conditions do not keep all one form: some things they
have generally in them all, and they are these: what ever stranger arrive
amongst them (unless he light in Fooliana the craggie) they presently
entertain him with all the pleasures that their towne-house, and table can by
any means afford: Come we to any of them all, with a dust-licking congee, and
some three or four vostra Signioria's, Spaniard like, and either commend his
good face, his new coat, his fine hand, his fair house, or season but his
affections with an admiring applause, and this your obsequiousness shall
purchase you an host whose courtesy will imagine nothing too dear for you;
good words and fair promises are all the moneys that this nation uses; yet
they have great store of gold, which they barter away for feathers, bells,
timbrells, and garlands, happy he that has the best store of such commodities
to utter at these Ports. The inhabitants are of a hard constitution, going
bare-brested, and thin attired in the depth of winter, to take air the better:
marry in the heat of summer, they were rugge gowns, and cloakes above that,
to keep out heat the better: yet they have some Philosophotericall professors
amongst them, that will go almost naked in midst of winter, in contempt of the
cold, and their reason is this, that seeing all creatures besides man can be
content with hair and hide only, why should not man that is made master to
them all, make shift to break through all the battalions of cold, being armed
only with his shirt of nature, his skin? I promise you, a strong and sensible
argument.

You shall never take any of them solitary, for they do continually talk and
contend in argument with themselves when they are alone and in game: you shall
have them fall terribly out sometimes with themselves only; one word provoking
him to tears, and another immediately procuring laughter, and the person being
all this while single by himself. They have also certain sects of people,
generally called Fool-osophers amongst them, and these have the same credit
there, that the Bonzoes have in China. I have well near forgotten their
several orders: some of them run upon my tongues end, and I think (I am not
sure) that there was one sort called Browne-backs, and another called
Cluniacenses.
Clunches: besides (as I remember) there are the The Trinitarians with square
caps.
Quadricornes, the Barly-faces, the Greenegeese, the societies of Saint Patch
del Culo, Saint Gynny come home at noone, and many more that are far from my
remembrance. all these give their own allowances unto others, and beg for
scraps themselves, wandering through yt verges of Fooliana, and where they find
a stone with any picture upon it, (be it what it will) down they go upon all
four, with curtsies, and cringes, it is more the^ strange to observe them: gold
is ready change with them for led, provided it have a tail of parchme^t at the
end of it. Tapers and noone day meet ordinarily at every dinner time amongst
them. To eat flesh is altogether unlawful for them; but for fish, take your
gorge full gratis, and never break statute for it, I Will be your warrant: It is
a sin inpardonable The tale of the Franciscan and the Dominican is common.
for some of them to touch gold or silver with their bare hands: as it is also
their general custom scarcely to salute any man, yet may they neither omit
cross, nor carved statue without a religious duck: They whip themselves
cruelly; the Who were solemnly scourged at the altar of Diana. Plut. in Apoph.
Spartans boys scourging was but a fly blowing unto this of theirs: first
because no man but themselves will undergo sore lashes, and secondly because
in the obedient times, they had a tradition given them yt calves blood was a
pleasing sacrifice to their gods nosthrils. Their crowns are shaven, either to
put the world in mind that all men are borne bald, or, for avoiding heat of
the head, or else, least the hair growing betwixt heaven and the brain,
should be any hindrance to the mind in her celestial meditation. Only two
things (in my simple judgment) they are justly to be accounted too witty in:
first in that they bring the people into such a fools paradise, that they
fetch all the fruits of other men's labors into their platters, whilst
themselves sit at ease in their cells: and secondly, in that they can so
cunningly avoid the bearing of their crosses at home, by getting grass for
their stallions abroad, and by keeping their foles at other men's mangers. There
is wit in this believe me.

If any of these monastical men be sick, the covent never cease weeping till
he either go for up, or take a longer day: Physic he must have none: yet
when they are in their pangs of death, their foolosophers anoint them with
oil: They measure not ones wisdom by his silence (for so may one of John of
Paul's Church-yeards blocks, prove wiser then he himself) but by the choice
composition and deliverance of good and graceful terms: He is held a wise
man, that speaks not much unto little purpose, not he that speaks little
unto none at all. They never come on horseback, nor a shipp-board, but hold it
fondness to hazard their lives either on a stumbling jade, or in a weltring
barge: they suck until their beards come: nor do they ever bury their dead,
holding it a slavish part for a man to tumble his parent, wife, brother or so,
into an hole, because that life is out of them, and to make a feast of them
unto the worms, because of the lack of a little breath, and therefore they As
the Indians of Brasilia, Peru, and other places did when these parts were first
discovered. Petr. Mart. ab Anglcria Decad. Ocean.
hang them up in the air, in their best attire, and every year keep a
solemn obite in honor of their departed ghosts, just in the place where they
are hung up, and this form of burial is most ancient as may be gathered out
of many monuments yet extant in Fooliana the devout.

The women of this nation are the principal governesses also of the state, but
their dominions more tolerable in that their wits cannot inform them of the
true state of Sovereignty. But what they have (as I was told) grew first upon
this: The Shrewes-burgesses whilom ouer-run all the whole region of Fooliana,
Annal. foolian dens. Centur. 19. sect. 7. li. 3. cap. 293.
which not-with-standing by reason of the barrenness of the soil, they would
not possess, but left the inhabitants in possession: provided, they held it no
longer then they did homage for it unto them; paying them an Ass laden with
gold, for their yearly tribute. This rent was paid along time, until at last
the Foolianders brake out upon these conditions, that as for the gold, they did
not respect it, so that the Shrews-burgesses would demand it when it was due:
but for them to force a loving creature, and one of their natural towne-borne
country-broode, with strokes and battes, to bear this burden out of their
land against his proper will and pleasure, this was a condition very hard, nay
to their judgments intolerable; besides that their quiet hereby stood in
doubt; for one ass (you know) being heavier then another, if gold and ass and
all, weighed more or less this year then they did the year before, the
Shrews-burgesses might allege that they had not their due: especially (which
is a maine reason of this breach) seeing that the poor creature, though
seeming never so able to bear out his burden at first, yet after a few days
iourneys has been forced to lay him down under his load. This message
incensed the Shrewesburgesses much, whereupon to arms they go, and entering
Fooliana, came without any resistance unto Blocksford, otherwise called
Duns-ton, the chief city of the land: alarm was given: out comes all the
Blocks-fordians hurling upon an heap without arms or order. The foe was
fairly ranged, and gave the charge: down falls a citizen or two, which the
rest beholding, fell all upon their knees in submission, with prayers for
mercy, and protestations of innocence: The weapons were held, and by and by
one of the grauest Foolianders bespake them in this manner. The Foolianders
oration unto the Shrewefburg^sses.
Ah what a violent inundation of cruelty has overflowed your good hearts, you
right valiant Shrewes-burgesses? that for one poor Ass you should kill thus
many proper men, and pretty scholars: especially (and oh let this especial
reason rule ye) seeing that one quick ass, or one ass being quick (do ye
understand me) would have bin more serviceable to your estate then a thousand
(a thousand said I? may then five and forty) men being dead, as nail in door?
take, (mistake me not, I bid you take) take every one his ass, and his burden
of gold, we had rather live without them then to die for them: you shall all
have asses (asses are not so scant in this country of ours) once more I say,
you shall have asses, Gods plenty: o then put up your shining things, and spare
the lives of a many weaponlesse men: I know (and to your honor be it spoken) I
do understand that your valor scorns to stand in defense against a
weaponlesse wretch: O spare us then I do beseech you, and free us from that
present fear! Well, the conqueresses are moved by this patheticall oration, and
consented to give them their pardons, mary upon this condition, that the women
of Fooliana should evermore in domestique employments, have pre-eminence before
the men. The vanquished gave their humble consents, and we thank ye too, for
it was a noisome toil to them to be euer-more in the tail of a slow-back,
egging him on to performance whether he would or no.

Of Fooliana the fickle. CHAP. 3.
FOoliana the fickle, is the Easter-most part of all Fooliana the great, and
next unto Shee-landt. Expect not here (gentle reader) any exact description
hereof: how I found it, and how I left it, I know thou shall know as well as I:
but if you chance to go thither your self (as many a fine Gentleman I can tell
ye, and men of good worship have done within this few years) and find not
the state as I describe it unto you, blame not any defect in me: for their
forms of government are so daily altered, that one may describe ye the shape
of Proteus, or the color of the Chamaelion or tell what wether it will be to
morrow, sooner then give you any true notice of their discipline. The
Portugales may brag of their travels and discoueries, let them do so, but I
durst venture a large wager, that if it could be tried, the ancient It is
natural to the Frenchman to be a wether cocksape, and to an Englishman
(pardon me you few of firmer spirits) to be his ape.
Frenchmen did first discover this country, there are as yet so many monuments
remaining that show it, both in the names of the towns* their most ancient
laws, and their chief coins. Their grounds never carry any one certain form
two years together: that which is pasture this year, shall be arrable the
next: that which was all high mountains this year, shall be all carried away
to fill up dales withal, the next. Nay they turn the very course of their
rivers also, so that sometimes, as Virgil says.

Virgil.
Plaustra boues ducunt qua remis acta carina est. The plough now tears that
up, yt whilom was
A way for nothing but for boats to pass:
So do the inhabitants shut out their swelling rivers on one side, and they
themselves (raging at their forced stops) carue themselves a new course out on
the other sides. They have great store of magnificent cities, but they change
their fashion every other day at the farthest: The chief of which, at my first
coming thither, was called Which is in Italian a^ Butter fly.
Farfellia, but ere I went away, it was decreed by the whole body of the
counsel, that it should thence-forth be called Butterflieux: the whole frame
of this city goes all upon wheels, and may be drawn like a cart, whether the
councels pleasures is to have it. It is recorded to have altered the situation
a hundred times since the foundation, and thirty times it has quite lost the
former shape. In the time that I was there it stood seated by Sir Thomas Moore
in his Eutopia has a river of the same name, (...)
the river of Water-lesse, and was very shortly to be carried up to the height
of Mount Wantwood. The rivers are all so frozen over with the extreme cold,
that if any town be weary of the old place it may pass the waters unto a new
one. Every month the form of the city changes, for every house is separable
from the next unto it: so that as soon as ever they find any the least fault
with the old neighbors away goes house and household and all, to seat
themselves in a new street. The arms wherewith this cities scutchion was
whilom charged, was a Snaile with her shell on her back, on a chief argent:
the words, Mea mecum, I carry mine own about me: but now it is the Butterfly
desplaied, in a field vert and floured: the word, Vbilibet: Where I list.

Of the peoples conditions, and attires. Sect. 1.
THe Inhabitants go all in painted feathers, as the Indians do; for seeing
that these light things kept the little birds warm enough, why (say they)
should we desire now being far more able to bear out could then those poor
and tender creatures are? Now when they would seem to have new-coates, then
they change the places of their feathers: so that that which in the morning wore
on their heads, comes before night to wipe the dust from their heels, and so
the rest, that which kept the knee warm but now, by and by gets up above
half a yard higher.

They do marry wives, and love them pestilently well for a while; keeping them
selves truly loyal to their espousalls, until they either take some occasion
of dislike in their old bedfellow, or chance to behold another that is fairer
then she: and then, farewell wife, and welcome with all mine heart husband
says she; for the wife is commonly as willing to make exchange, Just as our
Citizens use a man as long as he has cash, you have him, brow and bosom, but
that failing, my master is not within sir.
as the man is: (assure your selves that she takes the first dislike, if her
husbands Cocke-shippe be, any way declyning). They use a stranger for the
first day as if he were their own brother, (though they never saw him
before): marry the next day they will pass you by, and forget that ever they
knew ye.

They seldom or never proferre any thing which they do not call back again
at the next breath they take, before the promise be confirmed: Nor do they
ever promise, but they afterward forswear it, until it be performed: nor
do they ever perform any thing which they do not afterward, (though all to
late) repent and be sorry for. They will not sell you any thing to day, but if
you dislike it, they will give you double the price you paid for it to morrow.
They make their laws new every year once: for it is not fit (thus they defend
it) seeing all man's life is mutable, that the rules of life should not be
mutable also as well as the effects: besides, man's second cogitations being
generally more perfect, it were a strange slavery to be tied so to a first
decree, that although the after-wit dislike it never so, may not be altered.

Turne-coates tomb. The nations ancient Coins. Sect. 2.
IN this City, near unto the Built in the fashion of our Exchange and far
better traded.
Asse-change, is a tomb of one Turne-coate, of small antiquity, and of smaller
beauty, upon it I read this inscription.

PASSENGER.
Stay, Read, Walk. Here lies.

Just such an Epitaph is there in Bologna in Italy in Saint Peter's, beginning,
Aelia Laelia Crispis, nec vir nec inulier, nec Androgynan, nec casta, etc.
ANDREW TVRNE-COATE, WHO WAS NEITHER SLAVE, NOR SOLDIOR, NOR PHYSICIAN, NOR
FENCER, NOR COBBLER, NOR FILTCHER, NOR LAVVIER, NOR VSVRER, BUT ALL: WHO LIVED
NEITHER IN CITY, NOR COVNTRIE, NOR AT HOME, NOR ABROAD, NOR AT SEA, NOR AT
LAND, NOR HERE, NOR ELSVVHERE, BUT EVERY WHERE. WHO DIED NEITHER OF HVNGER,
NOR POISON, NOR HATCHET, NOR HALTER, NOR DOG, NOR DISEASE, BUT OF ALL
TOGETHER. I, I. H. BEING NEITHER HIS DEBTOVR, NOR HEIR, NOR KINSMAN, NOR
FRIEND, NOR NEIGHBOVR, BUT ALL: IN HIS MEMORY HAVE ERECTED THIS, NEITHER
MONVMENT, NOR TOMB, NOR SEPVLCHER, BUT ALL: VVISHING NEITHER EVIL NOR WELL,
NEITHER TO THEE, NOR ME, NOR HIM, BUT ALL UNTO ALL.



Somefoure miles from Giggumbobbia, there is a plain where there were certain
old coins dug up whilst I was there, I care not much if I show you the
forms of some of them.

One was a square piece, having a Ianus head with two faces on the one side,
and the semblance of a globe-like stone upon a smooth table on the other, and
in dark rust-eaten letters, this about it. FBR. VAR. DVC. the form was this.



There was another that was round, having on one side one in a gown, seeming
to be of a middle age, leaning his right hand upon the head of a little
pretty dog, and holding in the left hand, a book; and on the other side was
a Chamaeleon enameled in all her altering colors, and over her, these words,
Constable. Lips. This figure, as I remember it bare.

The third was larger, and of more value it seemed; bearing the figure of an
egg: having on one side a lean face with a long nose, and a wreath of laurel
about the forehead: on the other, a Polipus is a disease in the nose, called
Noli melangere asvvell as a many footed fish.
Polypus (a many-footed fish called a Pour-countrell, upon a stone, passing
well cut verily: the word was Pour-Bon.

The inuentor of this coin, I neither know nor care to know: nor what he
meant by this devise can I possibly imagine. Notwithstanding a little skill in
antiquities would soon fetch to light the true scopes of all these inventions:
I would some of deeper judgment would take the pains. Pour.

Bon.



Of the University that is in Fooliana the fickle. Sect. 2.
AS I traueled along the valley Capritchious, I chanced to light upon a town
that bare some shape of an University. The name they told me was
Whether-for-a-pennia. Here met I with some shadows of Philosophers, but never
a substance: You may go whistle and save your labor, as well as to come and
look for any lectures, rectors, books or schools of the seven sciences
here. Every peculiar man here is both his own teacher and his own Auditor.
Yet are there two Colleges in the town: one of the Philosophers that held
themselves discussers and exact inquirers of all things. Gell. lib. 11. chap. 5.
Skeptikes, who deny that their is any trust to be given to the sense: and
they are such absolute suspenders, that they dare not for their ears decree
any thing positiuely, no not this, that they ought to hold al things in
suspense. Steal away any one of their purses, cloakes or victuals In Diog.
Laert. De lacyda.
(as one of them was served once) and he presently falls into a doubt whether
ever he had such a thing or no: Strike one of them as hard as you can, he
doubts of it, both whether you struck hard or no, and whether he feel it or
no. Speak to him or touch him, he hears, sees, and feels you, yet he dare
not assure himself that any one thing of this is true.

The other College consists wholly of Gew-gawiasters, who give them selves
wholly to the invention of novelties, in games, buildings, garments, and
governments. He that can devise a new game or a new fashion, according to his
invention has a place of dignity assigned him by the Duke.

He that first devised to blow out bubbles of soap and spettle forth of the
walnut shell, is of as great renown amongst them, as ever was the first
Printer, or Gun-founder amongst us of Europe: these Gew-gawiasters, are in
great esteem in Court, yea and amongst the meaner sort also, in so much that
many of them will not put on a tatter, nor once move, without their directions.

Nay these I can tell ye are scholars indeed: they have devised a new
language wherein they kept the mysteries of their knowledge, only to
themselves: it is called the So do the Parace^sists call their balde^dashe.
Supermonicall tongue. Some of the words I will set down in this place, for
the good of such as shall travel those countries hereafter, that they be not
utterly Cedarine, in Paracelsisme is blockish or ignorant.
Cedarine in this language when they hear it spoken.

They call the earth; Silo.

The soul; Adek.

Al thing within the skin; Chohos.

The inner part of the midriff, Coostrum.

Aquality borne with the body; Relloleum.

A thing natural: Cherionium.

Salt: Al, and Malek.

The earths vapor: Leffas:

The waters moving: Lorindt.

Wild honey: Tereniabin.

The evil fumes of the elements; Realgar.

A mandrake: Aroph.

A male Cony, Ircub.

A beginning, Ilech.

A think supernatural, Iesadoal.

An unguent; Oppodeltoch.

Vinegar, Xisinium.

Star-slime, Nostoch.

Jupiter, Cydar.

Successiue generation, Dordo.

An uncertain presage, Erodinium.

A certain one, Essodinium.

Pustules, Bothor.

Lame, Artetiscus.

Crooke-backed, Nasda.

An amulet against the plague, Xenechtu^.

But I wondered much more at the names of their mineralls and spirits, for they
call brimstone, Chibur, Alcubrith, Kibrit, and Alchur.

Quicksiluer, Sibar, plissada^, azoth, vnquasi.

Vnfined lime, Wismadt.

The Philosophers salt, Alembrot.

Mercury precipitate, Diatessadelton.

A metal like Iron, Bobolt.

Iron, Edir.

Mercury, Missader, Zaibar.

Mineral gold, Chifir, Fido.

Copper, Maelibeum.

The rust of copper, Almizadir.

Vitriol, Colcohar.

A compound of coral and the lobster, Dubelcolep.

And now come the spirits names, with whom they are wondrously familiar.

Euestrum, Is the good Genius.

Xeniphidei, Good spirits that reveal secret things to man.

Trifertes, Spirits of the fire.

Caballi, Goblins.

Trarames, Apparitions.

Operinethiolin, Mineral spirits.

Gamahaea, An image impressed in the Fantasy.

Sylphes, Ayry spirits.

Paracelsus was provost of the college, who invented the^ this strange
language: But indeed I am not sure whether this tongue continuestill amongst
them, or has by this time given place to some language of the later edition.
How-soeuer it be, I have done my duty in warning you of it before hand.

Of Fooliana the Craggye. CHAP. 4.
FOoliana the Craggy lies just under the pole: the farthest of all the Land
Southward: it is a Mountaynous, stony, and eternally frosty country, lying in
an air extremely cold, and as extremely dry. Here there is an Iron Rock,
just like that Rock of Lode-stone, which the Geographers say is under the
North pole: and this is the reason why the compass, after you are past the
Epinoctiall, declines toward the South, the cause whereof no Geographer, or
Mariner could ever as yet declare.

This land is divided into two dutchies rather spacious then fertile, commonly
called Solitary and the sad, Cholerik-oye.

Of the Duke, and inhabitants of Solitaria the sad. Sect. 2.
THE Duke of Solitaria is generally called by the name of Grumble-doro the
Great, a testy and severe man, whose subjects are as like in conditions unto
him, as they are unlike to all the rest of the other Foolianders. He has a
huge and spacious palace called Hearts-griefe-Court, built all of Ebonye and
Iet, in a most magnificent kind of structure. Over the portch are these words
enchased in Coral.

Merentum locus est: Written by Ranizouius in a chapel nere to Sigeberg.
procul hinc discedite laeti:
This is the place where sorrow dwells and care:
Fly far, far hence, all you that mirthfull are.
The people of this nation are generally al haire-be grown, lean, slouenly,
swarty complexioned, rough headded, sternely visaged, and heavy eyed, fixing
their looks as in amazement, and seldom moving their ey-bals: their optike
organs stand far into their heads, making them look like so many hollow-eyed
sculls. Here it is in vain to look either for city or village: they dwell
every man in a place far from other, as Hares choose their seats: and profess
a kind of life most truly Heremiticall: partly because they are of too
suspicious and fearful a nature to dwell in company; and partly because the
Duke has expressly forbidden all men to build any one house within the sight of
another, or within the distance of thus many miles from any habitation
whatso-euer. They seldom or never stir forth a doors, partly for the
continual darkness that covers all this climate, and partly for their
own, and their Princes pleasures: and when they do go abroad they do very
seldom salute any one they meet, for this is one statute in their laws: Let
no man stir abroad, but upon necessity, nor salute any man he meets but
upon This the Ca^thusians observe very duly, and devoutly.
Thursdaies. Go to any of their houses, and knock at the door, you shall
stand a good while to cool your toes, and at last be sent away with a
snappish answer: for they are the most insociable creatures under the cope of
heaven. But how do they spend their time think you? Faith in imagining and
framing fictions to themselves of things never done, nor never likely to be
done: in believing these their fictions, and in following these beleefes: This
is the reason why they abhor company, and hate to be interrupted in their
ayrie castle buildings.

You shall have one of them directly persuaded that he is dead, and lying all
along under the stool, like a dead carcass. If any one come to question him,
he flies in his face with most violent fury, supposing him some Necromancer,
that has called his soul back again from the dead, by his magical
enchantments, and from that time forwards, So did one Pisander in a melancholy
fit. Cael Rhodig. lib. 9. chap. 26.
he wanders all about the country like a Ghost, imagining himself henceforth
wholly invisible: but if any of his fellows take him and bind him, he
forthwith deemes him a fury sent from Pluto, to fetch back the soul that
lately brake away from hell, and now is he in the most pitiful taking that ever
was man; imagining his house which he held to be but his grave before, to be a
direct hell to him now. Another is of opinion that he is become a Mole, and
lies in a cave under ground, hunting for worms, and turning up the earth with
a pike upon his nose provided just for the purpose: if any one follow him, and
give him but a little prick, he presently believes himself taken by the
Mole-catcher, and with miserable cries prepares himself to be hung up on the
hedge. A third holds himself to be Atlas, the worlds supporter; and so stands
immoueably still, now and then fetching a sigh or two, sometimes lifting up his
shoulder, and sometimes shrinking it downe-wards: now when he has swet a
little with this excessive toil, if any one come and thrust him from his
station, he presently falls flat down on his face with roares and cries,
expecting every moment when the skies should fall upon him, and railing at the
wickedness of man, that had so little respect of his own preservation, and
the safety of the whole world. Another auowes himself to be Megaera, one of
the furies, and affrighteth the passengers with terrible gestures: shaking his
hair (which he thinks is nothing but snakes) hissing, and running at them
that come by him, with open mouth: if he catch a whelpe or a catte, o how he
will torture it: and imagining it the soul of some sinner, takes great
pleasure in the cries of the poor beast (as it is said Ajax in his madness
did by the Rams). Another believes his nose to be grown of such a size, (as
Cyngar did in The inuentor of the Macaronicall tongue, he wrote of the gests
of Bal^us, Cyngar, Fracasso, Vin^azzo, Seraffus, etc. all in Strambottologicall
verse.
Cocaius) he gets him a great many thongs, to bind it up at his back for the
more convenient carriage. Another supposes himself made all of glass or
Potters earth, and so flies all men's company, least he should be broken
amongst them. Thus has every particular man in the whole land some conceit or
other, unto which he holds his shape to be conformed.

Sect. 3.
FRom the foot of Mount-eye, the river of Tears has his first spring, running
through most part of this Province, which is parted into two, by a continual
ledge of mountains, called the Noseautems, just as Italy is divided in the
midst by mount Appenine. These mountains have nothing in them but dire and
frightfull desolation, nor give harbor to any living thing save Bears, and
Witches, and these abound all the deserts through. The Bear (a most lumpish
melancholy creature) will lie ye all winter through, in a lightlesse cave,
living only upon sleep and licking of his feet. The witches being
bleare-eyed and toothlesse old hags, do nothing but sit muttering of charms
to raise winds and waters, to cure maladies, and call up the dead, over all
which they promise themselves assured authority, and yet in the mean time are
starued to death for want of meat. These hills on the one side are all covered
with a thick dark wood, called Owles-wood, which is continually haunted with
spirits and apparitions, and not for man to enter, or to pass through. Here
shall you have your Lycanthropi, they are men or women that by sorcery can put
on the shapes of wolves, and yet reserve the reason of man.
Witch-wolues in abundance, whose howling if you know not their customs
before, will set your hair an end with terror. In Diuels-dale at the foot of
these hills, you shall see many whom that famous Enchantresse By a Me^tathesis,
otherwise called Melancholy.
Choly-melan is said to have transformed into All melancholy is Asse-like, or
Lion-like.
Lions and Asses, and yet left them both the faces and voices of men.

Sect. 4.
HEre we may not ouer-passe the only wonder of ye whole co^ntry, it is this. On
the side of the highest mountains of all the Nose-autems is Cholly-melans
cave. It has a narrow entrance, and is almost frozen up with Ice, but it is as
it seems by the sound, of a large compass within. All the sides of the entry
are hung with huge Ice-hickles, which showing like teeth, do make the place
seem like the picture of Hels-mouth. In this cave they say the souls of
melancholic persons are plagued with continual and extreme cold: whosoever
offers to look in (as few will that wise are) is presently struck down
senseless, where his body lies a good while dead, expecting the return of
his tormented spirit: but he that lays his ear to the ground a little
without the hole, oh what howling, sighing, rattling of chains, and falling of
Ice-sickles shall he seem to hear? Or he that sleeps upon any part of
this mount (which I more hardily then warily adventured) good God what
Chimaera's, Centaures, and thousands of such amazefull apparitions shall he
(to his horror) behold in his dreams!

Of Cholerikoye, the other Duchy of Fooliana the craggie. CHAP. 5.
NExt unto this is Cholericoye, a barren, burnt, sandy soil; producing a
brood of hasty, furious, haire-braind, mad people: The natural token of
choler.
low of stature, pale-faced, read headed, ferret eyed, trembling lipped, and
unequally (though ordinarily hasty) paced. These are all under the government
of Duke Swash-buckliero, the model and Emblem of all tyrranny. The reader will
admire, and hold it incredible, that he should use his subjects as he does. The
famous Russian tyrant was a merciful Prince in respect of this man: there was
never Caesar, never Cannibal so bloodthirsty as he is. Here now the ingenious
searchers of nature may make a great doubt, how a nation so exorbitantly cold,
should produce such extraordinarily fiery constitutions, the bodies of others
generally following the nature of the clime wherein they are borne. O sir,
content your self whosoever ye be (if not, ye may choose, I will never
entreat ye) we Philosophers know well enough, that where the heat is kept in
by the stronger Antiperistasis, that is, where it is the stronglier bound in by
encircling cold, there it breaks out into a more violent operation. Does not
Africa, that burnt region, produce serpents of the coldest nature of all
others? are there not flies bred in ye furnaces of Cyprus, Mercurial. va^.
lection. Georg. Agric. lib. de Subterean.
whose cold do quite extinguish the heat of the fire? has not the thunder and
lightning their first original in the middle region of the air? and is not the
whole earth oftentimes shaken by a fire, hatched in the depth of her own cold
bowels? well, Philosophy is on my side, and I dare therefore be hold to say what
I do say. On with our description.

This Dukedom is divided into four weapentakes; Sallow-hew, Grene-chekes,
Blew brow, and As much to say Fiery-front. Rouge in French, is red in English.
Rougeux: the people of the first, wear all tawny: the second all green, the
third all blew, and the fourth all red. There is none of these that ever stir
abroad unarmed; he that is but half sufficiently apparelled, will be sure
howsoever to have his armor upon him A capo a pie: and like a Porter hired by
Mars, has his Musket on one shoulder, and his Halberd on the the other, his
sword there, and his great bumme dagger here, with two box hilts, a man may
boil two joints of meat in them, and at his back he bore his bow and shafts;
thus is he accoutred if he go John Fisticankots, Ajax his son and heir,
according to the pedigree drawn by Peter de qui, in his Catalogus Dunsor.
Ioannens. lib. 2. Cap. 17.
but to my neighbor John's, he must have his mooueables about him. If he
meet any man that will not give him the wall; catzo del diablo, slave, draw,
or prepare thy self to kiss my pumpe, for the resarciation of mine honor.
They never make any journey forth, but they either bring blows home, or leave
some behind them. If one chance to kill his enemy, he feeds upon him
immediately, for they eat raw flesh altogether, and drink warm blood, and
this is the best esteemed fare.

They have no laws, but all goes by might and maine. He that is wronged,
either reuengeth his own wrong, or else he may go home sit him down, and
so turn over the leaf and sing: All the rules they follow is but one and that
is this, Conquer and possess.

If you have any mind to revenge a wrong, to regaine what was your own, or to
take from another, you may call him to the field at any time, and he must come,
or loose his estate. If any come to interrupt ye, and so begin a sedition all
that remain unslain, are forthwith forfaited to furnish the Dukes shambles,
which crafty law does both suppress conspiracies, that were otherwise very
likely to be daily practiced upon the state, and also furnishes the Dukes
table in far greater abundance, and at far less charges. The chief seat
of the Duke is called Built just after the form of Tangir in Africa.
Fierce-fooliangir, a great city, but it is built only of wood-worke, the
Duke would not have it otherwise, that he might the better (upon just cause
given) set iron fire, and so burn city and citizens when his pleasure is.
It is inhabited with none but Tinkers, Black-smiths, and Butchers, in whose
shops you shall as commonly see legs of men hang up, as here with us you
shall find pestels of Porke, or legs of Veale. Through this city runs the
river Furieuse, with a course like a torrent, which in winter they say will be
exceeding hot (above your fountains in frost) and gives up unwholesome
fumes. Hard by it stands the Dukes Palace, on the top of an exceeding high
hill, called Mount Scalpe, and it is reported how it is grown to this height
only by the multitude of dead men's heads that have been thrown on an heap
continually in this place. The Dukes Palace is built of brick, very strong,
yet lives he in a continual suspect of his subjects loyalty, and had rather
trust his own Iron gates, then their glassie obedience He has a guard of
10000. Eps, ware, Things, and Welsh Dauie, were whi^om of his guard, as I was
credibly informed by such as knew.
Hacksters, who are ministers both to his fury and gluttony. If any stranger
come here, that knows not how all goes, he is presently seized upon, and
his head presented to the Duke for picking meat at supper, which he holds
more delicate, and hunteth more after, then ever did Vitellius after the Sueton
in Vitelio.
Phoenicopters tongues, or Lampreyes intrailes. He likens a Negro to a Thrush,
and a white man to a Quail; but such as dye only to do his gutts service,
are far better used then the rest, for they (as Diod. Sicul.
Olympias offered Euridice) have their choice what way they will dye, whether
being hanged or beheaded.

The most famous mount in all this Palace, is the Inquisition chapel, they
call it Saint Shambles: dedicated unto the powers infernal, whose statues
stand all therein, in horrible figures, wrought all with Ieatt and Coral, and
these do they offer their orisons unto. Here might you behold all the sorts of
deaths and tortures possibly to be devised: Wheels, Iibbets, Hatchets,
Halters, Swords, Clubbes, and rusty Pistols, so old, that I dare pass my word
for the Chinians, they will confess that they had their first Gunnes from
hence. A thousand Altars are in this Chapel, fuming with continual
sacrifices to the Devil, and the Duke, offering the soul to appease the fury
of the first, and the body to satiate the covetousness of the later; and for
the blood, they have a certain Art to keep that from congelation, and so
caske it up like Aligant, for the Dukes own weasand. Through the midst of
this chapel runs a channel called Nastie, and down that, they scowre all
the filth of the bloudstained pauement.

These men do never go, but run altogether, and generally you shall not
miss to take them all on a sweat. But there are two strange things, and worthy
observation in this country, the first is, you shall not find one man in this
whole region, but he is either lame in body, or deformed in face: which the
more scarres that it bears, the more beauty it is held to add unto the
bearer: and the second is, that a man of three score years old, is here held
for a miracle. For it is more then extraordinary for any of them to attain to
the middle age of man, they are flesht so young.

Near to the heart of the country is a fenne called Full-gall, as large and
as famous as ever was the ancient Meotis, now called Ortel. or (...) della
Ta^a: Bellonius ^^ch the Ita^^ans, call it ^ar Bianco. (...) Scythia it is
(...) Ca^pa^^^, as Tzetz^ (...).
Mar delle Sabacche: The water of it is of a deep yellow to the eye, and most
bitter to the taste: it ouerfloweth the bounds very often (but at no set
times) and sometimes drownes the most part of Cholerikoye: that which it does
drown, the sulphurous nature of the water does burn, as Phaetons ill-guided
wagon did the whole world: and at these times do all the inhabitants bottle up
this water, imagining that being drunk it annimateth their spirits unto the
most dangerous attempts. But here I would not have my reader too credulous, for
I have this but by hearsay, by my faith sir I durst not go to see if it were
true or no, I rememberd that French-mans saying too well, Il faut menager la
vie. This part of Fooliana was too dangerous a region for me to travel: I
staid at mine ease in Blockes-ford, and held it better to take this relation
upon credence; then to confirm it with mine own experience.

Fooliana the fond. CHAP. 6.
THis part of Fooliana is both the largest and the most ancient of all the
rest: the inhabitants of it affirm themselves to have been created in this
country, before any other part of the world was peopled: so that is held the
Had not our first parents (...) fools, in (...) not been (...) but now it is*
mother of all nations, as Blocks-ford is of cities. It lies in the very
midst of all the rest, as the navel of this goodly body. On the South it
has Fooliana the craggy: on the East, the Fickle: on the West, the Devout:
and on the North, the Fatt. The south part of it is called Cocks-combaya,
peopled with slothful and flegmatique inhabitants; but the northren part
thereof is possessed by more industrious and active spirits. Had I not beheld
the strange behauiours of this stupid sort of people with mine eyes, I should
never have believed that nature had bestowed so divine a gift as reason upon
such brutish creatures. For all those that border upon Fooliana the craggie,
go directly like beasts upon all four, nor do they know (silly things) any
other way of going. There is no house in all this part of the country: because
the inhabitants neither can build any themselves, nor dare adventure to come
into any that are built by others, least they should fall upon their heads.
There are every year great multitudes of them starued, and stormed to death,
in that they can neither make ready their meat, nor frame themselves apparel,
nor beds: nay they can scarcely speak true sense: not a man of them that
knows his own father, nor his own son, nor wife: nor how to return the
same way he came: nor how to distinguish a Bear from a Sheep, or a Lion from
a whelpe. Nay you have of them that cannot tell whether they should put their
meat in at their mouth, at the nosthrils, at their ears, or at some other
more unseasonable hold. finally, to be brief imagine but that you saw a Camane
Ass in an human shape, and such an one is a true Cockscombayan.

Of Asse-sex. Sect. 2.
ASse-sex Assex in Fooliana is larger then our three sexes in England here,
Essex, Middlesex and Suffix.
the Northern part of Fooliana the fond, is somewhat better furnished with
wit, and worthier of a travelers presence and observation. The people hold
themselves wonderful wise, and profess the search of natures most abstruse
effects: never leaving till they have drawn one reason or other, from the very
depth of inuestigation. They have but one eye a piece: They are not borne so,
but the parents at the child's birth plucks out the other, as being of no use in
nature, in that when the one eye is shut, the other has a more strong faculty
to discern. Part of this nation go all naked, to avoid the labor of putting
on and off: part of them have houses, but with out either doors or walls, yt
the fresh air may have the freer access: part of them build nests like birds
in the highest trees, both to be nearer heaven, and for their bodies exercise
in climing up to them; every particular man of them has both his peculiar
opinion and profession. Ambition and desire of glory draws diverse of them
into most strange and incredible actions: you shall have some going up and down
the streets on their heads and hands; and others flying about with wings made
of wax and feathers, you would verily imagine that The two winged brethren
sons unto Boreas: they ridd Phineus of the Harpyes.
Zetus and Calain were come again from the dead, if you but beheld how boldly
these fellows dare trust their wings with their necks.

Others, like your Italian Mount-bankes, draw the people together to see yt
effects of some rare vnguento, distilled water, or some strange engine: others,
out of the basest of metals, by a secret art (and that by St. Patrike a
gainful one too) can draw the purest gold. But in faith it is worth the
laughing at, to see the toylesome folly of these extractors: they are guld,
and guld, and terrible guld yet can they not find in their hearts to give
over. A sort of them of late (as I was informed) would needs to the Oracle, to
know the event of that weighty business they had in hand. The Oracle presently
gave the^ this answer Libauius sets down this rhyme of Alchimy. Alchymia est
ars sine art Cuius scire est parscum par^e, medium est strenue mentiri. Finis,
(...) dicatum (...).
Trauaillez that is, take pains. Pho, home come they as if they had gotten
their God in a box: and forward they go with their circulations, their
sublimations, their conjunctions, their fermentations, till all this head-lesse
action ended in putrefaction, until reputation and revenues were both dead and
rotten.

Ariost. Orland. Furios.
Thus each man seeks, to be an Alchymist
Till all be gone, and he his number mist.
Whereas indeed the oracle gave them better counsel then they could
comprehend: Take pains, that is, A mattock and a spade will get you gold*
Sooner then Chemistry, a thousand fold.


Of the Cities of Cockscombaya and Asse-sex, and of Blocs-foord, the
metropolitan sea. Sect. 3.
THE first City I light upon in this country was Hollow-pate, a town of good
antiquity, and well contrived: but it affordes no rarityes, and therefore I
leave it and pass on to Bable-dock, a corporation most worthily famous for the
wisdom of the Aldermen. These men a little before my arrival, held a sitting
upon this occasion. They sky was very cloudy, and rain was generally feared
on all sides: the Mayor calls a bensh, and fell to consultation, how to dispell
the feared shower.

The first man's advise was to ring out all the bells of the town: another
advised them to burn stinking savor in the open streets (as the Italian
women do to drive away tempests): At length, the grauest Foolianders opinion
was demanded, who arising, told them in plain terms, their policy was
vn-auaylable, and that the only quirke to fetch over this peremptory storm,
was to suffer all the moisture to fall that those big faced clouds
contained, and by that means (and by no other) the tempest would be so brave
(seeming to have no resistance) that as Hanniball did at Capua, it would ruin
it self or ever it were aware: was this an idle plotte? no believe it: the
whole bensh liked it and allowed it. Twitlecome twattes, wisdom is not sworn
to sit in Europe only.

The very Venus, The Author had this description from an experienced
Geographer, or Fooliander.
the eye, the luster of all Cities terrestrial, is here seated: Ciuitas
Angelorum? Why it is a very Peticoate Lane, a Pease-market hill to it: The name
of it is Blocks-foorde: for site, it stands partly upon a plashie plain,
and part upon a little mountain: both of them lying in the descent, Northward:
far from any wood, or any river.

The upper part of the town serves the lower with snow water, and the lower
does the like for the upper with spring water, mary that is of John a Cragges
standing. There are in the whole circumference of the walls just sixeteene
gates, wherein (according to the intent of the founders) it exceedes all
cities of the world, by four.

The geometrical form thereof is neither circular, nor ouall, but of a mean
proportion between a Cylinder, Spell the meaning.
and a renuersed Pyramide, just like unto the portraiture of a man's body. What
now? are your understandings vn-aquainted with such a geometrical draught as
this? why then you are but Scioccoes, and never saw Belgia in the form of a
Lion, Italy of a leg, Morea, of a plain tree leaf, Spain, of an Oxe-hide,
the West Indies, of a fishes lunges, nor all Europe in the shape of an
Empress. He that has seen these, and shall but view this town (as he cannot
lightly choose) must needs avow directly, that he beholds the lineaments either
of some Colossus, laid all along, or else of Prometheus, as he lies bound
upon mount So does Theuet call Caucasus.
Adazar* The market place is on the hills top: for that it is the head of the
city, and so administers life and sense to the residue.

But (honest Reader) if thou consider but the toil that the poor porters
endure by both horse and foot, whilst they lugge up all necessaries, even
hogs-heads of bear and wine against the steep descent of the hill: Upon mine
honest word I know not whether I should bid thee laugh or lie down: thou
would swear thou were in hell, and saw an hundred Sisiphi at once, rolling
so many restless stones. And when they are gotten half up the hill (nay by
Saint Loye sir, perhaps almost to the top) with half an hogs-head of sweat
upon their quarters: then (beshrew that then, may they say) down comes another
barrel, which having ye upper ground, holds it self the better man, and lays
all the poor men's labor in the dirt, and that not without endaungering
themselves.

On this mountains top, the Magnificoes, and the whole Signioria of the
City have their habitations, to the end that the whole town may lie as a
fitter object to their prospect: this, as I said, resembles the head of the
town: down from thence you descend a narrow which resembles the neck of this
head, and this is inhabited only with Serieants, Beadles, Deputy-constables,
and Hangmen, and other executioners.
Derick-iastroes. From the lower end of this street, do two other extend
themselves on either side, expressing the arms and hands in man's body, and
these are peopled (but slenderly God he knows) with handicrafts men, but not
over many handicraftes masters. The bulk of this fabrike lies in a broader
street, and here you have all your Innes, Alehouses, Tauernes and Hosterians
whatsoever, and these have houses down to the very loins, where (as mine
author affirms, but I was never so far in the town) they keep the Burdello.

Here indeed (says he) dwell the Cocatrices, the Roffianaes, the Makquerells,
and all those This is a mataphor that needs no gloss.
ancient fish wives that sell Ruffes, Mackrell and Whiting-mops whatsoever; and
then if you descend a little further, (all in one parish) you come into A Iakes
farmers burden in the night is called a Bride, as I have heard.
Bride-streete, and there have all the Scauingers, Scoure-Aiaxes, and eleauen a
clock Perfumers, tagge and ragge: this is called the Draffe-sacke of the
City: The legs and feet of the town are boxes to the Ragmans Rolls of
Porters and Panier-ists: and here your poor Traveler is (now and then) full
feign, to take up an hourly roost, be his penny never so good silver. I am
seges est vbi Troia fuit. Swine-troughes and Sepulchers are sometimes sworn
acquaintance. But Parcius ista viuis. Tamen obijcienda memento.


The houses of this town (fair though it be) have none of them any
foundation: for what allege they? had not we rather give honest burial to
the harmless stones, then tear them out of their graves? hold ye content my
friends, this is no laughing matter.

The Magnificoes build their houses of a stately form, and a lofty: to be
thereby the nearer to the sky, and the more eleuate from this unrefined garb
of terrestrial conversation. Their houses are all passinglie well Muro bianco
carto di matto. A white wall is a fools book.
painted within, especially with the names of their ancestry, their guests, and
acquaintance, gracefully delineate with coal and candle.

Of the Burguemasters of Blosk-foord. Sect. 4.
THE Gran-dunsonioes (for so the Burguemaisters will have themselves enstiled)
of Blocks-foord, whilst I was there, held a Parliament about matter of state,
in general and in special, about the securing, beautifiing, and advancing the
weale-publike of their City of Blocks-foord. Every one gave up his opinion,
according to that which seemed to him most commodious. One would advise them to
cut a convenient haven through the mountains (though it were some five hundred
miles from the sea, a matter of small charge you know) for ships to traffic
to the town by: he wanted no store of examples from other cities, whose glory
stood wholly upon the riches they reaped by the sea.

A second presently rises, and clearing his forehead from furrows, confutes
all that ever the former had affirmed, showing withal, how dangerous a thing
it was to repose any confidence in such an inconstant and unsatiate element:
nor wanted he examples at full, of cities that lay buried in the seas
devouring womb. Well, up rises a third: and he would have the rarest
conduites made that ever were devised, and bring the water up in pipes from the
valley to the hills top; a thing as possible, as could be thought upon,
seeing that every man sees the water in fountains to bubble up voluntarily,
and strive upwards of the own accord, and wanting means to contain it to
ouerflow the whole plain about it: and again, when the water runs down the
kennell, do ye plainly, that one part drives another forward? as plain as
day. Well, for all that, this will not fadge with the fancies of the bensh.
Speak another: one does so: and his speech tends to the raising of an high
mountain about the city, for these subsequent uses.

First that the whole world might not have notice of the actions of the
Blocksfordians, especially of the Grandunsonioes. Second, that the city
thereby might be more augmented and fortified. Third that there might be better
auoidance of cold, by the warm seating of the City within so high a mount:
and for the mount it self, those that dwelt below should dig it out of the
valley, and lay it together. And then should there be abridge built from that
unto the next mount, by which the city should be furnished with necessaries.
But then steps up another, and smiling, asked how it were possible that a
valley should bring forth a mountain, but to allow a possibility of that, to
suffer a bridge to be built were mere indiscretion: for if a carriage, or a
traveler should stumble or loose foote-hold thereon, there were no way in the
world for you but death, yea and that (which is worse) with the breaking of a
leg or an arm: no, as for my small experience in state affairs (quoth he)
I would rather advise thus (grave Grandunsonians) to enterprise a matter which
to effect is not laborious, and yet being effected, shall prove most glorious:
so that being propounded, I know that the well-willers of the state cannot
choose but approve it: and thus it is.

Every man according to his ability and the size of his house, shall erect a
spire upon the top thereof, and upon the top, of that, shall advance a Cock
(vulgarly termed a weather-cocke) of brass, or silver, with a comb of
gould, or Gold smiths work: and this shall be mooueable, to follow and
express the changes of the wind: Now in every spire I would have a clock to
strike hourelie: which being once fully performed, O what pathetique spirit
can express the reduplicate delight shall from hence redound both to the eye
and the ear: to see such a bright fulgor of lof^ie spires, and to hear such a
sweet clangor of harmonious bells. He had not shut his mouth, before the whole
house opens, in acclamation to his project, so gravely, and statesman like
propounded: And so they rose, to see it performed according to the intent of
such a ponderous advise: So that he that shall in his travel hereafter,
arrive at this City, shall find it in far more gorgeous estate then it was
my hap to behold it in, let him assure him self of that, for I saw some of
the broaches raised ere I departed.

Of the Marquisate of Spendall-ezza. Sect. 5.
Near unto Blocks-foord lies the Marquisate of Spendallezza, a country
whilom most rich, and of ancient and honorable memory, but now it is quite gone
down the wind: nor observed I any thing in it worthy observation but a
forest called Actaeon was eaten up by dogs, that is, he spent his estate upon
them*
Actaeons Dogs, Dice, and Ha^kes, the three objects of prodigali^y.
Dogkennell, an eight square city, called Hey-dice, and an other little
corporation called Haukes-peartch. The inhabitants are the only spenders under
the moon: they do nothing in the word, but invent how to spend with the best
garb: Some upon dogs, some upon hawks, or kites for a need: some upon a
pair of Iuorye Cubes, or abunsh of speckled pastboards, and thus fly their
patrimonies: and when all is gone but the clothes, farewell they also, the
dise or the brokers are their ordinary cope-men; alas poor Gentlemen, what is a
man but his pleasures? But whether this Marquisate belong to Fooliana the Fond
or the Fat, that I cannot resolve ye in, who soever ought it of yore, at
this day I am sure it is not in the hands of the old masters; It may be
there have been some Lawiers, or some Usurers in this Country in times past,
but now farewell they.

When these new inhabitants have cast all their whole estate ouer-boord, then
they do either retire unto other men's tables; or else are maintained at the
public charge. And here is that ancient model of Cole-harbour, bearing the
name of The Brodigalls Promontorie, and being as a Sanctuary unto banque-rupt
detters: hither fly all they for refuge that are cast at law, or feel
themselves insufficient to satifie their deluded Creditors: any of whom, if
they pursue their debtors hetheb, and force them from their protection whether
they will or no, they are immediately accused as guilty of sacrilege and so
are thrown head long from the higher tower in all the territory; and when
they rise from their fall, can no way complain of any injustice, but have
under gone the ancient law of the whole Marquisate.

Those of this country that have any sons, assign them their full
patrimony ere nature allow them any bearde: and in case they die before this
time, they leave all their estate unto their wives to dispose as they list
afterward, without any respect of progeny: But if they have the fortune to
bury their wives, then do they lavish out more upon their funerals, then
would serve for a dowry unto the fowlest of their daughters.

Sect. 6.
Between this Marquisate and Fooliana the fat, lies another nation called
Or flatter itan^a*
Clawback-ourt, peopled with the strangest monsters that ever man beheld. They
bear every one ^n one hood.
two faces, and speak with two tongues: carrying the shapes of To sooth, and
to backbite.
Apes upon their foremost parts, and all behind of Dogs: so that they seem
to be a confused composition of Man, Ape, and Dog. That there are such
monsters, let reverend Munster serve as a testimony, who describes certain
Indian people that are partly thus formed.

This Nation, it seems, is borne to servitude: the greatest part of them do
make themselves voluntary slaves unto the Magnificoes of Fooliana the fat,
which borders upon their country. And albeit they be so sottish, that of
their own heads they can enterprise nothing praise-worthie: Yet can they
imitate, and counterfeite any action they see done before them, the world has
not the like, for forging such exact resemblances.

They never wear attire, never speak word, never do deed, but they see or
hear the like before they go about it. Whilst, I was there, they halted all
vpod one leg; and went spitting and spawling all the day long, because that
Signior Tickle-eare, their governor, of late had hurt his foot, and with all,
was troubled with an old pockie Catarrhe. They are most of them Barbers,
Taylers, Pandars, and procurers: There are also by report, some gallant
courtiers amongst them: But how so ever, your Spanish Mimike is a mere
ninnihammer unto these Clawbakc-ourtiers, take them as generally as you can.
Speak but, or look but upon one of them; and ye shall presently have him
kiss his hand, cringe in the hamme, lick his two yeards of dust, and with a
laborious Congee, like an Echo, bandy the last word you spoke, all the room
about, and with an applauding fleere, return upon you with all the gracious
terms his gorge can possibly vent; together with an whole Heralds office of
Titles, and top-heauie Exellentiaes, and then putting his lips together with
another Bascio dalli mani, stand houering at your next speech, to hear how his
last stood to your liking. Then do but you approve him, and talk on, and
whatsoever you say (be it scarcely sense) shall into his tables, as a more
then human conceit; as a very oracle. Then will hee-stand with his eye fixed
on the skies, and adore you (as a drunkard does Bacchus) upon all four.

They acknowledge no God but the man whom they make choice to serve, and him
they observe with more prayers, sacrifices and adorations then any Idol would
exact. Now all this they do with one of their mouths only: marry there is not
a word comes out of this mouth, but the other, (their dogs mouth) does
forthwith secretly retract, and disclaim. And thus much for their conditions.

The first City in this Region, is called In English it is Praise^all.
Tutto-lodanie of fair and sight affecting structure: but so slightlye built,
that there is no hope it should continue: it is much enriched by the traffic
which it has by the means of the river of Fiction, and again, very much
endamaged by the same river, through often and several inundations.

Near unto this town stands a village, called Tongue-walke, the inhabitants
whereof are never well but when they are talking. This village stands at the
foot of a mountain that rises along as far as Tickling-streete, another
famous borough, where the townes-men keep themselves continually employed in
chasing of laughters. Close unto this, lies that pleasant valley called
Soothing-dale, at the farther end whereof there is a Marish, called
Scoffe-stowe Fenne, which reaches down along as far as Shame-stead, a town
of infamous note: whether they use to bannish all their Wizards, and all those
whom they call Bashful modesty is a foe to flattery.
Bashfull-apians.

Of Fooliana the fat. CHAP. 7.
THIS Region, compared either for wealth or pleasure with all the Regions of
this Southern continent, exceeds them all: and were it as wealthy as it makes
show of, I make a great question whether the whole Northren world could find
a country to parallel it: but indeed the people thereof do generallye
faigne to have what they have not, and to amplify by their braues that which
they have indeed.

There is a double ledge of Mountains extended some sixty German miles in
length on either side, between which lies a plain, full as iong, and this is
Fooliana the fat: through which, the river of Sound, a goodly current, has
his course, almost encircling the whole plain. The reader may soon conceive
what a goodly rank of Cities are seated on the Mountains sides, having the
prospect over such a fertile plain, so delicately watered and divided into such
a many cantons, all fraught with fat pastures, and spacious champians. The
neatness of the Cities in this tracte, excells their number; yet are they but
of a slender manner of building, and though their outward forms promise all
decorum, yet when you are within you shall not find overmuch good order.

At the mouth of the passage through the Rhodomantadian Mountains, stands
the City Hydalgo, otherwise called Like Madril in Spain.
Braggadrill: proudly built, but beggarly stated: and near unto this, is
Back-bitembourg, a town that may be mother to the dirty streets of Paris. By
this town is a Rock of incredible height, (and of as incredible note) called
Break-neck-cliffe: not much different from the Peakes crag in England. It is as
broad at the top as at the bottom: and yet so steep, that it bears the
former rather of a tower built by man's hand, then any mere work of nature.
And this Rock is as famous for a place of execution here, as ever the Tarpeian
cliffe was in Rome.

On the other side of this famous hill, has the City of Bawdesden her seat:
this town has been oftener on fire then ever was old Rome: partly through
the negligence of the Citizens, and partly through the aptness to take fire,
that is in the Bitumen, which they use in their buildings in steed of Lime.
Adjoining unto this is another City called Punkes-nest, built all of Flint,
and the hardest Cement that can be devised. And then a little further in,
toward the frontires of Idle-bergh, lie those large mountains, commonly
called Hollyday-Hills, where the people keep continual reuells, and sit in
judgment upon such as observe any working-dayes: two cities there are upon
these hills, Gamesware and Merry-cum-twang: and on the East side of these two,
the river of Sound falls into the river of Idle, making three or four Hands,
Skip-free Isles the Inhabitants called them where the peoples continual
exercise is in dancing unto the sound of musical instruments.

The quality and condition of the people. Sect. 2.
EVery particular man in this Country, auouches himself at least a Gentleman
borne: and most of them are able to show a pedigree of ten thousand years long
before ever the world was created. You shall have them show ye large galleries
all drawn with their lineall and colaterall descents, and yet when all comes
to all, their neighbors are able to prove, that they had Cobblers, carters, or
coster-mongers to their Grandfathers. Nor is there any of their more select
Gentilitie, but has his country Farms, three or four, leased out unto his
Viliacoes, his retainers, and those are commonly Clawback-courtiers.

The Quasi senza lode, unworthy of praise.
Sennaladij, their best sort of Gentlemen, do content themselves with the
poorest fare that ever attended a fasting day: yet some of them perhaps at the
years end, will make a feast, which for excess of preparation, and multitude
of guests, will give an end to the bidders whole revenues: but all the year
after he will so defraude his barking stomach, that many of them (I assure
you it is true,) do destroy themselves through mere hunger. Others of them
let the guts groan never so loud, never respect the belly, but clappe all
they can scrape upon the back: yet will they neither acknowledge nor confess
their defect of belly-timber, but quite contrary, wheresoever you meet them
about dinner time, you shall have them go brushing of their beards, and picking
of their teeth; as if they were newly come from the death of an whole deluge of
several dishes. There is none of them has so much either money or land, as
his cloak and sword would purchase; nor any of them that keeps not above an
hundred Mangeguadagnos: so the Italians call their servants*
Munch-gaines, (for so they call their servants) yet have they nothing in the
world but they pay interest for it (no man will lend them a quatrine upon their
credites) in so much that I have known diverse of them hire their apparel at
the Brokeria, only for four and twenty hours. Nay I knew one of them build
his horse a stable fitter for a Kings horse then his: adorning it with
farre-fetched Marble, nay and enchasing the walls and pillars with Iuory, and
he himself mean while fat warming of his heels in a poor little,
straw-thatched cottage.

They give themselves As he did who demanding lodging at a mean Inn, and
being asked what he was: Our name quoth he is Hernando Gonzales Ri^adeneira de
Toledo. By my troth sir (quoth the Hostess) we have not beds enough for so many.
tedious long names, and delight vnmeasurably to have their country and their
alliance mentioned in their styles, adding such compositions, and
reduplications unto their prolixe titles, that to recite them with one breath
is a thing directly impossible Estridge feathers are dear with them, as Rushian
furs are with us. Some of them use to hang silver bells at their heels, by
the noise whereof they may attract the peoples eyes upon their graceful
carriage as they pass the streets.

Those few of them that cannot deny their births to be base, are nevertheless
of as haughty spirits as the rest. I remember I read this distich over one of
their doors.

Misero quello, chi di persona vile,
Nasce di cor magnanimoe gentile!
O wretched he, that having had his birth
From a brave spirit, basely affects earth!
One thing I marvelled at above all the rest, as I lawfully might: There are
few of this nation that live by meat, or by drink, but altogether upon the
fume of a certain herb; which they take in smoke at their mouths, and give
it out at their noses, resembling the fumes of so many Brewers chimneys. I know
not certainly whether they had this from the Indians, or the Indians from them.
I^ is reported, that one Rollo Warallador, an ungodly fellow of this country
(though one of good place) was taught the invention of this wicked vapor by an
Indian devil: yet some affirm that the Indians of the Torrid Zone invented
the same to make themselves black within, disliking utterly to have their inner
parts of one color, and their outward of another. But this I am sure of once,
that though it fill the nostrils, it empties the coffers, or that many good
patrimonies have by this means gone in snuff out of their owners noses: that
smoakt so long in fume, till all the satte was in the fire, and all the fire
out of the Kitchen.

In all the Cities, especially in Baudesden and Punkes-nest, every other house
keeps sale Trugges or Ganymedes, all which pay a yearly stipend for the
license they have to trade. It is very lawful to deal with these upon any
conditions you can make with them; it is no shame for a man to salute his
Cockatrice, (I and to do more too, to kiss her) in the very market place, yea
even before his wife; nay you shall have some of them will make their wives
observe their humors with all serviceable attendance.

The Paradise of Fooliana the Fat. Sect. 3.
THere is not in all Fooliana, (no nor I doubt in the whole world) so rare and
stupendous a monument, as is the Paradise of Fooliana the fat: a work
worthy all admiration, it is worthy both the toil and the cost of all
travelers, but once to behold it. You shall a far of, behold a shining
mountain, all of pure gold (for so it is, or so it seems, and that's as good)
framed (as it is reported) in old time by art Chymicall: yet if any one come
to try the goodness of the metal by instrument, it falls all into dust; if
by fire it ascends all in smoke. On the top of this mountain there stands a
castle all of Crystal; not wrought by any art of humane power, say the
inhabitants: but the Goddess Fortuna fauet fatuis, is not so old as true.
Fortune, being (upon some distaste given unto the court of the gods) banished
from heaven, set up her rest here, and built this as a second, and terrestrial
heaven. And from hence she spreads her goodness through the world: here she
sitts giving all abundance that the most credulous servant she has, can
possibly expect: nay be his expectation constant, he cannot choose but obtain
it. Hither do men and women flock, from all the nations of the earth, but
especially from Fooliana the Devout: there is not one (almost) high or low,
in the whole world, but has seen this mount and ascended it. Men talk of Our
Lady of Loretto, Saint James of Compostella, our Lady of Walsingham, Hall, and
Sichem, they are desert and desolate places in respect of this: here the
pilgrims lie prostrate in the valley, in devout expectation of the Goddesses
call, as thick as ever haile-stones lay in high ways after a frostie storm:
nor may any man living approach the ascent of the hill, until such time as the
priests of the castle do hang out the white banner, and that is a sign that
the Goddess is pleased they shall ascend: and then they cry all with one
voice, making the skies rebound again, The Italians cry so, vnuailing of the
picture of our Lady of Lore^to.
Madona Scoperta, and then run that run may, one over another, every one crying
out of the straightness of the passage up. Nor will the worst man there give
place to the best, so that sometimes you shall have them scold one with
another, like so many inhabitants of Ram-Alley: and sometimes to it by
the ears, with dry blows, every one in the company thrusting on him that is
before him, and flouting them that are behind. Here did I see certain of them
that durst not venture upon the crowd, grown even hoarie with expectation, and
yet had not means to get up the hill. But what do they that get up? faith,
desire to have, called them together, and hope holds them together, each one
praying that it would be the Goddesses pleasure to grant him his desires*

You shall have one praying for the attainment of his way-ward love: another,
only that it would please Fortune to send him a wife that were no shrew: a
third for honors, and a fourth for riches, every man as he likes, and there
ye shall have twenty praying for uncles deaths, and as many for the burial of
thus many church men, that he may pass from reuersion to possession of this or
that fat benefice. There sat one king-like fellow at the gate and he (they
said) sued for the next monarchy: and by him sat a crew of ill-faced wenches,
and their suite was for beauty: there was an old wife also, with as many oak
trees in her mouth as teeth, and she expected to be restored to her youth
again, and a many more suitors (you must think) then I could take note of. Now
the sign of admission being given (as I said) up the hill go all that can go,
not on their feet (for that were sacrilege) but upon hands and knees, and
with great reverence I warrant ye. Being gotten to the midway, one of the
priest intertains them courteously and inquires every particular man's name and
country, which when he hears, he proclaims it with as loud a voice as ever
had A fellow in Homer (...) had a voice alowd as fifty men's.
Stentor, partly to give notice unto his fellows, and the Goddess her self,
what guests were arrived, and partly by this means inquiring ye deity of them,
to know ere they come any nearer, whether they come with the faith and purity
which is required: for if you come guilty of any heavy crimes, she hangs out
her red banner, in sign that you must be removed into the cloisters, where he
must be kept til he be able to salute her with a purer soul and pass the
residue of the journey with a lighter purse. But if the goddess like you at
first, the Priest gives you a leaden token, and so lets you pass: mary withal
he speaks these 3. words in your ear ere you pass; Believe, Expect and
Hope: and so God buoy. On go you as cheerful as a Pie, until you come at an
Iron threshold, a little below the steps that ascend to the Castle gate: upon
which Iron this distich is written: Sannazer.
Fortunam si auide vorare pergas,
Illam vt male concoquas necesse est.
Who swalloweth Fortune ere he chew it,
Through ill disgestion needs must rue it.


The Castle gates are kept by a rigorous porter: yet money will make him do any
thing: the entry is so narrow, that it seems to be rather an hole then a
gate: but after you are crept once in, then shall you see an house more like an
heavenly habitation then an earthly. All pearl and gold, whose luster dazels
the eye to look upon it, and whose external view promises no less then the
height of happiness, I omit to speak of the form of the temple, the priests
habits, orders and offiees: these, for breuities sake, I wittingly ouer-passe.
At length when you have viewd all (for you must needs bestow a little time to
gaze upon this pile of admiration) comes another of the Flamines to you, and
taking you by the hand (having first blind-folded you with a linne^ cloth) he
leads you through a hundred turnings, indeed whether he lists, but as fond me^
believe, into the temple of this good Goddess, whom mortal eyes must not
behold, and therefore are you muffled. Well, now you must coutch, and kiss the
sacred pauement: and lie so without once moving, until the Goddess call you
by your name, and, then ask boldly what you list: do but effect what she
commands without delay, or distrust, and were your request never so hard, it
should be fulfilled. Well, but what end of all this ceremonious observation,
say you? By my troth a ridiculous one, able to move the gentlest spleen
alive. They are all singularly, and ingeniously con-icatcht, men and women,
rarely fetched over, and with arts Quintessence: and yet for all that, this art
is so secret, that though no man pass this trial, that is not made an Ass,
yet every one had rather blame his own slothfulness or incredulity, then once
glance at any imperfection in the power of the Goddess. Well, having
propounded your petition, (suppose it be honor) the Goddess assents to it,
most graciously, commanding the suppliant, first after some hours, to take
the holy potion, whereby his spirit may be the better adopted unto the
ensuing felicity: and then, to lay him down again until she called him the
second time: which if he do but duly observe, he shall assuredly be
crowned with his full wishes, to continue enstalled in happiness for ever: and
to have ever the same cause to be grateful unto the Goddess for her heavenly
beneficence.

It passes; the suppliant takes the cup and drinks it off: praising to his
own thoughts the drinks delicious taste, being utterly ignorant that it is
only a potion made of poppie, opium, lettuce, and other such procurers of
sleep: but the effect is the trial; he has not been an hour after he has
taken it, but down lies he in a sleep, ye may turn the house out at the
window, (if ye can) and never awake him: and then is he haled up and down
the palace like a dead carcass by the buriers, and when they have laughed at
him till they be a weary, they lay him in a rich bed, in a Chamber like a
Kings, all seeled with Iuory, and arched with golden pillars, all the Tables
spread with couerings, the Arras of Campania, and the Tapistrie of Alexandria
are but sacke-cloath to them.

And about the door stands a company of attendants, each in his gold-chaine
at least, and all courtier-like accoutred, expecting when this The Mi^on of the
Moon* he slept 40. years together ere ever he awaked.
Endymion junior will awake, (which is commonly some three days after,) who
lifting up his head, beeholdes all the room with amazement, (as he well
may) and seeing all this fair company of shining attendance, is wholly
transformed with wonders: Whilst they in the meanetime approach all in order
with a ceremonious reverence to salute the awaked King: Health and happy days
to thy Sacred Majesty, great King. King thinks he? mass this is brave. What
apparel will it please your Majesty to wear to day? your suit of Golds-miths
work, your suite of tissue embrodered with Rubies, your cloth of gold doublet
with the Carbuncle buttons, or your Pearl poudred cassock? I? tissues, Rubies,
Carbuncles, cassockes? Heyda! my man's an Endymion indeed now, and will not
change states with the man in the moon, he, for all his fulgid throne he sittes
in. Well, rich clothes are brought him indeed, every man helps this brave
King, and as one says.

Dant digitis ge^mas, da^t long monilia collo: His hands with sparkling gems
they deck
And hang rich chains about his neck.
Set a diadem upon his head adorned with Pearls of incredible greatness and
lustree. All this goes well still, thinks he to himself: It Is time poor
king, for thou have eaten no meat this three days.
Get dinner ready. So said, so done: dinner was prepared, and served up, all
in state, such raritie of services, such brave attendants such mirth and such
melody! Pho, nineteen muses cannot give a man words to describe it. And thus
they spend the whole day, as time, ye know, will pass. Still my fine King
thinks all his own, still. Well, night comes, up with supper, and up supper
comes, with as rich, nay ritcher purueyance and attendance then waited on the
dinner: and for a conclusion to the feast, my maiesticall King has the the other
draught given him of the holy potion, which presently locks up his senses in
sleep as profound as the former: And then my poor twelue-houres King, being
as Virgill says

Iam simul expletus dapibus, vinoque sepultus, Gorgd with good cheer and wrapped
in sleepy wine. Is carried out at a posterne, stripped out of his tissues, his
Rubies, and al his Goldsmiths work, and re-invested in his old clothes,
(made somewhat more sluttish then they were before) and so laid out in the high
way, for passengers to gaze upon: where when he awakes, he falls into as
great amazement as before; and remembering how glorious a bliss he was
enthroned in but yesterdaie, and finding himself now utterly deprived of all,
Heu quo decidimus.
he falls a lamenting most extremely, miserably deploring, and bitterly
cursing either his own sloth, that would not give ear (as she had charged
him) to the Goddesses second call: or his gross ingratitude, who being placed
in so high a felicity, neglected to pay the good goddess her due tribute of
thankfulness. So away goes he weeping and wayling with this word continually
in his mouth, Fuimus, Troes! I was whilome a brave man,! And exhorting all men
to take example by him, never to be negligent, never thankelesse, but to
proceed with heed, and confidence, and obey what the goddess enjoined, and
then they could not fail of felicity. Such had I once (says he) but now, by
mine own only folly, I have lost it all, every part and parcel of my
former greatness. Now every one that hears him, thinks this; I hope to
take better heed then so; and they hood-winck themselves ere ever they come
there.

Of Fooliana the Devout. CHAP. 8.
Upon the western and part of the two Foolianaes, the Fat, and the Fond, lies
Fooliana the Devout, a region fertile enough of it self, but through the
inhabitants negligence, altogether vncultured. For whereas it is divided into
two Provinces, Trust-fablia, and Sectaryuoa, (the former being far the
larger of the two) yet is it so wholly given over to a sort of rotten
Ceremonies, that the Inhabitants thereof are all of this opinion, that one
cannot do God better service then in the utter neglect of themselves. There
are good store of pretty Hamblets in this province; there is Fragment, surnamed
the moldy, wonders-field, and within a little of them, Crepe-ham high cross,
Cringing-beck; and kissing-all-vp.

The borders of this nation are very deserts to speak of, and have scarcely
any inhabitants: some of the villages (for some villages there are, but very
few) as Lentestow right-maw, Pilgrims Inn, and Scourge-nock, are left almost
utterly desolate, but that they are once a year (at a set day) visited by some
Venetians; otherwise their thresholds are worn by none but their own
countrymen.

And here I may not ommit one memorable work, erected upon mount Bagnacauallo;
it is a goodly, well contrived spittle, both for largeness, and full
furniture: it bears the name of the Hospital of incurable Foolianders, and
was built at the public charge of the whole country, and thereupon is
maintained. The Proctor of it, at my being there, was one Thus was he borne
that wrote the Hospital of incurable fool^s.
Garzoni, an Italian, a man of good providence and discretion, and truly he
has desposed the almesmen in passing good method and in decent order. Hither
have diverse colonies been sent out of all parts of Fooliana.

But for a truth the number of the monasteries in this country, do very nere
exceed the number of the villages: besides which, there is nothing but scuruy
sheddes, worse then any Westphalian Inn: nor is there any freeholder left in
all this country: the Cloisters have got up all the lands every straw-bredth,
to make the deities the better cheer. Four sorts of buildings did I observe
in this soil: Temples, Monasteries, Hospitalls and Cottages: for all those
that are not professed cloysterers, are either slaves or beggars. They are all
of one religion, mary they cannot tell of what: but profess ignorance, and
neglect inquiry, it is enough for them to follow their forefathers, and to
hold the places whilom belonging to Saints, that is all they care for. In their
pace they make continual crosses; one thigh coming thwart another at every
step, and so makes the form of a cross at every foot of ground they pass:
And so likewise do they carry their arms, folded in cross-like manner, as if
they were all in loves Melancholy. They have goodly Temples, yet down upon
their knees will they go in the plain fields, if they spy but any antique
face upon a stone, or an old logge, or so: and then their beads (which they
bear upon strings) must needs rattle some two and fifty times over. There is
more Gods belongs to this country, then there is men. Varroes number of the
Roman gods was but half an unite in respect of those. They make them of
stone, wood and lome: and some of them augment their deities number, with
adoration of horses, hogs, and hounds. Every day gives life unto a new
deity: and sometimes ye shall reckon two hundred, made in one Temple upon one
day. And here we find the old Egiptian custom received, that men, whilst
they live, are naught set by, but dying, they are entombed in honorable
sepulture. 800. pounds have I seen bestowed at one funeral, and none of the
greatest man's neither. In this land will I lay my bones, and I do here by will
and testament, charge mine heirs to see me here entombed: and pray that all
those that do either condemn or commend this my description, beyond the
desert, be sent as mourners to accompany my corpse to the grave, as likewise
all such that shall hereafter be guilty of immitation thereof. But let us
forward with it.

At those objects, besides the tapers, incenses, bells, and bables that attend
the body, as beneficial unto the soul; there are two select persons bound by
the law to attend the body all the way with two black silk fannes, to drive
away the flies from it, be it in winter when the flies are all dead, and the
carcass not a fart the sweeter, all is one for that, law is law, and must be
allowed.

These Foolianders never touch any thing, be it Water, Oil, salt, Wax, or
Iron, unless it be first exorcised, and the devil driven out of every corner
of it.

They hallow guilt roses, with great follemnity, as they do also in baptizing
of their bells, and ensigns. But here is the rarest miracle that ever nature
saw or man heard of. In Wonders-field there is not a stone, but can hear,
weep, laugh, move, cure diseases, sweat blood, and do all that ever was done
by the Semones, the Daemones, or all the black guard whatsoever.

Sectarioua, the second Province of Fooliana the Devout. Sect. 2.
THe other part of Fooliana the Devout, Sectarioua, is a county of much
variety, but little delight: Every village, every house has his peculiar
fashion, quite different from the rest. Nor did I ever see, in all my trauells
such a multitude of vnruined monuments, as I saw here. Here was Saturnietta,
and the seven Piramides (somewhat ruined) which the citizens of this state
built This was the Saturnians opin^on.
in memory of the 7. Angels that made the world against Gods will: then was
there The Basilidians held that there were 265. heavens, according to the
number of the letters contained in the word (...)
Abraxia, the Basilidians seat; wherein there were but just 365. houses, the
townsmen being forbidden by an ancient law, either to increase their number,
or diminish it. Nere to this, stands They were called Gnostikes, that is,
muddy, for the falthinesse of the mysteries, and so were the Carpocratians
called: Iren. l. 1. c. 24.
Gnostico, wherein there are 30. old weather worn statues, standing al hand in
hand: whereof there are eight larger then the rest, all marked with Hebrew
characters. Not far from thence is a desert somewhat woody wherein the Iren. in
ep. ad Eus^b. These held that they might deny, their faith in persecution.
Hieron.
Elcesaites or Eb^onites had their mansions a long time: and here did I see
some of the ruined alters whereon they had been forced to offer sacrifice unto
Idols. On the left hand were the tombs of the They had a new manner of
redeeming their dead with oil, balsame, water.
Heracleo nitikes, al moystned with oil and balsame. And on the right hand was
the They held that Christ was that serpent that deceived. Euah and kept a snake
which came forth at Priests incantations, licken of the offering and then
returned to his hold.
Oxhites valley, where the Sacred Serpent had his cave, before which there
stood an Altar upon the which their charms forced him now and then to show
himself. Hard by were the caves of the Caianists, (and that is hard by hell
they say) and here they kept Caines Batte, and Judas his halter, as holy and
reverend relics. Upon the bank of the river Higri, you shall find the These
would drink no wine, but held it to be brought forth by Satan and the earth
August de Here Is.
Seuerians dish hung up by a chain at a pillar, the dish out of which those
obstinate men did whilom drink their water.

By this river also are the They held marriage to be as bad as fornication,
and therefore used little beds and less tables for they eat no flesh. Aug.
ibid.
Tacians, little cabbins, and lesser tables, and here and there by the They
pricked little infants with knives and of the blood and meal, they made
themselves communion cakes. Aug. ib.
Montanists fatal cakes, all scattred about: Here also are to be seen the
They held it good service unto God to geld both themselves and strangers
valesians pumy stones, the They affirmed that all plants had sense, and
therefore they would never cut up any thorns or briers, etc.
Manichees thorny gardens, the These did very continually, it was incredible
(says August.) to hear them, they were also called Euchites.
Psallians oratories, the Those held that the devil ereated the flesh: and
therefore they did so hate it, that many of them killed themselves.
Patricians gallows, the Who called themselves new vessels filled with new
wine, and bare a barrel about, in their Bacchanalles.
Ascites vassells, the So called of (...) and (...): they stopped their mouths
and noles with their fingers, and so professed silence. Aug. calls them
Dac^ylorenchites.
Patrolorinchites statues of Silence, the They offered water in the sacrament,
instead of wine.
Aquarians cups, and all the monuments of antique heresies.

But of all those glorious buildings of antiquity, This fellow held that all
heresies were true doctrine Philaster.
Rhetorius his palace does justly deserve the prick and praise: it bears the
fashion of all the other, and yet seems nevertheless to have a particular one
of the own.

There are standing yet some of the They never used their wives carnally, and
yet would not live without them, so that they made w^^ing choice of their
neighbors children to inherit their estates. Aug. ibi.
Abelians walls, those that continually adopted other men's Children, and used
to glory of the pedegrees and statues of such as were none of their own
fathers.

Here is one new city, built by acouple of damned vagabonds, The two founders
of Anabaptisme, or the Family of love.
Henry Nicholas, and David George: and here also have certain Certain
English Brownists, exiled into Virginia.
Virginian exiles laid a plot for to erect themselves a body politic. O all
you earthly Potentates, that know the contagious nature of heresy, and love to
have your states secured from so dangerous an infection, banish those damnable
perturbers of holy peace, unto this country, and let them take up their
stations here where they can do no great mischief.

The state politic of Fooliana, in general. CHAP. 9.
THe cities of this whole land are either under an Aristocraticall government,
or a Democraticall. The people choose as many Burguemaisters as they think
good of: and these must rule, but neither for their year, nor their lives, but
even while the people please. If any man of them give any proof of somewhat
more sound judgment then the rest, he is presently put out of office, and
banished by Ostracisme^. But all these Provinces do acknowledge one Grand
superior, and do fealty to one chief Prince, whose name when I was in those
parts, was Ill Buffonio Ottimo Massimo. His palace is in Fooliana the Fat,
near unto the Devout, and bears the The chamber where the pope is elected.
name of Papagalli. He is as it were a compound of an Emperor and a Priest,
wearing a crown upon a miter, or a miter in a crown. There is ever borne
before him a key and a sword, the ancient emblemes of Riches and Power. His
Key shows that all the Foolianders coffers are at his command: his sword,
that he may at his own pleasure both take from others, and defend his own.
All that come into his presence must kiss his foot, by an ancient custom,
begun at first by certain Kings (long ago) that were troubled with sores and
apostemes on their hands. He is not borne but chosen to this dignity, yet not
before he be very old, least the people should be a weary of him (as they
are wondrous prone to innovation) ere he were a weary of life. Before Saint
Sapa's chapel are two seats of Porphiry, wherein he that is to be elected
must pass a trial of his Rems and his Res, ere he be installed. He seldom
rides but upon men's shoulders, to show that men in respect of him are but as
beasts in respect of men. He sittes always, and goes abroad always under a
canopy: tush, these are things that others may do also as well as he: let us
here some of his singularities, beyond all others you shall. He never asks
penny tribute of any subject he has, but what they give willingly, he takes
thankfully and spends freely. He decrees nothing against the consent of the
meanest counselor in his state. He makes no laws, nor keeps any: nor does he
promulgate any decree of continuance, but once within two years it is quite
out of use. He uses his servants, (yea even his slaves) with much
familiarity, and when he list can lift them up above the best man in his
court. He allows his Parasites to do even what themselves think good, to
break laws, to counterfeit coins, or to disperse money stamped with their
own names and faces. I might have learnt much more matter in this court worthy
observation, but that I do not love of all things in the world, to tarry in
court longer then needs must: No, I was never good courtier, nor (I hope) ever
shall be.

Finis lib. 3.
The fourth Book.
The description of Theeue-ingen.
CHAP. 1. Of the situation thereof.
THeeuingen A word compounded of Theue, in English, and Ingenium in Latin.
is bounded on the West with the strait of Magellanus, and on the East, with
Fooliana the devout and part of Tenter-belly. It is a soil so utterly void of
fertility (excepting one little country that Pluto might rather seem to have
stolen Ceres daughter from hence then from Sicily. Nor shepherd, nor
husbandman shall ye find here, would ye seek your heart out: yet is it not
strange that this barren country should neuer-the-lesse have such abundance of
all necessaries, may and superfluities also, that it may challenge all the
world in a prize of wealth, and (as far as their natural fierceness
permits) of delicacy too? Take it from me (quoth Hieremy Ratcliffe) they
may; there is no rariety, nor excellent thing of worth in all the world, but
they will have it, by hook or by crook, and if they once get it, ye shall
sooner get a fart from a dead man, then fetch it back out of their clouches.
The Eastern part is enritched by the spoils of the two Fooliana's, the Fat,
and the Devout: the Western, by the treasures of India, together with the
Spaniards, Caricks and As the Spaniard called one of their great Caricks, which
si^ Francis Drake took. Her name (quoth he) was Caca fuego shite-fire before,
but now she may be called Caca plata, that is, shite-siluer.
Cacaplataes, for they are the notablest Pirates of the whole terrestrial
Globe. Assambeg of Alexandria, Barbarossa, Captain Ward, and Yagup Hemskerk;
tush these were all mere Adalantadoes of Herring-boates, in respect of the
Piraticall spirits this climate affords: I say it and I will stand unto it.

The whole country is divided into two Signiories: As there are two species of
this trade, the every and cousinage
Robbers-waldt and Lieger demaine: the first of which butts upon Fooliana and
an angle of Tenterbelly: the latter lies more West, and (against all custom
of the other Theeuingers, the wandering Robber swalders) keeps it self in the
own bounds: but both of them are barbarous and utterly inhospitable.

The conditions of the Robbers-walders. CHAP. 2.
RObberswaldt is divided from the two Foolianaes, by the Fennes, usually called
Filtching-fennes, wherein there are more Islands, or full as many, as is in the
river Rawley of Guiana, made by the turnings of the water. The whole region is
so woody and mountainous, that it seems rather a desert then a place
inhabited: and (as Strabo says of a city in the world) is to be held fitter
for rebellion then habitation. Their Of this language there is an excellent
exact discovery made in Thomas Deckers Bellman, but in his Lantern and
Candlelight, he has outstript all the world for variety of knowledge in
Canting.
language is very crabbed, I could not possibly learn it; only I observed
some Welsh words, taught them as it seems by some ancient travelers of our
Western Brittons. This Signiorie is indifferent well peopled, but under no
form of rule: each man holds himself borne only for himself, and so lives
obeying and respecting himself only. What he can bereave another of (by any
violence whatsoever) is forthwith his own, as good and lawful prize: and the
more powerful he grows, the more he is feared, and is attended by the more
vndersharkers that are his followers: they live all in certain families, all
which give due obedience to the father of the household and every one forbeares
his own blood, and robs where he can besides, freely and without control Both
the Fooliana's had by these sharkers bin long since eaten up, but that the
inhabitants are feign to pay yearly a great sum of money, for their protection
all the year after. This ransom (for a kind of ransom it is) is paid by the
principals of Fooliana, unto the chief householders of Robberswaldt.

In bodily shape they are like unto us, saving that all but the Ilanders, have
claws upon their hands instead of nails: and this is not only natural unto
all the Robberswalders, but even to the Lieger dumanists also. Upon the
mountains of this soil there breeds a kind of people called the Sbanditi,
and these are especial keepers of Booty-forrest (a frith so called) which is
of that breadth, that that same High Dutch Hercynian Sherewood, put
Schwarizwaldt, Odenwaldt, Steigerwaldt, Westerwaldt, Behemerwaldt, waldt quoth
you? nay put all the waldts, welts and gards in Europe to it: I tell ye, let
one word suffice, they all make but a days journey for an Irish Lowse, (be
she never so speedy) if you measure it with this.

No, I will be as good as my word, and justify, that if Hercynia keep ten
thousand thieves (as lightly it does always,) Booty-forrest shall keep a
thousand thousand: Baw waw! Hercynia? why it is a blanket for a Catte, a petty
Cock-pitte, nay a very Tobaccoboxe in respect of Booty-forrest.

In this country, you shall not find any man of state but he keeps a fort: yes
verily, all garrison soldiars: neither are their fortresses any way beautiful,
but they are most iudiciously contrived, both for defense and purueyance: and
here, they that live within keep all that they purloyne without (and that is
no small prize) maugre the beard of haughty Zulzemin. No, they are no
Shitilecocks! what they have they will hold, they are in place, and what is a man's
place if he make no use of it? Now in the mean while the poor commonalty
untruss their states and their Port-manuels under trees, and lay their noddles
close to the stumpe of some ancient Oak; Sic fuit ab initio (quoth the
Gentleman to the Chandlers son) so did your forefathers (my masters) be you
never so topheauie now, and so do these honest lads, these true Tartarians,
that never keep one mansion eight and forty hours. But alas! would this were
all: but I must needs go on. These plain seeming Villiacoes delight in
nothing but to lie in wait to make prize of poor passengers, and when they
catch them, they strippe them stark naked: they will not leave them a tatter
to serve for a curtain to the worlds propagatour; yet will they not murder,
as the damned, soulelesse, fiend-bred, hell-borne Italian thieves do, and those
durty, gut-swolne, toad-sprung Germans, (they have no cause indeed, for their
fact is not liable to the law) but him that they vnhuske, they do presently
bind, and carry in state unto their Dukes court, unto whom he must swear
perpetual obedience and loyalty: which if he break either in running his
country, or in omitting to practice Pourloynerie once or twice in a month,
he is forthwith condemned to commence at Tiborne was built for him, as some
say.
Doctor Stories cappe: trusted he shall be no more, but once trust up for all:
this law makes them maruailous mighty: and again, the Legerdumanists of late
enacted this decree, That no younger brother shall have any share in the fathers
land, and this law has added a great multitude of voluntaries unto
Robbers-waldt, as cannot but appear to the politic, and him that can ponder
it. The devout Foolianders (as I said before) love crosses: well they cannot
love them so much as these hate them. So that though their tribute assure them
quiet at home, yet if they be ouer-taken in Robberswaldt, farewell Fooliander,
up they go as round as a Iuglers box: and the only cause is, they use to
mock the Robberswalders, by making Iybbets at them with their fingers.

The maine householders are continually at dissension and civil wars amongst
themselves, about injurious booties, forced from one another: and by my faith
sir, the whole world fares the better by it: for should these rogish improouers
once lay their heads together against our world, we might put up our pipes, the
case is be-shitt, and go cast our capps at the Moon, for any state that we
should hold long: O sir, understand me, the case is plain, we were sure of
ruin I grant ye that: and so were all that could not stand in defense against
them: but the wiser sort of themselves prevent that, by nousling private
dissentions at home.

It is a great commendation of towardness in their children (as De bello
Galiico. lib. 6.
Caesar said of the Germans) to be cunning filtchers, in their young years:
for this art they teach them even from their infancies, in precepts which they
call Hermeticall: ye shall have the little theeuelings, even while they suck
their mothers breasts, to steal needles and pence from out of their purses: but
if they either ouer-shoote themselves, and be taken in the manner, by being
either too slow handed, or too boisterous, up goes their bums incontinent: Now
as they grow to years, so must they augment their practice, by stealing of
Geese, Ducks, or any such like prouant: nor does any day pass them wherein
they do not increase their stock by one lift or other. If their plot chance to
have any dangerous induction about it, then do they content themselves with As
the Welsh man stole Rushes, only to keep his hand in ure.
stealing a clod from your neighbors land, or a stake from his hedge, least
their hands should grow out of use: this is the ordinary practice of y^
borderers of Liegerdumaine: between it and Robberswaldt lies a large heath
called (e) Lyers-buy plain, of which you shall hear more here-after, when we
have passed the maritimall coasts of Robberswalat.

The Pirates, and sea-borderers of Robbers-waldt. CHAP. 3.
THese Pirates disperse themselves all along the shores of Magellanus his
strait, on the banks of Theeuingen, and in the Isles of Filtching-fennes. Now
they know that no ship that passes the strait can possibly return back, the
current is so swift, and therefore they stop the passage with chains and
shallops, and so make prize of all that should pass: whereby they that go
this voyage, do seldom or never return, more by reason of the multitude of
these Pirates, then ye strength of the opposed stream. Europe affoords not any
seaman that knows his bays, creekes, tides, shelfes, rocks and channells
better then these do generally: besides that they swim as nimbly and as
perfectly as the fishes themselves do. Their chief haven is called Not Dun
kirk.
Kirk-dun, a town of no great strength, nor compass: but fraught with as
hardy Pirates as Christendom affordes, and with as great store of stolen
riches. It is situate in that angle of Robberswaldt that lies just upon the
head of Filtching-fennes, ouer-against a part of Tenter-belly. The shores
here-abouts, as it is reported, are all ledged with Rocks of the Loade-stone,
which draw the ships unto these coasts, that are an incredible distance off,
and here they hold them. But the Kirk-duners that sail out into the maine,
and fetch in the merchants, they get the cash. And strange it is to see how
many purchases their bold valor has borne from strengths sometimes
trebbling theirs: some ascribe this unto the Magical Ensigns they have from
Fooliana, let the reader choose whether he will believe them or no. The
Cities arms, is the vulture, that feeds as she flies: the word, Fruor nec
quiesco: Rich and yet restless: Mantled, Geules; doubled, ermines.

A little within the mouth of the river Filtching, is there another town,
called Port van Berghen, the Queen and Lady of all those Isles and waters: it
takes tribute of all vessels that pass that way whatsoever, they cannot
pass ere they pay: and besides, it lays out great hooks with loade-stones
upon them, wherewith it angleth for ships, just as we do for Pikes,
Troutes, and other fishes: and where it once seazeth, there keeps it sure
hold. In these fens, and in this broad river, filled all with Isles, you No
more then the Egiptian Pirates had in Heliodorus. lib. 1.
shall not find one cottage, nor one boat: partly in that the people do
choose rather to make themselves and their families nests in Reeds (which grow
here in a far larger size then those of India,) and partly because they are
commixt with the Foolianders (lying one so near another) whereof there is none
but had rather swim then sail: so that they are so perfect in that art, that
like to the Crocodiles, they live as much in the water as in the land, and
move as swiftly as the swifted whirry. And of these do the Nauigators stand
more in fear, then of the other Pirates, by much: for these come suddenly upon
them, and many of them clap to them to the ship at once, stay her as fast as if
a Remora stuck to her keele: and then they tumble her with the bottom upwards
and sink her, or traile her to a rock, and there wrack her.

How the Author got into this country: Of the Harpies. CHAP. 4.
But the reader may well marvel how I came to learn thus much: and make a
question whether any man (that were wise) would expose himself to such a
barbarous nations courtesy: well sir I prevented all that. Understand, that the
Foolianders (the devout I mean) and these people hold a Iubylee both together,
every fifty year: during the which year, they are at peace with all the
world, and all men are free from fear of the rankest thief that breathes. At
these times do men come hither from all parts of this continent: yet at their
coming they do give such gifts to the inhabitants, that this one years peace
is more profitable unto them, then four years filching. Now it was my chance
to light here upon this very year: and so I and my fellow travelers had the
better means to take an exact view of the country. Only we were in some fear
of the Harpies, as we traveled: our gold got no peace at their hands. They are
(by my troth I know not what; either fowls or devils) and have kept here (by
report) ever since (Zethes and Calais chased them out of Europe: they build
their nests with strong beams, laying them a thwart over the forked arms of
huge grown trees: they are faced like owls, backed and bodied like Estridges,
fethered like Porcupines, beakt and pounced like Eagles. Truly they made me
remember the birds that (as Aristot lib. de mirabi. lib.
one writes) do keep in the Diomedaean Isles, which would sawne upon upon the
Greeks, and fly at the faces of all men besides: Just so did the Harpyes use
us that were stangers; they would not touch an inhabitant, but were as familiar
with them as tame Pigeons; but when any of us came near them, they would fly
upon us like fiends: nor can any man pass Booty Forest, but they tear him all
to pieces, unless he have a So do the Turks call the from Cayro to Ormus,
and the other po^ts of their traffic.
Carauan, of Robberswalders for his conuoie.

Of Lyers-bury plain. The natures of the Legerdumaynians. Of Free-purlogne,
and Baggs-death, two Cities. CHAP. 5.
NOw I come again to Lyers-burie plain, which lies upon the Eastern verges
of Robberswaldt and Legerdumayne: being As the way by the cross was in
Camden. I am free Merchant as passengers may ken, to Scots, to Britains, and
to Englishmen.
a free march unto them both, there is a river runs through the midst of it,
called For a lier must have a good memory.
memento, which parts the whole plain into two: and on this river, are diverse
of the Liegerdumaynians towns of garrisons seated. I am far mistaken if I saw
not her some old monuments of Pliny, and Herodotus, in this very dale.
Mercurius Gallobelgicus, has built himself a delicate house in the country:
and there is a certain If he do mean Baroniu^ he is not far amiss, many
suppose.
Cardinal (an Historian) that has laid the foundations of a mighty and
spacious castle in these quarters. For ever since Spain got the conquest of
those Indies that join upon this land, the Liegerdumanians have given leave to
the Jesuits (those busy-bauds, that must scald their lips in the whole worlds
pottage) to visit, and to inhabit this land, which the Robberswalders
irruptions had otherwise utterly dispeopled. Here are many Astrology schools,
whose professors are more in favor with the Liegerdumanians, then any other
artists whatsoever, excepting poets and lawiers. In this very place, did I
(better confess here then in a worse place) set up a school my self, and
read the lecture of spying maruells in the heavens vrinall as methodically as
any Star-gazer a^ the^ all: I had my Ptolomy, my Guido Bonatus, my Bencorat, my
Zahel, my Messahalach, my Albohali, my Hali Aben Razehell, al at an inch: and
by their prescriptions wrote Right, for this is but a discovery of Mundus
altered et idem.
an infallible prognostication of these present times. These Liegerdumaynians
are far more sociable (at least more circumspect and secret in their villainies)
then the Robberswalders; for that which these do in public, the
Leigerdumaynians do very closely: living under a law, and a Prince also,
called (as I heard) by the name of Tiberiodi Golde^-gripi: who keeps state in
Free-purloine, a delicate city in the very inmost edge of Lyers-burie plain:
they never stir abroad on the day time, but effect all their business in the
night: they hate the sun and love the moon, both with ye extremest of
affection. The trees of this soil are naturally so viscous, y^ no bird can
light in them but she is presently taken. The greatest town of trafike in all
this tract, is Bagges-death otherwise called Of Bo^sa which is in Spanish, a
purse; and Seco, in Latin to cut: H^er^nimus B^^secus, that same rare rascal
that wrote the lives of Calvin and Beza, was the founder of this city.
Bolseco, wherein there are two streets, Tongue-street, and Pawns-brooke,
which two in my judgment exceed all the streets of any one city in the world,
for largeness, for buildings. Tonguestreete is the Rendeuous of all the
lawiers, and Cause-mongers: Pawnes-brooke, of the usurers, brokers, and taylers.

And surely there is no nation under heaven so stored with lawiers as this is:
who (as In Paenulo.
Plautus says of one) if they want means of contention, play the seed-men,
and sow them themselves. Our Westminster, lay all the Innes of Court, and
Chancery to it, is but a very Katherines hall, to the utter Temple of this
street: and yet, though their number do daily increase, it is held
notwithstanding by the best politicians of the land, that they cannot continue.
For when they have lickt up all the whole country (as they have almost done
already) they must needs lack clyents, and so for want of emploiment go to
law one with another, and by that means disperse their evil gotten goods
amongst the co^munalty again, to leave their posterity the means of more
gainefull trading. The lawiers men are all suited in As the university show
makers do usually suit their parasites.
party colored liueries; to signify that their masters are ready to take
fees on either side. Now as for their emploiment, the usurers do make them the
most of it, together with the violent river Fraud, which running amongst the
Otherwise called the Strophades, of (...), to wrest or turn, those Quirkneyes
are somewhat like our orkeneyes, for situation, but not not for condition.
Quirkney Isles, eats one piece away here, and casts it up, there; and
afterward washes it from thence, and lays it in a third place; changing his
course now and then, and taking away one man's whole inheritance, to give it
unto another, this it is that makes work for the lawiers.

The Inhabitants are most of them (as the High-land men of the Alps are)
troubled with Chowles under their chins, called the Demosthenes his disease. It
reigns here in England, at some seasons of the year, very powerfully, God
knows, and to the wrack of many an upright cause. Meliora Deus.
Mony-chokes; a malady so ordinary amongst them that they neither care for
curing it nor covering it. But here is a strange work of nature: their skins
do naturally attract gold and silver, with as powrefull a strength, as the
loadestone draws steel, and holds it as fast: a thing that was never seen
elsewhere, and therefore the worthier of record. Pawnes-brooke is peopled with
all sorts of artificers: Yet they open no shops: but every one attends the
passengers at his own door with what lack ye Gentlemen, and then if he get a
chapman, he leads him in, and shows him his wares in private. Clauius
Chrysopaeiae. lib. 1. etc.
One will show ye a chain crusted offer with thin plates of gold; and swear,
that India nor Arabia did ever afford purer metal. Another cheares ye with a
counterfeite Musk-cod: a third with pearls, so rarely adulterate both for The
five true trialls of the goodness of pearls. Plin.
weight, fashion, clearenesse, smoothness and biggenesse, that you cannot
discern them from true ones: and then he will show ye the shells wherein
they grew. And here ye shall have your Lapidaries, with gemmes of all sorts,
able to delude any eye in the world: the Cyprian Dyamond, the Corynthian
Hephestiles, the Sicilian Agat, the Aegiptian Galactites, the Arabian Asbest,
the Macedonian Paeanites, the Asian Alabandine, the Indian Berill, the English
Ieat, the Persian Eagle-stone, the African Chalcedon, the Scithian Smaragde,
the German Corneil, the Ethiopian Chrysolite, the Lybian Carbuncle; here
they are all; al singularly forged. Apothecaries there are also here in great
abundance, and these do nothing but sophisticate receites with their
Succedanea, and their quid pro quo: It would ask a great volum to make a
particular discovery of their deceites. But one thing I am amazed at, and
grieve at their success herein, they are never taken in their falsifications,
be they never so gross: nor do they fear any trial of their forgeries, but
only that of the fire. When they are tript, they are punished with all severity:
but they have this prevention for that: they can change their shapes, voices,
trades and habits, upon an instant, so cunningly, that he does but wash an
Ethiop that seeks for him to day that couzend him yesterday. There is a
famous school in the suburbs, where art Spagirike (pardon me you Alchymists,
or blame your selves, that have given falsehood so good a name) is read unto the
youth of the city.

And here they have a book which they hold as holy as the Turks do their
Alcaron, it is called, The History of Mercury, (a book unknown to us) wherein
is related, how he in his infancy stole Neptunes mace, Mars his sword, Phoebus
his bow and shafts; Vulcans tongues, and Venus her girdle: and how he proloind
Jove's thunder, being as then so young as it seemed Lucian.
he had learnt the art of filtching in his mothers belly. It contained
furthermore, all the documents of deceit and cousenage whatsoever. Teaching
the student of it how to pick locks, how to draw latches, how to tread
without noise, how to angle in a locked chest with a twined thread: how to him
the pence and never touch the purse: how to forswear an ill deed without
blushing and a thousand such secrets that I might have learned but that I cared
not for their art Caballist. But of all of them, the Inkeepers are the knaves
Rampant: so faithless, that the traveler dares neither trust his purse under
his pillow, nor in any Iron casket whatsoever, but must be feign (as Iosep. de
Bello Iudaico.
the Jews did, being besieged) to engorge his gold for all the night, and
seek it in his close-stoole the next morning, it would be gone else every
Quart d'escu. The villages are inhabited with none but The two Emblemes of the
every.
Millers and Taylers, and unless you hap here and there to find some
straggling Gypsies.

Of Lurtch-wit, a County in Legerdumaine. CHAP. 6.
LVrtch-witte a large County, lies on the west of this Leigerdumaine, wherein
is the city Rigattiera, new repaired: nere unto which is mount Scapula stole
his Greek Lexicon, from Steuens, and yet durst avow this. Hoc ego contendo
Lexiconesse vovum.
Scapula, a very high hill. A Poet that is a Critique may here find many
ancient monuments. One stone I saw here whereon were engraven certain Greek
verses, Justin. Marter in Protreptico ad Gentes, and Canter. var. Lect. P. 1.
c. 3.
stolen by Homere from Orpheus and Musaeus. From Orpheus, these. Hom. Iliad. p.
(...).
(...).
(...).
And from Musaeus this.

(...). I found also many of Virgils upon another stone, which the inhabitants
said he had hought of by ye knees out of Homer and Hesiod. Here were also some
of Petrarchs, nimd from another D^nte, or messier C^no, or Sen^ccio, or some of
those times.
Tuscane Poet: and many other such like monuments. On the South part, lies It
is inhabited with none but Pursuiuants, and Benefice-bar^erers.
Rapineux, a plain all full of rubbish and ruins, which show that there has
been many cities there: but they were all pulled down long ago, to build those
two magnificent piles, Penny-patron, and Chaffer-kirke: so that you shall see
in this country, many old Churches turned into stables, streets into pastures,
and steeples into priuies. Besides this, the river Fraud does continually
tear away one piece or other from this part of the country, and lays it
either on the marshes of Lurtch-wit, or Otherwise called, Neuer-enough.
Stille-more.

Of Still-more. CHAP. 7.
THis Province is in the hands of a monstrous kind of men, such as you see
pictured in Munster and Maundeuill, with heads like hogs. They go always
upon their hands and knees, least they should otherwise miss any thing as they
pass along the streets, that were worth the taking up. Their voice is a kind
of grunting, nor have they other speech. None may dwell amongst them, but
Couetice is called the old man's evil.
old folks. Their youth they do spend in Booty-forrest (if they be valiant)
or else in Bags-death Schools: the inhabitants are all husbandmen, merchants,
and mettall-mongers. They do eat earth (as Gesner. de Quadruped.
the Wolf does when he is to go to fight) almost continually: yet some there
are that eat nothing at all; but live upon the sight only of gold and silver.
They never sleep but with their eyes open; herein only Idem ibid.
resembling the Lion.

They serve a God whom they call Quadagno, with all superstitious reverence:
they never go to their rest but when they have seen him: nor do they eat
but in his presence.

Touching the cities of this Province, there is Swine-borow, a filthy town, a
very stinking heap: but then is there Gatherington Ritcher then Amsterdam for
all that it is called the Low Countries storehouse.
Hoord-sterdam, and Lockadolid, all handsomely built things, marry I could not
come to view them within: by reason that every particular citizen in all these
places has a private key for the gates, to lock at his going in and out, so
that by this means they prevent all strangers access. The residue of this
nation live more like swine then men, in the Islands of Hoggs-bourg and the
Scrapiglias.

These men, towns, and manners, did I behold, admire, and laugh at: and after
30. years travel, growing weary of wandering, I returned into my native
country. FINIS.
THE CAMBRIDGE PILGRIM.


